NIRMALA YOGA नि र्मला योग March-April '81 Vol. 2 Bi-Monthly Year 1 H. H. MATAJI SHRI NIRMALA DEVI "Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns all the religions and seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga-THE UNION"

 Words of Christ the Lord, the Aum and the Amen, the beginning of the Creation, the most beloved son of Shri Mataji On Vibrations: "I am the living bread which came down from heavenr if any one eats of this bread, he will tive foreveri and the hread Which I shall give for the lite of the world is my flesh", John 6.51 "If any one thirst, let him come to me and drink. He who believes in me, as the scripture has sald, Out of his heart shall flow rivers of living waters" John 7.37 On Agya Chakra: "Strive to enter by the narrow door: for many, i tell you, will Luke 13.24 seek to enter and will not be able". "I am the door; if any one enters by me, he will be saved, and will go in and out and find pasture" John 10,9 On Kundalini's Action "To what shall I compare the Kingdom of God ? It is like leaven that a woman took and hid in threemeasures of flour till it was all leavened; what is the Kingdom of God like? And to what shall I compare it ? itis like a grain of mustard seed which a man took and sowed in his garden; and it grew and became a tree, and the birds of the air made nests in its branchas" Luke 13.18 (Contd on 3rd Cover)

 EDITORIAL We are glad lo bring out Ihe second issue of Nirmala Yoga, following H H. Mataji's programmes of Kundalini awakening in Delhi. She has been visiting different places in India since December, Thousands of people attended the programmes and got realisation at Her lotus feet. They are really lucky to get it without any efforts from their side, as, for ancient seekers Kundalini awakening and rising was the only achieve- ment of their lives for which they left all mundane affairs and lived at secluded spots. Centuries ago Gyaneshwara said 'अवधाचि संसार मुखाचा करीन' (I will make the whole world happy). H. H. Mataji's granting mass-realisation is the dream coming true for all great saints who wanted common man to be emancipated and evolved. It is said in Kaliyuga, God is having more compassion on man and is responding lo sincere prayers of Seekers: Indeed it is true. Divine Mother is going from place to place HILI inviting Seekers to have realisation and know the self. In the days when Adharma is overshadowing Dharma H. H. Mataji is keeping the promise.' वमरक्षणार्थ कार्याथ संभवामि यूगे यूंगे । Dharma.) Many people in India and abroad have given up drinking and smoking, many boys and girls in Western Countries have gone back to their parents, after getting realisation from the Mother. (। take birth again and again to. protect It, therefore, behoves for all those who have got realisation recently to preserve this precious gift and evolve themselves further. They should also awaken Kundalinis of others and bring more and more people to Shahaja Yoga. It is their Guru Dakshina (an offering to their Guru) to H. H. Mataji. We congratulate our Australian brother Sahaja Yogis, particularly Dr. Warren and Mr. Terence who met H. H. Mataji only last year in India and on returning gave realisation to large number of people, of course, with the blessings of Divine Mother. This year, we were glad to have amongst us about 35 Australian Sahaja Yogis who came to India to meet the Mother for the first time Their faith and devotion to the Mother are exemplary. Nirmala Yoga

 NIRMAL A YOGA 43, Bunglow Road, Delhi-110007 INDIA Founder-H.H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Sri R. D. Kulkarni Editorial Board : Dr. S. K. Mathur, Sri A. S. Mishra, Representatives: Hong Kong : Emilie P SHI Gavin Brown London Cliff Rence Bros. Co. Ltd.. Brown's Geological Information 1610, Wing On Centre, 111, Connaught Rd., Central, Services Limited, 160 North Gower Street, NW 1 2nd (UK) London Austratia: Diane Heaperman Switzerland: Arneau de Kalbermatten 344, Winterthurerstrasse, C/o.5/334, Victoria Place, Drummoyne, Sydney. 8057, Zuerich, Switzerland : M. B. Ratnannavar Bombay 13, Merwan Mansion Genjwala Lane, Borivali (W), Bombay-400 092 : Marie Rouger 175, Av. Ledru Rollin, France Paris-75001 CONTENTS Page 1. Editorial 2. Representatives 3. Lecture of Mataji 4. Our position in Sahaja Yoga 5. Letters 1 2. 3 12 13 6. International Correspondence Group 7. Devotion 8. Poem 9. A Year of Great Blessings 10. To Mother at Puja 11. The Healing Touch 15 16 19 20 21 21 12. आनन्द 22 13. ऊ माँ 24 Nirmala Yoga

 Advice given by Her Holiness Mataji Nirmala Deviji on 15th February 1977 at New Delhi, on Sat-Chit-Anand in English OES everybody follow my Hindi ? If ting all that the West is saying, we will lese say in English will you all follow ? I am all that we have, which is so great. Of course not in opposition for English language, but it is not going to be lost, but we are not the language of Atma is Sanskrit. They have going to utifise it for our purpose. We have never bothered about the Spirit. So we have to ignore all that on oneside, and we have to use some language which speaks about to accept something which is just a foreign Atma. English language is not adequate allen thing and nothing so much compre- enough. They do not have those experiences hensive. If is not 'Samagra'. It doesn't enve- since so far they have not gone deep enough. op everything. Therefore, I will request you D to learn a little of Hindi language also. One We are very old ancient people. Our culture has been to know God. Everything has come speech of mine, which was in English has been translated into Marathi, and what a in Sanskrit, because Sanskrit is really a Devavani. Apart from that, when the Kunda- tremendous thing it was ! What a poor show it was in English ! May be my English is lini moves, she makes vibrations. She makes special sounds, which are Devnagri Sounds very poor, be it so. on different Chakras. If I have time, I will inform you all about it. Even when you Anand'. Again recite Mantras through the Sanskrit language Sat-Chit-Anand is the 'Super Conscious- or Devnagri pronunciations only, you can exite them better. Try to learn, if not Sanskrit attention, the 'Consciousness'. You are just at least Hindi, because, it being a phonetic now conscious and listening to me. Every lanquage, it has a sound and that sound gives minule, you are consclous. But every moment that vibratory effect. You try to learn this is becoming dead into the past. Every language. Hindi is not my mother tongue. moment is coming from the future lo the My mother tongue is Marathi. I speak Hindi present. But you are conscious at this because after all 1 know the importance of Hindi. I also know a little bit of English. So rises and falls. You can see the rising of it is better to know at-least Hindi. What I want to say is that for speaking in Marathi in between these thoughts, there is a space is all right for me. Bengali I know a little bit. čalled Vilamb'. If you can stop for a while, You can convey it in Tamil or Telugu or in you get to the Conscious Mind and there any other language of this Yoga-Bhoomi. exists the 'Sat-Chit-Anand'. You can say This is a great country of Yoga. Every Sat-Chit-Anand' is the condition of the mind particle of this Bhoomi, you will be sur- prised, is vibrated. The scientists cannot thought, but you are aware Nirvichar'. This understand all this. When we start accep- Now we were talking about 'Sat-Chit- I have to use Sanskrit words. ness', the all pervading power. Chit' is the moment and are listening to me. A thought the thought, but not the falling of the thought or the state of mind, where there is no is the first stage, where you jump into; into Nirmala Yoga

 Kundalini has moved to the Collective Sub- the 'Super Consciousness. Some people that by realization you must conscious, they can start seeing things in the past. A person like that, when he comes achieve something as Adi Shankaracharya did, but it is not possible. With some it may to me, can see who I was in my previous be, but with everyone it is not possible. Your life, I do not have to convince him. This is first stage is Nirvichar. You become thought- the same thing as anybody who is posses- lessly aware. That happens when the Kunda- sed. A person who takes to drugs and is an lini rises above the Agya Chakra meaning alcoholic to the last word, but is a good soul enters into the lymbic area, when your atten- and is still seeking God, such a person can tion just touches 'Sal point. The reality see me, in a different form. He can see me separates fram Mithya'. You become two past, he can be very much enamoured by personalities. At that state you start separa- me. He would know who ting-like putting lime in the milk when it think that the past is greater than the starts separating into curd and water. In the present, always, because the past has been same way the beginning of reality starts. much greater than today, though I have This is the state when you can say that the Kundalini has awakened only. We must He, therefore, gets enamoured when he sees understand the different stages, as it things like that This happens to people happens. picture but normally the Kundalini shools off to Sahastrar' in most of the people. In past. Those who move out on the right hand some people it does not. It takes time. It is side can see me as light. They see all the either lost into the Swadhishthana or the Nabhi. It does not go much higher.. It is arrested by 'Anahata Chakra' or it may not Tanmatra namely the casual essence of even rise at all. But in case it crosses this the elements. It may help them to get convin- "door' of Agya Chakra, then you get into the ced, because such a person gets convinced state of 'thoughtless awareness'. With this thoughtless awareness, powers. Supposing for example, you become many Tantrikas who know who I was. They the Governor, you get certain powers of the Governor. Similarly you attain ceriain powers. There was an ordinary maid servant who But at this stage to leave the Kundalini is not КГ never given realisation to anyone previously. who are on the Supra conscious level it they move out on the left hand side ie., into the . I am giving you a very detailed five elements, they see me as a waterfall or as an iceberg. They start seeing the about me and such a person is much more convinced than you are. There are good you get certain are afraid of me and they talk about me. came to my programme and she got into a trance and started speaking Sanskrit and she described me completely in fifteen proper, because the Kundalini can start moving to this side or that side and can thus go to the supra conscious or to the Shlokas'. She said this first time although I collective sub-conscious. The 'Siddhis' are mostly available at this stage. Not minor is how it started. Siddhis but higher Siddhis, e.g., if the Kun- dalini moves to supra conscious one gets the Siddhi of predicting the future. If the your Kundalini, because you can had never said anything about myself. This So at this stage, I would not like to leave cure Nirmala Yoga 4.

 people and curative can be done with your Kundalini and they all say the same thing. Kundalini even when it is in the limbic area. They talk the same language-whether they I am very anxious always that it should come do so in English, Indian or any other langu- out of the Brahmarandra. At that stage you age. They say the same thing i.e., this chakra start getting the vibrations; but at this stage is catching or that chakra is catching. This is you are just a 'Chila" only and you just touch because you start seeing your own Kunda- the 'Sat pojnt. Your attention is only char- lini thereby seeing the Kundalini of others, med by the Spirit. Only the attention part as I told you is like a flicker or light in a Gas lamp, and Kundalini is like a gas which and not the Anand part of it: First stage is touches the spirit and the light of the spirit through Chitta that you feel the Kundalini of spreads in the central nervous syslem. "Chit' another person thereby you can raise the part, the outer core the 'Chitta means the Kundalini of another person. After a while, attention part. At that stage the Kundalini you can give realization also to another per- opens the Brahmarandra when you feel the vibrations from your hand and you can feel But the Anand stage is not yet reached. n another person's also; because you become the beginning you just feel the cold breeze collectively conscious'. Collectively cons-in your hand. You feel peace and tranquility cious again out of Sachita-Anand that you and also there is no thought. You feel the just touch the 'Chita' part. Thus you start thoughtless awareness' but the Anand part feeling the Chit of your Chitta becoming the is not yet felt at this first stage. Because "Chitta of the collective consciousness- now Ihave studied thousands of human means that you drop into the ocean of beings and their problems, know; this is Sachit Ananda in which you only feel the the fact. But there are some, who have collective consciousness. That means you reached the last stage, though they are very can feel another person's Kundalini. because through the fingers you can feel what is happening. You just feel the Chita son with the assistance of my photograph. very few. Thus at the first stage when you come, Yesterday there was another gentleman, as you have seen it, who was arguingwith me is the Chit' stage, the consciousness stage. that we have suspended intelligence but all You touch the 'Sal' which means you start that I said was "what is the suspended intelli- seeing the reality, is one thing you feel is gence?, I do not know about this thing". So flowing. At this time you start saying it is told him this. He said that, "I am in a Turiya coming or it is going. Just now you said, it Dasha" I said "if you are in 'Turiya' you can feel the Kundalini of another person and you ving, I am giving. That 7 goes out of your cannot certify yourself like that but can you language. But still the Ego and the Super- feel the Kundalini of another person". But he Ego are not completely gone down. They said 'no'. Then I asked him "how can you be are still there, but your attetion has come in Turiya ?" If you go in Turiya-i.e., if you cross this stage, then you have to feel the Kundalini of another person. Now you have people, you can give them Realisation as I is coming. You didn't say that / am recei- up and you feel the Chilta'. With this "Collective Consciousness' you can cure seen there are many people who can feel the have told you and also you can feel the Nirmala Yoga

 Kundalini of any person in the whole world; of the heart, the cancer of throat etc., but and cure the Chakras of that person. You can tell the condition of another person far caught up, either the left or the right side. he will say that it is the Chakras that are away by sitting down here. Wherever your attention goes, it works thereby your atten- tion becomes Universal. A drop of your or how far it is going and can give the depth attention becomes one with the ocean of the of such Chakras. There are many abstract Sat-Chit-Anand'. Listen, to me carefully important happennings taking place. Now from where the vibrations are coming because many people at this stage drop out and only the attention becomes effective. I will inform you about a disciple of mine, jivas's urrender to you They are watchingyou. who has come here from England. One day You are their responsibility. All the 'Deities he was sitting and thinking about his father. are awakened in you. If you do anything Suddenly he got a burning on his index fin- against the 'Deities' immediately they will ger. Hence he rang up his father. His mother harm you. A person who has got Realisa- told him that his condition was not good. tion, goes to a place which is not to be seen He was suffering from a bad throat. This boy did something to his finger and his father got well. Now he might think that he he will feel heated up. If he does not run is powerful and all that but he is not. He cannot think in this manner because his Sahastrara has opend up. He just said, another ordinary person. "Mother, I felt it and I did like this, and my father became all right". He never says I did Once you get the realisation, the 'Chiran- or which is not to be felt or which is not a good place, or to a fake Guru; immediately away, and if he still goes on jand on he will lose his vibrations and he will become like Initially it is in a very transitory stage. Still, I would say at this point that the repul- sion is not so very great that the man does not accept it. Because, if you accept it, you become completely realised. If you do not accept it, then there might be a little bodily problem that you might have. You might harm your own fingers, or you might get it since he is not attached to it. He is atta- little burning sensation here or there. But if it. 7 goes out. You never say did it but you will say, "Mother today my Agya is catching", "Mother my heart is catching". They come and speak like this about them- selves. Agya is catcning means you will be going mad. But one does not feel bad about ched to his Atma, So he says, as an Alma this Chakra is caught or that Chakra is and if you ignore them, then you start rising caught. A person who is suffering from higher and higher and I have already infor- cancer, does not know it. But to a realised med you that all the 'Chiranjivas' start gui- person his attention will tell him that so and ding you and looking after you. If there is so Chakras are out of gear-and so many One realised person in the train, there can- Chakras out of gear means cancer. He need not be an accident and if there is an acci- not go to the doctor but he can diagnose it dent, nobody will die in that train. If a reali- himself. He will not diagnose himself as the doctors do; saying you have the cancer sees a mishap, his attention goes there you are not afraid of these bodily sensations sed soul is walking on the road, and If he Nirmala Yoga

 immediately and the mishap is averted. His attention is being blessed. All this, a scien- beings, joy also starts. These are the feelings tist cannot understand. Somebody just now this is how you enjoy 'Nirvichar' or Samadhi asked me, "if he is guided by internal God, Samadhi does not mean going into uncons- th en he cannot do anything by himself", It ciousness but the unconscious becomes is not so The internal Gods are his own part-and-parcel, You can say that am guided by my brain hence I cannot do any- stage. There are many things like this and a thing else. You can see, the Gods are in your internal parts, by yourself. What is this self left with then ? WVhen you are united previous life, then you can see my vibrations with this Self, you become a hollow persona- lity, then you do not have this feeling of the been doing Devi-Pooja, then you can do Self. All the time you will say "it is going, something of Devi Praman. You can see It is happening, it is flowing". You start look- that also. If you see like that before realisa- ing at yourself as a third person. You do not tion, it means you are a possessed person. identify your self with yourself. It happens. Somebody is giving you ideas. After realisa- You can see these people how they are working. So the Joy' of enjoylng another Human conscious. The universal unconscious becomes conscious. So this is the first vāriety of things happen. Supposing you were doing a lot of 'Jyoti Pooja" in your coming and going. Supposing you have tion you start seeing certain things, then it has some meaning. So the gradual growth of the flower starts manifesting. There is also a part of little enjoyment. the 'Joy' or Anand'. Normally you will find that most of the 'Sahajyogis' will gather kalpa'where there is no Vikalpa'. Just now around a person who is realised and is not in Delbi there are very few Sahaja Yogis like a difficult person. Moreover, if there is that. First of all, by lemperament they are somebody who comes at my feet, who is a Vikalpi. The reason is a complete atmos- very great soul, then the Sahajyogis, enjoy phere of Vikalpa. If you say something, ano- it all the more. Once we were at Calcutta thet will pull you down by saying something staying in a hotel. There was a very nice man who came to see me. He was not a phare is so Vikalpi that you are not yet settled realised person but a very saintly person with a great Purva Sam pada. He just very great "Sahaj Yogis' in Delhi as well. touched my feet. The other Sahaj Yogis Now you will ask, how do you become were in the other rooms. They all rushed in. Nirvikalpa ? Supposing you are in the water, I said, "why did you come ?" They said "a vou are afraid of being drowned; therefore, great joy started coming within them so they vou are picked up and put in the boat, then came". He was all the time on my feet and they were standing there. I said, "neither he Now you can settle down firmly- is going to leave me nor are you going to leave me". For fifteen minutes he was enjoy- ing the Nectar of my fet and they were enjoying, his nectar and the fragrance of it. starts moving. We have in Bombay certain In the second stage, you become 'Nirvi- else. So the thing is that the whole atmos- down in Sahaja Yoga. But, we have also got you are no longer afraid of being drowned. You have to be firmly settled and with that you get certain powers-your Kundatini Nirmala Yoga

 People whose Kundalini rises at least one foot high. They are very developed people. their altention is always deep into the subtle At the Nirvikalpa state, the collective- part. They are not bothered. Such people consciousness becomes subtler and subtler. are the satisfied souls. Such people are At that stage you can understand the very deep significance of things when the reality for Sahaja Yoga. Because, when somebody starts becoming clearer. For example, you start understanding the working of the Kundalini. You start understanding how it have no time for outside gross matters-so the ones, who are going to create the Piller sees such a person, a transformed person like that, they get shocked. "Just look at this man. He is such a great person. He was a You can understand how it very horrid man earlier and how he has penetrates. works out. You can use it for experimenta- changed like this. See how is he transfor- tion with your own hand and you can move med." At this stage, at the Nirvikalpa stage, it as you please, You can cure people and the vibrations emit, then there is -no ques you can show the Kundalini's working in tioning at all. But such a man gets into a different ways. You can combine in permu- terrible temper if he sees somebody is mis- tations and combinations of the Kundalini. behaving with me and cannot bear It. Christ häs said, "forgive all those, for they know not what they are doing." But supposing You can say that in the first year of music, Vou just learn seven notes and two other notes and ordinary ragas. But when you they had done any thing against his Mother, grow subtler and higher, then you know all the minute points of how to create music. he would not have forgiven in the least. In the Bible it is written; "Nothing will be tole- rated against the Holy Ghost". And the At the Nirvikalpa stage you need not put Holy Ghost was his Mother, which is Adi- your hand towards the person. By sitting shakti. Hence you cannot tolerate anything down you know where it is, what is happe- against your Mother or Sahajyoga and one ning where he is catching, what is the prob- can get into a tremendous temper or a lem. What is the 'Collective Problems' ? "Sanharshakti" which they develop. It is You have no doubts about Sahajyoga, nor said that such a man if anybody tries to do about Kundalini nor about anything else, some harm he will immediately bring him There are no doubts at all. At that time you down through their devotion towards their start experimenting about it and you start Mother. We have a notion that a realized using it. Mastery of Kundalini starts. At that person should never lose his temper. It is a stage the Chitta the consciousness be- very wrong idea. Then you will say, "why comes subtle. Somebody was sitting with Krishna killed Jarasandha, why did he kill Me and outside the Sahajyogis knew that Kansa ?" How do you explain the violence of this gentleman is going to get realization Krishna ? How do you explain Devi who and they knew that Mother is giving the killed demons when She came and got into realisation. Such Sahaja Yogis are extremely Her Temper ? She used to get into tremen- pleased at such time and they do not grudge dous temper and then she used to kill. The or grumble about small matters. They are temper of Shiva ! How do you explain this ? carefree and live in a big way. They are not It is a foolish idea to say that they should touchy. Their attention is in the subtle. They not get into the temper even if someone Nirmala Yoga

 It is true that after Nirvikalpa, the Ganesha the whip (r) in his hand and drive them becomes really Jagrut. Such a person is not away. You have a right to get into a temper, tempted by any women. No temptation for another women will exist, except for his own wife, where he goes on living like a celebra- voice when need arises. l am using all the ted husband, because husband and wife are Ayudhas, if you have noticed in my hand, the united in a bond of matrimony. Otherwise, Chakra, the Parasha etc. They are there and he is a sanctified householder. He does not 1 have to use them and you canot stop me have temptation for-any alcohol or anything from using them. This is what I say that by like smoking and is beyond temptation. A tries to kill them. Even Christ had to take if you are in a Nirvikalpa state since you are given that right of even raising one's own reading people don't understand things. A Nirvikalpa man cannot have any templation. man who is quietly sitting and is being pes- One man came to me and told me that he tered by every body is called a realized per- was a realised Soul. I said, "how can it be ? son-what nonsense ! How dare you spite If you are a realised Soul, how are you taking at such a man ? Is the spite of a Devi to be to these things ? You cannot". Now for me, I will tell you it is an impossibility. I have never taken anything. Once my doctor gave me a little brandy as a medicine, 1 don't know why but he felt like giving it to me without Informing me, due to which I vomit- ted so much of blood since my stomach is borne by a realised soul ? To say that a realised soul should not get into a temper is a wrong thing. Now all those Rishis I have talked about and all those people who have talked about me and whose names I have given you, they religious or sacred If I see a woman who are all above Nirvikalpa, but they are very hot has dressed provocatively or something like tempered. These saints cannot tolerate that or sometimes I have to accompany my hypocricy but I can and I have to. No husband to parties and they starta cabaret or "Rakshas' can go near them but if anvbody some such thing. Immediately, I start getling goes they are put into sa noose and are vomitting, sensation like hell and more so hanged on the tree. That's why I say never when we are the chief guests. I make their go near the 'Babaji'. They are higher people, lives miserable, since something happens in no doubt, better than you all are and they my stomach when I see these half-dressed know me very well and they fall at my feet. They are very innocent and simple like chil- is the point because the Dharma is born dren to me. More important is Shri Ganesha. within our stomach. If he gets angry it is not so easy to control him. It is easier to control Shri Shiva's but the subtle style of things starts. Your Mula- not Ganesh's anger. Beware of him. That is dhar becomes chastity itself. It just cannot why during Kundalini Awakening, you get bear these things. You don't have to tell burning sensation and you start dancing or jumping, all this is Ganesha's anger. If you have insulted him by any chance, or insulted interest in all these things. They do not his Mother, He gets into a tremendous fury. women. Now what can I do with my stomach So the stomach becomes the Dharma itself. At this stage them. They have just no interest in such women. They do not flirt nor have they any bolher too much to dress up in such a way Nirmala Yoga

 You give him a Statue of a deity and ask that they would be very attractive to other women or men and at that time they believe him all about this statue whether it is alright like very simple people. They get to simpli- or not. He might say that it is not alright. You city dignified. Then suddenly they become can teel the subtle vibrations, whether it is very creative also. There is one gentleman in Dharma or otherwise. Now can we say in Bombay who got into 'Nirvikalpa' State. say that Ashtavinayaka's are living Gods. He came to me when he was jobless. So I How do you know ? Jyotirlingas are living. told him "why don't you start interior deco- How will you know ? Unless you know the ration work ?" He said that he did not know integrations of all the great souls together different types of wood nor could difleren- and how are you going to judge them ? tiate between one type and another so what That is why you must get Realisation. This could he do ? I said, "now, you are in is what my father told me, I should say he Nirvikalpa so start it". Today he is a very rich man. It just becomes dynamic, because you start seeing the beauty, the 'Saundarya' about realities etc., because you will create was my first Guru, as he was a realised soul. He told me it is of no use talking of the nature. You see-aesthetics are born another Bible or Gita. You do a practical in a person who is a realized Soul. He tihing. You find out 'A-mass-media andI starts seeing aesthetics in everything. The knew that was my mission So I worked on beauty of talking improves. The movements everyboody's Kundalini and tried to find out of the hands improve and your style also permutations, combinations, of their mis- improves. You become a beautiful person- takes and why these people are like this. aesthetics come in. You can become sud- Yo will be surprised that so many-people denly a great poet. We have two people like never knew that they were even in Nirvichara. that who have written beautiful poems and They did not know that they were highly you can also be a great painter if you a placed spirits. If they would have known, then they would not have told many things which have conditioned you. They have said, "Sach Bolo". Who is going to speak 'truth'? They did not know what Human beings are? They are 'lIncarnations'-a great people. already a painter, You get new ideas about painting, new aesthetics. In music, you start understanding absolutely. You may not know what classical music is but you will start understanding the subtle music. From the classical music you will know which is the best for your Atma. You They did not know much about the Human beings and how cunning they are or how see the Atma starts judging everything on that they are all the time against each other. level. If you appoint such a person to judge level, a drama or a painting, whether it is good or self-realisation, as I now have. As such bad, he will correctly judge it good or bad. know human beings but some things, of Then you put his selection to all the critics They For that one has to have a Human Then you put his selection to ail the critice of the world and they will say it is the best judgement Now, you will ask me "how does he know?" Because he can feel by vibrations the Ananda starts settling in you. When you and complete harmony in everything. course, I do not understand. When you get into the Nirvikalpa state, see cilies, any beautiful picture or csene, Nirmala Yoga 10:

 Immediately what you find is a great flow achieved and settled down in our brain. of Ananda coming down. This is the Grace Christ is als here. These two are not incar- that you are just lost into it; like the Ganges nations. They are born as Human beings. flowing over you, you are completely drow- They were born to Sita, as Lava and Kusha. ned into it.Your consciousness becomes Then they were born as Buddha and Maha- Anand. vira and 'Adishakti" was their Mother once again. Later on they were born to 'Fatimabi as Hasan and Husain. They are the two we have never known there is a 'Sarvavyapi milestones you have got, by which you can Shakti but now we are aware of the same. know to what height a Human being can We can feel it coming in our fingers. This rise. Now today they are like incarnations. is the Reality. There is Chaitanya all around There are other styles of personalities like us, which thinks, which understands, orga- Chiranjivas, Bhairava, Ganesha. There are all nises and loves us. All this you come to incarnations. Hanumana later on appeared as 'Gabriel the Angel'. 'Bhairav nath' came as Anand which is the Hridaya starts emitting Saint Michael. The names are different, but it. Later on what you get is Vilaya into they are the same personalities. Devi has At that stage complete Self- also incarnated. There is no doubt about it. realisation takes place. At that stage you The scientist will not understand this but a can control the sun, you can control the Sahaja Yogi can. Because they can imme- diately feel their Vibrations and can ask questions. You can ask questions about me Beyond that there is God's Realizalion. also and you will get the vibrations. For that There are three stages to that also, but just at least your Deities have to rise and say now I have told about this. 'Sat-Chit-Anand' Yes', You may or you may not get 'Realiza- state. The "God's Realisation' is the stage tion' but the answer you will definitely get. In reality you come to know that till now know the knowledge part of it. Then the Ananda. moon, you can control every element. which, Gautam Budha and Mahavira only had May God bless you. 21st March 1923 was the most auspicious day in the history of the World, when H. H. Mataji condescen- ded to save mankind from Adharma and help him to realise Divinity within himself. What pooja can offer to ADI SHAKTI, the creatrix of the Universe 1 On this occasion all Sahaja Yogis express their deep feelings of gratitude and rededicate themselves to the cause of Sahaja Yoga. Pray, Mother kindly accept this Pooja, howsoever, imperfect it is. 11 Nirmala Yoga

 Our Position in Sahaja Yoga In speaking of the Kingdom of Heaven, Christ says in the Gospel: "position" in the human sense of the term, because the "ego" has vanished. It is repla- ced by a state of consciousness pervaded by "The last will be first and the first last" purity, sweetness and a more authentic and (Mat 20.16) profound understanding of a new Reality which is delivered from the constraints of and also "For everyone who exalls him- the "ego". This "state" sends forth the self will be humbled, and he who humbled vibrations of love of Mataji, and one surren- (Luke 14.11) ders oneself to its support and its guidance. It will also act on our brain when it is time himself will be exalted". Seen in the context of Sahaja Yoga this means that those who, accerding to their in Sahaja Yoga, which will in effect be esta- own "ego", are the first are, in fact, outside blished by deepening this stage through an the Kingdom of Heaven, in which there is no place for the "ego", while those who are Vibrations in order to send Them forth, and humble and wiling to receive the Divine through the development of our Selves by Grace (the Vibrations) shall have a place in bur communion with the Collective Self the Kingdom; they shall be the first. to engage in action. That is our "position" evergreater capacity to absorb Mataji's made up by the other Sahaja Yogis. We know that there are "categories" if not an hierarchy in Sahaja Yoga. What does this mean ? These categories or hierarchy can certainly not be appreciated by our minds. In other words, the "first" will not necessarily be those who first joined Sahaja Yoga, nor those who think" that they have "done" a lot for Sahaja Yoga, nor those who "consider" themselves to be better Sahaja Yogis than others because they have no problems. All these attitudes are generated by a very subtle and even pernicious "ego". No, our position in Sahaja Yoga depends on a completely different type of principle; that of our thoughtless awareness when, by the Grace of the Holy Spirit, the Heart, the Self, is truly awakened. Then there is no question Devi is Chindwara, near Nagpur and not of being superior or feeling that one is more advanced, etc. One does not occupy a -ANTOINETTE SUSSEX Switzerland "Laziness is the worst enemy of Sahaja Yga" SHRI MATAJI Correction Birth place of H. H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Nagpur as mentioned in "Mother's Horo- scope" in Jan.-Feb. '81 issue. Nirmala Yoga 12

 Letters Zuerich, 10th February My dear sisters and brothers, Back to Europe, back to the eold, the snow and the wind. But it is impossible for us to forget your evershining sun, your unforgetable sunsets, the light and the bright- ness of your country. Colourful countrysides, unspoiled villages, the freshness of your atmosphere and the daily life of all the people we have met have invited us to peace and deeper meditation. And the Sahaja Yogis we have seen have led us to discover the Inner joy of the inhabitants of your blessed country. We know that we have got, in the West a bad habit to thank for everything. So we don't let speak our mind but our hearts. We would try, through this tetter, to express on behalf of all the western Sahaja Yogis that you have earned so much our gratitude for the way you have welcomed us in your great country, for the way you have given us so much love, joy and brotherhood. You, all of you, have been so sweet with us that really we could see how our beloved Mother acted through your smiles, attitudes and generosity, Our heart is filled with thankfulness and admiration. Your devotion to our Mother has been a perfect example of surrender and love. And we have felt the reflection of your devotion on your own behaviour, how wise you are, how confident you are, how you begin to master the intensity of the present ! Here in the west we see the future, we foresee, we plan and our speedometer goes mad. We don't have time to realize the beauty of the present and it is only through the present that we can enjoy our Mother's creation. We have seen you for the first time, and very soon we felt that you have resided in our hearts for ages and ages and in the first acquaintance we have recognized you as our our brothers and sisters, out of joy and eager to share it with all of us. We had just to receive and let us be pushed by this dynamics of affection. Our greatest experience is that we have seen for the first time intermediates between our Beloved Mother and us. Through your awareness you understand much more and you discover much more easily the Divine Beauty of The Adi Shakti, because you feel much more and you absorb through your acting spirit and not through a tired mind. At the same time your ego is deflated and your humility greater. Thanks to your behaviour we see Mother higher and higher, more divine and more powerful, because we see how you behave with Her with full attention, respect, devotion and adoration. You speak to Her when She speaks to you and you would never begin to speak at once, or interupt Her. You respect the protocol. Nirmala Yoga 13

 May we follow your straightforwardness and your enthusiasm in order to glorify the One who is worthy of being seen and understood only by our spirit. It was a great time where the West and the East dissolved in our Mother's love, when we discovered our own beauty enlightened by God and learned how to respect each other and how to show affection to each other. This feeling of togetherness and communicative love, bestowed by our beloved Mother is our goal and achievment. It is through this circulation of love and joy among us that the collective being manifests more and more, that Mother's divinity penetrates into us deeper and deeper. We all pray the Creator of this Universe and we make altogether this absolute promise that we shall see only the beauty which is sparkling in us, we shall love each other with more intensity remembering how much our Mother loves us, we shall share among us the feeling of belonging to the children of God. Let us put ourselves under Mother's protection, let us meet again and again under the intensity of Mother's presence and let us glorify Her all together all the time because It is only through Her Grace that we were able, my dear brothers and sisters, to discover your own beauty and the sparkling of your joyful spirit. Much much love and Jai Mataji Arneau, Maria-Amelia, Marie-Laure, Gregoire, Catherine, Christine Brothers and Sisters of India With open arms and open hearts you welcomed us from the west. With Mother's love and grace we have been invited and your giving of love has showed us much more about the beauty of life. The past weeks have been filled with many experiences. From the mass realization in Kadus to the making of a film 24 storeys up in Bombay. You have given us so much from your beautiful hearts and taught us the love, missing from our society. Thank you for it all and thank you dear Mother for making it possible. Jai Mataji Phillip. Nirmala Yoga 14

 NEW DELHI February 1981 Dearest Brothers and Sisters of India Our stay in India is now drawing to an end and it has been such a rich and deep We thank you for the experience for us all, we have so much to thank you all for. warmth of your hospitality, your love and your patience. We will be returning home with such respect and love for Mother India and her people. For most of us it was our first meeting with our Mother and what a perfect backdrop India has been for this great occasion ! We thank Mataji, our Mother with all our hearts for the joy and learning of the past two months and we thank you too for your great generosity, and for all that you have done to make us so welcomed and so at home. With our deepest love and gratitude. Wwww Jai Mataji An Australian Sahaja Yogini International Correspondence Group 8. Hari Jairam 9. Kathie Duff 10. Anu Cartton 11. Peter & Linda Pierce 12. John Watkinson 13. lan Lewis 14. Alan Brown Sahaja Yoga Centre 44 Chelsham Road, London S W 4 15. Mia Rodosleric 18. Yoga Singh 7 Shenley Road, Heston, Middlesex 16. Magda, Danya and Caleb Williams, 15 Well Walk London N W 3 17. Graham Pottinger 27 Constantine Road, 19. Anna Palmer 36 Winfold Road, Waterbeach, Combridge London N W 3 Nirmala Yoga 15

 Devotion LL Sahaja Yogis become twice-borns the respective chakra. Devotion to the when they get realisation from the Mother amounts to devotion to all Gods. Divine Mother. It is only the Divine Mother who can lead them to salvation because she is one with Primordial Father "Shiva-Shaktaikya-roopini'. Sahaja Yogis have to consider one to be better than another. a glimpse of the ultimate stage of the evolu- tionary process, when they go into the thoughtless blissful awareness at Her lotus feet. Each one therefore knows the goal and Before leaving the bed, one should bow depending upon physical and mental condi- Devotion has many aspects, some are gross and some subtle. It may not be correct as all are necessary in the interest of spiri- tual progress. Meditation in the early hours of morning is of immense importance. with great regards to the Mother Earth. It tions, may have a long way to go, Having may be useful to meditate in the bed itself for sometime before leaving the bed, but got this never-before-experienced, realisa- tion from the Mother, the conviction should atter cleaning oneself one should meditate before the Mother's photograph. 'Bandhana' to self and to the seat should be done before starting the meditation. Bow before the mother in great reverence and beseech be firm in mind that devotion to the Mother and meditating as per her instructions, is the only way to salvation (Jeevan Mukti). The mother's powers are all pervading Her forgiveness for wrong doings and the and distance cannot inhibit the spiritual blessings of becoming Her worthy child. The communication between Sahaja Yogis and Pooja should be performed after bath using the Mother; collective consciousness is Her good quality material and a clean cloth. It is precious gift to them. Her presence can advisable to sit in meditation after Pooja always be fell through vibratory awareness. She knows the activities of each of Her 'Arti and meditate. Attending the pro- sons and daughters through Her all perva- ding powers, takes care of their well being, prevents and corrects the disorders in their systems and keeps raising their Kundalinis. Her response to their call is always assured. She is keeping Her promise of 'Yogakshemam importance. However going to an extreme Vahamyaham'. also, for some time. In the evening perform grammes of collective meditation in a centre once a week is necessary for well being and progress. External and internal purity are of utmost in respect of superficial cleanliness is not desirable as it may detract the attention It is incorrect to assume that Gods and from via media. Nevertheless, salt water the Mother are different. All Gods fully treatment before going to bed (i.e, medita- manifest themselves within Her and They do ting, with feet dipped in lukewarm water with not like to be distinguished from Her. Any salt, in front of the mother's photograph) such notion is bound to cause damage to should be taken regularly. It is the specific Nirmala Yoga 16

 instruction of the Mother to all Sahaja Yogis. them. This courtesy is often extended to It keeps away physical and other disorders. fhe Mother but, being different from others, She does not need it. If she asks someone It is necessary to be always alert as regards the chakras. They should be always kept cleared of the external "badhas' and catches. Regular salt water bath shall help touch Her being without Her permission. ensure this. More often than not, ingres of "badhas which cause physical and other ailments, is through eyes and food. Special clear own chakras, raising the Kundalini, care in this regard is always advisable. getting into Bandhanā, raising left or right Deities are awake when the chakras are open and help Sahaja Yogis Getting in "Bandhana' before going to bedalso protecls Yogi audiences. All these can be done trom badhas': to do so, it is for clearing the chakras of that person and not for Her personal pleasure, All should therefore malke it a point not to Using symbolic gestures of hands to side to correct imbalance should be desis- ted from when we are among non Sahaja equally effective with the attention. It serves no useful purpose to throng the gate of the A devotee always likes to please his hall to receive the Mother at the place of deity. Our Mother is so kind that she is Her discourse. Prelerably all should be pleased to see Her children happy and seated before Her arrival and respectfully progressing well in Sahaja Yoga. She visits stand up as she enters the hall and receive different places and countries to meet them Her with folded hands. It is imperative to and solve their problems. They should be seek Her permission before garlanding. equally responsive and show more progress Generally she allows it soon afier the arrival every time She meets them, instead of telling when she also enquires about the welfare Her the problems. Undoubtedly, by practising of the people. Problems, if any, should be Her teachings Sahaja Yogis will be the hap- explained briefly at this time. If she does piest people in the world. not tell the solution to any problem imme- diately it should not be insisted upon. Her It is natural to feel love for the Mother.Bilence indicates that she has noted the Silence is the best expression of it, as she problem and a solution is soon to follow. understands the subtlest things from the heart of hearts. Rushing forward to touch Her feet without permission, attempting to and respectful treatment to all tend to be attract Her attention, speaking unasked, misunderstood. It is necessary to observe meeting Her at Her residence are undesir- all decorum and protocol in Her presence able manners of expressing this love. Our and be humble, respectful, attentitive and Divine Mother is the quintessence of purity. responsive to Her. All deities always attend While it gives others great pleasure to fall to Her and do not tolerate even the slightest on Her feet, she may find it troublesome disrespect to Her. They may show some due to 'Badhas' in their beings. It is custo- restraint in Her presence out of modesty and mary in India, for the young to serve the love for Her but beyond a cerlain limit they elders by pressing their feet who in turn bless may act, in which case punishment is ines- Her modesty and easy approachability 17 Nirmala Yoga

 of this life but also previous ones. Allerna- capable. All personal discussion should end as soon as she enters the hall and tively we may come across external negati- should never be done in Her presence. Dis- vity in daily life. turbance in Her speech must be avoided. She does not need any explanations, suggestions or comments. Inner negativity may identify itself with outer negativity, at an opnortune moment and if not checked, may neutralise all the Devotion is not possible without surrender. good influence of the Mother. It is therefore Ego and Super ego are the obstacles to sur- render. A wEstern Sahaja Yogi truely says, should go to any of the negative gurus, or "I look will you notf try to keep me from myself ?" from the discussions on negativity and Surrendering ego and super ego at the Lotus mixing with negative people. Vibrations Feet of the Mother is an essential step should be checked before entering a temple. towards self-realisation. Surrendering is accepting-that the Mother is supreme and the creatrix of the universe, that she knows essential that after realisation, no one k at my ego and smile, What tricks read their literature. It is better to abstain The Divine Mother should have a place in our hearts. Always remembering Her or what is best for us; that every spoken word maintaining thoughtlessness will cultivate of Hers is pranava manifest. Surrende- ring is forgetting past experiences, Gurus, affairs. Daily shoe beating or chappal and knowledge gained from reading books, beating) of one's own name can remove and adopting Her teachings sincerely. It is internal subtle negativity. Bandhana to leaving all the problems to Her instead of negative people and shoe beating of their solving them through ego. An easy way to surrender is to emulate Her way of life and improve them. Ignoring other's mistakes Her qualities. an attitude of detachment towards mundane names will keep them away and may even and follies instead of criticising them or complaining against them promotes magna- In the moments of temptation, provoca- nimity. Efforts to inculcate these qualities tion, or tension or depression, one can always ask oneself, "Would the Mother be- have as I am doing ?". Remembering Her and thinking what she would do in the seeds of Sahaja Yoga sown by the Mother circumstances, should be a guiding force may be very helpful. Not-with-standing all that has been said, will germinate and grow into big trees only and a great help in keeping away negative in the proper environments. The Mother pro- forces tects them by her all pervading powers, but the individuals have to provide requisite For the twice-borns life is a constant environments. They have to make judicious struggle with the negativity, assisted by use of the freedom of choice given to them their own ego and super ego, which may confront them. Negativity may be inherent; Mother. Almighty God is waiting to receive existing within us in the subtlest form accu- mulated as a result of past Karmas, not only have only themselves to blame. and persevere along the path shown by the them. Those who cannot reach him will Nirmala Yoga 18

 You are in my mind, You are in my heart, You are in my brain, You are in me every where ! Think yourself what you are Alive because I am alive Where will you be if I am nowhere You arego none can follow Big or small what you may You make your own way One comes down for you You arego none can follow I laugh at you as I realise you What a foolish thing you are None can reach the real You You arego none can follow Ages passed everybody knows What is what and why is so Slight a slip way for you You arego none can follow Follow me, Follow me I have no place for you I can rule, I can rule you, You arego none can follow UR OUT UR OUT YOU ARE EGO O'Mother my light is ON, Know the source from Thyself, Help me keep it on, keep it on. M. B. RATNANNAVAR Nirmala Yoga 19

 A Year of Great Blessings 980 in Sydney, Australia, saw many growing faith and love for H. H. Mataji to do great and joyous changes in 60 to 70 her footbaths and sharing of vibrations. It was so wonderful to see the blossoming of Joy and faithfulness, showing so specta- 1 people from all walks of life. With the return to Sydney after a two cularly on her tace. months stay in india with H. H. Mataji Nirmala Devi, Warren Reeves and Terence It was after only two months that she triumphantly arrived at the centre with her, she had brought all her prescribed pills. Handful of technicoloured poison were flushed down the toilet with praises of Blackly, by the grace of H.H. Mataji started giving Kundalini awakening. At first it was to close friends but soon blossomed to regu- lar public meetings in a local hall. Would like to relate just a few of the Jai Mataji at each flush. Nova cheeks blos- miraculous transformations we all witnessed soming with colour and youth had tears of in this short period of time. Truly all the 1oy and a very special enlightment in her transformations were miraculous but there heart. are those, as will be seen that stand out as great examples of the power of our beloved Mother H.H. Mataji. It must be remembered Yogis, was a seeker who was desperately that all of these transformations that took frying to find the answer to the purpose of place happened in Australia while H. H. her being. She also had breast cancer which Mataji was residing in UK a fact which the doctor wanted to operate on. She had proves the all pervading nature of a great refused permission for him to operate and Wanda, a friend of one of the Sahaja soon after was introduced to Sahaja Yoga. She, like many ardent seekers, had been inv- Incarnation. patient of Warren, or I should olved with many different teachings and alth- say, an ex-patient, arrived at the Sahaja Yoga ough she knew she had not found the answer centre in Sydney looking haggard, grey in had become identified with some aspects of the different teachings. She was given by middle aged woman who had been under- the grace of H. H. Mataji Kundalini awake- going electro-convulsive therapy (ECT) for ning and slowly she came to see that a light several years as well, she had been pres- had been switched on within her being. The cribed 14 different types of drugs, which she faith she had held from all the past involve- had been regularly taking. After the first few ments she soon came to see mere misidenti- weeks of being with the group, and receiving fications and they were unmasked and fell vibrations in front of the photagraph of H. H. away, Life became much simpler and joyful. Matajl, we all started noticing natural colour Very soon after joining Sahaja Yoga she coming to her face and her walk becoming returned to the Doctor for a check up. He that little but lighter. She continued, with was absolutely amazed that the breast Nova, a colour, and totally depressed. She is a Nirmala Yoga 20

 cancer had been cured and that no traces of H. H. Mataji Nirmala Devi.. the disease could be found. THE H EALING TOU CH Wanda, like all of us, found that not only It is natural in this world of suflering for had her cancer been cured but she had been people to think and act selfishly and egoisti- given the greatest gift, the answer to all her prayers and the promise of all the scrip- cally and because of it, it is equally natural tures. She had been given her second birth, actual contact and union with the Divine is natural for people to favour themselves and is on the path to full realisation of the and to neglect others; it is natural for people self. She does not have to read any more books or grape down any more alleys. Her path is there, in full light and all obstacles are removed. It is all done with such Love for suftering and unhappiness to follow. It to allow their own desires to run into greed and lust and all manner of evii but because r of it they must suffer endlessly. These things are natural but are not absolute, for, if people would listen to good teachings and do more considerate and Such are the blessings of our beloved careful thinking the suffering and unhappi- and Joy. Mother H. H. Mataji Nirmala Devi. We can ness might be avoided. H. H. Mataji with only pray that we can be forever at Her infinite compassion has shown the world a Lotus Feet. safe path to enlightenment and emancipa- David De Swardt tion. If people would believe in it and follow it all their suffering and unhappiness would be ended. Sydney To Mother at Puja H. H. Mataji is truly an Avatar in the universal tradition. Therefore all may come to her for spiritual help and guidance. "Mother you are my heart, You can give us food, K. S. Aiyer You are our heart, You give us love, And we give You flowers and honey, And yoghurt and sugar and flowers again. Mother you are our God, And we give you presents, And Kumkum and the miror that you bought, Madras Articles, Suggestions And a blessed comb to comb Your beautiful hair, & I love Your beautiful hair, Because it is golden and silver and beautiful colours, Experiences are requested We love you very much, Mother" Om Shri Mataji Nirmala Ma. Editor -LINDA PEARCE (Aged 6 years) Nirmala Yoga 21

 ी 5 आ न न्द सहज योग की महता प्राचीन काल से ही गुरणों का प्रचार एवं प्रसार करें जिससे मानव स्वीकार की गई हैं उसे आर्म-साक्षात्कार का संत्रसे थ्रेष्ठ साधन माना गया है। "अ्रय तु परमी तथा श्नैः शनेः मनुष्यता की ओर अग्रसर होता धम्मः यद्योगेनात्म दशंनम्" (मनु०) योग के द्वारा रहे । चरित्र की महिमा एवं गरिमा अपार है । आत्मदर्शन करना सबसे बड़ा घर्म है । सहज इस का योगान्त्गत कुण्डलिनी जागरण विधि की दीक्षा देवात्मा पूण्यशीला माताजी श्री निमंला देवी जी बंदनोय माता जी द्वारा दी जाती है। जिससे हैं जो साक्षात कूण्डलिनी माता का अवतार हैं। साधक पल्लावित एवं दिव्य इन्होंने अपने अनुठे सम-सामयिक आचार [विचार आह्वाद प्राप्त करता है। आशीवादात्मक प्रसाद वितरण कर अपनी अरथाह तथा गुणों को ग्रहण कर संसार के समक्ष एक मूल्य संपदा का स्वामी बनाने में समर्थ है। समृद्ध अद्भुत महान आश्चर्य प्रस्तुत किया है । अतीत का आकर्षण एवं वीते युग की भव्यता उद्भाषित हो उठती है। आाधुनिक युग में समस्त विश्व के लिये सहजयोग महत्वपूर्ण देन है । अनादिकाल से गूढ़ एवं व्यापक विषय रहा है । शारीरिक और मानसिक समृद्धि का महर्वपूर्ण विश्व का कोई भाग ऐसा नहीं जहां घर्म किसी न आधार "कुण्डलिनी उत्थान" प्रक्रिया ही है किसी रूप में विद्यमान न हो-देश काल एवं आध्यात्मिक मूल्यों को जन मानस में पुनः परिस्थितियों के अनुसार इसका वास्तविक स्वरूप प्रतिष्ठापित करने का प्रशंसनीय प्रयास पूज्य बदलता रहता है। जिन लोगों के विचारों में माताजी ने सहजयोग द्वारा सम्पन्न किया है । समाज अपना शस्तित्व वनाये रखने में सफल हो सांगोपांग वर्णन कठिन है । ऐसे ही कुमुमित होकर मुदिति प्रेरणाप्रद निश्छल एवं सदव्यवहार से पूर्वजो के चारित्रिक श्रादर्शो साधारणतया मानव जीवन के लिये धर्म किसी परम्परागत धर्म को मान्यता प्राप्त नहीं है वे भी व्यापक घर्म के किसी न किसी अंग को निःसन्देहः प्राणिमात्र में मानव ही सर्वश्रेष्ठ स्वीकार कर जीवन यापन करते हैं। धर्म के है। ओर उसका आधार स्वयं उसका चरित्र है। इसी अपने चरित्र के कारण वहै सर्वोपर है। परन्तु यह तथ्य भुलाया नहीं जा सकता कि समाज जब तक उसका चरित्र उसके पास है, तव तक व्यवस्था के अरारंभ से पूर्व मानव की वह अवस्था उसका यह गौरवपूर्णं अस्तित्व भी अक्षुण है। किसी न किसी रूप में विद्यमान है । परन्तु स्पष्ट न्यथा उसमें एवं अन्य जीवों में कोई अन्तर नहीं रूप से यह सामाजिक व्यवस्था के समय से ही है। संसार में अब तक जितने भी चरित्रवान मानव के समक्ष आया-आज भी समाज से अलग आरम्भ होने के समय के बारे में भी विवाद है महापुरुष हुये हैं और संसार जिन्हें पूज्य मानता हैं यलग इसका अस्तित्व स्वीकारा नहीं जा सकता । एवं नत-मस्तक होता है उन सबने अनादि काल से क्रमशः मानव जीवन का बिकास होता गया और ही सद्गुणों के आद्शों की स्थापना की है। इस धर्म का स्वरूप भी समाज के लिये स्पष्ट होता प्रकार उन्होंने ज्ञानी एवं बुद्धिमान देवात्माओं को गया अत: समाज का अर्थ किसी न किसी घर्म से बाध्य किया कि वे स्वयं चरित्रवान होकर उनके ही लिया जाता है। धर्म का सामाजिक रूप Nirmala Yoga 22

 निश्चित होते हो तत्समबन्धी विचार कि धर्ं क्या परिभाषा के अन्तर्गत है क्योंकि वे अनुप्राणित है, उठता है । इस विवेचन में "जो धारण करे वही आनन्द लहरियों द्वारा आत्मवेदं सर्वत्र" तथा धर्म है-घर्म का रूप निश्चित हआा जिसके अनुसार संस्कृति का निर्माण हुआ । सामाजिक व्यवस्था के साथ भी गहरा सम्वन्ध है पश्चात ही दूसरे के घर का दीपक जलाय। जा क्योंकि घम अर्थ, काम, मोक्ष में इसका स्थान प्रथम संकता है। आत्म- जान होने पर ही यथावं लोक है। इसकी पृष्टभूमि व्यापक है, युग के अनुसार संग्रह हो सकता है। आत्म जानी पुरुष दूसरों के परिस्थितियों में परिवर्तन होता है इन्हीं के कल्याण के लिये प्रेरित होता है। वेयक्तिक आधार पर उस विशिष्ट युग है । स्वधम सिद्धि इसके पालन से ही संभव पर धर्म से इसका विरोध संभव नहीं (गीता) आध्यात्मिक क्षेत्र में कम भक्ति श्र [ज्ञान को सभी जिसका शरीर बलवान एवं हृष्ट पूष्ट है परन्तु ने मान्यता दी है, अपने स्वभाव व अनुभव को मन में बुरी वासना, असद्विचार, काम, कोध, लोभ, आधार मान कर। यह श्रव सत्य है कि प्रारी मोह घृगणा दय वर हिसां, विना अपने को बातावरण के अनुक्कूल बनाये रह ई्यों, स्वार्थ आदि दुर्गुरा और दुष्ट विचार एव ही नहीं सकता-उसके अ्रस्तित्व में ही खतरा पैदा विकार निवास करते हैं, वह कदापि निरोग नहीं हो जाना स्वाभाविक है। प्राीमात्र आन्तरिक मत का रोगी सदा जलता रहता है। वह माताजी और बाह्य सामंजस्य की आवश्यकतावश ऋपने द्वारा दशायि सहज योग द्वारा ही अमोध वान्ति अंतंजगत में प्रपने बिचारों और अनुभवों के आधार की उपलब्धि कर सकता है सुन्दर वही है जिसका पर विचरण कारता है । मानसलोक की यही स्थिति हृदय सुन्दर है। इसको शुद्ध करो एक-२ दोष है । अंतर्जगत की अनुभूतियों के अ्राधार पर चुन-२ कर निकाल बाहर करी सद्गुराों को हुृढ-२ वहिजगत का निर्माण होता है उ्यक्ति काम क्रोध, कर हृदय में बसाओो। माता जी का कथन यह भी लोभ, मोह, हानि, लाभ, जीवन, मरग, यश, श्रपयश है कि "धरती का घन-धन नहीं सच्चा घन हृदय से रहित शुद्ध हृदय से सुख दुःख आदि द्वन्दों में में रहता है । उत्तम विचार और चरित्रवल ही स्थिर वृद्धि वाला सिद्धि असिद्धि से समता भाव से परम घन है । सूख न पहुँचा सकों तो दुख तो सम्पन्न और निष्पक्ष भाव से लोक संग्रह की भावना किसी को न दो; पृथ्वी पर से पाप का भार हुल्का लेकर अपनी आत्म तुष्टि में ही व्यावहारि का जीवन न कर सको तो पापमय जीवन बिता कर उसके का संवालन करना है, जिससे अन्तर्जगत रौर बाह्यजं- भार को मत बढ़ाओ । जोवन को निर्मल, सादा, गत में किसी प्रकार का असामजस्य न ही वस्तुतः स्पष्ट, सरल, धअद्धायुक्त आनन्दमय बनाओं अर रत्म ज्ञान की यष्टि और समर्टि रवूप में ठीक विवेक को सदव साथ निरुपण इसी आधार पर किया जा सकता है । सच्चिदानन्द धन निर्गरण निराकार बरह्म के सिवा मानव जीवन का विकास और उसके उद्देश्य की र कुछ भी नहीं है । अतः उस आनत्दमय ब्रह्म प्राप्ति इसी में संनिहित है । वहतमान जटिल का मन से कुण्डलिनी योग द्वारा इस प्रकार मनन परिस्थितियों में सहजयोगान्तगत कृण्डलिनी उत्थान का अभ्यास करना कि पूर्ण आनन्द, अचल आनिन्द, की देवी ध्रव आनन्द, नित्य आनन्द, अचार आनन्द, आत्म दीपोभव" का वोध कराती हैं। जिस प्रकार अपने घर के दीपक को प्रका शित करने के " ॥ाT की मान्यताएँ बनती मान्यतां के आधार पर सत्य निरुपरण संभव है, नहीं-यह सब सहज योग द्वारा ही सहज सुलभ है मन की निरोगता ही ास्तविक तिरोगता है प्रभिमान, कपट, ा रखो क्योंकि एक प्रक्रिया जो माता जी थ्री निर्मला अनुपम द्वारा अनुसंधानित एवं प्रसारित है वह धर्म की [अचिन्त्य आनन्द ज्ञानस्वरूप आनन्द, परम आनन्द Nir mala Yoga 23

 महान आनन्द बस एक अरनन्द के अतिरिक्त कुछ शब्द और प्रतीति की स्मृति भली भांति लूप्त हो भी न हो-व्रह्म [ध्येय है वुद्धि की वृत्ति घ्यान है जाने पर अपने रूप से शूल्य के सदृश केवल ध्येय श्रर साधक ध्याता है। ध्यान करने पर वृद्धि मात्र के स्वरूप को प्रत्यक्ष कराने वाली चित की तन्मय होकर, तद्प हो जाती है तब यह त्रिपुटी स्थिति ही निर्वितर्क नहीं रहती एकमात्र ब्रह्म ही रह जाता है और वितंडावाद के चक्कर में न पड़ कर सन्त कबीर साधक की ब्रह्मा में स्थिति हो जाती है और तब वह जी कहते हैं कि "साघो सहज समाधि भली है" निर्मल आनन्द स्वरूप बन जाता है इसी को अष्टांग जो सहज़ योग द्वारा ही सम्भव है इसमें अष्टांग योग में सविकल्प समाधि की संज्ञा प्रदान की गई योग के यम नियम आ्रदि कठिन साधनाओं के है। "तत्र शब्दार्थ ज्ञान विकल्प संकीरण सचित की केर में एक गृहस्थ को पड़ता उचित नहीं जान समापति" (पांतजली योग दर्शन १।४२) उनमें पड़ता । शुब्द, अर्थ शऔर ज्ञान इन तीनों के विकल्पों से संकीर्ण मिली हुई समाधि सवितक है इसके बाद समाधि है इस समाधि सर्व खल्विद ब्रह्म (छान्दोग्यपनिषद ३॥१४॥१) जड चेतन चर अचर सब में ब्रहा की ही स्वरूप जब साधक स्वयं ब्रहम में तद्रप हो जाता है तब ये शब्द अर्थ ज्ञान नहीं रहते वरन केवल ब्रह्म है। हृदय प्रदीप को प्रज्वलित कर जीवन सफल (आत्मा) का स्वरूप ही रहता है। यही निर्विकल्प करने में ही भलाई है। समाधि है| 'स्मृति परिशुद्धो स्वरूप शून्येवार्थं निर्मासा निवर्तको (पा० यो० दर्शन १४३) आनन्द स्वरूप मिश्र ॐ माँ ी री पाहिली मी डोळा विश्वची ही जननी हृदय सिंहासनी विराजीत । घ ॥। क्षमेची ही देवता, दयेची ही मूर्ति कृपा दृष्टि सदा लेकरां वरती ॥ १ ।। शुभ्र बस्त्र नेसे निर्मला माता दिसे प्रेमळ शांत हास्य वदन ते ।।२ ॥ जडावाचे असे गळा मंगल-सूत्र भाळाव री टिळा कंकवाचा ॥ ३ ॥ लाल चुड़े यांनी मंडीत ते हात पायांत जोडवी शोभतांत ॥ ४ ॥ मधुर वाणी एकूनी निर्मला मातेची होत असे आनंद माझे मनी ।। ५ । प्रसन्न वदन दिसे महादेवी तिच्या चरणी लीन होऊ सर्व जण ।। ६ ।। सौ० सुधा गिजरे नवी दिल्ली 24 Nirmala Yoga

 (Contd, from 2nd Cover) On Mataji "Truly I say to you, all sins will be forgiven the sons of men, and whatever blasphemies they utter: but whoever blasphe- mes against the Holy spirit never has forgiveness but is guilty of an eternal sin". Mark 3.28 And whoever says a word against the son of man will be for- given; but whoever speaks against the Holy spirit will not be torgiven". Matthew 12.32 "I have yet many things to say to you but you cannot bear them now, when the spirit of truth comes, he will guide you into all the truth". John 16.12 "These things I have spoken to you while I am still with you. But the Counselor, the Holy spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, he will teach you all things, and bring to your remembrance all that I have said to you. John 14 25 On the Collective Consciousness of the Sahaja Yogis with the Virata "In that day you will know that I am in my Father, and you in me, and I in you". John 14.18 "Father, the glory which thou hast given me I have given to them. that they may be one even as we are one, I in them and thou in me, that they may become perfectly one, so that the world may know that thou hast sent me and hast loved them even as thou hast loved me". John 17.22 Om Twamewa Sakshat Shri Mary Jesus Sakshat Shri Adi Shakti Bhagawati Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Namo Namah Compiled by- GREGOIRE DE KALBERMATTEN

 A CHALLEGE TO SCIENCE and an appeal to Sahaja Yogis) Science is a form of seeking. It confines many of the following details to my address itself to the external world and to 'objective given below ? phenomena'. It is interesting for us to see that philosophers of science themselves have realized that there is no such thing as an objective fact. So Sahaja Yoga presents a dilemma; the experience of realisation and the perception of Chaitanya is subjective and yet it is something of such importance that science cannot afford to ignore it. 1. Name of patient 2, Address of the patient 3. Occupation of the patient 4. Age of the patient 5. Name and address of patient's doctor and details of any hospitals visited (I.e. doctor in-charge of admission, dates of admission and any known record or bureau number) Perhaps, if no way is found to solve this dilemma, science will become an irrelevance as, the drama of these last days is played out. At the same time, science plays a very in Western important role-especially society. It is by appeals to Science, rather than to Religion, that actions and ideas are justified. So, if science can be brought up to the level of Sahaja Yoga, then we, who are realized scientists, should try to do it. 6. The patients symptoms 7. The doctor's diagnosis 8. The doctor's advice and treatment 9. The details of any Sahaja treatment Although the scientist can not measure or even objectively detect the vibrations of the Holy Spirit, all the Sahaj Yogis know that these vibrations, although subtle, do affect 10. The patient's progress 11. A photograph of the patient and any other information that seems relevant: the physical, body. Perhaps medical science will be able to measure this healing that Sahaj Yoga produces as a by-product, and so begin to solve the dilemma, David Spiro 17 Crescent Court, Park HiAI, Clapham, London SW4 8HR England. A collection of the case-histories of people cured by Mataji or by the Sahaja Yogis has been started. If any one knows of such a case, could they please send as Jai Mataji Edited & Published by Sh. S. C. Rai, 43, Bunglow Road, Delhi-110007 and Printed at Ratnadeep Press, Darya Ganj New Delhi-110002. One Issue Rs. 5,00 Annual Subscription Rs. 20-00 Foreign (By Airmail) £ 4.0



----------------------

1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-0.txt 
 NIRMALA YOGA
नि र्मला योग
March-April '81
Vol. 2
Bi-Monthly
Year 1
H. H. MATAJI SHRI NIRMALA DEVI
"Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns all the religions and
seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga-THE UNION"
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-1.txt 
 Words of Christ the Lord, the Aum and the Amen,
the beginning of the Creation, the most beloved
son of Shri Mataji
On Vibrations:
"I am the living bread which came down from heavenr if any
one eats of this bread, he will tive foreveri and the hread
Which I shall give for the lite of the world is my flesh",
John 6.51
"If any one thirst, let him come to me and drink. He who
believes in me, as the scripture has sald, Out of his heart
shall flow rivers of living waters"
John 7.37
On Agya Chakra:
"Strive to enter by the narrow door: for many, i tell you, will
Luke 13.24
seek to enter and will not be able".
"I am the door; if any one enters by me, he will be saved, and
will go in and out and find pasture"
John 10,9
On Kundalini's Action
"To what shall I compare the Kingdom of God ? It is like
leaven that a woman took and hid in threemeasures of flour
till it was all leavened;
what is the Kingdom of God like? And to what shall I compare
it ? itis like a grain of mustard seed which a man took and
sowed in his garden; and it grew and became a tree, and the
birds of the air made nests in its branchas"
Luke 13.18
(Contd on 3rd Cover)
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-2.txt 
 EDITORIAL
We are glad lo bring out Ihe second issue of Nirmala Yoga, following H H.
Mataji's programmes of Kundalini awakening in Delhi. She has been visiting different
places in India since December, Thousands of people attended the programmes and
got realisation at Her lotus feet. They are really lucky to get it without any efforts from
their side, as, for ancient seekers Kundalini awakening and rising was the only achieve-
ment of their lives for which they left all mundane affairs and lived at secluded spots.
Centuries ago Gyaneshwara said 'अवधाचि संसार मुखाचा करीन' (I will make the whole
world happy). H. H. Mataji's granting mass-realisation is the dream coming true
for all great saints who wanted common man to be emancipated and evolved. It is said
in Kaliyuga, God is having more compassion on man and is responding lo sincere
prayers of Seekers: Indeed it is true. Divine Mother is going from place to place
HILI
inviting Seekers to have realisation and know the self.
In the days when Adharma is overshadowing Dharma H. H. Mataji is keeping the
promise.' वमरक्षणार्थ कार्याथ संभवामि यूगे यूंगे ।
Dharma.) Many people in India and abroad have given up drinking and smoking, many
boys and girls in Western Countries have gone back to their parents, after getting
realisation from the Mother.
(। take birth again and again to. protect
It, therefore, behoves for all those who have got realisation recently to preserve
this precious gift and evolve themselves further. They should also awaken Kundalinis
of others and bring more and more people to Shahaja Yoga. It is their Guru Dakshina
(an offering to their Guru) to H. H. Mataji. We congratulate our Australian brother
Sahaja Yogis, particularly Dr. Warren and Mr. Terence who met H. H. Mataji only last
year in India and on returning gave realisation to large number of people, of course, with
the blessings of Divine Mother. This year, we were glad to have amongst us about 35
Australian Sahaja Yogis who came to India to meet the Mother for the first time Their
faith and devotion to the Mother are exemplary.
Nirmala Yoga
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-3.txt 
 NIRMAL A YOGA
43, Bunglow Road, Delhi-110007 INDIA
Founder-H.H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Sri R. D. Kulkarni
Editorial Board : Dr. S. K. Mathur, Sri A. S. Mishra,
Representatives:
Hong Kong : Emilie P SHI
Gavin Brown
London
Cliff Rence Bros. Co. Ltd..
Brown's Geological Information
1610, Wing On Centre,
111, Connaught Rd., Central,
Services Limited,
160 North Gower Street,
NW 1 2nd (UK) London
Austratia: Diane Heaperman
Switzerland: Arneau de Kalbermatten
344, Winterthurerstrasse,
C/o.5/334, Victoria Place,
Drummoyne, Sydney.
8057, Zuerich, Switzerland
: M. B. Ratnannavar
Bombay
13, Merwan Mansion
Genjwala Lane, Borivali (W),
Bombay-400 092
: Marie Rouger
175, Av. Ledru Rollin,
France
Paris-75001
CONTENTS
Page
1. Editorial
2. Representatives
3. Lecture of Mataji
4. Our position in Sahaja Yoga
5. Letters
1
2.
3
12
13
6. International Correspondence Group
7. Devotion
8. Poem
9. A Year of Great Blessings
10. To Mother at Puja
11. The Healing Touch
15
16
19
20
21
21
12. आनन्द
22
13. ऊ माँ
24
Nirmala Yoga
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Advice given by Her Holiness Mataji Nirmala Deviji on 15th February
1977 at New Delhi, on Sat-Chit-Anand in English
OES everybody follow my Hindi ? If ting all that the West is saying, we will lese
say in English will you all follow ? I am all that we have, which is so great. Of course
not in opposition for English language, but it is not going to be lost, but we are not
the language of Atma is Sanskrit. They have going to utifise it for our purpose. We have
never bothered about the Spirit. So we have to ignore all that on oneside, and we have
to use some language which speaks about to accept something which is just a foreign
Atma. English language is not adequate allen thing and nothing so much compre-
enough. They do not have those experiences hensive. If is not 'Samagra'. It doesn't enve-
since so far they have not gone deep enough. op everything. Therefore, I will request you
D
to learn a little of Hindi language also. One
We are very old ancient people. Our culture
has been to know God. Everything has come speech of mine, which was in English has
been translated into Marathi, and what a
in Sanskrit, because Sanskrit is really a
Devavani. Apart from that, when the Kunda- tremendous thing it was ! What a poor show
it was in English ! May be my English is
lini moves, she makes vibrations. She makes
special sounds, which are Devnagri Sounds very poor, be it so.
on different Chakras. If I have time, I will
inform you all about it. Even when you Anand'. Again
recite Mantras through the Sanskrit language Sat-Chit-Anand is the 'Super Conscious-
or Devnagri pronunciations only, you can
exite them better. Try to learn, if not Sanskrit attention, the 'Consciousness'. You are just
at least Hindi, because, it being a phonetic now conscious and listening to me. Every
lanquage, it has a sound and that sound gives minule, you are consclous. But every moment
that vibratory effect. You try to learn this is becoming dead into the past. Every
language. Hindi is not my mother tongue. moment is coming from the future lo the
My mother tongue is Marathi. I speak Hindi present. But you are conscious at this
because after all 1 know the importance of
Hindi. I also know a little bit of English. So rises and falls. You can see the rising of
it is better to know at-least Hindi. What I
want to say is that for speaking in Marathi in between these thoughts, there is a space
is all right for me. Bengali I know a little bit. čalled Vilamb'. If you can stop for a while,
You can convey it in Tamil or Telugu or in you get to the Conscious Mind and there
any other language of this Yoga-Bhoomi. exists the 'Sat-Chit-Anand'. You can say
This is a great country of Yoga. Every Sat-Chit-Anand' is the condition of the mind
particle of this Bhoomi, you will be sur-
prised, is vibrated. The scientists cannot thought, but you are aware Nirvichar'. This
understand all this. When we start accep-
Now we were talking about 'Sat-Chit-
I have to use Sanskrit words.
ness', the all pervading power. Chit' is the
moment and are listening to me. A thought
the thought, but not the falling of the thought
or the state of mind, where there is no
is the first stage, where you jump into; into
Nirmala Yoga
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Kundalini has moved to the Collective Sub-
the 'Super Consciousness. Some people
that by realization you must conscious, they can start seeing things in
the past. A person like that, when he comes
achieve something as Adi Shankaracharya
did, but it is not possible. With some it may to me, can see who I was in my previous
be, but with everyone it is not possible. Your life, I do not have to convince him. This is
first stage is Nirvichar. You become thought- the same thing as anybody who is posses-
lessly aware. That happens when the Kunda- sed. A person who takes to drugs and is an
lini rises above the Agya Chakra meaning alcoholic to the last word, but is a good soul
enters into the lymbic area, when your atten- and is still seeking God, such a person can
tion just touches 'Sal point. The reality see me, in a different form. He can see me
separates fram Mithya'. You become two past, he can be very much enamoured by
personalities. At that state you start separa- me. He would know who
ting-like putting lime in the milk when it think that the past is greater than the
starts separating into curd and water. In the present, always, because the past has been
same way the beginning of reality starts. much greater than today, though I have
This is the state when you can say that the
Kundalini has awakened only. We must He, therefore, gets enamoured when he sees
understand the different stages, as it things like that This happens to people
happens.
picture but normally the Kundalini shools
off to Sahastrar' in most of the people. In past. Those who move out on the right hand
some people it does not. It takes time. It is side can see me as light. They see all the
either lost into the Swadhishthana or the
Nabhi. It does not go much higher.. It is
arrested by 'Anahata Chakra' or it may not Tanmatra namely the casual essence of
even rise at all. But in case it crosses this the elements. It may help them to get convin-
"door' of Agya Chakra, then you get into the ced, because such a person gets convinced
state of 'thoughtless awareness'. With this
thoughtless awareness,
powers. Supposing for example, you become many Tantrikas who know who I was. They
the Governor, you get certain powers of the
Governor. Similarly you attain ceriain powers. There was an ordinary maid servant who
But at this stage to leave the Kundalini is not
КГ
never given realisation to anyone previously.
who are on the Supra conscious level it they
move out on the left hand side ie., into the
. I am giving you a very detailed
five elements, they see me as a waterfall or
as an iceberg. They start seeing the
about me and such a person is much more
convinced than you are. There are good
you get certain
are afraid of me and they talk about me.
came to my programme and she got into a
trance and started speaking Sanskrit and
she described me completely in fifteen
proper, because the Kundalini can start
moving to this side or that side and can
thus go to the supra conscious or to the Shlokas'. She said this first time although I
collective sub-conscious. The 'Siddhis' are
mostly available at this stage. Not minor is how it started.
Siddhis but higher Siddhis, e.g., if the Kun-
dalini moves to supra conscious one gets
the Siddhi of predicting the future. If the your Kundalini, because you can
had never said anything about myself. This
So at this stage, I would not like to leave
cure
Nirmala Yoga
4.
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-6.txt 
 people and curative can be done with your Kundalini and they all say the same thing.
Kundalini even when it is in the limbic area. They talk the same language-whether they
I am very anxious always that it should come do so in English, Indian or any other langu-
out of the Brahmarandra. At that stage you age. They say the same thing i.e., this chakra
start getting the vibrations; but at this stage is catching or that chakra is catching. This is
you are just a 'Chila" only and you just touch because you start seeing your own Kunda-
the 'Sat pojnt. Your attention is only char- lini thereby seeing the Kundalini of others,
med by the Spirit. Only the attention part as
I told you is like a flicker or light in a Gas
lamp, and Kundalini is like a gas which and not the Anand part of it: First stage is
touches the spirit and the light of the spirit through Chitta that you feel the Kundalini of
spreads in the central nervous syslem. "Chit' another person thereby you can raise the
part, the outer core the 'Chitta means the Kundalini of another person. After a while,
attention part. At that stage the Kundalini you can give realization also to another per-
opens the Brahmarandra when you feel the
vibrations from your hand and you can feel But the Anand stage is not yet reached. n
another person's also; because you become the beginning you just feel the cold breeze
collectively conscious'. Collectively cons-in your hand. You feel peace and tranquility
cious again out of Sachita-Anand that you and also there is no thought. You feel the
just touch the 'Chita' part. Thus you start thoughtless awareness' but the Anand part
feeling the Chit of your Chitta becoming the is not yet felt at this first stage. Because
"Chitta of the collective consciousness- now Ihave studied thousands of human
means that you drop into the ocean of beings and their problems, know; this is
Sachit Ananda in which you only feel the the fact. But there are some, who have
collective consciousness. That means you reached the last stage, though they are very
can feel another person's Kundalini.
because through the fingers you can feel
what is happening. You just feel the Chita
son with the assistance of my photograph.
very few.
Thus at the first stage when you come,
Yesterday there was another gentleman,
as you have seen it, who was arguingwith me is the Chit' stage, the consciousness stage.
that we have suspended intelligence but all You touch the 'Sal' which means you start
that I said was "what is the suspended intelli- seeing the reality, is one thing you feel is
gence?, I do not know about this thing". So flowing. At this time you start saying it is
told him this. He said that, "I am in a Turiya coming or it is going. Just now you said, it
Dasha" I said "if you are in 'Turiya' you can
feel the Kundalini of another person and you ving, I am giving. That 7 goes out of your
cannot certify yourself like that but can you language. But still the Ego and the Super-
feel the Kundalini of another person". But he Ego are not completely gone down. They
said 'no'. Then I asked him "how can you be are still there, but your attetion has come
in Turiya ?" If you go in Turiya-i.e., if you
cross this stage, then you have to feel the
Kundalini of another person. Now you have people, you can give them Realisation as I
is coming. You didn't say that / am recei-
up and you feel the Chilta'. With this
"Collective Consciousness' you can cure
seen there are many people who can feel the have told you and also you can feel the
Nirmala Yoga
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Kundalini of any person in the whole world; of the heart, the cancer of throat etc., but
and cure the Chakras of that person. You
can tell the condition of another person far caught up, either the left or the right side.
he will say that it is the Chakras that are
away by sitting down here. Wherever your
attention goes, it works thereby your atten-
tion becomes Universal. A drop of your or how far it is going and can give the depth
attention becomes one with the ocean of the of such Chakras. There are many abstract
Sat-Chit-Anand'. Listen, to me carefully important happennings taking place.
Now from where the vibrations are coming
because many people at this stage drop out
and only the attention becomes effective.
I will inform you about a disciple of mine, jivas's urrender to you They are watchingyou.
who has come here from England. One day You are their responsibility. All the 'Deities
he was sitting and thinking about his father. are awakened in you. If you do anything
Suddenly he got a burning on his index fin- against the 'Deities' immediately they will
ger. Hence he rang up his father. His mother harm you. A person who has got Realisa-
told him that his condition was not good. tion, goes to a place which is not to be seen
He was suffering from a bad throat. This
boy did something to his finger and his
father got well. Now he might think that he he will feel heated up. If he does not run
is powerful and all that but he is not. He
cannot think in this manner because his
Sahastrara has opend up. He just said, another ordinary person.
"Mother, I felt it and I did like this, and my
father became all right". He never says I did
Once you get the realisation, the 'Chiran-
or which is not to be felt or which is not a
good place, or to a fake Guru; immediately
away, and if he still goes on jand on he will
lose his vibrations and he will become like
Initially it is in a very transitory stage.
Still, I would say at this point that the repul-
sion is not so very great that the man does
not accept it. Because, if you accept it, you
become completely realised. If you do not
accept it, then there might be a little bodily
problem that you might have. You might
harm your own fingers, or you might get
it since he is not attached to it. He is atta- little burning sensation here or there. But if
it. 7 goes out. You never say did it but
you will say, "Mother today my Agya is
catching", "Mother my heart is catching".
They come and speak like this about them-
selves. Agya is catcning means you will be
going mad. But one does not feel bad about
ched to his Atma, So he says, as an Alma
this Chakra is caught or that Chakra is and if you ignore them, then you start rising
caught. A person who is suffering from higher and higher and I have already infor-
cancer, does not know it. But to a realised med you that all the 'Chiranjivas' start gui-
person his attention will tell him that so and ding you and looking after you. If there is
so Chakras are out of gear-and so many One realised person in the train, there can-
Chakras out of gear means cancer. He need not be an accident and if there is an acci-
not go to the doctor but he can diagnose it dent, nobody will die in that train. If a reali-
himself. He will not diagnose himself as
the doctors do; saying you have the cancer sees a mishap, his attention goes there
you are not afraid of these bodily sensations
sed soul is walking on the road, and If he
Nirmala Yoga
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-8.txt 
 immediately and the mishap is averted. His
attention is being blessed. All this, a scien- beings, joy also starts. These are the feelings
tist cannot understand. Somebody just now this is how you enjoy 'Nirvichar' or Samadhi
asked me, "if he is guided by internal God, Samadhi does not mean going into uncons-
th en he cannot do anything by himself", It ciousness but the unconscious becomes
is not so The internal Gods are his own
part-and-parcel, You can say that am
guided by my brain hence I cannot do any- stage. There are many things like this and a
thing else. You can see, the Gods are in
your internal parts, by yourself. What is this
self left with then ? WVhen you are united previous life, then you can see my vibrations
with this Self, you become a hollow persona-
lity, then you do not have this feeling of the been doing Devi-Pooja, then you can do
Self. All the time you will say "it is going, something of Devi Praman. You can see
It is happening, it is flowing". You start look- that also. If you see like that before realisa-
ing at yourself as a third person. You do not tion, it means you are a possessed person.
identify your self with yourself. It happens. Somebody is giving you ideas. After realisa-
You can see these people how they are
working.
So the Joy' of enjoylng another Human
conscious. The universal unconscious
becomes conscious. So this is the first
vāriety of things happen. Supposing you
were doing a lot of 'Jyoti Pooja" in your
coming and going. Supposing you have
tion you start seeing certain things, then it
has some meaning. So the gradual growth
of the flower starts manifesting.
There is also a part of little enjoyment.
the 'Joy' or Anand'. Normally you will find
that most of the 'Sahajyogis' will gather kalpa'where there is no Vikalpa'. Just now
around a person who is realised and is not in Delbi there are very few Sahaja Yogis like
a difficult person. Moreover, if there is that. First of all, by lemperament they are
somebody who comes at my feet, who is a Vikalpi. The reason is a complete atmos-
very great soul, then the Sahajyogis, enjoy phere of Vikalpa. If you say something, ano-
it all the more. Once we were at Calcutta thet will pull you down by saying something
staying in a hotel. There was a very nice
man who came to see me. He was not a phare is so Vikalpi that you are not yet settled
realised person but a very saintly person
with a great Purva Sam pada. He just very great "Sahaj Yogis' in Delhi as well.
touched my feet. The other Sahaj Yogis Now you will ask, how do you become
were in the other rooms. They all rushed in. Nirvikalpa ? Supposing you are in the water,
I said, "why did you come ?" They said "a vou are afraid of being drowned; therefore,
great joy started coming within them so they vou are picked up and put in the boat, then
came". He was all the time on my feet and
they were standing there. I said, "neither he Now you can settle down firmly-
is going to leave me nor are you going to
leave me". For fifteen minutes he was enjoy-
ing the Nectar of my fet and they were
enjoying, his nectar and the fragrance of it. starts moving. We have in Bombay certain
In the second stage, you become 'Nirvi-
else. So the thing is that the whole atmos-
down in Sahaja Yoga. But, we have also got
you are no longer afraid of being drowned.
You have to be firmly settled and with
that you get certain powers-your Kundatini
Nirmala Yoga
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-9.txt 
 People whose Kundalini rises at least one
foot high. They are very developed people. their altention is always deep into the subtle
At the Nirvikalpa state, the collective- part. They are not bothered. Such people
consciousness becomes subtler and subtler. are the satisfied souls. Such people are
At that stage you can understand the very
deep significance of things when the reality for Sahaja Yoga. Because, when somebody
starts becoming clearer. For example, you
start understanding the working of the
Kundalini. You start understanding how it
have no time for outside gross matters-so
the ones, who are going to create the Piller
sees such a person, a transformed person
like that, they get shocked. "Just look at this
man. He is such a great person. He was a
You can understand how it very horrid man earlier and how he has
penetrates.
works out. You can use it for experimenta- changed like this. See how is he transfor-
tion with your own hand and you can move
med." At this stage, at the Nirvikalpa stage,
it as you please, You can cure people and the vibrations emit, then there is -no ques
you can show the Kundalini's working in tioning at all. But such a man gets into a
different ways. You can combine in permu- terrible temper if he sees somebody is mis-
tations and combinations of the Kundalini. behaving with me and cannot bear It. Christ
häs said, "forgive all those, for they know
not what they are doing." But supposing
You can say that in the first year of music,
Vou just learn seven notes and two other
notes and ordinary ragas. But when you they had done any thing against his Mother,
grow subtler and higher, then you know all
the minute points of how to create music.
he would not have forgiven in the least. In
the Bible it is written; "Nothing will be tole-
rated against the Holy Ghost". And the
At the Nirvikalpa stage you need not put Holy Ghost was his Mother, which is Adi-
your hand towards the person. By sitting shakti. Hence you cannot tolerate anything
down you know where it is, what is happe- against your Mother or Sahajyoga and one
ning where he is catching, what is the prob- can get into a tremendous temper or a
lem. What is the 'Collective Problems' ? "Sanharshakti" which they develop. It is
You have no doubts about Sahajyoga, nor said that such a man if anybody tries to do
about Kundalini nor about anything else, some harm he will immediately bring him
There are no doubts at all. At that time you down through their devotion towards their
start experimenting about it and you start Mother. We have a notion that a realized
using it. Mastery of Kundalini starts. At that person should never lose his temper. It is a
stage the Chitta the consciousness be- very wrong idea. Then you will say, "why
comes subtle. Somebody was sitting with Krishna killed Jarasandha, why did he kill
Me and outside the Sahajyogis knew that Kansa ?" How do you explain the violence of
this gentleman is going to get realization Krishna ? How do you explain Devi who
and they knew that Mother is giving the killed demons when She came and got into
realisation. Such Sahaja Yogis are extremely Her Temper ? She used to get into tremen-
pleased at such time and they do not grudge dous temper and then she used to kill. The
or grumble about small matters. They are temper of Shiva ! How do you explain this ?
carefree and live in a big way. They are not It is a foolish idea to say that they should
touchy. Their attention is in the subtle. They not get into the temper even if someone
Nirmala Yoga
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-10.txt 
 It is true that after Nirvikalpa, the Ganesha
the whip (r) in his hand and drive them becomes really Jagrut. Such a person is not
away. You have a right to get into a temper, tempted by any women. No temptation for
another women will exist, except for his own
wife, where he goes on living like a celebra-
voice when need arises. l am using all the ted husband, because husband and wife are
Ayudhas, if you have noticed in my hand, the united in a bond of matrimony. Otherwise,
Chakra, the Parasha etc. They are there and he is a sanctified householder. He does not
1 have to use them and you canot stop me have temptation for-any alcohol or anything
from using them. This is what I say that by like smoking and is beyond temptation. A
tries to kill them. Even Christ had to take
if you are in a Nirvikalpa state since you are
given that right of even raising one's own
reading people don't understand things. A
Nirvikalpa man cannot have any templation.
man who is quietly sitting and is being pes- One man came to me and told me that he
tered by every body is called a realized per- was a realised Soul. I said, "how can it be ?
son-what nonsense ! How dare you spite If you are a realised Soul, how are you taking
at such a man ? Is the spite of a Devi to be to these things ? You cannot". Now for me,
I will tell you it is an impossibility. I have
never taken anything. Once my doctor gave
me a little brandy as a medicine, 1 don't
know why but he felt like giving it to me
without Informing me, due to which I vomit-
ted so much of blood since my stomach is
borne by a realised soul ? To say that a
realised soul should not get into a temper
is a wrong thing.
Now all those Rishis I have talked about
and all those people who have talked about
me and whose names I have given you, they religious or sacred If I see a woman who
are all above Nirvikalpa, but they are very hot has dressed provocatively or something like
tempered. These saints cannot tolerate that or sometimes I have to accompany my
hypocricy but I can and I have to. No husband to parties and they starta cabaret or
"Rakshas' can go near them but if anvbody some such thing. Immediately, I start getling
goes they are put into sa noose and are vomitting, sensation like hell and more so
hanged on the tree. That's why I say never when we are the chief guests. I make their
go near the 'Babaji'. They are higher people, lives miserable, since something happens in
no doubt, better than you all are and they my stomach when I see these half-dressed
know me very well and they fall at my feet.
They are very innocent and simple like chil- is the point because the Dharma is born
dren to me. More important is Shri Ganesha. within our stomach.
If he gets angry it is not so easy to control
him. It is easier to control Shri Shiva's but the subtle style of things starts. Your Mula-
not Ganesh's anger. Beware of him. That is dhar becomes chastity itself. It just cannot
why during Kundalini Awakening, you get bear these things. You don't have to tell
burning sensation and you start dancing or
jumping, all this is Ganesha's anger. If you
have insulted him by any chance, or insulted interest in all these things. They do not
his Mother, He gets into a tremendous fury.
women. Now what can I do with my stomach
So the stomach
becomes the Dharma itself. At this stage
them. They have just no interest in such
women. They do not flirt nor have they any
bolher too much to dress up in such a way
Nirmala Yoga
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-11.txt 
 You give him a Statue of a deity and ask
that they would be very attractive to other
women or men and at that time they believe him all about this statue whether it is alright
like very simple people. They get to simpli- or not. He might say that it is not alright. You
city dignified. Then suddenly they become can teel the subtle vibrations, whether it is
very creative also. There is one gentleman in Dharma or otherwise. Now can we say
in Bombay who got into 'Nirvikalpa' State. say that Ashtavinayaka's are living Gods.
He came to me when he was jobless. So I How do you know ? Jyotirlingas are living.
told him "why don't you start interior deco- How will you know ? Unless you know the
ration work ?" He said that he did not know integrations of all the great souls together
different types of wood nor could difleren- and how are you going to judge them ?
tiate between one type and another so what That is why you must get Realisation. This
could he do ? I said, "now, you are in is what my father told me, I should say he
Nirvikalpa so start it". Today he is a very
rich man. It just becomes dynamic, because
you start seeing the beauty, the 'Saundarya' about realities etc., because you will create
was my first Guru, as he was a realised
soul. He told me it is of no use talking
of the nature. You see-aesthetics are born another Bible or Gita. You do a practical
in a person who is a realized Soul. He tihing. You find out 'A-mass-media andI
starts seeing aesthetics in everything. The knew that was my mission So I worked on
beauty of talking improves. The movements everyboody's Kundalini and tried to find out
of the hands improve and your style also permutations, combinations, of their mis-
improves. You become a beautiful person- takes and why these people are like this.
aesthetics come in. You can become sud- Yo will be surprised that so many-people
denly a great poet. We have two people like never knew that they were even in Nirvichara.
that who have written beautiful poems and They did not know that they were highly
you can also be a great painter if you a placed spirits. If they would have known,
then they would not have told many things
which have conditioned you. They have said,
"Sach Bolo". Who is going to speak 'truth'?
They did not know what Human beings are?
They are 'lIncarnations'-a great people.
already a painter, You get new ideas about
painting, new aesthetics. In music, you
start understanding absolutely. You may
not know what classical music is but
you will start understanding the subtle
music. From the classical music you will
know which is the best for your Atma. You
They did not know much about the Human
beings and how cunning they are or how
see the Atma starts judging everything on that they are all the time against each other.
level. If you appoint such a person to judge level,
a drama or a painting, whether it is good or self-realisation, as I now have. As such
bad, he will correctly judge it good or bad. know human beings but some things, of
Then you put his selection to all the critics
They
For that one has to have a Human
Then you put his selection to ail the critice
of the world and they will say it is the best
judgement Now, you will ask me "how does
he know?" Because he can feel by vibrations the Ananda starts settling in you. When you
and complete harmony in everything.
course, I do not understand.
When you get into the Nirvikalpa state,
see cilies, any beautiful picture or csene,
Nirmala Yoga
10:
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-12.txt 
 Immediately what you find is a great flow achieved and settled down in our brain.
of Ananda coming down. This is the Grace Christ is als here. These two are not incar-
that you are just lost into it; like the Ganges nations. They are born as Human beings.
flowing over you, you are completely drow- They were born to Sita, as Lava and Kusha.
ned into it.Your consciousness becomes Then they were born as Buddha and Maha-
Anand.
vira and 'Adishakti" was their Mother once
again. Later on they were born to 'Fatimabi
as Hasan and Husain. They are the two
we have never known there is a 'Sarvavyapi milestones you have got, by which you can
Shakti but now we are aware of the same. know to what height a Human being can
We can feel it coming in our fingers. This rise. Now today they are like incarnations.
is the Reality. There is Chaitanya all around There are other styles of personalities like
us, which thinks, which understands, orga- Chiranjivas, Bhairava, Ganesha. There are all
nises and loves us. All this you come to incarnations. Hanumana later on appeared
as 'Gabriel the Angel'. 'Bhairav nath' came as
Anand which is the Hridaya starts emitting Saint Michael. The names are different, but
it. Later on what you get is Vilaya into they are the same personalities. Devi has
At that stage complete Self- also incarnated. There is no doubt about it.
realisation takes place. At that stage you The scientist will not understand this but a
can control the sun, you can control the Sahaja Yogi can. Because they can imme-
diately feel their Vibrations and can ask
questions. You can ask questions about me
Beyond that there is God's Realizalion. also and you will get the vibrations. For that
There are three stages to that also, but just at least your Deities have to rise and say
now I have told about this. 'Sat-Chit-Anand' Yes', You may or you may not get 'Realiza-
state. The "God's Realisation' is the stage tion' but the answer you will definitely get.
In reality you come to know that till now
know the knowledge part of it. Then the
Ananda.
moon, you can control every element.
which, Gautam Budha and Mahavira only had
May God bless you.
21st March 1923 was the most auspicious day in
the history of the World, when H. H. Mataji condescen-
ded to save mankind from Adharma and help him to
realise Divinity within himself.
What pooja can
offer to ADI SHAKTI, the creatrix of the Universe 1 On
this occasion all Sahaja Yogis express their deep feelings
of gratitude and rededicate themselves to the cause of
Sahaja Yoga.
Pray, Mother kindly accept this Pooja, howsoever,
imperfect it is.
11
Nirmala Yoga
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Our Position in Sahaja Yoga
In speaking of the Kingdom of Heaven,
Christ says in the Gospel:
"position" in the human sense of the term,
because the "ego" has vanished. It is repla-
ced by a state of consciousness pervaded by
"The last will be first and the first last"
purity, sweetness and a more authentic and
(Mat 20.16) profound understanding of a new Reality
which is delivered from the constraints of
and also "For everyone who exalls him- the "ego". This "state" sends forth the
self will be humbled, and he who humbled vibrations of love of Mataji, and one surren-
(Luke 14.11) ders oneself to its support and its guidance.
It will also act on our brain when it is time
himself will be exalted".
Seen in the context of Sahaja Yoga this
means that those who, accerding to their in Sahaja Yoga, which will in effect be esta-
own "ego", are the first are, in fact, outside blished by deepening this stage through an
the Kingdom of Heaven, in which there is no
place for the "ego", while those who are Vibrations in order to send Them forth, and
humble and wiling to receive the Divine through the development of our Selves by
Grace (the Vibrations) shall have a place in bur communion with the Collective Self
the Kingdom; they shall be the first.
to engage in action. That is our "position"
evergreater capacity to absorb Mataji's
made up by the other Sahaja Yogis.
We know that there are "categories" if not
an hierarchy in Sahaja Yoga. What does
this mean ? These categories or hierarchy
can certainly not be appreciated by our
minds. In other words, the "first" will not
necessarily be those who first joined Sahaja
Yoga, nor those who think" that they have
"done" a lot for Sahaja Yoga, nor those who
"consider" themselves to be better Sahaja
Yogis than others because they have no
problems. All these attitudes are generated
by a very subtle and even pernicious "ego".
No, our position in Sahaja Yoga depends on
a completely different type of principle; that
of our thoughtless awareness when, by the
Grace of the Holy Spirit, the Heart, the Self,
is truly awakened. Then there is no question Devi is Chindwara, near Nagpur and not
of being superior or feeling that one is more
advanced, etc. One does not occupy a
-ANTOINETTE SUSSEX
Switzerland
"Laziness is the worst enemy
of Sahaja Yga"
SHRI MATAJI
Correction
Birth place of H. H. Mataji Shri Nirmala
Nagpur as mentioned in "Mother's Horo-
scope" in Jan.-Feb. '81 issue.
Nirmala Yoga
12
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Letters
Zuerich, 10th February
My dear sisters and brothers,
Back to Europe, back to the eold, the snow and the wind. But it is impossible for
us to forget your evershining sun, your unforgetable sunsets, the light and the bright-
ness of your country. Colourful countrysides, unspoiled villages, the freshness of your
atmosphere and the daily life of all the people we have met have invited us to peace and
deeper meditation. And the Sahaja Yogis we have seen have led us to discover the
Inner joy of the inhabitants of your blessed country.
We know that we have got, in the West a bad habit to thank for everything. So we
don't let speak our mind but our hearts. We would try, through this tetter, to express on
behalf of all the western Sahaja Yogis that you have earned so much our gratitude for
the way you have welcomed us in your great country, for the way you have given us so
much love, joy and brotherhood.
You, all of you, have been so sweet with us that really we could see how our
beloved Mother acted through your smiles, attitudes and generosity, Our heart is filled
with thankfulness and admiration. Your devotion to our Mother has been a perfect
example of surrender and love. And we have felt the reflection of your devotion on your
own behaviour, how wise you are, how confident you are, how you begin to master the
intensity of the present ! Here in the west we see the future, we foresee, we plan and
our speedometer goes mad. We don't have time to realize the beauty of the present
and it is only through the present that we can enjoy our Mother's creation.
We have seen you for the first time, and very soon we felt that you have resided in
our hearts for ages and ages and in the first acquaintance we have recognized you as our
our
brothers and sisters, out of joy and eager to share it with all of us. We had just to receive
and let us be pushed by this dynamics of affection. Our greatest experience is that we
have seen for the first time intermediates between our Beloved Mother and us. Through
your awareness you understand much more and you discover much more easily the
Divine Beauty of The Adi Shakti, because you feel much more and you absorb through
your acting spirit and not through a tired mind. At the same time your ego is deflated
and your humility greater. Thanks to your behaviour we see Mother higher and higher,
more divine and more powerful, because we see how you behave with Her with full
attention, respect, devotion and adoration. You speak to Her when She speaks to you
and you would never begin to speak at once, or interupt Her. You respect the protocol.
Nirmala Yoga
13
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-15.txt 
 May we follow your straightforwardness and your enthusiasm in order to glorify the
One who is worthy of being seen and understood only by our spirit.
It was a great time where the West and the East dissolved in our Mother's love,
when we discovered our own beauty enlightened by God and learned how to respect
each other and how to show affection to each other. This feeling of togetherness and
communicative love, bestowed by our beloved Mother is our goal and achievment. It is
through this circulation of love and joy among us that the collective being manifests
more and more, that Mother's divinity penetrates into us deeper and deeper.
We all pray the Creator of this Universe and we make altogether this absolute
promise that we shall see only the beauty which is sparkling in us, we shall love each
other with more intensity remembering how much our Mother loves us, we shall share
among us the feeling of belonging to the children of God.
Let us put ourselves under Mother's protection, let us meet again and again under
the intensity of Mother's presence and let us glorify Her all together all the time because
It is only through Her Grace that we were able, my dear brothers and sisters, to discover
your own beauty and the sparkling of your joyful spirit.
Much much love and
Jai Mataji
Arneau, Maria-Amelia, Marie-Laure,
Gregoire, Catherine, Christine
Brothers and Sisters of India
With open arms and open hearts you welcomed us from the west. With Mother's
love and grace we have been invited and your giving of love has showed us much more
about the beauty of life. The past weeks have been filled with many experiences. From
the mass realization in Kadus to the making of a film 24 storeys up in Bombay. You have
given us so much from your beautiful hearts and taught us the love, missing from our
society. Thank you for it all and thank you dear Mother for making it possible.
Jai Mataji
Phillip.
Nirmala Yoga
14
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-16.txt 
 NEW DELHI
February 1981
Dearest Brothers and Sisters of India
Our stay in India is now drawing to an end and it has been such a rich and deep
We thank you for the
experience for us all, we have so much to thank you all for.
warmth of your hospitality, your love and your patience. We will be returning home with
such respect and love for Mother India and her people.
For most of us it was our first meeting with our Mother and what a perfect
backdrop India has been for this great occasion ! We thank Mataji, our Mother with
all our hearts for the joy and learning of the past two months and we thank you too for
your great generosity, and for all that you have done to make us so welcomed and so
at home.
With our deepest love and gratitude.
Wwww
Jai Mataji
An Australian Sahaja Yogini
International Correspondence Group
8. Hari Jairam
9. Kathie Duff
10. Anu Cartton
11. Peter & Linda Pierce
12. John Watkinson
13. lan Lewis
14. Alan Brown
Sahaja Yoga Centre
44 Chelsham Road,
London S W 4
15. Mia Rodosleric
18. Yoga Singh
7 Shenley Road,
Heston, Middlesex
16. Magda, Danya and Caleb Williams,
15 Well Walk
London N W 3
17. Graham Pottinger
27 Constantine Road,
19. Anna Palmer
36 Winfold Road, Waterbeach,
Combridge
London N W 3
Nirmala Yoga
15
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Devotion
LL Sahaja Yogis become twice-borns the respective chakra. Devotion to the
when they get realisation from the Mother amounts to devotion to all Gods.
Divine Mother. It is only the Divine
Mother who can lead them to salvation
because she is one with Primordial Father
"Shiva-Shaktaikya-roopini'. Sahaja Yogis have to consider one to be better than another.
a glimpse of the ultimate stage of the evolu-
tionary process, when they go into the
thoughtless blissful awareness at Her lotus
feet. Each one therefore knows the goal and Before leaving the bed, one should bow
depending upon physical and mental condi-
Devotion has many aspects, some are
gross and some subtle. It may not be correct
as all are necessary in the interest of spiri-
tual progress. Meditation in the early hours
of morning is of immense importance.
with great regards to the Mother Earth. It
tions, may have a long way to go, Having may be useful to meditate in the bed itself
for sometime before leaving the bed, but
got this never-before-experienced, realisa-
tion from the Mother, the conviction should atter cleaning oneself one should meditate
before the Mother's photograph. 'Bandhana'
to self and to the seat should be done
before starting the meditation. Bow before
the mother in great reverence and beseech
be firm in mind that devotion to the Mother
and meditating as per her instructions, is
the only way to salvation (Jeevan Mukti).
The mother's powers are all pervading Her forgiveness for wrong doings and the
and distance cannot inhibit the spiritual blessings of becoming Her worthy child. The
communication between Sahaja Yogis and Pooja should be performed after bath using
the Mother; collective consciousness is Her good quality material and a clean cloth. It is
precious gift to them. Her presence can advisable to sit in meditation after Pooja
always be fell through vibratory awareness.
She knows the activities of each of Her 'Arti and meditate. Attending the pro-
sons and daughters through Her all perva-
ding powers, takes care of their well being,
prevents and corrects the disorders in their
systems and keeps raising their Kundalinis.
Her response to their call is always assured.
She is keeping Her promise of 'Yogakshemam importance. However going to an extreme
Vahamyaham'.
also, for some time. In the evening perform
grammes of collective meditation in a centre
once a week is necessary for well being and
progress.
External and internal purity are of utmost
in respect of superficial cleanliness is not
desirable as it may detract the attention
It is incorrect to assume that Gods and from via media. Nevertheless, salt water
the Mother are different. All Gods fully treatment before going to bed (i.e, medita-
manifest themselves within Her and They do ting, with feet dipped in lukewarm water with
not like to be distinguished from Her. Any salt, in front of the mother's photograph)
such notion is bound to cause damage to should be taken regularly. It is the specific
Nirmala Yoga
16
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-18.txt 
 instruction of the Mother to all Sahaja Yogis. them. This courtesy is often extended to
It keeps away physical and other disorders.
fhe Mother but, being different from others,
She does not need it. If she asks someone
It is necessary to be always alert as
regards the chakras. They should be always
kept cleared of the external "badhas' and
catches. Regular salt water bath shall help touch Her being without Her permission.
ensure this. More often than not, ingres of
"badhas which cause physical and other
ailments, is through eyes and food. Special clear own chakras, raising the Kundalini,
care in this regard is always advisable. getting into Bandhanā, raising left or right
Deities are awake when the chakras are
open and help Sahaja Yogis Getting in
"Bandhana' before going to bedalso protecls Yogi audiences. All these can be done
trom badhas':
to do so, it is for clearing the chakras of that
person and not for Her personal pleasure,
All should therefore malke it a point not to
Using symbolic gestures of hands to
side to correct imbalance should be desis-
ted from when we are among non Sahaja
equally effective with the attention. It serves
no useful purpose to throng the gate of the
A devotee always likes to please his hall to receive the Mother at the place of
deity. Our Mother is so kind that she is Her discourse. Prelerably all should be
pleased to see Her children happy and seated before Her arrival and respectfully
progressing well in Sahaja Yoga. She visits stand up as she enters the hall and receive
different places and countries to meet them Her with folded hands. It is imperative to
and solve their problems. They should be seek Her permission before garlanding.
equally responsive and show more progress Generally she allows it soon afier the arrival
every time She meets them, instead of telling when she also enquires about the welfare
Her the problems. Undoubtedly, by practising of the people. Problems, if any, should be
Her teachings Sahaja Yogis will be the hap- explained briefly at this time. If she does
piest people in the world.
not tell the solution to any problem imme-
diately it should not be insisted upon. Her
It is natural to feel love for the Mother.Bilence indicates that she has noted the
Silence is the best expression of it, as she problem and a solution is soon to follow.
understands the subtlest things from the
heart of hearts. Rushing forward to touch
Her feet without permission, attempting to and respectful treatment to all tend to be
attract Her attention, speaking unasked, misunderstood. It is necessary to observe
meeting Her at Her residence are undesir- all decorum and protocol in Her presence
able manners of expressing this love. Our and be humble, respectful, attentitive and
Divine Mother is the quintessence of purity. responsive to Her. All deities always attend
While it gives others great pleasure to fall to Her and do not tolerate even the slightest
on Her feet, she may find it troublesome disrespect to Her. They may show some
due to 'Badhas' in their beings. It is custo- restraint in Her presence out of modesty and
mary in India, for the young to serve the love for Her but beyond a cerlain limit they
elders by pressing their feet who in turn bless may act, in which case punishment is ines-
Her modesty and easy approachability
17
Nirmala Yoga
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-19.txt 
 of this life but also previous ones. Allerna-
capable. All personal discussion should
end as soon as she enters the hall and tively we may come across external negati-
should never be done in Her presence. Dis- vity in daily life.
turbance in Her speech must be avoided.
She does not need any explanations,
suggestions or comments.
Inner negativity may identify itself with
outer negativity, at an opnortune moment
and if not checked, may neutralise all the
Devotion is not possible without surrender. good influence of the Mother. It is therefore
Ego and Super ego are the obstacles to sur-
render. A wEstern Sahaja Yogi truely says, should go to any of the negative gurus, or
"I look
will you notf try to keep me from myself ?" from the discussions on negativity and
Surrendering ego and super ego at the Lotus mixing with negative people. Vibrations
Feet of the Mother is an essential step should be checked before entering a temple.
towards self-realisation. Surrendering is
accepting-that the Mother is supreme and
the creatrix of the universe, that she knows
essential that after realisation, no one
k at my ego and smile, What tricks read their literature. It is better to abstain
The Divine Mother should have a place
in our hearts. Always remembering Her or
what is best for us; that every spoken word maintaining thoughtlessness will cultivate
of Hers is pranava manifest. Surrende-
ring is forgetting past experiences, Gurus, affairs. Daily shoe beating or chappal
and knowledge gained from reading books, beating) of one's own name can remove
and adopting Her teachings sincerely. It is internal subtle negativity. Bandhana to
leaving all the problems to Her instead of negative people and shoe beating of their
solving them through ego. An easy way to
surrender is to emulate Her way of life and improve them. Ignoring other's mistakes
Her qualities.
an attitude of detachment towards mundane
names will keep them away and may even
and follies instead of criticising them or
complaining against them promotes magna-
In the moments of temptation, provoca- nimity. Efforts to inculcate these qualities
tion, or tension or depression, one can
always ask oneself, "Would the Mother be-
have as I am doing ?". Remembering Her
and thinking what she would do in the seeds of Sahaja Yoga sown by the Mother
circumstances, should be a guiding force
may be very helpful.
Not-with-standing all that has been said,
will germinate and grow into big trees only
and a great help in keeping away negative in the proper environments. The Mother pro-
forces
tects them by her all pervading powers, but
the individuals have to provide requisite
For the twice-borns life is a constant environments. They have to make judicious
struggle with the negativity, assisted by use of the freedom of choice given to them
their own ego and super ego, which may
confront them. Negativity may be inherent; Mother. Almighty God is waiting to receive
existing within us in the subtlest form accu-
mulated as a result of past Karmas, not only have only themselves to blame.
and persevere along the path shown by the
them. Those who cannot reach him will
Nirmala Yoga
18
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-20.txt 
 You are in my mind, You are in my heart,
You are in my brain, You are in me every where !
Think yourself what you are
Alive because I am alive
Where will you be if I am nowhere
You arego none can follow
Big or small what you may
You make your own way
One comes down for you
You arego none can follow
I laugh at you as I realise you
What a foolish thing you are
None can reach the real
You
You arego none can follow
Ages passed everybody knows
What is what and why is so
Slight a slip way for you
You arego none can follow
Follow me, Follow me
I have no place for you
I can rule, I can rule you,
You arego none can follow
UR OUT UR OUT
YOU
ARE EGO
O'Mother my light is ON,
Know the source from Thyself,
Help me keep it on, keep it on.
M. B. RATNANNAVAR
Nirmala Yoga
19
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-21.txt 
 A Year of Great Blessings
980 in Sydney, Australia, saw many growing faith and love for H. H. Mataji to do
great and joyous changes in 60 to 70 her footbaths and sharing of vibrations. It
was so wonderful to see the blossoming of
Joy and faithfulness, showing so specta-
1
people from all walks of life.
With the return to Sydney after a two cularly on her tace.
months stay in india with H. H. Mataji
Nirmala Devi, Warren Reeves and Terence
It was after only two months that she
triumphantly arrived at the centre with her,
she had brought all her prescribed pills.
Handful of technicoloured poison were
flushed down the toilet with praises of
Blackly, by the grace of H.H. Mataji started
giving Kundalini awakening. At first it was
to close friends but soon blossomed to regu-
lar public meetings in a local hall.
Would like to relate just a few of the Jai Mataji at each flush. Nova cheeks blos-
miraculous transformations we all witnessed soming with colour and youth had tears of
in this short period of time. Truly all the 1oy and a very special enlightment in her
transformations were miraculous but there
heart.
are those, as will be seen that stand out as
great examples of the power of our beloved
Mother H.H. Mataji. It must be remembered Yogis, was a seeker who was desperately
that all of these transformations that took frying to find the answer to the purpose of
place happened in Australia while H. H. her being. She also had breast cancer which
Mataji was residing in UK a fact which the doctor wanted to operate on. She had
proves the all pervading nature of a great refused permission for him to operate and
Wanda, a friend of one of the Sahaja
soon after was introduced to Sahaja Yoga.
She, like many ardent seekers, had been inv-
Incarnation.
patient of Warren, or I should olved with many different teachings and alth-
say, an ex-patient, arrived at the Sahaja Yoga ough she knew she had not found the answer
centre in Sydney looking haggard, grey in had become identified with some aspects of
the different teachings. She was given by
middle aged woman who had been under- the grace of H. H. Mataji Kundalini awake-
going electro-convulsive therapy (ECT) for ning and slowly she came to see that a light
several years as well, she had been pres- had been switched on within her being. The
cribed 14 different types of drugs, which she faith she had held from all the past involve-
had been regularly taking. After the first few ments she soon came to see mere misidenti-
weeks of being with the group, and receiving fications and they were unmasked and fell
vibrations in front of the photagraph of H. H. away, Life became much simpler and joyful.
Matajl, we all started noticing natural colour Very soon after joining Sahaja Yoga she
coming to her face and her walk becoming returned to the Doctor for a check up. He
that little but lighter. She continued, with was absolutely amazed that the breast
Nova, a
colour, and totally depressed. She is a
Nirmala Yoga
20
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-22.txt 
 cancer had been cured and that no traces of H. H. Mataji Nirmala Devi..
the disease could be found.
THE H EALING TOU CH
Wanda, like all of us, found that not only
It is natural in this world of suflering for
had her cancer been cured but she had been
people to think and act selfishly and egoisti-
given the greatest gift, the answer to all her
prayers and the promise of all the scrip- cally and because of it, it is equally natural
tures. She had been given her second birth,
actual contact and union with the Divine is natural for people to favour themselves
and is on the path to full realisation of the and to neglect others; it is natural for people
self. She does not have to read any more
books or grape down any more alleys. Her
path is there, in full light and all obstacles
are removed. It is all done with such Love
for suftering and unhappiness to follow. It
to allow their own desires to run into greed
and lust and all manner of evii but because
r
of it they must suffer endlessly.
These things are natural but are not
absolute, for, if people would listen to good
teachings and do more considerate and
Such are the blessings of our beloved careful thinking the suffering and unhappi-
and Joy.
Mother H. H. Mataji Nirmala Devi. We can
ness might be avoided. H. H. Mataji with
only pray that we can be forever at Her infinite compassion has shown the world a
Lotus Feet.
safe path to enlightenment and emancipa-
David De Swardt tion. If people would believe in it and follow
it all their suffering and unhappiness would
be ended.
Sydney
To Mother at Puja
H. H. Mataji is truly an Avatar in the
universal tradition. Therefore all may come
to her for spiritual help and guidance.
"Mother you are my heart,
You can give us food,
K. S. Aiyer
You are our heart,
You give us love,
And we give You flowers and honey,
And yoghurt and sugar and flowers again.
Mother you are our God,
And we give you presents,
And Kumkum and the miror that you bought,
Madras
Articles, Suggestions
And a blessed comb to comb
Your beautiful hair,
&
I love Your beautiful hair,
Because it is golden and silver
and beautiful colours,
Experiences
are requested
We love you very much, Mother"
Om Shri Mataji Nirmala Ma.
Editor
-LINDA PEARCE
(Aged 6 years)
Nirmala Yoga
21
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-23.txt 
 ी
5
आ न न्द
सहज योग की महता प्राचीन काल से ही गुरणों का प्रचार एवं प्रसार करें जिससे मानव
स्वीकार की गई हैं उसे आर्म-साक्षात्कार का
संत्रसे थ्रेष्ठ साधन माना गया है। "अ्रय तु परमी तथा श्नैः शनेः मनुष्यता की ओर अग्रसर होता
धम्मः यद्योगेनात्म दशंनम्" (मनु०) योग के द्वारा रहे । चरित्र की महिमा एवं गरिमा अपार है ।
आत्मदर्शन करना सबसे बड़ा घर्म है । सहज इस का
योगान्त्गत कुण्डलिनी जागरण विधि की दीक्षा देवात्मा पूण्यशीला माताजी श्री निमंला देवी जी
बंदनोय माता जी द्वारा दी जाती है। जिससे हैं जो साक्षात कूण्डलिनी माता का अवतार हैं।
साधक पल्लावित एवं दिव्य इन्होंने अपने अनुठे सम-सामयिक आचार [विचार
आह्वाद प्राप्त करता है।
आशीवादात्मक प्रसाद वितरण कर अपनी अरथाह तथा गुणों को ग्रहण कर संसार के समक्ष एक
मूल्य संपदा का स्वामी बनाने में समर्थ है। समृद्ध अद्भुत महान आश्चर्य प्रस्तुत किया है ।
अतीत का आकर्षण एवं वीते युग की भव्यता
उद्भाषित हो उठती है। आाधुनिक युग में समस्त
विश्व के लिये सहजयोग महत्वपूर्ण देन है । अनादिकाल से गूढ़ एवं व्यापक विषय रहा है ।
शारीरिक और मानसिक समृद्धि का महर्वपूर्ण विश्व का कोई भाग ऐसा नहीं जहां घर्म किसी न
आधार "कुण्डलिनी उत्थान" प्रक्रिया ही है किसी रूप में विद्यमान न हो-देश काल एवं
आध्यात्मिक मूल्यों को जन मानस में पुनः परिस्थितियों के अनुसार इसका वास्तविक स्वरूप
प्रतिष्ठापित करने का प्रशंसनीय प्रयास पूज्य बदलता रहता है। जिन लोगों के विचारों में
माताजी ने सहजयोग द्वारा सम्पन्न किया है ।
समाज अपना शस्तित्व वनाये रखने में सफल हो
सांगोपांग वर्णन कठिन है । ऐसे ही
कुमुमित होकर
मुदिति प्रेरणाप्रद निश्छल
एवं सदव्यवहार से पूर्वजो के चारित्रिक श्रादर्शो
साधारणतया मानव जीवन के लिये धर्म
किसी परम्परागत धर्म को मान्यता प्राप्त नहीं है
वे भी व्यापक घर्म के किसी न किसी अंग को
निःसन्देहः प्राणिमात्र में मानव ही सर्वश्रेष्ठ स्वीकार कर जीवन यापन करते हैं। धर्म के
है। ओर उसका आधार स्वयं उसका चरित्र है।
इसी अपने चरित्र के कारण वहै सर्वोपर है। परन्तु यह तथ्य भुलाया नहीं जा सकता कि समाज
जब तक उसका चरित्र उसके पास है, तव तक व्यवस्था के अरारंभ से पूर्व मानव की वह अवस्था
उसका यह गौरवपूर्णं अस्तित्व भी अक्षुण है। किसी न किसी रूप में विद्यमान है । परन्तु स्पष्ट
न्यथा उसमें एवं अन्य जीवों में कोई अन्तर नहीं रूप से यह सामाजिक व्यवस्था के समय से ही
है। संसार में अब तक जितने भी चरित्रवान मानव के समक्ष आया-आज भी समाज से अलग
आरम्भ होने के समय के बारे में भी विवाद है
महापुरुष हुये हैं और संसार जिन्हें पूज्य मानता हैं यलग इसका अस्तित्व स्वीकारा नहीं जा सकता ।
एवं नत-मस्तक होता है उन सबने अनादि काल से क्रमशः मानव जीवन का बिकास होता गया और
ही सद्गुणों के आद्शों की स्थापना की है। इस धर्म का स्वरूप भी समाज के लिये स्पष्ट होता
प्रकार उन्होंने ज्ञानी एवं बुद्धिमान देवात्माओं को गया अत: समाज का अर्थ किसी न किसी घर्म से
बाध्य किया कि वे स्वयं चरित्रवान होकर उनके ही लिया जाता है। धर्म का सामाजिक रूप
Nirmala Yoga
22
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-24.txt 
 निश्चित होते हो तत्समबन्धी विचार कि धर्ं क्या परिभाषा के अन्तर्गत है क्योंकि वे अनुप्राणित
है, उठता है । इस विवेचन में "जो धारण करे वही आनन्द लहरियों द्वारा आत्मवेदं सर्वत्र" तथा
धर्म है-घर्म का रूप निश्चित हआा जिसके
अनुसार संस्कृति का निर्माण हुआ ।
सामाजिक व्यवस्था के साथ भी गहरा सम्वन्ध है पश्चात ही दूसरे के घर का दीपक जलाय। जा
क्योंकि घम अर्थ, काम, मोक्ष में इसका स्थान प्रथम संकता है। आत्म- जान होने पर ही यथावं लोक
है। इसकी पृष्टभूमि व्यापक है, युग के अनुसार संग्रह हो सकता है। आत्म जानी पुरुष दूसरों के
परिस्थितियों में परिवर्तन होता है इन्हीं के कल्याण के लिये प्रेरित होता है। वेयक्तिक
आधार पर उस विशिष्ट युग
है । स्वधम सिद्धि इसके पालन से ही संभव
पर धर्म से इसका विरोध संभव नहीं (गीता)
आध्यात्मिक क्षेत्र में कम भक्ति श्र [ज्ञान को सभी जिसका शरीर बलवान एवं हृष्ट पूष्ट है परन्तु
ने मान्यता दी है, अपने स्वभाव व अनुभव को मन में बुरी वासना, असद्विचार, काम, कोध, लोभ,
आधार मान कर। यह श्रव सत्य है कि प्रारी मोह घृगणा दय वर हिसां,
विना अपने को बातावरण के अनुक्कूल बनाये रह ई्यों, स्वार्थ आदि दुर्गुरा और दुष्ट विचार एव
ही नहीं सकता-उसके अ्रस्तित्व में ही खतरा पैदा विकार निवास करते हैं, वह कदापि निरोग नहीं
हो जाना स्वाभाविक है। प्राीमात्र आन्तरिक मत का रोगी सदा जलता रहता है। वह माताजी
और बाह्य सामंजस्य की आवश्यकतावश ऋपने द्वारा दशायि सहज योग द्वारा ही अमोध वान्ति
अंतंजगत में प्रपने बिचारों और अनुभवों के आधार की उपलब्धि कर सकता है सुन्दर वही है जिसका
पर विचरण कारता है । मानसलोक की यही स्थिति हृदय सुन्दर है। इसको शुद्ध करो एक-२ दोष
है । अंतर्जगत की अनुभूतियों के अ्राधार पर चुन-२ कर निकाल बाहर करी सद्गुराों को हुृढ-२
वहिजगत का निर्माण होता है उ्यक्ति काम क्रोध, कर हृदय में बसाओो। माता जी का कथन यह भी
लोभ, मोह, हानि, लाभ, जीवन, मरग, यश, श्रपयश है कि "धरती का घन-धन नहीं सच्चा घन हृदय
से रहित शुद्ध हृदय से सुख दुःख आदि द्वन्दों में में रहता है । उत्तम विचार और चरित्रवल ही
स्थिर वृद्धि वाला सिद्धि असिद्धि से समता भाव से परम घन है । सूख न पहुँचा सकों तो दुख तो
सम्पन्न और निष्पक्ष भाव से लोक संग्रह की भावना किसी को न दो; पृथ्वी पर से पाप का भार हुल्का
लेकर अपनी आत्म तुष्टि में ही व्यावहारि का जीवन न कर सको तो पापमय जीवन बिता कर उसके
का संवालन करना है, जिससे अन्तर्जगत रौर बाह्यजं- भार को मत बढ़ाओ । जोवन को निर्मल, सादा,
गत में किसी प्रकार का असामजस्य न ही वस्तुतः स्पष्ट, सरल, धअद्धायुक्त आनन्दमय बनाओं अर
रत्म ज्ञान की यष्टि और समर्टि रवूप में ठीक विवेक को सदव साथ
निरुपण इसी आधार पर किया जा सकता है । सच्चिदानन्द धन निर्गरण निराकार बरह्म के सिवा
मानव जीवन का विकास और उसके उद्देश्य की र कुछ भी नहीं है । अतः उस आनत्दमय ब्रह्म
प्राप्ति इसी में संनिहित है । वहतमान जटिल का मन से कुण्डलिनी योग द्वारा इस प्रकार मनन
परिस्थितियों में सहजयोगान्तगत कृण्डलिनी उत्थान का अभ्यास करना कि पूर्ण आनन्द, अचल आनिन्द,
की देवी ध्रव आनन्द, नित्य आनन्द, अचार आनन्द,
आत्म दीपोभव" का वोध कराती हैं। जिस
प्रकार अपने घर के दीपक को प्रका शित करने के
"
॥ाT
की मान्यताएँ बनती मान्यतां के आधार पर सत्य निरुपरण संभव
है, नहीं-यह सब सहज योग द्वारा ही सहज सुलभ
है मन की निरोगता ही ास्तविक तिरोगता
है
प्रभिमान, कपट,
ा
रखो क्योंकि एक
प्रक्रिया जो माता जी थ्री निर्मला
अनुपम
द्वारा अनुसंधानित एवं प्रसारित है वह धर्म की [अचिन्त्य आनन्द ज्ञानस्वरूप आनन्द, परम आनन्द
Nir mala Yoga
23
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-25.txt 
 महान आनन्द बस एक अरनन्द के अतिरिक्त कुछ शब्द और प्रतीति की स्मृति भली भांति लूप्त हो
भी न हो-व्रह्म [ध्येय है वुद्धि की वृत्ति घ्यान है जाने पर अपने रूप से शूल्य के सदृश केवल ध्येय
श्रर साधक ध्याता है। ध्यान करने पर वृद्धि मात्र के स्वरूप को प्रत्यक्ष कराने वाली चित की
तन्मय होकर, तद्प हो जाती है तब यह त्रिपुटी स्थिति ही निर्वितर्क
नहीं रहती एकमात्र ब्रह्म ही रह जाता है और वितंडावाद के चक्कर में न पड़ कर सन्त कबीर
साधक की ब्रह्मा में स्थिति हो जाती है और तब वह जी कहते हैं कि "साघो सहज समाधि भली है"
निर्मल आनन्द स्वरूप बन जाता है इसी को अष्टांग जो सहज़ योग द्वारा ही सम्भव है इसमें अष्टांग
योग में सविकल्प समाधि की संज्ञा प्रदान की गई योग के यम नियम आ्रदि कठिन साधनाओं के
है। "तत्र शब्दार्थ ज्ञान विकल्प संकीरण सचित की केर में एक गृहस्थ को पड़ता उचित नहीं जान
समापति" (पांतजली योग दर्शन १।४२) उनमें पड़ता ।
शुब्द, अर्थ शऔर ज्ञान इन तीनों के विकल्पों से
संकीर्ण मिली हुई समाधि सवितक है इसके बाद
समाधि है इस समाधि
सर्व खल्विद ब्रह्म (छान्दोग्यपनिषद ३॥१४॥१)
जड चेतन चर अचर सब में ब्रहा की ही स्वरूप
जब साधक स्वयं ब्रहम में तद्रप हो जाता है तब
ये शब्द अर्थ ज्ञान नहीं रहते वरन केवल ब्रह्म है। हृदय प्रदीप को प्रज्वलित कर जीवन सफल
(आत्मा) का स्वरूप ही रहता है। यही निर्विकल्प करने में ही भलाई है।
समाधि है| 'स्मृति परिशुद्धो स्वरूप शून्येवार्थं
निर्मासा निवर्तको (पा० यो० दर्शन १४३)
आनन्द स्वरूप मिश्र
ॐ माँ
ी
री
पाहिली मी डोळा विश्वची ही जननी
हृदय सिंहासनी विराजीत । घ ॥।
क्षमेची ही देवता, दयेची ही मूर्ति
कृपा दृष्टि सदा लेकरां वरती ॥ १ ।।
शुभ्र बस्त्र नेसे निर्मला माता
दिसे प्रेमळ शांत हास्य वदन ते ।।२ ॥
जडावाचे असे गळा मंगल-सूत्र
भाळाव री टिळा कंकवाचा ॥ ३ ॥
लाल चुड़े यांनी मंडीत ते हात
पायांत जोडवी शोभतांत ॥ ४ ॥
मधुर वाणी एकूनी निर्मला मातेची
होत असे आनंद माझे मनी ।। ५ ।
प्रसन्न वदन दिसे महादेवी
तिच्या चरणी लीन होऊ सर्व जण ।। ६ ।।
सौ० सुधा गिजरे
नवी दिल्ली
24
Nirmala Yoga
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-26.txt 
 (Contd, from 2nd Cover)
On Mataji
"Truly I say to you, all sins will be forgiven the sons of men,
and whatever blasphemies they utter: but whoever blasphe-
mes against the Holy spirit never has forgiveness but is guilty
of an eternal sin".
Mark 3.28
And whoever says a word against the son of man will be for-
given; but whoever speaks against the Holy spirit will not be
torgiven".
Matthew 12.32
"I have yet many things to say to you but you cannot bear them
now, when the spirit of truth comes, he will guide you into all
the truth".
John 16.12
"These things I have spoken to you while I am still with you.
But the Counselor, the Holy spirit, whom the Father will send
in my name, he will teach you all things, and bring to your
remembrance all that I have said to you.
John 14 25
On the Collective Consciousness of the Sahaja Yogis with the Virata
"In that day you will know that I am in my Father, and you in
me, and I in you".
John 14.18
"Father, the glory which thou hast given me I have given to them.
that they may be one even as we are one, I in them and thou
in me, that they may become perfectly one, so that the world
may know that thou hast sent me and hast loved them even as
thou hast loved me".
John 17.22
Om Twamewa Sakshat Shri Mary Jesus Sakshat Shri Adi Shakti
Bhagawati Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Namo Namah
Compiled by- GREGOIRE DE KALBERMATTEN
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-27.txt 
 A CHALLEGE TO SCIENCE
and an appeal to Sahaja Yogis)
Science is a form of seeking. It confines many of the following details to my address
itself to the external world and to 'objective given below ?
phenomena'. It is interesting for us to see
that philosophers of science themselves
have realized that there is no such thing as
an objective fact. So Sahaja Yoga presents
a dilemma; the experience of realisation and
the perception of Chaitanya is subjective and
yet it is something of such importance that
science cannot afford to ignore it.
1. Name of patient
2, Address of the patient
3. Occupation of the patient
4. Age of the patient
5. Name and address of patient's doctor
and details of any hospitals visited
(I.e. doctor in-charge of admission,
dates of admission and any known
record or bureau number)
Perhaps, if no way is found to solve this
dilemma, science will become an irrelevance
as, the drama of these last days is played
out. At the same time, science plays a very
in Western
important role-especially
society. It is by appeals to Science, rather
than to Religion, that actions and ideas are
justified. So, if science can be brought up
to the level of Sahaja Yoga, then we, who are
realized scientists, should try to do it.
6. The patients symptoms
7. The doctor's diagnosis
8. The doctor's advice and treatment
9. The details of any Sahaja treatment
Although the scientist can not measure
or even objectively detect the vibrations of
the Holy Spirit, all the Sahaj Yogis know that
these vibrations, although subtle, do affect
10. The patient's progress
11. A photograph of the patient and any
other information that seems relevant:
the physical, body. Perhaps medical science
will be able to measure this healing that
Sahaj Yoga produces as a by-product, and
so begin to solve the dilemma,
David Spiro
17 Crescent Court, Park HiAI,
Clapham, London SW4 8HR England.
A collection of the case-histories of
people cured by Mataji or by the Sahaja
Yogis has been started. If any one knows of
such a case, could they please send as
Jai Mataji
Edited & Published by Sh. S. C. Rai, 43, Bunglow Road, Delhi-110007 and
Printed at Ratnadeep Press, Darya Ganj New Delhi-110002.
One Issue Rs. 5,00 Annual Subscription Rs. 20-00 Foreign (By Airmail) £ 4.0
