Nirmala Yoga folofell निर्मला योग Vol. 3 Bi-Monthly Year 1 May-June '81 t Om Twamev Sakshat Shri Sahastrar, Swamini Moksha Pradayini, Kalaki, Bhagawati, Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Namonamah. "Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns all the religions and seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga-THE UNION"

 Dear Subramanyamji, But for the souls yet to be establihed, they face difficulties. Their stranded way of life causes stranded thinkings and they put I have and am feeling well. I hope all the Sahaja Yogis will also be progressing there. Altho- thorns and stones in the path. One should ugh I am away from all the Sahaja Yogis, it not be upset over the difficulties. It is part is only Mother's love that binds with each quite safely reached here and parcel of life. By leaving Sahaja Yoga Her love is like the n the middle after seeing the difficulties, one cannot overcome the difficulties. It is sun showering always the mercy of rays and wherever it falls it dispels the darkness. Her love is like the clouds showering always the rain of bliss and wherever it goes it showers endlessly and makes the land fertile. Let us pray Her that there be raining enough to swim the river when we want to and sun shine always altogether. like a person who wants to cross the river, but seeing the forceful stream, if he stays on the bank, will it be possible for him to cross the river? So we should be capable take water from the main river and if the banks have ups and downs the water Remembering my days in Delhi, every finds its way to go out and it will not come day is valuable and they made a turning in the channel. Similarly, when there is point in my life. I have considered Tamil imbalance, that is, ups and downs in the as a Mother and come to Delhi and saw Her system, the difficulties are caused. So we in the form of Tamil; I came to Delhi for should keep the bank is balance to ensure Mathematics and saw Her in the form of the constant flow of water. Mathematics; I came to Delhi for my re- Yoga is the working system for that. search, by her grace I have seen the ultimate research. I came to Delhi with lot of puzz- And Sahaja It is fortunate to be a Sahaja Yogi and ling questions about Gods and purpose of it iS more fortunate to give realisation to life, none of the questionss left unsolved, vet others. Of all the Dharmas to give realiza- I did not ask Her any single question. It is the tion is the greatest Dharma. Dharma of evolution. To enrich ourselves, we should give realization to more and more persons. AIl the purposes of life are con- For all the realised souls She is the Mother, because She begot them in Her Sahasrar. She is an embodiment of love, tained in the purpose of salvation and if dharma, Sat Guru and above all the Mo ther of the Universe. We are fortunate to be in salvation, then the purposes are endless. this time, the time of Her incarnation. The One should allow oneself to check the tune world of Sahaja Yogis is like a palace and of the music. If the tune is not proper, we She is the Queen in the Palace. It is a should pray to Mother. She is the guiding palace of realized souls and wherever a pillar force. She is the one who has shown the is erected, the palace is extended. By the precious stone in the vanity of life. It is our grace of Her let it cover the entire earth, to purpose to dig and find it. Please convey my give proper food to the coming great souls. there are purposas without the purpose of wishes to all Sahaja Yogis. With the grace of the Mother, In this world of chaos life is full of struggle for existence. In the struggle for the Yours affectionately & lovingly existence, we should not forget the real purpose. For the souls who have already made their path perfect, the goal is near. S. GANESHAN 303-81 343, Dom Students ul. Zamenhofa loa 00-187 Warszawa, POLAND

 EDITORIAL Sahasrar Chakra and with that Sahasrar Since ancient fime generations of see- kers in India and other countries spent their Chakra of. Virata: was opened. She also lives in search of ultimate truth and eternity. developed a very simple method of awake- ning and raising of the Kundalini. The most difficalt task thus became effortless. They observed their surroundings, tried to understand the nature and in the process Man no longer remained an ordinary mortal but could be reborn in the same life as pro- phet and enjoy God's love showered on him unfolded many mysteries. They explored inner beings and concluded that the truth would be perceived within themselves and then fear of death would no more haunt in the form of Divine Vibrations. Prayers They further realised that the uiti- and yearnings of ancient sages for God condescending to the level of every genuine them. mate truth would reveal itself in thought- lessness once Mother Kundalini was awake seeker have thus been responded. as she would lead them to their Primordial H. H. MATAJI SHRI NIRMALA DEVI, Adi-Shakti Incarnate, is going from place to place granting realisation showing them the path of God-realisation. Let us pray to her- Father. However, awakening of Kundalini and its rising proved to be the most difficult task and very few could achieve it. For thou- sand of years, sages living away from socie- ties were the repositories of this sacred knowledge. Common man remained ignorant of it and many charitans and pseudo Gurus misied him. to masses and तो गमय । उयोतिर्गमय । तममो मृत्योंसा अमृतम गमय । Turning point in the spiritual evolution of man was reached on 5th May 1971. On this auspicious day, Divine Mother while meditating at Bordi in Gujaraih opened Her (Lead me from illusion to trulh Lead me from darkness to light Lead me from death to eternity) Nirmala Yoga

 NIRMAL A YOGA 43, Bunglow Road, Delhi-110007 INDIA Founder-H.H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Editorial Board : Dr. S. K. Mathur, Sri A. S. Mishra, Sri R. D. Kulkarni Representatives: ; Gavin Brown Brown's Geological Information Services Limited, 160 North Gower Street, NW 1 2nd (UK) London Hong Kong : Emilie P SHI London Cliff Rence Bros. Co. Ltd. 1610, Wing On Centre, 111, Connaught Rd., Central. Diane Heaperman C/o. 5/334, Victoria Place, Drummoyne, Sydney. Australia : Arneau de Kalbermatten Swilzerland 344, Winterthurerstrasse, 8057, Zuerich, Switzerland : M. B. Ratnannavar Bombay 13, Merwan Mansion : Marie Rougher France Genjwala Lane, Borivali (W). 175, Av. Ledru Rollin. Bombay-400 092 Paris-75001 CONT ENTS Page 1. Editorial 2. Representatives 3. Mataji's Advice 10 4. Letter 11 5. H.H. Mataji Nirmala Devi in Australia 13 6. Sahaja Yoga 15 7. Speech of Mr. C.P. Srivastava 8. Om Shri Mataji Prasanna 9. Surrender in Sahaja Yoga 18 19 22 10. Welcome Address 24 11. A Star is born for Satya Yuga 2nd Cover 12. Letter 3rd Cover 13 अंबे उदे ! उदे ! ! 4th Cover 14. Nirmala Devi Ma Nirmala Yoga

 Her Holiness Mataji's Advice given at Delhi on 11th March 81 I have told you, the other day that these vibrations. We see the comfort, we see vibrations are nothing but the Brahma- Shakti-the power of Brahma. The power for other people to come in or not, but we of Brahma is the power that creates, that desires, that evolves and it gives the living force also. It is the power which is giving us the living force. Now, it is awareness which means awareness that is not easy to understand what is a dead force working upon living things. As in the, say, and what is a living force. Living force is cell at the tip of a the root of a tree is a very simple to understand. An animal, say a little worm, is a living force. It can turn itself Itis quided by the living force itself. So, it the way it likes. It can save itself from dán- knows how to move with the living force, ger. It may be a small little thing. but to live with it and how to understand the plan because it is living it can save itself. But of the living force to get along with it and something which is dead cannot move by how to merge with it. ather things. We might even see if it is good do not see the house from vibrations point of view. For anything that we do, we have, now, to think in terms of vibratory living thing. Of course, it does not think, itself. So, the "Self" part does not remain in it, as far as it is concerned. But, we human beings have got the free- dom to decide. Now, once you are realised, Now, being a living force we should try to find out, "Are we going to be the living you have got that living force within you. force or the dead one". Now, when we live This is the living force you feel. So, vou in the world, we start thinking about our comforts; where we have to live, what we keep your body, mind, ego, superego and have to do. When we think of all these everything in things, you see, we are thinking of the dead. understanding the planning of the living But when we think of having a place or a house or an Ashram from the angle that you will be doing some living work, then you are giving life to that place That atmosphere should be created from all that is dead-to create the living force. have to know how to use this living force to the enlighterned state, by force. It gives you all the ideas regarding most of the problems. For example, here in this country and specially in Delhi, I find that you catch on the left Nabhi, also right Swadhi- shthana and then on the Heart and also on your Agnya. These are the Chakras which deal with our being. So, let us try from the Now, this is very very subtle thing, which very few people understand, for example, somebody brings me a pholograph of Shri left side. What happens ? On the let side Ganesh and says, "Should I worship this the problem slarts from left swadhishthna, Shri Ganesh's photograph or not". First of because that is the first Chakra that starts all we should see if vibrations are coming emitting the negativity within us. Now, left from it or not Supposing you take a house Swadhishthana is actually under control You must see that the house is giving good only of Shri Ganesh because Shri Ganesh Nirmala Yoga

 is the beginning of life and also the link is human or man-nade like the watch; parti- between the life and the death. So Ganesh cularly time is also man made. For example, Is one who gives the balance, the "Vivek" the today, time here is something, but in England understanding to you by which you know it is different. If you say it is 4-0 clock in how far to go with things. Now, when left India, it is not the same in England. So, the Swathishthana catches, you start going to other people who promise you such things, arrive what time you go. how many times ike "I will give you this and that, this will you do it. is not important. happen, that will happen to you". But this left sided thing can also come from your own desire for wrong things. For example, time limit or space limit, you cannot count we might be desiring something very wrong: it, the way it moves, the way it works out. we might be thinking that let us have this Once we understand that it is a living force kind of a dead thing or that kind of dead which is spontaneous, which is not bother- thing or some sort of a special thing. Sup- ed about our dead ideas, we come out of pose, somebody wants a refrigerator and keeps on thinking of it. He thinks that he became ameoba, then we gradLually became must have a fridge. He must go to the human beings. So, our: attention is all the fridge, because he wants a fridge: and he time towards the dead. What should we get, must get it. Why he wants a fridge ? what should we have, what are the needs ? Because he thinks it will give him more comfort. But, when he brings the fridge, he knows that it is not so. So, the best way to look at all dead things is not to go too far with them. If you have, well and good. if you do not have, well and good. You can live with minimum of minimum or you can live with maximum of maximum of these. is unhappy, you do not get the vibrations. But when we start expanding our dead pos- Such a common thing ! If you have any timing is not important. What time you Because living force is infinite, it has na the dead. We were first stones, then we We have of this body which is going to die. We do not see to the needs of the Spirit. By seeing to the needs of the spirit, overcome the left side. You you can start looking after your spirit from which you know that you get your vibrations. If your Spirit is happy, you get your vibrations, if it disease or a problem on left hand side, to give it a balance, you put your attention to the future. But then people get stuck up on the future, ifI say you look to the future. Nabhi, and at left As dead is dead and is 'Mithya' firei (illu- sessions, it is very much bad. Then our attention goes into the dead. That's how we move into our subconscious then over to collective subconscious. Then it moves higher to the left Nabhi, we start becoming crazy about sion), same way future is also Mithya, is these dead things. watch, the Time. Time is a dead thing; same. Whether you go to left or right, whe- it is not a living things. It has nothing to do with living thing. For example, you cannot supraconscious mind, both the thing are say exactly at what time the flower will just the same. So, no use going to the past, become a fruit. So this watch or time has but if you are too much in the past, it is nothing to do with the living force at all. It better to think of the future, so that you are For example, the also not there. Both the things are just the ther you go to the subconscious or the Nirmala Yoga.

 pushed a little bit to the centre. But, it is even afler Buddha, how many got their realis- difficult with you, human beings. ation? You must think also that there are so many realised people, who talk the same Now, the other problem starts, when we language, who talk the same tongue. You start feeling guilty about something, when must (thank yourself also, that every thing left VishudhiT catches. We start feeling quilty. "I should have not done this thing or that thing". Then you start saying, "| am: very miserable, I am very guilty" etc., you you go in the past and you start saying, "Oh just start cursing yourself. This is another nonsense. That is how once you start doing that, then what: happens is that you again catching". As you know, those who catch become dead. Because living force will never condemn. No, it will Never. It goes ning. always grudging type because of poor on progressing itself. It sees, which side to thingas, they suffer. Now, to match with that move, this side or that side. It is not going to condemn itself, It is not going to aggress can be known to you. But, when you start catching on the left, God ? I am so useless, I am good for nothing. I am so useless, that I am still on the left hand side, are always complai- is the other side. So, if I tell you that you go to the other side also, it is a very dangerous anything. It has the wisdom to be in the Centre. That is how people should over- come their left side, by putting their atten- tion away from the dead things. You should watch from the Centre, when you are on the leftside. What you want to see, you don't see. But then ultimately to es.cape all this, what you do is to start blaming yourself all the time and feeling miserable. Now, this is the way you start ending up with your left side into a very miserable state, that is the cul- mination of all these attachments to the left game. For example, we have so many condi- tionings in our lives. You see, first of all our desire. Our desire is to become excellent Sahaja Yogis, to become Master Gurus and something great and this and that. That there should be many disciples that we should have who should touch our feet and we should be called Great Gurus etc. So, in Sahaja Yoga some things are pro- hibited That nobody should touch anybody's feet and no Sahaja Yogi should allow anyone to side. So, ultimately you start thinking that you are good for nothing, you are useless, you should have done this, you should have touch his or her feet. This is one of the great Bandhans for all Sahaja Yogis. No one should touch other's Feet and nobody should ask to touch his or her feet, whatever done that. may Now, at this time to overcome it, you be your quality. Those who will touch will have to count your blessings. Count your lose vibrations, and those who will get salu- Blessings one by one You have got your tations will also calch on the heart. So, such Realisation. During thousands of years how conditions, which we have about Sahaja many people got realisation ? You have got Yoga also, should be removed. your vibrations. In so many centuries, how many people got them ? It is written in Zen system that in eight centuries there were al- We are all of us growing together. We are part and parcel of one personality. No- together 26 Kashyaps (Realised Souls) So, body is higher or lower. One who thinks the Nirmala Yoga

 So, one must understand that in Sahaja slightest like this will go down faster. This is the left side conditioning, where people Yoga, you are developing that sharp edge, falter very much. So, such desires must ba that central point from which you do not deviate to the right or to the left. This is something so subtle that you are left sided, you are not going to remain left sided. You can become right-sided tomorrow. Exactly, given up in Sahaja Yoga. You must have very wider desires in Sahaja Yoga that all of us must get Realisa- tian-say as many as possible. We shoula try to save as many people as possible. tomorrow you can come with a right-sided We should try to improve ourselves as far problem. So, you must learn that Balancing, we can, and we are nothing yet we can lust like you start learning a bicycle. You improve and have so many blessings. might fall on this side or that side. Now, the thoughts can come from the left side also. Like, if you have some Bhoots in your head, they can give you the thought when you cycle down, that's the point when that, "Oh, you are useless or good for nothing." Now, raise your right side and put down the left. with your left hand. Now why do we do this ? Because from your right side, you get the Grace and put down the left side. Such people who suffer from the left side should try this. One more thing, is, that when these ideas come to you or such thoughts: come to you, that you are good for nothing etc., it is better to beat yourself with shoes. Go and sing the praise yourself, just to see and guide yourself. of the Lord and say that I am so happy. I have got everything around me. Now, when de you learn cycling? If you ask me, I will say, "When you learn." I mean you learn. So, in Sahaja Yoga, to balance it, you have to watch yourself carefully. Now, where is it going ? To the left side, then come to the right side. If going to the right side, come to the left side, Now, come to the Centre, you just separate yourself, you detach yourself all the time. Not to criticize yourself nor to aggress anyone or to criti- cize others. But use this point just to see Guidance is very different from getting lost. Now that is what it is. Supposing the dead thing is there. Say this is a dead thing. Now, the second thing is about the right When I throw it, it exactly will fall there. side. On the right side, mostly you catch Living thing, if I throw it will not fall there on the Swadhishthan. That is because you exactiy. So, the living force knows how to think. This is another kind of thinking that guide itself. In the same way you will learn gives you catch at right Swadhishthan. Thinking, whether it comes from right or the have mastered Sahaja Yoga. left will first give problem to your liver. The worst comes when both the sides are invol- ved. There are some Bhoots which give you ideas that you are good for nothing etc. while the other thing is when you start think- to guide yourself. If you have learnt it, you No use condemning yourself, in any way or thinking that you are great or small. But watch now, where the horse is going. You are sitting on the top of the horse; now you are no more the horse, Before, Realisa- tion you are the horse. Wherever it takes you, you go there. It may stand there, when it ing that you are so great. In this such a wobbling starts coming and the confusion starts setting in. Nirmala Yoga

 sees the grass and eat. Then the horse thise with the people, who are caught up. wants to kick somebody, it will do so, But, They just watch. If somebody comes, they will tell me, "Mataji, this fellow is caught". That's all. Somebody else comes. They now, you have come out of the horse and sitting on the horse as a Rider. Now you are the Rider and you must know how you are promptly tell me, "He is alright". That's all. befooled by these things. These desires are They just certify. They do not hate anyone, all ancient ageold things within you. See, they do not get worried about anything. If also the aggression, the Karma that you are doing are also ancient. By doing this you will get this, you will get that. Many people any malice about the person. will say, "Mother, we are doing this, we are doing so much for Sahaja Yoga; we have still not achieved anything". Now, what to do. Just can't help it. Now, you must find out, what is the matter with you. some body comes with a very bad Badha, they say, "Better please, go away", without Once, you are at the top of the hill, you have not to worry about the traffic. But, you are not yet on the top, that's why you are worried that, "I am climbing and falling, climbing and falling". This is just a Myth, Now, if the Heart is catching, such just a mental shadow on your mind. This is people can never progress. The Heart is the source of Light, it is the source of Brahma- Shakti. Heart is the seat of Atma, If in the Heart there is no living force, then how can you progress ? a fact that you are at the top of the hill, But you have not asserted, the assertion is not there. The God is the enjoyer. You cannot enjoy. You can only enjoy God, and it is the greatest enjoyment, to feet what God has created for you, what a beautiful life He has given you in human awareness, by You should grow mature to that point which you can know how much He has You must know what to chonse. This is what Sahaja Yoga should make out of you. where you know what to choose. This is Growth. Then you don't ask of Mother, You don't ask anyone. loved you, how much He has worked for you. He has brought you to this level. What He has given you, you can give to others and make others happy. If you think like that immediately both of your sides will be sett- what I do, I should know what led and you yourself will be filled with This development should come to you. I am doing. I should know what is cor- rect. I should know how to correct it". I should know T, here is the Spirit and not the Ego. No more the Ego exisls or the चाहिये । विराजिये, श्रासन पर विराजिये । आसन Super-ego exist. It is the Spirit which gui- des you. You see the Realised children. They don't ask such questions, They know Divine Vibrations. अब हिन्दी में बतायें । आपको विराजना पर बंठकर भीख मांग रहे हैं, रो रहे हैं। आसन पर बैठकर पागलपन कर रहे हैं । इनका किया क्या जाये ? अरे भई, आसत पर विराजो । आप राजा साहब हैं। बंठिये, और अपनी पांचों इन्द्रियों को आप प्राज्ञा (आर्डर) दीजिए "जनाव आप अब who is foolish, who is stupid, They know who is caught up. They know whom to shut up and whom to argue. They do not sympa- Nirmala Yoça 7.

 ऐसे चलिए, वहुत हो गया। अब ये ठोक है, अब देंगे और जैसे ही वो दिखाई दगे बेसे ही आप पुरी वो ठीक है, हां बहुत समझ लिया आपको ।" जब तरह से विराजिये, जेसे कोई राजा साहब है, अपने आप इस तरह से (Cornmand) कमाण्ड में अपने सिंहासन पर बेठे हैं। आपको अगर सुनाई दिया कि को करेंगे, जब आप अपने को पूरी तरह कण्ट्रोल हुमारे प्रजाजन, कुछ ग डब ड़ कर रहे हैं, तो कहिए, चुप रहिये, ऐसा नहीं करने का है। यह नहीं कि अपने को पूरी तरह (Control) में करेंगे, तभी तो आप प्रच्छे सहज- योगी हुए। नहीं तो आपके मन (Mind) ने कहा, ऐसा करो, वैसा करो।" "चलो इधर", आप बोलते हैं, "माताजी, क्या (Command) वामाण्ड में जो आदमी कर लेता है, करू, इतना मन को रोकता है, पर मन इधर जाता वही शक्तिशाली है। है। फिर मन क्या है ? मन तो एक (Living Force) जीवन्त शक्ति है, वी जाएगा ही। मन मिसाल के तोर पर लोगों की बातचीत ले । नोग जब बात करते हैं यानी हमसे भी बातचीत करने तो उसी जगह जाएगा. जहां जाना है। हमारा जा में रूथाल ही नहीं रहता कि किससे बात कर रहे हैं। इन्द्रियां हैं, वो जागृत हो जाती हैं और फिर हैम सी वात करते हैं कि बड़ा अाश्चर्य छा होता है । सी इधर-उघर जाना ही नहीं चाहेंगे और बहुत चौजें छोड़ते चले जायेंगे । उनको अन्दाज नहीं रह जाता कि हमें क्या कहना चाहिये, क्या नहीं कहता चाहिए। हमारी जबान पर भी क़ाबू होना चाहिए। यह काबू भी तभी होता है, जब आप अपने को अपने से हटे हुए देखेंगे। यह इन सब चीजों में हमको एक ही ध्यान रखना चाहिए; अपने हृदय को स्वच्छ रखना। जिन लोगों का हृदय स्वच्छ रहता है, उनको समस्या (Problems) कम होती हैं। इसका मतलब यह नहीं है, कि आरप लोग गंदी बातें सोचते रहते हैं। स्वच्छ तरीक बन जाय गे, नया श्रन्दाज बन जायेगा फिर जबान है न, उसे ठीक रक्खना पड़ता है । घीरे धीरे, आपकी नई आदतें हो जायेगी, नए आप अपने को (Order) आदेश देंगे। हमेशा हृदय का मतलब है, समर्पण । सहजयोग में अगर समर्पण में कमो हो जाय या कोई समझे कि मैं कोई 3rd Person में जो आदमी पार होता है वो कभी विशेष हैं, तो उस आदमी में (growth) प्रगति 1st Person ( प्रथम पुरुषप ) में बात नहीं नहीं हो सकती। उसके लिए कोई पढे-लिखे नहीं करता, हमेशा 3rd person में करता है, "ग्रापको चाहिए, कोई विशेष रूप के नहीं चाहिए । म E वहां पर चलना है, वहां चलिये, वहां बेटिये ।" बच्चे भी ज्यादातर एसा ही करते हैं, 3rd Person में "मुझे यह नहीं हुआ, मुझे कोई अनुभूति नहीं बात करते हैं," ये निर्मला अब जाने वाली नहीं है । हुई"- तो दोष आपका है या सहजयोग का ? लोग ये यहीं बैठी रहेगी।" सहजयोगियों को भी इसी तो कभी कभी इस तरह से मुझसे बातें करते हैं तरह बात करनी चाहिये । धीरे २ जैसे कि मैंने ठेका ही ले रखा है या मेरे पास आपने से हटाना चाहिये। अपनी जो इच्छाएँ है, अपने जो कोई रुपया पेसा जमा किया हुआ है कि मां, हम तो ideas (विचार) हैं, materialistic ideas आपके पास पच्चोस साल से अ रहे हैं।" पच्चीस (सांसारिक) हैं, या और कोई ideas, जैसे सत्ता क्या तीस साल तक; बुढ़े होने तक भी कोई काम नहीं होने वाला। इसलिए अगर यह नहीं हो रहा चाहिए कि हम सहजयोग के लिए क्या कर रहे हैं है, इसका मतलब है कि आपमें कोई न कोई कमी और क्या करना है । है । लेकिन जेसे ही आप प्रपने को अपने से हटाना शुरू करेंगे, आपको अपने दोष बड़ी हो जल्दी दिखाई में बहुत ज्यादा हैं । वो लोग कभी मुझसे आराकर अपने को, अपने ideas ( fa7) materialistic ideas के ideas, इत्यादि, ये सब छोड़कर हमें यह सोचना अभी भी हिन्दुस्तान में ये चीजें कम हैं, परदेस Nirmala Yoga ৪

 भोगने वाला परमात्मा हैं और वही रचयता है और आप तो सिर्फ बीच में हैं। जिस तरह पाइप (Pipe) होते हैं, उसी तरह आप है। अगर थोड़ा भोग ही सकते हैं, तो एक चीज भोग सकते हैं वह है परमात्मा जिसे आपसे अनन्त प्रेम है । वस, यही एक सत्य है जिससे आप पूरी तरह से प्ानन्दित रह सकते हैं, पुलकित रह सकते हैं । बाकी किसी भी चीज से आपको आनन्द नहीं मिल सकता, किसी भी चीज को भोगने वाला सिर्फ वही है। यह नहीं कहते कि मेरे वाप के, दादा के चाचा के संगे भाई का फलाना फलाना, वीमार है उसको आप ठीक कर द । कभी भी अरपनी material difficulties या Problems नहीं कहते हैं। हालांकि, आप पार जल्दी होते हैं. वो लोग बिचारे अपनी गलतियों की वजह से ज्यादा समय लेते हैं । पार आप जल्दी होते हैं पर आपको उसकी कीमत नहीं, वो जो पार देर से होते हैं, उनको उसकी कीमत है । उनको तरीका मालुम है, क्या चीज है। उनकी आखों में ही देखिये, कितनी एकाग्रता बात यह है कि आपको आज कुछ चाहिये वो है । एक एक शब्द को अगर मैं हिन्दीं में बोल रही है, पूरे ध्यान से सुनते हैं, हालांकि भाषा नहीं ला दिया, फिर भी आप खुश नहीं। कल फिर समझते लेकित उसमें कंस वाइबर शन (Vibra- tions) निकल रहे हैं, हाथ में कंसे (vibrations) बाइब शन आ रहे हैं, क्या चीज हो रही है, उस पर आपको कुछ चाहिये, कल दूसरी चीज ला दी, फिर तीसरो चीज ला दी, फिर भी खुश नहीं। पप कभी भी सांसारिक चीजों से खुश नहीं हो सकते । ाग== पूरा चिल्त रहता है। अब इन्होंने अपना जीवन हो सजयोग को दे दिया है। बो कोई ची ज नहीं सोचते, कि भई यह भी कर लेंगे, वो भी कर लगे । तभी गाप गहरे जत रेंगे । जीवन सहजयोग की देन भोगने वाला सिर्फ परमात्मा है, इसलिये सबको चाहिए कि हम उसको भोगें हमको परमात्मा को भोगना चाहिये, वही जो सबको भोगने वाला है से हो आप पनपते हैं; यह भी बात है। उसमें शापका कछ लेता देना तो है नहीं। कोई प्रापकी ौर क्या भोगने की जरूरत है। उसका ही सुख कमी नहीं हो जाती । सारा क्षेम आपके अनदर आ अगर उसको भोगना शुरू कर दिया तो फिर हमें भोग। पुरमात्मा ने क्या-क्या सृष्टि रचेी है, कितना सुन्दर सारा संसार बनाया है, कितनी सारी चीजें हमें दी हैं । हम सहजयोगों हो गये हैं। हमारे अंदर े शक्ति परमात्मा ने दी है। अब आप अपनी आत्मा को पा सकते हैं, दुसरे की आत्मा को पहचान सकते हैं। कितनो प्रनन्त कृपा परमात्मा को हमारे ऊपर है। बस यही सोच-२ कर अपने अंदर फूलिये । जाता है । सारा जोवन ही सहजयोग को दे देना चाहिये एक-एक क्षण सहजयोग को देना चाहिये। इसका मतलब है living spontaneously, कहां से आयेगी spontaniety ? वो living force से आतो है । हमारे प्रन्दर हर समय जो जीवित शक्ति इस तरह से जत्र प्राप परमात्मा को भोगना शुरू करंगे तो प्राप देखेंगे कि प्रापका heart (हृदय है, उससे । और सब बातों को सोचना हो नहों ) बहुत बड़ा हो जाता है। एसा लगेगा कि सारी चाहिये । सृष्टि उस हृदय (heart) में समा गई है। वसे भो आप कभी भोग नहीं सकते । भीगने वाला सिर्फ परमात्मा है। परापको नलतफहमी है कि आप भोग रहे हैं। आप भोग हो नहीं सकते । आज का मेरा आपको सन्देश है-आप पर- ककी मात्मा को भोगना शुरू करें । बाकी सत् चीजों का Nirmala Yoga

 भोग आप छोड़ कर परमात्मा का भोग करें और उसका आनन्द उठायें कि आपको परमात्मा ने क्या हर मिनट में हमें क्या मिला। इतना मिल गया, इतना मिल गया, ऐसे कहते हुए चलिये, क्या दिया। क्या क्या चीजें दो हैं, हर जगह इसका नहीं तो आपके complaints कभी नहीं खत्म आनन्द उठाना गुरू कर दीजिये । आप देखेंगे कि होने वाले और आप का aggression भी कभी आपका चित्त एक दम स्थिर हो जायेगा । सहजयोग में प्रगति इसी तरह से होंगी । खत्म नहीं होन वाला Bombay March 1981 JAI MATAJI I'm giving this experience of my hip bone fracture which took place on 30th November 1980. I was told by my doctor that I would not be able to walk without a stick for six months, but on the fifth day of my operation Our Dear Respected Mataji came to see me in the hospítal and with H.H. Matajl's grace and vibrations I felt so much energy and such strong vibrations that I started walking without a stick within fifteen days. At this experience my doctor also was so surprised that he became very keen to meet Our Respected Mataji and he came and met Mataji and got realised by her. I only pray that more people will come to our Sahaja Yoga and take blessings of Our Respected Mataji who's a Real Goddess Incarnation and we are really one of the fortu- nates to have this Great Mother who is full of Great [Love and Blessings for those who come to her Lotus feet. JAI MATAJI Mrs. Mahtaney Nirmala Yoga 10

 F H. H. MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI IN AUSTRALIA LE As so many of you know, our Divine Shri Ganesha was created by Her, as that Mother, H. H. Mataji Nirmala Devi came to our land, Australia, in March and April 1981. She came and blessed us by Her Divine Vibrations. great Divinity which resides at Mooladhara Chakra. So what a glorious event-Adi Shakti has, in Her complete form, come to Shri Ganesha at Mooadhara Chakra. None of the other Mother was welcomed by an excited joyous group of 70 Sahaja Yogis. She was so radiant and so giving of love that even the garlands and flowers seemed to be so happy that thay could adorn Adi Shakti, the one who had come to give enlightenment to human awareness Her children of the Mooladhara Chakra May we, Her children, grow in our awa- Gods could reach Shri Ganesha-neither Bramha, Vishnu nor Mahesha-so Adi Shakti Herself has come and this is an event and a blessing far far beyond our present and understanding. of her beautiful earth. reness to the point where we become the Awarenessitselt. This is our prayer, O It was a double Blessing because Mother Adi Shakti. arrived on Her Birthday-21st March 1981, and we were able to perform puja to Her on Meanwhile let us all determine, with humility this special day. In Her emphasised the importance of Australia in innocence, obedience and wisdom that is the spread of Sahaja Yoga (sea separate Shri Ganesha. May the primordial principal Puja talk She and sincerity to become that quality of transcript of Her talk). of holiness be re-established on this earth in Satya Yuga. Mother, soon after arrival, pointed out the close similarity of the Australian aborigi- nal place names in and around Sydney, to Sanskrit words. The apartment in which Mother stayed for Her time here overlooked the "Paramatta River". In the Australian So, Mother's birthday was bath a joy to us and a great Cosmic event !! Public programmes were held over 2. weeks in Sydney. Mother also gave two The preparation, Mother told us that in publicity and press coverage was excellent. aboriginal language this means; "The head of the great river". Sanskrit, "Paramatta" means the Supreme Sydney's shop windows carried Her photo- Mother or Adi Shakti. And the miracle was graph and that it began to emit cool vibrations. So we too now have a "Ganga', blessed by Adi and gave good exposure. Shakti Herself. the "Paramatta River". Mother also töld us for how Australia was originally a part of Mother India and as it day, produced a truly amazing response. lectures in Melbourne. details of Her programmes Newspaper advertisements were well placed The press conference held on the first separated to become a separate continent, All the newspapers who carried articles 11 Nirmala Yoga

 gave a favourable write-up and Her photo- allowed us to worship Her at Puja for Shri graph was carried in probably a million newspapers (including the national daily and Puja for the Devi on Her wedding anni- "The Australian". T. V. news coverage on at least two commercial networks was achieved and a brilliant radio interview for 3 with the Collective Being on those days of Ganesha, on the first day of the Indian Year versary. The photographs which we have, give a beautiful glimpse of the joy we shared hours (from 9p.m. to midnight) was broad- worship of Mother. cast live to over 1,80,000 listeners. (Mother used the opportunity to give Self-Realisation over the radio and the programme was acclaimed by the radio station as a great medium of recording Mother's lectures can event.) Several video tapes of Mother's lectures and pujas were made. We hope that this be used To see Mother's talks as well as hear them, is such more from now on. a joy. Regarding the public programmes, the opening night was a 'standingroom only event. (Mother's arrival had to be delayed by ! hour so that extra seating could be arranged but still people were standing at the back). We had expected about 300 maximum, in-fact there were approximately 500 each night. We moved to a larger hall Sydney to Bombay. after the first night. Mother departed after a most intensive 18 days with us here in Australia. We can still see and feel the vibration which She showered on our land and its people when She was here and as She flew out of It's difficult to describe Mother's visit Mother, in six lectures, covered all the chakras in detail and kept reinforcing the Reality on paper, and to describe a great awakening that had occured during the first Cosmic and earthly event in relative terms, night. in words. We feel it but, to put Absolute seems so inadequate, Just the joy and the determination continue. Each weekend we had an all-day practi- cal seminar session outdoors on the Mother earth. And the greatest blessing of all was given to the new people-they were invited to wash the Lotus Feetof our Divine Mother, The Collective Being has indeed said to the How Her Australian children have been world. from Mooladhara Chakra, "BEHOLD We pray Mataji that those who gained the Self at the Feet of the Holy Mother, will settle into Sahaja Yoga and become strong. blessed! THE MOTHER". As well as at the Birthday Puja, Mother Subscribers are requested to renew their subscription in time. For outstation cheques please add Rupeces Three extra for bank charges Nirmala Yoga 12

 SAHAJA YOGA Why is Sahaja Yoga the Maha Yoga? For They are all-pervading and we become like the first time in human history, one can feel antennae, receiving them and re-transmiting cool vibrations without any mental, physical them. We can feel them coming from others. or emotional effort. In this state, one is in complete relaxation and the mind is free from thoughts. There is complete silence, but one is totally alert and aware of every- thing that is happening, all the five senses are active. One feels like a child and all action is spontaneous. It sounds really fantastic, but it has to be so if they are the thing which created our mind. They only flow if we give them to others, because the sources wants others in collectivity, it wants theWhole. In Sahaja Yoga, one cannot achieve much on one's own. It invalves giving and sharing, One experiences the present, the only not materialistic things, but the vibrations, reality. This is Sahaja Yoga, the Maha Yoga. with others. H. H. Mataji Nirmala Devi is an enligh- tened soul and in Her presence, one receives this enlightenment. It is like one candle enlightening another candle. I have completed my M. Sc. degree in telecommunications and have been working with microwave antennae for the past four years. When I started practising Sahaja Sahaja Yoga is Maha Yoga because after Yoga, I never believed in gurus or religion, or even in God. I was totally scientific. | started feeling these cool vibrations in self the reality as cool vibrations flowing in the presence of Her Holiness Mataji. I was the palm of the hand. Vibrations are very sceptical-first I thought the cool wind was coming from the windows, then I pulsating out from the spirit, which resides thought it was a trick done by hypnosis, but I was totally alert and conscious, no- thing changed except that I felt this cool These vibrations are the only reality, they breeze in my hands and I had never felt so realisation, we can feel our Atma, spirit in our conscious being and one can see for one- iike electro-magnetic waves and they are in the heart. are present in every atom and they create peaceful yet alert in all my life. this universe. We see pictures on our T.V. screens by electro-magnetic vibrations. They are transmitted by a station, received and their movement from my studies. These by an antenna and sent to the T V. set. electro-magnetic vibrations move away from We know ihey are there because we can 1 know about electro-magnetic vibrations the source like the movement of ripples electromagnetic when a stone is thrown into a pool of water and they rebound off obstacles in exactly whereas the vibrations we feel in Sahaja the same way as ripples rebound from the Yoga are multi-dimensional, they include edge of the pool. It is the reception of these emotional, mental and physical energies. rebounding waves which is the principle of These measure them. are only three-dimensional, vibrations Nirmala Yoga 13

 emotional and physical aspects in our body radar because they indicate the presence and position of the object. The real nature to find an equilibrium. The cause of all of electro-magnetic waves are not known: All that can be said is that they are stresses produced by electric charges, their effect nal, or mental or physical. can be sensed, but they themselves are our problems is basically that we are not on the central path, we are either too emotio- When we try to balance ourselves thro- At work, I can measure the ugh techniques or effort before electro-magnetic energy from a distant source into a receiving antenna using a meter. I can couple this power out and constrain it to flow through waveguides. When we speak through the telephone, we are using electro-magnetic vibrations. Yoga. we just go on an ego trip in one direction or the next, we can't just sit and watch it. One moment we are happy, elated and full of energy and the next we are dep- fessed, worried or angry and all our ener- gies are used in one way or the olher: When our system is out of balance, we get all exactly the same thing was happening to sorts of diseases including cancer. After coming to Sahaja Yoga, the vibrations flow Here I was totally bewildered because me-I was actually the antenna and could feel these vibrations and my fingerS were through our being and help us to find the central path. acting like meters. I was receiving this energy and1 could manipulate it. It was really incredible and too fantastic to be true. It is entirely free because it is the vibra- tions which create matter (money), so how can we purchase them ? Vibrations are the flow of love and all genuine seekers should Ithen used my logic, since I was a scie- ntist. Why is it that I feel cool vibrations in my hands, is it something within me that recognises the truth of Sahaja Yoga and fake it seriously. It is given freely, there is manifests itself as cool vibrations ? If it has to do with God, then surely I would not be able to understand it with my mind, be- diplomat and She is here in this country on cause He is the one who created my mind; official duties not as a "practising guru", if I, a scientist, design a robot, there is no way the robot can understand me, his crea- tor. So, the only way to know is through an lightenment, the vibratory awareness, so we experience, à happening and through my can become aware of of our own divinity. rationality. no technique or hidden mantra. Who is Ma!aji ? She is the wife of a She lives like a queen in Her own right, yet She leaves everything and gives us this en- 1t is a yoga of divine love, a love beyond These vibrations are really powerful. The physical, mental or emotional sensations, it space satellite system is nothing compared is pure, it is the love of the spirit and to the power of these vibrations, it is just a mini-form of the vibration system which This is why it is called Maha Yoga. permeates the whole universe and here for the first time we can feel it, we can mano- euvre it, we can enjoy it, we can use it to manifests itself through cool vibrations. HARI JAIRAM, (Sahaja Yoga Ashram) 44 Chelsham Road Clapham, London SW4. 01-622 163A. cure others, because once the vibrations Telephone : start to flow, we can balance the mental, Nitmala Yoga 14

 On 26th December 1980, Bombay Sahajayogis alongwith their foreign counterparts offered very warm tributes to Mr. C.P. Srivastava for his appointment as Secretary General of IMCO (International Maritime Consultative Organisation) successively for the third time. Following is the text of the reply given by Mr. C. P. Srivastava, on this occasion Dear Members of the UnivVersal Sahajyoga family, I am very greatly honoured and very over- whelmingly touched by the most generous observations which have been made about unhappiness or a little frustration and people me and about my work.... to deserve the love and affection that you have chosen to shower upon me. You have mentioned that I have been sacrificing In order thaf my wife who is Mataji to you would be able to devote her time for Sahaj- there must be some answer to that, because voga. What I want to inform you is; It is not after all we have to live together, and an- you are in the North or in the South, every- where you find a certain feeling of unrest, of whatever I can do all over the world are wanting to know, "how can we all members of this universal world community live together in happiness and in peace." This is the question before every thinking individual in the world today. And a sacrifice, it's a great privilege. When vwe got married, and that was more than a third Swer really is that all of us whether we be- tong to one country or another, we are mem- of a century ago (34 years ago) we had our family, a little family, and we agreed among ourselves that our first duty would be to bring up our two daughters. We also agreed that once the daughters got married, SHE would be free to devote her time as bers of one great universal family. Afterall, if we just remember, that the whole of uni- verse that we know of there is only ane planet on which there is life, such as we have and that, we are the most fortunate persons to be those created by the Almighty to be the best of creations, that itself is a While our children were growing up-SHE very great privilege and the least that we gave all her time and devotion to them to should somehow do is to live together much as possible to the service of humanity. bring them up and SHE gave me tremendous brothers and sisters genuinely, not support. Without HER support, it would merely thro' lips but thro' hearts and it have been impossible for me to apply myself is most important for us to come to that for the responsibility which the Govt of the stage. I have a feeling that the world is now country entrusted to me. I am deeply grale- réady for a new revolution, There was the ful to HER. But today what I want to state industrial revolutlon in the 19th century which brought economic prosperity to many very proud of HER. And why am I proud of parts of the world, thus bringing prosperity HER ? I am proud because, at a time when to other parts. But that is notenough. For hu- the world is afflicted everywhere, whether man beings material prosperity is important, you are in the East or in the West, whether but it is not the ultimate aim. There is much as is that I amnot grateful to HER I am but Nirmala Yoga 15

 more in a human being than a mere desire for material well being-the spiritual part. It of those Is only through spiritual attainment, through admire HER, respect HER, and my fullest spiritual satisfaction that genuine happiness support is available to HER in everyway for guidance and I have no doubt that I am one thousands and thousands who can be attained, and there must be some the work that SHE is doing. But, I think, SPARK which has to light and the source support is not the right word because SHE of the SPARK is before you. THIS LADY. does not need support from anybody; but So when I say I am not sacrificing at all, in- you see you must forgive me because I have deed I am feeling to be a part of you, feeling a dicotomy. It is very difficult for me to to be a part of this great endeavour, andI am forget that I am HER husband, so please do proud of HER and the work SHE is doing. forgive the expression that I have used but, it was in my capacity as a consort and I I might tell you something more. Very recently I had a unique experience. SHE is a very busy person and if I may out being immodest, I am also very busy uplifting men & women everywhere through- with my work, but one evening SHE invited me very kindly to a function like this in worthy of the Almighty God who has created London. There I saw another family a Sahajyoga family, Sahajyogis and Yoginis. What a wonderful expression they had, what for the kind words about my re-election. a feeling of internal peace and calm they had, what feelings of togetherness they had. That gave me a very deep impression, a feeling only for one reason, viz that you would that, that family had been transformed from desperate individuals coming from different the world. On very few issues the Govts. parts of the country into a family mended of the World agree. Now, if they agreed together, knitted together with one purpose, viz., realising that we are members of one Union. United States. United Kingdom, or want vou to know that the work she is doing S is to my way of thinking very very important may say số with- for humanity. In fact, I feel that if is only by out the world, that we can really become us all. Now, in IMCO, the Organisation that | am privileged to serve, I am very grateful It was most gratifying. Perhaps you know that this was unanimous. Imention this hear that there are many issues that divide upon re-election, whether it was Soviet family. They all wanted to assist each other to help each other to grow together and to develop spiritually. Now, this is a marvell- ous task. I think the world needs this more Developing Countries or China or Pakistan, well, they agreed to uphold a certain princi- ple and in some way perhaps the message of Sahaja Yoga was being given to them thr- ough me coming from HER. And the mess- age that I always give to the member coun- tries of the Organisation is: "We are not divided into groups. 1 do not believe in groupism. I do not believe in confrontation, I do not believe that by fighting, the world I do not believe that the developing world can develop by fighting I believe, and I than anything else. This country needs this much more than anything else. It is the transformation, it is the uplifting of the indi- vidual from within, which is most important. If that uplifting does not come, you will have conflicts, you will not have the kind of homo- geniety or goodwill, which is so essential for all of us to be able to live together in peace. So, SHE is giving you spiritual the developed world. can get along. 16 Nirmala Yoga

 a routine life but the purposes are spiritual-much highly elevated. For believe very sincerely & genuinely, that all of us can get together only by way of toget- herness, by co-operation and this is the your success, for your happiness and your message that I give continuously." Now this wellbeing I will pray and with these few is only one aspect of Sahaj Yoga, only an aspect, but this is the message that I give to the organisation that I am privileged referred me today and I may also thank to serve and I am most gratified & delighted HER for all that SHE is doing for me by words I want to thank you once again for the veryvery kind words in which all speakers supporting me really, THANK YOU VERY MUCH. that the governments as they are represen- ted in this Maritime Organisation of the United Nations System, accept that philo- sophy and they accept that by working together the people of the world engaged in Maritime activity can make progress, which would be satisfactory from the point of view of everybody and if they re-elected me unani- mously, honour me greatly and my country- but to my way of thinking they honoured the principle which is to guide the whole of United Nations system. So, in some way there has been action and interaction between Sahaja Visit Yoga on one side and United Nations activity on the other. I have only a small responsibility in the United Nations system but to the extent that 1 can, it is my duty and it has been my endeavour always to serve the World Community in a far more elevated sphere- the spiritual sphere. Now to friends who have come from abroad, as an Indian I would like to extend a very hearty and a very warm welcome. I feel very greaty honoured & pri- vileged that you should be here at this time that you should spend your new Year Day in our country and I want to take this oppor- tunity to wish you the very very best for 1981 and the best that I can do is to say let Sahaja Yoga which is universal, grow and (Laughter & claps) Phone: 61 10 45 2: PARKASH STUDIO For HIGH CLASS PORTRAITS, GROUP PHOTOS CHILDREN PHOTOGRAPHY, DEVELOPING, PRINTING & ENLARGING WOODEN PICTURE FRAMING AND Movie & Flash Photography For PARTIES & MEETINGS grow & develop and really lift up the word to a new level of awareness, new level of human relationship based on love, affection, & realisation that human beings are born for great purposes, they are not born merely PHOTOSTAT OF DOCUMENTS 17, MAIN MARKET, LODI ROAD, NEW DELHI Nirmala Yoga 17

 OM SHRI MATAJI PRASANNA You asked me if I could write about of Sahaja Yoga is the recognition of one's spiritual benelits of Sahaja Yoga. When one sits down to do it, one feels the diffi- culty as being that even contemplating that phrase one goes thoughtless. The benefits are so many and various because as the chakras get enlightened so all the divine qualities start asserting in one's life in all Spirit divine in human form. That is the sin purity and beauty. Easy ito write about which Christ said will not be foregiven at the material benefits of better job, health impro- vements, passing exams with flying colours. But all that is a by product of the enlighten- ment by Mother's grace and one's spiritual Toga is to realise that the spiritual path of Instrumentation. It would be an imperti- nence to write about benefits to oneself of every soul must seek alone and individually. a spiritual nature. Because who benefits from Sahaja Yoga in the spiritual sense is actually God Almighty Himself. It his His joy But when ego drops away so does the myth in His creation that makes our Sahaja Yoga of loneliness. One finds all the brothers and such a joyous experience. It is his inno- cence that protects US and cures our illness. It is His wealth that showers on us material rewards. It is His fearless nature that kills all the negativity in our hearts and opens us to His joy and love for one another. The benefit is not to our self as we used to identify it but to our pure self which is a universal being. The benefit of Sahaja Yoga is that one becomes a Sahaja Yogi-one becomes identified with that and not with self in others and above all in Mataji Nir- ma'a Devi, the Adi Shakti incarnated in person on this earth for our salvation. Blake said that God does not hate sin but He hates unbelief. In this day and age that unbelief is not to recognize Mataji as the last judgement. The Special spiritual blessings of Sahaja seeking is not a lonely one even though The sense of loneliness comes from the Ego's sense of specialness and separation. sisters are on the same path, entering the same lovely garden, Separation ceases by merging in joy of speak of surrender, which implies effort. But recognition requires no effort, it happens spontaneously when the eyes clear and one see with certainty. Recognition is Sahaja and recognition of Mataji is the greatest joy of all. She is our Mother since all time. Just to recognize that is the greatest reward of all punyas. recognition. People JAI MATAJI. the myth of one's name, nationality, occu- pation, family or any limited thing. One becomes a part of the eternal being which is the same in everyone, and the brotherhood GAVIN BROWN London FESTIVALSS 17 July Guru Purnima, i.e., the day of Guru Puja. 23 August Shri Krishna Janmashtami, i.e. Birthday of Shri Krishna. (These are the most auspicious days for Puja) Nirmala Yoga 18

 + SURRENDER IN SAHAJA YOGA Sahaja Yoga is ultimately for everyone; the best benefits, however, are derived by individual dominates or is dominated against those who can surrender voluntarily at the his will. lotus feet of the Divine Mother, Her Holi- self-respect. A man with insufficient dig- ness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi. This is not nity cannot surrender effectively. Since Ma always easy; while living we develop a code of values and act accordingly-allbeit happ- the tormenting secret of the past remains Right side Vishudhi is affected when the It leads to erosion of dignity and never plays with the dignity of Herlchildren, ening automatically as a living process in an individual's experience. Trust in Ma and only. Because She knows us better than Her teachings have to be established. Cool vibrations in the hand is the indication of Divine support of Grace; this is the beginning intelligence which sees itself fully exposed of a need for further investigation. and vulnerable and knows that the vulner- continuously the benefits received in answer ability is not really a hazard in Mother's between the two-the Mother and Her child we know ourselves, She can do more for us than we can ourselves. It is a wise Examine to prayer. gentle hands. In any whatever she wants to; I hazard a guess case She can do When I can trust Ma, I can trust myself. AmI getting delensive with Ma? Is there that it is the Mother's nature to forgive. She something which I want to conceal from Ma? We all have our horror story in which the individual is the principal actor. "I wish it was not true", he muses can-not help that part of Herself. She is Nirmala Vidya-the Divine Mechanism by which Molher forgives, Divinity goes about its evolutionary way regardless of our non Hor could the memory of it giving rise to quilt feelings be understanding All we are required to do is erased from the psyche?" Ma knows all from the revealed story of the Chakras, a by submitting to it. history-sheet by itself. and other Divine means. Besides knowledge of our inner- most fears and unsurfaced anxieties, Ma to let the mystery do whatever it has to do Trust and faith will develop in their own time; like all other human relations it takes forgives completely because "your story" is time for trust to develop. And only trust can bridge the communication gap. strong man will not give his trust till the Guru is also tested. May be our own instru- Clearance of left Vishudhi is achieved by ment is testing for its own good. Let it do not quite horrible enough. Neverthless, there is needless guilt which affects left Vishudhi. the Mantra of Vishnumaya, Radha Krishna. so naturally. To accept Ma now or later Cultivating a sweet language helps to banish is one of our freedoms with which Ma will Is my inner speedometer sing vords by taking them into our vocabu- running too last through old habits of impa- lary and using them ! Guilt feeling is the fee- tience? Why hurry? Let it happen naturally, praying all the time for Ma to come into our chasm between Ma and me, as an unworthy. heart and void. Certainly we have to be guilt. Why not get familiar with some plea- not intertere. ling of inferiority and inhibition. It creates a Nirmala Yoga 19 5F

 palient with ourself knowing that the ego reacts to its own creations; it needs to be force bringing on this change should be brought into the Thoughtless awareness State; involved misidentification gradually affairs are really governed by so many Transformation within is the reality. The venerated and worshipped. An individual's forces beyond his control. He certainly cannot handle all of these complex variables dissolves away. Mantras of Nirmal Hriday, Nirmal Mun, which shape him and because he cannot, Nirmal Chitta, Nirmal Chaitanya and Nirmal Anand will help The utterance is as with other Deity Mantras, l.e. invoked in the name he gets anxious and tense. All tensions are the manifested discomforts of inferior feelings. Do I feel inferior because some things are beyond my capacity to do? The equipment of body, mind and soul is eqgui- pped for just those activities which are within its capability. Pursuit of excessive of the Great Mother. Ma is better than me in all esoteric matters. DoI want mastery over myself? Then I must learn: To learn from anybody aims like ambition, competition, unrealistic requires an attitude of humility towards the teacher; some ritualising before meditation helps to establish modesty and humility. A ritual is a symbolic physical action with emotion attached to it. Cleaning hands, objectives gives rise to the well-known ills like anger, fear, gluttony, lust, greed, pride, sloth etc. Recognition of one's worth by oneself is taking off shoes, using the vibrated red right No other person or social press ure sindoor (Vermilion) with reverence, lighting should be able to push us against our will. incense and candles, cleaning Ma's photo- To be independent of this external force graph with aclean red cloth, always facing needs Surrendering of all misguided exter- Mataji's photograph, avoiding all undesirable nally determined values of one's environ- ment. In any case my aim will be low-not high enough., So, why should I make dema- set conditions, or resist Her. Instead, I should accept Her in Her Totality, avoiding the intellectual interpretations. Whatever Ma is and does is the most appro- priate and ideal. An attitude of tötal accept- though Ma were present, there, asking for Her Grace etc. are some of the good ritual practices which give definite rewards of better awakened awareness. The mechanical conditions themselves will yield acts as nds on Ma, with time. The greatest form of admiration for a person is reflected as emulation. But what do you emulate? Ma is a mystery, unfathoma- ble. One just accepts the mystery and sincere, the quest honestly purposeful. Only submits allowing anything and everything to happen The living Deity is participating Ma I need you; please help me. in the Evolutionary Clearance of the indivi- dual and Collective Nervous System thro- ance, obedience and submisstion to Her helps in surrender. Let Mataji handle it all in the collectivity. The objective must be then absolute honesty will make one say, Give me the right temperamental attitude and environment for an effective surrender. 1 do not know how to." Badhas get cleared ugh mastery of the Divine-Controlled para- with prayer and that helps in surrender. sympathetic nervous system. Nirmala Yoga 20

 to ask twice the cause of the disturbance. The first answer will be superficial, mislea- What is one to surrender? The surrender is of wrong and harmful attitudes, ertain habitual patlerns of thinking and feelings; ding, not honest really. Then ask gently, inability to iorgive is one of them res maturily and ability to forgive. Resent- "and the other real reason." The Badha will reveal itself in most cases, The Badha . It requi- when once exposed can be easiy elimina- ment is immaturity, When due to my human cannot forgive I should ask Ma to ted from the attention. It is important to forgive on my behalf, till 1 can forgive. This understand that it is not what I want it to be nor what is my ideal butas REALITY REALLY helps to clear Agnya; forgiveness restores balance in the personality. IS. Universal Ma-the but Not me When Mataji is physically present amidst us, correct protocol demands that the per- son of Mataji be not touched. All attention should be on Ma: slight distractions from attention on Ma are to be resisted. Atten- tion should be focussed on the large Bindi of Ma on the Agnya Chakra. Never interr- word. upt Ma; be attentive in humbleness absor- bing all that is relevant to our being of the moment. Avoid coughing or clearing of the throat while with Ma. All private Conversa- tions must cease during the physical pre- sence of Ma. This is an elementary courtesy. That our spiritual Master is a lady should always find consideration with us. everything. Why does Mother-She bother-just enjcy yourself. Let Ma do Her Work. Jai Mataji ! *Pronounced as the underlined part of a Heart, Heartily (HE RIB THOU CALENDAR) HRIDAY The seeking desire (Rhyme it with Fun, Bun) Attention MUN CHITTA (CHIMP THINK A) Consciousness There will be interference in total submi- CHAITANYA (CHASTE THINK FUN YARN) ssion to Ma, Whatever is interfering should be ordered to behave, A very slight use of the will, helps. An invaluable aid can be taken from the Deities invoked in the name of our Mother When invoking the Deities through specific finger-touch of Mataji's photograph, specific quality of these Deities should also be requested. Another novel lechnique is Joy, Bless (ASK NONE THOU) ANAND P. K. Puri New Delhi 21 Nirmala Yoga

 Welcome Address to Her Holiness Mataji Smt. Nirmala Devi ji on 14th April '81 By Shri K. Subramanyam, at Mavalankar Auditorium, New Delhi German philosopher the world. Spiritual masters and their Ash- As the famous rams are growing like mushrooms. Hun- dreds of books are being published to Schelling remarked once: "If God would appear to me with the truth in the right hand and the quest of the truth in the left, asking preach the so-called spiritual ideas and me to choose between the two, I would rush towards his left hand telling him: Oh God! keep the truth for yourself alone." This is styled savlours. India has become a focal because the modern seeker is more interes- ted in the game of truth seeking than in the is known for her great spiritual wisdom, as Truth itself. It would not have mattered if the land of enlightenment. This has attrac- thoughts. Thoughts of qullible people, des- perately seeking solace, fall pray to self- paint of this Spiritual craze. So far, India subject was only for academic discussion like the question whether God exists or whether re-birth is a fact or fiction. But it to the affluent countries in the West. directly affects the life of a large mass of humanity today in the world. Millions of people have taken to one course or another is commonly belleved, has innumerable rami- under the name of spiritualism. They are fications. For instance. formal worship of a all wandering in wilderness, treading the deity, invocation of ghosts and spirits, reci- tracks which they belleve will lead them to their goals. ted a huge influx of lay seekers into this country and large export of spiritual leaders In India, the spiritual phenomenon, as it ting of mantras and lastly the meditation on a God's name or form or with a blank mind, for achieving occults powers by difficult or odd rituals and they are all believad to be The spiritual guides in this country who show these tracks are called Gurus and Maharishis. They even usurp the attributes of God and call themselves Bhagwans. How to know who is a real Guru and who an im- spiritual practices. Devotion and surrender to God, control of mind and body, introvert search of the ultimate reality, physical auste- poster ? In Ind an thought. Gurus are held rity and fasts, indulgence in intoxicants and in high esteem. The tradition demands ab- sex, have all been postulated as ways of solute faith from a follower and his com- Sadhana. This is broadly the so-called spiritual scene today. plete surrender to the Guru. It shuis doors to the discerning eye and the discriminating mind. No surprise that shrewd men with greed and passion don the garb of spliri- tual guides and their Ashrams become dens of vice and corruption. It is a matter of great concern for all those who are real seekers and who have a genuine urge for spiritual development. It raises before ihem the questions-"What is Hght and what is wrong? What is true and what is false ? What is base and what A craze for spiritualism is raging all over N rmala Yega 22

 is exalted ?" And the crux of the problem- of the divine energy. This interpretation was "What is exactly the spiritual phenomenon?" given by Her Holiness Mataji Nirmala Devi in one of Her discourses in Delhi. The tial to clear off the mass in which spiritua- Kundalini Yoga is centuries old in India. But Mataji has given it a new interpretation and a scientific base. What is amazingly remark- We have gathered today here to hear the able about her is that she awakens your The answers to these questions are essen- lism is enmeshed today. clear message of Her Holiness Mataji Nir- mala Devi who interprets this phenomenon differently. She defines the Sahaja Yoga/ inexhaustible reservoir of the cosmic energy Kundalini just by the grace of her glance or her mere presence, as though she is an Kundalini Yoga to the human nature. Since it comes so the Yoga innate awaiting you only to stretch out your hands towards her. This awakening of the Kun- dalini brings you all joy of life and ena- bles you to live better, she says. In the pre- sence of Mataji Nirmala Devi, the Divine Kundalini Shakti of the seeker is awakened to its glory. Realisation of God is possible Kundalini awaken from its slumber and flow only after the sleeping Divinity Kundalini as natural to our personality, we need not im- pose any external discipline on ourselves for spiritual growth. What we have to do is to just understand the cosmic force working within us and allow it its free play. Let our up in its natural course. Shakti is fully awakened. By regular Sadhana dedication, the devine Kundalini Shakti aroused in you by Matajaji can grow his young age, used to pelt stones and break in strength and envelope your whole being You experience the divinity within you, Gokul and Brindavana while they were on their which is the essence of truth, bliss, beauty way home from the Yamuna. He enjoyed the and love. Then the complete integration of the mental, physical, emotional and spiri- the water pouring down from their pitchers. tual self in you takes place. Gradually all Poets in the past have interpreted this mis- your physical, mental and emotional ail- chief as an amorous sport of Lord Krishna. ments are cured. Cool nectarine vibrations and According to the legend, Lord Krishna, in the pitchers of the Gopies (milk maids) of fun when the milk maids were drenched with the saints,saw in it divine love between the of divinity flow through your body and hands. You can grant self-realisation to She says, Cosmic others and cure them of physical ailments. Gopies and the God. Mataji Nirmala Devi vibrations were saturated in the waters of the The awakening of Kundalini Shakti by Mataji Nirmala Devi when it blossoms into water-filled its fullness will give you the experience of the divine which is in tolal conformity with back of the gopi to the base of her spine what is described in all our scriptures. Yamuna through the touch of Krishna. was a manifestation of the cosmic When he broke a who power. pitcher, the vibrated water flowed down the and there, by contact, awakened Kun- dalini, the serpent power which is a fraction of the cosmic power in the human body. In other words, by his apparent mischief, Lord attending to the various ailments of people. Krishna bestowed on the Gopis the bliss Nobody would doubt her claim when one sees her in exuberance of health and joy and The most lovable thing about Mataji Nirmala Nirmala Yoga 23

 Devi is her disarming informality and con- hectic tour of Australia. She has returned tagiously affectionate dis position. Unlike only a few days ago to Bombay to cheer our other godmen she bestows her grace on all minds and grant self-realisation. I, there- without discrimation and delights in perso- fore, appeal to all present here lo be simple nnal contact with everyone in a congrega- and humble in receiving the divine vibra- t'on. That explains why she calls herself tions and listening to her message, Let us your mother, rather the mother, and not your stop our game and stand in the sunrise. master. behold the smile of the goddess. The birth It is our great fortune that Mataji Nir- of the new day! Let us recognise Her, the mala Devi is amidst us today in spite of her goal, the Devi, the Maha Davi. YA DEVI SARVA BHUTESHU MOKSHA RUPENA SAMASTHITA NAMASTAYSAI NAMASTASYAI NAMASTASYAI NAMO NAMAHA. A STAR IS BORN FOR SATYA YUGA the asirononmers used infra-red equipment to cut through the shroud of gas and dust At Rahuri where so many of mother's children were with Her to welcome 1981, Mother referred to a light in the sky. This around the Protostar. The scientists say it was later seen by several Sahaja Yogis as they drove Her home at around 1.00 am. and it grew in intensity for many minutes. It was this phenomena which gave rise to Mother's announcement that Satya Yuga is the first time the birth of a star has been observed. A member of the scientific team, Dr. Harry Hayland, of the Australian National University, said the discovery was a major treakthrough for astronomy. He said the birth could take as long as one million years, and it might be thousands of years before the star become visible in teles- had begun and that 1981 would be a most dynamic year for Sahaja Yoga. Curiously when Warren Reeves was at the Australian High Commission in New Delhi he noticed in a news bulletin from Australia an item "Birth of a Star", Below is the article : copes. (RA: 3/2) When Mother saw the article she said: "See, you have your sign" and laughed. Then she said "And you people could see it, but the scientists eeded a great felescope" and laughed again. Birth of a Star Australian, British and American scien- tists say they have witnessed the birth of a star, 150 light years from the earth. The Protostar, as it is known, is in the Magella- nic Cloud, a galaxy beyond the Milky Way. Working at two observatories near Canberra What a Divine Play goes on before our very eyes ! What joy to be on this earth at when Satya Yuga the moment very commences! Nirmala Yoga 24

 उदे ! अंबे उदे ऊठ भवानी त्रिभुवनजननी आदि नारायणी तुझ्या दर्शना आतुर झाले भक्त सिद्ध ज्ञानी कस्तुरि मळवट वघता भाळी पूर्व दिशा दिपली कु कुमतिलका वरून खीने काया कुरवंडिली कृतार्थ झाली सुवर्णकिरणें चरणांवर लोंळ नी प्रसन्नवदने उधडो नयनं नवलप्रभा फाकु दे काजळ काळया तमपूतळपांना तेजोमय होल दे असखंड चाल प्रकाशजागर घ्यानि मनी शांत शारदा कलकामिनी विश्व मोहिनी त्रिजूळवारी रणचण्डी तू महिषासुर मंादिनी मोहक दाहक अनंत रूपे तुझीच संजीवनो ॥३॥ killer of demon Mahishasura, your forms are कु डलिनो तु श्रो जगदम्बा शक्तिरूप शोभा शिবशंभूच्या हृदयांमधली प्राणज्योत अंत्रा चंतऱ्याच्या It is customary in India to sing devotional songs early in the morning praising the God and requesting him to wake up and bless the world. The poem on the left is of this type. Wake up O Mother of the three Worlds (nether World, heaven and this World); man- 11Rl kind's primordial eager lo see you. Kindly open your eyes, O one of smiling face. May the glory of your eyes remove the darkness and enlighten shelter. Devotees are स्वप्नी ॥२॥॥ neditation, minds and dreams. All arts and knowledge originate from you. You have held a trident in your hands. You are the winner of all battles and the तूच endless, pleasing, trightening, enlivening etc. You are kundalini; the cosmic Mother Jagadamba; the light in heart of Shiva You are the empress, of chaitanya, in human form. चक्रवरतिची समूतं सम्राज्ञो कशी करावी स्तुतो कळे ना कसे तुला गावे वेद-पित्याच्या जन्मदात्रिला कसे आळ वावे ? उदे ! उदे ! गे पोत झळ दे पावन संकीतनी ॥४।। sing your praise, O Mother of (Brahma Deva) Ignorant are we, do not know how to the author of all Vedas मधुकर कुल कण्णी With best compliments from LUCKNOW PAPER DISTRIBUTORS ALL SORT S OF PAPER & BOARD A SPECIALITY 10-A, CAPPER ROAD, LUCK NO W-1 Phones: Offi. 49902 Resi. 84151 : STRAW PRODUCTS LTD. Wholesalar

 Registered with the Registrar of Newspapers under Regn. No. 36999/81 NIRMALA D EVI MA I was told there is a Devi calfed Nirmala, Go to Her if you need enlightenment: When I approached Her, She said: Son, the light that you seek is hidden- You must sit and meditate, meditate, meditate. Concentrate on your Chakras; The fruit of concentration is meditation, Since you are your own redeemer. The main Chakra is Muladhara, Which is the seat of lord Ganesha, Awaken this Serpent which slumbers- Coiled around three and half times Underneath your Pelvic Plexus, And place each step in the Spiritual Path. Next is Sri Brahmadeva and Saraswati, Which is at the seat of Swadisthana, Will start moving upwards and onwards. Then go to Manipur where Lord Vishnu and Laxmi Devi reside; The seat of Sri Shiva and Parvati is your Anahata; Vishuddhi is the sixteen-petalled Lotus Where you are sure to find Lord Krishna and Radha. My child, if you wish to travel to the fourth dimension, You must concentrate at your Agnya Chakra, Where you will meet Jesus Christ and Mother Mary To guide you to the realms of the Eternal. The abode of your Mataji where Eternal Power resides, Is at your Sahasrara; Which is known as the thousand-petalled Lotus. Thus my son, you are sure to obtain Existence, Knowledge, Bliss Absolute, And the Superconscious state of peace and joy, And the fruit of Meditation is Realization. S. M. Karaka Bombay Edited & Published by Sh. S. C. Rai, 43, Bunglaw Road, Delhi-110007 and Printed at Ratnadeep Press, Darya Ganj, New Delhi-110002. One Issue Rs. 5.00 Annual Subscription Rs. 20.00 Foreign (By Airmail] £ 4.O



----------------------

1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Nirmala Yoga
folofell
निर्मला योग
Vol. 3
Bi-Monthly
Year 1
May-June '81
t
Om Twamev Sakshat Shri Sahastrar, Swamini
Moksha Pradayini, Kalaki, Bhagawati, Mataji Shri
Nirmala Devi Namonamah.
"Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns all the religions and
seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga-THE UNION"
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-1.txt 
 Dear Subramanyamji,
But for the souls yet to be establihed, they
face difficulties. Their stranded way of life
causes stranded thinkings and they put
I have
and am feeling well. I hope all the Sahaja
Yogis will also be progressing there. Altho- thorns and stones in the path. One should
ugh I am away from all the Sahaja Yogis, it not be upset over the difficulties. It is part
is only Mother's love that binds with each
quite safely
reached here
and parcel of life. By leaving Sahaja Yoga
Her love is like the n the middle after seeing the difficulties,
one cannot overcome the difficulties. It is
sun showering always the mercy of rays and
wherever it falls it dispels the darkness.
Her love is like the clouds showering
always the rain of bliss and wherever it goes
it showers endlessly and makes the land
fertile. Let us pray Her that there be raining enough to swim the river when we want to
and sun shine always altogether.
like a person who wants to cross the river,
but seeing the forceful stream, if he stays
on the bank, will it be possible for him to
cross the river? So we should be capable
take water from the main river and if
the banks have ups and downs the water
Remembering my days in Delhi, every finds its way to go out and it will not come
day is valuable and they made a turning in the channel. Similarly, when there is
point in my life. I have considered Tamil imbalance, that is, ups and downs in the
as a Mother and come to Delhi and saw Her system, the difficulties are caused. So we
in the form of Tamil; I came to Delhi for should keep the bank is balance to ensure
Mathematics and saw Her in the form of the constant flow of water.
Mathematics; I came to Delhi for my re- Yoga is the working system for that.
search, by her grace I have seen the ultimate
research. I came to Delhi with lot of puzz-
And Sahaja
It is fortunate to be a Sahaja Yogi and
ling questions about Gods and purpose of it iS more fortunate to give realisation to
life, none of the questionss left unsolved, vet others. Of all the Dharmas to give realiza-
I did not ask Her any single question.
It is the
tion is the greatest Dharma.
Dharma of evolution. To enrich ourselves,
we should give realization to more and more
persons. AIl the purposes of life are con-
For all the realised souls She is the
Mother, because She begot them in Her
Sahasrar. She is an embodiment of love, tained in the purpose of salvation and if
dharma, Sat Guru and above all the Mo ther
of the Universe. We are fortunate to be in salvation, then the purposes are endless.
this time, the time of Her incarnation. The One should allow oneself to check the tune
world of Sahaja Yogis is like a palace and of the music. If the tune is not proper, we
She is the Queen in the Palace. It is a should pray to Mother. She is the guiding
palace of realized souls and wherever a pillar force. She is the one who has shown the
is erected, the palace is extended. By the precious stone in the vanity of life. It is our
grace of Her let it cover the entire earth, to purpose to dig and find it. Please convey my
give proper food to the coming great souls.
there are purposas without the purpose of
wishes to all Sahaja Yogis.
With the grace of the Mother,
In this world of chaos life is full of
struggle for existence. In the struggle for the
Yours affectionately & lovingly
existence, we should not forget the real
purpose. For the souls who have already
made their path perfect, the goal is near.
S. GANESHAN
303-81
343, Dom Students
ul. Zamenhofa loa
00-187 Warszawa, POLAND
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-2.txt 
 EDITORIAL
Sahasrar Chakra and with that Sahasrar
Since ancient fime generations of see-
kers in India and other countries spent their
Chakra of. Virata: was opened. She also
lives in search of ultimate truth and eternity. developed a very simple method of awake-
ning and raising of the Kundalini. The
most difficalt task thus became effortless.
They observed their surroundings, tried to
understand the nature and in the process
Man no longer remained an ordinary mortal
but could be reborn in the same life as pro-
phet and enjoy God's love showered on him
unfolded many mysteries. They explored
inner beings and concluded that the truth
would be perceived within themselves and
then fear of death would no more haunt in the form of Divine Vibrations. Prayers
They further realised that the uiti- and yearnings of ancient sages for God
condescending to the level of every genuine
them.
mate truth would reveal itself in thought-
lessness once Mother Kundalini was awake
seeker have thus been responded.
as she would lead them to their Primordial
H. H. MATAJI SHRI NIRMALA DEVI,
Adi-Shakti Incarnate, is going from place to
place granting realisation
showing them the path of God-realisation.
Let us pray to her-
Father.
However, awakening of Kundalini and its
rising proved to be the most difficult task
and very few could achieve it. For thou-
sand of years, sages living away from socie-
ties were the repositories of this sacred
knowledge. Common man remained ignorant
of it and many charitans and pseudo Gurus
misied him.
to masses and
तो
गमय ।
उयोतिर्गमय ।
तममो
मृत्योंसा
अमृतम
गमय ।
Turning point in the spiritual evolution
of man was reached on 5th May 1971. On
this auspicious day, Divine Mother while
meditating at Bordi in Gujaraih opened Her
(Lead me from illusion to trulh
Lead me from darkness to light
Lead me from death to eternity)
Nirmala Yoga
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-3.txt 
 NIRMAL A YOGA
43, Bunglow Road, Delhi-110007 INDIA
Founder-H.H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Editorial Board : Dr. S. K. Mathur, Sri A. S. Mishra, Sri R. D. Kulkarni
Representatives:
; Gavin Brown
Brown's Geological Information
Services Limited,
160 North Gower Street,
NW 1 2nd (UK) London
Hong Kong : Emilie P SHI
London
Cliff Rence Bros. Co. Ltd.
1610, Wing On Centre,
111, Connaught Rd., Central.
Diane Heaperman
C/o. 5/334, Victoria Place,
Drummoyne, Sydney.
Australia
: Arneau de Kalbermatten
Swilzerland
344, Winterthurerstrasse,
8057, Zuerich, Switzerland
: M. B. Ratnannavar
Bombay
13, Merwan Mansion
: Marie Rougher
France
Genjwala Lane, Borivali (W).
175, Av. Ledru Rollin.
Bombay-400 092
Paris-75001
CONT ENTS
Page
1. Editorial
2. Representatives
3. Mataji's Advice
10
4. Letter
11
5. H.H. Mataji Nirmala Devi in Australia
13
6. Sahaja Yoga
15
7. Speech of Mr. C.P. Srivastava
8. Om Shri Mataji Prasanna
9. Surrender in Sahaja Yoga
18
19
22
10. Welcome Address
24
11. A Star is born for Satya Yuga
2nd Cover
12. Letter
3rd Cover
13 अंबे उदे ! उदे ! !
4th Cover
14. Nirmala Devi Ma
Nirmala Yoga
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Her Holiness Mataji's Advice given at Delhi on 11th March 81
I have told you, the other day that these vibrations. We see the comfort, we see
vibrations are nothing but the Brahma-
Shakti-the power of Brahma. The power for other people to come in or not, but we
of Brahma is the power that creates,
that desires, that evolves and it gives
the living force also. It is the power
which is giving us the living force. Now, it is awareness which means awareness that is
not easy to understand what is a dead force working upon living things. As in the, say,
and what is a living force. Living force is cell at the tip of a the root of a tree is a
very simple to understand. An animal, say a
little worm, is a living force. It can turn itself Itis quided by the living force itself. So, it
the way it likes. It can save itself from dán- knows how to move with the living force,
ger. It may be a small little thing. but to live with it and how to understand the plan
because it is living it can save itself. But of the living force to get along with it and
something which is dead cannot move by how to merge with it.
ather things. We might even see if it is good
do not see the house from vibrations point
of view. For anything that we do, we
have, now, to think in terms of vibratory
living thing. Of course, it does not think,
itself. So, the "Self" part does not remain
in it, as far as it is concerned.
But, we human beings have got the free-
dom to decide. Now, once you are realised,
Now, being a living force we should try
to find out, "Are we going to be the living you have got that living force within you.
force or the dead one". Now, when we live This is the living force you feel. So, vou
in the world, we start thinking about our
comforts; where we have to live, what we keep your body, mind, ego, superego and
have to do. When we think of all these everything in
things, you see, we are thinking of the dead. understanding the planning of the living
But when we think of having a place or a
house or an Ashram from the angle that you
will be doing some living work, then you are
giving life to that place That atmosphere
should be created from all that is dead-to
create the living force.
have to know how to use this living force to
the enlighterned state, by
force.
It gives you all the ideas regarding most
of the problems. For example, here in this
country and specially in Delhi, I find that you
catch on the left Nabhi, also right Swadhi-
shthana and then on the Heart and also on
your Agnya. These are the Chakras which
deal with our being. So, let us try from the
Now, this is very very subtle thing, which
very few people understand, for example,
somebody brings me a pholograph of Shri left side. What happens ? On the let side
Ganesh and says, "Should I worship this the problem slarts from left swadhishthna,
Shri Ganesh's photograph or not". First of because that is the first Chakra that starts
all we should see if vibrations are coming emitting the negativity within us. Now, left
from it or not Supposing you take a house Swadhishthana is actually under control
You must see that the house is giving good only of Shri Ganesh because Shri Ganesh
Nirmala Yoga
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-5.txt 
 is the beginning of life and also the link is human or man-nade like the watch; parti-
between the life and the death. So Ganesh cularly time is also man made. For example,
Is one who gives the balance, the "Vivek" the today, time here is something, but in England
understanding to you by which you know it is different. If you say it is 4-0 clock in
how far to go with things. Now, when left India, it is not the same in England. So, the
Swathishthana catches, you start going to
other people who promise you such things, arrive what time you go. how many times
ike "I will give you this and that, this will you do it. is not important.
happen, that will happen to you". But this
left sided thing can also come from your
own desire for wrong things. For example, time limit or space limit, you cannot count
we might be desiring something very wrong: it, the way it moves, the way it works out.
we might be thinking that let us have this Once we understand that it is a living force
kind of a dead thing or that kind of dead which is spontaneous, which is not bother-
thing or some sort of a special thing. Sup- ed about our dead ideas, we come out of
pose, somebody wants a refrigerator and
keeps on thinking of it. He thinks that he became ameoba, then we gradLually became
must have a fridge. He must go to the human beings. So, our: attention is all the
fridge, because he wants a fridge: and he time towards the dead. What should we get,
must get it. Why he wants a fridge ? what should we have, what are the needs ?
Because he thinks it will give him more
comfort. But, when he brings the fridge, he
knows that it is not so. So, the best way to
look at all dead things is not to go too far
with them. If you have, well and good. if
you do not have, well and good. You can
live with minimum of minimum or you can
live with maximum of maximum of these. is unhappy, you do not get the vibrations.
But when we start expanding our dead pos- Such a common thing ! If you have any
timing is not important. What time you
Because living force is infinite, it has na
the dead. We were first stones, then we
We have of this body which is going to die.
We do not see to the needs of the
Spirit. By seeing to the needs of the spirit,
overcome the left side.
You
you can
start looking after your spirit from which you
know that you get your vibrations. If your
Spirit is happy, you get your vibrations, if it
disease or a problem on left hand side, to
give it a balance, you put your attention to
the future. But then people get stuck up on
the future, ifI say you look to the future.
Nabhi, and at left As dead is dead and is 'Mithya' firei (illu-
sessions, it is very much bad. Then our
attention goes into the dead. That's how
we move into our subconscious then over
to collective subconscious. Then it moves
higher to the left
Nabhi, we start becoming crazy about sion), same way future is also Mithya, is
these dead things.
watch, the Time. Time is a dead thing; same. Whether you go to left or right, whe-
it is not a living things. It has nothing to do
with living thing. For example, you cannot supraconscious mind, both the thing are
say exactly at what time the flower will just the same. So, no use going to the past,
become a fruit. So this watch or time has but if you are too much in the past, it is
nothing to do with the living force at all. It better to think of the future, so that you are
For example, the
also not there. Both the things are just the
ther you go to the subconscious or the
Nirmala Yoga.
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-6.txt 
 pushed a little bit to the centre. But, it is even afler Buddha, how many got their realis-
difficult with you, human beings.
ation? You must think also that there are so
many realised people, who talk the same
Now, the other problem starts, when we language, who talk the same tongue. You
start feeling guilty about something, when must (thank yourself also, that every thing
left VishudhiT catches. We start feeling
quilty. "I should have not done this thing or
that thing". Then you start saying, "| am:
very miserable, I am very guilty" etc., you you go in the past and you start saying, "Oh
just start cursing yourself. This is another
nonsense. That is how once you start doing
that, then what: happens is that you again catching". As you know, those who catch
become dead. Because living force will
never condemn. No, it will Never. It goes ning. always grudging type because of poor
on progressing itself. It sees, which side to thingas, they suffer. Now, to match with that
move, this side or that side. It is not going
to condemn itself, It is not going to aggress
can be known to you.
But, when you start catching on the left,
God ? I am so useless, I am good for
nothing. I am so useless, that I am still
on the left hand side, are always complai-
is the other side. So, if I tell you that you go
to the other side also, it is a very dangerous
anything. It has the wisdom to be in the
Centre. That is how people should over-
come their left side, by putting their atten-
tion away from the dead things. You should
watch from the Centre, when you are on the
leftside. What you want to see, you don't see.
But then ultimately to es.cape all this, what
you do is to start blaming yourself all the
time and feeling miserable. Now, this is the
way you start ending up with your left side
into a very miserable state, that is the cul-
mination of all these attachments to the left
game. For example, we have so many condi-
tionings in our lives. You see, first of all our
desire. Our desire is to become excellent
Sahaja Yogis, to become Master Gurus and
something great and this and that. That there
should be many disciples that we should
have who should touch our feet and we
should be called Great Gurus etc.
So, in Sahaja Yoga some things are pro-
hibited That nobody should touch anybody's
feet and no Sahaja Yogi should allow anyone to
side. So, ultimately you start thinking that
you are good for nothing, you are useless,
you should have done this, you should have
touch his or her feet. This is one of the great
Bandhans for all Sahaja Yogis. No one should
touch other's Feet and nobody should ask
to touch his or her feet, whatever
done that.
may
Now, at this time to overcome it, you be your quality. Those who will touch will
have to count your blessings. Count your lose vibrations, and those who will get salu-
Blessings one by one You have got your tations will also calch on the heart. So, such
Realisation. During thousands of years how conditions, which we have about Sahaja
many people got realisation ? You have got Yoga also, should be removed.
your vibrations. In so many centuries, how
many people got them ? It is written in Zen
system that in eight centuries there were al-
We are all of us growing together. We
are part and parcel of one personality. No-
together 26 Kashyaps (Realised Souls) So, body is higher or lower. One who thinks the
Nirmala Yoga
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-7.txt 
 So, one must understand that in Sahaja
slightest like this will go down faster. This
is the left side conditioning, where people Yoga, you are developing that sharp edge,
falter very much. So, such desires must ba that central point from which you do not
deviate to the right or to the left. This is
something so subtle that you are left sided,
you are not going to remain left sided. You
can become right-sided tomorrow. Exactly,
given up in Sahaja Yoga.
You must have very wider desires in
Sahaja Yoga that all of us must get Realisa-
tian-say as many as possible. We shoula
try to save as many people as possible. tomorrow you can come with a right-sided
We should try to improve ourselves as far problem. So, you must learn that Balancing,
we can, and we are nothing yet we can lust like you start learning a bicycle. You
improve and have so many blessings.
might fall on this side or that side.
Now, the thoughts can come from the
left side also. Like, if you have some Bhoots
in your head, they can give you the thought when you cycle down, that's the point when
that, "Oh, you are useless or good for
nothing." Now, raise your right side and
put down the left. with your left hand. Now
why do we do this ? Because from your
right side, you get the Grace and put down
the left side. Such people who suffer from
the left side should try this. One more
thing, is, that when these ideas come to you
or such thoughts: come to you, that you are
good for nothing etc., it is better to beat
yourself with shoes. Go and sing the praise yourself, just to see and guide yourself.
of the Lord and say that I am so happy. I
have got everything around me.
Now, when de you learn cycling? If you
ask me, I will say, "When you learn." I mean
you learn. So, in Sahaja Yoga, to balance it,
you have to watch yourself carefully. Now,
where is it going ? To the left side, then
come to the right side. If going to the right
side, come to the left side, Now, come to the
Centre, you just separate yourself, you
detach yourself all the time. Not to criticize
yourself nor to aggress anyone or to criti-
cize others. But use this point just to see
Guidance is very different from getting lost.
Now that is what it is. Supposing the dead
thing is there. Say this is a dead thing.
Now, the second thing is about the right When I throw it, it exactly will fall there.
side. On the right side, mostly you catch Living thing, if I throw it will not fall there
on the Swadhishthan. That is because you exactiy. So, the living force knows how to
think. This is another kind of thinking that guide itself. In the same way you will learn
gives you catch at right Swadhishthan.
Thinking, whether it comes from right or the have mastered Sahaja Yoga.
left will first give problem to your liver. The
worst comes when both the sides are invol-
ved. There are some Bhoots which give you
ideas that you are good for nothing etc.
while the other thing is when you start think-
to guide yourself. If you have learnt it, you
No use condemning yourself, in any way
or thinking that you are great or small.
But watch now, where the horse is going.
You are sitting on the top of the horse; now
you are no more the horse, Before, Realisa-
tion you are the horse. Wherever it takes
you, you go there. It may stand there, when it
ing that you are so great. In this such a
wobbling starts coming and the confusion
starts setting in.
Nirmala Yoga
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-8.txt 
 sees the grass and eat. Then the horse thise with the people, who are caught up.
wants to kick somebody, it will do so, But, They just watch. If somebody comes, they
will tell me, "Mataji, this fellow is caught".
That's all. Somebody else comes. They
now, you have come out of the horse and
sitting on the horse as a Rider. Now you are
the Rider and you must know how you are promptly tell me, "He is alright". That's all.
befooled by these things. These desires are They just certify. They do not hate anyone,
all ancient ageold things within you. See, they do not get worried about anything. If
also the aggression, the Karma that you are
doing are also ancient. By doing this you
will get this, you will get that. Many people any malice about the person.
will say, "Mother, we are doing this, we are
doing so much for Sahaja Yoga; we have
still not achieved anything". Now, what to
do. Just can't help it. Now, you must find
out, what is the matter with you.
some body comes with a very bad Badha,
they say, "Better please, go away", without
Once, you are at the top of the hill, you
have not to worry about the traffic. But, you
are not yet on the top, that's why you are
worried that, "I am climbing and falling,
climbing and falling". This is just a Myth,
Now, if the Heart is catching, such just a mental shadow on your mind. This is
people can never progress. The Heart is the
source of Light, it is the source of Brahma-
Shakti. Heart is the seat of Atma, If in the
Heart there is no living force, then how can
you progress ?
a fact that you are at the top of the hill, But
you have not asserted, the assertion is not
there.
The God is the enjoyer. You cannot
enjoy. You can only enjoy God, and it is the
greatest enjoyment, to feet what God has
created for you, what a beautiful life He
has given you in human awareness, by
You should grow mature to that point which you can know how much He has
You must know what to chonse. This is
what Sahaja Yoga should make out of you.
where you know what to choose. This is
Growth. Then you don't ask of Mother,
You don't ask anyone.
loved you, how much He has worked for
you. He has brought you to this level. What
He has given you, you can give to others
and make others happy. If you think like that
immediately both of your sides will be sett-
what I do, I should know what led and you yourself will be filled with
This development should come to you.
I am doing. I should know what is cor-
rect. I should know how to correct it".
I should know T, here is the Spirit and not
the Ego. No more the Ego exisls or the चाहिये । विराजिये, श्रासन पर विराजिये । आसन
Super-ego exist. It is the Spirit which gui-
des you. You see the Realised children.
They don't ask such questions, They know
Divine Vibrations.
अब हिन्दी में बतायें । आपको विराजना
पर बंठकर भीख मांग रहे हैं, रो रहे हैं। आसन
पर बैठकर पागलपन कर रहे हैं । इनका किया क्या
जाये ? अरे भई, आसत पर विराजो । आप राजा
साहब हैं। बंठिये, और अपनी पांचों इन्द्रियों को
आप प्राज्ञा (आर्डर) दीजिए "जनाव आप अब
who is foolish, who is stupid, They know who
is caught up. They know whom to shut up
and whom to argue. They do not sympa-
Nirmala Yoça
7.
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-9.txt 
 ऐसे चलिए, वहुत हो गया। अब ये ठोक है, अब देंगे और जैसे ही वो दिखाई दगे बेसे ही आप पुरी
वो ठीक है, हां बहुत समझ लिया आपको ।" जब तरह से विराजिये, जेसे कोई राजा साहब है, अपने
आप इस तरह से (Cornmand) कमाण्ड में अपने सिंहासन पर बेठे हैं। आपको अगर सुनाई दिया कि
को करेंगे, जब आप अपने को पूरी तरह कण्ट्रोल हुमारे प्रजाजन, कुछ ग डब ड़ कर रहे हैं, तो कहिए,
चुप रहिये, ऐसा नहीं करने का है। यह नहीं कि
अपने को पूरी तरह
(Control) में करेंगे, तभी तो आप प्रच्छे सहज-
योगी हुए। नहीं तो आपके मन (Mind) ने कहा, ऐसा करो, वैसा करो।"
"चलो इधर", आप बोलते हैं, "माताजी, क्या (Command) वामाण्ड में जो आदमी कर लेता है,
करू, इतना मन को रोकता है, पर मन इधर जाता वही शक्तिशाली है।
है। फिर मन क्या है ? मन तो एक (Living
Force) जीवन्त शक्ति है, वी जाएगा ही। मन
मिसाल के तोर पर लोगों की बातचीत ले ।
नोग जब बात करते हैं यानी हमसे भी बातचीत करने
तो उसी जगह जाएगा. जहां जाना है। हमारा जा में रूथाल ही नहीं रहता कि किससे बात कर रहे हैं।
इन्द्रियां हैं, वो जागृत हो जाती हैं और फिर हैम सी वात करते हैं कि बड़ा अाश्चर्य छा होता है ।
सी
इधर-उघर जाना ही नहीं चाहेंगे और बहुत
चौजें छोड़ते चले जायेंगे ।
उनको अन्दाज नहीं रह जाता कि हमें क्या कहना
चाहिये, क्या नहीं कहता चाहिए। हमारी जबान पर
भी क़ाबू होना चाहिए। यह काबू भी तभी होता है,
जब आप अपने को अपने से हटे हुए देखेंगे। यह
इन सब चीजों में हमको एक ही ध्यान रखना
चाहिए; अपने हृदय को स्वच्छ रखना। जिन
लोगों का हृदय स्वच्छ रहता है, उनको समस्या
(Problems) कम होती हैं। इसका मतलब यह नहीं
है, कि आरप लोग गंदी बातें सोचते रहते हैं। स्वच्छ तरीक बन जाय गे, नया श्रन्दाज बन जायेगा फिर
जबान है न, उसे ठीक रक्खना पड़ता है ।
घीरे धीरे, आपकी नई आदतें हो जायेगी, नए
आप अपने को (Order) आदेश देंगे। हमेशा
हृदय का मतलब है, समर्पण । सहजयोग में अगर
समर्पण में कमो हो जाय या कोई समझे कि मैं कोई 3rd Person में जो आदमी पार होता है वो कभी
विशेष हैं, तो उस आदमी में (growth) प्रगति 1st Person ( प्रथम पुरुषप ) में बात नहीं
नहीं हो सकती। उसके लिए कोई पढे-लिखे नहीं करता, हमेशा 3rd person में करता है, "ग्रापको
चाहिए, कोई विशेष रूप के नहीं चाहिए ।
म E
वहां पर चलना है, वहां चलिये, वहां बेटिये ।" बच्चे
भी ज्यादातर एसा ही करते हैं, 3rd Person में
"मुझे यह नहीं हुआ, मुझे कोई अनुभूति नहीं बात करते हैं," ये निर्मला अब जाने वाली नहीं है ।
हुई"- तो दोष आपका है या सहजयोग का ? लोग ये यहीं बैठी रहेगी।" सहजयोगियों को भी इसी
तो कभी कभी इस तरह से मुझसे बातें करते हैं तरह बात करनी चाहिये । धीरे २
जैसे कि मैंने ठेका ही ले रखा है या मेरे पास आपने से हटाना चाहिये। अपनी जो इच्छाएँ है, अपने जो
कोई रुपया पेसा जमा किया हुआ है कि मां, हम तो ideas (विचार) हैं, materialistic ideas
आपके पास पच्चोस साल से अ रहे हैं।" पच्चीस (सांसारिक) हैं, या और कोई ideas, जैसे सत्ता
क्या तीस साल तक; बुढ़े होने तक भी कोई काम
नहीं होने वाला। इसलिए अगर यह नहीं हो रहा चाहिए कि हम सहजयोग के लिए क्या कर रहे हैं
है, इसका मतलब है कि आपमें कोई न कोई कमी और क्या करना है ।
है । लेकिन जेसे ही आप प्रपने को अपने से हटाना
शुरू करेंगे, आपको अपने दोष बड़ी हो जल्दी दिखाई में बहुत ज्यादा हैं । वो लोग कभी मुझसे आराकर
अपने को, अपने
ideas ( fa7) materialistic ideas
के ideas, इत्यादि, ये सब छोड़कर हमें यह सोचना
अभी भी हिन्दुस्तान में ये चीजें कम हैं, परदेस
Nirmala Yoga
৪
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-10.txt 
 भोगने वाला परमात्मा हैं और वही रचयता है
और आप तो सिर्फ बीच में हैं। जिस तरह पाइप
(Pipe) होते हैं, उसी तरह आप है। अगर थोड़ा
भोग ही सकते हैं, तो एक चीज भोग सकते हैं वह है
परमात्मा जिसे आपसे अनन्त प्रेम है । वस, यही एक
सत्य है जिससे आप पूरी तरह से प्ानन्दित रह
सकते हैं, पुलकित रह सकते हैं । बाकी किसी भी
चीज से आपको आनन्द नहीं मिल सकता, किसी
भी चीज को भोगने वाला सिर्फ वही है।
यह नहीं कहते कि मेरे वाप के, दादा के चाचा के
संगे भाई का फलाना फलाना, वीमार है उसको
आप ठीक कर द । कभी भी अरपनी material
difficulties या Problems नहीं कहते हैं।
हालांकि, आप पार जल्दी होते हैं. वो लोग बिचारे
अपनी गलतियों की वजह से ज्यादा समय लेते हैं ।
पार आप जल्दी होते हैं पर आपको उसकी कीमत
नहीं, वो जो पार देर से होते हैं, उनको उसकी
कीमत है । उनको तरीका मालुम है, क्या चीज
है। उनकी आखों में ही देखिये, कितनी एकाग्रता
बात यह है कि आपको आज कुछ चाहिये वो
है । एक एक शब्द को अगर मैं हिन्दीं में बोल रही
है, पूरे ध्यान से सुनते हैं, हालांकि भाषा नहीं ला दिया, फिर भी आप खुश नहीं। कल फिर
समझते लेकित उसमें कंस वाइबर शन (Vibra-
tions) निकल रहे हैं, हाथ में कंसे (vibrations)
बाइब शन आ रहे हैं, क्या चीज हो रही है, उस पर
आपको कुछ चाहिये, कल दूसरी चीज ला दी, फिर
तीसरो चीज ला दी, फिर भी खुश नहीं। पप कभी
भी सांसारिक चीजों से खुश नहीं हो सकते ।
ाग==
पूरा चिल्त रहता है। अब इन्होंने अपना जीवन हो
सजयोग को दे दिया है। बो कोई ची ज नहीं
सोचते, कि भई यह भी कर लेंगे, वो भी कर लगे ।
तभी गाप गहरे जत रेंगे । जीवन सहजयोग की देन
भोगने वाला सिर्फ परमात्मा है, इसलिये सबको
चाहिए कि हम उसको भोगें हमको परमात्मा को
भोगना चाहिये, वही जो सबको भोगने वाला है
से हो आप पनपते हैं; यह भी बात है। उसमें
शापका कछ लेता देना तो है नहीं। कोई प्रापकी ौर क्या भोगने की जरूरत है। उसका ही सुख
कमी नहीं हो जाती । सारा क्षेम आपके अनदर आ
अगर उसको भोगना शुरू कर दिया तो फिर हमें
भोग। पुरमात्मा ने क्या-क्या सृष्टि रचेी है, कितना
सुन्दर सारा संसार बनाया है, कितनी सारी चीजें
हमें दी हैं । हम सहजयोगों हो गये हैं। हमारे अंदर
े शक्ति परमात्मा ने दी है। अब आप अपनी
आत्मा को पा सकते हैं, दुसरे की आत्मा को पहचान
सकते हैं। कितनो प्रनन्त कृपा परमात्मा को हमारे
ऊपर है। बस यही सोच-२ कर अपने अंदर फूलिये ।
जाता है ।
सारा जोवन ही सहजयोग को दे देना चाहिये
एक-एक क्षण सहजयोग को देना चाहिये। इसका
मतलब है living spontaneously, कहां से
आयेगी spontaniety ? वो living force से
आतो है । हमारे प्रन्दर हर समय जो जीवित शक्ति इस तरह से जत्र प्राप परमात्मा को भोगना शुरू
करंगे तो प्राप देखेंगे कि प्रापका heart (हृदय
है, उससे । और सब बातों को सोचना हो नहों )
बहुत बड़ा हो जाता है। एसा लगेगा कि सारी
चाहिये ।
सृष्टि उस हृदय (heart) में समा गई है।
वसे भो आप कभी भोग नहीं सकते । भीगने
वाला सिर्फ परमात्मा है। परापको नलतफहमी है कि
आप भोग रहे हैं। आप भोग हो नहीं सकते ।
आज का मेरा आपको सन्देश है-आप पर-
ककी
मात्मा को भोगना शुरू करें । बाकी सत् चीजों का
Nirmala Yoga
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-11.txt 
 भोग आप छोड़ कर परमात्मा का भोग करें और
उसका आनन्द उठायें कि आपको परमात्मा ने क्या
हर मिनट में हमें क्या मिला। इतना मिल
गया, इतना मिल गया, ऐसे कहते हुए चलिये,
क्या दिया। क्या क्या चीजें दो हैं, हर जगह इसका नहीं तो आपके complaints कभी नहीं खत्म
आनन्द उठाना गुरू कर दीजिये । आप देखेंगे कि होने वाले और आप का aggression भी कभी
आपका चित्त एक दम स्थिर हो जायेगा । सहजयोग
में प्रगति इसी तरह से होंगी ।
खत्म नहीं होन वाला
Bombay
March 1981
JAI MATAJI
I'm giving this experience of my hip bone fracture which took place on 30th
November 1980. I was told by my doctor that I would not be able to walk without a
stick for six months, but on the fifth day of my operation Our Dear Respected Mataji
came to see me in the hospítal and with H.H. Matajl's grace and vibrations I felt so
much energy and such strong vibrations that I started walking without a stick within
fifteen days. At this experience my doctor also was so surprised that he became very
keen to meet Our Respected Mataji and he came and met Mataji and got realised by her.
I only pray that more people will come to our Sahaja Yoga and take blessings of Our
Respected Mataji who's a Real Goddess Incarnation and we are really one of the fortu-
nates to have this Great Mother who is full of Great [Love and Blessings for those who
come to her Lotus feet.
JAI MATAJI
Mrs. Mahtaney
Nirmala Yoga
10
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-12.txt 
 F H. H. MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI IN AUSTRALIA LE
As so many of you know, our Divine Shri Ganesha was created by Her, as that
Mother, H. H. Mataji Nirmala Devi came to
our land, Australia, in March and April 1981.
She came and blessed us by Her Divine
Vibrations.
great Divinity which resides at Mooladhara
Chakra.
So what a glorious event-Adi Shakti has,
in Her complete form, come to Shri Ganesha
at Mooadhara Chakra. None of the other
Mother was welcomed by an excited
joyous group of 70 Sahaja Yogis. She was
so radiant and so giving of love that even
the garlands and flowers seemed to be so
happy that thay could adorn Adi Shakti, the
one who had come to give enlightenment to human awareness
Her children of the Mooladhara Chakra May we, Her children, grow in our awa-
Gods could reach Shri Ganesha-neither
Bramha, Vishnu nor Mahesha-so Adi Shakti
Herself has come and this is an event and
a blessing far far beyond our present
and understanding.
of her beautiful earth.
reness to the point where we become the
Awarenessitselt. This is our prayer, O
It was a double Blessing because Mother Adi Shakti.
arrived on Her Birthday-21st March 1981,
and we were able to perform puja to Her on Meanwhile let us all determine, with humility
this special day. In Her
emphasised the importance of Australia in innocence, obedience and wisdom that is
the spread of Sahaja Yoga (sea separate Shri Ganesha. May the primordial principal
Puja talk She and sincerity to become that quality of
transcript of Her talk).
of holiness be re-established on this earth
in Satya Yuga.
Mother, soon after arrival, pointed out
the close similarity of the Australian aborigi-
nal place names in and around Sydney, to
Sanskrit words. The apartment in which
Mother stayed for Her time here overlooked
the "Paramatta River". In the Australian
So, Mother's birthday was bath a joy to
us and a great Cosmic event !!
Public programmes were held over 2.
weeks in Sydney. Mother also gave two
The preparation,
Mother told us that in publicity and press coverage was excellent.
aboriginal language this means; "The head
of the great river".
Sanskrit, "Paramatta" means the Supreme Sydney's shop windows carried Her photo-
Mother or Adi Shakti. And the miracle was graph and
that it began to emit cool vibrations. So we
too now have a "Ganga', blessed by Adi and gave good exposure.
Shakti Herself. the "Paramatta River".
Mother also töld us for how Australia was
originally a part of Mother India and as it day, produced a truly amazing response.
lectures in Melbourne.
details of Her programmes
Newspaper advertisements were well placed
The press conference held on the first
separated to become a separate continent, All the newspapers who carried articles
11
Nirmala Yoga
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-13.txt 
 gave a favourable write-up and Her photo- allowed us to worship Her at Puja for Shri
graph was carried in probably a million
newspapers (including the national daily and Puja for the Devi on Her wedding anni-
"The Australian". T. V. news coverage
on at least two commercial networks was
achieved and a brilliant radio interview for 3 with the Collective Being on those days of
Ganesha, on the first day of the Indian Year
versary. The photographs which we have,
give a beautiful glimpse of the joy we shared
hours (from 9p.m. to midnight) was broad- worship of Mother.
cast live to over 1,80,000 listeners. (Mother
used the opportunity to give Self-Realisation
over the radio and the programme was
acclaimed by the radio station as a great medium of recording Mother's lectures can
event.)
Several video tapes of Mother's lectures
and pujas were made. We hope that this
be used
To see
Mother's talks as well as hear them, is such
more from now on.
a joy.
Regarding the public programmes, the
opening night was a 'standingroom only
event. (Mother's arrival had to be delayed
by ! hour so that extra seating could be
arranged but still people were standing at
the back). We had expected about 300
maximum, in-fact there were approximately
500 each night. We moved to a larger hall Sydney to Bombay.
after the first night.
Mother departed after a most intensive
18 days with us here in Australia. We
can still see and feel the vibration which
She showered on our land and its people
when She was here and as She flew out of
It's difficult to describe Mother's visit
Mother, in six lectures, covered all the
chakras in detail and kept reinforcing the Reality on paper, and to describe a great
awakening that had occured during the first Cosmic and earthly event in relative terms,
night.
in words. We feel it but, to put Absolute
seems so inadequate,
Just the joy and the determination continue.
Each weekend we had an all-day practi-
cal seminar session outdoors on the Mother
earth. And the greatest blessing of all was
given to the new people-they were invited
to wash the Lotus Feetof our Divine Mother, The Collective Being has indeed said to the
How Her Australian children have been world. from Mooladhara Chakra, "BEHOLD
We pray Mataji that those who gained
the Self at the Feet of the Holy Mother, will
settle into Sahaja Yoga and become strong.
blessed!
THE MOTHER".
As well as at the Birthday Puja, Mother
Subscribers are requested to renew their subscription in time.
For outstation cheques please add Rupeces Three extra for bank charges
Nirmala Yoga
12
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-14.txt 
 SAHAJA YOGA
Why is Sahaja Yoga the Maha Yoga? For They are all-pervading and we become like
the first time in human history, one can feel antennae, receiving them and re-transmiting
cool vibrations without any mental, physical them. We can feel them coming from others.
or emotional effort. In this state, one is in
complete relaxation and the mind is free
from thoughts. There is complete silence,
but one is totally alert and aware of every-
thing that is happening, all the five senses
are active. One feels like a child and all
action is spontaneous.
It sounds really fantastic, but it has to
be so if they are the thing which created
our mind. They only flow if we give them
to others, because the sources wants
others in collectivity, it wants theWhole. In
Sahaja Yoga, one cannot achieve much on
one's own.
It invalves giving and sharing,
One experiences the present, the only not materialistic things, but the vibrations,
reality. This is Sahaja Yoga, the Maha Yoga. with others.
H. H. Mataji Nirmala Devi is an enligh-
tened soul and in Her presence, one receives
this enlightenment. It is like one candle
enlightening another candle.
I have completed my M. Sc. degree in
telecommunications and have been working
with microwave antennae for the past four
years. When I started practising Sahaja
Sahaja Yoga is Maha Yoga because after Yoga, I never believed in gurus or religion,
or even in God. I was totally scientific.
| started feeling these cool vibrations in
self the reality as cool vibrations flowing in the presence of Her Holiness Mataji. I was
the palm of the hand. Vibrations are very sceptical-first I thought the cool wind
was coming from the windows, then I
pulsating out from the spirit, which resides thought it was a trick done by hypnosis,
but I was totally alert and conscious, no-
thing changed except that I felt this cool
These vibrations are the only reality, they breeze in my hands and I had never felt so
realisation, we can feel our Atma, spirit in our
conscious being and one can see for one-
iike electro-magnetic waves and they are
in the heart.
are present in every atom and they create
peaceful yet alert in all my life.
this universe. We see pictures on our T.V.
screens by electro-magnetic vibrations.
They are transmitted by a station, received and their movement from my studies. These
by an antenna and sent to the T V. set. electro-magnetic vibrations move away from
We know ihey are there because we can
1 know about electro-magnetic vibrations
the source like the movement of ripples
electromagnetic when a stone is thrown into a pool of water
and they rebound off obstacles in exactly
whereas the vibrations we feel in Sahaja the same way as ripples rebound from the
Yoga are multi-dimensional, they include edge of the pool. It is the reception of these
emotional, mental and physical energies. rebounding waves which is the principle of
These
measure them.
are only three-dimensional,
vibrations
Nirmala Yoga
13
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-15.txt 
 emotional and physical aspects in our body
radar because they indicate the presence
and position of the object. The real nature to find an equilibrium. The cause of all
of electro-magnetic waves are not known:
All that can be said is that they are stresses
produced by electric charges, their effect nal, or mental or physical.
can be sensed, but they themselves are
our problems is basically that we are not on
the central path, we are either too emotio-
When we try to balance ourselves thro-
At work, I can measure the ugh techniques or effort before
electro-magnetic energy from a distant
source into a receiving antenna using a
meter. I can couple this power out and
constrain it to flow through waveguides.
When we speak through the telephone, we
are using electro-magnetic vibrations.
Yoga. we just go on an ego trip in one
direction or the next, we can't just sit and
watch it. One moment we are happy, elated
and full of energy and the next we are dep-
fessed, worried or angry and all our ener-
gies are used in one way or the olher: When
our system is out of balance, we get all
exactly the same thing was happening to sorts of diseases including cancer. After
coming to Sahaja Yoga, the vibrations flow
Here I was totally bewildered because
me-I was actually the antenna and could
feel these vibrations and my fingerS were
through our being and help us to find the
central path.
acting like meters. I was receiving this
energy and1 could manipulate it. It was
really incredible and too fantastic to be true.
It is entirely free because it is the vibra-
tions which create matter (money), so how
can we purchase them ? Vibrations are the
flow of love and all genuine seekers should
Ithen used my logic, since I was a scie-
ntist. Why is it that I feel cool vibrations
in my hands, is it something within me that
recognises the truth of Sahaja Yoga and fake it seriously. It is given freely, there is
manifests itself as cool vibrations ? If it has
to do with God, then surely I would not be
able to understand it with my mind, be- diplomat and She is here in this country on
cause He is the one who created my mind; official duties not as a "practising guru",
if I, a scientist, design a robot, there is no
way the robot can understand me, his crea-
tor. So, the only way to know is through an lightenment, the vibratory awareness, so we
experience, à happening and through my can become aware of of our own divinity.
rationality.
no technique or hidden mantra.
Who is Ma!aji ? She is the wife of a
She lives like a queen in Her own right, yet
She leaves everything and gives us this en-
1t is a yoga of divine love, a love beyond
These vibrations are really powerful. The physical, mental or emotional sensations, it
space satellite system is nothing compared is pure, it is the love of the spirit and
to the power of these vibrations, it is just a
mini-form of the vibration system which This is why it is called Maha Yoga.
permeates the whole universe and here for
the first time we can feel it, we can mano-
euvre it, we can enjoy it, we can use it to
manifests itself through cool vibrations.
HARI JAIRAM,
(Sahaja Yoga Ashram)
44 Chelsham Road
Clapham, London SW4.
01-622 163A.
cure others, because once the vibrations
Telephone :
start to flow, we can balance the mental,
Nitmala Yoga
14
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-16.txt 
 On 26th December 1980, Bombay Sahajayogis alongwith their foreign counterparts
offered very warm tributes to Mr. C.P. Srivastava for his appointment as
Secretary General of IMCO (International Maritime Consultative
Organisation) successively for the third time.
Following is the text of the reply given by Mr. C. P. Srivastava, on this occasion
Dear Members of the UnivVersal Sahajyoga family,
I am very greatly honoured and very over-
whelmingly touched by the most generous
observations which have been made about unhappiness or a little frustration and people
me and about my work....
to deserve the love and affection that you
have chosen to shower upon me. You have
mentioned that I have been sacrificing In
order thaf my wife who is Mataji to you
would be able to devote her time for Sahaj- there must be some answer to that, because
voga. What I want to inform you is; It is not after all we have to live together, and an-
you are in the North or in the South, every-
where you find a certain feeling of unrest, of
whatever I can do
all over the world are wanting to know, "how
can we all members of this universal world
community live together in happiness and in
peace." This is the question before every
thinking individual in the world today. And
a sacrifice, it's a great privilege. When vwe
got married, and that was more than a third
Swer really is that all of us whether we be-
tong to one country or another, we are mem-
of a century ago (34 years ago) we had our
family, a little family, and we agreed among
ourselves that our first duty would be to
bring up our two daughters. We also
agreed that once the daughters got married,
SHE would be free to devote her time as
bers of one great universal family. Afterall,
if we just remember, that the whole of uni-
verse that we know of there is only ane
planet on which there is life, such as we
have and that, we are the most fortunate
persons to be those created by the Almighty
to be the best of creations, that itself is a
While our children were growing up-SHE very great privilege and the least that we
gave all her time and devotion to them to should somehow do is to live together
much as possible to the service of humanity.
bring them up and SHE gave me tremendous
brothers and sisters genuinely, not
support. Without HER support, it would merely thro' lips but thro' hearts and it
have been impossible for me to apply myself is most important for us to come to that
for the responsibility which the Govt of the stage. I have a feeling that the world is now
country entrusted to me. I am deeply grale- réady for a new revolution, There was the
ful to HER. But today what I want to state industrial revolutlon in the 19th century
which brought economic prosperity to many
very proud of HER. And why am I proud of parts of the world, thus bringing prosperity
HER ? I am proud because, at a time when to other parts. But that is notenough. For hu-
the world is afflicted everywhere, whether man beings material prosperity is important,
you are in the East or in the West, whether but it is not the ultimate aim. There is much
as
is that I amnot grateful
to HER
I am
but
Nirmala Yoga
15
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-17.txt 
 more in a human being than a mere desire
for material well being-the spiritual part. It of those
Is only through spiritual attainment, through admire HER, respect HER, and my fullest
spiritual satisfaction that genuine happiness support is available to HER in everyway for
guidance and I have no doubt that I am one
thousands and thousands who
can be attained, and there must be some
the work that SHE is doing. But, I think,
SPARK which has to light and the source support is not the right word because SHE
of the SPARK is before you. THIS LADY. does not need support from anybody; but
So when I say I am not sacrificing at all, in- you see you must forgive me because I have
deed I am feeling to be a part of you, feeling a dicotomy. It is very difficult for me to
to be a part of this great endeavour, andI am forget that I am HER husband, so please do
proud of HER and the work SHE is doing.
forgive the expression that I have used but,
it was in my capacity as a consort and I
I might tell you something more. Very
recently I had a unique experience. SHE is
a very busy person and if I may
out being immodest, I am also very busy uplifting men & women everywhere through-
with my work, but one evening SHE invited
me very kindly to a function like this in worthy of the Almighty God who has created
London. There I saw another family a
Sahajyoga family, Sahajyogis and Yoginis.
What a wonderful expression they had, what for the kind words about my re-election.
a feeling of internal peace and calm they had,
what feelings of togetherness they had. That
gave me a very deep impression, a feeling only for one reason, viz that you would
that, that family had been transformed from
desperate individuals coming from different the world. On very few issues the Govts.
parts of the country into a family mended of the World agree. Now, if they agreed
together, knitted together with one purpose,
viz., realising that we are members of one Union. United States. United Kingdom, or
want vou to know that the work she is doing
S is to my way of thinking very very important
may say số with- for humanity. In fact, I feel that if is only by
out the world, that we can really become
us all. Now, in IMCO, the Organisation that
| am privileged to serve, I am very grateful
It was most gratifying. Perhaps you know
that this was unanimous. Imention this
hear that there are many issues that divide
upon re-election, whether it was Soviet
family. They all wanted to assist each other
to help each other to grow together and to
develop spiritually. Now, this is a marvell-
ous task. I think the world needs this more
Developing Countries or China or Pakistan,
well, they agreed to uphold a certain princi-
ple and in some way perhaps the message
of Sahaja Yoga was being given to them thr-
ough me coming from HER. And the mess-
age that I always give to the member coun-
tries of the Organisation is: "We are not
divided into groups. 1 do not believe in
groupism. I do not believe in confrontation,
I do not believe that by fighting, the world
I do not believe that the
developing world can develop by fighting
I believe, and I
than anything else. This country needs this
much more than anything else. It is the
transformation, it is the uplifting of the indi-
vidual from within, which is most important.
If that uplifting does not come, you will have
conflicts, you will not have the kind of homo-
geniety or goodwill, which is so essential
for all of us to be able to live together in
peace. So, SHE is giving you spiritual the developed world.
can get along.
16
Nirmala Yoga
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-18.txt 
 a routine life but the purposes
are spiritual-much highly elevated. For
believe very sincerely & genuinely, that all
of us can get together only by way of toget-
herness, by co-operation and this is the your success, for your happiness and your
message that I give continuously." Now this wellbeing I will pray and with these few
is only one aspect of Sahaj Yoga, only an
aspect, but this is the message that I give
to the organisation that I am privileged referred me today and I may also thank
to serve and I am most gratified & delighted HER for all that SHE is doing for me by
words I want to thank you once again for
the veryvery kind words in which all speakers
supporting me really, THANK YOU VERY
MUCH.
that the governments as they are represen-
ted in this Maritime Organisation of the
United Nations System, accept that philo-
sophy and they accept that by working
together the people of the world engaged in
Maritime activity can make progress, which
would be satisfactory from the point of view
of everybody and if they re-elected me unani-
mously, honour me greatly and my country-
but to my way of thinking they honoured the
principle which is to guide the whole of United
Nations system. So, in some way there has
been action and interaction between Sahaja Visit
Yoga on one side and United Nations activity
on the other. I have only a small responsibility
in the United Nations system but to the
extent that 1 can, it is my duty and it has
been my endeavour always to serve the World
Community in a far more elevated sphere-
the spiritual sphere. Now to friends who
have come from abroad, as an Indian I would
like to extend a very hearty and a very warm
welcome. I feel very greaty honoured & pri-
vileged that you should be here at this time
that you should spend your new Year Day
in our country and I want to take this oppor-
tunity to wish you the very very best for
1981 and the best that I can do is to say let
Sahaja Yoga which is universal, grow and
(Laughter & claps)
Phone: 61 10 45
2:
PARKASH STUDIO
For
HIGH CLASS PORTRAITS, GROUP PHOTOS
CHILDREN PHOTOGRAPHY,
DEVELOPING, PRINTING & ENLARGING
WOODEN PICTURE FRAMING
AND
Movie & Flash Photography For
PARTIES & MEETINGS
grow & develop and really lift up the word
to a new level of awareness, new level of
human relationship based on love, affection,
& realisation that human beings are born
for great purposes, they are not born merely
PHOTOSTAT OF DOCUMENTS
17, MAIN MARKET, LODI ROAD,
NEW DELHI
Nirmala Yoga
17
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-19.txt 
 OM SHRI MATAJI PRASANNA
You asked me if I could write about of Sahaja Yoga is the recognition of one's
spiritual benelits of Sahaja Yoga. When
one sits down to do it, one feels the diffi-
culty as being that even contemplating that
phrase one goes thoughtless. The benefits
are so many and various because as the
chakras get enlightened so all the divine
qualities start asserting in one's life in all Spirit divine in human form. That is the sin
purity and beauty. Easy ito write about which Christ said will not be foregiven at the
material benefits of better job, health impro-
vements, passing exams with flying colours.
But all that is a by product of the enlighten-
ment by Mother's grace and one's spiritual Toga is to realise that the spiritual path of
Instrumentation. It would be an imperti-
nence to write about benefits to oneself of every soul must seek alone and individually.
a spiritual nature. Because who benefits
from Sahaja Yoga in the spiritual sense is
actually God Almighty Himself. It his His joy But when ego drops away so does the myth
in His creation that makes our Sahaja Yoga of loneliness. One finds all the brothers and
such a joyous experience. It is his inno-
cence that protects US and cures our
illness. It is His wealth that showers on us
material rewards. It is His fearless nature
that kills all the negativity in our hearts and
opens us to His joy and love for one another.
The benefit is not to our self as we used
to identify it but to our pure self which is a
universal being. The benefit of Sahaja Yoga
is that one becomes a Sahaja Yogi-one
becomes identified with that and not with
self in others and above all in Mataji Nir-
ma'a Devi, the Adi Shakti incarnated in
person on this earth for our salvation. Blake
said that God does not hate sin but He
hates unbelief. In this day and age that
unbelief is not to recognize Mataji as the
last judgement.
The Special spiritual blessings of Sahaja
seeking is not a lonely one even though
The sense of loneliness comes from the
Ego's sense of specialness and separation.
sisters are on the same path, entering the
same lovely garden, Separation ceases by
merging in joy of
speak of surrender, which implies effort. But
recognition requires no effort, it happens
spontaneously when the eyes clear and one
see with certainty. Recognition is Sahaja
and recognition of Mataji is the greatest joy
of all. She is our Mother since all time.
Just to recognize that is the greatest reward
of all punyas.
recognition. People
JAI MATAJI.
the myth of one's name, nationality, occu-
pation, family or any limited thing. One
becomes a part of the eternal being which
is the same in everyone, and the brotherhood
GAVIN BROWN
London
FESTIVALSS
17 July Guru Purnima, i.e., the day of Guru Puja.
23 August Shri Krishna Janmashtami, i.e. Birthday of Shri Krishna.
(These are the most auspicious days for Puja)
Nirmala Yoga
18
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-20.txt 
 +
SURRENDER IN SAHAJA YOGA
Sahaja Yoga is ultimately for everyone;
the best benefits, however, are derived by individual dominates or is dominated against
those who can surrender voluntarily at the his will.
lotus feet of the Divine Mother, Her Holi- self-respect. A man with insufficient dig-
ness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi. This is not nity cannot surrender effectively. Since Ma
always easy; while living we develop a code
of values and act accordingly-allbeit happ- the tormenting secret of the past remains
Right side Vishudhi is affected when the
It leads to erosion of dignity and
never plays with the dignity of Herlchildren,
ening automatically as a living process in an
individual's experience. Trust in Ma and only. Because She knows us better than
Her teachings have to be established. Cool
vibrations in the hand is the indication of
Divine support of Grace; this is the beginning intelligence which sees itself fully exposed
of a need for further investigation. and vulnerable and knows that the vulner-
continuously the benefits received in answer ability is not really a hazard in Mother's
between the two-the Mother and Her child
we know ourselves, She can do more for
us than we can ourselves. It is a wise
Examine
to prayer.
gentle hands. In any
whatever she wants to; I hazard a guess
case She can do
When I can trust Ma, I can trust myself.
AmI getting delensive with Ma? Is there that it is the Mother's nature to forgive. She
something which I want to conceal from Ma?
We all have our horror story in which the
individual is the principal actor. "I wish it
was not true", he muses
can-not help that part of Herself. She is
Nirmala Vidya-the Divine Mechanism by
which Molher forgives, Divinity goes about
its evolutionary way regardless of our non
Hor could the
memory of it giving rise to quilt feelings be understanding All we are required to do is
erased from the psyche?" Ma knows all
from the revealed story of the Chakras, a by submitting to it.
history-sheet by itself. and other Divine
means. Besides knowledge of our inner-
most fears and unsurfaced anxieties, Ma
to let the mystery do whatever it has to do
Trust and faith will develop in their own
time; like all other human relations it takes
forgives completely because "your story" is time for trust to develop. And only trust
can bridge the communication gap.
strong man will not give his trust till the
Guru is also tested. May be our own instru-
Clearance of left Vishudhi is achieved by ment is testing for its own good. Let it do
not quite horrible enough. Neverthless, there
is needless guilt which affects left Vishudhi.
the Mantra of Vishnumaya, Radha Krishna.
so naturally. To accept Ma now or later
Cultivating a sweet language helps to banish is one of our freedoms with which Ma will
Is my inner speedometer
sing vords by taking them into our vocabu- running too last through old habits of impa-
lary and using them ! Guilt feeling is the fee- tience? Why hurry? Let it happen naturally,
praying all the time for Ma to come into our
chasm between Ma and me, as an unworthy. heart and void. Certainly we have to be
guilt.
Why not get familiar with some plea-
not intertere.
ling of inferiority and inhibition. It creates a
Nirmala Yoga
19
5F
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-21.txt 
 palient with ourself knowing that the ego
reacts to its own creations; it needs to be force bringing on this change should be
brought into the Thoughtless awareness
State; involved misidentification gradually affairs are really governed by so many
Transformation within is the reality. The
venerated and worshipped. An individual's
forces beyond his control. He certainly
cannot handle all of these complex variables
dissolves away.
Mantras of Nirmal Hriday, Nirmal Mun, which shape him and because he cannot,
Nirmal Chitta, Nirmal Chaitanya and Nirmal
Anand will help The utterance is as with
other Deity Mantras, l.e. invoked in the name
he gets anxious and tense. All tensions
are the manifested discomforts of inferior
feelings. Do I feel inferior because some
things are beyond my capacity to do? The
equipment of body, mind and soul is eqgui-
pped for just those activities which are
within its capability. Pursuit of excessive
of the Great Mother.
Ma is better than me in all esoteric
matters. DoI want mastery over myself?
Then I must learn: To learn from anybody aims like ambition, competition, unrealistic
requires an attitude of humility towards the
teacher; some ritualising before meditation
helps to establish modesty and humility. A
ritual is a symbolic physical action with
emotion attached to it. Cleaning hands,
objectives gives rise to the well-known ills
like anger, fear, gluttony, lust, greed, pride,
sloth etc.
Recognition of one's worth by oneself is
taking off shoes, using the vibrated red right No other person or social press ure
sindoor (Vermilion) with reverence, lighting should be able to push us against our will.
incense and candles, cleaning Ma's photo- To be independent of this external force
graph with aclean red cloth, always facing needs Surrendering of all misguided exter-
Mataji's photograph, avoiding all undesirable nally determined values of one's environ-
ment. In any case my aim will be low-not
high enough., So, why should I make dema-
set conditions, or resist Her.
Instead, I should accept Her in Her Totality,
avoiding the intellectual interpretations.
Whatever Ma is and does is the most appro-
priate and ideal. An attitude of tötal accept-
though Ma were present, there,
asking for Her Grace etc. are some of the
good ritual practices which give definite
rewards of better awakened awareness. The
mechanical conditions themselves will yield
acts as
nds on Ma,
with time.
The greatest form of admiration for a
person is reflected as emulation. But what
do you emulate? Ma is a mystery, unfathoma-
ble. One just accepts the mystery and sincere, the quest honestly purposeful. Only
submits allowing anything and everything to
happen The living Deity is participating Ma I need you; please help me.
in the Evolutionary Clearance of the indivi-
dual and Collective Nervous System thro-
ance, obedience and submisstion to Her
helps in surrender. Let Mataji handle it all
in the collectivity. The objective must be
then absolute honesty will make one say,
Give me
the right temperamental attitude and
environment for an effective surrender. 1
do not know how to." Badhas get cleared
ugh mastery of the Divine-Controlled para-
with prayer and that helps in surrender.
sympathetic nervous system.
Nirmala Yoga
20
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-22.txt 
 to ask twice the cause of the disturbance.
The first answer will be superficial, mislea-
What is one to surrender? The surrender
is of wrong and harmful attitudes, ertain
habitual patlerns of thinking and feelings; ding, not honest really. Then ask gently,
inability to iorgive is one of them
res maturily and ability to forgive. Resent-
"and the other real reason." The Badha will
reveal itself in most cases, The Badha
. It requi-
when once exposed can be easiy elimina-
ment is immaturity, When due to my human
cannot forgive I should ask Ma to ted from the attention. It is important to
forgive on my behalf, till 1 can forgive. This understand that it is not what I want it to be
nor what is my ideal butas REALITY REALLY
helps to clear Agnya; forgiveness restores
balance in the personality.
IS.
Universal
Ma-the
but
Not
me
When Mataji is physically present amidst
us, correct protocol demands that the per-
son of Mataji be not touched. All attention
should be on Ma: slight distractions from
attention on Ma are to be resisted. Atten-
tion should be focussed on the large Bindi
of Ma on the Agnya Chakra. Never interr- word.
upt Ma; be attentive in humbleness absor-
bing all that is relevant to our being of the
moment. Avoid coughing or clearing of the
throat while with Ma. All private Conversa-
tions must cease during the physical pre-
sence of Ma. This is an elementary courtesy.
That our spiritual Master is a lady should
always find consideration with us.
everything. Why
does
Mother-She
bother-just enjcy yourself. Let Ma do Her
Work. Jai Mataji !
*Pronounced as the underlined part of a
Heart, Heartily
(HE RIB THOU CALENDAR)
HRIDAY
The seeking desire
(Rhyme it with Fun, Bun)
Attention
MUN
CHITTA
(CHIMP THINK A)
Consciousness
There will be interference in total submi-
CHAITANYA
(CHASTE THINK FUN YARN)
ssion to Ma, Whatever is interfering should
be ordered to behave, A very slight use of
the will, helps. An invaluable aid can be taken
from the Deities invoked in the name of our
Mother When invoking the Deities through
specific finger-touch of Mataji's photograph,
specific quality of these Deities should also
be requested. Another novel lechnique is
Joy, Bless
(ASK NONE THOU)
ANAND
P. K. Puri
New Delhi
21
Nirmala Yoga
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-23.txt 
 Welcome Address to Her Holiness Mataji Smt. Nirmala Devi ji
on 14th April '81 By Shri K. Subramanyam,
at Mavalankar Auditorium, New Delhi
German philosopher the world. Spiritual masters and their Ash-
As the famous
rams are growing like mushrooms. Hun-
dreds of books are being published to
Schelling remarked once: "If God would
appear to me with the truth in the right hand
and the quest of the truth in the left, asking preach the so-called spiritual ideas and
me to choose between the two, I would rush
towards his left hand telling him: Oh God!
keep the truth for yourself alone." This is styled savlours. India has become a focal
because the modern seeker is more interes-
ted in the game of truth seeking than in the is known for her great spiritual wisdom, as
Truth itself. It would not have mattered if the land of enlightenment. This has attrac-
thoughts. Thoughts of qullible people, des-
perately seeking solace, fall pray to self-
paint of this Spiritual craze. So far, India
subject was only for academic discussion
like the question whether God exists or
whether re-birth is a fact or fiction. But it to the affluent countries in the West.
directly affects the life of a large mass of
humanity today in the world. Millions of
people have taken to one course or another is commonly belleved, has innumerable rami-
under the name of spiritualism. They are fications. For instance. formal worship of a
all wandering in wilderness, treading the deity, invocation of ghosts and spirits, reci-
tracks which they belleve will lead them to
their goals.
ted a huge influx of lay seekers into this
country and large export of spiritual leaders
In India, the spiritual phenomenon, as it
ting of mantras and lastly the meditation on
a God's name or form or with a blank mind,
for achieving occults powers by difficult
or odd rituals and they are all believad to be
The spiritual guides in this country who
show these tracks are called Gurus and
Maharishis. They even usurp the attributes
of God and call themselves Bhagwans. How
to know who is a real Guru and who an im-
spiritual practices. Devotion and surrender
to God, control of mind and body, introvert
search of the ultimate reality, physical auste-
poster ? In Ind an thought. Gurus are held rity and fasts, indulgence in intoxicants and
in high esteem. The tradition demands ab- sex, have all been postulated as ways of
solute faith from a follower and his com-
Sadhana. This is broadly the so-called
spiritual scene today.
plete surrender to the Guru. It shuis doors
to the discerning eye and the discriminating
mind. No surprise that shrewd men with
greed and passion don the garb of spliri-
tual guides and their Ashrams become dens
of vice and corruption.
It is a matter of great concern for all
those who are real seekers and who have a
genuine urge for spiritual development. It
raises before ihem the questions-"What is
Hght and what is wrong? What is true
and what is false ? What is base and what
A craze for spiritualism is raging all over
N rmala Yega
22
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-24.txt 
 is exalted ?" And the crux of the problem-
of the divine energy. This interpretation was
"What is exactly the spiritual phenomenon?" given by Her Holiness Mataji Nirmala Devi
in one of Her discourses in Delhi. The
tial to clear off the mass in which spiritua- Kundalini Yoga is centuries old in India. But
Mataji has given it a new interpretation and
a scientific base. What is amazingly remark-
We have gathered today here to hear the able about her is that she awakens your
The answers to these questions are essen-
lism is enmeshed today.
clear message of Her Holiness Mataji Nir-
mala Devi who interprets this phenomenon
differently. She defines the Sahaja Yoga/ inexhaustible reservoir of the cosmic energy
Kundalini just by the grace of her glance or
her mere presence, as though she is an
Kundalini Yoga
to the human nature. Since it comes so
the Yoga innate
awaiting you only to stretch out your hands
towards her. This awakening of the Kun-
dalini brings you all joy of life and ena-
bles you to live better, she says. In the pre-
sence of Mataji Nirmala Devi, the Divine
Kundalini Shakti of the seeker is awakened
to its glory. Realisation of God is possible
Kundalini awaken from its slumber and flow only after the sleeping Divinity Kundalini
as
natural to our personality, we need not im-
pose any external discipline on ourselves
for spiritual growth. What we have to do is
to just understand the cosmic force working
within us and allow it its free play. Let our
up in its natural course.
Shakti is fully awakened. By regular Sadhana
dedication, the devine Kundalini
Shakti aroused in you by Matajaji can grow
his young age, used to pelt stones and break in strength and envelope your whole being
You experience the divinity within you,
Gokul and Brindavana while they were on their which is the essence of truth, bliss, beauty
way home from the Yamuna. He enjoyed the and love. Then the complete integration of
the mental, physical, emotional and spiri-
the water pouring down from their pitchers. tual self in you takes place. Gradually all
Poets in the past have interpreted this mis- your physical, mental and emotional ail-
chief as an amorous sport of Lord Krishna. ments are cured. Cool nectarine vibrations
and
According to the legend, Lord Krishna, in
the pitchers of the Gopies (milk maids) of
fun when the milk maids were drenched with
the saints,saw in it divine love between the
of divinity flow through your body and
hands. You can grant self-realisation to
She says, Cosmic others and cure them of physical ailments.
Gopies and the God. Mataji Nirmala Devi
vibrations were saturated in the waters of the
The awakening of Kundalini Shakti by
Mataji Nirmala Devi when it blossoms into
water-filled its fullness will give you the experience of
the divine which is in tolal conformity with
back of the gopi to the base of her spine what is described in all our scriptures.
Yamuna through the touch of Krishna.
was a manifestation of the cosmic
When he broke a
who
power.
pitcher, the vibrated water flowed down the
and there, by contact, awakened Kun-
dalini, the serpent power which is a fraction
of the cosmic power in the human body. In
other words, by his apparent mischief, Lord attending to the various ailments of people.
Krishna bestowed on the Gopis the bliss
Nobody would doubt her claim when one
sees her in exuberance of health and joy and
The most lovable thing about Mataji Nirmala
Nirmala Yoga
23
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-25.txt 
 Devi is her disarming informality and con- hectic tour of Australia. She has returned
tagiously affectionate dis position. Unlike only a few days ago to Bombay to cheer our
other godmen she bestows her grace on all minds and grant self-realisation. I, there-
without discrimation and delights in perso- fore, appeal to all present here lo be simple
nnal contact with everyone in a congrega- and humble in receiving the divine vibra-
t'on. That explains why she calls herself tions and listening to her message, Let us
your mother, rather the mother, and not your stop our game and stand in the sunrise.
master.
behold the smile of the goddess. The birth
It is our great fortune that Mataji Nir- of the new day! Let us recognise Her, the
mala Devi is amidst us today in spite of her goal, the Devi, the Maha Davi.
YA DEVI SARVA BHUTESHU MOKSHA RUPENA SAMASTHITA
NAMASTAYSAI NAMASTASYAI NAMASTASYAI NAMO NAMAHA.
A STAR IS BORN FOR SATYA YUGA
the asirononmers used infra-red equipment
to cut through the shroud of gas and dust
At Rahuri where so many of mother's
children were with Her to welcome 1981,
Mother referred to a light in the sky. This around the Protostar. The scientists say it
was later seen by several Sahaja Yogis as
they drove Her home at around 1.00 am.
and it grew in intensity for many minutes.
It was this phenomena which gave rise to
Mother's announcement that Satya Yuga
is the first time the birth of a star has been
observed.
A member of the scientific team, Dr.
Harry Hayland, of the Australian National
University, said the discovery was a major
treakthrough for astronomy. He said the
birth could take as long as one million years,
and it might be thousands of years
before the star become visible in teles-
had begun and that 1981 would be a most
dynamic year for Sahaja Yoga.
Curiously when Warren Reeves was at
the Australian High Commission in New
Delhi he noticed in a news bulletin from
Australia an item "Birth of a Star", Below
is the article :
copes. (RA: 3/2)
When Mother saw the article she said:
"See, you have your sign" and laughed.
Then she said "And you people could see
it, but the scientists eeded a great
felescope" and laughed again.
Birth of a Star
Australian, British and American scien-
tists say they have witnessed the birth of a
star, 150 light years from the earth. The
Protostar, as it is known, is in the Magella-
nic Cloud, a galaxy beyond the Milky Way.
Working at two observatories near Canberra
What a Divine Play goes on before our
very eyes ! What joy to be on this earth at
when Satya Yuga
the
moment
very
commences!
Nirmala Yoga
24
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-26.txt 
 उदे !
अंबे उदे
ऊठ भवानी त्रिभुवनजननी आदि नारायणी
तुझ्या दर्शना आतुर झाले भक्त सिद्ध ज्ञानी
कस्तुरि मळवट वघता भाळी पूर्व दिशा दिपली
कु कुमतिलका वरून खीने काया कुरवंडिली
कृतार्थ झाली सुवर्णकिरणें चरणांवर लोंळ नी
प्रसन्नवदने उधडो नयनं नवलप्रभा फाकु दे
काजळ काळया तमपूतळपांना तेजोमय होल दे
असखंड चाल प्रकाशजागर घ्यानि मनी
शांत शारदा कलकामिनी विश्व मोहिनी
त्रिजूळवारी रणचण्डी तू महिषासुर मंादिनी
मोहक दाहक अनंत रूपे तुझीच संजीवनो ॥३॥ killer of demon Mahishasura, your forms are
कु डलिनो तु श्रो जगदम्बा शक्तिरूप शोभा
शिবशंभूच्या हृदयांमधली प्राणज्योत अंत्रा
चंतऱ्याच्या
It is customary in India to sing devotional
songs early in the morning praising the God
and requesting him to wake up and bless the
world. The poem on the left is of this type.
Wake up O Mother of the three Worlds
(nether World, heaven and this World); man-
11Rl kind's primordial
eager lo see you. Kindly open your eyes, O
one of smiling face. May the glory of your
eyes remove the darkness and enlighten
shelter. Devotees
are
स्वप्नी ॥२॥॥ neditation, minds and dreams.
All arts and knowledge originate from
you. You have held a trident in your hands.
You are the winner of all battles and the
तूच
endless, pleasing, trightening, enlivening
etc.
You are kundalini; the cosmic Mother
Jagadamba; the light in heart of Shiva You
are the empress, of chaitanya, in human
form.
चक्रवरतिची
समूतं सम्राज्ञो
कशी करावी स्तुतो कळे ना कसे तुला गावे
वेद-पित्याच्या जन्मदात्रिला कसे आळ वावे ?
उदे ! उदे ! गे पोत झळ दे पावन संकीतनी ॥४।। sing your praise, O Mother of (Brahma Deva)
Ignorant are we, do not know how to
the author of all Vedas
मधुकर कुल कण्णी
With best compliments from
LUCKNOW PAPER DISTRIBUTORS
ALL SORT S OF PAPER & BOARD A SPECIALITY
10-A, CAPPER ROAD,
LUCK NO W-1
Phones: Offi. 49902
Resi. 84151
: STRAW PRODUCTS LTD.
Wholesalar
 1981_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-27.txt 
 Registered with the Registrar of Newspapers under Regn. No. 36999/81
NIRMALA D EVI MA
I was told there is a Devi calfed Nirmala,
Go to Her if you need enlightenment:
When I approached Her, She said:
Son, the light that you seek is hidden-
You must sit and meditate, meditate, meditate.
Concentrate on your Chakras;
The fruit of concentration is meditation,
Since you are your own redeemer.
The main Chakra is Muladhara,
Which is the seat of lord Ganesha,
Awaken this Serpent which slumbers-
Coiled around three and half times
Underneath your Pelvic Plexus,
And place each step in the Spiritual Path.
Next is Sri Brahmadeva and Saraswati,
Which is at the seat of Swadisthana,
Will start moving upwards and onwards.
Then go to Manipur where Lord Vishnu and Laxmi Devi reside;
The seat of Sri Shiva and Parvati is your Anahata;
Vishuddhi is the sixteen-petalled Lotus
Where you are sure to find Lord Krishna and Radha.
My child, if you wish to travel to the fourth dimension,
You must concentrate at your Agnya Chakra,
Where you will meet Jesus Christ and Mother Mary
To guide you to the realms of the Eternal.
The abode of your Mataji where Eternal Power resides,
Is at your Sahasrara;
Which is known as the thousand-petalled Lotus.
Thus my son, you are sure to obtain
Existence, Knowledge, Bliss Absolute,
And the Superconscious state of peace and joy,
And the fruit of Meditation is Realization.
S. M. Karaka
Bombay
Edited & Published by Sh. S. C. Rai, 43, Bunglaw Road, Delhi-110007 and
Printed at Ratnadeep Press, Darya Ganj, New Delhi-110002.
One Issue Rs. 5.00 Annual Subscription Rs. 20.00 Foreign (By Airmail] £ 4.O
