Nirmala Yoga BI-Monthly Vol. 10 Year 2 July-Aug. '82 56 t "Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns all the religions and seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga-THE UNION"

 EDIT ORIAL Sahaja Yogis are the most fortunate disciples like Arjuna, to have Sakshat Para- brahma (the supreme God) as their Guru. Shri Krishna was at first Arjuna's friend, a close relation, counsellor and a saviour. Then he became Arjuna's guru and imparted the highest knowledge and out of love even showed the vision of Virata form (i. e. universal form) for which great yogis, saints and sages were longing. Arjuna was equally loving and receptive. They made an ideal pair of Guru and disciple. Shri Jnaneshwar has beautifully described this relationship in his commentary on the Geeta (Jnaneshwari) and has summed up as under: हृदया हृदय एक जाहले । ये हृदयीचे ते हृदयी घातले । न मोडता केले । आपणा ऐसे अर्जुना ।। Hrdaya hradaya eka jähale. Ye Hrdayeeche te hrdayee ghåtale. Arjunā, dwaita modata kele apana aise na Translation Their hearts were united and what was in this heart (Shri Krishna's) was passed into that heart (Arjuna's). Keeping their duality unaffected Shri Krishna made Arjuna completely one with himself. This is the culminating point of love between any Guru and disciple. Shri Jnaneshwar and his guru Shri Nivrttinath had reached this highest level of Guru- disciple relationship, i. e. total unity of inner beings. Unity of inner being follows from love which comes from surrender and surrender is the result of recognition. As for Sahaja Yogis their guru is Sakshat Adishakti, i. e. Para-brahma, the mother of universe, the source of all knowledge and power, guru of all gurus. She is our Mother first because we get our second birth from Her. Then She Nirmala Yoga

 imparts the knowledge through the lectures and makes subtle revelations in the depth of our meditations. Her love for us is like a fathomless ocean. She ignores our mistakes and has forgiven all our sins. She guards us from hidden dangers and is looking after our spiritual progress and material welfare so loving as our Divine Mother. Answers to doubts and difficulties regarding Sahaja Yoga and meditation, solution to material problems and instructions in the difficult situations, come from Her, no matter where She is. She is present within us and without and is all pervading. We have to realize Her going deep in our meditations, Let us behave the way it pleases Her. Let us rededicate ourselves to Sahaja Yoga, to collectivity and for the propagation of Sahaja Yoga. FESTIVALS 4th August Raksha Bandhan 12th August Janmashtami (Shri Krishna's birth day) Shri Ganesha Chaturthi (Shri Ganesh is worshipped everyday during this period). 22nd August Anant Chaturdashi 2nd September Navaratri Puja begins 17th October Dussehra 27th October Guru Nanak's birth day 1st November Deepawali 15th November Full Moon day. Shri Shiva Puja is per- formed on this day, to celebrate the kill- ing of demon Tripura by him. 30th November 'X' Mas 25th December Shri Dattatreya's birth day 29th December Nirmala Yoga

 NIRMA ALA YOGA 43, BUNGLOW ROAD, DELHI-110007 (INDIA) Founder : HER HOLINESS MATAJI SHRI NIRMALA DEVI Editorial Board : Dr. S. K. Mathur, Sri A. S. Mishra, Sri R. D. Kulkarni REPRESENT ATIVES : CHERYL HYNES-10, Clarence Road, Burwood, N.S.W. 2134, Australia, Australia : MR. SUBHASH B. PRADHAN California-90701 U.S.A. Reva Street, U.S.A. Cerritos, 12416, Switzerland : ARNEAU DE KALBERMATTEN-Binningerstrasse 5, 4123, Allschwil (BL), Switzerland. : MARIE ROUGER 175, Av. Ledru Rollin, Paris-75001 : GAVIN BROWN - Nirmala Palace, 99, Nightingale Lane, Clapham South, Balham, London SW 12 U. K. France London Hong Kong: EMILIE P. SHI - Cliff Rence Bros. Co. Ltd., 1610, Wing On Centre, 111, Connaught Road Central, Hong Kong. : M.B. RATNANNAVAR-13, Merwan Mansion, Genjwala Lane, Borivali (W), Bombay-400 092. Bombay CONTENTS Page 1. Editorial 2. Festivals Sahasrara Day Puja Address by Her Holiness Mataji 4. Becoming 5. Divine Plan 6. Letter from France Sahaja Yogis 7. An Inspiration 8. Latest Revised Travel Plans of Mataji 9. To be Observed 1 3. 14 15 16 17 18 10. A few words on Protocol 19 11. For Sahaja Yogis to Remember 12. The Second Coming to Rome of Mataji 13. The Joy of Sahaja Yoga 14. A Sahaja Yogi-His Sadhna and Experiences 15. Glory be to Thee 16. Mother-A miraculous Sadguru 17. Mother's Trip to Lisbon and Madrid 18. Asserting our powers 19. Welcome Address by Sh. K. Subrahmanyam 19 20 21 22 26 26 27 29 31 Nirmala Yoga

 Le Raincy, France 5th of May 1982 SAHASRARA DAY PUJA ADDRESS BY HER HOLINESS MATAJI SHRI NIRMALA DEVI It is a great day for all of us, the seekers, Kundalini rising like a big furnace, and the that the last work of the Divine, of opening furnace was very silent but a burning appea- the last centre in the great primordial being, rance it had, as if you heat up a metal, and was done on the 5th of May 1970. It is the it has many colours. In the same way, the greatest event of all the spiritual happenings Kundalini showed up as a furnace like a tunnel, as you see these plants you have for coal burning, that create alectricity; and it stretched like a telescope and came out one after another, shoot! shoot ! shoot !, just like that; and the deities came and sat on their seats, golden seats and then they lifted the whole of the head like a big dome and opened it, and then this torrential rain completely drenched me-l started seeing all that and got lost in the joy. It was like an artist seeing his own creation, and I felt the joy of great fulfilment. After coming out of this beautiful experience, I looked around and saw human beings so blind and I became of the universe. It was done with very great care and great adjustments. It is not in the limits of human understanding, how things are worked out in the heavens. your fortune and God's love, that has work- ed out this wondrous miracle. Without this happening, there could not have been the possibility of giving mass realisation to people. One could have done it for one or two persons here and there, but to have given such a mass awakening would not have been possible. As you know, In the It is Sahasrara there are the seats of the seven main chakras. There are 1000 nadis or as they call it flames, and they all have each absolutely silent, and desired that I should 16,000 powers. Every nadi deals with a get the cups to fill the nectar, not all stones. particular type of person; and with the per- mutations and combinations of all these nadis, human beings are looked after. As petals of different colours appearing like in- soon as the Sahasrara was opened, the whole atmosphere was filled with tremen- dous chaitanya, and there was tremendous light in the sky, and the whole thing came on this ear th, as if a torrential rain or a waterfall with such tremendous force as if pouring its color and its fragrance around. was unaware and got stupefied. The hap- People have written very little about Sahas- pening was so tremendous, and so unexpec- ted that I was stunned and got totally silent from outside, and it is not possible for them at the grandeur. Sahasrara is the most beautiful part of your being. It is a big lotus with a thousand flated flames. It is a thing that has been seen by many people, but to see it poür that torrential rain was like these flames beco- ming a fountain, a fountain of colour, foun- tain of fragrance; when you think of a flower rara, because whatever they have seen is I saw the primordial to see from inside. Even if you reach from Nirmala Yoga

 in the forest; i was living as a normal human inside and the whole Sahasrara is not opened out, you cannot see its beauty; being among other normal human beings: because when it is closed, the whole of it, and they were not that earnest, that artha, you just pass through an aperture and get and I had to do this work among them. How to lalk to them about the real world that exists, and the false in which they live ? One lady, the first one who got realization out of it. But just imagine a huge big thousand petalled lotus, and you are sitting inside on the corona and looking at all those petals, all very beautifully coloured, and just came to see me because she was pos- sessed with the idea of seeking. She sought and it worked with her. It was not the happiest day, because she was one of those who got individually realised. With this great happening many should get it at a time. We had a programme in Bordi in 1970, and there, first one gentleman got fragrant, and pulsating with the bliss of joy. To remain on that position, is the ideal position, but then after the silence you are filled with tremendous compassion and love, and you are drawn out to people who haven't yet known what is having eyes. And then you try to put your attention to the Sahasrara of millions of people, and then you start seeing the problems that exist in the Sahasrara. And even if you desire to realisation in the evening Next day there were negative forces acting in the morning time, and they started talking of favouritism. I could see in the atmosphere the vibrations were going wrong, In the evening I took up a very strong, firm attitude; I was in a great open the Sahasrara, it is a very difficult thing, because the channelling of the Divine to human beings, has to be done through human beings. The power may be with fury, I never went into such a fury before you, but it has to be channelled through hu- and I lashed all of them. Surprisingly, twelve man beings. All my life Ihave not known many realized souls. How to get them? How to work it out? So I started looking out for people, by one. Three of them travelling back got of them got realization. That was the greatest moment. Then many got it one realization in the train, suddenly they felt vibrations. So the mass evolution started. and I met an old lady of 70 years, and she was very perturbed about something very gross and when she came to see me she felt very peaceful: Her Sahasrara was very worn out, and in my company, she would think of Sahasrara is your awareness. When it is enlightened you get into the techniques something else, not the spirit; and her of the Divine. Now there are two techni- ques, the techniques of the Divine, and the techniques you follow. You cannot act as lighten it; but she did not get her reali- divine, but you can use the divine power and manoeuvre it. For example, the Divine looks me after all the universal happenings. Every minute st particle is controlled by the Divine. When your sahasrara opens out, and your brain would be covered with clouds and darkness. Again and again, I had to en- zation. Most of the people who came to in the beginning, came for getting cured. This capacity I had since childhood. And I could also give realiza- tion, to a few people before, but they had to kundalini touches the fontanelle bone, a be very earnest, artha.I did not meet any- one of that quality because I was not living rara; and as soon as the fontanelle bone to me sort of igniting force is ready in your sahas- Nirmala Yoga

 area opens up in the brahmarandra, the presses the sahasrara, and gives pain. grace of the spirit ignites that igniting force keep the sahasrara in its healthy state. One and your nadis get enlightened. Not all of has to realize, one's priorities have to them, but quite a lot of them; not all the change. Some people take time so they length, but quite the peripheries That's have to make deliberate efforts. There are how you get your enlightenment. So many things happen because of your seven cen- tres being in the sahasrara With the light rara does not like it. It closes back. That's you see their relative positions. I mean you do not see, but it works in your conscious thought to come in the mind. If you go mind. Your conscious mind feels that inte- about with the poison, then again it closes. gration within you. The rationality, that is separated from the heart, becomes one with tempered, very much hot iempered, and all the heart. 1t becomes one with your atten- tion. Wherever your attention goes you act in a collective way. All the activities of starts closing. Those people who have had your attention are blessed. Your attention conditioning from wrong gurus, and wrong itself is effective. Your attention is very books, from wrong parents may be, from important, your desires are even more wrong country, from a wrong livelihood, also important, because it is such an integraled do not allow the sahasrara to grow in it's thing, your desires and your attention healthy way So many books, if you read them, they suggest anti-God activities. An enlightened sahas- like a poison; it does not like any poisonous In the same way the people who are hot the other problems of the ego, if they try to suppress the sahasrara, also the sahasrara become one. Whatever is good for the spirit you desire, and your attention goes to whatever is emitting spiritual power. The priorities change very fast. Those people the sahasrara is, the more it receives who are primitive and not evolved, may not the spiritual qualities of the spirit. Actually, find that happening; but those who are mentally developed, they have an attention is also felt in the sahasrara, because that is which they try to lest. see how to raise the Kunda lini. It is only the sahasrara which has to grow, not the spirit. The more sensitive the peace is felt in the sahasrara. The bliss They first want to the brain, and the brain is the epitome of the nervous system, the central nervous consciousness itself. So Thay want to see that is logical. For a system, balanced person there is no questioning at merely by opening sahasrara, the work is all, we have some people like that amongst not done. We have to have more and more us. They just became and never question- channels, who will act as the nadis with ed. They just settled down. They are their different powers, and who can work it innocent, they are intelligent, above all they out in a proper systematic manner. But are spiritual; but whatever may be the those people who indulge into wasteful defects in the qualities, they can be correc- habits after reallsation, obstruct the flow of ted through your sahasrara. First of all you the nadis, and are really very harmful for have to put down your ego; because if ego the Virata. Such people should really leave is there it presses the sahasrara. Also the Sahaja Yoga and spare; or such people super-ego must be reduced because it also should be asked to leave and we should or 6. Nirmala Yoga

 severe all relations with such people who you are, and you should talk like a prophet. stand against such a great work of the actually, you have to educate yourself. How Divine. does a prophet speak ? This is not insin- cere or acting, because now you are awake- The one who wants to develop on ned. When you are not awakened, whatever Sahasrara should know, he should not you do like this, is artificial. Sahasrara is develop with bad company, but always have the controlling, guiding and evolving force, He and so to keep it absolutely ready for growth the company of other sahaja yogis. should not have his own holidays, or own and expansion, one has to watch one's own time, but most of the time, he should spend growth. Never justify your wrong doings; If you start justifying, you are thinking about that. We have no time to think about it. After the sahasrara, when you are above We have to think of others, because others the sahasrara, you can see that it is very are also in your brain; and when you start important that all these nadis must be kept thinking of others, talking to them about together, and all the centres and all the dei- their resurrection, your Sahasrara will defi- ties must be kept intact and integrated. nitely increase in its size and its subtlity, The This can be done even with conscious sensitivity also will increase. The depth effort, by watching yourself, your thoughts. will also come. It is just like a tree, when So you have to come out of your shells and spread your in the company of other sahaja yogis. it grows, its roots spread You start seeing your ego and your super- ego. You will be able to see how you cheat yourself and are dishonest with yourself. wings. All your small things of mind must be given up. You must live like a huge big How you are enjoying an ego personality, which has to give support, gui- dance, help and awakening to thousands. How you are convincing yourself, you are very good trip ? If this Sahasrara Day in France, establi- shes a new dynamism in this country, am Sahaja Yoga is for people who are spirits, so all other things must drop out. All misidentifications must be dropped out. sure that it will catch up with the thought One can do it through the conscious mind, of the people. It will resound in their minds, as I said, one should really correct oneself, their unconscious will transmit it into their because after realisation whatever you desire beings, and they will start thinking afresh. becomes part of the divine desire, whatever Now, new breakthroughs will take place, and you do becomes part of the divine action; people will start going towards truth logi- so one has to remember that with conscious cally. They will come lo right conclusions effort we can really find ourselves and see and drop out all that is wasteful and useless. if we are really honest about it. y Sahasrara is the throne for the spirit; and the bigger is the king, the bigger to expand is the throne The way you treat your s spirit, is expressed in your sahasrara, and this is how you can give realisation, and stature is needed of a prophet, which then you can become a subtle being. If we are honest one can see that col- lectivity is the Sahasrara. only way For that tolerance is and the the needed, wisdom is needed, Nirmala Yoga 7.

 Through your conscious effort, you can what is your job. Just try enter the beings of others and raise their it pure and clean, and this will definitely Kundalini. Enlightening the Sahasrara also gives you a new light to see all the suksh- jump into a new dimension of many more mas, all the subtle happenings in the atmos- phere. When you start developing higher and higher, you can see the vibrations as to keep mark another step, another accelerated human beings. It is a very great pleasure to be in Paris. today, so that the whole world's attention should be on Paris, on France. This country which has been cursed and neglected by all lights around you. You may not have any interest in many things, but will become amazed how the deities, because human beings went you become master of everything; as if really very wrong. Let all the deities be your brain is manifesting what you desire. And this is who is actually the Virata; so become the master of your brain, because may the Sahasrara of France be opened out actually the spirit is master of the brain. The more you bring your spirit into your ed to the Spirit, and eternal life. It is a attention, the more the Sahasrara increases very important country and that is why I in size; its light expands and you become a more powerful Sahaja Yogi. This is the greatest thing for God Almighty to say, "see, this has happened," So for the time being he may postpone his anger and wrath; kind, gentle and healthy people; but at the so he can forgive human beings for their mistakes, their obstinacy and childish Yogis, so that when others see them, they pranks. Let the man rise to see the glory should see the superiority in them. Before and the greatness of his Father. Let him also get the power to bear the compassion ful session. I am very happy about it. of God. Let him also see the Sahasrara settled down in this country, because this is what Krishna promised, the attention, and whatever attention we pay, is reported to us through Sahasrara. So you and the attention of France should be guid- decided to celebrate Sahasrara day here. The responsibility of French Sahaja Yogis is much greater. They have to change their methods and styles. They have to become same time, should be very strong Sahaja the Sahasrara day, we had such a success- Now I bless all the centres in the world, develop to such dimension, that he can execute the workings of the divine through who have prayed or are praying; to give them his conscious mind. a very developed sahasrara, an enlightened one, that they may expand so much, so they may become one with the whole, The Sahasrara has one mantra, that is NIRMALA, meaning one should keep it clean, May God Bless Them. That is pure and immaculate. 8. Nirmala Yoga

 Her Holiness Mataji Nirmala Devi OLD ALRESFORD 18th May 1980 BECOMING "This is only because I have given you birth. dead and finished and gone. "I'm a diffe- rent person", now that acceptance, people Nobody could have done before this find it difficult because Sri' Ego is there. tell you-you can cure others, you can give It doesn't allow you, it says, "Oh God, how speeches in Sahaja Yoga; you can know can that be?" I mean to say that you are your own problems, your own surroundings, transformed absolutely, can you imagine, you can cleanse yourselves and athers. vou can give realisation to people. You tell Only with realisation it's that it's all in a bundle. What a jump it is from the first will all run away, nobody will believe, somebody, they say, "Oh I know this", they awareness where it was just a desire. From here, you started. But all these things that Nobody will believe it. There was a yogi, were looking quite funny in the first one first he said, "Mother, how can that when you had desire, from a very subtler be ? He couldn't believe that he could beautiful forms as they come into you. At give realisation. Poor fellow has been this time, you do feel your chakras, their working as a yogi for so many years. He problems, you start again analysing them The biggest problem in the West is they fellow was giving realisation start analysing. they'll analyse it. Give them anything, they They cannot bel.eve. So what you have to will analyse. Analysis is the biggest thing do about becoming is to at least believe: and that's how this analysis business is. So yes, you are giving realisation. After all, maddening for them. Here it is that they're you see it like a white cloth before you-still but you know you can give realisation. wouldn't believe it to begin with -same Even if to You give them a case, believe you can give realisation takes time. clinging on to their realisation, the other side you say it is black, Hurst Blue! So these of everything, analysing. You see, the legs are dealings with the Hurst Blue is the worst analysed, feet are analysed, nails are analy- case. You are giving realisation, see how sed and they've taken on the microscope lan is suppose to be going to the psychia- and seeing to it, there the legs are to be trist, he can give realisation to that used for climbing up, and here you're psychiatrist. The doctor who is going to analysing the legs and feet, see the whole treat you, you can give him realisation. purpose is lost when you start identifying Believe it, you can. But when he says this with whatever was hanging on to you. So to him, he thinks, "Oh, he'll run away". now you should say, "Now finished, done! But at least believe into yourself. This is the place where you must have faith. This faith that you got realisation through Sahaja Yoga. That it's a tremendous power, that there is an all-pervading power which is accept that the person that was there is absolutely dynamic and that you have that Now I'm another person. The greatest thing is in this awareness of yours when you are realised, you must Nirmala Yoga

 power flowing through you, and that you ler, they start departing from you. This is are giving realisation, and that your brother the third state where your three gunas you is something special. because I'm saying, because it's blind, but you have seen it, but this is what it is when you see it, you also don't believe it, then what see the desire being fulfilled, but all these should I call it ? You know for definite that this is happening but you don't believe into it, then what should I say ? If you believe that it is so, that is faith. Imagine faith means blindness! It's opening your eyes much more to what it is and accepting that call catching, catching-you say recording. it is so, And then the faith must grow. Faith is not faith can see, but they do not affect you. So in the first state you have desire. second state which is a very big thing, you In the subtleties are mixed up within you. In the third state, you see them, but they do not affect you. This is the third state when one has to see that they do not affect you. You do see catching, but then you do not You think you are an instrument, you are just recording. The effect of that becomes very small, very small. At this stage, it is the power of faith that helps you. Nothing but power of faith. And power of faith is the greatest beco- ming power I should say, because then you realise that whatever you had known so far record this effect. This is the third state. has been of no value. This is something so great and so gigantic and so dynamic. third state-the only way is complete faith. You become so powerful within that the effect of this catching is very little, you just Now at this third state, you rise up to this It's something so much out of the blue that you have never known before and then you get really bewildered and then you start protocol, but with faith, if you learn protocol having faith. you just put your hands like this and put you're forced into it, you'll feel bad, the a bhandan, it works. It does work. Then mixture state is still on. So to develop faith, Faith is; first of all, you have to learn cer- tain things about faith; one of them is the Now then, when I say that then you will not feel bad about it, but if also you start seeing that when Mother does like this (blows on Her hand) to Herself, clearly, "don't you see this is happening ? we all feel it. Then we start feeling it that Can't you see it is rising? Can't you under- we are in Her and She is in us; and that we stand" Tell yourself, "Isn't it dynamic" Just are aware of our wholesomeness and She sit down and think how wonderful it is, how is our wholesomeness; then the faith starts areat it is. Just talk to the ocean, talk to the you have first of all to tell yourself rationally, growing. You cannot realise it because this is beyond analysis anymore. Only dead things you can realise; living, you cannot. This is beyond living-this is what it is. So "I've found it, I've got it" Tell yourself-so you cannot realise it so you start surrender- telling yourself, you'll develop this faith. ing. When you start surrendering and the taith comes in then your awareness rises flowers-they are better than many hunman beings-and tell them, "Don't you think so?" Go in the museum and tell all the statues, There's no way out. Many people have asked me this question: how to develop the higher than this, and these small, small, faith ? Now, it is such an absurd thing. little, little, things which have become subt- Here you are knowing the kundalini, you are Nirmala Yoga 10

 giving realisation and turn round and ask, myself that it was emitting vibrations and "Mother, how do we develop faith ?" It is beyond me to understand that, I mean, what well. See the main problem was how to is happening here, now what are you doing? This faith then starts encompassing. Also, what I say means absorbing, not criticising, not reading back, but absorbing it. This absorption can be hindered by many other means, also absorption is the only way you grow. How does a tree grow ? By absorp- Sahaja Yoga is becoming, is awakening and tion. What is the mouth of absorption ? is life and that my photograph came up so approach so many people. You can have, say, one hundred Sahaja Yogis. You can have two hundred, you can have at the most two thousand You see for this stuff it is very easy, you just have the distraction, you pay the money and you're there. With realisation. How is it going to work out ? What Is nirvichara ? Where Nirvichara. It was a very big problem for me not that I can just give you a book and just get it and read it and say that, "Yes, I have got it, I have become." It's real becoming, ripening, maturing, living process. how am I to do it ? And here is the answer - in the photograph. Then your T.V., that's also modern. Of course, the T.V. people have not allowed me to go on the screen, . It's you do not think about it. Now then, I say you are not to think, at a lower state, people will say, "Oh, you know, She's very domina- ting. very dom inating, I must say !" But absorption is only possible when you have faith, and the whole thing goes into you, go on sucking like a child, the whole thing goes into you just like a lake it is, without any ripple, it reflects the complete, entire creation in it, complete. Now, so far, but l've gone on the screen in India. Only in Poona, not here, it's rather difficult. First, let them have all the things, then I'll go, that always has been, so this is what it is, that all your medias can be used through my photograph. What a blessing it is. And the photograph, if you think, is repre- senting me, I think you're not expressing it I was amazed that my photographs are much more powerful than many statues put together, even produced by Mother Earth, because photograph has so many elements in it. For example, you see it has If there are any ripples, then there's diffusion, what's stage of faith the second to go to the third. now, we'll take a simple case of my photo- graph. There were no photographs before. Only in my lifetime the photographs have fully. started, for your information. These photo- graphs also you have developed yourself on your own, of course with the help of the Holy Ghost no doubt, that goes without saying, but you have developed it. I myself light element, it has water element, it has did not know this photography would catch me so much. I did not know myself. You'll be amazed that I started seeing that these confusion. So is the which starts from the For example earth element and also air element. If the air is not all right, you cannot take a photo- graph.. And also it has the ether element. With all these five elements, you cannot Ether element it has photographs are more powerful than a statue which is made according to what I was before. Because this is the present thing; this is how I exist. I was amazed produce a statue. because if you have a photograph here, you can transmit it to another place you can Nirmala Yoga 11

 transmit the photograph, but you cannot important to start developing that faith. transmit a statue as it is anywhere-only the photo of a statue, you can. So it has also ether in it. So photograph is much more powerful than any statue it is a reproduction, no doubt, but a repro- duction of reality, with five elements. So as telling you because of faith problem. Thave with you it's just a representative, its quite me because my attention is there. We have experimented with this. A yogini had a photograph of mine and a relation came to her and she used to mock at the photograph in the morning. Especially if they're Hindus. and say all kinds of things. You should keap one photograph with you all the time in your pocket; respect it. As many as possible, respect them. Not for decoration, but to be respected. morning you see the photograph. Now I'm Moreover, In the to tell you it nyself, the whole thing. That's the worst part of this incarnation because other things you have done, e.g. those who follow Christ, they will have his photograph they'll touch the feet morning time, evening time, before sleeping, going out, coming in, they'll do that. In the same way, when you have a photograph, you work on that with that understanding, that Mother's with us. You'll be amnazed how things work out. She brought the photograph to me show- ing it had become all dark, black. So l sald, "Who was there ?" and she said, "It's a relation who had come and made it like that. I said, "You had better put it in the sea, my attention is not there, no vibrations, my attention has gone away. Faith will help you. To act just as oint- ment on al these catches, you won't be such a person all the time going like this- "Oh, I'm catching," you'll be seeing. Like an elephant-walking and all the dogs bar- king at you-you'll just go along, it's like You see that problem, I can see that. You should not have put the photograph like that." So there's a very big difference between a statue and a photograph, because my atten- tion Is there. Of course, even the statues which are created by Mother Earth also have vibrations and they also show they have vibrations, but they cannot give you the awakening of the kundalini because my photograph has my desire also in it. They cannot. If they could, Stonehenge would have. If you go to these statues and if I am there, they make no vibrations, only you have to put one hand towards Me and the other towards them, then they start emitting, but they have to accept My permission. Even the statue you have of Ganesha-now it's that. So the third awareness comes in when you start seeing all this, recording it. This is the third state. Then the fourth state is called as the turia state. In the fourth state, you dominate these three gunas. You control all the elements, At this stage, you just say it works. You see yesterday what happened (Mother made it rain)-it just works, you become master of these three gunas. Like I used to des- cribe that, first you are sitting in the car, to give vibrations until it was worked out somebody's driving it, he uses your left and all right, but in the beginning, it never used this way. But they do not lack authority So the protocol of those photographs is right side, or you can say, the brake and the accelerator and the car is driven. Then he Nirmala Yoga 12

 I have come down to the first state and I'm starts teaching you how to drive it. Then you start learning by using your left trying to pull you up. If you do not drag and right, accelerator and brake. Then the third stage comes in when you become the request is don't drag me down. That's how driver, but still you are worried about the man who is sitting behind, that you are doing a mistake, doing wrong. But then the me down, I can pull you up very far, so only the becoming is going to be. Now this is the basic, the basic structure and now you are feeling all the beautiful things in bet- ween and all the things can be nicely again ter, you make others drive. Order here, any- arranged and can be done properly. But fourth state comes and you become the mas- one, order the Sun, order the Moon, order. Order means just tell them, I mean no question of any domination, just desire, just say it, it works out. this is the basic structure of becoming Now do not try to fix yourself up at this stage or that stage, because that is very common with people who are still thinking about it. Then : "Mother, at what stage am 1 ?" This is common when you grow yourself, it will happen to you. You don't have to determine anything, it should hap- pen to you, that's all. Allow it to grow, allow it to grow, but at least you are at a state where you're doubtlessly aware, most of you. But still I would say the basic desire is still not there that strong. The basic desire, that would be cleared out. You see, sometimes it happens the house Now this fourth stage is called turia dasha (state). Then comes the filth stage in which I don't want to give you names or you stick on to these. They are not so clear cut. They might mingle from each other and they are but in turia state. When you mature properly, then you jump into the fifth state; in which you do not even deter- mine or say anything; just anything slips out of your mouth, may not even slip out, it works. It's a state. There you handle the whole situation, sitting down here. Sitting down here, you know each other's chakras. Then not only you masterit, but in that you can enter into it. Now, for example, I tell you. I can enter into your subconscious; into your collective subconscious; into your sup- raconscious; into all the areas you see, like that if I want. This is when you have mas- tered it completely. When you enter into It; self, that. "All right, that's my car, I have can be demolished because the basics are not all right. Sometimes in the basic there are mistakes so you go down into your- selves, right down to find out oh, this is still there, take it out. You have to weed out all those things, and that weeding out requires real alertness, but don't get into self-pity, don't get into this guilt business. But a very positive attitude towards your- when you are the master, then you enter into it. When you're master of this house, you may enter into it. Then you enter the seventh state and that is the state where to put it right." Even if you become the master of the car and the car is useless, what's the use ? Desire is the car, Kunda- lini is that desire. If your Kundalini is weak, try to sustain it, try to improve it. Try to raise it. Feed it, feed your kundalini with you just are. Your being there is sufficient. Just being there, nothing exists, but you for yourself. Now all these seven states you can reach, because I stand beyond that and (Contd. on Page 30) Nirmala Yoga 13

 DIVINE PLAN Creeping toward the great disaster Constant pain is gaining sway What was lent to us for comfort Now in pain is forced away. In these days of no compassion Filled with every grief and doubt Comes an answer to this madness Comes the sword to clear it out. Not some words-to be forgotten Not a spell-bound form of wood Not a hoary gleaming crystal Nor some spirit, bad or good. But the breath of Kundalini Sweeps our every care away In our swollen eyes of anguish Joyful tears begin to play. Mother's filled us with Her gladness Drawing us towards the one Disentangled-our illusions melt As dew before the sun. Engines of the one in all She's revealed your subtle keys And we're mastering every measure Of these cosmic harmonies. At the root of Adi Rainbow We have found our pot of gold Looking on with childlike rapture The great mystery we behold. Let us scale the fiery mountain Swim the oceans to their source Trace the paths of ancient rivers Fly the sun's celestial course. Let us do the deeds of Heroes Making saints of every man Thus uniting Earth and Heaven To fulfill Her Divine plan. -Herman Gaddy Amen. 14 Nirmala Yoga

 Le ler Juin 1982 La Maison Du Sahaja Yoga 9. Allée Du Rocher, 93 340, Le Raincy, (1) 381.16.12, Dear Brothers and Sisters, testing us again ! By the 5th of May the house in Le Raincy was full of Sahaja Yogis from England, Switzerland, Italy and France mainly and Mother decided to stay until Saturday evening. We all had a very This 5th of May has been a great day for us French Sahaja Yogis. Mother had deci- ded that Sahasrara Day would take place in France in the new ashram at Le Raincy, near Paris. Mother arrived in Lille on Sun- beauti ful and fruitful time. day afternoon (2nd May) with about 30 English Sahaja Yogis and a public program was held that evening. people were there too. When we took Mother to Roissy-Airport Some Belgian She started talking to two Africans from Congo. They came to see us afterwards On the previous day in Paris we were at Le Raincy and decided to start Sahaja waiting for Her in a large Hall, filled with close to 200 people, but our Mother had postponed Her arrival to show us that a small group of Sahaja Yogis could give realisation to a large group of people. Gregoire introduced Sahaja Yoga very clearly and powerfully and afterwards we stood at the back, Swiss and French Sahaja Yogis, and raised the collective Kundalini with our hands together. Mother's atten- tion was very obviously with us: vibrations were very strong and most people got reali- zation and came back to the other two pro- Yoga in their country. This visit of Mother has brought a great change for us, a decisive step in the collec- tive feeling and in the positive desire to spread Sahaja Yoga. This ashram has only existed since the beginning of March, but all is changed since then. Preparing Mother's coming, organising preparatory meetings, inviting people to the house, working together in the house and the garden has really brought about a collective feeling which is essential to the growth of Sahaja Yoga here. grams : on the 3rd and 4th of May Mother was there and spoke to very full halls. Many people had strong experiences, and the number of french Sahaja Yogis has next few months and have meetings there, increased, but as is always in small proportion to the numbers that showed up at Mother's lectures ! We hope to visit quite a few towns in the case, in collaboration with the Swiss and the Belgian Sahaja Yogis. May the Grace of Our Holy Mother spread further and stronger in the collec- tive Soul of Creation. Mother invited some of the new people for the Sahasrara Day Puja. It was a very beautiful strong and joyful puja, and then we had the Havan (fire ceremony) in the garden. It rained and rained on us and we laughed and the rain stopped. Mother was Om Twamewa Sakshat Shri Nirmmala Vidya Shri Sahaja Yoga Dayini Moksha Pradayini Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Ma Namo Namah. Nirmala Yoga 15

 AN INSPIRATION 1. Ladies and Gentlemen of the present Generation, With a great deliberation, I have intended to give you an idea of my resolution, In a fine piece of alliteration Prepared by my own imagination, And stolen from no quotation. 2. Sahaja Yogis of the present Generation, My idea is to perfect my Meditation, Which at present is a source of botheration, As my chakras need clarification and purification- From the evil forces surrounding my constitution3B As we physical beings differ from Nation to Nation. 3. Sahaja Yogis of the present Generation, The thought of Concentration and Meditation, Is a great source of insipration; Which by raising your Kundalini without any botheration, Your Vibrations blossom by transformation- And thereby enjoy bliss with divine accelaralion. With these few words, Sahaja Yogis, of the present Generation. Permit me to occupy my location of Meditation : Which by no means is a sanguine disposition To our beloved Sahaja Yogis' contemplation and aspiration, Leading to a great world-wide Brotherhood of Association, Which nodoubt will flourish from Generation to Generation. -S. M. KARAKA Bombay It is the Mercy of my true Guru that has made me to know the unknown; Without eating, I have tasted of the sweet- ness of nectar, and without water I have quenched my thirst; I have learned from Him how to walk with- out feet, to see without eyes, to hear without Vears, to drink without nouth, to fiy withour Where there is the response of delight, there is the fullness of joy. Before whom can that joy be uttered ? wings; I have brought my love and meditation into the land where there is no Sun and Moon, nor day and night; Kabir says, "the Guru is great beyond words, and great is the good fortune of the disciple". -KABIR Nirmala Yoga 16

 Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi LATEST REVISED TRAVEL PLANS In USSR July 18-24 Mytholmroyd, Yorkshire (Rita Davies) July 30 Cowley Manor, Gloucestershire (Linda Pearce/Alan Henderson) July 31-August 1 Cheltenham (Alan Henderson) August 1* Birthday of Sri Krishna August 15 Caxton Hall, London August 16 Ganesha Puja August 22 Switzerland/Germany (Arneau de Kalbermatten) August 23-28 Scotland (Fin Robertson) September 4-8 Introductory Seminar, llminster, Somerset (Patrick Anslow) September 10-12* Caxton Hall, London September 13 West Country (Chris Greaves) Septem ber 14-17 Vienna (Gregoire de Kalbermatten) September 25-30 October 4-9 South Midlands (Jim Thomas) Navratri Puja October 17 North Country (Elana Harris) October 19-22 Diwali Puja November 17 Depart for India November 22 Western Sahaja Yogis arrive India for minimum of two months. December 19 *Mother may not attend in person. Nirmala Yoga 17

 To be Observed 1. Her Holiness Mataji's photograph represents Her in our houses and other rising sun. Manfra may be said as 'Om places where it is placed. It has therefore to be kept with great respect and all proto- shat Shri Bhagwati Mataji Shri Nirmala cals have to be observed. It should be Devi Namo Namah'. Naver see the setting placed at a high place and should not be moved very frequently. Daily worshipping Agya. If seen by mistake forgiveness should with vermilions, flowers and offering of milk änd sugar or chana (Gram) is necessary. Oil lamp/candie lamp should be lighted in the morning and evening and Mantras recited. vibrations that protects us. Hence it should 6. Always see and pay obeisance to the Twameva Sakshat Shri Surya Narayan Sak- sun as it has adverse affect on eyes and left be requested. 7. "Bandhan' is the shield of the Holy always be done in thoughtless and with great reverence to Shri Mataji. It may also be done with reciting the Mantra-Mahalaxmi 2. Never stretch your legs towards the phofograph even in sleep. If it happens un knowingly, immediately request for Her Mahasaraswati or just 'Om Shri Nirmala Ma forgiveness. Namo Namah'. 3. In collective Puja and meditation after the arti and prayers have been sung, it is as frequently as possible, in order to keep advisable to maintain the same atmosphere of devotion and silence for some more time as Her Holiness Mataji is requested to be present and accept the Puja and Her Pre- sence becomes manifest to all through the vibrations. At that point of time Sahaja Yogis should silently enjoy the vibrations for some time or help those, not enjoying 8. We should always raise the kundalini the balance and remain thoughtless. By practice the Kundalini can also be raised by inward attention. New Arrival EVOLUTION OF KUNDALINI -By Yogi Mahajan (Introductory Literature for Beginners) the same bliss. Price per Copy: Rs. 8/- + Postage. $ 1/+ Postage. 4 In general personal talk on non- Sahaja Yoga matters should be avoided at Available at: the collective meditation. (a) Mr. K. Subramanyam D-II/88, Pandara Road, 5. It is desired to remind that Her Holl- ness Mataji has repeatedly advised us against being miserly and receving anything free in Sahaja Yoga. it would be in our own interest to pay all contributions collec- ted for organising various sahaja yoga New Delhi-110003. (b) Mr. Gavin Brown Brown's Geological Information Service Limited, 160, North Gower Street, NW1 2 ND (UK) London. activities, 18 Nirmala Yoga

 A FEW WORDS ON PROTOCOL When we organise public meetings, we seekers to Her. When we got to the hall, must respect Mother's protocol. It is the it was filled ! More people had come than instinctive protocol of love, that of the little for the better organised programs ! It was children for their Mother-but sometimes a wonderful evening, and everyone got their realisation, including a catholic priest! we forget... Before a publie meeting, we should pray for Her blessings, and for many seekers to Mother's photograph with respect: we come. This was beautifully demonstrated in Paris, some two years ago : Marie had and behave in a simple and dignified way. done what she could to advertise, but had Most of all, we should be kind and loving only had time to put up a Somewhat in a panic, we feared that no one would come. Mother, always unruffled, smiled and said : "Just ask me !". We prayed, asking Her please to draw many at every moment. In the meeting place, we should treat should speak of Her with love and dignity. few posters. towards all who come-and patient-just like our Mother ! It is very simple really. If we follow our hearts, and our vibrations, we cannot go wrong, for Mother is with us FOR SAHAJA YOGIS TO REMEMBER We, who have undertaken this tremen- the uniqueness of our posi tion. This for- dous task, have but a limited amount of We cannot afford to indulge in How much better it is to act in the way H H. Mataji has prescribed, leaving so immersed in our own personal enlighten- the details of the "working out" to Her. ment that we unwittingly ignore the fact Giving Realisation is the most significant way to help ourselves and others, while others. We must active ly participate in the showing our Divine Mother our unwavering uplifting of human consciousness, or suffer devotion. By offering daily the fruits of our labour at Her Lotus feet, we are proclaiming: By giving Realisation, Sometimes we, as Sahaja Yogis, forget getfulness can cause us to neglect the time. importance of sharing our most Divine of lethargy. gifts...Realisation. Often we find ourselves that we can and must give realisation to the consequences. "Thy will be done." we become the Divine Will. Our Divine Mother unceasingly reminds us of the vast amount of "seekers" born during this period in history. motherly way, She makes known to us the age and attention. In her Let us pray for increased wisdom, cour- will of God. "They (seekers) have to get Jai Mataji it", She says matter-of-factly. Giving, it has become the job of the Sahaja Yogis. -ANDREA Nirmala Yoga 19

 THE SECOND COMING TO ROME of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi the consideration and support from our The second coming of Shri Mataji to Rome proved to be of great importance for elder brothers and sisters all over the world, Italy. She came with the spring, nature receiving visits from the centres of Switzer- blossoming everywhere, in a grand explo- land, France etc... Cassettes, presents are sion of colours and perfumes. And again pouring in, the telephone goes on ringing.- Our Mother, the source of all love showed By now we have a public meeting every how much She loved Italy and the Italians. Tuesday: on Saturday we are meeting at S he held three public programs and two ad hoc functions in the morning for those who to a lake or the sea or the country side. The were anxious to know more and more. They blessings of Mother on Italy are many, Her were very eager to listen to Her, to look at Her. About 150 people came al every pro- Ruth's flat, on Sunday we go out together, attention is on us. Many little miracles and jokes happen. Jai Shri Hanumana ! Here gram and amazingly enough they all got is a small example. their realisation. Most people were of very good quality, Mother sald, ancient seekers of a high level, with an instant capacity to walking down the road saw a catholic priest recognize Truth. and radiant to see such devotion and under- a realised soul. Hence, to check with the standing. For three days they went on bringing flowers, small gifts, letters; they priest. At that very second the priest col- tried to touch Mother's Feet as She passed lapsed and fell heavily on the ground. Of among them, to manifest their deep respect course Pedro was amazed and ran to the for the Goddess. Pedro, a new sahaja yogi from Cuba, coming and, innocently, wondered if he was Mother was so happy vibrations, he put his hands towards the help of the poor man. The priest did not understand what happened but, while get- And now, only one month after the pro- fing up, he confessed that without Pedro's gram, they are so deeply concerned about help he would have remained glued to the sahaja yoga, so sincere, they assert that ground, unable to move ! their life's goal is now to spread it as far as possible. Really with people adorned with such open hearts, with such spontaneity brought us, "old" sahaja yogis, a sense of and genuineness, sahaja yoga in Rome is tulfillment, our desires coming true in the spreading very fast. We do not even have an Ashram yet and Mother has already mentioned that Rome will become a very ding, expanding in awareness, expanding in important centre in the world ! Needless the Ocean of Love, to say, we feel quite spoiled, feeling also This second coming of our Divine Mother increase and beauty of our collectivity. In this atmosphere of deep joy we feel expan- (Contd. on Page 21) Nirmala Yoga 20

 The Joy of Sahaja Yoga The transformation which takes place On the contrary, we start to feel real com- after Realisation can only be experienced to be truly believed. So many times I have listened to Mother describing what happens after Realisation, how you are transformed and become a joyful, hollow personality. nalities, filled with God's love and joy, for And-apart from my initial experience of nothing is more joy-giving than to transmit Realisation, which was very powerful-I used to think it was impossible, at least for me ! What Mother described was totally beyond my limited imagination, and all i could see was how much I was still identi- fled with negativity-old habits, thought- e ! It is fantastic beyond our forms, etc. I wildest dreams ! And it is true. Joy can- everything, and I knew intellectually that this was beyond a doubt what I had always been seeking. But very little joy. I persisted, of course, inspired by Mother Herself, and by the other Sahaja Yogis and Yoginis, espe- cially our brothers and sisters in India, who feel the joy of Realisation far sooner than we Westerners do. Sooner or later there had to be a breakthrough ! passion for the suffering of others, and all our attention goes towards alleviating it- that is, giving them their Realisation too. in this way we truly become hollow perso- to others the priceless gift of Realisation that we have been blessed to receive, We know that in this way the whole world can be transformed and that the King- dom of God can be established on earth. It is incredible could feel vibrations, catches, not be faked. Nor, once experienced, can it be doubted. These are the blessings of our beloved Divine Mother. Jai Mataji ! -CHRISTINE New York And so there was ! All that Mother says and has said is absolutely true. The joy was (Contd. from Page 20) there all along. It was simply that I was not allowing my attention to go to it I was still persisting with negativity. And when the alttention is enlightened, it cannot bear anything that is not of the Spirit This is how we human beings will truly learn the will of the Divine. This is the enlighten- reality, to shine, at last, all over the country ment. It is very simple, really : all we have to do is to accept the fact that the game is Har light, the Spirit, The Atman With utmost respect and awe, our deepest Pranam to the Devi, to the Maha- devi. May we deserve Her infinite Love and our surrender more and more to become instru- ments of Her will, channels of Her Love, to break all the chains that keep us in the un- and beyond so as to be the reflections of over. That we have found the Spirit now, and nothing can take this away from us. This does not mean that we become selfish. -FLAVIA A. 7.6. 1982 Nirmala Yoga 21

 A SAHAJA YOGI- HIS SADHANA AND EXPERIENCES Ancient name of Poona is Punya Nagari, hospital. ie. town of Punya (i.e. spiri tual the merit) H.H. Mataji says in one of Her letters that to expose some vested interests and their Poona Sahaja Yogis have fulfilled the Punya frauds. He was never really interested in of Poona, which, she also says, is the place the Government service being able to make of Shri Ganesha. When a Sahaja Yogi own living comfortably from the rental pay- visits Rajwade Mangal Karyalaya, he feels convinced that it is to the people like Shri Rajaram Shankar alias Dadasaheb Rajwade and other Sahaja Yogis that Poona owes its Punya, the merit. Rajwade Mangal Karya- laya, which means the place of auspicious gramme in Poona, was arranged at Rajwade functions is Sahaja Yoga Centre of Poona Mangal Karyalaya. Bed-ridden due to diabe- and is the residence of Dadasaheb Rajwade. tes, high blood pressure, rheumatism and The place is having very beautiful vibrations, numbness of both legs, Dadasaheb listened and like Sage Markandeya, Dadasaheb lives to Malaji's Ilecture from the balcony of his there engrossed in worshipping and medita- tion of Divine Mother. Thereafter, he worked for five years in a Government Departnent in order ments he received from the Karyalaya (place of auspicious functions) which he opened in 1939, the first of its kind in Poona. In 1972, Her Holiness Mataji's first pro- room and got the realization. Her Holiness Mataji noticed him and asked him to be brought to her feet. There, She told him Dadasaheb Rajwade, aged 74, was a freedom fighter in his young age. He was arrested in 1943, for supplying ammunition to the revolutionaries fighting against the then British Government and spent one year in that all his diseases would be cured in 8 days and lo ! within 8 days he was free from all the diseases without any medicine, only through the meditation. Police Custody and two years in deiention. He recalls the fond memories of how his father Shri Shankar Ramachandra Rajwade, diseases were cured, and ā great Sanskrit scholar and a revolutionary and a realized soul had sent him a word not meditated daily from 4 A.M. to 5 A.M. and to disclose anything, disregarding all the then from 1 P M. to 2 P.M. and made so Thus he got his second rebirth, the first was realization and the second when his began his Sadhana, le. Sahaja Yoga practice. He consequences, including death. Father's message, however, worked as a boon and Rajabhai Modi suggested him to open a the police could not file any case against curative centre. Accordingly, he opened a him inspite of such a long detention. He centre at his residence, i.e. Karyalaya and was released in 1946 after a severe attack worked from 8. A.M. to 3 P.M. every day. of uraemia as the doctors could not cure much progress within one month, that Mr. Thousands of men, women and children got him even though he spent one month in the relief from their physical and mental ail- 22 Nirmala Yoga

 In 1974, with Mataji's permission, he ments in very short time. Papers of some of those case are still available with him and stopped the curative treatment and intensi- are very interesting from the Sahaja Yoga point fied his own sadhana i.e. Sahaja Yoga prac- Wof view. Those cured, included cancer, dia- tice. Daily he would get up at 3 A. M. and betes, heart, asthma patients and mentally bathe. After the Pooja he would meditate retarded children and young boys and girls having defects due to children's diseases, body would rise and leave his gross body Two asthma patients were suffering for 30 years and 40 years respectively and were cured after 2. months' treatment. One 61 years old man suffering from trigeminal the morning and in the afternoon, for two neuralgia for 10 years was cured in few weeks. Another had a tumour of the size of Her Holiness Matají for being brought back a coconut near his Kidney and was twice operated upon. He was also cured in short get involved into it as that would affect the for 8 to 10 hours. In meditation his subtle and go about in the Universe. He saw and even talked to his dead father and other relatives. He had this experience, daily in months and then it stopped. He requested to this stage, but She advised him not to sent their spiritual progress. some doctors patients to Dadasaheb for treatment and Even time. The Sadhana continued. One day he had complete self-realization, but he could not understand it. Later when Her Holiness Mataji was about to leave for London he requested Her for his getting complete self- realization. She said that he had already got it. He returned to Poona after Her Holiness they were cured. Many Ghosts were exorcised just by tapping of Mataji's slippers on the chakras One lady possessed by 5 Ghosts was relie- ved of the trouble after 2 month's treatment. The case paper reads like a horror story. Matail's departure to London. Next morning, in the meditation, he saw himself as Shri breathing problem, was actually making shrill whistling sound from her mouth. It Ganesha, in virata form pervading the whole stopped for the day after tapping of Mataji's slipper for 2 minutes, on her chakras. She different holy places like Pandharpur, Alandi universe. He saw within himself, as Shri Ganesha, his own subtle body, deities of was completely cured after 5 days treatment. etc. Above all, he says, that the bliss that he experienced cannot be described. It went on for 2 hours. Tears of joy were rolling While discussing all these, Mr. Rajawade gratefully emphasises that it was mainly due from his eyes. Immediately after that he to special protection given by Her Holiness Mataji that all these could be done and also he was not at all affected by the 'badhas' realization. contacted Her Holiness Mataji on phone. She confirmed that it was a complete self- which were removed. He told that one 'siddha' who had specially invited him for discussion saw Her Holiness Mataji stan- that he meditated on Sahastrara going into ding all the while behind him in order to thoughtlessness. Also he daily performed When asked how he meditates he told protect. the chanting of Mantra 'Om Namah Shivaya' Nirmala Yoga 23

 50,000 times. This resulted in high blood make any difference; on the contrary his health deteriorated very fast and he was reduced to bones. Despite all tests, the doctors could not make any diagnosis and pressure, so much so that one day he was unable to even talk. One Sahaja Yogi Mr Vijay Patil from Ahmednagar visited him on that day, as if he was sent by our Mother, and ultimately said that he would not sur- and suggested that the meditation should vive beyond another 4 days At this stage, And lo ! As Dada- Poona Sahaja Yogis who were meeting him saheb agreed to it, blood pressure came every day and were convinced that only down to normal within few moments and vibratory treatment would help, decided to then he chatted with Mr. Vijay Patil for 2 act. Till then they were watching him help- Next morning the chanting ie lessly, as his son and other relatives are hours. Japa became automatic i.e. Ajapa-Jap not Sahaja Yogis and have no faith in and is going on endlessly even when he Sahaja Yoga and Her Holiness Mataji On talks, sleeps and does other work. This is how, he gratefully explains, our beloved being shifted back to his Fresidence for Mother looks after us. the advice of Sahaja Yogis he insisted on His wish was Later on, when he Sahaja Yoga treatment. told Her this experience She advised him to reluctantly complied with, but by the time he chant first 108 times, the Mantra Om Twa- meva Sakshat Shri Shiva Parvati Sakshat Shri Bhagwati Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Namo Namah', as protection. Since then automatic chanting i.e. ajapa-japa, has become a part of his inner being. He is was moved he became unconscious. One day Mr. Rao Saheb Pimple saw Her Holiness Mataji in his dream and received instructions from Her to cure Mr. Rajawade in the same way as Mr. Pimple had helped and completely cured a paralytic patient. Mrs. Bakshi, another Sahaja Yogi and nurse always thoughtless and ajapa-jap does not Many times he sees the disturb him. visions of Her Holiness Mataji in the by profession, received instructions in the mediatation regarding the course of treat- She says that she has been given His 'sadhana' and curative treatment instructions and ideas, in thoughtlessness, even 3 days in advance, as to what to do till March this year. His younger brother, a next. The treatment is mainly massaging non-Sahaja Yogi collapsed due to massive with oil and vibrations and some Ayurvedic Mr. Rajawade was giving medicines given by a realised doctor, who him vibrations. As a result the brother has prepared them as described in Jnanesh- died peacefully but his 'badha' attacked wari. Mrs. Bakshi treats and nurses him Mr. Rajawade, Next morning, while riding in the morning and Mr. Rao Saheb Pimple his bicycle (please note, at the age of 74 he helps him in the evening for 3-4 hours. was going to far away places on bicycle), Other Sahaja Yogis, tike Mr. J. G. Pimple, all of a sudden, he lost strength from his Mr. Limaye, Mr. & Mrs. Dhumal, Mr. Desh- both legs: There was absolutely no strength pande Mr. Petkar, Mr. & Mrs. Gaikwad have left below his waist. Two months of treat- worked tirelessly and passed vibrations. Mr. Harish Gaikwad attends to him in the meditation. ment had been going on without any interruption heart attack: ment in a well-equipped hospital did not Nirmala Yoga 24

 Mr. Dadasaheb Rajawade's dedication to Sahaja Yoga and zeal to propogate it, his tireless efforts to attain the Supreme nights. Hundreds of other Sahaja Yogis have met him every day and prayed for his early recovery, He says that many other great saints and realised persons also call- ed on him of their own and assured him. that he had nothing wrong in his system. and devotion to Her Holiness Mataji are inspiring and worth emulaling. He is ex- tremely humble and emphatically tells that Her Holiness Mataji is Sakshat Paramesh- war, the Supreme God. Above all, his experiences prove and reassure everyone, the unfailing and at-the-very-moment res- ponse of Her Holiness Mataji, to a call. May he have sound health and long life. May he attain very soon the highest stage of God realization. Now he has 90% recovered his health. all that is left is being able to walk freely, which is expected to take another one month. There is no laxity in the treatment. Sahaja Yogis are still meeting him every day to pass the vibrations. He has regained his lost weight. Even his skin has come anew. He says his recovery is his third re- birth and a miracle of Her Holiness Mataji through the Sahaja Yogis. Sahaja Yogis including Mr. Rajawade say that this could be a test given to them by onwards the magazine should contain at least Her Holiness Mataji Congratulations my brothers and sisters, you have proved your We, therefore, request all our brothers and loyalty to Sahaja Yoga and a brother Sahaja sisters to share their experiences particularly Yogi, in the toughest of the times and have an spiritual side which may be a guideline to (The above article has been writt.n based on the discussion Mr. Kulkarni had with Mr. Most of the Rajawade, It is proposed thar from this issue one article on the experiences of Sahaja Yogis. passed the test. Hewcomers.) "The Sensitivity of the Chakras becomes dull after the first few shocks to them. Then, a human being starts living with all the shocking habits very easily. He exists but in a very superficial way as he does not want to go down into his depths, because in this movement, he has to first face the shocks that are stored within. He tries to forget them. as that helps him to exist. But mere existence is not enough. It is insulting, frustrating, debasing and degenerating. Many courageous people really want to face themselves. --Her Holiness Mataji Sahaja Yoga will help them." ASKING Often, we come up against problems, internal or external, which we feel powerless to overcome. We shoe-beat, we put bandans, we go crazy-nothing seems to work. Finally we give up, and say "Mother, please work it out." And lo and behold ! She does ! All we have to do is ask ! If we have problems with lethargy or ego, all we need do is sincerely pray to Mother to remove them. Verily, we become like little children, and our Divine Mother lovingly grants us all Her blessings. With all our heart and sincere desire, we pray for the spreading of Sahaja Yoga. And if our desire is strong and sincere, Mother will work it out. -A Sahaja Yogi from Canada. Nirmala Yoga 25

 Glory Be To Thee MOTHER-A MIRACULOUS SADGURU O Devi ! Glory be to Thee! Before coming to Sahajyoga, I used to meditate without any guru except the books. In the process, my all the chakras were badly damaged especially Agya and Nabhi. This led me to a state of madness. When I came to Mother's feet I got realisation and that too on the very first day of my visit to the centre. I could feel that my Nabhi chakra was forced to rotate. After some time of this strange experience my whole body was relaxed and I was full of joy. At night when I did salt water bath, I realised that my Nabhi chakra was quite all right. After long time I could take meal to my satisfaction on that day and did not sleep in the night because of bliss I got and because of the thoughts 1 had about the love showered by Great Mother. Later on my other chakras also got rectified in similar way as Nabhi and my state of mad- also vanished, which I never had imagined. Really this is the miracle and today when I am writing my experience, I am really enjoying the bliss given by Mother. Now, here I would like to point out that if somebody had an opportunity to read great Saints, it is very clearly written by them that chakras which are damaged due to wrong meditation, can be rectified only by a sad- guru of high class spiritual powers. And from my experience, one can cleariy under- stand what our Mother is ? I am unable to find words to explain this feeling. Thou hast empowered Thy children to be Thy instruments of Salvation. O Miracle of miracles ! O Joy of joys ! Glory be to Thee! Thou hast come to fulfil at last the ancient prophecies of those great sons and daughters of thine, whose light shone like beacons in the darkness, reflecting Thy Glory. O Devi ! Glory be to Thee ! Thou hast come, O Comforter, to reveal all things. Thou hast come to make the men and women of God prophets. Thou hast come to string together all the pearls on the sacred thread of Kundalini. Thou hast come for the final battle, to establish the Kingdom of God on Earth. O Devi ! May Mother bless the whole humanity with Intensive light of real knowledge. Glory be to Thee ! -Christine (S. K. VASUDEVA) New Delhi New York 26 Nirmala Yoga

 Mother's trip to Lisbon and Madrid May/June 1982 Twice in two years Mother went to Spain help needed was provided and a beautifu! and Portugal, and twice people got realizat- old house was available for the period requ- ion and then forgot about it. But this third ired. And just five minutes walking from time it was different. Real seekers came, and now in each country, regular meetings taking place, in the old part of Lisbon. are being held. It is such a Joy to see how Mother's message of Love is being spread all over the world. the hall where the public meetings were The 27th May arrived and it was difficult to wait patiently for Mother's arrival. Finally She was there, making the dull aeroport room become full of Light. As all the cio- uds in the sky would disappear and just the sun in all its radius appearance would shine. The Sweetness of Her Face, the Arriving at Lisbon, in the middle of May, from the plane it was given to me to see a Under a blue sky, there were new town shining pink roofs, with a bright of freshess I had never seen before; though it was far from being the first time that view of Lisbon Loving of Her Glance, the Radiance of Her was being offered to my eyes, it was oh yes, the wery first time I was seeing it so clean filling them completely with Joy. and bright. 1 felt it was a sign of the Divine showing that this time our prayers and desire would be responded. More and more real seekers, the seekers of the Truth will come and recognize Her as the Adi Shakti, the Divine Mother. Smile, going straignt into our hearts, ful- Some journalists had said they would not come, others answered that maybe, but non had given any definite answer. As so, we were not expecting to have an interview at Mother's arrival. But She knew it was very much our desire, and in the last minute there was a journalist and a photographer, interviewing Mother right in the middle of the luggage-room !! the unexpected turns out to be the Reality in Sahaja Yoga. Beautiful people came in Spain, beauti- ful people came in Portugal, got realization and are now establishing themselves in Sahaja Yoga. But the funniest was that we, so-called Doing the preparatives and establish- ing the contacts for the three programmes, organisers, had no idea about the journa- we were very much feeling the help of Shri Hanumana, in this beautiful game of organisation, Something very difficult to get just play at doing things. Though it is also in Lisbon was an apartment for just one week, and we were told that would not be possible. We knew Mother would not of Sahaja Yoga and then put it into action. like to stay in a hotel again. Once more the list's coming. A very subtle way of Mother to deflate our Mr. Ego and to show us that we really do not do anything at all, that we necessary to be dynamic, we have to deeply desire things to happen for the spreading At that stage, Mother will put ideas in our Nirmała Yoga 27

 Some Sahaja Yogis from England (Marie- minds, will show us exactly what, when and how to do it. Because She is the only Laure, Kay, Pamela, Fatricia, Anne, Roxana, Source, the only Doer. Gerardo and Yan) had come to prepare the programmes of Mother in Spain. Three programmes were held in the old Lisbon, each of them bringing more or less 40 people. Not many in quantity but good a great success, specially the second. in quality. In Madrid the two public Meelings were Around 150 to 200 people, and they were true seekers. Souls of high quality and Another meeting was arranged One day, Mother manifested the idea of depth. going to a popular Fair. The guardian of privately by Mr. Singh, the Ambassador the Hall was going there and one of the of India in Madrid, portuguese Sahaja Yogis had to fake him; Sahaja Yogis very much in the preparation Mother suggested we should go. Approa- of the public meetings. And everybody got ching the local of this Fair, which takes realization, Very sensible people, remin- place only two saturdays of the whole year, ding us what we had seen, liven and felt Mother asked whether there was a sanctuary before, in India. Again the Indian genero- In the area. "Vibrations are there" She sity and welcoming was being exemplified said "there must be a Sanctuary". The with this kind reception. guardian told the story of the Lady of the Rock. Two children have entered a cave who helped the When Mother left the country, people were coming everyday to the apartment and found a statue of the Virgin Mary, which has changed the place afterwards. Nowa- where the Sahaja Yogis were staying and days this cave was a sanctuary people there they were having the follow up meet- visited. How much was the apparition of ings. They would all meditate together and the Virgin in Fatima talked about in the also live this atmosphere of brother and whole world, and this one, true happening, sisterhood among Sahaja Yogis. The best was and is unknown for most of the people, example that could be given of what had just in a country which is said to be so reli- been explained. giously catholic like Portugal. Shri Mataji left these two countries leaving The Goddes - had to come to point it out behind lots of new realized souls. This time to us. How to put in words the emotion and they reacted. This time it worked out. The the feelings your heart experiences when only thing we can ask Mother, and from the bottom of our hearts we do it, is that from you visit a Sanctuary where the Virgin ap- peared longtime back, accompanying.. Mother Mary Herself ?... The statue was now on, every and all meetings will be a complete success; that many many more there, the Almond Eyes and the black long people will come and establish themselves in Sahaja Yoga; that we all live melted in Her Love and Joy, feeling Her Divine Bliss Hair too much similar. People were giving money and when we in our hearts. asked Mother whether we should give some too, She answered smilingly : "You people should, not Me; after all, what is the use of giving money to Myself ?" JAI MATAJI Maria-Amelia de Kalbermatten Basel Nirmala Yoga 28

 ASSERTING OUR POWERS My dear brothers and sisters, it is tremen- dous ! God is acting through us, His love is Do we know that we are Sahaja Yogis? Do we realize what a Sahaja Yogi is ? Are we ready to assume the role assigned flowing perpetually through our being and by our Beloved Mother ? His Divine Vibrations bring us into a state of bliss and joy. The reflection of His The Sahaja Yogi is not a human being, powers and His unlimited Glory fills us with he is a Sahaja Yogl God Almighty has bestowed upon us the bliss of self-Realiza- tion and given us our second birth. Let us switch off the past and all our misidentifica- tions and let us put on the new, pure, spot- less clothes given by the Divine Power. The showers of vibrations have enlightend us and allow our spirit to wake up for the enjoyment of itself. The intelligence of the Divine has transformed our limited souls peace and absolute confidence. A Sahaja Yogi is the reflection of Mother in his own heart. A Sahaja Yogi is the smile of Mother in his own heart. A Sahaja Yogi is the melody of Mother who speaks to his heart. A Sahaja Yogi is the Grace of Her hands who touches the inner part of his heart. and made us understand the plans and A Sahaja Yogi is the eyes of Mother who shine with compassion in the deepest part of his heart. methods of ADI SHAKTI. Finally the com- passion and love of our Beloved Mother have led us to the realm of joy where only the spirit can enter; She introduced us to the circle of all the deities who responded A Sahaja Yogi is a part and parcel of the Divine because Mother resides in our heart. with love and tenderness to the ascend of our Kundalini. Yes, we are Sahaja Yogis and the bondage of love which binds us to our ters, wake up ! We all have to wake up and Beloved Mother is our mark, the mark prin- stand to assist to the glory and the corona- Wake up, my beloved brothers and sis- ted forever on our heart by the unlimited beauty of the Creator. We bear the Divine Seal. It has to shine and radiate all over pride and fearlessness the role assigned by the world, so that people will say : "this is a man of God". tion of ADI SHAKTI. We have to raise to assert our status. We have to assume with our Beloved Mother. Being the reflection of God, the instrument of His Power, should we remain motionless, discouraged by the darkness of the mind and the deception of the Ego ? We have to be the actors of the for truth and salvation? A Sahaja Yogi is play of God and witness it in His manifes- Do we realize our dimensions, our own Beauty? Do we feel our spirit ready to stand nothing else but the instrument of God ted splendour. By witnessing the drama of life we stay tn the centre path where the circulate and act. By acting Almighty, the channel of His powers, the executant of His will and above all His child. spirit can Nirmala Yoga 29

 through the dynamic force of the light of (Contd from Page 13) our spirit, we become the real instruments of Mother, the tools She can use to Build Her realm and the foundations of the new something, think of it, what are you saying? desire of becoming. Neutralise all other desires with one desire. Before you say The assumption of this active Are you saying of one desire ? You have the grealest fortune that you have some one who loves you very much and who can give you all this, you are extremely fortunate. Make use of it. May God bless you-but at this stage, wherever you are, you have to role goes through a full understanding of our own qualities. We can only be power- ful when we feel the power of Mother in us. We can only be confident when we feel Her Divine confidence in us. When we feel this indentification, this interpenetration of Divi- develop faith. All of you require more ne qualities and manifestations, these taith and more faith, that's all. As soon as smooth vibrations pouring in to our heart the faith, this is the source, this is how with grace and full subtlety, then we can vou'll absorb, this is the sap in you which assume the role assigned by ADI SHAKTI. Then we become this moving force, this tremendous power magnified by humility the limits of doubts now, so the faith is and surrender. Then we do not have powers going to work out." is going to grow. More faith and more faith and more faith; because you have crossed we become The Power. It is the last judgement. People will be judged by their Kundalini. A tremendous task is waiting us. We must be ready to cooperate with the Divine, work with Him, Dear Delhi Sahaja Yogis walk through the path of life and fight for righteousness and Divine Justice under the laws of God. Help to everyone ! We hope everyone there is joyful and healthy and progressing in Sahaja. We still remember with great fondness everything you did for us all the Let us gain the battlefield and let us hold in our hand the sword of judgment. Let hospitality you showed, all the care us, with prayers and will-power ask Mother received, all that we learned from you. to give us the energy to tell the whole world Please, if there is anything we can do for that the Redeemer, the Comfortor and the you here, you must let us know. And please Councellor has come and that the entire keep in touch, keep us informed about what universe will be irradiated by the emanation is happening there and give us any advice of Her Love. we you think could help us. Kouz. Patrick 'all the Canadian Sahaj's Jai Mataji Forever JAI MATAJI -Arneau Nirmala Yoga 30

 Respected Mother and Jaswant Singh Saheb, The situation naturally leads one to a Today, spiritualism is in a big confusion.. It means different things to different people. fundamental question what is really the spi- Anything that is beyond the comprehension ritual phenomenon ? What is its nature and of the ordinary man, anything that is strange goal ? What variety of practices it can con- to the common place of occurrence, passes tain without becoming unspiritual ? off as spiritual. Even tricksters and juggl- psychological happenings, extra sensory ers are called spiritualists. There are no perception, clairvoyance, cases of rebirth clear cut definitions or criteria for determi- ning what is spiritual and what is not spiri- domain of spiritualism. And all these vari- tual, what is genuine and what is fake, what is superior. Para- miracles and mystical events are all in the ous ramifications are crowded by followers. Some followers want the gratification of the desires. Some try to escape the The situation is assuming alarming pro- portions these days. As a reaction of the sins. dehumanizing effects of the modern indus- trial civilization, a large mass of humanity is turning to spiritual pursuits for mental piece and happiness. A craze for spiritualism is all their life to attain the divine bliss. Some razing all over the world. misdeeds and consequences of their Some wish to avert their evidence Some or astral calamities or curses. are content with the favours their Gurus bestow on them while some others strive pray and worship. Some appease deities by offering precious gifts. Some spend In fact, there is nothing wrong if Indian their wealth in charity. Some see God in spiritualism spreads its benevolent wings man, while some others run all over the country and beyond. bled humanity of today badly needs a spiri- incomplete faith for all their earthly and tual regeneration all over the world where spiritual well being, while some others the values of life are fast vanishing and life plough a lonely furrow in search of the itself is becoming unbearably insignificant. Brahman. And they all call it their spiritual But the question is whether there is really pursuit. something spiritual in whatever goes in the name of spiritualism today. Some of them appear obviously unrighteous and even ludicrous and there is no dearth of cases away from The trou- society to see God. Some rely on their This is the spiritual scene today. It is all confusion and chaos. It is, therefore, a matter of great concern for all those who where morality and human decency are are real seekers and who have a genuine outraged in the name of spiritualism. urge for spiritual development. Welcome Address by Shri K. Subramanyam on the occasion of a Public Address by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi at FICCI Hall on 18th Feb. 1982 at New Delhi. 31 Nirmala Yoga

 We as Sahajayogis evolved by Her Holi- relaxed extremely happy watching inside. ness Mataji Nirmala Devi have a responsi- A great silence has taken place inside. In bility in finding answers to these questions this silence everybody knows that they are because we care for the truth and we insist noble and they are free. It is like waking on purity of means. We are perhaps better up after a long dream. I know it because suited for this search than many others in it happened to me. It had happened to L us. the field, because by the grace of our res- And as Her Holiness says, it will happen to pected Mother we have vibratory awareness, many more. It is called self-realisation because in this experience granted by the great Goddess the self (A tma) is experienc- ed. Please come and get it. "How is it pos- a touch stone. What happens to those who come for the programme? Her Holiness Mataji's message is very simple. She says "Do you want the truth" Come and get it. sible ?" they argue. They hide themselves, they escape without having the courage to come. But seeking is such a nice role identi- They arrive at a programme of Sahaja- fied with so many engrossing emotional and yoga, sit quietly eventually listen to Mataji's mental tunes. Get it. It would put an end exposure of Kundalini awakening and they stretch their hands towards her. After some to all confusions. Our quest has not been in vain. It was beautiful. It is true that dawn brings light. time, the pupils start dialating. They may feel a bit sleepy. A gentle breeze like a cool wind comes in the hand. This breeze But dawn never comes without the sun. Our seeking was dawn. But the great Goddess is the sun. has been described in the sacred christian scriptures as the breath of the Holy spirit, the power of God the Almighty. It is the Chaitanya Lahari of Adi Shankaracharya sunrise. Behold the smile of the Goddess, But, they do not know it. They just sit the birth of the new day. Let us recognise peacefully in front of H.H. Mataji absolutely her, the goal, the Devi, the Maha Devi. Let us stop our game and stand in the Ya Devi Sarva Bhuteshu Moksha Rupena Samsthita Namas Tasyai Namas Tasyai Namas Tasyai Namo Namah With Best Compliments from: Internatio nal Tulsi Manufacturers & Exporters of: Fashion Garments, Toys, Handicrafts Imitation Jewellery etc. 9/4, RAJINDER NAGAR, NEW DELHI-110060 (INDIA) Cable : 'NIGHTIE Tele : 58 48 31 32 Nirmala Yoga

 Registered with the Registrar of Newspapers under Regn. No. 36999/81 Wich Complmen M/s. The Ampoules Company (Manufacturers of Glass Ampoules) VEERA DESAI ROAD, VEERA BROTHERS COMPOUND, ANDHERI WEST. BOMBAY-400058 Edited e Published by Sh. S. C. Rai, 43, Bunglow Road, Delhi-110007 and Printed at Ratnadeep Press, Darya Gani. New Delhi-110002. One Issue Rs. 6.00 Annual Subscription Rs. 30 00 Foreign [By AirmailEE S 510]



----------------------

1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Nirmala Yoga
BI-Monthly
Vol. 10
Year 2
July-Aug. '82
56
t
"Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns all the religions and
seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga-THE UNION"
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-1.txt 
 EDIT ORIAL
Sahaja Yogis are the most fortunate disciples like Arjuna, to have Sakshat Para-
brahma (the supreme God) as their Guru. Shri Krishna was at first Arjuna's friend, a
close relation, counsellor and a saviour. Then he became Arjuna's guru and imparted
the highest knowledge and out of love even showed the vision of Virata form (i. e.
universal form) for which great yogis, saints and sages were longing. Arjuna was
equally loving and receptive. They made an ideal pair of Guru and disciple. Shri
Jnaneshwar has beautifully described this relationship in his commentary on the Geeta
(Jnaneshwari) and has summed up as under:
हृदया हृदय एक जाहले । ये हृदयीचे ते हृदयी घातले ।
न मोडता केले । आपणा ऐसे अर्जुना ।।
Hrdaya hradaya eka jähale. Ye Hrdayeeche te hrdayee ghåtale.
Arjunā,
dwaita
modata kele
apana
aise
na
Translation
Their hearts were united and what was in this heart (Shri Krishna's) was passed
into that heart (Arjuna's). Keeping their duality unaffected Shri Krishna made Arjuna
completely one with himself.
This is the culminating point of love between any Guru and disciple. Shri
Jnaneshwar and his guru Shri Nivrttinath had reached this highest level of Guru-
disciple relationship, i. e. total unity of inner beings.
Unity of inner being follows from love which comes from surrender and surrender
is the result of recognition. As for Sahaja Yogis their guru is Sakshat Adishakti, i. e.
Para-brahma, the mother of universe, the source of all knowledge and power, guru of all
gurus. She is our Mother first because we get our second birth from Her. Then She
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-2.txt 
 imparts the knowledge through the lectures and makes subtle revelations in the depth of
our meditations. Her love for us is like a fathomless ocean. She ignores our mistakes
and has forgiven all our sins. She guards us from hidden dangers and is looking after
our spiritual progress and material welfare so loving as our Divine Mother. Answers to
doubts and difficulties regarding Sahaja Yoga and meditation, solution to material
problems and instructions in the difficult situations, come from Her, no matter where
She is.
She is present within us and without and is all pervading. We have to realize Her
going deep in our meditations, Let us behave the way it pleases Her. Let us rededicate
ourselves to Sahaja Yoga, to collectivity and for the propagation of Sahaja Yoga.
FESTIVALS
4th August
Raksha Bandhan
12th August
Janmashtami (Shri Krishna's birth day)
Shri Ganesha Chaturthi (Shri Ganesh is
worshipped everyday during this period).
22nd August
Anant Chaturdashi
2nd September
Navaratri Puja begins
17th October
Dussehra
27th October
Guru Nanak's birth day
1st November
Deepawali
15th November
Full Moon day. Shri Shiva Puja is per-
formed on this day, to celebrate the kill-
ing of demon Tripura by him.
30th November
'X' Mas
25th December
Shri Dattatreya's birth day
29th December
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-3.txt 
 NIRMA ALA
YOGA
43, BUNGLOW ROAD, DELHI-110007 (INDIA)
Founder : HER HOLINESS MATAJI SHRI NIRMALA DEVI
Editorial Board : Dr. S. K. Mathur, Sri A. S. Mishra, Sri R. D. Kulkarni
REPRESENT ATIVES
: CHERYL HYNES-10, Clarence Road, Burwood, N.S.W. 2134, Australia,
Australia
: MR. SUBHASH B. PRADHAN
California-90701 U.S.A.
Reva Street,
U.S.A.
Cerritos,
12416,
Switzerland : ARNEAU DE KALBERMATTEN-Binningerstrasse 5, 4123, Allschwil (BL),
Switzerland.
: MARIE ROUGER 175, Av. Ledru Rollin, Paris-75001
: GAVIN BROWN - Nirmala Palace, 99, Nightingale Lane, Clapham
South, Balham, London SW 12 U. K.
France
London
Hong Kong: EMILIE P. SHI - Cliff Rence Bros. Co. Ltd., 1610, Wing On Centre,
111, Connaught Road Central, Hong Kong.
: M.B. RATNANNAVAR-13, Merwan Mansion, Genjwala Lane, Borivali
(W), Bombay-400 092.
Bombay
CONTENTS
Page
1. Editorial
2. Festivals
Sahasrara Day Puja Address by Her Holiness Mataji
4. Becoming
5. Divine Plan
6. Letter from France Sahaja Yogis
7. An Inspiration
8. Latest Revised Travel Plans of Mataji
9. To be Observed
1
3.
14
15
16
17
18
10. A few words on Protocol
19
11. For Sahaja Yogis to Remember
12. The Second Coming to Rome of Mataji
13. The Joy of Sahaja Yoga
14. A Sahaja Yogi-His Sadhna and Experiences
15. Glory be to Thee
16. Mother-A miraculous Sadguru
17. Mother's Trip to Lisbon and Madrid
18. Asserting our powers
19. Welcome Address by Sh. K. Subrahmanyam
19
20
21
22
26
26
27
29
31
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Le Raincy, France
5th of May 1982
SAHASRARA DAY PUJA ADDRESS
BY HER HOLINESS MATAJI
SHRI NIRMALA DEVI
It is a great day for all of us, the seekers, Kundalini rising like a big furnace, and the
that the last work of the Divine, of opening furnace was very silent but a burning appea-
the last centre in the great primordial being, rance it had, as if you heat up a metal, and
was done on the 5th of May 1970. It is the it has many colours. In the same way, the
greatest event of all the spiritual happenings Kundalini showed up as a furnace like a
tunnel, as you see these plants you have
for coal burning, that create alectricity; and
it stretched like a telescope and came out
one after another, shoot! shoot ! shoot !,
just like that; and the deities came and sat
on their seats, golden seats and then they
lifted the whole of the head like a big dome
and opened it, and then this torrential rain
completely drenched me-l started seeing
all that and got lost in the joy. It was like an
artist seeing his own creation, and I felt the
joy of great fulfilment. After coming out of
this beautiful experience, I looked around
and saw human beings so blind and I became
of the universe. It was done with very
great care and great adjustments. It is not
in the limits of human understanding, how
things are worked out in the heavens.
your fortune and God's love, that has work-
ed out this wondrous miracle. Without this
happening, there could not have been the
possibility of giving mass realisation to
people. One could have done it for one or
two persons here and there, but to have
given such a mass awakening would not
have been possible. As you know, In the
It is
Sahasrara there are the seats of the seven
main chakras. There are 1000 nadis or as
they call it flames, and they all have each absolutely silent, and desired that I should
16,000 powers. Every nadi deals with a get the cups to fill the nectar, not all stones.
particular type of person; and with the per-
mutations and combinations of all these
nadis, human beings are looked after. As petals of different colours appearing like in-
soon as the Sahasrara was opened, the
whole atmosphere was filled with tremen-
dous chaitanya, and there was tremendous
light in the sky, and the whole thing came
on this ear th, as if a torrential rain or a
waterfall with such tremendous force as if pouring its color and its fragrance around.
was unaware and got stupefied. The hap- People have written very little about Sahas-
pening was so tremendous, and so unexpec-
ted that I was stunned and got totally silent from outside, and it is not possible for them
at the grandeur.
Sahasrara is the most beautiful part of
your being. It is a big lotus with a thousand
flated flames. It is a thing that has been
seen by many people, but to see it poür that
torrential rain was like these flames beco-
ming a fountain, a fountain of colour, foun-
tain of fragrance; when you think of a flower
rara, because whatever they have seen is
I saw the primordial
to see from inside. Even if you reach from
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-5.txt 
 in the forest; i was living as a normal human
inside and the whole Sahasrara is not
opened out, you cannot see its beauty; being among other normal human beings:
because when it is closed, the whole of it, and they were not that earnest, that artha,
you just pass through an aperture and get and I had to do this work among them. How
to lalk to them about the real world that
exists, and the false in which they live ?
One lady, the first one who got realization
out of it. But just imagine a huge big
thousand petalled lotus, and you are sitting
inside on the corona and looking at all those
petals, all very beautifully coloured, and just came to see me because she was pos-
sessed with the idea of seeking. She
sought and it worked with her. It was not
the happiest day, because she was one of
those who got individually realised. With
this great happening many should get it at
a time. We had a programme in Bordi in
1970, and there, first one gentleman got
fragrant, and pulsating with the bliss of joy.
To remain on that position, is the ideal
position, but then after the silence you are
filled with tremendous compassion and love,
and you are drawn out to people who
haven't yet known what is having eyes. And
then you try to put your attention to the
Sahasrara of millions of people, and then
you start seeing the problems that exist in
the Sahasrara. And even if you desire to
realisation in the evening
Next day there
were negative forces acting in the morning
time, and they started talking of favouritism.
I could see in the atmosphere the vibrations
were going wrong, In the evening I took up
a very strong, firm attitude; I was in a great
open the Sahasrara, it is a very difficult
thing, because the channelling of the Divine
to human beings, has to be done through
human beings. The power may be with fury, I never went into such a fury before
you, but it has to be channelled through hu- and I lashed all of them. Surprisingly, twelve
man beings. All my life Ihave not known many
realized souls. How to get them? How to work
it out? So I started looking out for people, by one. Three of them travelling back got
of them got realization. That was the
greatest moment. Then many got it one
realization in the train, suddenly they felt
vibrations. So the mass evolution started.
and I met an old lady of 70 years, and she
was very perturbed about something very
gross and when she came to see me she felt
very peaceful: Her Sahasrara was very worn
out, and in my company, she would think of
Sahasrara is your awareness. When it
is enlightened you get into the techniques
something else, not the spirit; and her of the Divine. Now there are two techni-
ques, the techniques of the Divine, and the
techniques you follow. You cannot act as
lighten it; but she did not get her reali- divine, but you can use the divine power and
manoeuvre it. For example, the Divine looks
me after all the universal happenings. Every
minute st particle is controlled by the Divine.
When your sahasrara opens out, and your
brain would be covered with clouds and
darkness. Again and again, I had to en-
zation. Most of the people who came to
in the beginning, came
for getting cured. This capacity I had since
childhood. And I could also give realiza-
tion, to a few people before, but they had to kundalini touches the fontanelle bone, a
be very earnest, artha.I did not meet any-
one of that quality because I was not living rara; and as soon as the fontanelle bone
to
me
sort of igniting force is ready in your sahas-
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-6.txt 
 area opens up in the brahmarandra, the presses the sahasrara, and gives pain.
grace of the spirit ignites that igniting force keep the sahasrara in its healthy state. One
and your nadis get enlightened. Not all of has to realize, one's priorities have to
them, but quite a lot of them; not all the change. Some people take time so they
length, but quite the peripheries That's have to make deliberate efforts. There are
how you get your enlightenment. So many
things happen because of your seven cen-
tres being in the sahasrara With the light rara does not like it. It closes back. That's
you see their relative positions. I mean you
do not see, but it works in your conscious thought to come in the mind. If you go
mind. Your conscious mind feels that inte- about with the poison, then again it closes.
gration within you. The rationality, that is
separated from the heart, becomes one with tempered, very much hot iempered, and all
the heart. 1t becomes one with your atten-
tion. Wherever your attention goes you act
in a collective way. All the activities of starts closing. Those people who have had
your attention are blessed. Your attention conditioning from wrong gurus, and wrong
itself is effective. Your attention is very books, from wrong parents may be, from
important, your desires are even more wrong country, from a wrong livelihood, also
important, because it is such an integraled do not allow the sahasrara to grow in it's
thing, your desires and your attention healthy way
So
many books, if you read them, they suggest
anti-God activities. An enlightened sahas-
like a poison; it does not like any poisonous
In the same way the people who are hot
the other problems of the ego, if they try to
suppress the sahasrara, also the sahasrara
become one. Whatever is good for the
spirit you desire, and your attention goes to
whatever is emitting spiritual power. The
priorities change very fast. Those people the sahasrara is, the more it receives
who are primitive and not evolved, may not the spiritual qualities of the spirit. Actually,
find that happening; but those who are
mentally developed, they have an attention is also felt in the sahasrara, because that is
which they try to lest.
see how to raise the Kunda lini.
It is only the sahasrara which has to
grow, not the spirit. The more sensitive
the peace is felt in the sahasrara. The bliss
They first want to the brain, and the brain is the epitome of
the nervous system, the central nervous
consciousness itself.
So
Thay want to see that is logical. For a system,
balanced person there is no questioning at merely by opening sahasrara, the work is
all, we have some people like that amongst not done. We have to have more and more
us. They just became and never question- channels, who will act as the nadis with
ed. They just settled down. They are their different powers, and who can work it
innocent, they are intelligent, above all they out in a proper systematic manner. But
are spiritual; but whatever may be the those people who indulge into wasteful
defects in the qualities, they can be correc- habits after reallsation, obstruct the flow of
ted through your sahasrara. First of all you the nadis, and are really very harmful for
have to put down your ego; because if ego the Virata. Such people should really leave
is there it presses the sahasrara. Also the Sahaja Yoga and spare; or such people
super-ego must be reduced because it also should be asked to leave and we should
or
6.
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-7.txt 
 severe all relations with such people who you are, and you should talk like a prophet.
stand against such a great work of the actually, you have to educate yourself. How
Divine.
does a prophet speak ? This is not insin-
cere or acting, because now you are awake-
The one who wants to develop on ned. When you are not awakened, whatever
Sahasrara should know, he should not you do like this, is artificial. Sahasrara is
develop with bad company, but always have the controlling, guiding and evolving force,
He and so to keep it absolutely ready for growth
the company of other sahaja yogis.
should not have his own holidays, or own
and expansion, one has to watch one's own
time, but most of the time, he should spend growth. Never justify your wrong doings;
If you start justifying, you are thinking about
that. We have no time to think about it.
After the sahasrara, when you are above We have to think of others, because others
the sahasrara, you can see that it is very are also in your brain; and when you start
important that all these nadis must be kept thinking of others, talking to them about
together, and all the centres and all the dei- their resurrection, your Sahasrara will defi-
ties must be kept intact and integrated. nitely increase in its size and its subtlity, The
This can be done even with conscious sensitivity also will increase. The depth
effort, by watching yourself, your thoughts. will also come. It is just like a tree, when
So you have to
come out of your shells and spread your
in the company of other sahaja yogis.
it grows, its roots spread
You start seeing your ego and your super-
ego. You will be able to see how you cheat
yourself and are dishonest with yourself. wings. All your small things of mind must
be given up. You must live like a huge big
How you are enjoying an ego personality, which has to give support, gui-
dance, help and awakening to thousands.
How you are convincing yourself, you are
very good
trip ?
If this Sahasrara Day in France, establi-
shes a new dynamism in this country, am
Sahaja Yoga is for people who are
spirits, so all other things must drop out.
All misidentifications must be dropped out. sure that it will catch up with the thought
One can do it through the conscious mind, of the people. It will resound in their minds,
as I said, one should really correct oneself, their unconscious will transmit it into their
because after realisation whatever you desire beings, and they will start thinking afresh.
becomes part of the divine desire, whatever Now, new breakthroughs will take place, and
you do becomes part of the divine action; people will start going towards truth logi-
so one has to remember that with conscious cally. They will come lo right conclusions
effort we can really find ourselves and see and drop out all that is wasteful and useless.
if we are really honest about it.
y
Sahasrara is the throne for the spirit;
and the bigger is the king, the bigger
to expand is the throne The way you treat your
s spirit, is expressed in your sahasrara,
and this is how you can give realisation, and
stature is needed of a prophet, which then you can become a subtle being.
If we are honest one can see that col-
lectivity is the
Sahasrara.
only way
For that tolerance is
and the
the
needed,
wisdom is needed,
Nirmala Yoga
7.
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Through your conscious effort, you can what is your job. Just try
enter the beings of others and raise their it pure and clean, and this will definitely
Kundalini. Enlightening the Sahasrara also
gives you a new light to see all the suksh- jump into a new dimension of many more
mas, all the subtle happenings in the atmos-
phere. When you start developing higher
and higher, you can see the vibrations as
to keep
mark another step, another accelerated
human beings.
It is a very great pleasure to be in Paris.
today, so that the whole world's attention
should be on Paris, on France. This country
which has been cursed and neglected by all
lights around you.
You may not have any interest in many
things, but will become amazed how the deities, because human beings went
you become master of everything; as if really very wrong. Let all the deities be
your brain is manifesting what you desire.
And this is
who is actually the Virata; so
become the master of your brain, because may the Sahasrara of France be opened out
actually the spirit is master of the brain.
The more you bring your spirit into your ed to the Spirit, and eternal life. It is a
attention, the more the Sahasrara increases very important country and that is why I
in size; its light expands and you become a
more powerful Sahaja Yogi. This is the
greatest thing for God Almighty to say,
"see, this has happened," So for the time
being he may postpone his anger and wrath; kind, gentle and healthy people; but at the
so he can forgive human beings for their
mistakes, their obstinacy and childish Yogis, so that when others see them, they
pranks. Let the man rise to see the glory should see the superiority in them. Before
and the greatness of his Father. Let him
also get the power to bear the compassion ful session. I am very happy about it.
of God. Let him also see the Sahasrara
settled down in this country, because this is
what Krishna promised, the attention, and whatever attention we pay,
is reported to us through Sahasrara. So
you
and the attention of France should be guid-
decided to celebrate Sahasrara day here.
The responsibility of French Sahaja Yogis
is much greater. They have to change their
methods and styles. They have to become
same time, should be very strong Sahaja
the Sahasrara day, we had such a success-
Now I bless all the centres in the world,
develop to such dimension, that he can
execute the workings of the divine through who have prayed or are praying; to give them
his conscious mind.
a very developed sahasrara, an enlightened
one, that they may expand so much, so they
may become one with the whole,
The Sahasrara has one mantra, that
is NIRMALA, meaning one should keep it
clean,
May God Bless Them.
That is
pure and immaculate.
8.
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Her Holiness Mataji Nirmala Devi
OLD ALRESFORD
18th May 1980
BECOMING
"This is only because I have given you birth. dead and finished and gone. "I'm a diffe-
rent person", now that acceptance, people
Nobody could have done before this find it difficult because Sri' Ego is there.
tell you-you can cure others, you can give It doesn't allow you, it says, "Oh God, how
speeches in Sahaja Yoga; you can know
can that be?" I mean to say that you are
your own problems, your own surroundings, transformed absolutely, can you imagine,
you can cleanse yourselves and athers. vou can give realisation to people. You tell
Only with realisation it's that it's all in a
bundle. What a jump it is from the first will all run away, nobody will believe,
somebody, they say, "Oh I know this", they
awareness where it was just a desire. From
here, you started. But all these things that Nobody will believe it. There was a yogi,
were looking quite funny in the first one first he said, "Mother, how can that
when you had desire, from a very subtler be ? He couldn't believe that he could
beautiful forms as they come into you. At give realisation. Poor fellow has been
this time, you do feel your chakras, their working as a yogi for so many years. He
problems, you start again analysing them
The biggest problem in the West is they fellow was giving realisation
start analysing.
they'll analyse it. Give them anything, they They cannot bel.eve. So what you have to
will analyse. Analysis is the biggest thing do about becoming is to at least believe:
and that's how this analysis business is. So yes, you are giving realisation. After all,
maddening for them. Here it is that they're you see it like a white cloth before you-still
but you know you can give realisation.
wouldn't believe it to begin with -same
Even if to
You give them a case,
believe you can give realisation takes time.
clinging on to their realisation, the other side
you say it is black, Hurst Blue! So these
of everything, analysing. You see, the legs are dealings with the Hurst Blue is the worst
analysed, feet are analysed, nails are analy- case. You are giving realisation, see how
sed and they've taken on the microscope lan is suppose to be going to the psychia-
and seeing to it, there the legs are to be trist, he can give realisation to that
used for climbing up, and here you're psychiatrist. The doctor who is going to
analysing the legs and feet, see the whole
treat you, you can give him realisation.
purpose is lost when you start identifying Believe it, you can. But when he says this
with whatever was hanging on to you. So to him, he thinks, "Oh, he'll run away".
now you should say, "Now finished, done! But at least believe into yourself. This is
the place where you must have faith. This
faith that you got realisation through Sahaja
Yoga. That it's a tremendous power, that
there is an all-pervading power which is
accept that the person that was there is absolutely dynamic and that you have that
Now I'm another person.
The greatest thing is in this awareness
of yours when you are realised, you must
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-10.txt 
 power flowing through you, and that you ler, they start departing from you. This is
are giving realisation, and that your brother the third state where your three gunas you
is something special.
because I'm saying, because it's blind, but
you have seen it, but this is what it is when
you see it, you also don't believe it, then what see the desire being fulfilled, but all these
should I call it ? You know for definite that
this is happening but you don't believe into
it, then what should I say ? If you believe
that it is so, that is faith. Imagine faith
means blindness! It's opening your eyes
much more to what it is and accepting that call catching, catching-you say recording.
it is so, And then the faith must grow.
Faith is not faith
can see, but they do not affect you. So in
the first state you have desire.
second state which is a very big thing, you
In the
subtleties are mixed up within you. In the
third state, you see them, but they do not
affect you. This is the third state when
one has to see that they do not affect you.
You do see catching, but then you do not
You think you are an instrument, you are
just recording. The effect of that becomes
very small, very small.
At this stage, it is the power of faith
that helps you. Nothing but power of faith.
And power of faith is the greatest beco-
ming power I should say, because then you
realise that whatever you had known so far record this effect. This is the third state.
has been of no value. This is something
so great and so gigantic and so dynamic. third state-the only way is complete faith.
You become so powerful within that the
effect of this catching is very little, you just
Now at this third state, you rise up to this
It's something so much out of the blue that
you have never known before and then you
get really bewildered and then you start protocol, but with faith, if you learn protocol
having faith.
you just put your hands like this and put you're forced into it, you'll feel bad, the
a bhandan, it works. It does work. Then mixture state is still on. So to develop faith,
Faith is; first of all, you have to learn cer-
tain things about faith; one of them is the
Now then, when I say that
then you will not feel bad about it, but if
also you start seeing that when Mother
does like this (blows on Her hand) to Herself, clearly, "don't you see this is happening ?
we all feel it. Then we start feeling it that Can't you see it is rising? Can't you under-
we are in Her and She is in us; and that we stand" Tell yourself, "Isn't it dynamic" Just
are aware of our wholesomeness and She sit down and think how wonderful it is, how
is our wholesomeness; then the faith starts areat it is. Just talk to the ocean, talk to the
you have first of all to tell yourself rationally,
growing. You cannot realise it because
this is beyond analysis anymore. Only dead
things you can realise; living, you cannot.
This is beyond living-this is what it is. So "I've found it, I've got it" Tell yourself-so
you cannot realise it so you start surrender- telling yourself, you'll develop this faith.
ing. When you start surrendering and the
taith comes in then your awareness rises
flowers-they are better than many hunman
beings-and tell them, "Don't you think so?"
Go in the museum and tell all the statues,
There's no way out. Many people have
asked me this question: how to develop the
higher than this, and these small, small, faith ? Now, it is such an absurd thing.
little, little, things which have become subt-
Here you are knowing the kundalini, you are
Nirmala Yoga
10
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-11.txt 
 giving realisation and turn round and ask, myself that it was emitting vibrations and
"Mother, how do we develop faith ?" It is
beyond me to understand that, I mean, what well. See the main problem was how to
is happening here, now what are you doing?
This faith then starts encompassing. Also,
what I say means absorbing, not criticising,
not reading back, but absorbing it. This
absorption can be hindered by many other
means, also absorption is the only way you
grow. How does a tree grow ? By absorp- Sahaja Yoga is becoming, is awakening and
tion. What is the mouth of absorption ? is
life and that my photograph came up so
approach so many people. You can have,
say, one hundred Sahaja Yogis. You can
have two hundred, you can have at the most
two thousand
You see for this stuff it is
very easy, you just have the distraction, you
pay the money and you're there.
With
realisation. How is it going to work out ?
What Is nirvichara ?
Where
Nirvichara.
It was a very big problem for me
not that I can just give you a book and just
get it and read it and say that, "Yes, I have
got it, I have become." It's real becoming,
ripening, maturing, living process.
how am I to do it ? And here is the answer
- in the photograph. Then your T.V., that's
also modern. Of course, the T.V. people
have not allowed me to go on the screen,
. It's
you do not think about it. Now then, I say
you are not to think, at a lower state, people
will say, "Oh, you know, She's very domina-
ting. very dom inating, I must say !" But
absorption is only possible when you have
faith, and the whole thing goes into you, go
on sucking like a child, the whole thing
goes into you just like a lake it is, without
any ripple, it reflects the complete, entire
creation in it, complete.
Now,
so far, but l've gone on the screen in India.
Only in Poona, not here, it's rather difficult.
First, let them have all the things, then I'll
go, that always has been, so this is what it
is, that all your medias can be used through
my photograph. What a blessing it is.
And the photograph, if you think, is repre-
senting me, I think you're not expressing it
I was amazed that my photographs
are much more powerful than many statues
put together, even produced by Mother
Earth, because photograph has so many
elements in it. For example, you see it has
If there are any ripples, then there's
diffusion, what's
stage of faith
the second to go to the third.
now, we'll take a simple case of my photo-
graph. There were no photographs before.
Only in my lifetime the photographs have fully.
started, for your information. These photo-
graphs also you have developed yourself on
your own, of course with the help of the
Holy Ghost no doubt, that goes without
saying, but you have developed it. I myself light element, it has water element, it has
did not know this photography would catch
me so much. I did not know myself. You'll
be amazed that I started seeing that these
confusion. So is the
which starts from the
For example
earth element and also air element. If the
air is not all right, you cannot take a photo-
graph.. And also it has the ether element.
With all these five elements, you cannot
Ether element it has
photographs are more powerful than a
statue which is made according to what I
was before. Because this is the present
thing; this is how I exist. I was amazed
produce a statue.
because if you have a photograph here, you
can transmit it to another place you can
Nirmala Yoga
11
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-12.txt 
 transmit the photograph, but you cannot important to start developing that faith.
transmit a statue as it is anywhere-only
the photo of a statue, you can. So it has
also ether in it. So photograph is much
more powerful than any statue
it is a reproduction, no doubt, but a repro-
duction of reality, with five elements. So as telling you because of faith problem. Thave
with you it's just a representative, its quite
me because my attention is there. We have
experimented with this. A yogini had a
photograph of mine and a relation came to
her and she used to mock at the photograph in the morning. Especially if they're Hindus.
and say all kinds of things.
You should keap one photograph with you
all the time in your pocket; respect it. As
many as possible, respect them. Not for
decoration, but to be respected.
morning you see the photograph. Now I'm
Moreover,
In the
to tell you it nyself, the whole thing. That's
the worst part of this incarnation because
other things you have done, e.g. those who
follow Christ, they will have his photograph
they'll touch the feet morning time, evening
time, before sleeping, going out, coming in,
they'll do that. In the same way, when you
have a photograph, you work on that with
that understanding, that Mother's with us.
You'll be amnazed how things work out.
She brought the photograph to me show-
ing it had become all dark, black. So l sald,
"Who was there ?" and she said, "It's a
relation who had come and made it like that.
I said, "You had better put it in the sea, my
attention is not there, no vibrations, my
attention has gone away.
Faith will help you. To act just as oint-
ment on al these catches, you won't be
such a person all the time going like this-
"Oh, I'm catching," you'll be seeing. Like
an elephant-walking and all the dogs bar-
king at you-you'll just go along, it's like
You see that
problem, I can see that. You should not
have put the photograph like that." So
there's a very big difference between a
statue and a photograph, because my atten-
tion Is there. Of course, even the statues
which are created by Mother Earth also
have vibrations and they also show they
have vibrations, but they cannot give you
the awakening of the kundalini because my
photograph has my desire also in it. They
cannot. If they could, Stonehenge would
have. If you go to these statues and if I am
there, they make no vibrations, only you have
to put one hand towards Me and the other
towards them, then they start emitting, but
they have to accept My permission. Even
the statue you have of Ganesha-now it's
that.
So the third awareness comes in when
you start seeing all this, recording it. This
is the third state. Then the fourth state is
called as the turia state. In the fourth state,
you dominate these three gunas. You
control all the elements,
At this stage, you just say it works. You
see yesterday what happened (Mother made
it rain)-it just works, you become master
of these three gunas. Like I used to des-
cribe that, first you are sitting in the car,
to give vibrations until it was worked out somebody's driving it, he uses your left and
all right, but in the beginning, it never used
this way. But they do not lack authority
So the protocol of those photographs is
right side, or you can say, the brake and the
accelerator and the car is driven. Then he
Nirmala Yoga
12
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-13.txt 
 I have come down to the first state and I'm
starts teaching you how to drive it. Then
you start learning by using your left trying to pull you up. If you do not drag
and right, accelerator and brake. Then the
third stage comes in when you become the request is don't drag me down. That's how
driver, but still you are worried about the
man who is sitting behind, that you are
doing a mistake, doing wrong. But then the
me down, I can pull you up very far, so only
the becoming is going to be. Now this is
the basic, the basic structure and now you
are feeling all the beautiful things in bet-
ween and all the things can be nicely again
ter, you make others drive. Order here, any- arranged and can be done properly. But
fourth state comes and you become the mas-
one, order the Sun, order the Moon, order.
Order means just tell them, I mean no
question of any domination, just desire,
just say it, it works out.
this is the basic structure of becoming
Now do not try to fix yourself up at this
stage or that stage, because that is very
common with people who are still thinking
about it. Then : "Mother, at what stage
am 1 ?" This is common when you grow
yourself, it will happen to you. You don't
have to determine anything, it should hap-
pen to you, that's all. Allow it to grow,
allow it to grow, but at least you are at a
state where you're doubtlessly aware, most
of you. But still I would say the basic
desire is still not there that strong. The
basic desire, that would be cleared out.
You see, sometimes it happens the house
Now this fourth stage is called turia
dasha (state). Then comes the filth stage
in which I don't want to give you names or
you stick on to these. They are not so
clear cut. They might mingle from each
other and they are but in turia state. When
you mature properly, then you jump into the
fifth state; in which you do not even deter-
mine or say anything; just anything slips
out of your mouth, may not even slip out, it
works. It's a state. There you handle the
whole situation, sitting down here. Sitting
down here, you know each other's chakras.
Then not only you masterit, but in that you
can enter into it. Now, for example, I tell
you. I can enter into your subconscious; into
your collective subconscious; into your sup-
raconscious; into all the areas you see, like
that if I want. This is when you have mas-
tered it completely. When you enter into It; self, that. "All right, that's my car, I have
can be demolished because the basics are
not all right. Sometimes in the basic there
are mistakes so you go down into your-
selves, right down to find out oh, this is still
there, take it out. You have to weed out
all those things, and that weeding out
requires real alertness, but don't get into
self-pity, don't get into this guilt business.
But a very positive attitude towards your-
when you are the master, then you enter
into it. When you're master of this house,
you may enter into it. Then you enter the
seventh state and that is the state where
to put it right." Even if you become the
master of the car and the car is useless,
what's the use ? Desire is the car, Kunda-
lini is that desire. If your Kundalini is weak,
try to sustain it, try to improve it. Try to
raise it. Feed it, feed your kundalini with
you just are. Your being there is sufficient.
Just being there, nothing exists, but you for
yourself. Now all these seven states you
can reach, because I stand beyond that and
(Contd. on Page 30)
Nirmala Yoga
13
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-14.txt 
 DIVINE PLAN
Creeping toward the great disaster
Constant pain is gaining sway
What was lent to us for comfort
Now in pain is forced away.
In these days of no compassion
Filled with every grief and doubt
Comes an answer to this madness
Comes the sword to clear it out.
Not some words-to be forgotten
Not a spell-bound form of wood
Not a hoary gleaming crystal
Nor some spirit, bad or good.
But the breath of Kundalini
Sweeps our every care away
In our swollen eyes of anguish
Joyful tears begin to play.
Mother's filled us with Her gladness
Drawing us towards the one
Disentangled-our illusions melt
As dew before the sun.
Engines of the one in all
She's revealed your subtle keys
And we're mastering every measure
Of these cosmic harmonies.
At the root of Adi Rainbow
We have found our pot of gold
Looking on with childlike rapture
The great mystery we behold.
Let us scale the fiery mountain
Swim the oceans to their source
Trace the paths of ancient rivers
Fly the sun's celestial course.
Let us do the deeds of Heroes
Making saints of every man
Thus uniting Earth and Heaven
To fulfill Her Divine plan.
-Herman Gaddy
Amen.
14
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-15.txt 
 Le ler Juin 1982
La Maison Du Sahaja Yoga
9. Allée Du Rocher, 93 340, Le Raincy,
(1) 381.16.12,
Dear Brothers and Sisters,
testing us again ! By the 5th of May the
house in Le Raincy was full of Sahaja
Yogis from England, Switzerland, Italy and
France mainly and Mother decided to stay
until Saturday evening. We all had a very
This 5th of May has been a great day for
us French Sahaja Yogis. Mother had deci-
ded that Sahasrara Day would take place in
France in the new ashram at Le Raincy,
near Paris. Mother arrived in Lille on Sun-
beauti ful and fruitful time.
day afternoon (2nd May) with about 30
English Sahaja Yogis and a public program
was held that evening.
people were there too.
When we took Mother to Roissy-Airport
Some Belgian
She started talking to two Africans from
Congo. They came to see us afterwards
On the previous day in Paris we were at Le Raincy and decided to start Sahaja
waiting for Her in a large Hall, filled with
close to 200 people, but our Mother had
postponed Her arrival to show us that a
small group of Sahaja Yogis could give
realisation to a large group of people.
Gregoire introduced Sahaja Yoga very
clearly and powerfully and afterwards we
stood at the back, Swiss and French Sahaja
Yogis, and raised the collective Kundalini
with our hands together. Mother's atten-
tion was very obviously with us: vibrations
were very strong and most people got reali-
zation and came back to the other two pro-
Yoga in their country.
This visit of Mother has brought a great
change for us, a decisive step in the collec-
tive feeling and in the positive desire to
spread Sahaja Yoga.
This ashram has only existed since the
beginning of March, but all is changed
since then. Preparing Mother's coming,
organising preparatory meetings, inviting
people to the house, working together in
the house and the garden has really brought
about a collective feeling which is essential
to the growth of Sahaja Yoga here.
grams : on the 3rd and 4th of May Mother
was there and spoke to very full halls.
Many people had strong experiences, and
the number of french Sahaja Yogis has next few months and have meetings there,
increased, but as is always
in small proportion to the numbers that
showed up at Mother's lectures !
We hope to visit quite a few towns in
the case, in collaboration with the Swiss and the
Belgian Sahaja Yogis.
May the Grace of Our Holy Mother
spread further and stronger in the collec-
tive Soul of Creation.
Mother invited some of the new people
for the Sahasrara Day Puja. It was a very
beautiful strong and joyful puja, and then
we had the Havan (fire ceremony) in the
garden. It rained and rained on us and we
laughed and the rain stopped. Mother was
Om Twamewa Sakshat Shri Nirmmala Vidya
Shri Sahaja Yoga Dayini
Moksha Pradayini Mataji
Shri Nirmala Devi Ma Namo Namah.
Nirmala Yoga
15
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-16.txt 
 AN INSPIRATION
1. Ladies and Gentlemen of the present Generation,
With a great deliberation,
I have intended to give you an idea of my resolution,
In a fine piece of alliteration
Prepared by my own imagination,
And stolen from no quotation.
2. Sahaja Yogis of the present Generation,
My idea is to perfect my Meditation,
Which at present is a source of botheration,
As my chakras need clarification and purification-
From the evil forces surrounding my constitution3B
As we physical beings differ from Nation to Nation.
3. Sahaja Yogis of the present Generation,
The thought of Concentration and Meditation,
Is a great source of insipration;
Which by raising your Kundalini without any botheration,
Your Vibrations blossom by transformation-
And thereby enjoy bliss with divine accelaralion.
With these few words, Sahaja Yogis, of the present Generation.
Permit me to occupy my location of Meditation :
Which by no means is a sanguine disposition
To our beloved Sahaja Yogis' contemplation and aspiration,
Leading to a great world-wide Brotherhood of Association,
Which nodoubt will flourish from Generation to Generation.
-S. M. KARAKA
Bombay
It is the Mercy of my true Guru that has
made me to know the unknown;
Without eating, I have tasted of the sweet-
ness of nectar, and without water I have
quenched my thirst;
I have learned from Him how to walk with-
out feet, to see without eyes, to hear without
Vears, to drink without nouth, to fiy withour
Where there is the response of delight,
there is the fullness of joy. Before whom can
that joy be uttered ?
wings;
I have brought my love and meditation into
the land where there is no Sun and Moon, nor
day and night;
Kabir says, "the Guru is great beyond
words, and great is the good fortune of the
disciple".
-KABIR
Nirmala Yoga
16
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
LATEST REVISED TRAVEL PLANS
In USSR
July 18-24
Mytholmroyd, Yorkshire
(Rita Davies)
July 30
Cowley Manor, Gloucestershire
(Linda Pearce/Alan Henderson)
July 31-August 1
Cheltenham (Alan Henderson)
August 1*
Birthday of Sri Krishna
August 15
Caxton Hall, London
August 16
Ganesha Puja
August 22
Switzerland/Germany
(Arneau de Kalbermatten)
August 23-28
Scotland (Fin Robertson)
September 4-8
Introductory Seminar, llminster,
Somerset (Patrick Anslow)
September 10-12*
Caxton Hall, London
September 13
West Country (Chris Greaves)
Septem ber 14-17
Vienna (Gregoire de Kalbermatten)
September 25-30
October 4-9
South Midlands (Jim Thomas)
Navratri Puja
October 17
North Country (Elana Harris)
October 19-22
Diwali Puja
November 17
Depart for India
November 22
Western Sahaja Yogis arrive India
for minimum of two months.
December 19
*Mother may not attend in person.
Nirmala Yoga
17
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-18.txt 
 To be Observed
1. Her Holiness Mataji's photograph
represents Her in our houses and other rising sun. Manfra may be said as 'Om
places where it is placed. It has therefore
to be kept with great respect and all proto- shat Shri Bhagwati Mataji Shri Nirmala
cals have to be observed. It should be Devi Namo Namah'. Naver see the setting
placed at a high place and should not be
moved very frequently. Daily worshipping Agya. If seen by mistake forgiveness should
with vermilions, flowers and offering of milk
änd sugar or chana (Gram) is necessary.
Oil lamp/candie lamp should be lighted in
the morning and evening and Mantras recited. vibrations that protects us. Hence it should
6. Always see and pay obeisance to the
Twameva Sakshat Shri Surya Narayan Sak-
sun as it has adverse affect on eyes and left
be requested.
7. "Bandhan' is the shield of the Holy
always be done in thoughtless and with
great reverence to Shri Mataji. It may also
be done with reciting the Mantra-Mahalaxmi
2. Never stretch your legs towards the
phofograph even in sleep. If it happens un
knowingly, immediately request for Her Mahasaraswati or just 'Om Shri Nirmala Ma
forgiveness.
Namo Namah'.
3. In collective Puja and meditation after
the arti and prayers have been sung, it is as frequently as possible, in order to keep
advisable to maintain the same atmosphere
of devotion and silence for some more time
as Her Holiness Mataji is requested to be
present and accept the Puja and Her Pre-
sence becomes manifest to all through the
vibrations. At that point of time Sahaja
Yogis should silently enjoy the vibrations
for some time or help those, not enjoying
8. We should always raise the kundalini
the balance and remain thoughtless. By
practice the Kundalini can also be raised by
inward attention.
New Arrival
EVOLUTION OF KUNDALINI
-By Yogi Mahajan
(Introductory Literature for Beginners)
the same bliss.
Price per Copy: Rs. 8/- + Postage.
$ 1/+ Postage.
4
In general personal talk on non-
Sahaja Yoga matters should be avoided at
Available at:
the collective meditation.
(a) Mr. K. Subramanyam
D-II/88, Pandara Road,
5. It is desired to remind that Her Holl-
ness Mataji has repeatedly advised us
against being miserly and receving anything
free in Sahaja Yoga. it would be in our
own interest to pay all contributions collec-
ted for organising various sahaja yoga
New Delhi-110003.
(b) Mr. Gavin Brown
Brown's Geological Information
Service Limited,
160, North Gower Street,
NW1 2 ND (UK) London.
activities,
18
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-19.txt 
 A FEW WORDS ON PROTOCOL
When we organise public meetings, we seekers to Her. When we got to the hall,
must respect Mother's protocol. It is the it was filled ! More people had come than
instinctive protocol of love, that of the little for the better organised programs ! It was
children for their Mother-but sometimes
a wonderful evening, and everyone got their
realisation, including a catholic priest!
we forget...
Before a publie meeting, we should pray
for Her blessings, and for many seekers to Mother's photograph with respect: we
come. This was beautifully demonstrated
in Paris, some two years ago : Marie had and behave in a simple and dignified way.
done what she could to advertise, but had Most of all, we should be kind and loving
only had time to put up a
Somewhat in a panic, we feared that no
one would come. Mother, always unruffled,
smiled and said : "Just ask me !". We
prayed, asking Her please to draw many at every moment.
In the meeting place, we should treat
should speak of Her with love and dignity.
few posters. towards all who come-and patient-just
like our Mother ! It is very simple really.
If we follow our hearts, and our vibrations,
we cannot go wrong, for Mother is with us
FOR SAHAJA YOGIS TO REMEMBER
We, who have undertaken this tremen-
the uniqueness of our posi tion. This for- dous task, have but a limited amount of
We cannot afford to indulge in
How much better it is to act in
the way H H. Mataji has prescribed, leaving
so immersed in our own personal enlighten- the details of the "working out" to Her.
ment that we unwittingly ignore the fact Giving Realisation is the most significant
way to help ourselves and others, while
others. We must active ly participate in the showing our Divine Mother our unwavering
uplifting of human consciousness, or suffer devotion. By offering daily the fruits of our
labour at Her Lotus feet, we are proclaiming:
By giving Realisation,
Sometimes we, as Sahaja Yogis, forget
getfulness can cause us to neglect the time.
importance of sharing our most Divine of lethargy.
gifts...Realisation. Often we find ourselves
that we can and must give realisation to
the consequences.
"Thy will be done."
we become the Divine Will.
Our Divine Mother unceasingly reminds
us of the vast amount of "seekers" born
during this period in history.
motherly way, She makes known to us the age and attention.
In her
Let us pray for increased wisdom, cour-
will of God. "They (seekers) have to get
Jai Mataji
it", She says matter-of-factly. Giving, it has
become the job of the Sahaja Yogis.
-ANDREA
Nirmala Yoga
19
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-20.txt 
 THE SECOND COMING TO ROME
of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
the consideration and support from our
The second coming of Shri Mataji to
Rome proved to be of great importance for elder brothers and sisters all over the world,
Italy. She came with the spring, nature receiving visits from the centres of Switzer-
blossoming everywhere, in a grand explo- land, France etc... Cassettes, presents are
sion of colours and perfumes. And again pouring in, the telephone goes on ringing.-
Our Mother, the source of all love showed By now we have a public meeting every
how much She loved Italy and the Italians. Tuesday: on Saturday we are meeting at
S he held three public programs and two ad
hoc functions in the morning for those who to a lake or the sea or the country side. The
were anxious to know more and more. They blessings of Mother on Italy are many, Her
were very eager to listen to Her, to look at
Her. About 150 people came al every pro-
Ruth's flat, on Sunday we go out together,
attention is on us. Many little miracles and
jokes happen. Jai Shri Hanumana ! Here
gram and amazingly enough they all got is a small example.
their realisation. Most people were of very
good quality, Mother sald, ancient seekers
of a high level, with an instant capacity to walking down the road saw a catholic priest
recognize Truth.
and radiant to see such devotion and under- a realised soul. Hence, to check with the
standing. For three days they went on
bringing flowers, small gifts, letters; they priest. At that very second the priest col-
tried to touch Mother's Feet as She passed lapsed and fell heavily on the ground. Of
among them, to manifest their deep respect course Pedro was amazed and ran to the
for the Goddess.
Pedro, a new sahaja yogi from Cuba,
coming and, innocently, wondered if he was
Mother was so happy
vibrations, he put his hands towards the
help of the poor man. The priest did not
understand what happened but, while get-
And now, only one month after the pro- fing up, he confessed that without Pedro's
gram, they are so deeply concerned about help he would have remained glued to the
sahaja yoga, so sincere, they assert that ground, unable to move !
their life's goal is now to spread it as far as
possible. Really with people adorned with
such open hearts, with such spontaneity brought us, "old" sahaja yogis, a sense of
and genuineness, sahaja yoga in Rome is tulfillment, our desires coming true in the
spreading very fast. We do not even have
an Ashram yet and Mother has already
mentioned that Rome will become a very ding, expanding in awareness, expanding in
important centre in the world ! Needless the Ocean of Love,
to say, we feel quite spoiled, feeling also
This second coming of our Divine Mother
increase and beauty of our collectivity. In
this atmosphere of deep joy we feel expan-
(Contd. on Page 21)
Nirmala Yoga
20
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-21.txt 
 The Joy of Sahaja Yoga
The transformation which takes place On the contrary, we start to feel real com-
after Realisation can only be experienced to
be truly believed. So many times I have
listened to Mother describing what happens
after Realisation, how you are transformed
and become a joyful, hollow personality. nalities, filled with God's love and joy, for
And-apart from my initial experience of nothing is more joy-giving than to transmit
Realisation, which was very powerful-I
used to think it was impossible, at least for
me ! What Mother described was totally
beyond my limited imagination, and all i
could see was how much I was still identi-
fled with negativity-old habits, thought- e ! It is fantastic beyond our
forms, etc. I wildest dreams ! And it is true. Joy can-
everything, and I knew intellectually that this
was beyond a doubt what I had always been
seeking. But very little joy. I persisted, of
course, inspired by Mother Herself, and by
the other Sahaja Yogis and Yoginis, espe-
cially our brothers and sisters in India, who
feel the joy of Realisation far sooner than
we Westerners do. Sooner or later there
had to be a breakthrough !
passion for the suffering of others, and all
our attention goes towards alleviating it-
that is, giving them their Realisation too.
in this way we truly become hollow perso-
to others the priceless gift of Realisation
that we have been blessed to receive,
We know that in this way the whole
world can be transformed and that the King-
dom of God can be established on earth.
It is incredible
could feel vibrations, catches,
not be faked. Nor, once experienced, can
it be doubted.
These are the blessings of our beloved
Divine Mother.
Jai Mataji !
-CHRISTINE
New York
And so there was ! All that Mother says
and has said is absolutely true. The joy was (Contd. from Page 20)
there all along. It was simply that I was not
allowing my attention to go to it I was
still persisting with negativity. And when
the alttention is enlightened, it cannot bear
anything that is not of the Spirit This is
how we human beings will truly learn the
will of the Divine. This is the enlighten- reality, to shine, at last, all over the country
ment. It is very simple, really : all we have
to do is to accept the fact that the game is Har light, the Spirit, The Atman
With utmost respect and awe, our
deepest Pranam to the Devi, to the Maha-
devi. May we deserve Her infinite Love and
our
surrender more and more to become instru-
ments of Her will, channels of Her Love, to
break all the chains that keep us in the un-
and beyond so as to be the reflections of
over. That we have found the Spirit now,
and nothing can take this away from us.
This does not mean that we become selfish.
-FLAVIA A.
7.6. 1982
Nirmala Yoga
21
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-22.txt 
 A SAHAJA YOGI-
HIS SADHANA AND EXPERIENCES
Ancient name of Poona is Punya Nagari, hospital.
ie. town of Punya (i.e. spiri tual the merit)
H.H. Mataji says in one of Her letters that to expose some vested interests and their
Poona Sahaja Yogis have fulfilled the Punya frauds. He was never really interested in
of Poona, which, she also says, is the place the Government service being able to make
of Shri Ganesha. When a Sahaja Yogi own living comfortably from the rental pay-
visits Rajwade Mangal Karyalaya, he feels
convinced that it is to the people like Shri
Rajaram Shankar alias Dadasaheb Rajwade
and other Sahaja Yogis that Poona owes its
Punya, the merit. Rajwade Mangal Karya-
laya, which means the place of auspicious gramme in Poona, was arranged at Rajwade
functions is Sahaja Yoga Centre of Poona Mangal Karyalaya. Bed-ridden due to diabe-
and is the residence of Dadasaheb Rajwade. tes, high blood pressure, rheumatism and
The place is having very beautiful vibrations, numbness of both legs, Dadasaheb listened
and like Sage Markandeya, Dadasaheb lives to Malaji's Ilecture from the balcony of his
there engrossed in worshipping and medita-
tion of Divine Mother.
Thereafter, he worked for five
years in a Government Departnent in order
ments he received from the Karyalaya (place
of auspicious functions) which he opened
in 1939, the first of its kind in Poona.
In 1972, Her Holiness Mataji's first pro-
room and got the realization. Her Holiness
Mataji noticed him and asked him to be
brought to her feet. There, She told him
Dadasaheb Rajwade, aged 74, was a
freedom fighter in his young age. He was
arrested in 1943, for supplying ammunition to
the revolutionaries fighting against the then
British Government and spent one year in
that all his diseases would be cured in 8
days and lo ! within 8 days he was free
from all the diseases without any medicine,
only through the meditation.
Police Custody and two years in deiention.
He recalls the fond memories of how his
father Shri Shankar Ramachandra Rajwade, diseases were cured, and
ā great Sanskrit scholar and a revolutionary
and a realized soul had sent him a word not meditated daily from 4 A.M. to 5 A.M. and
to disclose anything, disregarding all the then from 1 P M. to 2 P.M. and made so
Thus he got his second rebirth, the first
was realization and the second when his
began his
Sadhana, le. Sahaja Yoga practice. He
consequences, including death. Father's
message, however, worked as a boon and Rajabhai Modi suggested him to open a
the police could not file any case against curative centre. Accordingly, he opened a
him inspite of such a long detention. He centre at his residence, i.e. Karyalaya and
was released in 1946 after a severe attack worked from 8. A.M. to 3 P.M. every day.
of uraemia as the doctors could not cure
much progress within one month, that Mr.
Thousands of men, women and children got
him even though he spent one month in the
relief from their physical and mental ail-
22
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-23.txt 
 In 1974, with Mataji's permission, he
ments in very short time. Papers of some of
those case are still available with him and stopped the curative treatment and intensi-
are very interesting from the Sahaja Yoga point fied his own sadhana i.e. Sahaja Yoga prac-
Wof view. Those cured, included cancer, dia-
tice. Daily he would get up at 3 A. M. and
betes, heart, asthma patients and mentally bathe. After the Pooja he would meditate
retarded children and young boys and girls
having defects due to children's diseases, body would rise and leave his gross body
Two asthma patients were suffering for 30
years and 40 years respectively and were
cured after 2. months' treatment. One 61
years old man suffering from trigeminal the morning and in the afternoon, for two
neuralgia for 10 years was cured in few
weeks. Another had a tumour of the size of Her Holiness Matají for being brought back
a coconut near his Kidney and was twice
operated upon. He was also cured in short get involved into it as that would affect the
for 8 to 10 hours. In meditation his subtle
and go about in the Universe. He saw and
even talked to his dead father and other
relatives. He had this experience, daily in
months and then it stopped. He requested
to this stage, but She advised him not to
sent their spiritual progress.
some doctors
patients to Dadasaheb for treatment and
Even
time.
The Sadhana continued. One day he had
complete self-realization, but he could not
understand it. Later when Her Holiness
Mataji was about to leave for London he
requested Her for his getting complete self-
realization. She said that he had already got
it. He returned to Poona after Her Holiness
they were cured.
Many Ghosts were exorcised just by
tapping of Mataji's slippers on the chakras
One lady possessed by 5 Ghosts was relie-
ved of the trouble after 2 month's treatment.
The case paper reads like a horror story. Matail's departure to London. Next morning,
in the meditation, he saw himself as Shri
breathing problem, was actually making
shrill whistling sound from her mouth. It Ganesha, in virata form pervading the whole
stopped for the day after tapping of Mataji's
slipper for 2 minutes, on her chakras. She different holy places like Pandharpur, Alandi
universe. He saw within himself, as Shri
Ganesha, his own subtle body, deities of
was completely cured after 5 days treatment.
etc. Above all, he says, that the bliss that he
experienced cannot be described. It went
on for 2 hours. Tears of joy were rolling
While discussing all these, Mr. Rajawade
gratefully emphasises that it was mainly due from his eyes. Immediately after that he
to special protection given by Her Holiness
Mataji that all these could be done and also
he was not at all affected by the 'badhas' realization.
contacted Her Holiness Mataji on phone.
She confirmed that it was a complete self-
which were removed. He told that one
'siddha' who had specially invited him for
discussion saw Her Holiness Mataji stan- that he meditated on Sahastrara going into
ding all the while behind him in order to thoughtlessness. Also he daily performed
When asked how he meditates he told
protect.
the chanting of Mantra 'Om Namah Shivaya'
Nirmala Yoga
23
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-24.txt 
 50,000 times. This resulted in high blood make any difference; on the contrary his
health deteriorated very fast and he was
reduced to bones. Despite all tests, the
doctors could not make any diagnosis and
pressure, so much so that one day he was
unable to even talk. One Sahaja Yogi Mr
Vijay Patil from Ahmednagar visited him on
that day, as if he was sent by our Mother, and ultimately said that he would not sur-
and suggested that the meditation should vive beyond another 4 days
At this stage,
And lo ! As Dada- Poona Sahaja Yogis who were meeting him
saheb agreed to it, blood pressure came every day and were convinced that only
down to normal within few moments and vibratory treatment would help, decided to
then he chatted with Mr. Vijay Patil for 2 act. Till then they were watching him help-
Next morning the chanting ie
lessly, as his son and other relatives are
hours.
Japa became automatic i.e. Ajapa-Jap not Sahaja Yogis and have no faith in
and is going on endlessly even when he Sahaja Yoga and Her Holiness Mataji On
talks, sleeps and does other work. This is
how, he gratefully explains, our beloved being shifted back to his Fresidence for
Mother looks after us.
the advice of Sahaja Yogis he insisted on
His wish was
Later on, when he Sahaja Yoga treatment.
told Her this experience She advised him to reluctantly complied with, but by the time he
chant first 108 times, the Mantra Om Twa-
meva Sakshat Shri Shiva Parvati Sakshat
Shri Bhagwati Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Namo Namah', as protection. Since then
automatic chanting i.e. ajapa-japa, has
become a part of his inner being. He is
was moved he became unconscious.
One day Mr. Rao Saheb Pimple saw Her
Holiness Mataji in his dream and received
instructions from Her to cure Mr. Rajawade
in the same way as Mr. Pimple had helped
and completely cured a paralytic patient.
Mrs. Bakshi, another Sahaja Yogi and nurse
always thoughtless and ajapa-jap does not
Many times he sees the
disturb him.
visions of Her Holiness Mataji in the by profession, received instructions in the
mediatation regarding the course of treat-
She says that she has been given
His 'sadhana' and curative treatment instructions and ideas, in thoughtlessness,
even 3 days in advance, as to what to do
till March this year. His younger brother, a next. The treatment is mainly massaging
non-Sahaja Yogi collapsed due to massive with oil and vibrations and some Ayurvedic
Mr. Rajawade was giving medicines given by a realised doctor, who
him vibrations. As a result the brother has prepared them as described in Jnanesh-
died peacefully but his 'badha' attacked wari. Mrs. Bakshi treats and nurses him
Mr. Rajawade, Next morning, while riding in the morning and Mr. Rao Saheb Pimple
his bicycle (please note, at the age of 74 he helps him in the evening for 3-4 hours.
was going to far away places on bicycle), Other Sahaja Yogis, tike Mr. J. G. Pimple,
all of a sudden, he lost strength from his Mr. Limaye, Mr. & Mrs. Dhumal, Mr. Desh-
both legs: There was absolutely no strength pande Mr. Petkar, Mr. & Mrs. Gaikwad have
left below his waist. Two months of treat- worked tirelessly and passed vibrations.
Mr. Harish Gaikwad attends to him in the
meditation.
ment
had been going on without any interruption
heart attack:
ment in a well-equipped hospital did not
Nirmala Yoga
24
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-25.txt 
 Mr. Dadasaheb Rajawade's dedication
to Sahaja Yoga and zeal to propogate it,
his tireless efforts to attain the Supreme
nights. Hundreds of other Sahaja Yogis
have met him every day and prayed for his
early recovery, He says that many other
great saints and realised persons also call-
ed on him of their own and assured him.
that he had nothing wrong in his system.
and devotion to Her Holiness Mataji are
inspiring and worth emulaling. He is ex-
tremely humble and emphatically tells that
Her Holiness Mataji is Sakshat Paramesh-
war, the Supreme God. Above all, his
experiences prove and reassure everyone,
the unfailing and at-the-very-moment res-
ponse of Her Holiness Mataji, to a call.
May he have sound health and long life.
May he attain very soon the highest stage
of God realization.
Now he has 90% recovered his health.
all that is left is being able to walk freely,
which is expected to take another one
month. There is no laxity in the treatment.
Sahaja Yogis are still meeting him every day
to pass the vibrations. He has regained
his lost weight. Even his skin has come
anew. He says his recovery is his third re-
birth and a miracle of Her Holiness Mataji
through the Sahaja Yogis.
Sahaja Yogis including Mr. Rajawade say
that this could be a test given to them by onwards the magazine should contain at least
Her Holiness Mataji Congratulations my
brothers and sisters, you have proved your We, therefore, request all our brothers and
loyalty to Sahaja Yoga and a brother Sahaja sisters to share their experiences particularly
Yogi, in the toughest of the times and have an spiritual side which may be a guideline to
(The above article has been writt.n based
on the discussion Mr. Kulkarni had with Mr.
Most of the
Rajawade, It is proposed thar from this issue
one article on the experiences of Sahaja Yogis.
passed the test.
Hewcomers.)
"The Sensitivity of the Chakras becomes dull after the first few shocks to them.
Then, a human being starts living with all the shocking habits very easily. He exists but
in a very superficial way as he does not want to go down into his depths, because in this
movement, he has to first face the shocks that are stored within. He tries to forget them.
as that helps him to exist. But mere existence is not enough. It is insulting, frustrating,
debasing and degenerating. Many courageous people really want to face themselves.
--Her Holiness Mataji
Sahaja Yoga will help them."
ASKING
Often, we come up against problems, internal or external, which we feel powerless
to overcome. We shoe-beat, we put bandans, we go crazy-nothing seems to work.
Finally we give up, and say "Mother, please work it out." And lo and behold ! She
does ! All we have to do is ask ! If we have problems with lethargy or ego, all we need
do is sincerely pray to Mother to remove them. Verily, we become like little children,
and our Divine Mother lovingly grants us all Her blessings.
With all our heart and sincere desire, we pray for the spreading of Sahaja Yoga.
And if our desire is strong and sincere, Mother will work it out.
-A Sahaja Yogi from Canada.
Nirmala Yoga
25
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-26.txt 
 Glory Be To Thee
MOTHER-A MIRACULOUS SADGURU
O Devi ! Glory be to Thee!
Before coming to Sahajyoga, I used to
meditate without any guru except the books.
In the process, my all the chakras were
badly damaged especially Agya and Nabhi.
This led me to a state of madness. When
I came to Mother's feet I got realisation
and that too on the very first day of my visit
to the centre. I could feel that my Nabhi
chakra was forced to rotate. After some
time of this strange experience my whole
body was relaxed and I was full of joy. At
night when I did salt water bath, I realised
that my Nabhi chakra was quite all right.
After long time I could take meal to my
satisfaction on that day and did not sleep
in the night because of bliss I got and
because of the thoughts 1 had about the
love showered by Great Mother. Later
on my other chakras also got rectified in
similar way as Nabhi and my state of mad-
also vanished, which I never had
imagined. Really this is the miracle and today
when I am writing my experience, I am
really enjoying the bliss given by Mother.
Now, here I would like to point out that if
somebody had an opportunity to read great
Saints, it is very clearly written by them that
chakras which are damaged due to wrong
meditation, can be rectified only by a sad-
guru of high class spiritual powers. And
from my experience, one can cleariy under-
stand what our Mother is ? I am unable to
find words to explain this feeling.
Thou hast empowered Thy children
to be Thy instruments
of Salvation.
O Miracle of miracles !
O Joy of joys !
Glory be to Thee!
Thou hast come to fulfil at last
the ancient prophecies
of those great sons and daughters
of thine, whose light
shone like beacons
in the darkness,
reflecting Thy Glory.
O Devi ! Glory be to Thee !
Thou hast come, O Comforter,
to reveal all things.
Thou hast come to make the men and
women of God prophets.
Thou hast come to string together
all the pearls on the sacred thread
of Kundalini.
Thou hast come for the final battle,
to establish the Kingdom of God
on Earth.
O Devi !
May Mother bless the whole humanity
with Intensive light of real knowledge.
Glory be to Thee !
-Christine
(S. K. VASUDEVA)
New Delhi
New York
26
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-27.txt 
 Mother's trip to Lisbon and Madrid
May/June 1982
Twice in two years Mother went to Spain help needed was provided and a beautifu!
and Portugal, and twice people got realizat- old house was available for the period requ-
ion and then forgot about it. But this third ired. And just five minutes walking from
time it was different. Real seekers came,
and now in each country, regular meetings taking place, in the old part of Lisbon.
are being held. It is such a Joy to see how
Mother's message of Love is being spread
all over the world.
the hall where the public meetings were
The 27th May arrived and it was difficult
to wait patiently for Mother's arrival. Finally
She was there, making the dull aeroport
room become full of Light. As all the cio-
uds in the sky would disappear and just the
sun in all its radius appearance would
shine. The Sweetness of Her Face, the
Arriving at Lisbon, in the middle of May,
from the plane it was given to me to see a
Under a blue sky, there were
new town
shining pink roofs, with a bright of freshess
I had never seen before; though it was far
from being the first time that view of Lisbon Loving of Her Glance, the Radiance of Her
was being offered to my eyes, it was oh yes,
the wery first time I was seeing it so clean filling them completely with Joy.
and bright. 1 felt it was a sign of the Divine
showing that this time our prayers and
desire would be responded. More and more
real seekers, the seekers of the Truth will
come and recognize Her as the Adi Shakti,
the Divine Mother.
Smile, going straignt into our hearts, ful-
Some journalists had said they would
not come, others answered that maybe, but
non had given any definite answer. As so,
we were not expecting to have an interview
at Mother's arrival. But She knew it was
very much our desire, and in the last minute
there was a journalist and a photographer,
interviewing Mother right in the middle of
the luggage-room !! the unexpected turns
out to be the Reality in Sahaja Yoga.
Beautiful people came in Spain, beauti-
ful people came in Portugal, got realization
and are now establishing themselves in
Sahaja Yoga.
But the funniest was that we, so-called
Doing the preparatives and establish-
ing the contacts for the three programmes, organisers, had no idea about the journa-
we were very much feeling the help
of Shri Hanumana, in this beautiful game of
organisation, Something very difficult to get just play at doing things. Though it is also
in Lisbon was an apartment for just one
week, and we were told that would not
be possible. We knew Mother would not of Sahaja Yoga and then put it into action.
like to stay in a hotel again. Once more the
list's coming. A very subtle way of Mother
to deflate our Mr. Ego and to show us that
we really do not do anything at all, that we
necessary to be dynamic, we have to deeply
desire things to happen for the spreading
At that stage, Mother will put ideas in our
Nirmała Yoga
27
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-28.txt 
 Some Sahaja Yogis from England (Marie-
minds, will show us exactly what, when and
how to do it. Because She is the only Laure, Kay, Pamela, Fatricia, Anne, Roxana,
Source, the only Doer.
Gerardo and Yan) had come to prepare the
programmes of Mother in Spain.
Three programmes were held in the old
Lisbon, each of them bringing more or less
40 people. Not many in quantity but good a great success, specially the second.
in quality.
In Madrid the two public Meelings were
Around 150 to 200 people, and they were
true seekers. Souls of high quality and
Another meeting was arranged
One day, Mother manifested the idea of depth.
going to a popular Fair. The guardian of privately by Mr. Singh, the Ambassador
the Hall was going there and one of the of India in Madrid,
portuguese Sahaja Yogis had to fake him; Sahaja Yogis very much in the preparation
Mother suggested we should go. Approa- of the public meetings. And everybody got
ching the local of this Fair, which takes realization, Very sensible people, remin-
place only two saturdays of the whole year, ding us what we had seen, liven and felt
Mother asked whether there was a sanctuary before, in India. Again the Indian genero-
In the area. "Vibrations are there" She sity and welcoming was being exemplified
said "there must be a Sanctuary". The with this kind reception.
guardian told the story of the Lady of the
Rock. Two children have entered a cave
who helped the
When Mother left the country, people
were coming everyday to the apartment
and found a statue of the Virgin Mary, which
has changed the place afterwards. Nowa- where the Sahaja Yogis were staying and
days this cave was a sanctuary people there they were having the follow up meet-
visited. How much was the apparition of ings. They would all meditate together and
the Virgin in Fatima talked about in the also live this atmosphere of brother and
whole world, and this one, true happening, sisterhood among Sahaja Yogis. The best
was and is unknown for most of the people, example that could be given of what had just
in a country which is said to be so reli- been explained.
giously catholic like Portugal.
Shri Mataji left these two countries leaving
The Goddes - had to come to point it out behind lots of new realized souls. This time
to us. How to put in words the emotion and they reacted. This time it worked out. The
the feelings your heart experiences when only thing we can ask Mother, and from the
bottom of our hearts we do it, is that from
you visit a Sanctuary where the Virgin ap-
peared longtime back, accompanying..
Mother Mary Herself ?... The statue was
now on, every and all meetings will be a
complete success; that many many more
there, the Almond Eyes and the black long people will come and establish themselves
in Sahaja Yoga; that we all live melted in
Her Love and Joy, feeling Her Divine Bliss
Hair too much similar.
People were giving money and when we in our hearts.
asked Mother whether we should give some
too, She answered smilingly : "You people
should, not Me; after all, what is the use of
giving money to Myself ?"
JAI MATAJI
Maria-Amelia de Kalbermatten
Basel
Nirmala Yoga
28
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-29.txt 
 ASSERTING OUR POWERS
My dear brothers and sisters, it is tremen-
dous ! God is acting through us, His love is
Do we know that we are Sahaja Yogis?
Do we realize what a Sahaja Yogi is ?
Are we ready to assume the role assigned flowing perpetually through our being and
by our Beloved Mother ?
His Divine Vibrations bring us into a state
of bliss and joy.
The reflection of His
The Sahaja Yogi is not a human being, powers and His unlimited Glory fills us with
he is a Sahaja Yogl God Almighty has
bestowed upon us the bliss of self-Realiza-
tion and given us our second birth. Let us
switch off the past and all our misidentifica-
tions and let us put on the new, pure, spot-
less clothes given by the Divine Power. The
showers of vibrations have enlightend us
and allow our spirit to wake up for the
enjoyment of itself. The intelligence of the
Divine has transformed our limited souls
peace and absolute confidence.
A Sahaja Yogi is the reflection of
Mother in his own heart.
A Sahaja Yogi is the smile of Mother
in his own heart.
A Sahaja Yogi is the melody of Mother
who speaks to his heart.
A Sahaja Yogi is the Grace of Her
hands who touches the inner part of
his heart.
and made us understand the plans and
A Sahaja Yogi is the eyes of Mother
who shine with compassion in the
deepest part of his heart.
methods of ADI SHAKTI. Finally the com-
passion and love of our Beloved Mother
have led us to the realm of joy where only
the spirit can enter; She introduced us to
the circle of all the deities who responded
A Sahaja Yogi is a part and parcel of
the Divine because Mother resides in
our heart.
with love and tenderness to the ascend of
our Kundalini. Yes, we are Sahaja Yogis and
the bondage of love which binds us to our ters, wake up ! We all have to wake up and
Beloved Mother is our mark, the mark prin- stand to assist to the glory and the corona-
Wake up, my beloved brothers and sis-
ted forever on our heart by the unlimited
beauty of the Creator. We bear the Divine
Seal. It has to shine and radiate all over pride and fearlessness the role assigned by
the world, so that people will say : "this is
a man of God".
tion of ADI SHAKTI. We have to raise to
assert our status. We have to assume with
our Beloved Mother. Being the reflection
of God, the instrument of His Power, should
we remain motionless, discouraged by the
darkness of the mind and the deception of
the Ego ? We have to be the actors of the
for truth and salvation? A Sahaja Yogi is play of God and witness it in His manifes-
Do we realize our dimensions, our own
Beauty? Do we feel our spirit ready to stand
nothing else but the instrument of God
ted splendour. By witnessing the drama of
life we stay tn the centre path where the
circulate and act. By acting
Almighty, the channel of His powers, the
executant of His will and above all His child. spirit can
Nirmala Yoga
29
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-30.txt 
 through the dynamic force of the light of (Contd from Page 13)
our spirit, we become the real instruments
of Mother, the tools She can use to Build
Her realm and the foundations of the new something, think of it, what are you saying?
desire of becoming. Neutralise all other
desires with one desire. Before you say
The assumption of this active
Are you saying of one desire ? You have
the grealest fortune that you have some one
who loves you very much and who can give you
all this, you are extremely fortunate. Make
use of it. May God bless you-but at this
stage, wherever you are, you have to
role goes through a full understanding of
our own qualities. We can only be power-
ful when we feel the power of Mother in us.
We can only be confident when we feel Her
Divine confidence in us. When we feel this
indentification, this interpenetration of Divi- develop faith. All of you require more
ne qualities and manifestations, these taith and more faith, that's all. As soon as
smooth vibrations pouring in to our heart the faith, this is the source, this is how
with grace and full subtlety, then we can vou'll absorb, this is the sap in you which
assume the role assigned by ADI SHAKTI.
Then we become this moving force, this
tremendous power magnified by humility the limits of doubts now, so the faith is
and surrender. Then we do not have powers going to work out."
is going to grow. More faith and more faith
and more faith; because you have crossed
we become The Power.
It is the last judgement. People will be
judged by their Kundalini. A tremendous
task is waiting us. We must be ready to
cooperate with the Divine, work with Him, Dear Delhi Sahaja Yogis
walk through the path of life and fight for
righteousness and Divine Justice under the
laws of God.
Help to everyone ! We hope everyone
there is joyful and healthy and progressing
in Sahaja. We still remember with great
fondness everything you did for us all the
Let us gain the battlefield and let us
hold in our hand the sword of judgment. Let hospitality you showed, all the care
us, with prayers and will-power ask Mother received, all that we learned from you.
to give us the energy to tell the whole world Please, if there is anything we can do for
that the Redeemer, the Comfortor and the you here, you must let us know. And please
Councellor has come and that the entire keep in touch, keep us informed about what
universe will be irradiated by the emanation is happening there and give us any advice
of Her Love.
we
you think could help us.
Kouz. Patrick 'all the Canadian Sahaj's
Jai Mataji Forever
JAI MATAJI
-Arneau
Nirmala Yoga
30
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-31.txt 
 Respected Mother and Jaswant Singh Saheb,
The situation naturally leads one to a
Today, spiritualism is in a big confusion..
It means different things to different people. fundamental question what is really the spi-
Anything that is beyond the comprehension ritual phenomenon ? What is its nature and
of the ordinary man, anything that is strange goal ? What variety of practices it can con-
to the common place of occurrence, passes tain without becoming unspiritual ?
off as spiritual. Even tricksters and juggl- psychological happenings, extra sensory
ers are called spiritualists. There are no perception, clairvoyance, cases of rebirth
clear cut definitions or criteria for determi-
ning what is spiritual and what is not spiri- domain of spiritualism. And all these vari-
tual, what is genuine and what is fake, what
is superior.
Para-
miracles and mystical events are all in the
ous ramifications are crowded by followers.
Some followers want the gratification of
the desires. Some try to escape the
The situation is assuming alarming pro-
portions these days. As a reaction of the sins.
dehumanizing effects of the modern indus-
trial civilization, a large mass of humanity is
turning to spiritual pursuits for mental piece
and happiness. A craze for spiritualism is all their life to attain the divine bliss. Some
razing all over the world.
misdeeds and
consequences of their
Some wish to avert their evidence
Some
or astral calamities or curses.
are content with the favours their Gurus
bestow on them while some others strive
pray and worship. Some appease deities
by offering precious gifts. Some spend
In fact, there is nothing wrong if Indian their wealth in charity. Some see God in
spiritualism spreads its benevolent wings man, while some others run
all over the country and beyond.
bled humanity of today badly needs a spiri- incomplete faith for all their earthly and
tual regeneration all over the world where spiritual well being, while some others
the values of life are fast vanishing and life plough a lonely furrow in search of the
itself is becoming unbearably insignificant. Brahman. And they all call it their spiritual
But the question is whether there is really pursuit.
something spiritual in whatever goes in the
name of spiritualism today. Some of them
appear obviously unrighteous and even
ludicrous and there is no dearth of cases
away from
The trou- society to see God. Some rely on their
This is the spiritual scene today. It is
all confusion and chaos. It is, therefore,
a matter of great concern for all those who
where morality and human decency are are real seekers and who have a genuine
outraged in the name of spiritualism.
urge for spiritual development.
Welcome Address by Shri K. Subramanyam on the occasion of a Public Address by
Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi at FICCI Hall on 18th Feb. 1982 at New Delhi.
31
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-32.txt 
 We as Sahajayogis evolved by Her Holi-
relaxed extremely happy watching inside.
ness Mataji Nirmala Devi have a responsi- A great silence has taken place inside. In
bility in finding answers to these questions this silence everybody knows that they are
because we care for the truth and we insist noble and they are free. It is like waking
on purity of means. We are perhaps better
up after a long dream. I know it because
suited for this search than many others in it happened to me. It had happened to L
us.
the field, because by the grace of our res- And as Her Holiness says, it will happen to
pected Mother we have vibratory awareness, many more. It is called self-realisation
because in this experience granted by the
great Goddess the self (A tma) is experienc-
ed. Please come and get it. "How is it pos-
a touch stone.
What happens to those who come for the
programme? Her Holiness Mataji's message
is very simple. She says "Do you want the
truth" Come and get it.
sible ?" they argue. They hide themselves,
they escape without having the courage to
come. But seeking is such a nice role identi-
They arrive at a programme of Sahaja- fied with so many engrossing emotional and
yoga, sit quietly eventually listen to Mataji's mental tunes. Get it. It would put an end
exposure of Kundalini awakening and they
stretch their hands towards her. After some
to all confusions.
Our quest has not been in vain. It was
beautiful. It is true that dawn brings light.
time, the pupils start dialating. They may
feel a bit sleepy. A gentle breeze like a
cool wind comes in the hand. This breeze
But dawn never comes without the sun. Our
seeking was dawn. But the great Goddess
is the sun.
has been described in the sacred christian
scriptures as the breath of the Holy spirit,
the power of God the Almighty. It is the
Chaitanya Lahari of Adi Shankaracharya sunrise. Behold the smile of the Goddess,
But, they do not know it. They just sit the birth of the new day. Let us recognise
peacefully in front of H.H. Mataji absolutely her, the goal, the Devi, the Maha Devi.
Let us stop our game and stand in the
Ya Devi Sarva Bhuteshu Moksha Rupena Samsthita
Namas Tasyai Namas Tasyai Namas Tasyai Namo Namah
With Best Compliments from:
Internatio nal
Tulsi
Manufacturers & Exporters of:
Fashion Garments, Toys, Handicrafts Imitation Jewellery etc.
9/4, RAJINDER NAGAR, NEW DELHI-110060 (INDIA)
Cable : 'NIGHTIE
Tele : 58 48 31
32
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-33.txt 
 Registered with the Registrar of Newspapers under Regn. No. 36999/81
Wich
Complmen
M/s. The Ampoules Company
(Manufacturers of Glass Ampoules)
VEERA DESAI ROAD,
VEERA BROTHERS COMPOUND,
ANDHERI WEST.
BOMBAY-400058
Edited e Published by Sh. S. C. Rai, 43, Bunglow Road, Delhi-110007 and
Printed at Ratnadeep Press, Darya Gani. New Delhi-110002.
One Issue Rs. 6.00 Annual Subscription Rs. 30 00 Foreign [By AirmailEE S 510]
