Nirmala Yoga Year 2 Vol. 8 March-April "82 Bi-Monthiy in *"Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns all the religions and seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga-THE UION"

 Editorial मनसव व्योम त्वं मरुदसि मरुत्सारथिरसि स्वमापस्त्वं भूमिस्वयि परिणतायां न हि पर त्ब मेव स्वात्मानं परिणासयितु विश्ववपुषा चिदानन्दाकार शिवयूवति भावेन विभूषे।। । Manas Twam Vyona Tiwam Marud Asi Marutsarthir Asi Twam Apas Twam Bhoomis Twayl Parinatā vām Na Hi Param Twam Eva Swät-Mänam Pari Na Mayi Tum Vishwa Va pusha Chida Nanda Kāram Shiva Yıvati Bhāven Bibhrushe You are the Mind, you are the Ether, you are the Air, you are also Fire and Water and the Earth. You manifest yourself as the universe, there exists nothing other than you. To transform yourself, who are consciousness Bliss into the universal body, you deem yourself the young bride of Shiva. And she took many incarnations to save the world, gods and human beings from demons. In modern times, demons of the past have come with decent and attractive appearances. Man has become slave of his nature and goes to extremes to accomplish his ambitions, ending in disasters. Ocean of love as the Divine Mother is, she has again condescended in this world, on 21st March, 1923, to save mankind. Perhaps she has taken the birth on this day to correct imbalance even at cosmic level. Adi Shankaracharya has said "Your right eye being the embodiment of the Sun creates day, your left eye being the embodiment of the Moon creates night, your third eye radiant like the slightly open golden lotus, creates twilight." He also says that due to collyrium that the Mother wears, her eyes become tri-coloured-the streak of red, the natural white colour of the eyes and the black of the collyrium. They look like the triad of the three quantities-Raja, Sattwa and Tama. O Mother. you are noi only correcting the imbalances of the people, but are also freely distributing the divine bliss which could be enjoyed by very few in the past after great efforts. May thousands and thousands more come and drink the nectar that is flowing from your lotus feet. kind that you are present in our hearts the very moment we remem ber you. O Mother, pray, kindly keep this form of yours for years and years, so that all seekers get their salvation and Mother Earth is relieved from all evil. What can we offer in Puja when you are everywhere and everything, including our Selves? Proximity to your lotus feet Is Moksha and you are so *21st March is equinor when day and night are equal.

 Nirmala Yoga 43, BUNGLO W ROAD, DELHI-110007 (INDIA) Founder-Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Editorial Board: Dr. S. K. Mathur, Sri A. S. Mishra, Sri R. D. Kulkarni REPRESENTATIVES Australia: Cheryl Hynes 10, Clarence Road, London: Gavin Brown Brown's Geological Information Services Ltd. Burwood, N.S.W. 2134, 160 North Gower Street, NW1 2ND (UK) London. Australia. Mr. Subhash B. Pradhan U.S.A. : 12416, Reva Street, Cerritos, California-90701 U.S.A. Hong Kong : Emilie P. SHI Cliff Rence Bres. Co. Ltd., 1610 Wing On Centre, 111, Connaught Rd. Central. Switzerland: Arneau de Kalbermatten Binningerstrasse 5, 4123, Allschwil (BL). Switzerland. M. B. Ratnannavar 13, Merwan Mansion, Genjwala Lane, Borivali (W), Bombay-400 092. Bombay: Marie Rouger France: 175, Av. Ledru Rollin, Paris-75011. CONT ENTS Page 1. Editorial 2. Sahaja Yoga the Maha Yoga 3. Seeking and Finding 12 *** 18 The Fight for Collectivity 5. Easter 19 6. Letter of Shree Mataji 24 All Correspondence should be addressed to : Sh. S. C. Rai, C/o. Straw Products Ltd., Nehru House, 4 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg. New Delhi-110002 2. Dr. S. K. Mathur, 43, Bunglow Road (Suite No. 1), Delhi-110007. Nirmala Yoga

 SAHAJA YOGA plt oole THE MAHA YOGA Notl- system is di fferent, and your heart sys- Sahaja, is something that is born with you, tem is different, other brain system or that is innately built in you that sprouts by nervous system is different, 1 mean you itself in you, which manifests itself. Like you can't take it out like that, your brain hanging can see a seed sprouting into a tree. This on one side and your digestive system han- ging on the other. It is one integrated form of organisation which is a living organisa- Now all other Yogas, which go along tion, which understands each other, which with it are part and parcel of Sahaja-Yoga. reacts to the demands. You cannot separate They cannot be separated from this yoga. I the system, but as it Is, our brains are so people have misunderstood disintegrated or they are good at that dis- of Yoga. integrating everything within us and without That would be a misundertsanding as to that we want to disintegrate the living thing Saha' means with; Ja' means born, is what is Sahaja. the think limbs that there are four think that they are separate or different. which is Yoga. When we say that we have eaten this food, it does nat mean that like a bolt it has gone Yoga is not a dead organisation. It is a inside the body and passed out of the body living process. Absolutely a living process. When it is a living process, you cannot do like a bolt coming out. Does it ? It means that you tasted the food in your mouth: it anything about it. So it is Sahaja. At the means that it has secreted some saliva in most you can shift it a little bit and push it the mouth, later on, it has passed through here or there, push It around and all that. the trachea, oesophagus, going down into If a tree is coming up, like in Japan, and the stomach part and then to the intestines they will like to give it a shape, then they and then to the larger intestines. All this will cut branch first and bend it a little more movement along this passage is done another one and bend it this way, that way through the other kind of the movement and give it a shape. But whatever is living which is existing in the organs itself like the is working out spontaneously within us with stomach itself pushing it down, coming from many complicated organisations which are your brain. The sympathetic and para sym- living themselves and are aware of what pathetic coming into play and working it out. they are doing. For example your body is It is a big system and the organization that much more aware of me than your rationa- lity. Say, you are a possessed person. You won't accept that you are a possessed per- son. I won't say myself also because I don't digestive system is different, the respiratory want to get very kind of thing which is in is working it out. Now if you want to separate it: that the *This advice was given by Her Holiness Matajl at London. Nirmala Yoga

 They have to find out the means and riences of people, Because some people methods. And as a result of that probe has when they try to raise the Kundalini so brought forth other Yogas, which we call as called'" say they started jumping. The Raj-Yoga or they call it as Hatha-Yoga, or Kundalini does not rise. Some people star- the third one they call as Kriya Yoga (1 think ted taking off their clothes or may be some Kriya and Raj is about the same) and Bhakti guch sort of a funny thing. They felt heated Yoga and Gyan Yoga and Karam Yoga. All up. So people thought let us take off our these are the methods human beings want clothes and we'l find God. Some people to employ to make the bull rise. When they felt same sort of a grip on the stomach or get frustrated, they want to hang themselves some of them did see also these things by the nearest tree. So, that also is another happening within. So they called it a Mool- frustrated Yoga. Then Sadistic Yoga, then bandha. The bandha' has taken place, beating Yogas, then beating others Yogas something has gripped there. So the Kriya- then it goes on like that, you see, flowering Yoga is that, you take out your tongue from into better and better things. Then fanati- here. You cut this thread of the tongue cism, because human baings find it diffi- from here and you push it back here, touch cult to sit still they get a challenge. "Oh the tip of the tongue here where normally it this bull does not rise, I will make it rise." is wagging. Push it back here at the Vishuddhi centre, they think the Vishuddhi Moreover they haven't got the authority- is here, The problem is that they think the Even those who are self-realised they have Vishuddhi is here. So they push it back no knowledge because Kundalini is not made by them. Like, even if I get this machinery, I do not know how to handle it, how to use it? sing of Kundalini by this. It is just the other I may try but Imay burn my hands instead. Such a hotch potch of endeavour brings They think they will achleve the rai- here. way round, we are trying, you see. The effect cannot reach the cause. forth so many Yogas in this world. And everybody is baffled at it that how it is that there are so many Yogas and this Yoga and come to the effect. Did you see my point ? that Yoga and Buddha or Mahabir or Christ. Supposing the Vishuddhi Chakra which is Then Church Yoga "And what is wrong in here, a very subtle centre behind, is spoilt witchcraft" somebody sald the other day. then the effects are felt, say, here And Nothing wrong but the bull will settle down your tongue gets affected, your eyes get better, it won't rise then. You have to go to the root of cause to eftected, your nose gets affected, your cheeks get affected, There are 16 you see. All Now, so they have tried to find out what these can get affected But by tickling your should we do ? Stand on your heads bull nose you do not touch the Vishuddhi Chakra. won't rise, it won't. So what should we do ? Isn't it ? Did you see my point ? For example, something goes wrong at the centre We should know what is the Kundalini from where the electricity is coming here. All these Yogas that have By tickling it here you cannot correct that that is within us. come up, have been depicted from the expe- one there. You have to go to the roots. Or Nirmala Yoga

 on a tree you find a fruit. All the fruits are He does'nt talk of separation, he talks of getting rot. So by treating the fruit, can you authority, because he is there he has that treat the disease ? You'll have to go to the authority. Those who talk of separation and roots. So these people when they saw crying and weeping and woes and all that things happening to human beings they for- are blind like all others. They have no busi- All are ness to be there. There is no humility about it, I mean if have a red shawl, I should say, I have a red shawl.' What is there to feel Try to understand, this is a very simple humble about ? Imean whatever you are, thing. After realisation all of them are right. there is no harm in saying what you are. Bafore realisation all of them are wrong. when you are not that, when you don't have Before your car starts, if you start turning that and you say that you have, it is arro- med different type of methods. wrong and all are right. the wheel, or using the brake, you are spoi- gance. But when you are there, you have to say. That christ said, 'l am the light, I am the path'. I mean he was not trying to be arrogant about it. What is there to feel bad about it ? So Hatha Yoga itself is done under a person who is a realised soul. Not only realised but who knows. Who has ting the car. When the car has started and you know how to drive and you have become a master of driving, then everything is right. Otherwise the same car which has to drive you from your house to this Ashram will land to somewhere. In the same way, the same thing before realisation has no meaning. After realisation only you start mastered the art of Shakti-pat is the raising of the Kundalini minimum. Of course Sahaja Yogis just raise it like that. It is different. But no other Yogis can do that. It is only understanding. So let us take the case of Hatha Yoga. It is based on centres, no doubt. It is based you, because you are authorised, that you So on "Ishwar Pranidhana", no doubt, all the can raise the Kunalini just like that. eight sides of Hatha what these Hatha-Yogis have done they Yoga. See from human point of view, I'm have boiled it down to only the physical sense. So you have to have Ishwaraprani- dhana, Yama and Niyama and that too before 25 years of age, you have to discipline your- self in a way that you should understand, tion on Ishwara Pranidhana means they what is right and what is wrong. Now those should fix the attention into the existence of who have done all the wrongs of the world Ashtangas, all the saying. For them why Hatha Yoga came into being. It's first that they should fix their atten- God. Not blind faith. But to understand before they are 15 years of age, now at the that there is God, so that you humble down age of 25 are trying to learn what is Yama yourself. Then you should go to the rea- and Niyama. How can you do it ? Just tell lised soul as a Guru. Guru means a reali- me now. Supposing you have spoilt the sed soul minimum. Any Tom, Dick and car completely. At the most you can ask Harry becomes a Guru, is a nonsense ab- for insurance, if you have paid for it. But solutely. He has to be a realised soul and how can you expect the car to come out if he is a realised soul he will say like that. absolutely new, as if it has come out from Nirmala Yoga 6.

 the factory ? A house which is being com- years of age you should be there and prac- pletely mutilated cannot be renovated. Isn't tise under his guidance in complete celibacy it ? That would be madness. So one has to in the almosphere of complete celibacy. undersiand that these Yama and Niyamas and all these things are not meant for us. At least for the Western people, in any way. Now come to Kriya Yoga. When we take to Kriya Yoga, it is taking out the tongue as Let us accept it whatever it is in experi I said cutting it out and putting it back here mentation or whatever it is we have commit- to tickle the Vishuddhi Chakra. I mean I ted lots of mistakes or may be we have been don't know sometimes, your rationality also experimenting, again I'll say the same word, goes out, I think. By doing like that do you Whatever we have done we have done a lot think you can excite this great power within of harm to ourselves, to our body and to our you, which is discrimination, which under- mind. Because we had nobody to guide us. stands each and everything; you cannot be Alright. but by mistake it happened. Now what to have been trying by ourselves of poking do ? So all these tricks which we We didn't want to harm ourselves fooled by that. yourself here and poking youself there. we are just spoiling your instrument for It is a very sad affair. People are sick nothing at all. But it happens, when the They cannot do Hatha-Yoga The atmos- Kundalini rises through the Vishuddhi phere is sick, The whole place is sick. They chakra, that when the dilation of the Chakra want love, they do not want exercise. They takes place it happens that your tongue is do not want scouts. They want somebody pulled inside. It happens that your eyes to love them, to heal them, to cure them to get dilated.I hope they do not put Atropin to dilate their eyes to gel their Kunda- So it happens like that establish them. lini awakening. There is no word of love in Hatha Yoga Bandhas take place the stomach holds the these days because you pay for it. One thing kundalini with the bandhas. you cannot pay for is your love. How can you the chakras when the kundalini comes up, pay for love ? And that's why this modern it closes down automatically so that the Hatha Yoga is just a misnomer. But after energy is kept upwards it is not allowed to realisation you can do Hatha Yoga because fall down. All these things happen within you are purified, you are cleansed, you are us. These bandhas happen which some healed, your wounds are alright. People are supraconscious people might be seeing and wounded, they are so much hurt. They are they want to think that if you pull your extremely unhappy. You touch them and stomach like this, put your tongue inside, feel it. Why talk about big things when kundalini is awakened These things happen they do not even have energy to sustain as a rusult of kundalini awakening but by themselves ? It is a strain on them. And doing these things you do not awaken the none of them are realised souls neither are kundalini. Now did you follow my point ? they masters of Shakti-pat. So that's why Did you ? It is clear now. it was said, ""you go to a Guru who is a rea- lised soul. Go into the jungles before 25 It closes down That is why these kriya yogas have star- Nirmala Yoga

 ted, this jumping has started. Even the pace of an ant and they fix your kundalini nudity has started. All this as a result of by inches there and they say do not lead any some people who are tyring to raise the adharmic life, you have to lead a very vir- kundalini. Even in the centre which it rises tuous life, like a horse, you see, when you all these things happen is not alright you are sick, your heart is blinds around so they have to train the horse working, labouring very hard to look after before it starts really running the race. But your physical being, you try to make it even with this the most important is the love of weaker by taking these strenuous things. the grand parents who are with them, in And by using the other way round methods, those days they used to be-to look after as I told you, you also spoil your instrument the children and the love of the Guru and like the electricity has to come so the elec- the training and the discipline of the own tricity must flow from there If I start blowing self. The gurus who take money from you from here or poking trom here, with frusta- what are they going to train you up in ? tion also breaking this one here electricity Business management or dubious methods is not going to come, only this wili be of cheating ? finished. Do you follow my clear cut idea ? beautifully blended with their love, with their It is very clear that if you are going to knowledge and their whole understanding spoil your awn instrument you are not that it has a direct affect on the character going to get the energy to rise within you When your health have to train the horse you put these two Their own lives were so and the personality of the pupil. While now But one who is a realised soul he would in India no body can write epic like Rama's. We do not have any Ramas now. We won't tell you first of all he may raise of your have narhaps. They only write stories. Now kundalini, minimum, awaken your kundalini and ask you to make way for the kundalini to we have poems coming out of India like rise gradually. Human beings when they your horrible Lord Byron, he is born in India now. He has left your country. So like that all the dynamism in literature is also raise their kundalini they raise it by every chakra. They br.ng the kundalini to, say, finished because there is no ideal before Mooladhara, of course the, cannot touch it. The kundalini would come upło, say, nabhi at the most. Then how to keep it there so they will say, "eat less, do not take away thing to our Guru (so called) we see their Mour attention too much, you must eat very ives The impression that we have within the people. They cannot think of a perfect personality. So the epics are different and they say everywhere we go to learn these little food so that Ihere is no much attention on food. You must be detached." This is before 25 years of age. "Do not strave too much. Eat at regular intervals Do not pay much attention to anywhere outside" so that the attention is kept there so the kundalini same thing. It is described by great saints does not drop down from the little inch of in India that those Jalunder Bandhas us is also just the same and they cannot s teach anything unless and until they them- selves have the light. Now this Kriya Yoga is also just the progress it has made in 25 years. and all these bandhas take place, means They are born again and they move at the the bondage take place in the stomach in Nirmala Yoga

 the heart and all these granthis are broken. Now still you want to have your crutches Yes, it happens in you also when the kunda- because you are identified with them. So lini rises. it does happen because I am you go back to your crutches and again quite a big master. I do everything myself. want to become lame. This is just acting I do not leave anything to you, till you have go ng on for some time. But if you act for got it. Only this thing you have to do is to a long period you become lame. Because freely choosing the path of self realisation. you have been playing games, you see. And That is the only thing you have to do "to be absolutely free": In all your freedom you accept yourself that you are great. And that have to accept Sahaja Yoga. If I find you have not chosen it by your freedom you get there now you are a light. You have to out of it, very fast, you would not be there. accept that you are a light now. You are You will simply run away. if not, I will see to it that you run away. now the game is over. So you have to you have got it now within yourself. It is not the same you were before and you are transformed into this flower. have faith in yourself and confidence in you You should Some one has to understand these Margas, all these paths, even like people like that with bad experiences, in- Bhakti. Ihave told you about three types of diferent experiences, you do not want to bhaktas. One who are asking for kama. So helieve that there can be an experience of all Because you have been identified with many have come to me for, say, cures, so many of them. It is a good thing. It is a But if you understand it a little bit you will good chance for me. Then they get cured; settle down nicely and Iam here to make then they have that love since they are you the master of it absolutely the complete Mumukshus and they can become very great mastery over all this. Sahaja yogis. In India there are many who have come like that they first come for treat- ment and bacome very great Sahaia yogis. have to worry about anything else. All the So they can pass through all these various yogás are at your feet. You just raise your that kind. You do not want to accept it. When Maha yoga comes in, you do not hands just like this and the kundalini will stages. rise. It is a fact you just try. Anybody is So one has to understand that this is the sick, you put your hands like this the person time of Mahayoga. Where all these Antar is going to be alright. Try yourself. yoga means all these happenings inside take place automatically. I have something to do with your kundalini very much and she point of Sahaja Yoga. Once you achieve it knows me very well too. So much so that you do not have to do anything else. Then as soon as she sees me she is up there so you become that because only everything happy. And the first impact is so great you works for the Becoming and if there is feel she is got it. She rises with such something that just gives you the whole thumping joy, you get it. But again you go thing, then why should you do it. All things back to your crutches. Even you have lost that have happned to you after you have all your troubles and everything finished. come to sahaja yoga I am going to give you This is Maha yoga: The culimination Nirmala Yoga

 a list of those and what are they are called a name to only one person in his life time. in Sanskrit language. Here these Dick, Tom and Harry are giving names like they are distributing, I do not Thousands of years people have had to know what ? Nothing is more easily avail- work for it. But you have got it just like that. able more It is a fact. It is difficult to accept that you things. If I told these Indians they will know have got just like that without doing any (इन लोगों को एक मंत्र दिया, 'आइन्गा' एक दिया hard any big exercises, is not it: But just हिंगा। तुमको तो मायूम है मतलब ) wait and see what you have got. Of course some people do not get it because there is a problem. Some problem is there. But do rity which you can use and every mantra not bother, it will work out. But those who which you say will be awakened. You know got it should know that they have got it that after realisation it is such a wonderful because of something and that something thing to see that even if you are not yet out you have to discover. That is what you have of your possession still you work it out. to find out for yourself. There is a reason Still nothing happens to your kundalini rai- why you have got it like that. Like mantras sing system, nothing happens to that, still also, somebody told me that there is a you can raise the kundalini. Isn't it? Still you guru who gives mantras according to the can give realisation to people. You may be age. It is all nonsense. Complete nonsense possessed all this time, fighting with the it is. You see, even a realised soul would spirit but here with one hand you are raising not give you a mantra, that is why it was kundalini automatically. regarded as a great thing if some body gave you a mantra. Now every Dick, Tom and Harry like a donkey brazes in your ears and to possess you. You are feeling them with you think, "I have got." They are trying to befoo! you, they do not know they are be- are raising the kundalini. Nothing would go fooling themselves. Whatever they have wrong with the person whose kundalini you done they will have to pay very heavily. than these names of horrible इ You sould have some sort of an autho- There are lots of spirits which are trying one hand that side and with one hand you are raising. To that purity. Otherwise to give mantra and to take mantra a person has So mantras are never given just like that to starve for seven days. Not to see a you have to know various points of a person, man's face or a woman's face. All sorts of as to, who is your kula-devata, the worship vidhis (fAN) are there, then only you can get of your family, what is your personal wor- It. There some people tell the discipile to shipping God, what is your horoscope, what wash their hands 108 times every day. All are the stars you are catching. At this sorts of these neti (a) kriyas and all that point giving of the mantras, the time is to be has to be done before a mantra is given. It determined, at a particular time of the horo- is a big ritual. Why ? Because you are so scope what is the time of the horoscope vulnerable. It is like a phosphorus. And that tallies with the Guru's horoscope. That you cannot put phosphorous into some is why people used to have one or two people. body's hand. You have to make all arrange- a person like Gyaneshwara gave ments till you can do it safely. Even 10 Nirmala Yoga

 But supposing you become all powerful to you. Who knows everything. All about it. then what ? Everything becomes a child's Somebody who has done all this who knows play. Everything becomes so simple. You all the tricks of trade and also knows you are raising the kundalini. You know there very well, though still I am learning. are centres. You can raise it through the centres, You know how to awaken them. That is why it is Mahayoga. About human beings 1 have still to learn a lot. They can be quite queer. I do not know why they behave like this. Cannot under- It had to be this way, sometime, other- stand, Oh God It is a great revelation some- wise how are we going to save this world ? times when you see human beings, how they How this creation is to be justified ? We hehave. Very interesting, Very interesting have to find. I mean God has to find some creature, I must say, they never behave the method by which all of you who are seeking same way. You cannot predict. Most unpre- Him are to be blessed, and that he should dictable. Do not know, what they will come be manifested so that His work should be out with ? Very interesting. After Sahaja THNT completed. yoga you will also enjoy very much. So this is Mahayoga which encompasses all the yogas. There is no need, now to go This is about so many yogas I have told you. Now if you have any questions ask me sensible cnes, again I say. me questions because I have told you in a to stone ages to come back to human slage. It is something like that. Or else you can say that now if I have to go to India, Ineed go like Columbus and end up in short way but later I will give you the com- Ask plete idea. America. May God bless you ! Somebody who knows the way has come IN RESPONSE TO A QUESTION MOTHER ANSWERED THUS... Now this lama business is all wrong; alli being blessed and the desire of God is the must say very frankly. They do some tricks shakti. And the desire of God is that He to spoil this instrument. Hypnotise. Do all loves you. His desire is to give you all His kinds of things. It has brought about lots powers and all his loving capacity. This is of problems. You have not got it so it is a little problem, dormant. So when it rises, His desire is does not matter. You have to little bit co- fulfilled. And that is how you get your ful- operate with me and you will get it. You filment. Unless and until you are God, must get it. It is my desire. That is your you cannot command desire of God, But desire also. We meet on this point. Now everybody has got it. His desire. It is placed within you and is after realisation He gives you, bestows His power that you can manoeuvre His desire. Kundalini is the desire oi God. Is not You can raise the kundalini in the people desire for God-is the desire of God itself. which is the desire of God. And you can So it can be only awakened by that desire. make Him desire. That is the greatest one It is the desire of God within you that is can achieve. Nirmala Yoga 11

 SEEKING AND FINDING by JASON COPELAND When I look back at the longings and of religion was to drug the populace into passions I felt before meeting Mother, it is cringing submission to the property own- hard to discern how I merited the title of ing classes and bureaucrats with spurious I have to look c'osely into the hopes of a better life after death. It should jumble of aims and conflicting desires that be remembered here that Christians do not moved my life then, and see if any of it had believe in reincarnation, so their despair- and drive to ingratiate themselves with authority-is thus total. Religion seemed to me to be the ultimate fraud, the sickest seeker any consistent thread. FLE In fact there were several. Religion was not noticeably one of them; I was brought con trick played in the history of the uni- up a Catholic in the dogmatic Irish tradition, verse, the cruellest and most foul traduction and hated the Catholic Church with a violent of the human spirit that the perversity of the rage born of the brutal, insansitive, mindless human spirit could concoct. terror I had recelved from it. I didn't grow up in a happy home, my parenis broke up entirely without prejudice as to the question So much for religion. That of course was when I was small and after that all I remem- of whether or not God exists. I went ber is unhappiness and fear. Everything through several different stages on that one, seemed to be a sin, especially speaking to adults they didn't want to hear what you ometimes that he did but was busy else- said. Religion to me means black clothing, where on a less ambitious project than miserable old men putting the frighteners on trving to create intelligent life on Earth, small children, mystifying ceremonies in a sometimes just that God must be the long-dead language, and violent punish- essence of cruelty and hardness to allow ments for the slightest sin (especially if it such brutality, violence, injustice and sava- sometimes believing that God doesn't exist, was fun or involved thinking for oneself) and ultimately enternal damnation to a hell of dope-smoking revolutionary hippie for some sadistic tortures in which burning flesh vears, I looked at one of the varieties of seemed to be the main component, by a imported oriental mysticism then available vindictive elderly male deity with no sense in England, a pouty-looking brat of an alle- of humour. gery to continue. In 1971, having been a ged Guru called Guru Maharaj ji, who was then about thirteen years old. His acolytes That was my early view of religion. As I said many interesting things about spiritua- grew up and found out Just how many lity and the knowledge", and impressed me true faiths there are, I concluded that Marx with what seemed to my misted eyes to be a was right, and the whole and only purpose degree of sincerity and depth that I had not 12 Nirmala Yoga

 found elsewhere, so I decided to try it. I large, loving, forgiving, great-hearted, gene- wasn't at all sure that I possessed the rous people who shone with the laughter of requisite degree of sincerity since my main infinite love I was never very interested in motive for looking for God seemed to be a the rest of the gurus that battened on the desire to escape from the suicidal lunatic detritus of the druggy generation after that, asylum I found Earth to be, but I was suffi- so in the following decade I went back into ciently motivated not to wanf to miss out on the revolution in its many forms, hoping to God and real love at last if this was It, sol build a belter world. I got into the clai- hung around for long enough to persuade mants' Union's struggles for justice for the the "mahatmas" of my interest and even- sick and unemployed, into squatting strug- tually asked for "the knowledge". On the gles for justice for the homeless, Into law appointed day, was taken with several centres, therapy and the "growth move- other postulants to an upstairs room, and ment", housing co-pps, and lots of other after the introductory "satsang" was shown efforts intended as blows against the empire four meditation techniques with which I tried öf mammon, It was a great adventure and to meditate for a few months. a I learned much, bacame good at administration, law, writing The movement in Britain was much popu- and other tasks, arnd ended up making my lated by not very bright young people whose living in housing administration and social rejection of intellectuality seemed mainly to security advice. I spent most of my spare in meetings, and saw almost everything for more than ten words. That was the first as a political struggle. The trouble was, thing that made me suspicious. I could most of the rest of humanity didn't seem to see the need in spiritual pursuits to bring grasr that view, and the situation on the the rational mind to a recognition of the planet as a whole went on getting worse, narrowness of its own limits, but the extent with wars and battles on the increase daily, of the willing mindlessness of little fatso's socialists and other fighters for human devotees seemed to me to mock the dignity rights and dignity getting mauled, the rich of man and God, and to insult the tools God getting richer every day by robbing the poor gave man. Secondly the abject abnegation and the man in the street getting more in- of ego espoused by the premies seemed to sular and apathetic all the time. The result produce an unhealthily degrading effect, an of that was that 1 took increasing solace in atmosphere of self-hatred rather than one my other two consuming passions, alcohol couldn't and women, when I became too tired or great Iraining ground; stem from their inability to pursue a thought time of sincere and warm humility. I c understand what sort of God would want to despondent to work myself to distraction. be worshipped by such cringing cyphers as Marriage as an institution had no credibility the long-term devotees made of themselves in my view; my pärents were disastrously -at any rate, such a mean, spiteful and mismatched and couldn't cope with each power-hungry deity wasn't the God I wanted other at all, and many friends had parents -the God I was looking for was warm and who stayed together for decades in silent generous and full of love, which fat brat visibly misery and consuming bitterness "for the wasn't. I had always envisaged saints and sake of the children" and multiplied every- Nirmala Yoga 13

 one's unhappiness by so doing. So life for with ane of the frequent colds that my imbi- me was a series of attempts to love a woman bing and smoking habits left mme prey to, that failed or succeeded for only a short when the same girlfriend dropped in with her Sahaja Yogi friend in tow. That lady breezed in smiling and laughing and saying encouraging things, and her freshness, time. That then was what my life consisted of: unending work in the cause of creating a nurity and laughing warmth made the most better society-with fewer and fewer peopie profound impression on me. Thus were profound impression on me. two seeds planted which were before very believing in it, and me beginning to doubt the ability of humans to behave rationally in their own interest- booze taking its slow long to bear the greatest possible fruit. Though for the moment my conscious mind forgot about them (thank God it did that in- stead of messing the memory around with rationalisations) the impressions created by the two encounters stayed with me, quicken- ing my vibrations, and vere later to return to consclousness with devastating effect. but mounting toll on my hiealth, and women not giving me the warm and gentle love I sought nor accepting what I offered. A threefold path that led nowhere. But before Idescribe the simultaneous end of these paths, I shall mention a couple of incidents along the way which were to have a much greater significance than was at first But let us return to what happend "before". In 1980 I knew much despair. apparent. In spring 1979 my then girl friend showed Lunatics in governments throughout the me a small picture of Mataji. She had been world were talking increasingly loudly about taken to a meeting by a friend, and thought nuclear weapons, and a climate of tension Mother was very nice but wasn't into having was being created which as a student of a guru at that particular moment. I looked history I recognised, and which terrified me closely at the picture and thought how lovely to the depths of my being. Meanwhile ex and warm She looked, and what a lovely ploiters seeking profit continued apace to idea it would be to have a lady guru if you strip the planet of all the resources they were going to have one at all I thought could thieve from it, whole species of that was just the sort of joke that God (the mals were being wiped out, and the very warm loving God I was ater that is) would capacity of the Earth to support life was play on people's expectations, as God is al- being systematically destroyed. The burning ways thought of as exclusively male in the of the Amazonian forests particularly frigh- west. But I wasn't into having a Guru at tened me-with the amount of foliage des- that time either (Oh Mother, what an idiot !) troyed by that wanton vandalism, a shortage so I just smiled and put the picture down of oxygen to breathe was being caused. So again.... but there did commence then an which was going to happen first, was the unconscious process of anxiety-suppose this planet gaing to choke on the pollutions and poisons of humanity's unfettered greed, or was it going to be a radioactive cinder by Later that year I was languishing in bed the paranoid genocide machines ? All the ani- time it WAS a real incarnation of God ? Nirmala Yoga 14

 That was it. In three easy stages over time people walked about apparently uncon- cerned, while at night I cried aloud in fright less than twelve hours, my world had collap- God, if you exist, help l" Through real sed. I walked out into the rain with one and bitter tears I called out "God, please, thing left to check out, and that was a friend come into my life, help me !" In the summer who had been telling me for weeks that she of 1980 my fear quickened with every news- wanted me to meet her spiritual teacher. As paper I read, At the same time, the negative I stumbled along, I was crying, and mutter- process of my other passions quickened ing myself through the pain "God, if this is pace. On July 19th I got a rude brush-off all there is to life, you can stick it !" For from a woman with whom I was hoping to the first time in my life, I actually wanted to get off. I felt awfully hurt by the shock and die. The fight had gone out of me, I had got excessively drunk. This, and over- drinking of past 3 weeks caused nausea for sobbed, "I want out of it." alcohol and I swore it off on the spot. the same day, I read an article in the news no hope left. "If this is all there is, "I I arrived at my friend's house and she saw straight away the state I was in. She took me upstairs and made some coffee, and paper. It was a fluent and well written travel we talked a little. After a few minutes the piece by a writer who knew Russia well, and mist started to clear a little and I noticed a described at great length the moral corrup- small pink picture on her mantelpiece. I tion, self-seeking, time-serving, cynicism went over and looked at it a little more and general climate of pettiness and closely. Then leaned forward to look at it selessness prevailing in the showplece of a bit closer still. And closer and closer... communism. The Russian people, he said. Kaboom ! A thousand megaton explosion had a strong spirituality, but since the revo- lution religion had been forbidden in any and slammed the life back into my heart. A form, and the nation's heart, deprived of an tiny voice within me whispered deafeningly outlet for its aspirations, had turned black. purpo- tore away the remaining vestiges of my mind "Mary I" and I knew in that split second that I had found God's incarnation. The tears This article affected me to the core of my of joy and sweet, blessed relief ran rivers beliefs, and brought out the question I had down the windows of my soul. been avoiding for years. never a communist, my political hopes for a better world were in general tied in with the of my head with joy, relief and excitement. struggle of the left for economic and politi- There was no doubt in my mind as to pre- cal liberation for the world as a whole, and cisely what I had been lucky enough to this article landed me squarely with the discover, and the importance of it, and the conclusion that self-government by humans incredible fact that little me had been smiled was not possible, they always fouled it up, on by God, that God had answered my an- and thus there was no hope of improvement guished cry for help, sent me completely in the human condition by rational effort over the moon with excitement. I knew that Although I was For the next twenty-four hours I was out this was the discovery of a thousand life- alone, 15 Nirmala Yoga

 times, and that certainty sustained me for intensity of the operation as the vibralion much of Ihe succeeding week during which flooded through me. Afterwards, I felt much time I had precious little interest in food or cleaner, much lighter, straighter of body and sleep or indeed anything at all save Mother of mind, and filled with great love, peace, and the vibration. I could hardly contain security and bliss, and a sense of the vast- myself until the monday night. when I was due to attend a meeting of Sahaja Yoga in spirit. The presence of the kundalini was Westminsler, where Mother was expected to appear. ness of God and the permanence of the so palpable in all my sensations that I hardly needed to ask my hands whether they felt cool breeze- ielt strong sensations on my I took my place early in the meeting hall, head, in my heart and throughout my body. and meditated on Mother's picture. When The sense of well-being pervaded all over me, She arrived, my wildest dreams were ins- along with the tangible efects of the clear- tantly fulfilled; by Her gentleness, warmth, ing-out Mother had given me, sweetness, joy, laughter, charm and general unbounded lovingness. I knew the Goddess of love was here, and I felt a great relief as all the terrors of the stern punitive mascu- On the way home, 1 threw away my tobacco tin and gave up smoking perma- line God of the Catholics evaporated-and I nently, and then leapt in the air and swung laughed with joy and freedom from fear. round lampposts for sheer joy and exube- Mother sat down and gave a talk, of which I remember little, so wild was my joy, save I felt like a long-lost son who had just been welcomed home by his Mother, rance. that she was full of humour and lauahter and my awe and joy were uncontainable. and my cup of joy ran truly over at the amazing revelation of the Godess of bounti- ful love and goodness I The intense excitement continued as my mind began to grasp in a little more detail the implications and the enormity of what had happened to me. That night, like the night before and most of the succeeding fortnight, I slept hardly at all, and thought After Her talk, Mother asked me which only about Mother, and everything that flowed false guru i had been to, and I told her. She from realisation. One by one pieces of my then sat me down on the floor in front of life came to consciousness to be completely Her and laid Her feet on various parts of my re-evaluated in the new and searching light back and front. I didn't know about bhoots of Sahaja Yoga. I realised for example that then, but I did physically feel negativity, bad 1 would not be in my current job for very energy, leaving my body at various points, much longer. The organisation I was work- and pains and blockages moving about ing for was wrongly based--like all political Mother cricked my neck and did several initiatives it was based in ego, in the idea other things to straighten my spine up a bit, that humans could govern themselves, so and kept Her feet on my suffering body for that was out. Also, it contained people who what felt like at least half an hour. Great took drugs, smoked and drank unrestrained- heat came out, and I became dazed with the ly, and followers of false gurus. My earnest had always wanted. My exultation cannot be described. 16 Nirmala Yoga

 desire was to escape from that situation now--I didn't want to work for such people my desires, If at any time I feel the neces- or be in contact with such rubbish. I wanted sity to change the world, Mother so arranges to live dharmically, but knew it would take a things that I give an introductory talk at a little while to find anew the right and wrong. public meeting for newcomers, and 1 am In the meantime I learned also to put my filled with joy tnat my voice is used as a I have the source of satisfaction of all trust in Mother's love, and not to feel guilty vehicle for persuading people to try the one for real or imagined errors. The friend who thing that is worth lock ng for.. I know that introduced me to Sahaja Yoga gave much realisation will have a far greater effect oni help over the first week, teaching me about people's lives than any of the political solu- bandhans, footsoaking and various mantras. tions I used to advocate, and I feel privileged and Introduced me to the chakras and the to be allowed to play a part in spreading Deities. It seemed so much to learn at Sahaja Yoga. Life is not easy, but now it first, and I wondered how I would ever is worthwhile, it is suffused with a glorious remember it all, or cope with the greal optimism and positivity that was totally number of new things to do and changes to lacking before. Every day there arises in some challenging form the struggle to curb one's ego and surrender to Mother, and the ever present necessity to inculcate discipline in looking after one's spirit in all the ways go through. It did however cope with my life, and as time went on, had an increasingly wide . Now, a year and a half later. effect on mne. it has transformed almost everything. I no Mother has taught us; but all that happens longer smoke or drink or take any drugs, I am physically, mentally and emotionally and the all-pervading certainty that one is healthier, I've lost much of the neurotic way of life I used to pursue and most of the atti- fainty, in contrast to the agonising doubt tudes that went with it, I no longer waste my that preceded it, is the greatest of Mother's time on political endeavour. immense and infinitely generous grace I am graleful that I have at last been released now married to a Sahaja Yogini, and we are Trom the mire of maya that the rest of a family of four, including two children, humanity is still stuck in, and that I am now Some material problems remain, but far part of a growing, loving and supporting fewer than I had before. Very much ramains collective under the guidance and protection for me to learn, and I teel I have barely begun to transform myself. It has taken I In the context of great hope, joy and love, on the right path at last. For me that cer- By Mother's magnificent gifts. I am, above all, profoundly y of our Holy Mother. O Mother, from the bottom of my heart,I this long for me to learn from the conse- thank You ! quences of omissions that I really have to meditate regularly twice a day and shoebeat at least as otten, and to be constantly aware Bolo Shri Bhagawati Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi KI Jai. of the state of my vibrations and chakras. Now, having learnt the necessity, I must learn to actually do these things! Jason Copeland 10.12.81. 17 Nirmala Yoga

 THE FIGHT FOR COLLECTIVITY PART II) Let us have a closer look at good old ners of this silent and watchful totality, tricky ego. Shri Mataji, but, with a pinch of Shri Hanu- Shiva's desire is that Virata should manifest. mana's inspired humour we can defiate it. In other words, by actualising our collecti- The ego will end up looking like the Courl's vity we are pleasing the Self: the fight for fool whose erratic jokes are meant to enter. collectivity is the fight for our own becoming. tain the King. Between the king and the fool, the Self and the ego, there are indeed some himself is different from a human being's very basic differences. In order not to take perception of himself. The human being No use fighting with it, says Now, Totality seeks itself. That means Hence a Sahaja Yogl's perception of any more the fool for the king, let us now explore one of them. understands growth as the assertion of his limited identity. The Sahaja Yogi is not The ego, by its very nature, seeks in- motivated as an independent actor aiming dividual achievment; the Self, by its very at his individual achievment. He is a part nature, resis in the collective dimension. of the Whole motivated by collective achiev- Why is it so ? The body of the ego is that ment. He feels the identity between the sheet of accumulated illusions through Tness of the Self and the ' ness of the which we perceive ourselyes as seif-suffi- collective being He is like an antenna of cient, individual identities without any link the formidable cosmic horse of Shri Kalki to the whole. The Self is this very whole merged in the Bhavasagara, sometimes collective being activated, sometimes put to rest by the power of Shri Mataji. But ever aware and a witness. What does all this concretely within us, but recovered by the sheet. When a Sahaja Yogi, unconsciously carrying on with old habits, seeks individual mean in our daily behaviour ? achievments in Sahaja Yoga (I have done this, I have organized thal) he is still, may be, dancing on ego's clownish tune, The fool will bore the King, after all; for the Self knows the right tune, it knows the sound of the flute which enchanted the banks of the y It means this: 1. I do not bother about my own salvátion because Mother has accepted me and thus I am saved. But let me be an instrument for others to be saved. Yamuna, it stores the gopis' memory. The Self likes correct elegance and rythm. The question is then : how to behave so as to please the Self ? 2. 1 do not help anybody; assisting others I work at my own growth. I do not love: it is love which flows through me, I do not act, but through me things may work out: The answer is : let us benave according to the Self's nature. The Self is Shiva. We are, within the Creation, the living contai- (Cont. on Page 23, Nirmala Yoga 18

 EASTER Here; how people are playing around with disfigured. But. that cloth was just left there. Christ's life. They call themselves Chris- Imean, what is so importantabout the shroud, tians and they show no respect to His life at I can't understand it. It's the Blood of Christ. all, He is the Becoming He talked about. The lgnorance with which people looked He did'nt talk about all those nonsensical at him. One should be ashamed of oneself. things. Secondly, we show no respect. There is no awe in our hearts that He is the One who has created Universes after Univer- their ego and living in complete darkness ses. And what are we compared to Him ? What ego human beings have, like bubbles. Of course, He was made of the Brahman allowed Him to live for three or four years. itself, the Divine Love itself, so He could not He did not do any harm whatsoever to any- be killed. Moreover, He had to be born after Krishna; because Krishna has said that this that. If He was born in India, they might Divine power of God does not die It is not have done the same. killed. Just to prove that He took this form: Mohammed Sahib ? The same thing. But this gross form of Christ. You can't imagine if you see from that angle how people are managing themselves with and self-certifying that they are the people who can judge even God and hardly they one. You cannot blame any community for What did they do to why there are so many thieves as shown in His life ? Only as a contrast they were He came on this Earth, but human allowed to get out, Why this compromise beings, they have no eyes to see anything, they know what is a diamond, they know what a precious cloth is, but they don't know today what a precious thing it was, that He came was possible and why it was not with Christ? Do we also do with us the same thing. That we compromise ourselves with thieves-who are negative people and we do not mind Christ being crucified. onto this earth. Now think of it, the situation was horrible- Now as you know, He created all the no question of talking to anyone about God, Brahmandas. Brahmanda or about realisation, but even to talk about dharma itself, righteousness was very diffi- of that Universe has come the Earth. Out of cult. I mean what ignorance must have that, you have come out and in your agnya covered those people, that they crucified Him. Then, even the disciples never recognised it. He exists within your agnya chakra. Christ. When He was crucified they said, This sacrifice is very very significant and "Now He's dead." Then, when He rose, though it is gross, in subtle, it has happend nobody would believe it. They have all kinds to take the awareness through this centre of of theories. Even about the shroud they agnya; was done by Christ, by His cruci- have found out. Of course, there was a cloth which was tied onto His face, which was like a gross human being. His body died pulled up, that's why his face looks slightly but did not die, because that body was also means a Uni- verse. Now the Universe of the Sun. Out chakra He created a small virata as they call fixion. He came as a gross person, just Nirmala Yoga 19

 made of that imperishable divine vibrations, has come for all of us to as you call, the radiations or this Brahma: to receive Him. We are not yet ready to They did not die and that's why the body did receive Him, Unless and until you are rea- not die and He resurrected with His body. lised you cannot receive Him because if you He had to die to show that the body, though remain unrealised till He comes, you'll be dies, can be saved. That's why he had to finished, you'l be gone, you'Il be destroyed. be crucified. Otherwise, He could not have shown you, but His actualizing that He died sical things. So this short time should be and then resurrected to show that this does used for your emancipation and for your be prepared He has just come to destroy all the nonsén- not die development. But, when we think of Christ, how human beings, you see, put up preten- ces. All kinds of pretentions you see, like, how Christ was crucified. They wear all the beautiful jewels Krishna has said, "It is not killed by any weapon, neither it is burnt by any fires. they act, and act, Nor it is blown by any wind Nothing can suck it". That Spirit is He. When they saw It's and everything and they will enact. His being resurrected, they started saying. mockery going on. If you have to really Oh, He is the One." Then His disciples come to resurrection, then you must awaken believed Him. What ignorance, what dark- Christ within you, yourself, in the agnya ness. It's like telling an ant about human chakra, lf you cannot do it, then all this civilization. enactment even in Spain, they say are enac- ting as crucified, I mean, this is mockery going on in this world; we are living wit pretentions and falsehoods all these things are going to take us nowhere. We have to Moses crossed the river. This was the face ourselves, we have to awaken Chris As this gross happening took place, when in the subtler also the same happe- ning had to take place. Like when you say happening of the Void being crossed by the Primordial Master. So in the subtle what- ever is done is expressed in the gross in this manner, and this is exactly what happe- ple who are prelentious, who make a circu ned when Christ, was crucified, But again out of Him-it's a mockery going on every you cannot crucify Him. Now He has become Ekadasha Rudra as described. The eleven within ourselves, We have to baw to Hin in full understanding of how great He is. Or the contrary, we always bend towards peo This carrying the cross or an drama, I mean, it was such a miserabl where. Rudras as you know very well These are thing and to enact it, I don't know why pec all the powers of Shiva given to Him. Up ple want to do that, I just can't understanc till now, till He was born, Krishna had given I can't bear it. But I mean, if you have fee Him his powers and that He became Maha- ings, you can see within yourself. It canno virata, he was even placed above Krishna, be a ceremony, a ritual, to be sacrificed an but now when He will come He will be best- to be resurrected. It's the actuality, it's th owed with the destructive powers of Shiva- becoming. It's not any drama, and peop eleven of them. One of them is sufficient to finish all the Universes and that's what is described as the coming of The Christ. You cannot crucify Him anymore and the time want to see a drama like that and be sati: fied. For us, Sahaja Yogis, it is important t understand the significance of Christ's lif that His body was the only body made Nirmala Yo 20

 and idiots. Donkeys that He was riding is suggestion of these donkeys who are ego- oriented. He tried to control the donkey. But the left hand side are the people, these Rudras, and this has, given Him the highest position. So on this day we have to think how He was resurrected for us. More than Him His Mother had to suffer His crucifixion-it was too much; because She knew all these was going to happen and She was in human form as a Mother and Her only toving Son, being crucified in Her presence. Cross for the one reason of Christ being horrible negative people, they get frightened of Him, absolutely frightened, you take Christ's name and they just run away, depart. No, nothing doing, thay're not going to face Him-"Oh! God." Now, this mark is the sign ot His Blood actually. Even if you show this colour they run away, but one has to understand the significance of Christ crucitied on that, but cross is the sign of with patience, with humility, because He is the One who has created Universes after We should not glrorify the the agnya chakra, also because the same swastika, which was equally distributed, is expressed as an evolved symbol that is a cross. So when we glorify cross, we are glorifying our agnya chakra by which we accept the life of dedication and of sacrifice. And if we look forward after the cross, we Universes. Here you cannot just sit on a table and say, let's have it out, let's discuss this. There's no dogma going on. He's a living God and Living cannot be discussed by human beings. You have to become know that it is the Resurrection and the superhuman beings to discuss Him, to understand Him. And, the more you rise, Resurrection that you are going to actua- tize in this life time, But now give up all nonsensical ideas about your seekings and useless ramblings Seeking means not know- support of the Universe, He is our support, ing about anything but becoming something. the more you are filled with awe, "Oh ! God." And when you realise that He is the then you fel very powerful-that nobody For that, Christ crucified Himself. He re- But surrected Himself so that you all could be you cannot just sort of possess Christ as resurrected, so you have to, today, thank can possess you, if He's your support. your own, you cannot say Christ is mine, you cannot, nobody can, possess Him. You have to surrender to Him, so that you become Him for giving you the lead of resurrection and in this lifetime only, you are going to be resurrected and you are going to see, with His possessions. So that He looks after your own eyes, your resurrection as the you. His greatness cannot be described in words. As a child, and as a Son, He is the giver of joy. One cannot describe how happen to all of you. He looked after His Mother, it's impossible. No words can describe the understanding of Christ for His Mother, His love, His gentle- ness, His care, His devotion and dedication cannot be described. And you know that He came as an evolved Sri Ganesh, and at and our petty hankerings, our small littl the back He's Sri Ganesh and at the front lives in which we live like frogs, Expan disciples saw the resurrection of Christ This is being all promised and this mus So we should rejoice and be happy tha the time has come for the resurrection an such a great event we are facing. We ar such a people-give up our small vision He's Kartikeya. Very powerful-eleven yourself and think that today you are facin 22 Nirmala Yog

 the drama of mass resurrection, not only because in our lives the death has died and that, but you are manoeuvring it. So re- We are resurrected, joice and be happy that what Christ did May God Bless You. 2,000 years back, today we are going to do it. That's why Easter is a special day for all of us. It really is a very special day April 6th 1981 Ashram, London England. (Contd. from Page 18) that's all. I am watching it. And I do not necessarily decorate... experience joy. 6. I will not seek to strenghten my relationship to Shri Mataji by trying some kind of illusory 3. I do not belong to any clan, family, group or circle of friends. Those who are committed to sahaja yoga to secure "privileged position" near Her but by dissolving in the collective Being to whom She is giving birth. and devoted to Shri Adi Shakti Mataji Nirmnala Devi are automati- cally my brothers, sisters and friends. 7. I cannot know the Self without becoming collective. I cannot be- comecollective without deflating the ego. And I cannot deflate the ego without surrendering to Mother. 4. I will accept the natural leadership of those sahaja yogis who can best spread sahaja yoga. There will be no jealousy whatsoever. For, their cause is my cause: by promoting take the vow to fight for our Collectivity. sahaja yoga they are promoting There is the glory and the joy; After all, our me. When sahaja yoga grows it is most amazing guru the Divine Mothers is my true "I" who grows. In this winter of 1982, all of us should sakshat Shri Shiva Virata. In exploring the 5. I will rejoice in the forthcoming depth of the Self and the extent of our manifestation of all higher realised collectivity we sfart travelling in the arteries beings because they will decorate of Her cosmic body to visit the radiant aura our new Jerusalem of which I am a founding stone. Founding stones of beauty of Her Adi Chakras. -GREGOIRE 23 Nirmala Yoga

 LETT ER My dear Dr. Raul, xious to have a conference next year in New York, Due to our slavery for so many years, doctors in India have lost the capacity to was a very wise step on your know that we are the people born on the Yoga part to have met Shri Gagan Gadh Maharaj. Bhumi. Their thinking is so slavish that they What he says about the miracle of Sahaja think all our ideas about medicine are stupid Yoga is absolutely true. The reason why while western knowledge is very sensible. I received a very detailed letter from this great sanctuary never manifested in reality was that whenever Adishakti descen- I bless you with all my heart that Dr. ded asincarnation (She) did not have all the Ramlingam has good vibrations. Shri Rama chakras integrated through Sahastrara The in him would have wisdom to understand the ways of God Almighty. I send you my an integrated instrument of her personality love and protection so that you can break the barriers of ignorance of our medical men. Let them know that the time has come complete harmony and unison merged into is bringing forth these fantastic results. So much so that I am surprised at myself. for them to accept that science is not every- I think he (Gagan Gadh Maharaj) also thing, It only discovers whatever exists and cannot imagine the dynamics of this Dis- covery and hence he feels that 'Avdhuts' have to be away in the forests and that Cancer can give you reaction. You have oured the Cancer of Phadke's father. Did appears before the gross being. Once we become subtle rising in the fourth dimension, we see the subtle being, the spirit and contentment and DIVINE working of this love, cannot be done by argument. One has to be realised. One has to evolve through it give you any reaction ? When you are at a giving end how can you receive anything ? You are reborn as Lotus wvhich does not take anything bad from muddy surroundings but transforms its surroundings with its beauty and fills it with fragrance. This is the magic araph. Water has the religion (Dharma) of of a realised soul. Do you think doctors Sahaja Yoga spontaneously as this is a living proces. is of water i. e. putting feet in the river, sea For Cancer best treatment will accept that there exists the Kingdom of cleansing and hence Shri VISHNU and DATTATRAYA responsible for the religion God and that it creates us and that the Lord Dharma) of human beings are to be wor- of our aulonomous nervous system is our shipped. They help you to cure and also the spirit which is the reflection of God ? You lncal Deity of the Chakra that is attacked. can quote the names of people like Mr. Bose Putthe patient before the photograph with the and Mr. Daftary and Mr. Sharma who are candle and his feet being in the water, bring miraculously cured of his colour blindness through Sahaja Yoga. In any case I am going to America next year. One of my dear Sons Dr. Lanjewar has now become tion, then he is cured. More in the next. down your hands across the sympathetic ner- vous system towards the water. The patient will cool down gradually. If he gets realiza- the president of the Medical Practitioners Association of New York and is very an- YOURS LOVING MOTHER NİRMALA 24 Nirmala Yoga

 GGW ce

 Registered with the Registrar of Newspapers under Regn. No. 36999/81 Basie, Dec. 16, '81 Dear Sahaja Yogi, Sahaja Yogini, A central file is being built up in Switzerland on all the materials (posters, letters, leaflets etc.) used to spread Sahaja Yoga in various anguages English, French, Italian, German, Portuguese. Spanish then be available for people who desire the photocopy of a specific model: ex letter to a TV station (like the one we sent to the press in New York). It may be circulated whenever required. Also we will collect all press articles in the various languages. Above all, a record will be kept of everything that The material will .. has been tried and done. Later on we will make an exhibition. You are kindly requested to send any material (Australia) or any new material (UK, India) to: Arneau de Kalbermatten 5, Binningerstrasse, 4123, Allschwil (Baselland). Switzerland. We should not take too seriously these slightly bureaucratic activities ! Yet such a file may be of some help to our information network. And may the supreme Mother smile at the plays of her little children. Jai Mataji much love, Gregoire and Arneau जय माताजी निर्मला देवो नमो नमः "भजन" चाल : आम्ही बिघडलो तुम्ही विधडाना आम्ही विषडलो तुम्ही बिचडाना । विषडली चेतन्यमय शाली ।। १ ।। निर्मलेच्यासंगे बाधा बिधडली, बाध विधडली प्रकाशमय झाली ।। २ ।॥ माताजींच्या संगे मुले विश्रडली, मुले सहजयोगासंगे मी बिधडलो, मोही विधडलो महायोगी आलो ।। ३.॥ महायोगासगे जन विषडले. जन विषडले सच्चीदानंद झाले ।। ४ ।। माताजींच्यासंगे राग बिषडला, राग बिधडला अनुराग झाला ।। ५ ।। शिवार्म्याच्यासंगे दोष विधडला दोष विपडला परमात्माही झाला। ६ ॥ मातेच्यासंगे विकार विधडला विकार विधडला निर्मलवी झञाला ।। ७ ॥। सह जयोगी-पंढरीनाथ जयवंत (मुंबई केन्द्र ) Edited & Published by Sh. S. C. Rai, 43, Bungiow Road, Delhi-110007 and Printed at Ratnadeep Prass, Darva Gani, New Deihi-110002. One Issua Rs 6.00 Annual Subscription Rs. 30 00 Foreign (By Airmail E 5 $ 10]



----------------------

1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Nirmala Yoga
Year 2
Vol. 8
March-April "82
Bi-Monthiy
in
*"Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns all the religions and
seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga-THE UION"
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-1.txt 
 Editorial
मनसव व्योम त्वं मरुदसि मरुत्सारथिरसि
स्वमापस्त्वं भूमिस्वयि परिणतायां न हि पर
त्ब मेव स्वात्मानं परिणासयितु विश्ववपुषा
चिदानन्दाकार शिवयूवति भावेन विभूषे।।
।
Manas Twam Vyona Tiwam Marud Asi Marutsarthir Asi
Twam Apas Twam Bhoomis Twayl Parinatā vām Na Hi Param
Twam Eva Swät-Mänam Pari Na Mayi Tum Vishwa Va pusha
Chida Nanda Kāram Shiva Yıvati Bhāven Bibhrushe
You are the Mind, you are the Ether, you are the Air, you are also Fire and Water
and the Earth. You manifest yourself as the universe, there exists nothing other than
you. To transform yourself, who are consciousness Bliss into the universal body,
you deem yourself the young bride of Shiva.
And she took many incarnations to save the world, gods and human beings from
demons. In modern times, demons of the past have come with decent and attractive
appearances. Man has become slave of his nature and goes to extremes to accomplish
his ambitions, ending in disasters. Ocean of love as the Divine Mother is, she has
again condescended in this world, on 21st March, 1923, to save mankind. Perhaps she
has taken the birth on this day to correct imbalance even at cosmic level.
Adi Shankaracharya has said "Your right eye being the embodiment of the Sun
creates day, your left eye being the embodiment of the Moon creates night, your third
eye radiant like the slightly open golden lotus, creates twilight." He also says that due
to collyrium that the Mother wears, her eyes become tri-coloured-the streak of red, the
natural white colour of the eyes and the black of the collyrium. They look like the triad
of the three quantities-Raja, Sattwa and Tama.
O Mother. you are noi only correcting the imbalances of the people, but are
also freely distributing the divine bliss which could be enjoyed by very few in the past
after great efforts. May thousands and thousands more come and drink the nectar that
is flowing from your lotus feet.
kind that you are present in our hearts the very moment we remem ber you. O Mother,
pray, kindly keep this form of yours for years and years, so that all seekers get their
salvation and Mother Earth is relieved from all evil. What can we offer in Puja when you
are everywhere and everything, including our Selves?
Proximity to your lotus feet Is Moksha and you are so
*21st March is equinor when day and night are equal.
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Nirmala
Yoga
43, BUNGLO W ROAD, DELHI-110007 (INDIA)
Founder-Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Editorial Board: Dr. S. K. Mathur, Sri A. S. Mishra, Sri R. D. Kulkarni
REPRESENTATIVES
Australia:
Cheryl Hynes
10, Clarence Road,
London:
Gavin Brown
Brown's Geological
Information Services Ltd.
Burwood, N.S.W. 2134,
160 North Gower Street,
NW1 2ND (UK) London.
Australia.
Mr. Subhash B. Pradhan
U.S.A. :
12416, Reva Street, Cerritos,
California-90701 U.S.A.
Hong Kong : Emilie P. SHI
Cliff Rence Bres. Co. Ltd.,
1610 Wing On Centre,
111, Connaught Rd. Central.
Switzerland: Arneau de Kalbermatten
Binningerstrasse 5,
4123, Allschwil (BL).
Switzerland.
M. B. Ratnannavar
13, Merwan Mansion,
Genjwala Lane,
Borivali (W),
Bombay-400 092.
Bombay:
Marie Rouger
France:
175, Av. Ledru Rollin,
Paris-75011.
CONT ENTS
Page
1. Editorial
2. Sahaja Yoga the Maha Yoga
3. Seeking and Finding
12
***
18
The Fight for Collectivity
5. Easter
19
6. Letter of Shree Mataji
24
All Correspondence should be addressed to :
Sh. S. C. Rai, C/o. Straw Products Ltd., Nehru House, 4 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg. New Delhi-110002
2. Dr. S. K. Mathur, 43, Bunglow Road (Suite No. 1), Delhi-110007.
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-3.txt 
 SAHAJA YOGA
plt oole
THE MAHA YOGA
Notl-
system is di fferent, and your heart sys-
Sahaja, is something that is born with you, tem is different, other brain system or
that is innately built in you that sprouts by nervous system is different, 1 mean you
itself in you, which manifests itself. Like you can't take it out like that, your brain hanging
can see a seed sprouting into a tree. This on one side and your digestive system han-
ging on the other. It is one integrated form
of organisation which is a living organisa-
Now all other Yogas, which go along tion, which understands each other, which
with it are part and parcel of Sahaja-Yoga. reacts to the demands. You cannot separate
They cannot be separated from this yoga. I the system, but as it Is, our brains are so
people have misunderstood disintegrated or they are good at that dis-
of Yoga. integrating everything within us and without
That would be a misundertsanding as to that we want to disintegrate the living thing
Saha' means with; Ja' means born,
is what is Sahaja.
the
think
limbs
that there
are four
think that they are separate or different. which is Yoga.
When we say that we have eaten this food,
it does nat mean that like a bolt it has gone
Yoga is not a dead organisation. It is a
inside the body and passed out of the body living process. Absolutely a living process.
When it is a living process, you cannot do
like a bolt coming out. Does it ? It means
that you tasted the food in your mouth: it anything about it. So it is Sahaja. At the
means that it has secreted some saliva in most you can shift it a little bit and push it
the mouth, later on, it has passed through here or there, push It around and all that.
the trachea, oesophagus, going down into If a tree is coming up, like in Japan, and
the stomach part and then to the intestines they will like to give it a shape, then they
and then to the larger intestines. All this will cut branch first and bend it a little more
movement along this passage is done another one and bend it this way, that way
through the other kind of the movement and give it a shape. But whatever is living
which is existing in the organs itself like the is working out spontaneously within us with
stomach itself pushing it down, coming from many complicated organisations which are
your brain. The sympathetic and para sym- living themselves and are aware of what
pathetic coming into play and working it out. they are doing. For example your body is
It is a big system and the organization that much more aware of me than your rationa-
lity. Say, you are a possessed person. You
won't accept that you are a possessed per-
son. I won't say myself also because I don't
digestive system is different, the respiratory want to get very kind of thing which is in
is working it out.
Now if you want to separate it: that the
*This advice was given by Her Holiness Matajl at London.
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-4.txt 
 They have to find out the means and riences of people, Because some people
methods. And as a result of that probe has when they try to raise the Kundalini so
brought forth other Yogas, which we call as called'" say they started jumping. The
Raj-Yoga or they call it as Hatha-Yoga, or Kundalini does not rise. Some people star-
the third one they call as Kriya Yoga (1 think ted taking off their clothes or may be some
Kriya and Raj is about the same) and Bhakti guch sort of a funny thing. They felt heated
Yoga and Gyan Yoga and Karam Yoga. All up. So people thought let us take off our
these are the methods human beings want clothes and we'l find God. Some people
to employ to make the bull rise. When they felt same sort of a grip on the stomach or
get frustrated, they want to hang themselves some of them did see also these things
by the nearest tree. So, that also is another happening within. So they called it a Mool-
frustrated Yoga. Then Sadistic Yoga, then bandha. The bandha' has taken place,
beating Yogas, then beating others Yogas something has gripped there. So the Kriya-
then it goes on like that, you see, flowering Yoga is that, you take out your tongue from
into better and better things. Then fanati- here. You cut this thread of the tongue
cism, because human baings find it diffi- from here and you push it back here, touch
cult to sit still they get a challenge. "Oh the tip of the tongue here where normally it
this bull does not rise, I will make it rise."
is wagging. Push it back here at the
Vishuddhi centre, they think the Vishuddhi
Moreover they haven't got the authority- is here, The problem is that they think the
Even those who are self-realised they have Vishuddhi is here. So they push it back
no knowledge because Kundalini is not made
by them. Like, even if I get this machinery, I
do not know how to handle it, how to use it? sing of Kundalini by this. It is just the other
I may try but Imay burn my hands instead.
Such a hotch potch of endeavour brings
They think they will achleve the rai-
here.
way round, we are trying, you see. The
effect cannot reach the cause.
forth so many Yogas in this world. And
everybody is baffled at it that how it is that
there are so many Yogas and this Yoga and come to the effect. Did you see my point ?
that Yoga and Buddha or Mahabir or Christ. Supposing the Vishuddhi Chakra which is
Then Church Yoga "And what is wrong in here, a very subtle centre behind, is spoilt
witchcraft" somebody sald the other day. then the effects are felt, say, here And
Nothing wrong but the bull will settle down your tongue gets affected, your eyes get
better, it won't rise then.
You have to go to the root of cause to
eftected, your nose gets affected, your cheeks
get affected, There are 16 you see.
All
Now, so they have tried to find out what these can get affected But by tickling your
should we do ? Stand on your heads bull nose you do not touch the Vishuddhi Chakra.
won't rise, it won't. So what should we do ? Isn't it ? Did you see my point ? For
example, something goes wrong at the centre
We should know what is the Kundalini from where the electricity is coming here.
All these Yogas that have By tickling it here you cannot correct that
that is within us.
come up, have been depicted from the expe- one there. You have to go to the roots. Or
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-5.txt 
 on a tree you find a fruit. All the fruits are He does'nt talk of separation, he talks of
getting rot. So by treating the fruit, can you authority, because he is there he has that
treat the disease ? You'll have to go to the authority. Those who talk of separation and
roots. So these people when they saw crying and weeping and woes and all that
things happening to human beings they for- are blind like all others. They have no busi-
All are ness to be there. There is no humility about
it, I mean if have a red shawl, I should say,
I have a red shawl.' What is there to feel
Try to understand, this is a very simple humble about ? Imean whatever you are,
thing. After realisation all of them are right. there is no harm in saying what you are.
Bafore realisation all of them are wrong. when you are not that, when you don't have
Before your car starts, if you start turning that and you say that you have, it is arro-
med different type of methods.
wrong and all are right.
the wheel, or using the brake, you are spoi-
gance. But when you are there, you have
to say. That christ said, 'l am the light, I am
the path'. I mean he was not trying to be
arrogant about it. What is there to feel bad
about it ? So Hatha Yoga itself is done
under a person who is a realised soul. Not
only realised but who knows. Who has
ting the car. When the car has started and
you know how to drive and you have become
a master of driving, then everything is right.
Otherwise the same car which has to
drive you from your house to this Ashram
will land to somewhere. In the same way,
the same thing before realisation has no
meaning. After realisation only you start mastered the art of Shakti-pat is the raising
of the Kundalini minimum. Of course Sahaja
Yogis just raise it like that. It is different.
But no other Yogis can do that. It is only
understanding.
So let us take the case of Hatha Yoga.
It is based on centres, no doubt. It is based you, because you are authorised, that you
So
on "Ishwar Pranidhana", no doubt, all the can raise the Kunalini just like that.
eight sides of Hatha what these Hatha-Yogis have done they
Yoga. See from human point of view, I'm have boiled it down to only the physical
sense. So you have to have Ishwaraprani-
dhana, Yama and Niyama and that too before
25 years of age, you have to discipline your-
self in a way that you should understand,
tion on Ishwara Pranidhana means they what is right and what is wrong. Now those
should fix the attention into the existence of who have done all the wrongs of the world
Ashtangas, all the
saying. For them why Hatha Yoga came
into being.
It's first that they should fix their atten-
God. Not blind faith. But to understand before they are 15 years of age, now at the
that there is God, so that you humble down age of 25 are trying to learn what is Yama
yourself. Then you should go to the rea- and Niyama. How can you do it ? Just tell
lised soul as a Guru. Guru means a reali- me now. Supposing you have spoilt the
sed soul minimum. Any Tom, Dick and car completely. At the most you can ask
Harry becomes a Guru, is a nonsense ab- for insurance, if you have paid for it. But
solutely. He has to be a realised soul and how can you expect the car to come out
if he is a realised soul he will say like that. absolutely new, as if it has come out from
Nirmala Yoga
6.
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-6.txt 
 the factory ? A house which is being com- years of age you should be there and prac-
pletely mutilated cannot be renovated. Isn't tise under his guidance in complete celibacy
it ? That would be madness. So one has to in the almosphere of complete celibacy.
undersiand that these Yama and Niyamas
and all these things are not meant for us.
At least for the Western people, in any way.
Now come to Kriya Yoga. When we take
to Kriya Yoga, it is taking out the tongue as
Let us accept it whatever it is in experi I said cutting it out and putting it back here
mentation or whatever it is we have commit- to tickle the Vishuddhi Chakra. I mean I
ted lots of mistakes or may be we have been don't know sometimes, your rationality also
experimenting, again I'll say the same word, goes out, I think. By doing like that do you
Whatever we have done we have done a lot think you can excite this great power within
of harm to ourselves, to our body and to our you, which is discrimination, which under-
mind. Because we had nobody to guide us. stands each and everything; you cannot be
Alright.
but by mistake it happened. Now what to have been trying by ourselves of poking
do ?
So all these tricks which we
We didn't want to harm ourselves fooled by that.
yourself here and poking youself there.
we are just spoiling your instrument for
It is a very sad affair. People are sick nothing at all. But it happens, when the
They cannot do Hatha-Yoga The atmos- Kundalini rises through the Vishuddhi
phere is sick, The whole place is sick. They chakra, that when the dilation of the Chakra
want love, they do not want exercise. They takes place it happens that your tongue is
do not want scouts. They want somebody pulled inside. It happens that your eyes
to love them, to heal them, to cure them to get dilated.I hope they do not put Atropin
to dilate their eyes to gel their Kunda-
So it happens like that
establish them.
lini awakening.
There is no word of love in Hatha Yoga Bandhas take place the stomach holds the
these days because you pay for it. One thing kundalini with the bandhas.
you cannot pay for is your love. How can you the chakras when the kundalini comes up,
pay for love ? And that's why this modern it closes down automatically so that the
Hatha Yoga is just a misnomer. But after energy is kept upwards it is not allowed to
realisation you can do Hatha Yoga because fall down. All these things happen within
you are purified, you are cleansed, you are us. These bandhas happen which some
healed, your wounds are alright. People are supraconscious people might be seeing and
wounded, they are so much hurt. They are they want to think that if you pull your
extremely unhappy. You touch them and stomach like this, put your tongue inside,
feel it. Why talk about big things when kundalini is awakened These things happen
they do not even have energy to sustain as a rusult of kundalini awakening but by
themselves ? It is a strain on them. And doing these things you do not awaken the
none of them are realised souls neither are kundalini. Now did you follow my point ?
they masters of Shakti-pat. So that's why Did you ? It is clear now.
it was said, ""you go to a Guru who is a rea-
lised soul. Go into the jungles before 25
It closes down
That is why these kriya yogas have star-
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-7.txt 
 ted, this jumping has started. Even the pace of an ant and they fix your kundalini
nudity has started. All this as a result of by inches there and they say do not lead any
some people who are tyring to raise the adharmic life, you have to lead a very vir-
kundalini. Even in the centre which it rises tuous life, like a horse, you see, when you
all these things happen
is not alright you are sick, your heart is blinds around so they have to train the horse
working, labouring very hard to look after before it starts really running the race. But
your physical being, you try to make it even with this the most important is the love of
weaker by taking these strenuous things. the grand parents who are with them, in
And by using the other way round methods, those days they used to be-to look after
as I told you, you also spoil your instrument the children and the love of the Guru and
like the electricity has to come so the elec- the training and the discipline of the own
tricity must flow from there If I start blowing self. The gurus who take money from you
from here or poking trom here, with frusta- what are they going to train you up in ?
tion also breaking this one here electricity Business management or dubious methods
is not going to come, only this wili be of cheating ?
finished. Do you follow my clear cut idea ? beautifully blended with their love, with their
It is very clear that if you are going to knowledge and their whole understanding
spoil your awn instrument you are not that it has a direct affect on the character
going to get the energy to rise within you
When your health have to train the horse you put these two
Their own lives were so
and the personality of the pupil. While now
But one who is a realised soul he would in India no body can write epic like Rama's.
We do not have any Ramas now. We won't
tell you first of all he may raise of your have narhaps. They only write stories. Now
kundalini, minimum, awaken your kundalini
and ask you to make way for the kundalini to
we have poems coming out of India like
rise gradually. Human beings when they your horrible Lord Byron, he is born in India
now. He has left your country. So like that
all the dynamism in literature is also
raise their kundalini they raise it by every
chakra. They br.ng the kundalini to, say, finished because there is no ideal before
Mooladhara, of course the, cannot touch it.
The kundalini would come upło, say, nabhi
at the most. Then how to keep it there so
they will say, "eat less, do not take away thing to our Guru (so called) we see their
Mour attention too much, you must eat very ives The impression that we have within
the people. They cannot think of a perfect
personality. So the epics are different and
they say everywhere we go to learn these
little food so that Ihere is no much attention
on food. You must be detached." This is
before 25 years of age. "Do not strave too
much. Eat at regular intervals Do not pay
much attention to anywhere outside" so that
the attention is kept there so the kundalini same thing. It is described by great saints
does not drop down from the little inch of in India that those Jalunder Bandhas
us is also just the same and they cannot
s teach anything unless and until they them-
selves have the light.
Now this Kriya Yoga is also just the
progress it has made in 25 years.
and all these bandhas take place, means
They are born again and they move at the the bondage take place in the stomach in
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-8.txt 
 the heart and all these granthis are broken. Now still you want to have your crutches
Yes, it happens in you also when the kunda- because you are identified with them. So
lini rises. it does happen because I am you go back to your crutches and again
quite a big master. I do everything myself. want to become lame. This is just acting
I do not leave anything to you, till you have go ng on for some time. But if you act for
got it. Only this thing you have to do is to a long period you become lame. Because
freely choosing the path of self realisation. you have been playing games, you see. And
That is the only thing you have to do "to be
absolutely free": In all your freedom you accept yourself that you are great. And that
have to accept Sahaja Yoga. If I find you
have not chosen it by your freedom you get there now you are a light. You have to
out of it, very fast, you would not be there. accept that you are a light now. You are
You will simply run away. if not, I will see
to it that you run away.
now the game is over. So you have to
you have got it now within yourself. It is
not the same you were before and you are
transformed into this flower.
have faith in yourself and confidence in you
You should
Some one has to understand
these Margas, all these paths, even like people like that with bad experiences, in-
Bhakti. Ihave told you about three types of diferent experiences, you do not want to
bhaktas. One who are asking for kama. So helieve that there can be an experience of
all
Because you have been identified with
many have come to me for, say, cures, so
many of them. It is a good thing. It is a But if you understand it a little bit you will
good chance for me. Then they get cured; settle down nicely and Iam here to make
then they have that love since they are you the master of it absolutely the complete
Mumukshus and they can become very great mastery over all this.
Sahaja yogis. In India there are many who
have come like that they first come for treat-
ment and bacome very great Sahaia yogis. have to worry about anything else. All the
So they can pass through all these various yogás are at your feet. You just raise your
that kind. You do not want to accept it.
When Maha yoga comes in, you do not
hands just like this and the kundalini will
stages.
rise. It is a fact you just try. Anybody is
So one has to understand that this is the sick, you put your hands like this the person
time of Mahayoga. Where all these Antar is going to be alright. Try yourself.
yoga means all these happenings inside
take place automatically. I have something
to do with your kundalini very much and she point of Sahaja Yoga. Once you achieve it
knows me very well too. So much so that you do not have to do anything else. Then
as soon as she sees me she is up there so you become that because only everything
happy. And the first impact is so great you works for the Becoming and if there is
feel she is got it. She rises with such something that just gives you the whole
thumping joy, you get it. But again you go thing, then why should you do it. All things
back to your crutches. Even you have lost that have happned to you after you have
all your troubles and everything finished. come to sahaja yoga I am going to give you
This is Maha yoga:
The culimination
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-9.txt 
 a list of those and what are they are called a name to only one person in his life time.
in Sanskrit language.
Here these Dick, Tom and Harry are giving
names like they are distributing, I do not
Thousands of years people have had to know what ? Nothing is more easily avail-
work for it. But you have got it just like that. able more
It is a fact. It is difficult to accept that you things. If I told these Indians they will know
have got just like that without doing any (इन लोगों को एक मंत्र दिया, 'आइन्गा' एक दिया
hard any big exercises, is not it: But just हिंगा। तुमको तो मायूम है मतलब )
wait and see what you have got. Of course
some people do not get it because there is a
problem. Some problem is there. But do rity which you can use and every mantra
not bother, it will work out. But those who which you say will be awakened. You know
got it should know that they have got it that after realisation it is such a wonderful
because of something and that something thing to see that even if you are not yet out
you have to discover. That is what you have of your possession still you work it out.
to find out for yourself. There is a reason Still nothing happens to your kundalini rai-
why you have got it like that. Like mantras sing system, nothing happens to that, still
also, somebody told me that there is a you can raise the kundalini. Isn't it? Still you
guru who gives mantras according to the can give realisation to people. You may be
age. It is all nonsense. Complete nonsense possessed all this time, fighting with the
it is. You see, even a realised soul would spirit but here with one hand you are raising
not give you a mantra, that is why it was kundalini automatically.
regarded as a great thing if some body gave
you a mantra. Now every Dick, Tom and
Harry like a donkey brazes in your ears and to possess you. You are feeling them with
you think, "I have got." They are trying to
befoo! you, they do not know they are be- are raising the kundalini. Nothing would go
fooling themselves. Whatever they have wrong with the person whose kundalini you
done they will have to pay very heavily.
than these names of horrible
इ
You sould have some sort of an autho-
There are lots of spirits which are trying
one hand that side and with one hand you
are raising. To that purity. Otherwise to
give mantra and to take mantra a person has
So mantras are never given just like that to starve for seven days.
Not to see a
you have to know various points of a person, man's face or a woman's face. All sorts of
as to, who is your kula-devata, the worship vidhis (fAN) are there, then only you can get
of your family, what is your personal wor- It. There some people tell the discipile to
shipping God, what is your horoscope, what wash their hands 108 times every day. All
are the stars you are catching. At this sorts of these neti (a) kriyas and all that
point giving of the mantras, the time is to be has to be done before a mantra is given. It
determined, at a particular time of the horo- is a big ritual. Why ? Because you are so
scope what is the time of the horoscope vulnerable. It is like a phosphorus. And
that tallies with the Guru's horoscope. That you cannot put phosphorous into some
is why people used to have one or two people. body's hand. You have to make all arrange-
a person like Gyaneshwara gave ments till you can do it safely.
Even
10
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-10.txt 
 But supposing you become all powerful to you. Who knows everything. All about it.
then what ? Everything becomes a child's Somebody who has done all this who knows
play. Everything becomes so simple. You all the tricks of trade and also knows you
are raising the kundalini. You know there very well, though still I am learning.
are centres. You can raise it through the
centres, You know how to awaken them.
That is why it is Mahayoga.
About human beings 1 have still to learn
a lot. They can be quite queer. I do not know
why they behave like this. Cannot under-
It had to be this way, sometime, other- stand, Oh God It is a great revelation some-
wise how are we going to save this world ? times when you see human beings, how they
How this creation is to be justified ? We hehave. Very interesting, Very interesting
have to find. I mean God has to find some creature, I must say, they never behave the
method by which all of you who are seeking same way. You cannot predict. Most unpre-
Him are to be blessed, and that he should dictable. Do not know, what they will come
be manifested so that His work should be out with ? Very interesting. After Sahaja
THNT
completed.
yoga you will also enjoy very much.
So this is Mahayoga which encompasses
all the yogas. There is no need, now to go
This is about so many yogas I have told
you. Now if you have any questions ask
me sensible cnes, again I say.
me questions because I have told you in a
to stone ages to come back to human slage.
It is something like that. Or else you can
say that now if I have to go to India, Ineed
go like Columbus and end up in short way but later I will give you the com-
Ask
plete idea.
America.
May God bless you !
Somebody who knows the way has come
IN RESPONSE TO A QUESTION MOTHER ANSWERED THUS...
Now this lama business is all wrong; alli being blessed and the desire of God is the
must say very frankly. They do some tricks shakti. And the desire of God is that He
to spoil this instrument. Hypnotise. Do all loves you. His desire is to give you all His
kinds of things. It has brought about lots powers and all his loving capacity. This is
of problems.
You have not got it so it is a little problem, dormant. So when it rises, His desire is
does not matter. You have to little bit co- fulfilled. And that is how you get your ful-
operate with me and you will get it. You filment. Unless and until you are God,
must get it. It is my desire. That is your you cannot command desire of God, But
desire also. We meet on this point.
Now everybody has got it. His desire. It is placed within you and is
after realisation He gives you, bestows His
power that you can manoeuvre His desire.
Kundalini is the desire oi God. Is not You can raise the kundalini in the people
desire for God-is the desire of God itself. which is the desire of God. And you can
So it can be only awakened by that desire. make Him desire. That is the greatest one
It is the desire of God within you that is can achieve.
Nirmala Yoga
11
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-11.txt 
 SEEKING AND FINDING
by
JASON COPELAND
When I look back at the longings and of religion was to drug the populace into
passions I felt before meeting Mother, it is cringing submission to the property own-
hard to discern how I merited the title of ing classes and bureaucrats with spurious
I have to look c'osely into the hopes of a better life after death. It should
jumble of aims and conflicting desires that be remembered here that Christians do not
moved my life then, and see if any of it had believe in reincarnation, so their despair-
and drive to ingratiate themselves with
authority-is thus total. Religion seemed
to me to be the ultimate fraud, the sickest
seeker
any consistent thread.
FLE
In fact there were several. Religion was
not noticeably one of them; I was brought con trick played in the history of the uni-
up a Catholic in the dogmatic Irish tradition, verse, the cruellest and most foul traduction
and hated the Catholic Church with a violent of the human spirit that the perversity of the
rage born of the brutal, insansitive, mindless human spirit could concoct.
terror I had recelved from it. I didn't grow
up in a happy home, my parenis broke up entirely without prejudice as to the question
So much for religion. That of course was
when I was small and after that all I remem-
of whether or not God exists. I went
ber is unhappiness and fear. Everything through several different stages on that one,
seemed to be a sin, especially speaking to
adults they didn't want to hear what you ometimes that he did but was busy else-
said. Religion to me means black clothing, where on a less ambitious project than
miserable old men putting the frighteners on trving to create intelligent life on Earth,
small children, mystifying ceremonies in a sometimes just that God must be the
long-dead language, and violent punish- essence of cruelty and hardness to allow
ments for the slightest sin (especially if it such brutality, violence, injustice and sava-
sometimes believing that God doesn't exist,
was fun or involved thinking for oneself) and
ultimately enternal damnation to a hell of dope-smoking revolutionary hippie for some
sadistic tortures in which burning flesh vears, I looked at one of the varieties of
seemed to be the main component, by a imported oriental mysticism then available
vindictive elderly male deity with no sense in England, a pouty-looking brat of an alle-
of humour.
gery to continue. In 1971, having been a
ged Guru called Guru Maharaj ji, who was
then about thirteen years old. His acolytes
That was my early view of religion. As I said many interesting things about spiritua-
grew up and found out Just how many lity and the knowledge", and impressed me
true faiths there are, I concluded that Marx with what seemed to my misted eyes to be a
was right, and the whole and only purpose degree of sincerity and depth that I had not
12
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-12.txt 
 found elsewhere, so I decided to try it. I large, loving, forgiving, great-hearted, gene-
wasn't at all sure that I possessed the rous people who shone with the laughter of
requisite degree of sincerity since my main infinite love I was never very interested in
motive for looking for God seemed to be a the rest of the gurus that battened on the
desire to escape from the suicidal lunatic detritus of the druggy generation after that,
asylum I found Earth to be, but I was suffi- so in the following decade I went back into
ciently motivated not to wanf to miss out on the revolution in its many forms, hoping to
God and real love at last if this was It, sol build a belter world. I got into the clai-
hung around for long enough to persuade mants' Union's struggles for justice for the
the "mahatmas" of my interest and even- sick and unemployed, into squatting strug-
tually asked for "the knowledge". On the gles for justice for the homeless, Into law
appointed day, was taken with several centres, therapy and the "growth move-
other postulants to an upstairs room, and ment", housing co-pps, and lots of other
after the introductory "satsang" was shown efforts intended as blows against the empire
four meditation techniques with which I tried öf mammon, It was a great adventure and
to meditate for a few months.
a I learned much,
bacame good at administration, law, writing
The movement in Britain was much popu- and other tasks, arnd ended up making my
lated by not very bright young people whose living in housing administration and social
rejection of intellectuality seemed mainly to security advice. I spent most of my spare
in meetings, and saw almost everything
for more than ten words. That was the first as a political struggle. The trouble was,
thing that made me suspicious. I could most of the rest of humanity didn't seem to
see the need in spiritual pursuits to bring grasr that view, and the situation on the
the rational mind to a recognition of the planet as a whole went on getting worse,
narrowness of its own limits, but the extent with wars and battles on the increase daily,
of the willing mindlessness of little fatso's socialists and other fighters for human
devotees seemed to me to mock the dignity rights and dignity getting mauled, the rich
of man and God, and to insult the tools God getting richer every day by robbing the poor
gave man. Secondly the abject abnegation and the man in the street getting more in-
of ego espoused by the premies seemed to sular and apathetic all the time. The result
produce an unhealthily degrading effect, an of that was that 1 took increasing solace in
atmosphere of self-hatred rather than one my other two consuming passions, alcohol
couldn't and women, when I became too tired or
great Iraining ground;
stem from their inability to pursue a thought time
of sincere and warm humility. I c
understand what sort of God would want to despondent to work myself to distraction.
be worshipped by such cringing cyphers as Marriage as an institution had no credibility
the long-term devotees made of themselves in my view; my pärents were disastrously
-at any rate, such a mean, spiteful and mismatched and couldn't cope with each
power-hungry deity wasn't the God I wanted other at all, and many friends had parents
-the God I was looking for was warm and who stayed together for decades in silent
generous and full of love, which fat brat visibly misery and consuming bitterness "for the
wasn't. I had always envisaged saints and sake of the children" and multiplied every-
Nirmala Yoga
13
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-13.txt 
 one's unhappiness by so doing. So life for with ane of the frequent colds that my imbi-
me was a series of attempts to love a woman bing and smoking habits left mme prey to,
that failed or succeeded for only a short when the same girlfriend dropped in with
her Sahaja Yogi friend in tow. That lady
breezed in smiling and laughing and saying
encouraging things, and her freshness,
time.
That then was what my life consisted of:
unending work in the cause of creating a nurity and laughing warmth made the most
better society-with fewer and fewer peopie profound impression on me. Thus were
profound impression on me.
two seeds planted which were before very
believing in it, and me beginning to doubt
the ability of humans to behave rationally in
their own interest- booze taking its slow long to bear the greatest possible fruit.
Though for the moment my conscious mind
forgot about them (thank God it did that in-
stead of messing the memory around with
rationalisations) the impressions created by
the two encounters stayed with me, quicken-
ing my vibrations, and vere later to return to
consclousness with devastating effect.
but mounting toll on my hiealth, and women
not giving me the warm and gentle love I
sought nor accepting what I offered. A
threefold path that led nowhere. But before
Idescribe the simultaneous end of these
paths, I shall mention a couple of incidents
along the way which were to have a much
greater significance than was at first
But let us return to what happend
"before". In 1980 I knew much despair.
apparent.
In spring 1979 my then girl friend showed Lunatics in governments throughout the
me a small picture of Mataji. She had been world were talking increasingly loudly about
taken to a meeting by a friend, and thought nuclear weapons, and a climate of tension
Mother was very nice but wasn't into having was being created which as a student of
a guru at that particular moment. I looked history I recognised, and which terrified me
closely at the picture and thought how lovely to the depths of my being. Meanwhile ex
and warm She looked, and what a lovely ploiters seeking profit continued apace to
idea it would be to have a lady guru if you strip the planet of all the resources they
were going to have one at all I thought could thieve from it, whole species of
that was just the sort of joke that God (the mals were being wiped out, and the very
warm loving God I was ater that is) would capacity of the Earth to support life was
play on people's expectations, as God is al- being systematically destroyed. The burning
ways thought of as exclusively male in the of the Amazonian forests particularly frigh-
west. But I wasn't into having a Guru at tened me-with the amount of foliage des-
that time either (Oh Mother, what an idiot !) troyed by that wanton vandalism, a shortage
so I just smiled and put the picture down of oxygen to breathe was being caused. So
again.... but there did commence then an which was going to happen first, was the
unconscious process of anxiety-suppose this planet gaing to choke on the pollutions and
poisons of humanity's unfettered greed, or
was it going to be a radioactive cinder by
Later that year I was languishing in bed the paranoid genocide machines ? All the
ani-
time it WAS a real incarnation of God ?
Nirmala Yoga
14
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-14.txt 
 That was it. In three easy stages over
time people walked about apparently uncon-
cerned, while at night I cried aloud in fright less than twelve hours, my world had collap-
God, if you exist, help l" Through real sed. I walked out into the rain with one
and bitter tears I called out "God, please, thing left to check out, and that was a friend
come into my life, help me !" In the summer who had been telling me for weeks that she
of 1980 my fear quickened with every news- wanted me to meet her spiritual teacher. As
paper I read, At the same time, the negative I stumbled along, I was crying, and mutter-
process of my other passions quickened ing myself through the pain "God, if this is
pace. On July 19th I got a rude brush-off all there is to life, you can stick it !" For
from a woman with whom I was hoping to the first time in my life, I actually wanted to
get off. I felt awfully hurt by the shock and die. The fight had gone out of me, I had
got excessively drunk. This, and over-
drinking of past 3 weeks caused nausea for sobbed, "I want out of it."
alcohol and I swore it off on the spot.
the same day, I read an article in the news
no hope left. "If this is all there is, "I
I arrived at my friend's house and she
saw straight away the state I was in. She
took me upstairs and made some coffee, and
paper.
It was a fluent and well written travel we talked a little. After a few minutes the
piece by a writer who knew Russia well, and mist started to clear a little and I noticed a
described at great length the moral corrup- small pink picture on her mantelpiece. I
tion, self-seeking, time-serving, cynicism went over and looked at it a little more
and general climate of pettiness and closely. Then leaned forward to look at it
selessness prevailing in the showplece of a bit closer still. And closer and closer...
communism. The Russian people, he said. Kaboom ! A thousand megaton explosion
had a strong spirituality, but since the revo-
lution religion had been forbidden in any and slammed the life back into my heart. A
form, and the nation's heart, deprived of an tiny voice within me whispered deafeningly
outlet for its aspirations, had turned black.
purpo-
tore away the remaining vestiges of my mind
"Mary I" and I knew in that split second that
I had found God's incarnation. The tears
This article affected me to the core of my of joy and sweet, blessed relief ran rivers
beliefs, and brought out the question I had down the windows of my soul.
been avoiding for years.
never a communist, my political hopes for a
better world were in general tied in with the of my head with joy, relief and excitement.
struggle of the left for economic and politi- There was no doubt in my mind as to pre-
cal liberation for the world as a whole, and cisely what I had been lucky enough to
this article landed me squarely with the discover, and the importance of it, and the
conclusion that self-government by humans incredible fact that little me had been smiled
was not possible, they always fouled it up, on by God, that God had answered my an-
and thus there was no hope of improvement guished cry for help, sent me completely
in the human condition by rational effort over the moon with excitement. I knew that
Although I was
For the next twenty-four hours I was out
this was the discovery of a thousand life-
alone,
15
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-15.txt 
 times, and that certainty sustained me for intensity of the operation as the vibralion
much of Ihe succeeding week during which flooded through me. Afterwards, I felt much
time I had precious little interest in food or cleaner, much lighter, straighter of body and
sleep or indeed anything at all save Mother of mind, and filled with great love, peace,
and the vibration. I could hardly contain security and bliss, and a sense of the vast-
myself until the monday night. when I was
due to attend a meeting of Sahaja Yoga in spirit. The presence of the kundalini was
Westminsler, where Mother was expected
to appear.
ness of God and the permanence of the
so palpable in all my sensations that I hardly
needed to ask my hands whether they felt
cool breeze- ielt strong sensations on my
I took my place early in the meeting hall, head, in my heart and throughout my body.
and meditated on Mother's picture. When The sense of well-being pervaded all over me,
She arrived, my wildest dreams were ins- along with the tangible efects of the clear-
tantly fulfilled; by Her gentleness, warmth, ing-out Mother had given me,
sweetness, joy, laughter, charm and general
unbounded lovingness. I knew the Goddess
of love was here, and I felt a great relief as
all the terrors of the stern punitive mascu-
On the way home, 1 threw away my
tobacco tin and gave up smoking perma-
line God of the Catholics evaporated-and I nently, and then leapt in the air and swung
laughed with joy and freedom from fear. round lampposts for sheer joy and exube-
Mother sat down and gave a talk, of which I
remember little, so wild was my joy, save
I felt like a long-lost son who had
just been welcomed home by his Mother,
rance.
that she was full of humour and lauahter and my awe and joy were uncontainable.
and my cup of joy ran truly over at the
amazing revelation of the Godess of bounti-
ful love and goodness I
The intense excitement continued as my
mind began to grasp in a little more detail
the implications and the enormity of what
had happened to me. That night, like the
night before and most of the succeeding
fortnight, I slept hardly at all, and thought
After Her talk, Mother asked me which only about Mother, and everything that flowed
false guru i had been to, and I told her. She from realisation. One by one pieces of my
then sat me down on the floor in front of life came to consciousness to be completely
Her and laid Her feet on various parts of my re-evaluated in the new and searching light
back and front. I didn't know about bhoots of Sahaja Yoga. I realised for example that
then, but I did physically feel negativity, bad 1 would not be in my current job for very
energy, leaving my body at various points, much longer. The organisation I was work-
and pains and blockages moving about ing for was wrongly based--like all political
Mother cricked my neck and did several initiatives it was based in ego, in the idea
other things to straighten my spine up a bit, that humans could govern themselves, so
and kept Her feet on my suffering body for that was out. Also, it contained people who
what felt like at least half an hour. Great took drugs, smoked and drank unrestrained-
heat came out, and I became dazed with the ly, and followers of false gurus. My earnest
had always wanted.
My exultation cannot be described.
16
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-16.txt 
 desire was to escape from that situation
now--I didn't want to work for such people my desires, If at any time I feel the neces-
or be in contact with such rubbish. I wanted sity to change the world, Mother so arranges
to live dharmically, but knew it would take a things that I give an introductory talk at a
little while to find anew the right and wrong. public meeting for newcomers, and 1 am
In the meantime I learned also to put my filled with joy tnat my voice is used as a
I have the source of satisfaction of all
trust in Mother's love, and not to feel guilty vehicle for persuading people to try the one
for real or imagined errors. The friend who thing that is worth lock ng for.. I know that
introduced me to Sahaja Yoga gave much realisation will have a far greater effect oni
help over the first week, teaching me about people's lives than any of the political solu-
bandhans, footsoaking and various mantras. tions I used to advocate, and I feel privileged
and Introduced me to the chakras and the to be allowed to play a part in spreading
Deities. It seemed so much to learn at Sahaja Yoga. Life is not easy, but now it
first, and I wondered how I would ever is worthwhile, it is suffused with a glorious
remember it all, or cope with the greal optimism and positivity that was totally
number of new things to do and changes to lacking before. Every day there arises in
some challenging form the struggle to curb
one's ego and surrender to Mother, and the
ever present necessity to inculcate discipline
in looking after one's spirit in all the ways
go through.
It did however cope with my life, and as
time went on, had an increasingly wide
. Now, a year and a half later.
effect on mne.
it has transformed almost everything. I no Mother has taught us; but all that happens
longer smoke or drink or take any drugs, I
am physically, mentally and emotionally and the all-pervading certainty that one is
healthier, I've lost much of the neurotic way
of life I used to pursue and most of the atti- fainty, in contrast to the agonising doubt
tudes that went with it, I no longer waste my that preceded it, is the greatest of Mother's
time on political endeavour.
immense and infinitely generous grace I am graleful that I have at last been released
now married to a Sahaja Yogini, and we are Trom the mire of maya that the rest of
a family of four, including two children, humanity is still stuck in, and that I am now
Some material problems remain, but far part of a growing, loving and supporting
fewer than I had before. Very much ramains collective under the guidance and protection
for me to learn, and I teel I have barely
begun to transform myself. It has taken
I In the context of great hope, joy and love,
on the right path at last. For me that cer-
By Mother's magnificent gifts. I am, above all, profoundly
y of our Holy Mother.
O Mother, from the bottom of my heart,I
this long for me to learn from the conse-
thank You !
quences of omissions that I really have to
meditate regularly twice a day and shoebeat
at least as otten, and to be constantly aware
Bolo Shri Bhagawati Mataji Shri Nirmala
Devi KI Jai.
of the state of my vibrations and chakras.
Now, having learnt the necessity, I must
learn to actually do these things!
Jason Copeland
10.12.81.
17
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-17.txt 
 THE FIGHT FOR COLLECTIVITY
PART II)
Let us have a closer look at good old ners of this silent and watchful totality,
tricky ego.
Shri Mataji, but, with a pinch of Shri Hanu- Shiva's desire is that Virata should manifest.
mana's inspired humour we can defiate it. In other words, by actualising our collecti-
The ego will end up looking like the Courl's vity we are pleasing the Self: the fight for
fool whose erratic jokes are meant to enter. collectivity is the fight for our own becoming.
tain the King. Between the king and the fool,
the Self and the ego, there are indeed some himself is different from a human being's
very basic differences. In order not to take perception of himself. The human being
No use fighting with it, says Now, Totality seeks itself. That means
Hence a Sahaja Yogl's perception of
any more the fool for the king, let us now
explore one of them.
understands growth as the assertion of his
limited identity. The Sahaja Yogi is not
The ego, by its very nature, seeks in- motivated as an independent actor aiming
dividual achievment; the Self, by its very at his individual achievment. He is a part
nature, resis in the collective dimension. of the Whole motivated by collective achiev-
Why is it so ? The body of the ego is that ment. He feels the identity between the
sheet of accumulated illusions through Tness of the Self and the ' ness of the
which we perceive ourselyes as seif-suffi- collective being He is like an antenna of
cient, individual identities without any link the formidable cosmic horse of Shri Kalki
to the whole. The Self is this very whole merged in the Bhavasagara, sometimes
collective being
activated, sometimes put to rest by the
power of Shri Mataji. But ever aware and
a witness. What does all this concretely
within us, but recovered by the sheet.
When a Sahaja Yogi, unconsciously
carrying on with old habits, seeks individual mean in our daily behaviour ?
achievments in Sahaja Yoga (I have done
this, I have organized thal) he is still, may
be, dancing on ego's clownish tune, The
fool will bore the King, after all; for the Self
knows the right tune, it knows the sound of
the flute which enchanted the banks of the
y It means this:
1. I do not bother about my own
salvátion because
Mother has
accepted me and thus I am saved.
But let me be an instrument for
others to be saved.
Yamuna, it stores the gopis' memory. The
Self likes correct elegance and rythm. The
question is then : how to behave so as to
please the Self ?
2. 1 do not help anybody; assisting
others I work at my own growth. I
do not love: it is love which flows
through me, I do not act, but
through me things may work out:
The answer is : let us benave according
to the Self's nature. The Self is Shiva. We
are, within the Creation, the living contai-
(Cont. on Page 23,
Nirmala Yoga
18
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-18.txt 
 EASTER
Here; how people are playing around with disfigured. But. that cloth was just left there.
Christ's life. They call themselves Chris- Imean, what is so importantabout the shroud,
tians and they show no respect to His life at I can't understand it. It's the Blood of Christ.
all, He is the Becoming He talked about. The lgnorance with which people looked
He did'nt talk about all those nonsensical at him. One should be ashamed of oneself.
things. Secondly, we show no respect.
There is no awe in our hearts that He is the
One who has created Universes after Univer- their ego and living in complete darkness
ses. And what are we compared to Him ?
What ego human beings have, like bubbles.
Of course, He was made of the Brahman allowed Him to live for three or four years.
itself, the Divine Love itself, so He could not He did not do any harm whatsoever to any-
be killed. Moreover, He had to be born after
Krishna; because Krishna has said that this that. If He was born in India, they might
Divine power of God does not die It is not have done the same.
killed. Just to prove that He took this form: Mohammed Sahib ? The same thing. But
this gross form of Christ.
You can't imagine if you see from that angle
how people are managing themselves with
and self-certifying that they are the people
who can judge even God and hardly they
one. You cannot blame any community for
What did they do to
why there are so many thieves as shown in
His life ? Only as a contrast they were
He came on this Earth, but human allowed to get out, Why this compromise
beings, they have no eyes to see anything,
they know what is a diamond, they know
what a precious cloth is, but they don't know today
what a precious thing it was, that He came
was possible and why it was not with Christ?
Do we also do with us the same thing.
That we compromise ourselves
with thieves-who are negative people and
we do not mind Christ being crucified.
onto this earth.
Now think of it, the situation was horrible-
Now as you know, He created all the
no question of talking to anyone about God, Brahmandas. Brahmanda
or about realisation, but even to talk about
dharma itself, righteousness was very diffi- of that Universe has come the Earth. Out of
cult. I mean what ignorance must have that, you have come out and in your agnya
covered those people, that they crucified Him.
Then, even the disciples never recognised it. He exists within your agnya chakra.
Christ. When He was crucified they said, This sacrifice is very very significant and
"Now He's dead." Then, when He rose, though it is gross, in subtle, it has happend
nobody would believe it. They have all kinds to take the awareness through this centre of
of theories. Even about the shroud they agnya; was done by Christ, by His cruci-
have found out. Of course, there was a cloth
which was tied onto His face, which was like a gross human being. His body died
pulled up, that's why his face looks slightly but did not die, because that body was also
means a Uni-
verse. Now the Universe of the Sun. Out
chakra He created a small virata as they call
fixion. He came as a gross person, just
Nirmala Yoga
19
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-19.txt 
 made of that imperishable divine vibrations, has come for all of us to
as you call, the radiations or this Brahma: to receive Him. We are not yet ready to
They did not die and that's why the body did receive Him, Unless and until you are rea-
not die and He resurrected with His body. lised you cannot receive Him because if you
He had to die to show that the body, though remain unrealised till He comes, you'll be
dies, can be saved. That's why he had to finished, you'l be gone, you'Il be destroyed.
be crucified. Otherwise, He could not have
shown you, but His actualizing that He died sical things. So this short time should be
and then resurrected to show that this does used for your emancipation and for your
be prepared
He has just come to destroy all the nonsén-
not die
development. But, when we think of Christ,
how human beings, you see, put up preten-
ces. All kinds of pretentions you see, like,
how Christ was
crucified. They wear all the beautiful jewels
Krishna has said, "It is not killed by any
weapon, neither it is burnt by any fires. they act, and act,
Nor it is blown by any wind Nothing can
suck it". That Spirit is He. When they saw
It's
and everything and they will enact.
His being resurrected, they started saying. mockery going on. If you have to really
Oh, He is the One." Then His disciples
come to resurrection, then you must awaken
believed Him. What ignorance, what dark- Christ within you, yourself, in the agnya
ness. It's like telling an ant about human chakra, lf you cannot do it, then all this
civilization.
enactment even in Spain, they say are enac-
ting as crucified, I mean, this is mockery
going on in this world; we are living wit
pretentions and falsehoods all these things
are going to take us nowhere. We have to
Moses crossed the river. This was the face ourselves, we have to awaken Chris
As this gross happening took place,
when in the subtler also the same happe-
ning had to take place. Like when you say
happening of the Void being crossed by the
Primordial Master. So in the subtle what-
ever is done is expressed in the gross in
this manner, and this is exactly what happe- ple who are prelentious, who make a circu
ned when Christ, was crucified, But again out of Him-it's a mockery going on every
you cannot crucify Him. Now He has become
Ekadasha Rudra as described. The eleven
within ourselves, We have to baw to Hin
in full understanding of how great He is. Or
the contrary, we always bend towards peo
This carrying the cross or an
drama, I mean, it was such a miserabl
where.
Rudras as you know very well These are thing and to enact it, I don't know why pec
all the powers of Shiva given to Him. Up ple want to do that, I just can't understanc
till now, till He was born, Krishna had given I can't bear it. But I mean, if you have fee
Him his powers and that He became Maha- ings, you can see within yourself. It canno
virata, he was even placed above Krishna, be a ceremony, a ritual, to be sacrificed an
but now when He will come He will be best- to be resurrected. It's the actuality, it's th
owed with the destructive powers of Shiva- becoming. It's not any drama, and peop
eleven of them. One of them is sufficient to
finish all the Universes and that's what is
described as the coming of The Christ. You
cannot crucify Him anymore and the time
want to see a drama like that and be sati:
fied. For us, Sahaja Yogis, it is important t
understand the significance of Christ's lif
that His body was the only body made
Nirmala Yo
20
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-20.txt 
 and idiots. Donkeys that He was riding is
suggestion of these donkeys who are ego-
oriented. He tried to control the donkey.
But the left hand side are the people, these
Rudras, and this has, given Him the highest
position. So on this day we have to think
how He was resurrected for us.
More than Him His Mother had to suffer
His crucifixion-it was too much; because
She knew all these was going to happen
and She was in human form as a Mother
and Her only toving Son, being crucified in
Her presence.
Cross for the one reason of Christ being
horrible negative people, they get frightened
of Him, absolutely frightened, you take
Christ's name and they just run away,
depart. No, nothing doing, thay're not going
to face Him-"Oh! God." Now, this mark
is the sign ot His Blood actually. Even if
you show this colour they run away, but one
has to understand the significance of Christ crucitied on that, but cross is the sign of
with patience, with humility, because He is
the One who has created Universes after
We should not glrorify the
the agnya chakra, also because the same
swastika, which was equally distributed, is
expressed as an evolved symbol that is a
cross. So when we glorify cross, we are
glorifying our agnya chakra by which we
accept the life of dedication and of sacrifice.
And if we look forward after the cross, we
Universes. Here you cannot just sit on a
table and say, let's have it out, let's discuss
this. There's no dogma going on. He's a
living God and Living cannot be discussed
by human beings. You have to become know that it is the Resurrection and the
superhuman beings to discuss Him, to
understand Him. And, the more you rise,
Resurrection that you are going to actua-
tize in this life time, But now give up all
nonsensical ideas about your seekings and
useless ramblings Seeking means not know-
support of the Universe, He is our support, ing about anything but becoming something.
the more you are filled with awe, "Oh !
God." And when you realise that He is the
then you fel very powerful-that nobody
For that, Christ crucified Himself. He re-
But surrected Himself so that you all could be
you cannot just sort of possess Christ as resurrected, so you have to, today, thank
can possess you, if He's your support.
your own, you cannot say Christ is mine,
you cannot, nobody can, possess Him. You
have to surrender to Him, so that you become
Him for giving you the lead of resurrection
and in this lifetime only, you are going to be
resurrected and you are going to see, with
His possessions. So that He looks after your own eyes, your resurrection as the
you. His greatness cannot be described
in words. As a child, and as a Son, He is
the giver of joy. One cannot describe how happen to all of you.
He looked after His Mother, it's impossible.
No words can describe the understanding
of Christ for His Mother, His love, His gentle-
ness, His care, His devotion and dedication
cannot be described. And you know that
He came as an evolved Sri Ganesh, and at and our petty hankerings, our small littl
the back He's Sri Ganesh and at the front lives in which we live like frogs, Expan
disciples saw the resurrection of Christ
This is being all promised and this mus
So we should rejoice and be happy tha
the time has come for the resurrection an
such a great event we are facing. We ar
such a people-give up our small vision
He's Kartikeya.
Very
powerful-eleven
yourself and think that today you are facin
22
Nirmala Yog
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-21.txt 
 the drama of mass resurrection, not only because in our lives the death has died and
that, but you are manoeuvring it. So re- We are resurrected,
joice and be happy that what Christ did
May God Bless You.
2,000 years back, today we are going to do
it. That's why Easter is a special day for
all of us. It really is a very special day
April 6th 1981
Ashram, London
England.
(Contd. from Page 18)
that's all. I am watching it. And I
do not necessarily decorate...
experience joy.
6. I will not seek to strenghten my
relationship to Shri Mataji by trying
some kind of illusory
3. I do not belong to any clan, family,
group or circle of friends. Those
who are committed to sahaja yoga
to secure
"privileged position" near Her but
by dissolving in the collective Being
to whom She is giving birth.
and devoted to Shri Adi Shakti
Mataji Nirmnala Devi are automati-
cally my brothers, sisters and
friends.
7. I cannot know the Self without
becoming collective. I cannot be-
comecollective without deflating the
ego. And I cannot deflate the ego
without surrendering to Mother.
4. I will accept the natural leadership
of those sahaja yogis who can best
spread sahaja yoga. There will be
no jealousy whatsoever. For, their
cause is my cause: by promoting take the vow to fight for our Collectivity.
sahaja yoga they are promoting There is the glory and the joy; After all, our
me. When sahaja yoga grows it is most amazing guru the Divine Mothers is
my true "I" who grows.
In this winter of 1982, all of us should
sakshat Shri Shiva Virata. In exploring the
5. I will rejoice in the forthcoming depth of the Self and the extent of our
manifestation of all higher realised collectivity we sfart travelling in the arteries
beings because they will decorate of Her cosmic body to visit the radiant aura
our new Jerusalem of which I am a
founding stone. Founding stones
of beauty of Her Adi Chakras.
-GREGOIRE
23
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-22.txt 
 LETT ER
My dear Dr. Raul,
xious to have a conference next year in New
York, Due to our slavery for so many years,
doctors in India have lost the capacity to
was a very wise step on your know that we are the people born on the Yoga
part to have met Shri Gagan Gadh Maharaj. Bhumi. Their thinking is so slavish that they
What he says about the miracle of Sahaja think all our ideas about medicine are stupid
Yoga is absolutely true. The reason why while western knowledge is very sensible.
I received a very
detailed letter from
this great sanctuary never manifested in
reality was that whenever Adishakti descen-
I bless you with all my heart that Dr.
ded asincarnation (She) did not have all the Ramlingam has good vibrations. Shri Rama
chakras integrated through Sahastrara The in him would have wisdom to understand
the ways of God Almighty. I send you my
an integrated instrument of her personality love and protection so that you can break
the barriers of ignorance of our medical
men. Let them know that the time has come
complete harmony and unison merged into
is bringing forth these fantastic results. So
much so that I am surprised at myself.
for them to accept that science is not every-
I think he (Gagan Gadh Maharaj) also thing, It only discovers whatever exists and
cannot imagine the dynamics of this Dis-
covery and hence he feels that 'Avdhuts'
have to be away in the forests and that
Cancer can give you reaction. You have
oured the Cancer of Phadke's father. Did
appears before the gross being. Once we
become subtle rising in the fourth dimension,
we see the subtle being, the spirit and
contentment and DIVINE working of this
love, cannot be done by argument. One has
to be realised. One has to evolve through
it give you any reaction ? When you are at
a giving end how can you receive anything ?
You are reborn as Lotus wvhich does not take
anything bad from muddy surroundings but
transforms its surroundings with its beauty
and fills it with fragrance. This is the magic araph. Water has the religion (Dharma) of
of a realised soul. Do you think doctors
Sahaja Yoga spontaneously as this is a
living proces.
is of water i. e. putting feet in the river, sea
For Cancer best treatment
will accept that there exists the Kingdom of cleansing and hence Shri VISHNU and
DATTATRAYA responsible for the religion
God and that it creates us and that the Lord Dharma) of human beings are to be wor-
of our aulonomous nervous system is our shipped. They help you to cure and also the
spirit which is the reflection of God ? You lncal Deity of the Chakra that is attacked.
can quote the names of people like Mr. Bose Putthe patient before the photograph with the
and Mr. Daftary and Mr. Sharma who are candle and his feet being in the water, bring
miraculously cured of his colour blindness
through Sahaja Yoga. In any case I am
going to America next year. One of my
dear Sons Dr. Lanjewar has now become tion, then he is cured. More in the next.
down your hands across the sympathetic ner-
vous system towards the water. The patient
will cool down gradually. If he gets realiza-
the president of the Medical Practitioners
Association of New York and is very an-
YOURS LOVING MOTHER
NİRMALA
24
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-23.txt 
 GGW
ce
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-24.txt 
 Registered with the Registrar of Newspapers under Regn. No. 36999/81
Basie, Dec. 16, '81
Dear Sahaja Yogi, Sahaja Yogini,
A central file is being built up in Switzerland on all the materials (posters,
letters, leaflets etc.) used to spread Sahaja Yoga in various anguages
English, French, Italian, German, Portuguese. Spanish
then be available for people who desire the photocopy of a specific model:
ex letter to a TV station (like the one we sent to the press in New York). It
may be circulated whenever required. Also we will collect all press articles
in the various languages. Above all, a record will be kept of everything that
The material will
..
has been tried and done. Later on we will make an exhibition.
You are kindly requested to send any material (Australia) or any new material
(UK, India) to:
Arneau de Kalbermatten
5, Binningerstrasse,
4123, Allschwil (Baselland).
Switzerland.
We should not take too seriously these slightly bureaucratic activities ! Yet
such a file may be of some help to our information network. And may
the supreme Mother smile at the plays of her little children.
Jai Mataji
much love, Gregoire and Arneau
जय माताजी निर्मला देवो नमो नमः
"भजन" चाल : आम्ही बिघडलो तुम्ही विधडाना
आम्ही विषडलो तुम्ही बिचडाना ।
विषडली चेतन्यमय शाली ।। १ ।।
निर्मलेच्यासंगे बाधा बिधडली, बाध विधडली प्रकाशमय झाली ।। २ ।॥
माताजींच्या संगे मुले विश्रडली, मुले
सहजयोगासंगे मी बिधडलो, मोही विधडलो महायोगी आलो ।। ३.॥
महायोगासगे जन विषडले. जन विषडले सच्चीदानंद झाले ।। ४ ।।
माताजींच्यासंगे राग बिषडला, राग बिधडला अनुराग झाला ।। ५ ।।
शिवार्म्याच्यासंगे दोष विधडला दोष विपडला परमात्माही झाला। ६ ॥
मातेच्यासंगे विकार विधडला विकार विधडला निर्मलवी झञाला ।। ७ ॥।
सह जयोगी-पंढरीनाथ जयवंत (मुंबई केन्द्र )
Edited & Published by Sh. S. C. Rai, 43, Bungiow Road, Delhi-110007 and
Printed at Ratnadeep Prass, Darva Gani, New Deihi-110002.
One Issua Rs 6.00 Annual Subscription Rs. 30 00 Foreign (By Airmail E 5 $ 10]
