Nirmala Yoga Vol. 9 Year 2 May-June '82 Bi-Manthly "Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns all the religions and seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga-THE UNION"

 Nirmala Yoga 43, BUNGLOW ROAD, DELHI-110007 (INDIA) Founder-Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmała Devi Editorial Board: Dr. S. K. Mathur, Sri A. S. Mishra, Sri R. D. Kulkarni REPRESENTATIVES London : Australia : Cheryl Hynes 10, Clarence Road, Burwood, N.S.W. 2134, Gavin Brown Brown's Geological Information Services Ltd. 160 North Gower Street, Australia. NW1 2ND (UK) London. Mr. Subhash B. Pradhan 12416, Reva Street, Cerritos, U.S.A. : Hong Kong: Emilie P. SHI California-90701 U.S.A. Cliff Rence Bros. Co. Ltd., 1610 Wing On Centre, 111, Connaught Rd. Central. Switzerland : Arneau de Kalbermatten Binningerstrasse 5, 4123, Allschwil (BL). Switzerland. M. B. Ratnannavar 13, Merwan Mansion, Genjwala Lane, Borivali (W), Bombay: Marie Rouger 9 Allee du Rocher France: Bombay-400 092. 93340 LE RAINCY Page CONTT ENTS 1. 1. Editorial 3. 2. Predictions 3. Shri Jesus Christ announces the incarnation of Shri Mataji 4. The Value of Marriage 5. Dedication to Shri Mataji 6. Pledge 7. Sahaja Yoga Canada Newsletter 8. From Mass Preaching to Mass Realisation 9. Prayer 10. Letter 11. The Collective Joy 12. Thank you, Mother! 13. First Light 14. The Vishuddhi and Collectivity in Brighton-(1) 15. Tentative Programme of Shri Mataji and Festivals 16. Experience 17. On Blake's Birthday 14 15 16 18 20 21 22 24 25 26 30 31 32 2nd Cover 18. Representatives & Cotents 19. Warning 4th Cover

 EDITORIAL सारेक्चरण युगलान्तविगलोतः স सुवाधारा पप्रचं सिचन्ती पुनर्रपि रसाम्नाव महसः । अवाप्य स्वा भूमि भुजग निभमध्युष्ट वलय स्वमात्मान कृतवा स्वपिषि कुलकुण्डे कुहरिशी । Yugalüntarvigalitaih såraishcharana Sudhādhārā Prapancham Sinchanti Punarapi rasāmnāya mahasah Aväpya Swām-Bhoomi Bhujag Nibhamadhyushta Valayam Swamatmanam Kritva Swapishi Kulakunde Kuharini. Oh glorious one drenching the universse with nectar dripping from your lotus feet, you descend from the dizzy heights to your abode and turning yourselfinto serpentine coil sleepin the fine hole of lotus-root-like mooladhar That is how Shri Adi Shankaracharya says, the Kundalini has come to reside in Mooladhar of cosmic being and this would apply equally aptly to individual being. In the sixth chapter of his commentary on the Geeta, Shri Jnaneshwar has beautifully des- cribed the Kundalini as ; She is the cosmic Mother Jagadamba she has protected the Universe from the time when it was just a seed, the receptacle of Param Shiva, the Mother of Pranava. He then explains how Kundalini ascends, enters the Brahmarandhra and removing the veil of 5 elements unites the individual consciousness with Universal consciousness. He also explains that the Yoga of Kundalini is the safest path that leads to God realization and many great saints and seekers have followed it in the past. He has made the following prophesy 1

 बाहेर युक्तीची मुद्रा पडे । त्व प्रात आत सुख वाढे ।। नाभ्यासिता ।॥ तेथे सहजेचि योग धडे । Bāher Yuktichi Mudrā Pade-Tava äta āta sukha vädlhe Tethe sahajechi Yogu Ghade-Nabhyasita As the balanced state (in which all extremeties are avoided) shows its effect externally, then the inner happiness grows In that person, Yoga takes place spontaneously (Sahaja), for which no efforts from the seeker are required. Note the words, "Yoga becoming Sahaja" According to him, this Yogi has steady mind like the flame of a lamp, in still air. However the prophesy could not come true for another 700 years, as in Kaliyuga, balanced living, avoiding the extremities, is diffi- It became possible only after the advent of Adi Shakti on the cult for a common man. spring equinox. Before that she came as virgin Mary, for opening the Agnya Chakra of Cosmic being. Perhaps, she chose equinox to arrive amongst us again, in order to correct some imbalance at Cosmic level which would facilitate enactment of the final act of the cosmic play. Mahakundalini then further ascended and entered the Sahastrar chakra of Virata, İ.e., Universal being, true to her name Sahastrārām-bujā-roodha (one who resides in Sahastrar lotus). At microcosmic level awakenining and raising of the Kundalini to Sahastrar, has become thereafter, child's play. She is Sudha-sära-bhivarshini (one who showers nectar), whole universe is filled with nectarine vibrations and every seeker can now enjoy its showers from our beloved Mother's lotus feet. May the darkness of evil be dispelled from the Universe. May the pure-desire be awakened and fulfilled in every human being, may the aggregate of God-realised souls, live on the back of the Mother earth, in everlasting oneness with the Primordial Father. Om twameva Sakāskāt Shri Sahastrār Swāmini Moksha Pradāyini Adi Shakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devyai Namo Namah. 2.

 PREDICTIONS* And here they have tried to establish how astrology is so correct and whatever is do or not to do, that means MAHAKALI predicted 14,000 years back is also coming AND MAHALAKSHMI-all the powers. true today. About 2000 years back one of Before this the people used to go into the great astrologers of this place, not BHAKTI (devotion), GYANA means reading Sholapur but a little downward in Karnataka; PATANJALI Yoga and then they used to he has described it so clearcut that you get their Mokshas. But with this new will be amazed. And he will possess all the powers to method that this MAHAYOGI will bring in the pure power within you, in your Chakras He said that this Great Yogi will came will rise and as a result the KUNDALINI on this earth on Pisces and so lam born SHAKTI will be awakened and will be en- just on the cusp of Pisces and Aries but that is not so important. lightening. Because of this new method of MAHAYOGA, you will see with your own Then he says gradually we will start seeing eyes and you will get in this body in your some miracles from 1964 to 1966. He says that it may be little bit but he says that real body the joy of realization in your lifetime. change in the age (MANVANTAR), the Imagine 2000 years back, he is greater than new age will start from 1970 and by 1980 it , I must say. His will take its grip. That time, by this new method, new age will be formed, the old one (VAIVASTA) be over. You see we have the 'YUGAS'. One of the Yugas will be over and that Yuga is in KALI-YUGA, That Many people, great saints, sacrificed their is how KALI-YUGA will be finished from body in living condition. They went into a 1970-will start receding back, the Kaliyuga cave and shut thamselves and died. That and a new age of active divinity will start is not necessary with this new method. (Krita Yuga). lifetime the realisation, you will get in your BLAKE, ACHARYA KAKA BHUJANDER TATWA- name was CHARY. You don't have to sacrifice this body. You won't die either,means you will achieve your spirit and (SAKSHATKARI SANT) That time the Sun will rule in a new way. realised souls, the saints who have realized The axis of earth will be reduced and the the BRAHMANANDA, the joy of BRAHMA, speed of the earth will be reduced gra- by this new YOGA and they won't have to dually. And at that time a great MAHA- go into SAMADHI. YOGI will be born who will be completely people just sit down and go on meditating PARBRAHMA completely PARBRAHMA; for hours together and the ants grow upon that's Me. (JAGATMATA NIRMALA DEVI them, and all that. dust without doing any- KI JAI) Samadhi is where thing like that they will get their realization *These words of H. H. Mataji were recorded at Sholapur in January 1982, when She spoke about predictions done long ago, about Her Advent and Sahaja Yoga, particularly by Acharya Kaka Bhujandar Satwacharya, in his book "NARHI GRANTH", 3.

 And they will enjoy the joy of BRAHMA- the SAHAJA-SAMADHI. This is SAHAJA fly in the air also with that body. Also they SAMADHI, according to him, May be that some of you, if you want,can can become subtle and enter into the body of others to get them cured. That you are Amongst millions, first one will get rea- already doing. lization. So you understand your own tosition. You see the way sometimes we fritter away our attention in nonsensical by any weapons. Also you will be able to things you realize that among millions you see these subtle things with your own eyes. are one. This is written here. WE fritter You can see them This will not only hap- away our attention in useless things llke my pen in India but all over the wor ld. wife, my husband, my children, this, that. It is written here that among millions only That is why there are powers which will look one will be selected. Do you follow that They will not be touched by the fire and India is a country of great PUNYAS. after the afflictions of this country and this point ? country will gradually rise. over Then all the human race can get C their death i.e. destruction, through this He says that the third world war, they may go for the 3rd world war and they Yoga, You will have to lead a life, a married wiu have to suffer for it, Atter that this life,, a normal life, may not be married but like a life of a normal householder otherwise countries will come together, with a under- you cannot get this Yoga. Like, if you standing of collective oneness and they will become a big 'SAINT' or a 'SADHU BABA' or a "GURU' or something great, then you bin city (I don't know which one) a conference cannot get this Yoga. You will have to be of all the countries will be held. There, not the a normal householder may be married or Great Incarnation will interfere and all the understand that war is so horrible. In a very may not be married is not the point. SAN- politicians but the yogis will direct them. SARIK means living on this earth, living down to the basic grassroo's level. Yogis, he calls them yogis throughout. This third World War might be the one w had with with China, may be Chinā, because he says that because of China's Then all the diseases w Il disapp ar. so fast in this Yoga, that you will not need any- aggressive policies and the 3rd World War thing like a hospital. Great. In the begin- ning this great Yogi, (now you people also) will have to fill the gaps only by touching people, can cure people. pravers, we will be able to unite all the This is a fact. Like a ARDHNARINATESH- WARA (is like SHIVA), that will be this thing for human beings disappear, their body will remain as it is divine knowledge and the science will and they wil have a body which is divine, become one. What a promise ! So don't worry too much able to establish the existence ot God and about your bodily comforts. Alright! we will have to bear lots of problems and But through countries. The old age will By the new inventions of Science, the With the science we will be death. That is how there will be coordina-

 tion, there will be correlationship between the science and the spirit or the divine attack on India. He has described here about the china's knowledge. They have also given the name of Jac- Already we are getting it because you qualine Murray. She is an American Lady. see on my photograph people get vibra- This woman had predicted about me and tions. It is a science on televisions, mantra, she had said that a great personality will and all that. If you start curing people be born in India, a lady; she said in 1924 through scientific methods, you are using but I was born in 1923, about correct. science for that purpose. We can prove that these things can be carried by magne- Advent will start a new age. There is a tic forces, by sound etc. difference of 10 years. But Cheiro has said about 1980 the new all these things. We can prove it. There is a lady called Alice Bailey. She Then he says that because of MAYA, yogis had to suffer a lot to become collec- is supra-conscious, I believe. In the supra- tively conscious-BRAHMET (aua) ie. to conscious state she has sald that since feel the BRAHMA and they had to do lots Indians have all their attention on Yoga, to penance, that was so difficult. It has that a new Yoga will come by which the This is the word people will be connected to Holy Ghost "SAHAJA" (SAHAJA PRAPT), "SAHA- She has said, this horrible one, Alice Bailey, JA", and you don't have to give up anything that there is a danger of third World War. It may be inevitable but that can be avoided if people develop love for each other with become, SAHAJA. to achieve BRAHMA. In the new Yoga system, when it will this Yoga. manifest in the different countries in the new age, the administration will be govern- ned by people, who will have their own part of it. powers of yoga-depending on how far you are in your yoga and their qualjty as yogis. That will be the determining factor. There are lots of things but I have said a Then, here is a tape of what Gyanesh- wara has said about this new age. What will happen ? How people will become They will be able to create a society realised? The translation of it is with me which will completely fulfil their desires but in Marathi. I have to transiate in Eng- and necessities and people won't need ish that how people will become realised money accumulated with them. Poverty and what will happen and how they will love and sickness will be completely finished each other and all these things he has sald, and in their absence the country, the Gyaneshwara. SAMAJ, (the society) will be healthy and restful and without any anger. ... 5

 SHRI JESU S CHRIST ANNOUNCES THE INCARNATION OF SHRI MATAJI From "The Aquarian Gospel of Jesus the Christ by Levi. the Supraconscious inspired author got the records of some of Jesus' teachings) Section XVIII 9. Then will the world be led to truth, 4. And Jesus spoke again unto the and man will be the truth. eleven and said, "Grieve not because I go away, for it is best that I should go away, she will convince the world of sin, and of 10. When she has come, the Comforter, If I go not the Comforter will not come to you. the truth of what I speak, and of the right- ness of the judgment of the just; and then the prince of carnal life will be cast out. 5. These things I speak while with you in the flesh, but when the Holy Breath shall come in power, lo, she will teach you more I need not intercede for you; for you will and more, and bring to your remembrance all stand approved, and God will know you then the words that I have said to you. 11. And when the Comforter shall come as he knows me. 12. The hour has come when you will 6. There are a multitude of things yet to weep. the wicked will rejoice because I go away; but Iwill come again and all your sor- rows shall be turned to joy; be said; things that this age cannot receive because it cannot comprehend. 7. But, lo, I say, Before the great day of the Lord shall come, the Holy Breath will who welcomes back a brother from the 13. Yea, verily, you will rejoice as one make all mysteries known- dead'. 8. The mysteries of the soul, of life, of death, of immortality; the oneness of a man speak not in proverbs any more; speak plai- with every other man and with his God. 14. And the disciples said our Lord, aly unto us, For Sahaja Yogis, at last, these words are plain enough. BOLO JAGATMATA SHRI MATAJI SHRI NIRMALA DEVI KI JAI "Devorss Publishers (Marina Del Rey, California, 1972). 6.

 Dollis Hill, LONDON 8th March, 1980 THE VALUE OF MARRIAGE Sahaja Yoga, is first, to start your germi- person who has a left side which is very nation; then it grows; in that growth you strong, it will compensate, and that's how have to become a wider personality and a you will make a good marriage. wider personality. But, for that, one thing is very Important, that you must share. You must share life, every moment of it, every bit of it. If you do With a marriage you become even a better person, or you develop a better per- sonality. Now, why marriage is necessary not khow how to share life it's going to be for Sahaja Yogis ? thing, it is the most normal thing to do. is do We express our love ?-by sharing all to marry. God has given you this desire to be married for some purpose, but this same First and faremost very difficult. When it comes to love, how our joys, all our pains, all our problems.... But in Sahaja Yoga it is a little more, I think desire if you do not use it for the purpose it quite a lot more, much more. Here you have is given, it can become a perversion, it can to share the community, the marriage is not become a nasty thing, it can be very detri- for individuals in Sahaja Yoga, not at all. If mental to your growth; so one should anybody has a feeling a marriage in Sahaj- understand this desire within us to have a yoga is between two people is a wrong thing: it is two communities, It can be two Nations, it can be completely two universes. So it is marriage. Marriage means, wife who is a part and not tobe enjoyed between yourself. If you are parcel of your being, a wite on whom you good husband wife to each other, it is not can depend; she's your mother, she's your sufficient in Sahaja Yoga. That love should sister, she's your child, she's everything: be enjoyed by every one else in the society, you share all your feelings with your wife; in the community. If you cannot do that so it is important that the wife should be then you have not achieved Sahaja-yoga mar- such that she should understand that this Is riage, it is just an ordinary marriage as people have, it's just that. There's nothing special about it. Such marriages should be Now in Sahaja Yoga, as you have seen, able to give chances for very great souls all of you have problems either of the left, to come on this earth. A person who is or of the right. Now when these marriages married in Sahaja Yoga, who are Sahaja will take place, mostly spontaneously it will Yogis, who are sharing their love equally happen, by Nature's Plan itself, that you with the Sahaja Yogis and the society that will marry a person who is a complementary is Sahaja Yoga, then only great people will personality to you. Because supposing you be born. I would say Bohdan has done that, are a left-sided person, and if you have a Bohdan and Mandy, they have done it. It's the need of a marriage

 something surprising, you see they were realised this point there would have been engaged before Sahaja Yoga, they were much less problem, married after realisation, and I don't know how it has clicked in their life that they really share companionship with other they control others, or dominate others or Sahaja Yogis. Whenever he writes to me he always writes about Sahaja Yogis, he'll way. It is heart which really governs every- ask about every one of them, he'll ask thing. Heart rules out everything else, it is about them how are they, what are their heart which has got the power to envelop problems. Unless and until it happens the the brain, to soothe it. Brain is a headache, marriage has no meaning in Sahaja Yoga, you know; it works, works, tike mad. But at all, no meaning. So first test of a Sahaja heart is the one which really covers the body Yogi marriage is how much you have been with its love and can soothe, can give it joy able to share by this marriage other people. Now see it is not the way people think sort of try to suppress them. It is not that and happiness. It is the heart which contains fhe spirit. So heart is a very important Now for example in a normal marriage thing, which is the power of the body, like man is the person who is the head of the ultimately you have to become the Spirit, family, as you say. Now he has to be the which is in the heart. head, the man has to be the head, for cer- tain reasons. There is nothing wrong in With brain you natice, and that's why man becoming the head, it's alright, you man has to become the head, he has to go become the heart. Heart is more important out, he has to work, he has to deal with than the head is. Perhaps we do not realise people, he is an extrovert as you call it; and that, how heart is important; you see even if a woman has to work sometimes, if there's the head falls the heart can go on. We can difficulties and troubles are. But the woman always go on up till the heart is going on, should not feel dominated if the man says but if the heart fails, the head fails too. So "Alright you don't work'. But if he says it you are the heart as a woman and he is the in love ! Now, if the brain starts dominating head of the family. Let him have that feeling the heart too much, what will happen ? that he is the head; it is a feeling, just a Then, there will be dryness. You see, like feeling. Like the head always feels he many men are very meticulous, very parti- also knowS cular-they are headaches, absolute head- that it is the heart one has to cater, it aches to themselves, to others, and to the is the heart which is all pervading, whole society. Such people can become is the real source of everything. So the extremely dry and they can be all the time, woman's position, if she understands how you see, like they can never enjoy their important it is, she would never feel let wives, they cannot enjoy their children, they down or dominated, if she knows she is the cannot enjoy anything whatsoever because heart. I think this is the point people, women you see they are so particular; like they say, especially, in the West, have lost and have "Come at five-ten'. If you reach there at forgotten and have not realised. If they had five-nine or five-eleven you have had it; they decides, but the 8.

 are just watching time, just to find out the way you have to go'. I say 'Oh alright, you faults, you see as soon as the wife comes can go ahead, and I'Il walk with you', but i in they'll be shouting "what, you come so said "You know I think it's not the road, I'll late! How many ? Forty-five seconds- have to walk back again I know for definite, lost ! You see, the wife is coming, the ex- but alright if you wantI can walk with you. pectancy, the meeting of it, the joy of it, you All right I'm walking, I'm just enjoying, I are going to meet your own heart ! It's may have to go this way only, so'. Then he lucky ! You miss your luck! "Is it true ? Is it cor- rect?'... Then he starts thinking, you know, Or may be, because starts wondering Now this brain can go all off the rule, Is it really ? that you see, it can go off, and it can be very, She has instincts ? You see. Because She very taxing; it creates tremendous problems has intuition, She has so many things, She with it. So, heart must be respected, heart gets that, what you call a hunch'...They must be obeyed. That's the point. Heart get a hunch of it and that's what it is. And must be obeyed. But that doesn't mean that the women should dominate men, it hunches of the wife are correct, then they doesn't mean must understand what your love says. You about making your husband follow you ? see, do it in love. If you do it in love is very it's wrong, I think. There's no need for him once they start understanding that the that. Obeyed means, you follow her in a way. But what is so great good. to follow You go this way'; what need is there to do all that ? We are going the same For example I am lecturing you morning till evening, you are not tired; you are not Way, but we must know that somebody is tired of My lectures. Normally people should on the left, one is on the right. The left has be... What's this sermon going on ? This to be on the left; supposing the left wheel lady all the time talking to us ? . do not mind it, for one reason. Why ? Be- wheel left What are we going to do about cause you know I love you very much. In it ? We are all going the same way. the same way the woman must establish the role, that she loves. The man may become a little funny, but he'll come round. are two wheeis needed to give it a balance, He'll go a little astray but he'll come round. but we are going on the same way. These But do not judge him in outward domina- people don't realise. They think one wheel tions.. Like you see if he says 'This colour has to go on the right, another has to turn to is not good. Alright, whatever you like l'll the left. So imagine what will be the condi- putit. Then he'll say 'Oh, I think the one you tion of such a family, We are going on the have put was good. You know I was really same way. Only understanding is needed, foolish'. He would say like that. You just that one has to live with the powers of agree to them you know. I mean I have ex- heart, and another has to live with the perimented this in my own life. I have done power of rationality, of understanding. Now it. For example my husband doesn't know when it comes to rationality, ultimately it much of roads. So, supposing we are going will turn to heart. Because it reaches somewhere, and he says 'I think this is the point when it does not know, you see, then But vou starts going to the right, we'll have only one There are no two ways about it, there 9

 it comes to heart. Once women realise it, because somebody cares for you, there's this that they have this within themselves- a concern, somebody loves you, wants you but you must nurture your power of heart. to have this and wants you to do that; you But you compele with them in everything; like such a person, you want somebody to If he goes on the horse, why can'tI ? If do that.You do not want to be left to he can do this, why can'tI"? f he can drive, dogs, that Do whatever you please'. That I can drive'. You See, wisdom lies in doing kind of thing is no good. And once you deve- things-many things-by avoiding them. lop thatieeling 'Oh' that person cares for me, You see, for example, I don't drive, so every- vou see, that person loves', then you start body drives me around;1 don't type-very also caring for the feeling of that person. good, everybody types for me. You also start to understand (Now again the guilt is working, now will you stop teel- ing guilty about anything. I do not say But I do some things which nobody can do as well as I can do, like I can cOok very these things to make you feel guilty, but well, so when it comes to cooktng they have to come to Me. It's like that. But you don't do everything that the men want to do, or you don't do everything that the women want to do. For men will be cooking and women will be driving is a wrong thilng Men the power and Krishina was the one who Just to understand you have to be in a very light mood, in a very light mood). This has been created long time balance back-a very long time back. Say, even when Radha-Krishna existed, Radha was should know all manly things and women should know all womanly things. They must learn. They must put their hearts into it. I potential and the kinetic. People only know mean women can be equally intelligent, men can be equally intelligent. Women can go on the right hand, men can go on thing. She had to dance and He pressed the left hand. No doubt abput it. But, you put Her feet and He said now You must be tired. imbalance to the whole universe by that; Why did She dance? Because without Her that's the point. Is not that by doing that dancing thing could not work out. So it is so you are in any way less or more; this idea interdependent, it is should go out of your minds absolutely, as you cannot have only a wick and you that men think I am the man who wears the was expressing it. It's as you say, the about Krishna, but Radha was the power. When He had to kill Kamsa He had to ask Radha to do it. It was She who did every- so interdependent, cannor have only the light. You cannot pants' Alright, you wear the pants, but we have these two things separately. If you can wear the beautiful skirts, alright. That's the understand that then this balance is com- pletely harmonious, it is between God and His Power : absolutely One-you cannot You see once this goes away Sahaja Yoga imagine how it is One!-with God and His will work out better, The domination is felt Poer. His Power, His desire is the same way it should be looked after. only when there is no love. You see, some- as God, there's no difference at all. times people like to dominate, isn't it. For exmple they say now this food, you must have this; and you like ted people, your desire is different, your But in human beings you are disintegra- come along, have 10

 thinking is different, your asking is different. a man, he is absoluely an earthworm: So everything is so disintegrated. That's why this is what it is, a man has to have charac- marriages are absolutely disintegrated. The ter, he has to have that chivalry in him, he complete integration is the intermingling. has to have that courage in him, he has to If the wife has to work, one need not worry. have that protective thing. If thieves come if the man has to work it does nol worry, as in the house the man telis the wife 'Oh, you long as there is complete understanding of go and open the door, and l'm going to integration, of balance, within you. course women are responsible-the grace says "I am going to dominäte". That's not of the family, she has to be gracious, it the way. The man has to protect. The man doesn't look nice for a woman to behave has to look after. Thal's why doesn't matter Of hide', and when the thleves go away he like a man. Because man need not be if he is a little crude sometimes, doesn't that gracious as a woman is, he's after all matter, because he has to face, he's, you a man, so it's alright in his behaviour-he can say, he's llke a thorn, and women are need not be atrocious-but I mean some- like flowers. timas if he swears sometimes, doesn't Now in the thorn and the flower you mátter in a way for a man. But for a woman it does because she is a gracious would like to be the flower, isn't It? But in But there are some things a man a man and woman you would like to be cannot do. You se like taking an interest thorn. So il's wrong. He has to protect, in women, you see. Some men are so hot, he has to look after the invasions on the you know, horrible, absolutely I canno't family life, and other things. On the understand the way they take interest in contrary they are the ones who allow infil- women, What dresses women wear, what trations by wrong people in the family, is the perfumes, all this sort of thing. All this rat-like behaviour, is horrible, and this can- bring horrible people through their domlna- not be manly. That means they are such tion. "Oh, she's my friend, how can you slaves of women, they may call themselves object ?" But what sort of a friend is she ? something, this and that. You know, I heard He has to say 'No, I do not like these people that this Mrs Kennedy's underclothes were to come into the house. they're not the right for sale, and people from Australia were type, they have to get out., 1t is he who flying out to buy them.I mean, think of these has to say. And the woman has to under- men, what da you call them? I don't know stand. But if he says it just out of domina- what you call them in English language, but tlon, it is nonsense. they are just worse than earthworms. I don't know from where they come. They bring in horrible women they man So everything has lwo sides, you can see clearly; if it is done in love it is perfect, So, man has to be a man and man is a but if it is done in domination it is nonsen- person like Rama. You have heard about sical. Why dominate? I mean I don't under- His life, how He was, you see, how He loved stand the word domination. When there His wite, respected His own chastity. A are two wheels do they dominate each man who cannot respect his chastity is not other? Can they ? If one dominates, say one 11

 becomes bigger than the other, it will go not spend money for that, need not, you can round and round. Won't it ? There's no just be kind to them, nice to them, and little question of domination in this, but is a ques- money too; you see there's no harm in tion of integration and understanding and spending little money for others ....and complete cooperation with themselves- expressing your love. You see we are still which must permeate into the society, into very meticulous in our Sahaja Yoga, as far as money's concerned, as far as love is con- cerned, we are very, very cautious, we have the family. The marriages which are not helpful to so much of fear within us.... the society are of no use; they are just a Now domination should never come in waste, just a waste, you see. We have so many marriages like this; people get married, Sahaja Yoga at all. For example when am live well, happily among themselves and telling you anything an outsider might think finish off. These are the marriages which that I am dominating you, because really are going to change the society, with their I am touching very sore points within you, joy, happiness, make a home where every- it you see it clearly. (It is there putting the body is expected, look after them, do for left side too much, you are all feeling guilt, others. You see there are many people that's not good, come along....) So who think nobody's doing anything for us. the-this is also an ascape, you see, that What have you done for others? What have you start feeling guilty and then you just you done? Have you done anything for don't cure yourself. Just don't feel guilty them? This, once you start deciding and about anything. You see lam just telling unerstanding, it will be very good. Normally you this becanse I have to tell you. Now a woman is, if not brought up properly, can one can feel that this is domination if they be very very conceited, and can be very do not see the love behind it, the beauty selfish and self centred. Man can be also, behind it, the compassion there. So never but women can be because, if they're not to feel that anybody dominates you it is the brought up properly, I am saying, they might best way. not like to spend their money on others, they wouldn't like others to come into the house and share this and that. But again we You are the spirit. Your ego can be hurt; have to judge it, is it done in love or not ? you are the spirit, It cannot be dominated. Like the husband, you see, brings his But you are the spirit ? Are you feeling friends, and they may not like the friends your Spirit ? If you are feeling your Spirit coming in, because it means money you you can never be dominated, no one can see; they would like to have more ornaments dominate you. But if you feel that way all to themselves, than to have some freinds for the time, that you are dominated, you will their friend. Can be, can be like that. Some become a very very nervous person, you can men could be like that also, but both the be a horrible person, you cannot face peo- things are wrong. This should be shared to ple. So it is time that you realised you are be understood, and the whole thing is that Spirit and your hasband is also Spirit; or if you must lavish your love on others. Need you are the husband you must know the You see, how can you be dominated ? 12

 wife also is Spirit. And a mutual respect people, the Les Miserables, you see, they must grow in that level because both of you sit down crying, boo-hoo-hoo for nothing at are Saints, you are Sahaja Yogis. You all you see, the whole world is collapsing must respect each other, because you are before them. Now there are some great Sahaja Yogis. Everybody respects you poets like Lord Byron maybe or someone, because you are Sahaja Yogis, who have horrible people who have written horrible not achieved self-realisation, "Ah, they are poems like that, and then they will recite Realised Souls'..Just think that. when those poems, "Oh the sweetest songs are you were not realised somebody tells you those; and all sorts of nonsense. Now for he is a Realised Soul, how you would have Sahaja Yogis-you are not to indulge in felt about that person, You are not cons- this kind of nonsense, of sitting down and cious of that. But you should be conscious. indulging into this kind of enjoying the By that you should not become vain; but miseries of each other. For the present you THIE you must respect others, those who are have no miseries. Whatever has been realised souls. They're the children of your there is passed and finished. Now you are MOTHER. When talking to each other you new people, with new awareness, with new have to understand that; more so when you things, you have no miseries. So forget all those things and try to enjoy each other's company. And if you start doing that sitting are husband and wife. The whole understanding that you had down and enjoying the miseries, you get out so far of husband and wite must be given of it immediately and say 'Oh, we are getting up, it is ! think a contract sort of a marri- into the same play of Lord Byron'. I do not age; in the marriage you see how much want to create Lord Byrons out of Sahaja he dominates, what are his powers, what Yogis any more. So please remember that, are my powers, how much money I get, how don't sit down and discuss and analyse much he gets where the money is kept, what's all that. You See it will only bannen your miseries, you have no miseries of any kind... ..You are the Spirit, you are the when you do not trust each other. But go on source of joy for yourself and for others and trusting more and more; there should be a competition in loving, there should be you have no business to sit down and cry competition in trusting, in being honest, in and weep. And I don't know what's hap- pening, I don,t know why you don't know being kind. in being in service. Let there be a competition like that and you'll achieve your Spirit. Don't you know your Spirit? You results. The competition should be on the know ? Then why don't you know ? You other side, instead of dominating, instead have your vibratiory awareness, and why is of being afraid, instead of sharing all it you are saying you do not know ? You have to know everything, it has to be a very positive act to be happy, to be fragrant with nonsense. That's another thing which1 joy and to give joy to others; that has to be out. which happens to a married couple and with you otherwise everything has no mean- which is very, very wrong also, that both of l try My level best to make them take up the role of very miserable must point ing. You see (Contd, on Page 31) 13

 DEDICATION TO SHRIMATAJI Read at the Easter Puja, Sunday 11th April 1982 our hearts ! Let us pray to You, Mother, to be Your soldiers, the soldiers of truth and MOTHER, For your Birthday we have made a righteousness. Please take out our passivity, pledge. We shall dedicate our life to Sahaja kill our inaction, destroy our apathy. Yoga. What is this pledge and to what extent can we follow this pledge ? My brothers and sisters, let us wake up to gain the battlefield. Are we Sahaja Yogis or are we cowards ? Do we realize that we are the children of ADI SHAKTI ? Do the moment our spirit rejoins Your heart, we see every second our life that She is Mother; we are collective the moment tour Almighty, that everything which lives and smile irradiates our beings: we are collec- pulsates comes from Her and goes to Her, tive the moment Your eyes of love and that the whole Universe is in Her command compassion pour into our heart their Divine and bows to Her Lotus Feet, that all the flow of unequalled beauty; we are collective angels äre protecting us to win the war? We We have to be collectively surrendered to our beloved Mother. We are collective the moment Your heart touches with soft- are not allowed to sit down. We have to stand up, to take the sword, to hold it firm ness and peace the inner part of ourselves. Collective means one heart in the heart in our hands. What is more glorious and of the Divine, one smile in the smile of God beautiful than to fight beside our beloved Almighty, one joy melted in the Divine joy Mother ! And when in the middle of the of Your Glory, You, our beloved Mother, one sound expressed through the extramely let us just pronounce Her name in our beautiful melody of Your voice. battlefield we feel that the fear gains us, heart. Your Name, Mother, like a pure river cleans and eliminates all our fears and Then we surrender to You: Surrender is a happening, it is the exchange of love between the Mother and the child. Let us doubts, fills us with confidence and joy, melt Your heart, let us dissolve ourselyse courage and faith, because Your Name is in the inner part of Your heart, so that we can see and feel the Glory of Your Becom- extraordinary Glory, eternal Purity, Cosmic ing, the tenderness of Your face and the Power, Greatest love, unsurpassed splen- the Name of God Almighty. tively surrender to You. Extreme Beauly, Let us collec- grace of Your hands. dour shining all over the Universe, Molher, Mother of All the Mothers, Mother of Your devoted children. But surrender is more. action magnified through collectivity. How can we love You, Mother, if we do not act ? How can we follow You if we don't fight ! and blessings it will reside in our hearts How can we be the golden builders if we forever. do not build Your love and compassion in Surrender is This is our pledge and with Your grace -Arneau de Kalbermatten 14

 PLEDGE Most worshipful and beloved Mother But Thou hast come within time so that we could fulfil our Thou art birthless. old dreams, behold Thee and celebrate Thy birthdays. In this year 1982, we Thy children by the grace of Thy love are gathered here orn behalf of the Sahaja Yogis of the whole world. And we say this: Mother of God, in the name of all the sacred deities who are Thyself, we solemnly pledge ourselves to build Thy derusalem with all our deslre, heart and consciousness; to dedicate our life to Sahaja Yoga so that, O beloved Great Goddess, through Thy love and power, the world will know that You came to give the meaning to Thy creation. AUM AMEN TO BE OBSERVED 1. In general, no one should close the eyes 5. At the time of collective meditation when Mother is personally present. When Mother tells you to close eyes then only you must. at centres, vermilion should be applied to Her Holiness Mataji's photo by only one person and not by every one. 2. Those having problems of left side 6. Never show your back to the Mother or should meditate keeping their eyes open. Her photo at the time of collective medi- tation/pooja. 3. When problam is on left side right hand should be placed on affected chakra/ 7. While receiving or seeing off the Mother garlanding should be done by one or two persons representing all Sahaja All should receive Her with folded hands and no one should fall on Her feet without Her permission. part and vice versa. 4. When worshipping the Mother's photo, never use for yourself the vermilion left on your finger after applying to the photo. Clean your hand and then apply fresh vermilion to yourself. Yogis of the place. 15

 Vancouver Sahaja Yoga Centre SAHAJA YOGA CANADA NEWSLETTER 31 March 1982 1950 E. 5th Ave Vancouver BC V 5N 1M2 Canada With April on our doorstep, we're look- possible we'll use personal contacts. Our ing forward to an active and energetic first talk to such a group will be tonight, to month working for Sahaja Yoga here in Canada. a Hatha Yoga group that Lori formerly be- longed to, in White Rock, a suburb of Vancouver where Lori lives. Mother said Before we left London, Mother instructed us on how we should go about our work in Canada. She said that the time was short and there was much to do and ing: Again, send any advice based on your this course of action was a success when used by, if memory serves us, Warren and Mateus for the Santa Cruz, California meet- suggested : experiences that you can. 1. Holding public Meetings 2. Going to already established seeking Our media contact has been limited. We will draw up a press release to accompany each notice placed in a local paper. Mother suggested writing articles on our trip to groups and talking to them 3. Getting out to the media We've approached the public Meetings India and on the false gurus, and approach- in this way: Choosing a neighbourhood or ing the local press for interviews and area of the city, finding a central community articles. We would appreciate greatly any meeting place, postering the local area and press releases which have been written as advertising in the local press as well as well as photocopies of articles written by getting free listings in Community Events Sahaja Yogis and others about Sahaja Yoga media. This past Monday, 29 March, our and about false gurus first meeting drew five seekers and six Sahaja Yogis, a result we were very pleased with. It allowed us to give better than one- to-one attention and gave us a gentle intro- and the USA. We hope to hold meetings duction to the art of public meetings. have two more meetings set up and we plan Victoria, BC, in April. Victoria is the nearest to do one a week, moving around the city. major Canadian city and the capital of our Advice sent to us on strategy, tactics and province, BC (short for British Columbia). protocol would be greatly appreciated. Mother also said we should, if we can, move into the neighbouring parts of Canada on a Friday, Saturday and Sunday in We We live on the mainland, while Victoria is at the southern tip of Vancouver Island, a We plan to write and call the established ferry-trip away. Soon we'd like to go to healing groups, psychotherapy groups, Calgary, east of here, and to Seattle, to the hatha yoga and tai chi groups etc. Where south, in the USA. We have a large area in 16

 Here in Vancouver we did pooja with all which to spread Sahaja Yoga when we in- clude the whole of Canada Mother said the other Sahaja Yogis across the world. It she is coming to North America in the fall, first to New York, then lo Boston, Toronto there were only five in the room. We have (Canada's largest city), Vancouver, then to about half dozen solid people here. Predic- California, Houston (Texas) through New York. A visit to Seattle would altogether while we were absent. With our be added if we set things up there and stops base stronger and more doubtless we reach in other cities are possible. was very strong, very beautiful, although and back tably a few got stronger and some fell of out and Mother works through us. Mother called Vancouver "virgin territory' One cannot sum up the tour in India in words. One cannot reduce to a deseription relatively untouched by the history of our the all-encompassing care we recetved from founding countries (England and France) or our Mother. The love and attention to our the materialism south of the border in the comfort we received from the Indian Sahaja Yogis was so subtle and unobtrusive, so profoundly bountiful and sweet. USA. From our front porch here you can see a formation in the mountains to the north, We take into our lives from the Indian The lions, named for the lions which quard Sahaja Yogis a deep inner tranquility and London, It's not hard to believe that Mother balance. We want very much to unlearn our Western inhibitions and complicated placed them here long ago, these giant concepts, and be able to enjoy, to laugh, and to express our collectivity with the same spontaneity and humility we found through. going forward confidently, knowing Mother out India. Nelson's statue in Trafalgar Square in symbols of courage and Kingship, to guard us and give us strength. In Canada, we're is taking care of us. But we're still very young and need all the help and advice Our return trip from India was extremely from our brothers and sisters that we can pleasent. We stopped only one day in Paris, get. Please write ! but oh what a day ! With six French Sahaja Being back home, reading the news- and watching TV (Nicaragua, Yogis and four English, the four Canadians participated in the pooja to establish the papers French Centre, a very special blessing from Guatamala, El Salvador) it's hard not to fee! Mother. We received terrific French hospi- the overwhelming urgency of our mission. tality and got some of the rich French food Sahaja Yoga is here to transform and that makes French livers what they are. change the world. The degree to which we do that is dependent, Mother tells us, on In England we were taken in typical warm our desire and our will. We must put our Sahaja style, leaving us wondering why the attention and desire on World Peace, do English are always telling us they have bad pooja for it, shoebeat the world leaders and hearts. We returned to Vancouver one at the bhoots of the countries themselves, pray a time, Lori on 7 March, Patrick on the 14th, for it. Our desire must encompass the and Mark on the 23rd after participating in whole world, for Mother means us to be Mother's birthday pooja. -JAI MATAJI universal. 17

 FROM MASS PREACHING TO MASS REALISATION Shri Jnaneshwar who wrote about the It was an Open Invitation Kundalini Shakti. In the language of Some of the local devotees were al- Her Holiness masses witnessed its awakening in his devotees and their mass realisation with Matai's photograph. As they sat down. the blessings of Shree Mataji, the Adi with their hands stretched towards Shree Kundalini; पैतन्य चवजतीची शोना. Beauty of the emperor of Chaitanya (consciousness), ready attracted towards Mataji's photograph, others also followed one by one The only information about It happened at Nevase, a village near Shree Mataji that was given by the Sahaja Aurangabad (Maharashtra, India), about 700 years ago, Shri Jnaneshwar had and with Her blessings the realisation takes explained the Geeta in Marathi, the langu- place and those who sincerely desire to age of masses, for the first time. Till then have supreme experience may pray to Her knowledge of the Geeta remained confined for the same, to only priestly and elite class. This work, later, popularly came to be known as Jnan- us it was a first experience of mass Kunda- eshwari and is being read, every day. with great devotion, by lakhs of people in Maha- thought or planned about it in advance. rashtra. In its sixth chapter Jnaneshwar has explained in detail about Kundalini Shakti. where Yogis was that she is their spiritual Guru As a matter of fact practically for all of lini awakening and more so nothing was It was all spontaneous and Sahaja. The photograph of Shree Mataji was placed in The A temple has been built on the spot between us and the new seekers. where the Geeta was explained. About 50 Sahaja Yogis and Sahaja Yoginis started Sahaja Yogis from Australia and Europe giving vibrations to the aspirants. Pindrop visited the temple in Jan. 81. As the village silence prevailed in the temple within the is not a tourist spot, the visit by the fore:g- shortest time. ners, with such simplicity and having red markon their foreheads, made the villagers After about 10-15 minutes the Deities of very curious. Moreover, the Sahaja Yoais' all the respective chakras were invoked regard towards Jnaneshwsr was clearly seen from their faces and the garlands they were carrying. When a few villagers enquired, they were told that the temple has a great through the MANTRAS- The seekers were also prompted to ask clarification within their hearts from Shri Jnaneshwar as to whether he also regards Mataji Nirmala Devi as the incarnation of Adi Shakti Bhagwati ? significance from spiritual point of view and Shri Jnaneshwar is still present in the temple. They were also told to ascertain This was responded very quickly and many of them confirmed that there was a the fact themselves. 18

 sensation of tingling on their palms, Within lisation is indeed most imporlant in Sahaja next few minutes one of the seekers infor- Yoga. med us that he was feeling cool breeze over his palms. The man sitting next to him was requested to check up over the head of the Realisation. After Realisation a person is person who was feeling cool breeze. If there is a desire, Mother gives the transformed absclutely. He can give Reali- sation to people, he can cure others, he He expressed his great surprise and can know his own problems, his reported that a forceful draft of cool air was surroundings, he can clean himself and coming out of the head of his neighbour: others. Once this is experienced, the faith As a result all of them started checking remains no more a blind faith. Sahaj yogi their Sahasraras and dozens of seekers experiences that a photograph of Mother is confirmed that they were feeling cool breeze just a representative of Adishakti Mataji over their palms and heads. We all felt Nirmala Devi because her attention is there. extremely grateful to Mataji for fulfilling our desire under the circumstances to help the settled down in Sahaja Yoga seriously. seekers for getting Realisation. own But for this purpose one is required to be Though we were not accompanied by Mother in our journey, we realised that we helped The remainig seekers were collectively as well as individually and about are in Her and she is in us and that we are more than 250 seekers of all ages and sex aware of our wholesomeness and she is were found realised with the blessings ot our wholesomeness. The faith started Shree Mataji. growing stronger and stronger and in a real sense this is Becoming. This experience further strengthened our confidence in the great power of vibra- tions given by Mother. The experience of the actualisation in the process of the Rea- Jai Mataji Gopal Patankar The lamps that burn high cannot be pressed by cover. They You yourselves are lamps. become much more forceful than the cover. It is their own achievement. When they are struck, they are distrubed and extinguished. Why are your lamps disturbed ? It is necessary to think on this. Is there no transpa- rent sheath of love around them ? Have you forgotten your Mother's love for you ? Are you disturbed because of that ? As the glass cover protects the lanip, in the same way my love will protect you. But, how to keep the glass clean ? How can I explain ? Shall I say like Shri Krishna, -SHRI MATAJI 19

 PRAYER देवि प्रपत्नातिहरे प्रसीद प्रसीद मातर्जगतोऽसखिलस्य । प्रसीद विश्वेववरि पाहि विश्वं त्वमीश्वरी देवि चराचरस्य ।। Devi Prapannārti-hare Praseed Praseed Mätar-Jagatao-Khilasya | Praseed Vishve-Shwari Pähi Vishwam Twamee-Shwari Devi Chara-Charasya | Translation : O Devi, you, who removes the distress of your suppliants, be gracious. Be gracious, O Mother of the World. Be gracious, O Queen of the Universe. Protect the universe. O Devi, you are the Ishwari (the Goddess, the queen) of all moving and unmoving things. आधारभूत। जगतस्त्वमेका महीस्वरूपेण यतः स्थितासि । अपां स्वरूपस्थितया त्वयंत- दाप्यायते कृत्स्तमलंघ वीर्ये ॥ Ādhāra-Bhootā Jagatas-Twametā Mahee-Swaroopena Yatah Sthitāsi | Apăm Swaroopa-Sthitaya Twayait Dāpyă Yate Krutsna-Malangha-Veerye | Translation: You are the only support of the World, because you are in the form of earth. By you who exists in the form of water, is the whole universe pervaded, your powers are unsurpassed. Devi Mahatmayam Chap. XI 20

 Dear Brothers and Sisters of India, Having already been back home for a while, it is hard to tell you in words what was our experience in India. So better to let our hearts speak: You have given us so much, so much in all dimensions. Every day, every minute you were taking so much care of us, organizing, arranging everything so well. You were treating us like "princes" and we do not know how we deserved it. Because you were taking off our shoulders the worries of accommodation, transport and food, you were giving us the grace to put our attention only on the essential : our spirit, our Divine Mother. We have learnt so many things from you : The Power of Love Love is our most powerful weapon; it does not fear anything, it overcomes all the obstacles : levels the mountains of hate and arrogance, fills the ditches of despair and loneliness, softens the corners of lite. When it opens, it lets the flow of joy pour with Love is the key to the heart. abundance and life. Like the stream, it runs through the fields, nourishing the grass, allowing new seeds to take birth and grow. Like the sun, it just emits, emits everywhere without expecting anything back, shining with glory.. And the one who is sensitive will be attracted by this force and will desire to stay in this light. Love is the bond among men which will bring peace on earth. It is the basic structure of our collectivity. You have also shown us what humility was. Without humility how can we reach the Almighty ? What are we so far ? What have wB done to deserve the Grace to have been chosen by the Adi Shakti ? Nothing. She is the Embodiment of all the universes, of all the powers, of all what is breathing and living. So, what can we pretend to ? Better let our baloon of ego deflate and pray with humble heart that She, in Her infinite Compassion, will remove all the clouds of our ignorance. (Contd. on Page 23) 21

 THE COLLECTIVE JOY "You cannot love me if you don't love tion in our hearts. It is not my spirit, it is your sister and your brother". These are the Spirit, eternal, pure, loving, joyous, the words of the Goddess and Her Maya innocent which lights up everyone of us. It makes us forget that we can only come is absolute, therefore the spirit is collective. closer to Her Heart when we come closer The channel of this collectivity is love and to the hearts of our brothers and sisters. its foundation is our enlighted awareness. The protocol is a dead ritual when it hides As this Spirit is One and Absolute, Undivi- behind it the Ego of the Sahaja Yogis. ded and indivisible, it cannot shine only in "I'm doing the Pooja of Mother, so I'm Mother's heart: the Spirit is unlimited only greater than the others and Mother looks when it shines for the joy of shining, after me better". Sahaja Yogis used to put themselves on the glow. So how can our spirit love Mother front stage, crushing the newcomers from when il does not shine in the hearts of other their mythical heights. They believed, theySahaja Yogis ? Do we realise that the were the ones who had access to the God- same spirit sparkles its glimpses of love dess, who were the confidents, the great heroes of the modern times. If they were married, their wives would help them to assert their nebulous depth and arrogant see the spirit of all of them eager to flow behaviour. It might start a game of com- into our hearts, respond to our invitation to petition where the Ego had the lead. But one love and joy, and circulate like a river which day they also might realise that they lay has discovered a new way to reach the down on the street, deprived of the Essence Ocean of love ? of joy, abandoned by themselves in the dark- Many so called great because it is its essence to shine and in the heart of every Sahaja Yogi ? Do we see the beauty of its expression in the heart of our brothers and sisters ? Do we Why should every small, tiny stream flow alone to reach the ocean ? It may dry and disappear before reaching the shore ness of solitude. As Sahaja Yogis we should ask this where there is the new life of compassion question in our hearts, why did it happen ? and why so quick ? and bliss bestowed upon us by Adi Shakti. How can this tiny stream enjoy the move- The answer is very simple; because we ment and the music of its waves when it have forgotten the existence of our spirit. must struggle alone against the danger of How can we come close to the great God- nature ? Why should not all these small dess ? If the spirit shines, we become the streams rejoin together joyfully so that the water of life gets stronger and stronger, so drop which rejoins the ocean and we become the ocean itself; so, we actually that every stream melis into each other in never move towards our Beloved Mother, one wave, one music, one grace, one love, för when we become the ocean we reside one combined purily and lightness before in Her Heart, and her tremendous love reaching the shore and losing itself into the pouring in our being is Her Divine Reflec- Ocean of Beauty and Bliss? 22

 Let us, with all our powers kill, with great on this earth as Lord Jesus Christ. He is anger and courage, all our misidentifica- the One who will bring all the little streams tions, jealousies, envies, rivalries. Let us together at the Lotus Feet of His Divine destroy everything which prevents us from Mother. This is the joy of collectivity, This sharing tagether the brilliance of our Spiril. joy should lead us to a state where there is We should, with the Help of the Divine only one smile, for we smile together; only Mother give no chance to the Satan any one glance, for we see together in the same more and unite together under the protec- ther: only one prayer; for we adore the more and unite together under the protec- direction, önly one sound, for we sing toge- tive arms of Adi Shakti. Let us irradiate Divine Mother together, only one move- the whole world through our collective ment, for we bow together at Her Lotus Feet, only one joy; for our spirits manifest at the same time for God and only one heart, for all our hearts reside in the warmth spirit! There are not 100, 1000 or 10000 Sahaja Yogis and Sahaja Yoginis, they are only and Divine Smoothness of the heart of the 100, 1000 or 10000 spirits dissolved in One Divine Spirit, enjoying the manifestation of Eternally, Glorious, Victorious, Magnificent the Self. There must be one light, because there is one love, there must be one joy, because there is one Absolute. strenghen what is imperishable, let us des- troy what is fake. We should in our prayer of togetherness associate our great Brother and Protector Shri Ganesh who incarnated Adi Shakti, Victory to the spirit, Victory to the collective being. Victory to Mataji. Let us --ARNEU (Contd. from Page 21) And above all, we saw that it is a reality that the Kingdom of God is established Let us enlarge It to the whole world. on earth. This is our duty. This is the only way to thank our Beloved Mother for all Her Blessings. You are supporting us by your vibrations, by the depth of your meditations and we have to fight. Togelher we will win. And let us pray that the next time we will see you, we will be able to say to you: "You have thousands of new brothers and sisters." "Om Twamev Sakshat Shree Adi Shakti Shree Nirmala Devi Namonamah". With all my Love and thankfullness Marie-Laure Brighton 23

 Thank You, Mother! Thank You, Mother, for having brought us to sleep on the Kundalini of the world. Thank You, Mother, for having demonstrated by means of vibrations the Oneness of God through various worshipping sites and temples. Thank You, Mother, for having soothed our Nabhis with delicious meals prepared by sahaja loving hands. Thank You, Mother, for having reminded us through thousand and one little tricks that our attention is to sit on the top of our heads. Thank You, Mother, for having imparted us Your eternal Knowledge, seated in the middle of us, under a tree, at candlelight or basking in the glow of our uncle Shri Chan- dra, just like the Masters of all times, You who are the Master of All the Masters, Thank You, Mother, for having given us the parents we had always dreamt of in the person of Your Indian children, bestowers of familial security. Thank You, Mother, for having so often spread into our hearts the Joy of the Spirit. Thank You, Mother, for having taught us through practical exercises what it means to be collective, feel collective, speak collective. Thank You, Mother, for having made the present so attractive for us and thus we for- got a tiny bit about those egos and conditionings wandering into our heads. Thank You, Mother, for been such a Beautiful, Wonderful, Perfect Mother with unbelieve- able patience. while supervising at the same time this whole earth and fourteen entire universes. Thank You, Mother, above all, for being our Mother and for allowing us to be Your children. Back from India ! RUTH L. Rome, 1st March, 1982 24

 FIRST LIGHT Some are awake though it's still dark They wander round, some bleary eyed As those just roused from millenia long sleep Whilst others sleep on regardless Not even knowing that they slumber. There are those, but few, who have always been awake; Who can do naught but watch wisely from the peaks While on the stage the new actors stumble With the weight of little understood insight In the valleys it is still dark Not the rustle of a leaf or the twitter of a bird- The deep black grey of 6000 year night wreaks its weight on the human spirit as it moans wretchedly beneath the load of insufferable indignity But high on the mountain tops it's already quite light and a distinct glow is seen in the east Here on these few high spots the night is already a bad memory an illusion that evaporates as mist with new day Here you can see everything clearly as crystal in the incomparable brilliance of the dawn Here, how can you lie or deceive Here, it is obvious, plain, even blatant How could fear or corruption survive the glare ! The Angels take positions in crystal glass galleries of muiti-rainbow hue painting the infinite blue backdrop with glittering festoon Up here it will always be daylight But down there it will not much longer be night. -Ray Harris 25

 SAHAJA YOGA SEMINAR 10th October 1981 THE VISH UDDHI AND COLLECTIVITY IN BRIGHTON-1) Introduction by-RAY HARRIS and JASON COPELAND The purpose of a seminar is for Sahaja mas, the rules of living by which we protect Yogis to come together for a couple of days and nourish our spiritual growth, and collectively explore an aspect of Sahaja Yoga, and concentrate on going deeper into the vibration particularly in that aspect. The of the magnificent awesomeness of God theme of this seminar was the Vishuddhi, that created such an impact that thou- the well-being of which is the source of Sands of years later the Hebrews were successful collectivity, which is something we still need to work towards. Krishna however showed Arjuna a vision able to expand on this knowledge by the grace of Abraham, Moses and Christ. Be- fore Krishna revealed God to Arjuna, few The vishuddhi is a sixteen-petalled lotus people had any idea of the all pervading at the back of the neck, at the cervical ple- oneness. xus. The deities seated thera are Sri Radha Krishna, Shri Sarva Mantra Siddhi, and Sri Viratangata-Virata. The great Incarnation a unified, i, e. a Yogic, part of this all-per- of Krishna 6000 years ago brought enligh- vading oneness, it is essential for us to tened knowledge of Almighty God to India activate the qualities of the vishuddhi, and via Arjuna on the battlefield of Kurukshetra. starting from correct self-respect, to deve- Sri Krishna, although an incarnation of the lop proper detached, loving, non-possess- Father, is an aspect of the Son, Vishnu the ive relationships with our brothers and preserver. The absolute limitless God is sisters as Krishna himself had. In the west impossible for humans to comprehend, and we act in very adharmic ways, so the vis- difficult even for an incarnation to demons- huddhi catches. This is especially acute trate-humans can only be guided towards when we compartmentalise, label or other- knowledge of the infinite by the system wise misidentify people, e.g. as strangers, which is born within them. Generally it is potential lovers, friends, or "our" family, the Mother incarnations such as Mary who rather than as brothers and sisters which show surrender and humility, the Son incar- is what we all are. People in the west are nations who show us how we can and sho- encouraged to attract, and be primarily uld behave, and the Guru incarnations interested in attracting the opposite sex which give us the knowledge of the divine (with the accent on sex) which is an obse- and our sustenance in the form of the dhar- ssion which utterly sabotages the natural In order for us to take up our place as 26

 The objectification state of our own or others' chakras and state of col'ectivity. and excessive individuation of people bro- vibrations. If one smokes or behaves in ught about by the protestant ethics of private an undiplomatic manner, the vishuddhi capitalist effort has undermined collectivity will catch and our chances of feeling vib- throughout the world, and has prompted rations will decrease. the illusions of communism, socialism and hippy communalism as its antithesis. us look at the left vishuddhi in detail, since that is the seat of so many Let However itis only the rising of the Kun- problems for us in the west. The deity dalini through the vishuddhi chakra which of left vishuddhi is Sri enables us to transcend our possessive- Now when ness and emotional attachments to others himself in adharmic activities, he usually and to rise above our usual ways of seeing knows inside that it is somehow wrong, so people as different kinds of people, so that he starts to feel guilty and loses his self-res- we can relate to each other in a calm, digni- pect. Guilt however is often instilled in a fied and compassionate manner. THE Vishnumaya. a seeker specifically involves religious upbringing in the west, usually for the purpose of stabilising societies in an Speech and communication commence unhealthy state of subservience to all too in the vishuddhi, and hence all our rela- human interpretations of what are alleged to tionships. Being the source of mantras, be God's laws. The result is an enforced the vishuddhi is also the seat of our rela- slavery to an external set of rules rather tionships with all the deities, and in parti- than a voluntary, even joyful, cleaving to cular is the seat of the Virata, the ether what is known from within the heart to element which is the oneness of the whole be right-the furtive, negative avoidance manifest universe, the "glue" which not of that which is forbidden rather than the merely holds the quarks together but in happy involvement in that which is healthy. fact is the stuff of which other, transient Thus develop alienated people who alternate states of manifestation such as the tempo- between cringing subservience to human whirlpools of energy which we feel as authority and the only possible unenligh- solid matter, are made. Through the ether tened response to that, resentiul and angry travel all forms of energy, such as gravity rebellion against it. and radio waves-so when we try to spread Sahaja Yoga either in unaided speech or rary The fact that today people are breaking using the electronic media, our success is their dharmas is as much a reflection of the adharmic state of the religions which have diverted them into guilt as it is of the the unbalaced emotional state of the people directly related to the strength and clarity of our vishuddhis. In the body, it is at the vishuddhi that in charge of them. It is a fact that only if nerves of the arms join the spinal column, one breaks the dharmas the spirit will be and thus on the health of that junction adversely affected; for that to happen is depends whether or not we feel the cool bad enough by itself without humans impo- breeze on the hands or read accurately the sing a crippling set of neuroses and repre 27

 ssions on top of it. Mataji has shown us of Laxmi and Vishnu. The other side of that we are merely the spirit and nothing self respect is respect for others, and lack else. Since our spirit just watches, we do of it will give rise to resentment. Irritabi- nothing, so what have we got to feel guilty lity, anger and shouting will result in a about ? If you keep the dharmas, you don't catch in this chakra. From the healthy need external religion to control your state of this chakra stem divine diplomacy and correct interrelationships, and respect for our fathers. behaviour. Our spirit can only desire, and the rest of the universe, being Mother or the Power of God, fulfils our desire, even if we desire Vishuddhi qualities do we need to consi- the wrong thing ! If you ask forgiveness for der? Firstly, we must develop self-res- these wrongs, She will forgive you totally; pect-get rid of guilt and all ideas of unwor- nothing is permanent or unforgivable, so thiness, cleave with joy to the spontaneous what is guilt about? The worst you can do is promptings of the dharma from within to destroy yourself, and since that affects instead of sticking in fear to the bindings of no-one but you then there's no need for of the word "should" or shouldn't" from guilt there either. Regret your wrongdoings, without. We must develop confidence that pull your ears and ask for forgiveness, then if we truly ask for forgiveness we will get forget about it! The negativity loves you to it and then forget our sins. From self-res- degrade yourself with breast-beatings of pect and the feeling that we are beings of remorse and unworthiness-it stops you true worth comes respect for each other. spreading the vibration of God's love! So what outward manifestations of From the vishuddhi comes correct datach- ment as taught by Krishna: Let's consider the nature of Sri Vishnu- "The wise grieve not for those who tive; maya : she was the baby girl who was put into prison with Krishna's mother to replace and they grieve not for those who die -for Krishna, when the wicked king Kamsa had life and death shall pass away. Because killed all her previous babies since the pro- phecy that one of them would conquer his and those kings of men. And we all shall empire. When the guards came to kill the be for all time, we all for ever and ever." new-born baby, Vishnumaya flew out of the window; she was merely an illusion for the wicked King, enabling Krishna to survive. each other apart from that of the spirit The qualities she embodies are self-respect, within, and when dealing with each other correct relationships with women and res- pect for one's mother. (Sri Vishnumaya is always with also known as Yogamaya.) we all have been for all time : 1, and thou, So we must attach no perceptions to never speak harshly, speak and deal consideration compassion, generosity and love-all the ingredients of divine diplomacy. That way we will On the right vishuddhi we find Sri develop, starting from each individual's Yeshoda, the Mother of Krishna, and Sri internal process, true Vitthla Rukmani, these belng incarnations Sahaja Yogis will then mesh together as collectivity, and 28:

 an organic unit moulded by Mother. We experience to do so. After realisalion we will still be groups of individuals, but become instruments of God, we can rely united by the vibration and by our common on Mother to ensure that what we say will understanding of the spirit and actualisa- be the right thing. This is the true mean- tion of the spirit's qualities, and united in ing of surrendering to Mother. We surre- pursuit of the common alm- God-reali- nder to Mother the direction of the action, sation for each one of us and the spreading but we must do the actions! We must per- of Sahaja Yoga so that all souls have a form the tasks, we must do the work! All chance to attain union with God now. of us must speak in public, take the lead, become bold and resolute, take responsibi- In the next four years all the world must lity, sharpen our intellects and shout from net to hear about Sahaja Yoga. Caution the rooftops ! is necessary in order to spread the message correctly, but Mother has already approved the idea of us appearing on the media our- selves talking positively about Sahaja Yoga. presence and blessings upon us by hearing To sum up Ihe theme of this seminar then, let us ask the spirit of Sri Krishna for his We must hype it up a litlle bit, each of us must take individual personal responsTDRIty brave warrior was cowering on the floor of for pushing the issue to the fore. his chariot in understandable horror at the Yoga is the most fantastic thing that ever happened since the beginning of history, Thought of slaughtering his teachers and and we must say so in so many words. His words to Arjuna when the aforesaid Sahaja close relatives in the coming battle. These words seem to banish forever the spectre of guilt and the feeling that we are unwor- We must also take collective responsi- bility; we must at all times help and encour- age each other to stand up and do this thy. Of course we are worthy! Mother, the greatest and most powerful incarnation öf God that has ever appeared, has perso- great work. At all times with diplomacy-wa nally hand-picked us, and in so doing She must think constantly !how is my brother has said for all the universe to hear that in Her opinion we ARE worthy of tne task She has glven us. or sister feling-are they hurt or offended by the way I am putting my point over? Can I say it or put it across in a different way which will achieve what I'm trying for So who are we to r say or think otherwise? without offence ? So let us remember what Sri Krishna We must use, each of us, all our life considers a suitable attitude for bold missio- experience, even from before realisation, nary warriors and apostles of God; as Sri in the struggle to spread the message. Krishna said to Arjuna after he sank down After realisation our previous experience in the chariot, his is not written off, it becomes a tool to use despair and grief, his eyes filled with tears : to speak to the world. We have found the way, now we must show everyone else, and we can use any tool in our armoury of in this hour, the hour of trial? Strong men soul overcome with "Whence this lifeless dejection, Arjuna, 29

 know not despair, Arjuna, for this wins neither heaven nor earth. Fall not into The Moon is full degrading weakness, for this becomes not a man who is a man. Throw off this igno- ble discouragement, and arise like a fire the sky's alight the City slowly sinks from sight Upon the deep I look above that burns all before it!" and see Her face-a star of love कुतस्वा कश्मलमिदं विषमे समूपस्थितग । अनायंजुष्टम स्वग्यंम कीर्तिकरम अ्र्जून ।। ल्कैब्यं मा स्म गमः पार्थ नेतत्वव्युपपद्यते । क्षद्रं हृदयदोबल्यं व्यक्त्वोत्तिष्ठ परंतप ।। Oh would my soul in rapture rise to meet the challenge in Her eyes And leave behind my earthly form to gain forever my longed-for home. Shreemad Bhagwat Geeta (Chapter II) -Joseph Pomerance Brooklyn, N.Y. TENTATIVE PROGRAMME of Her Holiness Mataji Shti Nirmala Devi for 1982 Lisbon and Madrid 27th May to 3rd June London 4th June Geneva, Baseland, Freiberg (Germany) August/September North America October ITAE U.K. November Australia December FESTIVALS Guru Purnima 6th July '82 Nag Panchmi 25th July '82 Raksha Bandhan 4th August '82 Janmashtami (Sri Krishna Birthday) 12th August 82 Sri Ganesh Chaturdashi 22nd August '82 Anant Chaturdashi 2nd September '82 30

 Xperience This is a dream that I had, about a year after my initiation in Sahaja Yoga, but I had kept quiet aver it, since I felt that it had some bearing to one of my past life. Here it is ! ***** I saw myself walking in a bamboo forest by the side of a mountain and sud- denly came out of an opening where there were no trees, for about 50 feet, since a black lava had flowed from the mountain top down below, some ages ago; and a natural platform had formed, small in size, where I was standing. I sat a little away facing this platform, in meditation. i was a six footer Sadhu, of brown complexion with tuft of long hair which had thinned up at the top of the head. After a little while, Her Holiness Shri Durga Mata came over seated on a tiger and got down and sat on this platform and the tiger sat at Her feet. Durga Mataji looked at me for some time and said : "Go to Mataji". Ireplied: "I will not go". She again repeated in anger: "I said Go to Mataji". I asserted with pride within me: "1 will Not go". Then Durga Mata lifted up Her sword and struck me on my shoulder and I fell down bleeding in front of the tiger. The tiger atonce started licking the blood and in three licks, the wound completely healed and I got up. Then Durga Mataji pointing up Her finger said : "Now go"; that is, go to Mataji Nirmala Devi. I walked away with ego and pride uppermost within me and as I was entering raised my right hand and shouted: "Durga- the forest, and without look ing back, I Mataji-ki-Jai'". But that loud that I woke up from my dream with a start. I looked at the watch to see what time it was and found it to be exactly 4.00 A.M., time to get up for meditation. "Jai" was so (Contd. from Page 13) every marriage a very pompous thing, a very beautiful thing, but ultimately what I find, two crumpled up people sitting down there, you know, sulking.... Then imagine the children who are going to be born. They will think what, these sulking parents, Oh God save us from these crying babies ! This dream remained lingering in my mind for a very, very long time and felt that it had some significance, a sort of reminder to me, to be always in touch with Sahaja Yoga and be implicitly guid- ed by Mataji's instructions. So don't put all my hopes to a complete shattered stata, by this kind of attitude,... Now if you have any questions, ask them, because I don't know how far to say -S M. Karaka: Bombay 31

 ON BLAKE'S BIRTHDAY On 10th November 1381, birthday of the great William Blake, prophet and poet, a small band of Sahaja Yogis honoured the occasion by attending a recital of Blake's works at the church in Picadilly, St. James's, where he is supposed to have been baptized. Vibrations flowed from the beautiful marble font where the 'baptism' took place and from paintings of Blake's, set up on screens round about us. While most of the readers in the recital alas had little idea of the essence of the words in front of them, there were one or two whose Spirit shone through and whose inspired renderings were great and we Sahaja Yogis thankfully drank the vibrations of those Divine moments. The following verse is taken from Chapter Three of a section of JERUSALEM titled "To the Christians", which was read on Tuesday by Rosemary Leach: England I awake I awake l awake ! Jerusalem thy Sister calls! Why wilt thou sleep the sleep of death And close her from thy ancient walls ? Thy hills and valleys felt her feet Gently upon their bosoms move : Thy gates beheld sweet Zion's ways : Then was a time of joy and love. And now the time returns again : Our souls exult, and London's towers Receive the Lamb of God to dwell In England's green and pleasant bowers. by KATHIE DUGG 32

 1I13 2912U0

 Registered with the Registrar of Newspapers under Regn. No. 36999/81 WARNING THE THIRD WORLD WAR, SAID SHRI MATAJI, IS NOT AN ELEMENT IN THE PLAN OF GOD TO BRING ABOUT SATTYA YUGA. IT WOULD ONLY CREATE MEANINGLESS DESTRUCTION AND SUF- YET MEN'S MADNESS IS PRESENTLY CREATING THE FERINGS. CONDITIONS WHICH MAKE THIS DREADFUL CALAMITY VERY LIKELY. IN ANY CASE THE SAHAJA YOGIS WILL BE PROTECTED BUT THEY SHOULD CLEARLY UNDERSTAND THEIR RESPONSIBI- IF ALL THE SAHAJA YOGIS DO NOT PUT ALL THEIR LITY. ENERGY AND AVOID THIS BY ACTIVELY SPREADING SAHAJA YOGA IT MAY WELL HAPPEN AND SOON. Edited & Published by Sh. S C. Rai, 43, Burnglow Road DethiE11oo07 and Printed at #atnadeeo Press, Darya Ganj, New Deihl-110002 One Issue Rs 00 Annual Subseription Rs. 30.00 Foreign (By Airmail E 5 $ 101



----------------------

1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Nirmala Yoga
Vol. 9
Year 2
May-June '82
Bi-Manthly
"Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns all the religions and
seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga-THE UNION"
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-1.txt 
 Nirmala Yoga
43, BUNGLOW ROAD, DELHI-110007 (INDIA)
Founder-Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmała Devi
Editorial Board: Dr. S. K. Mathur, Sri A. S. Mishra, Sri R. D. Kulkarni
REPRESENTATIVES
London :
Australia :
Cheryl Hynes
10, Clarence Road,
Burwood, N.S.W. 2134,
Gavin Brown
Brown's Geological
Information Services Ltd.
160 North Gower Street,
Australia.
NW1 2ND (UK) London.
Mr. Subhash B. Pradhan
12416, Reva Street, Cerritos,
U.S.A. :
Hong Kong: Emilie P. SHI
California-90701 U.S.A.
Cliff Rence Bros. Co. Ltd.,
1610 Wing On Centre,
111, Connaught Rd. Central.
Switzerland : Arneau de Kalbermatten
Binningerstrasse 5,
4123, Allschwil (BL).
Switzerland.
M. B. Ratnannavar
13, Merwan Mansion,
Genjwala Lane,
Borivali (W),
Bombay:
Marie Rouger
9 Allee du Rocher
France:
Bombay-400 092.
93340 LE RAINCY
Page
CONTT ENTS
1.
1. Editorial
3.
2. Predictions
3. Shri Jesus Christ announces the incarnation of Shri Mataji
4. The Value of Marriage
5. Dedication to Shri Mataji
6. Pledge
7. Sahaja Yoga Canada Newsletter
8. From Mass Preaching to Mass Realisation
9. Prayer
10. Letter
11. The Collective Joy
12. Thank you, Mother!
13. First Light
14. The Vishuddhi and Collectivity in Brighton-(1)
15. Tentative Programme of Shri Mataji and Festivals
16. Experience
17. On Blake's Birthday
14
15
16
18
20
21
22
24
25
26
30
31
32
2nd Cover
18. Representatives & Cotents
19. Warning
4th Cover
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-2.txt 
 EDITORIAL
सारेक्चरण युगलान्तविगलोतः
স
सुवाधारा
पप्रचं सिचन्ती पुनर्रपि
रसाम्नाव महसः
।
अवाप्य स्वा भूमि भुजग निभमध्युष्ट वलय
स्वमात्मान कृतवा स्वपिषि
कुलकुण्डे कुहरिशी ।
Yugalüntarvigalitaih
såraishcharana
Sudhādhārā
Prapancham Sinchanti Punarapi rasāmnāya mahasah
Aväpya Swām-Bhoomi Bhujag Nibhamadhyushta Valayam
Swamatmanam Kritva Swapishi Kulakunde Kuharini.
Oh glorious one drenching the universse with nectar dripping from your
lotus feet, you descend from the dizzy heights to your abode and turning
yourselfinto serpentine coil sleepin the fine hole of lotus-root-like mooladhar
That is how Shri Adi Shankaracharya says, the Kundalini has come to reside in
Mooladhar of cosmic being and this would apply equally aptly to individual being. In the
sixth chapter of his commentary on the Geeta, Shri Jnaneshwar has beautifully des-
cribed the Kundalini as ; She is the cosmic Mother Jagadamba she has protected the
Universe from the time when it was just a seed, the receptacle of Param Shiva, the
Mother of Pranava. He then explains how Kundalini ascends, enters the Brahmarandhra
and removing the veil of 5 elements unites the individual consciousness with Universal
consciousness. He also explains that the Yoga of Kundalini is the safest path that
leads to God realization and many great saints and seekers have followed it in the past.
He has made the following prophesy
1
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-3.txt 
 बाहेर युक्तीची मुद्रा पडे ।
त्व प्रात आत सुख वाढे ।।
नाभ्यासिता ।॥
तेथे सहजेचि योग धडे ।
Bāher Yuktichi Mudrā Pade-Tava äta āta sukha vädlhe
Tethe sahajechi Yogu Ghade-Nabhyasita
As the balanced state (in which all extremeties are avoided) shows its
effect externally, then the inner happiness grows In that person, Yoga
takes place spontaneously (Sahaja), for which no efforts from the seeker
are required.
Note the words, "Yoga becoming Sahaja" According to him, this Yogi has steady
mind like the flame of a lamp, in still air. However the prophesy could not come true
for another 700 years, as in Kaliyuga, balanced living, avoiding the extremities, is diffi-
It became possible only after the advent of Adi Shakti on the
cult for a common man.
spring equinox. Before that she came as virgin Mary, for opening the Agnya Chakra of
Cosmic being. Perhaps, she chose equinox to arrive amongst us again, in order to
correct some imbalance at Cosmic level which would facilitate enactment of the final
act of the cosmic play.
Mahakundalini then further ascended and entered the Sahastrar chakra of Virata,
İ.e., Universal being, true to her name Sahastrārām-bujā-roodha (one who resides in
Sahastrar lotus). At microcosmic level awakenining and raising of the Kundalini to
Sahastrar, has become thereafter, child's play. She is Sudha-sära-bhivarshini (one who
showers nectar), whole universe is filled with nectarine vibrations and every seeker can
now enjoy its showers from our beloved Mother's lotus feet.
May the darkness of evil be dispelled from the Universe. May the pure-desire be
awakened and fulfilled in every human being, may the aggregate of God-realised souls,
live on the back of the Mother earth, in everlasting oneness with the Primordial Father.
Om twameva Sakāskāt Shri Sahastrār Swāmini Moksha Pradāyini
Adi Shakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devyai Namo Namah.
2.
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-4.txt 
 PREDICTIONS*
And here they have tried to establish
how astrology is so correct and whatever is do or not to do, that means MAHAKALI
predicted 14,000 years back is also coming AND MAHALAKSHMI-all the powers.
true today. About 2000 years back one of Before this the people used to go into
the great astrologers of this place, not BHAKTI (devotion), GYANA means reading
Sholapur but a little downward in Karnataka; PATANJALI Yoga and then they used to
he has described it so clearcut that you get their Mokshas. But with this new
will be amazed.
And he will possess all the powers to
method that this MAHAYOGI will bring in
the pure power within you, in your Chakras
He said that this Great Yogi will came will rise and as a result the KUNDALINI
on this earth on Pisces and so lam born SHAKTI will be awakened and will be en-
just on the cusp of Pisces and Aries but
that is not so important.
lightening. Because of this new method of
MAHAYOGA, you will see with your own
Then he says gradually we will start seeing eyes and you will get in this body in your
some miracles from 1964 to 1966. He says
that it may be little bit but he says that real body the joy of realization in your lifetime.
change in the age (MANVANTAR), the Imagine 2000 years back, he is greater than
new age will start from 1970 and by 1980 it , I must say. His
will take its grip. That time, by this new
method, new age will be formed, the old one
(VAIVASTA) be over. You see we have
the 'YUGAS'. One of the Yugas will be
over and that Yuga is in KALI-YUGA, That Many people, great saints, sacrificed their
is how KALI-YUGA will be finished from body in living condition. They went into a
1970-will start receding back, the Kaliyuga cave and shut thamselves and died. That
and a new age of active divinity will start is not necessary with this new method.
(Krita Yuga).
lifetime the realisation, you will get in your
BLAKE,
ACHARYA KAKA BHUJANDER TATWA-
name
was
CHARY.
You don't have to sacrifice this
body.
You won't die either,means you will achieve
your spirit and (SAKSHATKARI SANT)
That time the Sun will rule in a new way. realised souls, the saints who have realized
The axis of earth will be reduced and the the BRAHMANANDA, the joy of BRAHMA,
speed of the earth will be reduced gra- by this new YOGA and they won't have to
dually. And at that time a great MAHA- go into SAMADHI.
YOGI will be born who will be completely people just sit down and go on meditating
PARBRAHMA completely PARBRAHMA; for hours together and the ants grow upon
that's Me. (JAGATMATA NIRMALA DEVI them, and all that. dust without doing any-
KI JAI)
Samadhi is where
thing like that they will get their realization
*These words of H. H. Mataji were recorded at Sholapur in January 1982, when She spoke about predictions
done long ago, about Her Advent and Sahaja Yoga, particularly by Acharya Kaka Bhujandar Satwacharya, in
his book "NARHI GRANTH",
3.
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-5.txt 
 And they will enjoy the joy of BRAHMA-
the SAHAJA-SAMADHI. This is SAHAJA fly in the air also with that body. Also they
SAMADHI, according to him,
May be that some of you, if you want,can
can become subtle and enter into the body
of others to get them cured. That you are
Amongst millions, first one will get rea- already doing.
lization. So you understand your own
tosition. You see the way sometimes we
fritter away our attention in nonsensical by any weapons. Also you will be able to
things you realize that among millions you see these subtle things with your own eyes.
are one. This is written here. WE fritter You can see them This will not only hap-
away our attention in useless things llke my pen in India but all over the wor ld.
wife, my husband, my children, this, that.
It is written here that among millions only That is why there are powers which will look
one will be selected. Do you follow that
They will not be touched by the fire and
India is a country of great PUNYAS.
after the afflictions of this country and this
point ?
country will gradually rise.
over
Then all the human race can get C
their death i.e. destruction, through this
He says that the third world war, they
may go for the 3rd world war and they
Yoga, You will have to lead a life, a married wiu have to suffer for it, Atter that this
life,, a normal life, may not be married but
like a life of a normal householder otherwise countries will come together, with a under-
you cannot get this Yoga. Like, if you standing of collective oneness and they will
become a big 'SAINT' or a 'SADHU BABA'
or a "GURU' or something great, then you bin city (I don't know which one) a conference
cannot get this Yoga. You will have to be of all the countries will be held. There, not the
a normal householder may be married or
Great Incarnation will interfere and all the
understand that war is so horrible. In a very
may not be married is not the point. SAN- politicians but the yogis will direct them.
SARIK means living on this earth, living
down to the basic grassroo's level.
Yogis, he calls them yogis throughout.
This third World War might be the one
w had with with China, may be Chinā,
because he says that because of China's
Then all the diseases w Il disapp ar. so
fast in this Yoga, that you will not need any- aggressive policies and the 3rd World War
thing like a hospital. Great. In the begin-
ning this great Yogi, (now you people also) will have to fill the gaps
only by touching people, can cure people. pravers, we will be able to unite all the
This is a fact. Like a ARDHNARINATESH-
WARA (is like SHIVA), that will be this
thing for human beings
disappear, their body will remain as it is divine knowledge and the science will
and they wil have a body which is divine, become one.
What a promise ! So don't worry too much able to establish the existence ot God and
about your bodily comforts. Alright!
we will have to bear lots of problems and
But through
countries.
The old age will
By the new inventions of Science, the
With the science we will be
death. That is how there will be coordina-
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-6.txt 
 tion, there will be correlationship between
the science and the spirit or the divine attack on India.
He has described here about the china's
knowledge.
They have also given the name of Jac-
Already we are getting it because you qualine Murray. She is an American Lady.
see on my photograph people get vibra- This woman had predicted about me and
tions. It is a science on televisions, mantra, she had said that a great personality will
and all that. If you start curing people be born in India, a lady; she said in 1924
through scientific methods, you are using but I was born in 1923, about correct.
science for that purpose. We can prove
that these things can be carried by magne- Advent will start a new age. There is a
tic forces, by sound etc. difference of 10 years.
But Cheiro has said about 1980 the new
all these things.
We can prove it.
There is a lady called Alice Bailey. She
Then he says that because of MAYA,
yogis had to suffer a lot to become collec- is supra-conscious, I believe. In the supra-
tively conscious-BRAHMET (aua) ie. to conscious state she has sald that since
feel the BRAHMA and they had to do lots Indians have all their attention on Yoga,
to penance, that was so difficult. It has that a new Yoga will come by which the
This is the word people will be connected to Holy Ghost
"SAHAJA" (SAHAJA PRAPT), "SAHA- She has said, this horrible one, Alice Bailey,
JA", and you don't have to give up anything that there is a danger of third World War.
It may be inevitable but that can be avoided
if people develop love for each other with
become, SAHAJA.
to achieve BRAHMA.
In the new Yoga system, when it will this Yoga.
manifest in the different countries in the
new age, the administration will be govern-
ned by people, who will have their own part of it.
powers of yoga-depending on how far you
are in your yoga and their qualjty as yogis.
That will be the determining factor.
There are lots of things but I have said a
Then, here is a tape of what Gyanesh-
wara has said about this new age. What
will happen ?
How people will become
They will be able to create a society realised? The translation of it is with me
which will completely fulfil their desires but in Marathi. I have to transiate in Eng-
and necessities and people won't need ish that how people will become realised
money accumulated with them. Poverty and what will happen and how they will love
and sickness will be completely finished each other and all these things he has sald,
and in their absence the country, the Gyaneshwara.
SAMAJ, (the society) will be healthy and
restful and without any anger.
...
5
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-7.txt 
 SHRI JESU S CHRIST ANNOUNCES
THE INCARNATION OF SHRI MATAJI
From "The Aquarian Gospel of Jesus the Christ by Levi.
the Supraconscious inspired author got the records of some of Jesus' teachings)
Section XVIII
9. Then will the world be led to truth,
4. And Jesus spoke again unto the and man will be the truth.
eleven and said, "Grieve not because I go
away, for it is best that I should go away, she will convince the world of sin, and of
10. When she has come, the Comforter,
If I go not the Comforter will not come
to you.
the truth of what I speak, and of the right-
ness of the judgment of the just; and then
the prince of carnal life will be cast out.
5. These things I speak while with you
in the flesh, but when the Holy Breath shall
come in power, lo, she will teach you more I need not intercede for you; for you will
and more, and bring to your remembrance all stand approved, and God will know you then
the words that I have said to you.
11. And when the Comforter shall come
as he knows me.
12. The hour has come when you will
6. There are a multitude of things yet to
weep. the wicked will rejoice because I go
away; but Iwill come again and all your sor-
rows shall be turned to joy;
be said; things that this age cannot receive
because it cannot comprehend.
7. But, lo, I say, Before the great day of
the Lord shall come, the Holy Breath will who welcomes back a brother from the
13. Yea, verily, you will rejoice as one
make all mysteries known-
dead'.
8. The mysteries of the soul, of life, of
death, of immortality; the oneness of a man speak not in proverbs any more; speak plai-
with every other man and with his God.
14. And the disciples said our Lord,
aly unto us,
For Sahaja Yogis, at last, these words are plain enough.
BOLO JAGATMATA SHRI MATAJI SHRI NIRMALA DEVI KI JAI
"Devorss Publishers (Marina Del Rey, California, 1972).
6.
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Dollis Hill, LONDON
8th March, 1980
THE VALUE OF MARRIAGE
Sahaja Yoga, is first, to start your germi- person who has a left side which is very
nation; then it grows; in that growth you strong, it will compensate, and that's how
have to become a wider personality and a you will make a good marriage.
wider personality.
But, for that, one thing is very Important,
that you must share. You must share life,
every moment of it, every bit of it. If you do
With a marriage you become even a
better person, or you develop a better per-
sonality. Now, why marriage is necessary not khow how to share life it's going to be
for Sahaja Yogis ?
thing, it is the most normal thing to do. is do We express our love ?-by sharing all
to marry. God has given you this desire to
be married for some purpose, but this same
First and faremost very difficult. When it comes to love, how
our joys, all our pains, all our problems....
But in Sahaja Yoga it is a little more, I think
desire if you do not use it for the purpose it quite a lot more, much more. Here you have
is given, it can become a perversion, it can to share the community, the marriage is not
become a nasty thing, it can be very detri- for individuals in Sahaja Yoga, not at all. If
mental to your growth; so one should anybody has a feeling a marriage in Sahaj-
understand this desire within us to have a yoga is between two people is a wrong thing:
it is two communities, It can be two Nations,
it can be completely two universes. So it is
marriage.
Marriage means, wife who is a part and not tobe enjoyed between yourself. If you are
parcel of your being, a wite on whom you good husband wife to each other, it is not
can depend; she's your mother, she's your sufficient in Sahaja Yoga. That love should
sister, she's your child, she's everything: be enjoyed by every one else in the society,
you share all your feelings with your wife; in the community. If you cannot do that
so it is important that the wife should be then you have not achieved Sahaja-yoga mar-
such that she should understand that this Is riage, it is just an ordinary marriage as
people have, it's just that. There's nothing
special about it. Such marriages should be
Now in Sahaja Yoga, as you have seen, able to give chances for very great souls
all of you have problems either of the left, to come on this earth. A person who is
or of the right. Now when these marriages married in Sahaja Yoga, who are Sahaja
will take place, mostly spontaneously it will Yogis, who are sharing their love equally
happen, by Nature's Plan itself, that you with the Sahaja Yogis and the society that
will marry a person who is a complementary is Sahaja Yoga, then only great people will
personality to you. Because supposing you be born. I would say Bohdan has done that,
are a left-sided person, and if you have a Bohdan and Mandy, they have done it. It's
the need of a marriage
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-9.txt 
 something surprising, you see they were realised this point there would have been
engaged before Sahaja Yoga, they were much less problem,
married after realisation, and I don't know
how it has clicked in their life that they
really share companionship with other they control others, or dominate others or
Sahaja Yogis. Whenever he writes to me
he always writes about Sahaja Yogis, he'll way. It is heart which really governs every-
ask about every one of them, he'll ask thing. Heart rules out everything else, it is
about them how are they, what are their heart which has got the power to envelop
problems. Unless and until it happens the the brain, to soothe it. Brain is a headache,
marriage has no meaning in Sahaja Yoga, you know; it works, works, tike mad. But
at all, no meaning. So first test of a Sahaja heart is the one which really covers the body
Yogi marriage is how much you have been with its love and can soothe, can give it joy
able to share by this marriage other people.
Now see it is not the way people think
sort of try to suppress them. It is not that
and happiness. It is the heart which contains
fhe spirit. So heart is a very important
Now for example in a normal marriage thing, which is the power of the body, like
man is the person who is the head of the ultimately you have to become the Spirit,
family, as you say. Now he has to be the which is in the heart.
head, the man has to be the head, for cer-
tain reasons. There is nothing wrong in
With brain you natice, and that's why
man becoming the head, it's alright, you man has to become the head, he has to go
become the heart. Heart is more important out, he has to work, he has to deal with
than the head is. Perhaps we do not realise people, he is an extrovert as you call it; and
that, how heart is important; you see even if a woman has to work sometimes, if there's
the head falls the heart can go on. We can difficulties and troubles are. But the woman
always go on up till the heart is going on, should not feel dominated if the man says
but if the heart fails, the head fails too. So "Alright you don't work'. But if he says it
you are the heart as a woman and he is the in love ! Now, if the brain starts dominating
head of the family. Let him have that feeling the heart too much, what will happen ?
that he is the head; it is a feeling, just a Then, there will be dryness. You see, like
feeling. Like the head always feels he many men are very meticulous, very parti-
also knowS cular-they are headaches, absolute head-
that it is the heart one has to cater, it aches to themselves, to others, and to the
is the heart which is all pervading, whole society. Such people can become
is the real source of everything. So the extremely dry and they can be all the time,
woman's position, if she understands how you see, like they can never enjoy their
important it is, she would never feel let wives, they cannot enjoy their children, they
down or dominated, if she knows she is the cannot enjoy anything whatsoever because
heart. I think this is the point people, women you see they are so particular; like they say,
especially, in the West, have lost and have "Come at five-ten'. If you reach there at
forgotten and have not realised. If they had five-nine or five-eleven you have had it; they
decides, but the
8.
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-10.txt 
 are just watching time, just to find out the way you have to go'. I say 'Oh alright, you
faults, you see as soon as the wife comes can go ahead, and I'Il walk with you', but i
in they'll be shouting "what, you come so said "You know I think it's not the road, I'll
late! How many ? Forty-five seconds- have to walk back again I know for definite,
lost ! You see, the wife is coming, the ex- but alright if you wantI can walk with you.
pectancy, the meeting of it, the joy of it, you All right I'm walking, I'm just enjoying, I
are going to meet your own heart ! It's may have to go this way only, so'. Then he
lucky ! You miss your luck!
"Is it true ? Is it cor-
rect?'... Then he starts thinking, you know,
Or may be, because
starts wondering
Now this brain can go all off the rule,
Is it really ?
that
you see, it can go off, and it can be very, She has instincts ? You see. Because She
very taxing; it creates tremendous problems has intuition, She has so many things, She
with it. So, heart must be respected, heart
gets that, what you call a hunch'...They
must be obeyed. That's the point. Heart get a hunch of it and that's what it is. And
must be obeyed. But that doesn't mean
that the women should dominate men, it hunches of the wife are correct, then they
doesn't mean
must understand what your love says. You about making your husband follow you ?
see, do it in love. If you do it in love is very it's wrong, I think. There's no need for him
once they start understanding that the
that. Obeyed means, you follow her in a way. But what is so great
good.
to follow You go this way'; what need is
there to do all that ? We are going the same
For example I am lecturing you morning
till evening, you are not tired; you are not Way, but we must know that somebody is
tired of My lectures. Normally people should on the left, one is on the right. The left has
be... What's this sermon going on ? This to be on the left; supposing the left wheel
lady all the time talking to us ? .
do not mind it, for one reason. Why ? Be- wheel left What are we going to do about
cause you know I love you very much. In it ? We are all going the same way.
the same way the woman must establish the
role, that she loves. The man may become
a little funny, but he'll come round. are two wheeis needed to give it a balance,
He'll go a little astray but he'll come round. but we are going on the same way. These
But do not judge him in outward domina- people don't realise. They think one wheel
tions.. Like you see if he says 'This colour has to go on the right, another has to turn to
is not good. Alright, whatever you like l'll the left. So imagine what will be the condi-
putit. Then he'll say 'Oh, I think the one you tion of such a family, We are going on the
have put was good. You know I was really same way. Only understanding is needed,
foolish'. He would say like that. You just that one has to live with the powers of
agree to them you know. I mean I have ex- heart, and another has to live with the
perimented this in my own life. I have done power of rationality, of understanding. Now
it. For example my husband doesn't know when it comes to rationality, ultimately it
much of roads. So, supposing we are going will turn to heart. Because it reaches
somewhere, and he says 'I think this is the point when it does not know, you see, then
But vou starts going to the right, we'll have only one
There are no two ways about it, there
9
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-11.txt 
 it comes to heart. Once women realise it, because somebody cares for you, there's
this that they have this within themselves- a concern, somebody loves you, wants you
but you must nurture your power of heart. to have this and wants you to do that; you
But you compele with them in everything; like such a person, you want somebody to
If he goes on the horse, why can'tI ? If do that.You do not want to be left to
he can do this, why can'tI"? f he can drive, dogs, that Do whatever you please'. That
I can drive'. You See, wisdom lies in doing kind of thing is no good. And once you deve-
things-many things-by avoiding them. lop thatieeling 'Oh' that person cares for me,
You see, for example, I don't drive, so every- vou see, that person loves', then you start
body drives me around;1 don't type-very also caring for the feeling of that person.
good, everybody types for me.
You also start to understand (Now again
the guilt is working, now will you stop teel-
ing guilty about anything. I do not say
But I do some things which nobody can
do as well as I can do, like I can cOok very these things to make you feel guilty, but
well, so when it comes to cooktng they have
to come to Me. It's like that. But you don't
do everything that the men want to do, or
you don't do everything that the women
want to do. For men will be cooking and
women will be driving is a wrong thilng Men the power and Krishina was the one who
Just to understand you have to be in a very
light mood, in a very light mood). This
has been created long time
balance
back-a very long time back. Say, even
when Radha-Krishna existed, Radha was
should know all manly things and women
should know all womanly things. They must
learn. They must put their hearts into it. I potential and the kinetic. People only know
mean women can be equally intelligent,
men can be equally intelligent. Women
can go on the right hand, men can go on thing. She had to dance and He pressed
the left hand. No doubt abput it. But, you put Her feet and He said now You must be tired.
imbalance to the whole universe by that; Why did She dance? Because without Her
that's the point. Is not that by doing that dancing thing could not work out. So it is so
you are in any way less or more; this idea interdependent, it is
should go out of your minds absolutely, as you cannot have only a wick and you
that men think I am the man who wears the
was expressing it. It's as you say, the
about Krishna, but Radha was the power.
When He had to kill Kamsa He had to ask
Radha to do it. It was She who did every-
so interdependent,
cannor have only the light. You cannot
pants' Alright, you wear the pants, but we have these two things separately. If you can
wear the beautiful skirts, alright. That's the understand that then this balance is com-
pletely harmonious, it is between God and
His Power : absolutely One-you cannot
You see once this goes away Sahaja Yoga imagine how it is One!-with God and His
will work out better, The domination is felt Poer. His Power, His desire is the same
way it should be looked after.
only when there is no love. You see, some- as God, there's no difference at all.
times people like to dominate, isn't it. For
exmple they say now
this food, you must have this; and you like ted people, your desire is different, your
But in human beings you are disintegra-
come along, have
10
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-12.txt 
 thinking is different, your asking is different. a man, he is absoluely an earthworm: So
everything is so disintegrated. That's why this is what it is, a man has to have charac-
marriages are absolutely disintegrated. The ter, he has to have that chivalry in him, he
complete integration is the intermingling. has to have that courage in him, he has to
If the wife has to work, one need not worry. have that protective thing. If thieves come
if the man has to work it does nol worry, as in the house the man telis the wife 'Oh, you
long as there is complete understanding of go and open the door, and l'm going to
integration, of balance, within you.
course women are responsible-the grace says "I am going to dominäte". That's not
of the family, she has to be gracious, it the way. The man has to protect. The man
doesn't look nice for a woman to behave has to look after. Thal's why doesn't matter
Of hide', and when the thleves go away he
like a man. Because man need not be if he is a little crude sometimes, doesn't
that gracious as a woman is, he's after all matter, because he has to face, he's, you
a man, so it's alright in his behaviour-he can say, he's llke a thorn, and women are
need not be atrocious-but I mean some- like flowers.
timas if he swears
sometimes, doesn't
Now in the thorn and the flower you
mátter in a way for a
man. But for a
woman it does because she is a gracious would like to be the flower, isn't It? But in
But there are some things a man a man and woman you would like to be
cannot do. You se like taking an interest thorn. So il's wrong. He has to protect,
in women, you see. Some men are so hot, he has to look after the invasions on the
you know, horrible, absolutely I canno't family life, and other things. On the
understand the way they take interest in contrary they are the ones who allow infil-
women, What dresses women wear, what trations by wrong people in the family, is the
perfumes, all this sort of thing. All this
rat-like behaviour, is horrible, and this can- bring horrible people through their domlna-
not be manly. That means they are such tion. "Oh, she's my friend, how can you
slaves of women, they may call themselves object ?" But what sort of a friend is she ?
something, this and that. You know, I heard He has to say 'No, I do not like these people
that this Mrs Kennedy's underclothes were to come into the house. they're not the right
for sale, and people from Australia were type, they have to get out., 1t is he who
flying out to buy them.I mean, think of these has to say. And the woman has to under-
men, what da you call them? I don't know stand. But if he says it just out of domina-
what you call them in English language, but tlon, it is nonsense.
they are just worse than earthworms. I
don't know from where they come.
They bring in horrible women they
man
So everything has lwo sides, you can see
clearly; if it is done in love it is perfect,
So, man has to be a man and man is a but if it is done in domination it is nonsen-
person like Rama. You have heard about sical. Why dominate? I mean I don't under-
His life, how He was, you see, how He loved stand the word domination. When there
His wite, respected His own chastity. A are two wheels do they dominate each
man who cannot respect his chastity is not other? Can they ? If one dominates, say one
11
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-13.txt 
 becomes bigger than the other, it will go not spend money for that, need not, you can
round and round. Won't it ? There's no just be kind to them, nice to them, and little
question of domination in this, but is a ques- money too; you see there's no harm in
tion of integration and understanding and spending little money for others ....and
complete cooperation with themselves- expressing your love. You see we are still
which must permeate into the society, into very meticulous in our Sahaja Yoga, as far
as money's concerned, as far as love is con-
cerned, we are very, very cautious, we have
the family.
The marriages which are not helpful to so much of fear within us....
the society are of no use; they are just a
Now domination should never come in
waste, just a waste, you see. We have so
many marriages like this; people get married, Sahaja Yoga at all. For example when am
live well, happily among themselves and telling you anything an outsider might think
finish off. These are the marriages which that I am dominating you, because really
are going to change the society, with their I am touching very sore points within you,
joy, happiness, make a home where every- it you see it clearly. (It is there putting the
body is expected, look after them, do for left side too much, you are all feeling guilt,
others. You see there are many people that's not good, come along....) So
who think nobody's doing anything for us. the-this is also an ascape, you see, that
What have you done for others? What have you start feeling guilty and then you just
you done? Have you done anything for don't cure yourself. Just don't feel guilty
them? This, once you start deciding and about anything. You see lam just telling
unerstanding, it will be very good. Normally you this becanse I have to tell you. Now
a woman is, if not brought up properly, can one can feel that this is domination if they
be very very conceited, and can be very do not see the love behind it, the beauty
selfish and self centred. Man can be also, behind it, the compassion there. So never
but women can be because, if they're not to feel that anybody dominates you it is the
brought up properly, I am saying, they might best way.
not like to spend their money on others,
they wouldn't like others to come into the
house and share this and that. But again we You are the spirit. Your ego can be hurt;
have to judge it, is it done in love or not ? you are the spirit, It cannot be dominated.
Like the husband, you see, brings his But you are the spirit ? Are you feeling
friends, and they may not like the friends your Spirit ? If you are feeling your Spirit
coming in, because it means money you you can never be dominated, no one can
see; they would like to have more ornaments dominate you. But if you feel that way all
to themselves, than to have some freinds for the time, that you are dominated, you will
their friend. Can be, can be like that. Some become a very very nervous person, you can
men could be like that also, but both the be a horrible person, you cannot face peo-
things are wrong. This should be shared to ple. So it is time that you realised you are
be understood, and the whole thing is that Spirit and your hasband is also Spirit; or if
you must lavish your love on others. Need you are the husband you must know the
You see, how can you be dominated ?
12
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-14.txt 
 wife also is Spirit. And a mutual respect people, the Les Miserables, you see, they
must grow in that level because both of you sit down crying, boo-hoo-hoo for nothing at
are Saints, you are Sahaja Yogis. You all you see, the whole world is collapsing
must respect each other, because you are before them. Now there are some great
Sahaja Yogis. Everybody respects you poets like Lord Byron maybe or someone,
because you are Sahaja Yogis, who have horrible people who have written horrible
not achieved self-realisation, "Ah, they are poems like that, and then they will recite
Realised Souls'..Just think that. when those poems, "Oh the sweetest songs are
you were not realised somebody tells you those; and all sorts of nonsense. Now for
he is a Realised Soul, how you would have Sahaja Yogis-you are not to indulge in
felt about that person, You are not cons- this kind of nonsense, of sitting down and
cious of that. But you should be conscious. indulging into this kind of enjoying the
By that you should not become vain; but miseries of each other. For the present you
THIE
you must respect others, those who are have no
miseries. Whatever has been
realised souls. They're the children of your there is passed and finished. Now you are
MOTHER. When talking to each other you new people, with new awareness, with new
have to understand that; more so when you things, you have no miseries. So forget all
those things and try to enjoy each other's
company. And if you start doing that sitting
are husband and wife.
The whole understanding that you had down and enjoying the miseries, you get out
so far of husband and wite must be given of it immediately and say 'Oh, we are getting
up, it is ! think a contract sort of a marri- into the same play of Lord Byron'. I do not
age; in the marriage you see how much want to create Lord Byrons out of Sahaja
he dominates, what are his powers, what
Yogis any more. So please remember that,
are my powers, how much money I get, how don't sit down and discuss and analyse
much he gets where the money is kept,
what's all that. You See it will only bannen your miseries, you have no miseries of any
kind... ..You are the Spirit, you are the
when you do not trust each other. But go on
source of joy for yourself and for others and
trusting more and more; there should be a
competition in loving, there should be you have no business to sit down and cry
competition in trusting, in being honest, in and weep. And I don't know what's hap-
pening, I don,t know why you don't know
being kind. in being in service. Let there be
a competition like that and you'll achieve your Spirit. Don't you know your Spirit? You
results. The competition should be on the know ? Then why don't you know ? You
other side, instead of dominating, instead have your vibratiory awareness, and why is
of being afraid, instead of sharing all it you are saying you do not know ? You
have to know everything, it has to be a very
positive act to be happy, to be fragrant with
nonsense.
That's another thing which1 joy and to give joy to others; that has to be
out. which happens to a married couple and with you otherwise everything has no mean-
which is very, very wrong also, that both of l try My level best to make
them take up the role of very miserable
must point
ing. You see
(Contd, on Page 31)
13
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-15.txt 
 DEDICATION TO SHRIMATAJI
Read at the Easter Puja, Sunday 11th April 1982
our hearts ! Let us pray to You, Mother, to
be Your soldiers, the soldiers of truth and
MOTHER,
For your Birthday we have made a righteousness. Please take out our passivity,
pledge. We shall dedicate our life to Sahaja kill our inaction, destroy our apathy.
Yoga. What is this pledge and to what
extent can we follow this pledge ?
My brothers and sisters, let us wake up
to gain the battlefield. Are we Sahaja Yogis
or are we cowards ? Do we realize that
we are the children of ADI SHAKTI ? Do
the moment our spirit rejoins Your heart, we see every second our life that She is
Mother; we are collective the moment tour Almighty, that everything which lives and
smile irradiates our beings: we are collec- pulsates comes from Her and goes to Her,
tive the moment Your eyes of love and that the whole Universe is in Her command
compassion pour into our heart their Divine and bows to Her Lotus Feet, that all the
flow of unequalled beauty; we are collective angels äre protecting us to win the war? We
We have to be collectively surrendered
to our beloved Mother. We are collective
the moment Your heart touches with soft-
are not allowed to sit down. We have to
stand up, to take the sword, to hold it firm
ness and peace the inner part of ourselves.
Collective means one heart in the heart in our hands. What is more glorious and
of the Divine, one smile in the smile of God beautiful than to fight beside our beloved
Almighty, one joy melted in the Divine joy Mother ! And when in the middle of the
of Your Glory, You, our beloved Mother, one
sound expressed through the extramely let us just pronounce Her name in our
beautiful melody of Your voice.
battlefield we feel that the fear gains us,
heart.
Your Name, Mother, like a pure river
cleans and eliminates all our fears and
Then we surrender to You: Surrender is
a happening, it is the exchange of love
between the Mother and the child. Let us doubts, fills us with confidence and joy,
melt Your heart, let us dissolve ourselyse courage and faith, because Your Name is
in the inner part of Your heart, so that we
can see and feel the Glory of Your Becom- extraordinary Glory, eternal Purity, Cosmic
ing, the tenderness of Your face and the Power, Greatest love, unsurpassed splen-
the Name of God Almighty.
tively surrender to You. Extreme Beauly,
Let us collec-
grace of Your hands.
dour shining all over the Universe, Molher,
Mother of All the Mothers, Mother of Your
devoted children.
But surrender is more.
action magnified through collectivity. How
can we love You, Mother, if we do not act ?
How can we follow You if we don't fight ! and blessings it will reside in our hearts
How can we be the golden builders if we forever.
do not build Your love and compassion in
Surrender is
This is our pledge and with Your grace
-Arneau de Kalbermatten
14
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-16.txt 
 PLEDGE
Most worshipful and beloved Mother
But Thou hast come within time so that we could fulfil our
Thou art birthless.
old dreams, behold Thee and celebrate Thy birthdays.
In this year 1982, we Thy children by the grace of Thy love are gathered here orn
behalf of the Sahaja Yogis of the whole world.
And we say this:
Mother of God, in the name of all the sacred deities who are Thyself, we solemnly
pledge ourselves to build Thy derusalem with all our deslre, heart and consciousness;
to dedicate our life to Sahaja Yoga so that, O beloved Great Goddess, through Thy
love and power, the world will know that You came to give the meaning to Thy creation.
AUM AMEN
TO BE OBSERVED
1. In general, no one should close the eyes 5. At the time of collective meditation
when Mother is personally present.
When Mother tells you to close eyes
then only you must.
at centres, vermilion should be applied
to Her Holiness Mataji's photo by only
one person and not by every one.
2. Those having problems of left side 6. Never show your back to the Mother or
should meditate keeping their eyes open.
Her photo at the time of collective medi-
tation/pooja.
3. When problam is on left side right hand
should be placed on affected chakra/ 7. While receiving or seeing off the Mother
garlanding should be done by one or
two persons representing all Sahaja
All should receive
Her with folded hands and no one should
fall on Her feet without Her permission.
part and vice versa.
4. When worshipping the Mother's photo,
never use for yourself the vermilion left
on your finger after applying to the
photo. Clean your hand and then apply
fresh vermilion to yourself.
Yogis of the place.
15
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Vancouver Sahaja Yoga Centre
SAHAJA YOGA CANADA NEWSLETTER
31 March 1982
1950 E. 5th Ave
Vancouver BC
V 5N 1M2
Canada
With April on our doorstep, we're look- possible we'll use personal contacts. Our
ing forward to an active and energetic first talk to such a group will be tonight, to
month working for Sahaja Yoga here in
Canada.
a Hatha Yoga group that Lori formerly be-
longed to, in White Rock, a suburb of
Vancouver where Lori lives. Mother said
Before we left London, Mother instructed
us on how we should go about our work
in Canada. She said that the time was
short and there was much to do and ing: Again, send any advice based on your
this course of action was a success when
used by, if memory serves us, Warren and
Mateus for the Santa Cruz, California meet-
suggested :
experiences that you can.
1. Holding public Meetings
2. Going to already established seeking
Our media contact has been limited. We
will draw up a press release to accompany
each notice placed in a local paper. Mother
suggested writing articles on our trip to
groups and talking to them
3. Getting out to the media
We've approached the public Meetings India and on the false gurus, and approach-
in this way: Choosing a neighbourhood or ing the local press for interviews and
area of the city, finding a central community articles. We would appreciate greatly any
meeting place, postering the local area and press releases which have been written as
advertising in the local press as well as well as photocopies of articles written by
getting free listings in Community Events Sahaja Yogis and others about Sahaja Yoga
media. This past Monday, 29 March, our
and about false gurus
first meeting drew five seekers and six
Sahaja Yogis, a result we were very pleased
with. It allowed us to give better than one-
to-one attention and gave us a gentle intro- and the USA. We hope to hold meetings
duction to the art of public meetings.
have two more meetings set up and we plan Victoria, BC, in April. Victoria is the nearest
to do one a week, moving around the city. major Canadian city and the capital of our
Advice sent to us on strategy, tactics and province, BC (short for British Columbia).
protocol would be greatly appreciated.
Mother also said we should, if we can,
move into the neighbouring parts of Canada
on a Friday, Saturday and Sunday in
We
We live on the mainland, while Victoria is
at the southern tip of Vancouver Island, a
We plan to write and call the established ferry-trip away. Soon we'd like to go to
healing groups, psychotherapy groups, Calgary, east of here, and to Seattle, to the
hatha yoga and tai chi groups etc. Where south, in the USA. We have a large area in
16
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-18.txt 
 Here in Vancouver we did pooja with all
which to spread Sahaja Yoga when we in-
clude the whole of Canada Mother said the other Sahaja Yogis across the world. It
she is coming to North America in the fall,
first to New York, then lo Boston, Toronto there were only five in the room. We have
(Canada's largest city), Vancouver, then to about half dozen solid people here. Predic-
California, Houston (Texas)
through New York. A visit to Seattle would altogether while we were absent. With our
be added if we set things up there and stops base stronger and more doubtless we reach
in other cities are possible.
was very strong, very beautiful, although
and back tably a few got stronger and some fell of
out and Mother works through us.
Mother called Vancouver "virgin territory'
One cannot sum up the tour in India in
words. One cannot reduce to a deseription relatively untouched by the history of our
the all-encompassing care we recetved from founding countries (England and France) or
our Mother. The love and attention to our the materialism south of the border in the
comfort we received from the Indian Sahaja
Yogis was so subtle and unobtrusive, so
profoundly bountiful and sweet.
USA.
From our front porch here you can see a
formation in the mountains to the north,
We take into our lives from the Indian The lions, named for the lions which quard
Sahaja Yogis a deep inner tranquility and London, It's not hard to believe that Mother
balance. We want very much to unlearn
our Western inhibitions and complicated placed them here long ago, these giant
concepts, and be able to enjoy, to laugh,
and to express our collectivity with the same
spontaneity and humility we found through. going forward confidently, knowing Mother
out India.
Nelson's statue in Trafalgar Square in
symbols of courage and Kingship, to guard
us and give us strength. In Canada, we're
is taking care of us. But we're still very
young and need all the help and advice
Our return trip from India was extremely from our brothers and sisters that we can
pleasent. We stopped only one day in Paris, get. Please write !
but oh what a day ! With six French Sahaja
Being back home, reading the news-
and watching TV (Nicaragua,
Yogis and four English, the four Canadians
participated in the pooja to establish the papers
French Centre, a very special blessing from Guatamala, El Salvador) it's hard not to fee!
Mother. We received terrific French hospi- the overwhelming urgency of our mission.
tality and got some of the rich French food Sahaja Yoga is here to transform and
that makes French livers what they are.
change the world. The degree to which we
do that is dependent, Mother tells us, on
In England we were taken in typical warm our desire and our will. We must put our
Sahaja style, leaving us wondering why the attention and desire on World Peace, do
English are always telling us they have bad pooja for it, shoebeat the world leaders and
hearts. We returned to Vancouver one at the bhoots of the countries themselves, pray
a time, Lori on 7 March, Patrick on the 14th, for it. Our desire must encompass the
and Mark on the 23rd after participating in whole world, for Mother means us to be
Mother's birthday pooja.
-JAI MATAJI
universal.
17
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-19.txt 
 FROM MASS PREACHING
TO MASS REALISATION
Shri Jnaneshwar who wrote about the
It was an Open Invitation
Kundalini Shakti. In
the language of
Some of the local devotees were al-
Her Holiness
masses witnessed its awakening in his
devotees and their mass realisation with Matai's photograph. As they sat down.
the blessings of Shree Mataji, the Adi with their hands stretched towards Shree
Kundalini; पैतन्य चवजतीची शोना. Beauty of the
emperor of Chaitanya (consciousness),
ready attracted towards
Mataji's photograph, others also followed
one by one The only information about
It happened at Nevase, a village near Shree Mataji that was given by the Sahaja
Aurangabad (Maharashtra, India),
about 700 years ago, Shri Jnaneshwar had and with Her blessings the realisation takes
explained the Geeta in Marathi, the langu- place and those who sincerely desire to
age of masses, for the first time. Till then have supreme experience may pray to Her
knowledge of the Geeta remained confined for the same,
to only priestly and elite class. This work,
later, popularly came to be known as Jnan- us it was a first experience of mass Kunda-
eshwari and is being read, every day. with
great devotion, by lakhs of people in Maha- thought or planned about it in advance.
rashtra. In its sixth chapter Jnaneshwar has
explained in detail about Kundalini Shakti.
where Yogis was that she is their spiritual Guru
As a matter of fact practically for all of
lini awakening and more so nothing was
It was all spontaneous and Sahaja. The
photograph of Shree Mataji was placed in
The
A temple has been built on the spot between us and the new seekers.
where the Geeta was explained. About 50 Sahaja Yogis and Sahaja Yoginis started
Sahaja Yogis from Australia and Europe giving vibrations to the aspirants. Pindrop
visited the temple in Jan. 81. As the village silence prevailed in the temple within the
is not a tourist spot, the visit by the fore:g- shortest time.
ners, with such simplicity and having red
markon their foreheads, made the villagers
After about 10-15 minutes the Deities of
very curious. Moreover, the Sahaja Yoais' all the respective chakras were invoked
regard towards Jnaneshwsr was clearly seen
from their faces and the garlands they were
carrying. When a few villagers enquired,
they were told that the temple has a great
through the MANTRAS- The seekers were
also prompted to ask clarification within
their hearts from Shri Jnaneshwar as to
whether he also regards Mataji Nirmala
Devi as the incarnation of Adi Shakti
Bhagwati ?
significance from spiritual point of view and
Shri Jnaneshwar is still present in the
temple. They were also told to ascertain
This was responded very quickly and
many of them confirmed that there was a
the fact themselves.
18
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-20.txt 
 sensation of tingling on their palms, Within lisation is indeed most imporlant in Sahaja
next few minutes one of the seekers infor- Yoga.
med us that he was feeling cool breeze over
his palms. The man sitting next to him was
requested to check up over the head of the Realisation. After Realisation a person is
person who was feeling cool breeze.
If there is a desire, Mother gives the
transformed absclutely. He can give Reali-
sation to people, he can cure others, he
He expressed his great surprise and can know his own problems, his
reported that a forceful draft of cool air was surroundings, he can clean himself and
coming out of the head of his neighbour: others. Once this is experienced, the faith
As a result all of them started checking remains no more a blind faith. Sahaj yogi
their Sahasraras and dozens of seekers experiences that a photograph of Mother is
confirmed that they were feeling cool breeze just a representative of Adishakti Mataji
over their palms and heads. We all felt Nirmala Devi because her attention is there.
extremely grateful to Mataji for fulfilling our
desire under the circumstances to help the settled down in Sahaja Yoga seriously.
seekers for getting Realisation.
own
But for this purpose one is required to be
Though we were not accompanied by
Mother in our journey, we realised that we
helped
The remainig seekers were
collectively as well as individually and about are in Her and she is in us and that we are
more than 250 seekers of all ages and sex aware of our wholesomeness and she is
were found realised with the blessings ot our wholesomeness. The faith started
Shree Mataji.
growing stronger and stronger and in a
real sense this is Becoming.
This experience further strengthened
our confidence in the great power of vibra-
tions given by Mother. The experience of
the actualisation in the process of the Rea-
Jai Mataji
Gopal Patankar
The lamps that burn high cannot be pressed by cover. They
You yourselves are lamps.
become much more forceful than the cover. It is their own achievement. When they are struck,
they are distrubed and extinguished.
Why are your lamps disturbed ? It is necessary to think on this. Is there no transpa-
rent sheath of love around them ? Have you forgotten your Mother's love for you ? Are you
disturbed because of that ? As the glass cover protects the lanip, in the same way my love will
protect you.
But, how to keep the glass clean ? How can I explain ? Shall I say like Shri Krishna,
-SHRI MATAJI
19
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-21.txt 
 PRAYER
देवि प्रपत्नातिहरे प्रसीद
प्रसीद मातर्जगतोऽसखिलस्य ।
प्रसीद विश्वेववरि पाहि विश्वं
त्वमीश्वरी देवि चराचरस्य ।।
Devi Prapannārti-hare Praseed
Praseed Mätar-Jagatao-Khilasya |
Praseed Vishve-Shwari Pähi Vishwam
Twamee-Shwari Devi Chara-Charasya |
Translation :
O Devi, you, who removes the distress of your suppliants, be gracious. Be
gracious, O Mother of the World. Be gracious, O Queen of the Universe. Protect the
universe. O Devi, you are the Ishwari (the Goddess, the queen) of all moving and
unmoving things.
आधारभूत। जगतस्त्वमेका
महीस्वरूपेण यतः स्थितासि ।
अपां स्वरूपस्थितया त्वयंत-
दाप्यायते कृत्स्तमलंघ वीर्ये ॥
Ādhāra-Bhootā Jagatas-Twametā
Mahee-Swaroopena Yatah Sthitāsi |
Apăm Swaroopa-Sthitaya Twayait
Dāpyă Yate Krutsna-Malangha-Veerye |
Translation:
You are the only support of the World, because you are in the form of earth.
By you who exists in the form of water, is the whole universe pervaded, your powers are
unsurpassed.
Devi Mahatmayam Chap. XI
20
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Dear Brothers and Sisters of India,
Having already been back home for a while, it is hard to tell you in words what
was our experience in India. So better to let our hearts speak:
You have given us so much, so much in all dimensions. Every day, every minute
you were taking so much care of us, organizing, arranging everything so well. You were
treating us like "princes" and we do not know how we deserved it. Because you were
taking off our shoulders the worries of accommodation, transport and food, you were
giving us the grace to put our attention only on the essential : our spirit, our Divine
Mother.
We have learnt so many things from you :
The Power of Love
Love is our most powerful weapon; it does not fear anything, it overcomes all the
obstacles :
levels the mountains of hate and arrogance,
fills the ditches of despair and loneliness,
softens the corners of lite.
When it opens, it lets the flow of joy pour with
Love is the key to the heart.
abundance and life. Like the stream, it runs through the fields, nourishing the grass,
allowing new seeds to take birth and grow.
Like the sun, it just emits, emits everywhere without expecting anything back, shining
with glory..
And the one who is sensitive will be attracted by this force and will desire to stay
in this light.
Love is the bond among men which will bring peace on earth.
It is the basic structure of our collectivity.
You have also shown us what humility was.
Without humility how can we reach the Almighty ?
What are we so far ? What have wB done to deserve the Grace to have been
chosen by the Adi Shakti ? Nothing.
She is the Embodiment of all the universes, of all the powers, of all what is breathing
and living.
So, what can we pretend to ?
Better let our baloon of ego deflate and pray with humble heart that She, in Her
infinite Compassion, will remove all the clouds of our ignorance.
(Contd. on Page 23)
21
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-23.txt 
 THE COLLECTIVE JOY
"You cannot love me if you don't love tion in our hearts. It is not my spirit, it is
your sister and your brother". These are the Spirit, eternal, pure, loving, joyous,
the words of the Goddess and Her Maya innocent which lights up everyone of us. It
makes us forget that we can only come is absolute, therefore the spirit is collective.
closer to Her Heart when we come closer The channel of this collectivity is love and
to the hearts of our brothers and sisters. its foundation is our enlighted awareness.
The protocol is a dead ritual when it hides As this Spirit is One and Absolute, Undivi-
behind it the Ego of the Sahaja Yogis. ded and indivisible, it cannot shine only in
"I'm doing the Pooja of Mother, so I'm Mother's heart: the Spirit is unlimited only
greater than the others and Mother looks when it shines for the joy of shining,
after me better".
Sahaja Yogis used to put themselves on the glow. So how can our spirit love Mother
front stage, crushing the newcomers from when il does not shine in the hearts of other
their mythical heights. They believed, theySahaja Yogis ? Do we realise that the
were the ones who had access to the God- same spirit sparkles its glimpses of love
dess, who were the confidents, the great
heroes of the modern times. If they were
married, their wives would help them to
assert their nebulous depth and arrogant see the spirit of all of them eager to flow
behaviour. It might start a game of com- into our hearts, respond to our invitation to
petition where the Ego had the lead. But one love and joy, and circulate like a river which
day they also might realise that they lay has discovered a new way to reach the
down on the street, deprived of the Essence Ocean of love ?
of joy, abandoned by themselves in the dark-
Many so called great because it is its essence to shine and
in the heart of every Sahaja Yogi ? Do we
see the beauty of its expression in the
heart of our brothers and sisters ? Do we
Why should every small, tiny stream
flow alone to reach the ocean ? It may dry
and disappear before reaching the shore
ness of solitude.
As Sahaja Yogis we should ask this where there is the new life of compassion
question in our hearts, why did it happen ?
and why so quick ?
and bliss bestowed upon us by Adi Shakti.
How can this tiny stream enjoy the move-
The answer is very simple; because we ment and the music of its waves when it
have forgotten the existence of our spirit. must struggle alone against the danger of
How can we come close to the great God- nature ? Why should not all these small
dess ? If the spirit shines, we become the streams rejoin together joyfully so that the
water of life gets stronger and stronger, so
drop which rejoins the ocean and
we
become the ocean itself; so, we actually that every stream melis into each other in
never move towards our Beloved Mother, one wave, one music, one grace, one love,
för when we become the ocean we reside one combined purily and lightness before
in Her Heart, and her tremendous love reaching the shore and losing itself into the
pouring in our being is Her Divine Reflec- Ocean of Beauty and Bliss?
22
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-24.txt 
 Let us, with all our powers kill, with great on this earth as Lord Jesus Christ. He is
anger and courage, all our misidentifica- the One who will bring all the little streams
tions, jealousies, envies, rivalries. Let us together at the Lotus Feet of His Divine
destroy everything which prevents us from Mother. This is the joy of collectivity, This
sharing tagether the brilliance of our Spiril. joy should lead us to a state where there is
We should, with the Help of the Divine only one smile, for we smile together; only
Mother give no chance to the Satan any one glance, for we see together in the same
more and unite together under the protec- ther: only one prayer; for we adore the
more and unite together under the protec- direction, önly one sound, for we sing toge-
tive arms of Adi Shakti. Let us irradiate Divine Mother together, only one move-
the whole world through our collective ment, for we bow together at Her Lotus
Feet, only one joy; for our spirits manifest
at the same time for God and only one
heart, for all our hearts reside in the warmth
spirit!
There are not 100, 1000 or 10000 Sahaja
Yogis and Sahaja Yoginis, they are only and Divine Smoothness of the heart of the
100, 1000 or 10000 spirits dissolved in One
Divine Spirit, enjoying the manifestation of Eternally, Glorious, Victorious, Magnificent
the Self. There must be one light, because
there is one love, there must be one joy,
because there is one Absolute.
strenghen what is imperishable, let us des-
troy what is fake. We should in our prayer
of togetherness associate our great Brother
and Protector Shri Ganesh who incarnated
Adi Shakti,
Victory to the spirit,
Victory to the collective being.
Victory to Mataji.
Let us
--ARNEU
(Contd. from Page 21)
And above all, we saw that it is a reality that the Kingdom of God is established
Let us enlarge It to the whole world.
on earth.
This is our duty. This is the only way to thank our Beloved Mother for all Her
Blessings. You are supporting us by your vibrations, by the depth of your meditations
and we have to fight.
Togelher we will win.
And let us pray that the next time we will see you, we will be able to say to you:
"You have thousands of new brothers and sisters."
"Om Twamev Sakshat Shree Adi Shakti Shree Nirmala Devi Namonamah".
With all my Love and thankfullness
Marie-Laure
Brighton
23
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-25.txt 
 Thank You, Mother!
Thank You, Mother, for having brought us to sleep on the Kundalini of the world.
Thank You, Mother, for having demonstrated by means of vibrations the Oneness of
God through various worshipping sites and temples.
Thank You, Mother, for having soothed our Nabhis with delicious meals prepared by
sahaja loving hands.
Thank You, Mother, for having reminded us through thousand and one little tricks that
our attention is to sit on the top of our heads.
Thank You, Mother, for having imparted us Your eternal Knowledge, seated in the
middle of us, under a tree, at candlelight or basking in the glow of our uncle Shri Chan-
dra, just like the Masters of all times, You who are the Master of All the Masters,
Thank You, Mother, for having given us the parents we had always dreamt of in the
person of Your Indian children, bestowers of familial security.
Thank You, Mother, for having so often spread into our hearts the Joy of the Spirit.
Thank You, Mother, for having taught us through practical exercises what it means to
be collective, feel collective, speak collective.
Thank You, Mother, for having made the present so attractive for us and thus we for-
got a tiny bit about those egos and conditionings wandering into our heads.
Thank You, Mother, for been such a Beautiful, Wonderful, Perfect Mother with unbelieve-
able patience. while supervising at the same time this whole earth and fourteen entire
universes.
Thank You, Mother, above all, for being our Mother and for allowing us to be Your
children.
Back from India !
RUTH L.
Rome, 1st March, 1982
24
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-26.txt 
 FIRST LIGHT
Some are awake though it's still dark
They wander round, some bleary eyed
As those just roused from millenia long sleep
Whilst others sleep on regardless
Not even knowing that they slumber.
There are those, but few, who have always been awake;
Who can do naught but watch wisely from the peaks
While on the stage the new actors stumble
With the weight of little understood insight
In the valleys it is still dark
Not the rustle of a leaf or the twitter of a bird-
The deep black grey of 6000 year night
wreaks its weight on the human spirit
as it moans wretchedly beneath the load
of insufferable indignity
But high on the mountain tops it's already quite light
and a distinct glow is seen in the east
Here on these few high spots
the night is already a bad memory
an illusion that evaporates as mist with new day
Here you can see everything clearly as crystal
in the incomparable brilliance of the dawn
Here, how can you lie or deceive
Here, it is obvious, plain, even blatant
How could fear or corruption survive the glare !
The Angels take positions in crystal glass
galleries of muiti-rainbow hue
painting the infinite blue backdrop
with glittering festoon
Up here it will always be daylight
But down there it will not much longer be night.
-Ray Harris
25
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-27.txt 
 SAHAJA YOGA SEMINAR
10th October 1981
THE VISH UDDHI AND COLLECTIVITY
IN
BRIGHTON-1)
Introduction by-RAY HARRIS and JASON COPELAND
The purpose of a seminar is for Sahaja mas, the rules of living by which we protect
Yogis to come together for a couple of days and nourish our spiritual growth,
and collectively explore an aspect of Sahaja
Yoga, and concentrate on going deeper into
the vibration particularly in that aspect. The of the magnificent awesomeness of God
theme of this seminar was the Vishuddhi, that created such an impact that thou-
the well-being of which is the source of Sands of years later the Hebrews were
successful collectivity, which is something
we still need to work towards.
Krishna however showed Arjuna a vision
able to expand on this knowledge by the
grace of Abraham, Moses and Christ. Be-
fore Krishna revealed God to Arjuna, few
The vishuddhi is a sixteen-petalled lotus people had any idea of the all pervading
at the back of the neck, at the cervical ple- oneness.
xus. The deities seated thera are Sri Radha
Krishna, Shri Sarva Mantra Siddhi, and Sri
Viratangata-Virata. The great Incarnation a unified, i, e. a Yogic, part of this all-per-
of Krishna 6000 years ago brought enligh- vading oneness, it is essential for us to
tened knowledge of Almighty God to India activate the qualities of the vishuddhi, and
via Arjuna on the battlefield of Kurukshetra. starting from correct self-respect, to deve-
Sri Krishna, although an incarnation of the lop proper detached, loving, non-possess-
Father, is an aspect of the Son, Vishnu the ive relationships with our brothers and
preserver. The absolute limitless God is sisters as Krishna himself had. In the west
impossible for humans to comprehend, and we act in very adharmic ways, so the vis-
difficult even for an incarnation to demons- huddhi catches. This is especially acute
trate-humans can only be guided towards when we compartmentalise, label or other-
knowledge of the infinite by the system wise misidentify people, e.g. as strangers,
which is born within them. Generally it is potential lovers, friends, or "our" family,
the Mother incarnations such as Mary who rather than as brothers and sisters which
show surrender and humility, the Son incar- is what we all are. People in the west are
nations who show us how we can and sho- encouraged to attract, and be primarily
uld behave, and the Guru incarnations interested in attracting the opposite sex
which give us the knowledge of the divine (with the accent on sex) which is an obse-
and our sustenance in the form of the dhar- ssion which utterly sabotages the natural
In order for us to take up our place as
26
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-28.txt 
 The objectification state of our own or others' chakras and
state of col'ectivity.
and excessive individuation of people bro- vibrations. If one smokes or behaves in
ught about by the protestant ethics of private an undiplomatic manner, the vishuddhi
capitalist effort has undermined collectivity will catch and our chances of feeling vib-
throughout the world, and has prompted rations will decrease.
the illusions of communism, socialism and
hippy communalism as its antithesis.
us look at the left vishuddhi in
detail, since that is the seat of so many
Let
However itis only the rising of the Kun- problems for us in the west. The deity
dalini through the vishuddhi chakra which of left vishuddhi is Sri
enables us to transcend our possessive- Now when
ness and emotional attachments to others himself in adharmic activities, he usually
and to rise above our usual ways of seeing knows inside that it is somehow wrong, so
people as different kinds of people, so that he starts to feel guilty and loses his self-res-
we can relate to each other in a calm, digni- pect. Guilt however is often instilled in a
fied and compassionate manner.
THE
Vishnumaya.
a seeker specifically involves
religious upbringing in the west, usually for
the purpose of stabilising societies in an
Speech and communication commence unhealthy state of subservience to all too
in the vishuddhi, and hence all our rela- human interpretations of what are alleged to
tionships. Being the source of mantras, be God's laws. The result is an enforced
the vishuddhi is also the seat of our rela- slavery to an external set of rules rather
tionships with all the deities, and in parti- than a voluntary, even joyful, cleaving to
cular is the seat of the Virata, the ether what is known from within the heart to
element which is the oneness of the whole be right-the furtive, negative avoidance
manifest universe, the "glue" which not of that which is forbidden rather than the
merely holds the quarks together but in happy involvement in that which is healthy.
fact is the stuff of which other, transient Thus develop alienated people who alternate
states of manifestation such as the tempo- between cringing subservience to human
whirlpools of energy which we feel as authority and the only possible unenligh-
solid matter, are made. Through the ether tened response to that, resentiul and angry
travel all forms of energy, such as gravity rebellion against it.
and radio waves-so when we try to spread
Sahaja Yoga either in unaided speech or
rary
The fact that today people are breaking
using the electronic media, our success is their dharmas is as much a reflection of
the adharmic state of the religions which
have diverted them into guilt as it is of the
the unbalaced emotional state of the people
directly related to the strength and clarity
of our vishuddhis.
In the body, it is at the vishuddhi that in charge of them. It is a fact that only if
nerves of the arms join the spinal column, one breaks the dharmas the spirit will be
and thus on the health of that junction adversely affected; for that to happen is
depends whether or not we feel the cool bad enough by itself without humans impo-
breeze on the hands or read accurately the sing a crippling set of neuroses and repre
27
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-29.txt 
 ssions on top of it. Mataji has shown us of Laxmi and Vishnu. The other side of
that we are merely the spirit and nothing self respect is respect for others, and lack
else. Since our spirit just watches, we do of it will give rise to resentment. Irritabi-
nothing, so what have we got to feel guilty lity, anger and shouting will result in a
about ? If you keep the dharmas, you don't catch in this chakra. From the healthy
need external religion to
control your state of this chakra stem divine diplomacy
and correct interrelationships, and respect
for our fathers.
behaviour.
Our spirit can only desire, and the rest
of the universe, being Mother or the Power
of God, fulfils our desire, even if we desire Vishuddhi qualities do we need to consi-
the wrong thing ! If you ask forgiveness for der? Firstly, we must develop self-res-
these wrongs, She will forgive you totally; pect-get rid of guilt and all ideas of unwor-
nothing is permanent or unforgivable, so thiness, cleave with joy to the spontaneous
what is guilt about? The worst you can do is promptings of the dharma from within
to destroy yourself, and since that affects instead of sticking in fear to the bindings of
no-one but you then there's no need for of the word "should" or shouldn't" from
guilt there either. Regret your wrongdoings, without. We must develop confidence that
pull your ears and ask for forgiveness, then if we truly ask for forgiveness we will get
forget about it! The negativity loves you to it and then forget our sins. From self-res-
degrade yourself with breast-beatings of pect and the feeling that we are beings of
remorse and unworthiness-it stops you true worth comes respect for each other.
spreading the vibration of God's love!
So what outward manifestations of
From the vishuddhi comes correct datach-
ment as taught by Krishna:
Let's consider the nature of Sri Vishnu-
"The wise grieve not for those who tive;
maya : she was the baby girl who was put
into prison with Krishna's mother to replace and they grieve not for those who die -for
Krishna, when the wicked king Kamsa had life and death shall pass away. Because
killed all her previous babies since the pro-
phecy that one of them would conquer his and those kings of men. And we all shall
empire. When the guards came to kill the be for all time, we all for ever and ever."
new-born baby, Vishnumaya flew out of the
window; she was merely an illusion for the
wicked King, enabling Krishna to survive. each other apart from that of the spirit
The qualities she embodies are self-respect, within, and when dealing with each other
correct relationships with women and res-
pect for one's mother. (Sri Vishnumaya is always with
also known as Yogamaya.)
we all have been for all time : 1, and thou,
So we must attach no perceptions to
never speak harshly, speak and deal
consideration compassion,
generosity and love-all the ingredients
of divine diplomacy. That way we will
On the right vishuddhi we find Sri develop, starting from each individual's
Yeshoda, the Mother of Krishna, and Sri internal process, true
Vitthla Rukmani, these belng incarnations Sahaja Yogis will then mesh together as
collectivity, and
28:
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-30.txt 
 an organic unit moulded by Mother. We experience to do so. After realisalion we
will still be groups of individuals, but become instruments of God, we can rely
united by the vibration and by our common on Mother to ensure that what we say will
understanding of the spirit and actualisa- be the right thing. This is the true mean-
tion of the spirit's qualities, and united in ing of surrendering to Mother. We surre-
pursuit of the common alm- God-reali- nder to Mother the direction of the action,
sation for each one of us and the spreading but we must do the actions! We must per-
of Sahaja Yoga so that all souls have a form the tasks, we must do the work! All
chance to attain union with God now.
of us must speak in public, take the lead,
become bold and resolute, take responsibi-
In the next four years all the world must lity, sharpen our intellects and shout from
net to hear about Sahaja Yoga. Caution the rooftops !
is necessary in order to spread the message
correctly, but Mother has already approved
the idea of us appearing on the media our-
selves talking positively about Sahaja Yoga. presence and blessings upon us by hearing
To sum up Ihe theme of this seminar then,
let us ask the spirit of Sri Krishna for his
We must hype it up a litlle bit, each of us
must take individual personal responsTDRIty brave warrior was cowering on the floor of
for pushing the issue to the fore. his chariot in understandable horror at the
Yoga is the most fantastic thing that ever
happened since the beginning of history, Thought of slaughtering his teachers and
and we must say so in so many words.
His words to Arjuna when the aforesaid
Sahaja
close relatives in the coming battle. These
words seem to banish forever the spectre
of guilt and the feeling that we are unwor-
We must also take collective responsi-
bility; we must at all times help and encour-
age each other to stand up and do this
thy. Of course we
are worthy! Mother,
the greatest and most powerful incarnation
öf God that has ever appeared, has perso-
great work. At all times with diplomacy-wa nally hand-picked us, and in so doing She
must think constantly !how is my brother
has said for all the universe to hear that in
Her opinion we ARE worthy of tne task
She has glven us.
or sister feling-are they hurt or offended
by the way I am putting my point over?
Can I say it or put it across in a different
way which will achieve what I'm trying for
So who
are we to
r say or think otherwise?
without offence ?
So let us remember what Sri Krishna
We must use, each of us, all our life considers a suitable attitude for bold missio-
experience, even from before realisation, nary warriors and apostles of God; as Sri
in the struggle to spread the message. Krishna said to Arjuna after he sank down
After realisation our previous experience in the chariot, his
is not written off, it becomes a tool to use despair and grief, his eyes filled with tears :
to speak to the world. We have found the
way, now we must show everyone else, and
we can use any tool in our armoury of in this hour, the hour of trial? Strong men
soul overcome with
"Whence this lifeless dejection, Arjuna,
29
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-31.txt 
 know not despair, Arjuna, for this wins
neither heaven nor earth. Fall not into
The Moon is full
degrading weakness, for this becomes not
a man who is a man. Throw off this igno-
ble discouragement, and arise like a fire
the sky's alight
the City slowly sinks from sight
Upon the deep I look above
that burns all before it!"
and see Her face-a star of love
कुतस्वा कश्मलमिदं विषमे समूपस्थितग ।
अनायंजुष्टम स्वग्यंम कीर्तिकरम अ्र्जून ।।
ल्कैब्यं मा स्म गमः पार्थ नेतत्वव्युपपद्यते ।
क्षद्रं हृदयदोबल्यं व्यक्त्वोत्तिष्ठ परंतप ।।
Oh would my soul in rapture rise
to meet the challenge in Her eyes
And leave behind my earthly form
to gain forever my longed-for home.
Shreemad Bhagwat Geeta
(Chapter II)
-Joseph Pomerance
Brooklyn, N.Y.
TENTATIVE PROGRAMME
of Her Holiness Mataji Shti Nirmala Devi
for 1982
Lisbon and Madrid
27th May to 3rd June
London
4th June
Geneva, Baseland, Freiberg (Germany)
August/September
North America
October
ITAE
U.K.
November
Australia
December
FESTIVALS
Guru Purnima
6th July '82
Nag Panchmi
25th July '82
Raksha Bandhan
4th August '82
Janmashtami (Sri Krishna Birthday)
12th August 82
Sri Ganesh Chaturdashi
22nd August '82
Anant Chaturdashi
2nd September '82
30
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-32.txt 
 Xperience
This is a dream that I had, about a year after my initiation in Sahaja Yoga, but
I had kept quiet aver it, since I felt that it had some bearing to one of my past life.
Here it is !
*****
I saw myself walking in a bamboo forest by the side of a mountain and sud-
denly came out of an opening where there were no trees, for about 50 feet, since a
black lava had flowed from the mountain top down below, some ages ago; and a natural
platform had formed, small in size, where I was standing.
I sat a little away facing this platform, in meditation. i was a six footer
Sadhu, of brown complexion with tuft of long hair which had thinned up at the top of
the head. After a little while, Her Holiness Shri Durga Mata came over seated on a
tiger and got down and sat on this platform and the tiger sat at Her feet. Durga Mataji
looked at me for some time and said : "Go to Mataji". Ireplied: "I will not go". She
again repeated in anger: "I said Go to Mataji". I asserted with pride within me: "1 will
Not go". Then Durga Mata lifted up Her sword and struck me on my shoulder and I
fell down bleeding in front of the tiger. The tiger atonce started licking the blood and
in three licks, the wound completely healed and I got up. Then Durga Mataji pointing
up Her finger said : "Now go"; that is, go to Mataji Nirmala Devi.
I walked away with ego and pride uppermost within me and as I was entering
raised my right hand and shouted: "Durga-
the forest, and without look ing back, I
Mataji-ki-Jai'". But that
loud that I woke up from my dream with a
start. I looked at the watch to see what
time it was and found it to be exactly 4.00
A.M., time to get up for meditation.
"Jai" was so
(Contd. from Page 13)
every marriage a very pompous thing, a
very beautiful thing, but ultimately what I
find, two crumpled up people sitting down
there, you know, sulking.... Then imagine
the children who are going to be born. They
will think what, these sulking parents, Oh
God save us from these crying babies !
This dream remained lingering
in my mind for a very, very long time and
felt that it had some significance, a sort
of reminder to me, to be always in touch
with Sahaja Yoga and be implicitly guid-
ed by Mataji's instructions.
So don't put all my hopes to a complete
shattered stata, by this kind of attitude,...
Now if you have any questions, ask them,
because I don't know how far to say
-S M. Karaka:
Bombay
31
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-33.txt 
 ON BLAKE'S BIRTHDAY
On 10th November 1381, birthday of the great William Blake, prophet and poet, a
small band of Sahaja Yogis honoured the occasion by attending a recital of Blake's works
at the church in Picadilly, St. James's, where he is supposed to have been baptized.
Vibrations flowed from the beautiful marble font where the 'baptism' took place and
from paintings of Blake's, set up on screens round about us.
While most of the readers in the recital alas had little idea of the essence of the
words in front of them, there were one or two whose Spirit shone through and whose
inspired renderings were great and we Sahaja Yogis thankfully drank the vibrations of
those Divine moments.
The following verse is taken from Chapter Three of a section of JERUSALEM
titled "To the Christians", which was read on Tuesday by Rosemary Leach:
England I awake I awake l awake !
Jerusalem thy Sister calls!
Why wilt thou sleep the sleep of death
And close her from thy ancient walls ?
Thy hills and valleys felt her feet
Gently upon their bosoms move :
Thy gates beheld sweet Zion's ways :
Then was a time of joy and love.
And now the time returns again :
Our souls exult, and London's towers
Receive the Lamb of God to dwell
In England's green and pleasant bowers.
by KATHIE DUGG
32
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-34.txt 
 1I13
2912U0
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-35.txt 
 Registered with the Registrar of Newspapers under Regn. No. 36999/81
WARNING
THE THIRD WORLD WAR, SAID SHRI MATAJI, IS NOT AN
ELEMENT IN THE PLAN OF GOD TO BRING ABOUT SATTYA YUGA.
IT WOULD ONLY CREATE MEANINGLESS DESTRUCTION AND SUF-
YET MEN'S MADNESS IS PRESENTLY CREATING THE
FERINGS.
CONDITIONS WHICH MAKE THIS DREADFUL CALAMITY VERY
LIKELY. IN ANY CASE THE SAHAJA YOGIS WILL BE PROTECTED
BUT THEY SHOULD CLEARLY UNDERSTAND THEIR RESPONSIBI-
IF ALL THE SAHAJA YOGIS DO NOT PUT ALL THEIR
LITY.
ENERGY AND AVOID THIS BY ACTIVELY SPREADING SAHAJA
YOGA IT MAY WELL HAPPEN AND SOON.
Edited & Published by Sh. S C. Rai, 43, Burnglow Road DethiE11oo07 and
Printed at #atnadeeo Press, Darya Ganj, New Deihl-110002
One Issue Rs 00 Annual Subseription Rs. 30.00 Foreign (By Airmail E 5 $ 101
