Nirmala Yoga Vol. 12 Bi-Monthly Year 2 Nov.-Dec, '82 + Om Twamewa Sakshat, Shri Kalki Sakshat, Shri Sahastrar Swamini, Moksha Pradaini, Bhagwati Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Namo Namaha. "Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns all the religions and seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga-THE UNION"

 Editorial Moksha is commonly understood, as liberation from the cycle of birth and death. Attainment of this state is the cherished objective of every spiritual seeker. Even those who never think of their Spirit and feel contented by superficial worshipping and morti- fication keep the desire of achieving so called Moksha. However no one knows whether such a state really exists and if exists when it is granted. Idea of Moksha presupposes binding, for, Lunless one is bound, one cannot be freed andthat binding is limitations of one's awareness. Every individual being has its separate existence on account of 'I' consciousness which is the real experience of life. Impressions of past experiences and unsatisfied desires are associated with 'I' cons- ciousness. According to Patanjali's aforisms on Yoga, even the fulfilled desires leave behind subtle impressions of the experiences, which become the cause of further desires. Add to it new desires and impressions accumulated every day and reactions to external impulses. Even the desire for so called Moksha would strengthen the attachment to life. Shri Jnaneshwar in his following verse has described a liberated Yogi :- आकाश है माझे मस्तक बापा चिद्ूपा नाद उठती आधारा पासोनी सहस्र दलावरली, नि:शब्द निरंतर नाडी एक ज्ञानदेव म्हणे ऐसा अनुभव जेथ तोचि एक योगी जीवन मुक्त Transcription Ākash he māze mastaka bapä, chidroopă nād uthati Ādhārā pāsoni sahastra dalāvarali, nishabda nirantar nādi eka Jnānadeva mhane aisă anubhava jeth tochi eka Yogi jeevan mukta. Translation Only that Yogi is liberated from life (Jeevan Mukta) who experiences that his head L.e. attention is the sky (Brahmarandhra) where sounds arise and there is endless and soundless channel (Nadi) from Muladhar to Sahasrar. Nirmala Yoga

 However despite this clear advice people are still clinging to their old belief. Moksha or Jeevan Mukti or liberation is possible only in Sahaja Yoga, it is not the deliverance as commonly believed. It is totally severing the connections with past and future. When Kundalini is in Sahasrar and deflates ego and superego, links with past are dis- rupted and future becomes non-existent, as 'l' consciousness fades away in thoughtless awareness. With that go away other attachments arising out of individuality. Our beloved mother has freed us from our past Karmas, with our full knowledge and understanding. We are the most fortunate of all human beings. We have risen above the limitations of time and place. We are deathless because we have transcended above the physical, psychic and vital beings. We are truly liberated. We are proud children of the Supreme Goddess, Param Parameshwari, Adi Shakti, Moksha Pradayini. A Prayer O Mother, You see me, son of Your life-birth- staggering and tottering, learning to stand up. You hold your helping hands back, letting me fall a few times, so that from a baby toddler, I may grow to be a man at one with the Holy Spirit. Spreading God's truth amongst all the peoples of the world, so that they may know that which they are. I see Your Motherly concern and, behind that, the strength which Our Father gives You, His Consort, so freely. Yet you know that we have to play the drama and grow up in our world- to reflect purely that glorious globe of truth, in the mirrors of our soul. May we learn only to cleanse, nourish and love our Souls, O Mother, may You know fully our eternal gratitude and awe-full respect, and may all the beauty of this world be redeemed. From a Sahaja Yogi in the Heart of this Universe... Nirmala Yoga 2.

 Yoga Nirmala 43, Bunglow Road, Delhi-110007 (India) Founder : Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Editoria! Board: Dr. S. K. Mathur, Sri A. S. Mishra, Sri R. D. Kulkarni Representatives :CHERYL HYNES-10, Clarence Road, Burwood, N.S..W. 2134, Australia. Australia U. K. GAVIN BROWN-Nirmala Palace, 99, Nightingale Lane, Clapham South, Balham, London SW 12 U.K. U. S. A. : CHRISTINE RIEGER-215 West 92 ND Street, APT. 7 E. New York, NY 10025 : RECHARD PAYMENT-1950, East 5th Avenue, Vancouver, B. C. Canada V5N 1M2. Canada Switzerland: CHARLES AND MRS. MAGDA MATHYS-5, Chemin Des Mouldins, 1256, Troinex (Canton de Geneva), Switzerland. : MARIE ROUGER-175, Av. Ledru RIlin, Paris-750001. France Hong Kong : EMILIE P. SHI- Cliff Rence Bros. Co. Ltd., 1610, Wing On Centre, 111, Connaught Road Central, Hong Kong. : M.B. RATNANNAVAR-13, Merwan Mansion, Genjwala Lane, Borivali (W), Bombay-400 092. RAJARAM SHANKAR RAJWADE 840, Sada Shiva Peth, Pune-411030. India CONT ENTS Page 1. Editorial 2. A Prayer 3. Representatives 4. Translation of Her Holiness Mataji's old Marathi letter 5. Kalki 6. The 51 Names of Shri Mary Mahalakshmi 7. Agnya 8. John's Vision of Shri Mataji in the book of Revelation 9. Letter of Mataji 10. Her Holiness Mataji's Advice 11. Festivals 12. Jai Mataji 13. Beating the Deadline 14. Surrender 2. 4. 15 17 22 23 25 25 26 27 29 30 Poem 15. 16. Towards Shri Mother 17. Poem 31 33 Nirmala Yoga

 Translation of Her Holiness Mataji's old Merathi letter At that time waves of bliss start flowing because it is the Spirit that is saying', how My dear Nirmala Many Blessings Received your loving letter. I have also can any thought come at that time ? very much enjoyed Navaratri Puja. People pour their wine in the glass. But Puja is also an external offering. Your Puja is like that. In that, wine is your Even your heart has said so. But you should faith and the glass is the recitation of Man- tras and the worshipping. When you are drinking that wine forgetting everything, how can a thought come ! Then only bath- A Puja or a prayer grows from your heart. ing in the ocean of bliss ! How can that Mantras are the words of your Kundalini. joy be expressed in thoughts? Who will pour But it Puja is not performed from heart or if that wine, back in the giass, which is to be Kundalini is not associated with recitation drunk and that t0o in the inferior glass of of Mantras then that Puja becomes a ritual. thoughts ? However, the joy that you get understand how you get the reward or blessings of the Puja and Its prasad. If you become thoughtless in Puja, koow after drinking the wine is eternal and ever- that your heart is also involved in it. Collect present. It becomes your asset. the Puja material and offer it sincerely. There should be no formality or bindings in in my presence. Every time a big wave the offerings. It is correct to wash hands, comes and take you to a new land. Expe- but is your heart washed ? When attention riences of many such lands become your is on heart it does not go to others. Al- though you remain quiet from outside, you and open new gates of joy. are speaking from within. Hence you should not be silent for long time. If man's heart is not clean, then the silence becomes very photo by looking at it, can be placed in harmful. At the same time loose talks can heart or, after the Puja, its view goes to bring catastrophies. Many such Pujas have been performed They glve vastness to personality own. Best is worshipping in the heart. If, the heart, then the joy which you get only at that time, can become everiasting and ever- Show this letter to all Sahaja You should say the Mantras in Puja but present. with great faith (Shraddha). There is no Yogi's and send its copies. alternative to Shraddha. You should per- form the Puja when Shraddha grows deep, so that heart itself gets all Puja performed. Your Mother Nirmala Nirmala Yoga

 This is the most important time because Sahaja Yoga is the last judgement. It is fantastic to have this but that's a fact & is the truth. Though you can understand, that mother's love makes it very easy for you to SHRI KALKI ***** get through your realisation & that the whole story of the last judgement looks such as horrifying experience has been made very beautiful & very tender & delicate and Today I am going to speak in English as does not disturb you. But Ihis is the last decided. Even tomorrow I may have to judgement I tell you, and you all are going to be judged through Sahaja Yoga, whether, speak in foreign language. Today's subject is relationship between you can enter into the kingdom of God or Kundalini & Kalki. The word Kalki is actually not. an abbreviation of the word Nishkalank Now in Sahaja Yoga people come in means the same as my name is which means Nirmala That means it is spotlessly clean. There could be people who have too much Something that is spotlessly clean is of gratait (Tamsivrati) and what you call (Nishkalank) without any spot or marks. with different kinds of attentions or 'chitta'. inerlia or the more sort of sluggishness or slow movement temperament. These when Now, this incarnation has been described In many Puranas and will be coming on this they are exaggerated, people take to addiction earth on a white horse, in a village of Sambhalpur as they call it. interesting how people take everything literally. The word Sambhal means-'Bhal' is Forehead, means at that stage, that means Kalki is situaled on your Bhal Bhal is the they want to win the whole world. And forehead & here he is going to be born that they want to become something independent is the real meaning of the word. For us, in do not want to keep their relationship with between Christ & this destroying incarnation God. You can see in Kaliyuga, how people of Mahavishnu time given to human beings to rectify them- are very much indulging into the too much of selves, for them to enter in the kingdom alcoholism or you can call it something of God, which in the Bible is called as the running away from your awareness or from Last Judgement. That you will be Judged, your self, from truth and beauty. The others all of you will be judged on this earih. The are denying, they are denying everything population of the world is maximum, say, that is beautiful and are ego oriented. So because all those, practically, all those who we have people, who are super-ego oriented, have aspirations to enter into the kingdom very much conditioned, and lethargic and of God are born in the modern times and lazy and absolutely revolting. sor take to alcohol or some such things which lake you away from reality and make you numb. The other side as you know, is right hand side people who have got too much ambitions: That extremely ambitious people, It is very on their own-malignant & cancerous. They called as Kalki, there is a have gone to extremes. Some of them are The other side people who are extremely ambitious, are going to be born very soon. Nirmala Yoga

 dominating and are destroying each other the people will also go with him, in by their ambition & competition. These two SAHAJA-YOGA itself. This has been types of people of extreme nature are rather happening in Bombay very often. This has been a common thing that is going on, but this is known as "Yoga Bhrastta", where his Yoga, comes easily absorbed in the Sahaja Yoga. More- down trom his Yoga because Sahaja Yoga over people who are less complicated, simple gives vou all the freedom, whether to fall or difficult to enter into Sahaja Yoga. But people who are in the center are a person falls from hearted as they are in villages are very to come up But if you go to any other Guru, easily absorbed by Sahaja Yoga and they doing other sort of yoga, in which purifica- take to it without any difficulty. In the city tion takes place and where people are trained you can see the result of so much of work of mine Ihat there are hardly about 2 to 3 hundred people today here. But if I go to village, the whole village of 5 to 6 thou- sand people come round and all of them get badly that you have no connections with any their realisation without any difficulty. Beca: body else; like an operation. They take out use here people are supposed to be very busy. There are so many other preoccupa- and disciplined from the very childhood. In that yoga the Guru sees that somehow or other you are injured or you are hurt so that personality and throw him out. In Sahajyoga it is left to your freedom. They think other things are much To understand that, you have to keep to the more important than Seeking God and mains: you have to keep to the growth, you wasting your time in such pursuits like have to keep to the whole and not to one tions. seeking God. person here and there, who is trying to over- Under such circumstances, Sahaja Yoga power the rest. In Sahajyoga anybody who tries to come up too much is put down; be- takes its roots, very sweetly into the heart of all the seekers. It works very spontan- cause in Nature, you must have seen that no- thing grows out of bounds; like humanbeings are of certain height, the trees are of certain heights. Everything is controlled. You cannot try to show-off in Sahaja Yoga neit- her you can make groups of some special When we talk of 'KALKI' we have to thing. Specially I have seen in Sahaja eously, you get your realisation without any difficulty, without any efforts, without paying for it, without going into any sort of strenu- ous exercise. EOU remember that between getting our realisa- Yoga, that there are people, who come up tion and entering into the kingdom of God, and ask others to touch their feet. It is we can falter very much. This is called as "Yoga Bhrasta yoga, enter into the yoga, and are still that they are gone out of Sahaja Yoga. it enchanted by their Pravarultis e.g. an ego oriented man, man who wants to dominate, can form a for a while; their vibrations may be there, but group of people, whom he will dominate by they come down and down till they are com- his ideas, can go in for a fall and the rest of pletely finished. more surprising that invariably such people to will get exposed in no time, and one knows Sthiti' people take is because their chakras are caught, very or a money oriented badly caught, though they may not feel it Nirmala Yoga

 This Yogabhrasta sthiti is the worst Iam telling to the whole world today that thing that can happen to any sahaja yogi. First of all you don't get your yoga, and if not try to take advantage of others, and do you get yoga and then jump into this sort not try to show off your own powers. of condition about which Shri Krishna has Because if once this destruction starts in described, that you go to the Rakshasa your life you won't know how to stop it. "Be careful". Do not try to harm others. Do Yoni. Once I had been to Andhra Pradesh, and told the people there, that you should not grow the tobacco. They were very angry Those who come to sahaja yoga must know that you have to stick on to one thing with me and they thought that I am affecting properly, otherwise what is the yoni you get there living. They would not listen. I have if you die without yoga ! May be that you also warned them that be careful. The will be born again as a human being, may Kalki in the sea, will take its spite on you. be but this life is wasted. If you try such tricks after coming to sahaja yoga, and try happened there. Same was the case with to impress on others, thal you are very Morvi, Last year some big people from great realised soul that you have achieved Morvi met me, They believed in a very this and achieved that all this nonsense horrible 'saint, who has really destroyed that you have been doing before getting the families after families. I asked them why realisation, then there is a very serious offence and you are punished for that. This attention to Materialistic things. Why do is the power of Kalki which is secretly wor- king behind sahaja yoga. It will come on you You already know what do you belleve this man ? He is taking your you believe ? Every house in Morvi has a picture of this horrible fellow. When I told them they would not listen to me. They Kalki means there are eleven powers, which are guarding the beauty of sahaja thought that I am jealous of that fellow. yoga. Anybody who tries to play around And you know what happened at Morvi. It's with sahaja yoga is harmed very badly. So a tact. The same was the case of pandas today is the day of telling you about the I had warned them to leave dangers of playing with the Divine. So far their notorious activities or the Ganges will people have been taking them for granted. one day ruin you completely. And when the They have fortured great saints. All the time human beings are tortured. Now I am warning them in almost every lecture of are running away with their belongings. mine, that don't try this trick today, because Kalaki is already on. Don't try to trouble anybody who is a saintly person, who is a good person. Be careful about it because Kalki is on. And once this power comes on of Mathura. loods came in rivers Jamuna and Ganga, I saw it on T.V. in London, that all the pandas When you associate or live with these horrible fellows, you also suffer. The inno- cents suffer. Why should you be impres- sed by such people ? That's the thing you have to pay for. When you are impressed, you are so compromising. After all it doesn't matter if we go there. He is a panda Not only to the sahaja yogis, but this of our forefather so must we give some- you, you would not know how to hide your- self. Nirmala Yoga

 thing to this fellow ? Imagine ! The river and understanding it through our developed of love and the river of joy is flowing there brain. We just go on adding to it. That is and these people are sitting with their backs what Icall people as Tamasi, who do not towards the river, and asking money from use their Brains. They are Moodh Buddhis. you. What silly people they are ? such They just fall on somebody because there stupid, useless people, and you pay them is some sort of Hypnotic influence, or some money and think that you have done a great sort of Charismatic movement. That is why in the west you can see that these charis- matic people will take thousands of rupees This sort of life we have been leading, of from them, and will give them Epilepsy, Punya. compromising. Not understanding what is truth ? and what is not ? One side is that sort of things, and people are running complete blind faith, into all these things after them like madmen and adding up to are going on not only in India but also all the destruction by piling up sins after sins, Gangarin, if not that, madness, lunacy and over the world. We are simple innocent people with lot of 'Havikta' within. But that does not mean that we should be stupid and fools. The other day in a meeting at precious time and one has to be very care- Avadgaon near Rahuri, I said that those ful and alert about oneself. One should not people in the Vithal Mandir at Pandharpur depend on any other person for help in this; called as Badwe, should be nicely punished but should try to completely consolidate for the way they are ill-treating these pil- one's own being into the kingdom of God, grims, and something must be done to them. and occupy the highest seat in the heart Everybody was little annoyed, when I said of the God Almighty. Because when Kalki this because for those pilgrims, these will come, He will slaughter all these people, Badwas who are 'Rakshasas Incarnate' are without any compassion. He is devoid of something great. They break the heads of any compassion. There are 'Eleven Rudras' people, who walk the thousands of miles, in Him means there are eleven destructive just like coconuts, when they bow down for powers, absolutely powerfully settled in Namaskar. Such cruelty they commit on Him. When I see all that, because I can these innocent simple people. Do you think see all that, and this emergency grows into that I should support them when I stand for truth and religion and for compassion ? play fool with Him. Don't take it easy and Thank God within 3 months time, the whole do not compromise, with these nonsensical thing was taken over by Government. instead of cleansing themselves. This time what we have got is a most me and Itell you 'Beware of Him'. Don't people. Stick on to the right. Otherwise the day is very near when Kalki is going to It is so common with us that we see with come. our open eyes what is happening. Still we will be going on with the same things in the temple. Even in the name of God we are through their intelligence. They have deni- doing sins after sins. We are adding sins ed God. to our sins and instead of clearing it out is not God, it is all nonsense. Science is The other type of people are, who think They say where is God ? There Nirmala Yoga 8.

 everything. What has science done so far ? I can ask people to put their hands, and Let us see that ! Science has done nothing there can be thousands, who will get Rea- so far. It has done only dead work. made you Ego oriented. All the west is My being is a fact, why anybody should feel Ego oriented. They are finding all the angry about it ? Why your ego should hurt methods of committing sin. How to commit you, it I am like that ? Why should you feel worst sins ? There are some Gurus in bad, if somebody is a Divine Personality ? India, who supply them knowledge of how to commit even worst and worst of sins. So why did you feel bad that Christ was a that they can easily go with two easy jumps Him ? Why did you kill Him ? Why did to Hell Whether it is to-day, tomorrow or yesterday or thousands of years back whatever is wrong for your Dharma or suslenance is wrong. The New phase is-What's wrong people, running after all kinds of wrong in this ? What's wrong in that ? This types of useless misguiding people. There question will be answered by Kalki only. I are so many now who have come to mis- am just telling you that it is wrong. It is guide you. They are taking money from you extremely wrong. It is against your Ascent. for misguiding. They are taking money from It is against your being, and then you will you for giving out sins. When I say about not have any time to repent, and will not them, the people feel hurt that why should have any time to ask this question what's Mataji taik about these Gurus. They are not wrong ? You will be chopped off. That is what is the Kalki Incarnation. He is going devils will go to Hell. Then people got It has lisation. It is a fact, that this emitting from divine personalty ? Why did you murder Whatever is wrong, is wrong ! you torture all the saintly people ? You were very wise and sSweet ! Isn't it ? You have been very kind and nice Gurus. They are Rakshasas. Once Christ said that these devils and children of these to come on a white Horse, they say, It's tremendous thing that is going to work out. s a after Him and said why did you say such things against them ? They don't say any- Every Human Being is going to be sorted thing against each other ! Christ said the out and nobody can then claim, see, every thing has been advertised, everything has been published. Even this microphone, that each other. They are properly organised. is created by science, can be used for spreading Sahaja Yoga. You know very ness and the kind of ego orientation and well that if I put it on my chakra, you get the money orientation. We are all the time busy vibrations and you get the Realisation. The with this money. I call it "Bhrama' call it a whole science is subservient to Sahaja 'Halucination'. It's a big halucination with Yoga. Like the other day some T.V. people you people; that you are running after money. came to me and said Mother, we want a T.V. Programme from you, careful before doing it. I don't want any two mirages that you are running after. What publicity; but whatever you do, do it pro- are you going to get out of this money ? perly. Through T.V. we can give Sahaja Just go and see somebody who is a very Yoga. WhenI am there on T.V. screen very rich man. Is he a happy man ? What Satan is not going to speak against his own house, They are very friendly with The otherside of this kind of ambitious- Itis another halucination that you are running said you be after 'Prelatmas', dead bodies. These are Nirmala Yoga

 is the analysis of his life ? The so called see me, his eight year old son also came successful people, you just go and see with him, very good boy, had a realisation, them. What is the success they have ! but had a very bad Swadhisthana. So I Who respects them ? When they turn their asked the doctor "Does this man come to back, people say Oh God' let me go and your house ?" He said "yes, Mother, he wash my face. Are you auspicious ? If comes very often". Despite my warnings anybody sees you does anything good he would go there and entertain him, ins- comes out of you ? Same Shubha happens pite of my telling him that you go to Mother to that person ? Are you 'Kalyanmaya' ? and get yourself cleaned out 1 They are Are you 'Mangalmaya' ? What sort of intoxicated and hypnotised by such a per- personality are you ? Just judge yourself son. Then I said, go and beat shoes to and that judgement will take place here in this man, as we do in sahaja yoga, and that Sahaja Yoga. We had a patient who came to boy got cured. Do you want to ruin your Sahaja Yoga, and he told me "Mother I am family, your children and everybody, because a young boy and I don't know what has you are adhering to some hypnotic fellow ? happened to me that I have become inaus- At least have same consideration for them ! picious" I sald "How do you know ?" He There are many like these, but in sahaja said "Wherever I go there is a quarrel bet- yoga it is very easy to desert and even in ween husband and wife, something goes London I know who is going where and what wrong with the children, the children start they are doing ? I write to them, I tell them crying and shouting and screaming. Now don't do it. I am hated by everybody and everybody you must understand that our Mother knows says that something is wrong with me." I these things. She knows and if She has found out what was the malter with him he told, then it is to be done. got cured. Now he is emitting beautiful ed. Did you get your vibrations by argu- Just don't do it Immediately Not to be argu- vibrations. ment ? But still in Sahaja Yoga you can falter and that is the worst thing that you can do. Because Yogabhrashtas are the You can have very negetive vibrations going out of you. You might be doing sins most condemned. Where will they go ? without your knowledge and will say "Oh Mother I am getting all the vibrations, I am I have to warn all the sahaja yogis who Such people always decide are here. Because sahaja yoga is the last about themselves and others. Who is judgement not only that you will be judged, going to judge you ? It is your deed. What that you are entering into the kingdom of good have you done to others ? Recently God, but you become the citizens of God is we had a mishap like that; and I tound out correct. Apart from that you are capable of that all those people who were touched by being there where you have the complete that gentleman, had left Swadhisthana cat- surrendering and understanding of divine ching very badly. When I told them that it's love, Even it you are belonging to, say, India and you are a citizen of India, and if There you do thefts and commit criminal offence, you will be punished even then. So even a wrong thing to do to make this man so important, they all got after my life. was a sahaja Yogi doctor who had come to Nirmala Yoga 10

 if you are a citizen of God, you have to be will be absolutely sorted out, and the last killing will be done by Him. I wish it is just a killing. It is not going to be ordinary very very careful about it. The second thing I would like to tell you Hanana, like even the Devi has done. Devi about, is the destroying powers of 'Kalki'. has killed all the Rakshasas, thousands of Today's lecture is going to be very sharp vear back, but they are back in the seat for you, because the incarnation that you have asked me to speak on is a very sharp again. Now the problem is very different at the Krishna's incarnation, for example. He has present moment: which you should try to Hanan Shakti. He has killed Kansa, so understand. in the old days during Shri Is the sharpest of all. We had one, many Rakshasas, you know as a child also Krishna's time, when He said ET ta He has killed Putana but He had 'Leela' घर्मस्य ग्लानीभवती भारत: । परित्राणायच साधुनां also. He had love and He did give conces- fanTa The last stanza you sions to people, He forgave people. Christ must understand faai a means to is the embodiment of forgiveness. For- destroy the cruel people, or the negative giveness of Christ is nothing but is the forces and to save the saints विनाशायाच power of sustenance within him. If He Explodes, the whole forgiveness will come on us as a big disaster, if you are not able the problem of Kaliyuga, is that there is not to understand the value of his forgiveness. pure and simple person as a Sadhu or Rak- He has said very clearly that "Anything shasas. So many Rakshasas have entered said against me will be tolerated; but a word against Holy Ghost won't be tolera- people, who are wrong and who are doing ted." Now you have to understand that Wrong, who are doing all sorts of wrong Holy Ghost is Adishakti. I am going to come again and again but Into your brains. You side with so many things in the name of Religion, in the name of politics, progress and education and all One has to understand that such a Incar- that. Once you have sided with them, then nation is imminent, and Shri Krishna's they are in your brains, they are within you. Powers are given to Him, which is only When they are having within you how to Hanana Shakti. Bramha Deva's Powers destroy the ad ? You may be a good which are only Hanana Shakti are given to Him. Siva's Powers, which are also Hanana you are having them in your heads. So Shakti, i.e. a part of his Tandav' is given to there is not hard and fast rule to say, who Him. Similarly Bhairava's Khadaga Shri is a real negative and who is a real positive Ganesha's Parshu, Shri Hanumana's Gada person ? Only Sahaja Yoga is going to and the Siddhis which are going to destroy cleanse you and make you absolutely posi- are given to Him. Buddha's forgiveness and tive, positively for the good and positive Mahavira's Ahimsa, are going to turn up- people. This is the only way when your side down. All these Eleven powers are Ankura (Sprouting), when it starts giving going to come. On the top of us when we you Realisation, you feel your Self. will be finished with Sahaja Yoga; when we with that Self, you know that you are Your- person, but you may be destroyed because And Nirmala Yoga 11

 self and not this Mirage. You start enjoy- is the time coming ? If this is a living pro- ing that Self. When you start enjoying it, cess ! When the work will be finished ? you give up all the things that make you When you see that there is not more chance compromise and make mixedup person. All this confusion will then time. Kalki will come down. Let us see go along. So it is essential that you take how many come in ! But for that there is a to Sahaja Yoga, in a most dedicated manner limit also. So I will request you lo go out and free ourselves of all the wrong doings in the world, call your relatives, call your and also the others, whom we know. This neighbours, all of them. Tomorrow is the is the only thing we can give to our friends, last day of my programme of Navaratri, when you a hortible of having any more people coming in this invite others for dinner what you give them? they are going to have a little felicitation of the Mother; To me the greatest felicitation Nothing. Then give presents on a birthday, or send greeting, garlands, etc. In London Will be, that in this Bombay, I will find more during X'mas the cards pile up in post people realised, taking to Sahaja Yoga office to such an extent that no letters can seriously. After coming to Sahaja Yoga not go for 10 days prior to X'mas, But where to indulge in backbiting and small pettimin- is Christ ? On the day when Christ is born dedness and getting angry with each other, they will go in for a champaign. Such but being loving and wise. It is most sur- foolish people, If somebody dies, they prising that those who are supposed to be will go for a champaign. Champaign is the Cream of the Nation, the most sophesti- their Religion now and whisky is their cated people are so pettyminded ! I have to tell you these things, because of the immediate emergency that is coming for- Kundalini. They cannot understand God. How can ward before me. I only pray that it should they, when they have made God according not be in Bombay, that it should start, Bom- to their own conception of falsehood. As bay had gone into the verge, if you remem- a Mother I have to warn you. Be Careful ! ber the day when Rajesh Shah phoned me Don't play about with your Self! Do not to say that Mother "what about rain ! What go down, but come up! come up ! and come about rain I I did not answer him, when he up. I am here to help you I am here to work said "I know Mother you are angry with for you Day and Night. You know that I work Bombay people, but still forgive them once very hard for you. I spare no efforts, to again" That is the night when you started help you, and do everything that is possible getting the rain once again. Next calamity! to make you all right; to make you pass this examination of last judgement; but you have to cooperate with me, and you have to go people. Every timeI come back, I find this headlong about it, and devote most of your kind of nonsense of these Sahaja Yogis, time for Sahaja Yoga and for imbibing all getting after one man, somewhere and get- that is great and noble. I have to tell all Bombay Beware of it ! ting lost. The other thing is that Bombay people are still most unaware of what is Kalki is a very big subject. If you see going to fall on them. Most unware, of Kalki Purana, it is such a big book. When how they are made from Amoeba to this Nirmala Yoga 12

 stage ! What God has done for them ! person when he is going to get it. When And what they have to do for God ? It is a the Kalki Chakra is caught up, all your fin- very very sad affair, extremely sad for the gers start burning, on the hands on the whole of this country, because people try to palms and same time in the body you get follow this Bom bay. Many peopie like to terrible burning. A person's Kalki Chakra tollow actors and actresses, than to follow catching means that he will be down with a God. This is the trouble with our super- horrible desease like Cancer, may be lep- ficial temperaments. Tomorrow we have a rosy or may be that he is about to collapse very good programme of releasing the book into some sort of calamity. So the Kalki There are at Chakra must be kept all right: Advent; written by G. de Kalbermatten who is the son of a Baron, a Swiss boy. VWhen least eleven Sukshma Chakras in the Kalki he came to me, I could see clearly that he Chakra. Out of that atleast try to keep some I had to work hard with him for of them alive, so that others can be restor- is a seeker, a year, to bring him round to his normal ed, If all the eleven Chakras are ruined senses. But when there is not any seeking then it is very difficult to give Realisation. within you, and when you go back astray, what will happen to you, I don't know, So be careful. Be very very careful. To day Keep the kalki alright. To keep your Kalki is the day of warning you because you have What is the thing that one should do to Chakra all right you must have an Awe for God. If you do not have awe for God, if you are not afraid of God, if you are not afraid, asked me to speak on Kalki. He is placed on our forehead. When that if you do wrong, He is there with his the chakra of Kalki is caught up, the whole wrath! And that He is a wrathful God, that of Murdha, which is on the top goes out of He is full of poison for us, if you try to do order. In the Kundalini awakening, we anything wrong; if there is no fear of that. find that if the Murdha goes out of order, Not that it is to be hidden from Me or from the Kundalini doesn't rise. The whole head anybody else, but you yourself know that become logged. Such people do not allow you are doing wrong. If you are doing the Kundalini to rise above the Hansa something wrong and in your Hearts of the Chakra. At the most they might try to raise hearts you know it, then please don't do it. it upto Agnya, but then it drops down. Otherwise your Kalki will go out. There is another reason also, as I have said that if you put your head on the feet of wrong Gurus, you suffer. Too much thinking when you know that God is all pervading, all also creates problem at the right hand side powerful. He has the powers to raise us to and one of the aspects of Kalki gels spoiled; this state of higher being and also He has and there is an imbalence created on this powers to bestow all the blessings that He side. The whole forehead, if it is full of lot has. He is the most compassionate God of bumps, then we must know that the Kalki or we can say, the compassionate father, Chakra is out of order. If it is out of order that one can think of. But in the same way, then the person is about to go into some he has a wrath; and that wrath when falls sort of very bad calamity it is a sign on a upon you be very very careful about the When you have that Awe for God, and Nirmala Yoga 13

 wrath of your Father, because if He comes Self Realisation you will be placed in the on you with that wrath, nobody can slip it. highest position. Nobody can stop it! And the compassion of the mother will not be listened to because He may say that "you have spolied nare you may be the richest, may be biggest your children by giving them too much loo- political leader and all that nonsense; in the seness." So I have to tell you, please don't presence of God those who are dear to God do anything that is wrong, and do not make will be placed at the highest position and Me feel bad about it, because for Mother it not all these worldly things, which looks so is very difficult to tell these things It is interesting and enchanting to you. very hard for a Mother, who has a very ten- most important thing is where are you as der heart, a kind heart for you to say all far as God is concerned ? That relation these things But I have to request you you must eslablish, by first finding out your "Don't play about, because your Father is Self, your Atma, to Sahaja Yoga and then full of wrath, He can punish you for doing relating yourself to that. anything wrong." But if you do anything for Him, or for your own being or for your Today, you may be the biggest millio- The May God Bless You All. Wither Compliments Sroig WOODWORD & DICKERSON (P) LTD. 15-E, Vasant Lok, Vasant Vihar, New Delhi Nirmala Yoga 14

 THE 51 NAMES OF SHRI MARY MAHALAKSHMI Name in Latin Chorus English translation Sancta Maria Ora Pro Nobis (pray for us) Holy Mary Sancta Dei Genitrix Holy Mother of God Sancta Virgo Virginium Holi Virgin among all Virgins Mater Christi Mother of Christ Mater Divinae Gratiae Mother of Divine Grace Mother very pure Mater Purissima Mater Castissima Mother most chaste Mater Inviolata Mother without any blemishes Mater Intemerata Fearless Mother Mater Amabilis Lovable Mother Mater Admirabilis Admirable Mother Mater Boni Concilii Mother who is a good councellor Mater Creatoris Mother of the creator Mater Salvatoris Mother of the saviour Virgo Prudentissima Virgin very careful Virgo Veneranda Virgin to be worshipped Virgo Predicanda Virgin who preaches Virgo Potens Powerful Virgin Virgo Clemens Compassionate Virgin Virgo Fidelis Trustworthy Virgin Speculum Justitiae Mirror of justice 16 Sedes Sapientiae Seat of wisdom Causa Nostra Laetitia Cause of our joy Vas Spirituale Vase of spirituality Vas Honorabilis Honorable vase Vas Insignae Devotionis Vase of extraordinary devotion Rosa Majestica Majestuous rose Turris Davidica Tower of David Nirmala Yoga 15

 Chorus Name in Latin English translation Ora Pro Nobis (Pray for us) Tower of ivory Turris Eburnea House of gold Domus Aurea Foederis Arca Arch of the union Janus Caeli Gate of Heaven Stella Matutina Morning star Salus Infirmorum Salvation of those who suffer Refugium Peccatorum Shelter of the sinners Consolatrix Afflictorum Comforter of the afflicted Regina Angelorum Queen of the Angels Regina Patriarcharum Queen of the elders Regina Prophetarum Queen of the prophets Queen of the spreaders of truth Regina Apostolorum Queen of the martyrs Regina Martyrum Queen of the learned Regina Confessorum Queen of the virgins Regina Virginium Queen of all the saint Regina Sanctorum Omnium Regina Sine Labe Originalis Concepta Queen immaculate Queen of the sacred rosary Regina Sacratissimi Rosarii Queen of peace Regina Pacis Queen of love Regina Amoris Regina Beatitudinis Queen of bliss Imperatrix Mundi Emperess of the world Light of sahaj truth Lumen Sahajae Veritatis Om Twameva Sakshat Shri Omkara Sakshat Shri Jesus Mahavishnu Sakshat Shri Mary Mahalakshmi Sakshat Shri Adi Shakti Bhagwati Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Namoh Namah Nirmala Yoga 16

 Caxton Hall, 18.12.1978 H. H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi AGN YA A GNYA means the witness. Was Christ at this stage. He is the Principle. created in the human being when he What is our Principle ? The Kundalini you can say. Creation, the whołe creation, is have a language we cannot think. Before, the Principle and support. At this creation, thought was inspiration. Thoughts that He represents the essence of creation, i.e, come to us are in light and shade. After in the family, the husband and wife and realization, it's only light and shade like a child. The child is the essence of the hus- pattern-lighthouse. It's a language, these band and wife-the essence of the house. thoughts are conditions on us. We bounce Until they had the child, there was no mea- from one thought to another, like the sea- ning. Like Christ was the essence of the waves reach the shore and then go back first sound OM. When the Primordial and come again. It can become maddening. Father and Mother separated they made that Sometimes negative and sometimes positive. sound, He is that sound that supports and looks after, more the support of all the Uni- Because He is just the essence, the ego on the right-hand side. Conditioning essence never dies. My essence is Spirit- is on the right-hand side and gives us the the Spirit never dies. The body dies but fears and dangers. There is no need to the essence is there. He is the most impor- A started thinking. Language-If we didn't пе Ego is on the left-hand side and super- verse. have a thought about the past or the future tant incarnation. -animals do not. When they know an ani- mal is coming, O.K.-why think about it ? Humans think about everything and think where the optic nerve and optic thalamus that it is wise to sit down and think. It He is placed in our Agnya in the centre, cross : it's a very subtle point. It creates two sounds Hum and Kshum. Hum on right- should be spontaneous, like inspiratian, it should just come to you. Thinking is the hand side-superego, and Kshum on the playing of the dead. left-hand side- ego. Hum and Kshum create two kinds of vibrations. The Hum sound This is the centre of Christ, He resides creates the vibration. I AM, I AM. Hum, in this centre. He developed into Maha this comes from our existence power that Vishnu. Actually Christians don't know we know we have to live in this world, and anything about His Becoming, how He be- we are not going to die. Any human being came Christ and why God didn't come down who tries to kill himself is considered not Himself and do the job. It's a most impor- normal. Normally, every human being or tant incarnation. He is the principle of animal tries to retain its life, that is through creation, "Tattwa". Ganesha resides in the the power of Hum-I AM, the superego on Mooladhara chakra gradually evolves to be the right-hand side and ego on the left-hand Nirmala Yoga 17

 side is Kshum. This superego, you are how he befools us, he goes on befooling us conditioned by so many things, that you are all the time. worried because these experiences make By thinking, you get your ego. There is mind, and this fear is settled in the super- no wisdom with a great ego. He behaves It starts from your Amoeba stage and in such a childish manner, it doesn't matter until today stored there-you are afraid of about the age. How is it that our parents Police, this and that. Some people are not are so stupid and we are searching God ? afraid of these things, but are afraid of May be because of the War, they are dis- something else. Whatever have been your turbed. Ego is a thing that makes you think conditions, your experiences, all are in the about everything-e.g., making plans ahead This centre sends messages about getting here or there, the journey is am, I am, you are Hum, don't spoiled because it didn't work out as plan- you the kind of person to have fear in the ego. superego. Hum, Hum, be afraid. ned. A sensible person will take it in his stride, why get upset ? Mr. Ego doesn't want you to be happy or relaxed, always gives you ideas you must do this or that and the other, until you are finished ! There's no advantage. You can discriminate between the two types : one are very aggressive, one are subordinated, frightened. vibrations will drive away the fear. It's how you can get help from the Divine by saying HUM. HUM say-the From morning until evening ask for for- giveness and pull your ears from both the Ego is a colossal problem. Solution is sides-say, "Oh God, forgive me". Remem- by forgiving others. You have to learn to forgive if they feel hurt and to ask for for- giveness. Too much ego means you've ego. He did everything possible so you pampered it too much. Try to humble down wouldn't develop your ego He was born as in your heart. Your heart is the Spirit and too much ego covers the heart-it takes you ordinary conditions, kept Himself behind the away from your spirit It makes you stupid whole scene and foolish-you will know an egotistical Roman Emperor. He took His birth even person when he's blowing his own trumpet where not even ordinary people take their because he will immediately become stupid. birth-but there was light and joy. We have Without understanding what's happening lost the joy because we forget God Al- people will wonder what's wrong with him, mighty. When we forget Him-He is love especially children. You become so stupid, and Joy. People have affluence and money because you forget the existence of God, and your relationship with the Divine. Mr. Ego makes us do the stupid things in the not at all normal human beings, they are country-making a law for a son-in-law to marry a mother-in-law; impossible, she is your mother-absurd. It's not easy to see ber Him from morning till evening. All the time remembering Christ brings down your an ordinary carpenter's son, lived in very He could have been born a but still they are not happy-whatever you say to them they will be angry. They are sick. It's not hard to ask for forgiveness-we Nirmala Yoga 18

 don't even ask once a day, not even once a so you can rise in your spirit that you are, month, not even once a year. On Christ- that's the boundary you have to cross. We mas Day, you don't ask for forgiveness, have to ask help from Christ. Christ cruci- instead you have champagne and all the fied Himself Why ? What did He do ? arrogant things. Ego presses the superego Loot people ? He just challenged the ego so much sometimes that others are hurt by of the Romans and the Jews. That's why what you say, cutting and painful to others. he was crucified. And now we have to The way people talk to each other in Parlia- crucify our egos through His Cross, other- ment, they behave so badly : not even ani- wise wa are going to do the same, crucify mals treat or back at each other like that. our Christ in our ego optic thalamus is Egos are always dashing at each other where He lives. You have to awaken him to There's always, "I have made this or that crucify the ego. You have to stand in point"-but they have lost the joy. Argu- thoughtlessness. Thoughts, we are beyond ment is a sign of tomfoolerly-won't lead thoughts. Agnya is a very importent chakra you to any knowledge, only with an ego. -immediately there is no thought when Kun- dalini crosses the Agnya-thereis nothought All Western Societies are ego-orienta- from ego or superego. We have to steady ted. We've to lead the underdeveloped coun- tries-the ego in Western Society is always our Agnya. Agnya is placed at the crossing of our nerves also, optic and thalamus. pampered. members of Parliament to keep good heaith. To keep good health you don't work like eyes, you will have a wobbling Agnya, You mad, you've to be a wise and sensible have to steady the eyes to soothe them. The person. Wisdom is to be sought to keep. most soothing thing for the eyes is the good health and not by ego - orientated green grass. If you could see the green things, like possessions, showing off your grass with your eyes, you walk with your great car, houses, etc. They're like jokers- eyes on the ground. That's why Christ, even if they've no food in the house, they've He talked about adulterous eyes. Every to have a great car-nothing but to pamper woman, a man must see ! Every man a the ego. All the advertisements are ego woman must see ! Christ said you must pamperers. When you fight Nature, the ego not have adulterous eyes. You have to be develops in you. We can't think of our lives very deep and loving. You receive through without ego. "T", "I", "I", it's indecent to your eyes If your eyes are closed, your talk like that; putting your opinions first People run around like mad Now it is sald that if you have wobbling thoughts are less because you cannot see so much to put your attention to. If your Who are you ? I am the Spirit, the eter- eyes are open, there are more thoughts nal being. We have lost faith in God be- rushing in, because everywhere your eyes cause those in charge of God are so arro- gant-and so egotistical, it's impossible to thoughts and create more. Your attention think of God beyond our ego. Ego is so has to go to your Spirit, to God, has to superficial like a bubble, like a balloon that shine through the window of the Divine. can burst-just like that. And it has to burst, This beautiful thing is ruined the way we go, your a ttention goes, you add more Nirmala Yoga 19

 use our eyes and we do not respect them. glance. Only with a glance of your eyes you There is nothing as pure as the grass on can raise a Kundalini; with the glance of your the ground. We should put our heads at eves you can cure people. Only with your the ground instead of looking at other glance you can bring joy into the destroyed, people. ruined people, with your eyes, they are the window of your being. Your spirit is through From Sahaja Yoga point of view : an en- tity might enter your eyes when flirting. At your eyes and when the Kundalini rises parties, they exchange entities from person your eyes become dilated. There Is a tre- to person all the time the attention is diver- mendous difference between a realized ted. We don't always know why we feel souls eyes and a non-realized soul's eyes. attracted. Nothing is gained by looking at A realized soul's eyes sparkle like diamonds. a person, only wasting so much energy. It's If your eyes are not pure, your spirit will not sure and certain sign of a person going show through. We have to give up all the mad-wobbling eyelids and eyes. 80% of impurities of the mind. We have to respect our attention and thoughts come through our eyes. the eyes. Useless activity has to be stop- ped. Christ's aspects have to be respected. He saved a prostitute. A good woman you Agnyas. There are two types of mental spoil, give her ideas. Young small girls sufferings. Psychologists aren't capable of who are virgins are spoiled by your dirty curing or giving relief to anyone suffering glances. You are doing the opposite that mentally. One is where people oppress you Christ has done. "You have to be a pros. very much titute for Christ to save us"- madness. When you are realized and when you Cross-a very wrong idea about Christ. glance at someone you might suddenly get a Anyone who tries to make a slave out of headache or feel like a dart has just hit your you, you should deny it absolutely. You head, you might feel you're blinded by should say, HUM I-I AM! Who are you someone-that's how important your eyes to dominate anyone in this whole world. Everything all nervousn ss can be Then they are running away from the duty The psychologists have the worst You shouldn't enslave to any- one whatsoever. You shouldn't bear the are. cured if you have pure eyes. of themselves. We have to rise in our self- It's such a vicious circle, that all the bad respect. is gathered in the Agnya and you have to clear the Agnya to clear the eyes. We have Christ's level never suffer. Every human to ask for forgiveness. We have to bring being has to have self-respect and everyone Christ into our Agnya. We have to give up has to respect his Self, which is the spirit drugs and all intoxicants which will come within him. Nothing should dominate him, naturally in Sahaja Yoga. Eyes express the whether you belong to that country or this whole of our being-your brain, your bodies, country, that ism or this ism, All that will your limbs, everything. If your Agnya is all break down under the rule of God. No one right, then your eyes are perfectly all righ1. has a right to dominate anyone's spirit. You They emit nothing but love wherever they don't know how to use your freedom-by People who bear the Cross, people of Nirmala Yoga 20

 domineering others ? You're on top of don't be afrald. You will be amazed at how everyone's soul, dominating by land, pro- much they will give you. perty or possession. Either this or that way you are against yourself. Just be in the centre, and see for yourself. are you emitiing love towards another person If you are a slave, how can you love ?-you Try to look at a tree with love and you'll find cannot. If you are free and abundant, how the tree itself is giving you the joy of its can you love ? Lore has its own bondages Creation, because you will become thought- -very sweet and beautiful. You have to live less and the Creator who has made that with them. If a little child comes to your beautiful tree will be giving all that joy that house and he will spoil your house, and he is stored into it. Every human being is a should do and you should enjoy that spoil- store of joy unlimite'd. Don't waste it be- ing. And your freedom, if it is challenged cause someone's not properly dressed or by a little child's crying, then you are not he is not what you would like him to be, wise people, it's abandonment, or it's lone- what you learned at your public school. liness, it's cutting off from the primordial, Every doorstep, everywhere there is beauty from the large one that you are-not being lying-do not miss it. But if you have a able to tolerate other people's freedom. We possessiveness or an admitting of it, you Mother is a living example of this. Libe- rate your wisdom and intelligence. These poisons outside and inside, tırow them away, Just look at in: ? That store of all that can never enjoy it all. have to be free, i.e., when a little child can- not cry in its own home, what kind of free- beauty wealth which is in every human dom is that ? If a boy can't eat what he being, every moment it is bubbling. wants in his own home-what kind of free- dom is that ? It's such a confusion of For Agnya, it's a good thing. a time when Shri Mataji has to wish us a happy Christ- things. It's the opposite of enslavement. But in the middle is love. Every moment is filled with little bondages, i.e., if a husband says he wants something to eat and the Obey your Self-and not your ego. Then you wife says, "Oh, you...", she should be happy to know what he wants and be glad to make such a small thing that will make EverytRing in the world, Everything you can him so happy. What have you gained, the way you are fighting ? Such dryness, lone- liness and emptiness exists. If you want to lead a good life, you are not sacrificing anything, you are gaining by leading a good Agnya must have Christ there-your Agnya life. The Truth has to be told. If you want to be happy, you have to come down to reality. Support awakened within you, which is all- mas. One must know what to order and how to obey. Obey the Divine. Obey our elders, can order also others. Not only human beings, bitt the Sun and the Moon and the winds, and contral with this Agnya. If you know some- one is going to do something wrong, take his name to your Agnya and he will not do it. It's a trick for realised souls. Anything you order on your Agnya must be res pected. But your has to be clear Beeause you have the great Friends - what kind of relationship do we pervading into all small molecules and atoms have ?-e.g., if we don't receive a Christmas card we feel bad. Try to be bound by others. (Contd. on Page No. 24) Nirmala Yoga 21

 (The Apocalypse) JOHN'S VISION OF SHRI MATAJI IN THE BOOK OF REVELATION We all know that John was the most the dragon; and the dragon and his angels centered of Shri Jesus' disciples for he fought, but they were defeated and there was related to his Master from the heart. So he no longer any place for them in heaven. And was gran'ed a mighty and yet mysterious the great dragon was thrown down, that vision as he was staying on the Greek is- ancient serpent, who is called the Devil land of Patmos. In this vision the struggle and Satan, the deceiver of the whole world of the last days is being described, that is, -he was thrown down to the earth, and his the struggle of which Shri Mataji says : "I angels were thrown down with him." warn you : a big war is on; don't loose time, mature fast; time is short". (Revelarion 12.7.) Now the sequence is described in which Shri Mataji appears in this vision as She the fight takes place on this earth with all the demonic forces trying to destroy the is giving birth to Shri Kalki: "And a great portent appeared in Heaven sahaja yogis. a woman clothed with the Sun, with the Moon under Her feet, and on Her head a crown of saving: "Now the salvation and the power Twelve Stars She was with child and She and the kingdom of our God and the autho- cried out in Her Pangs of Birth, in anguish rity of his Christ have come but woe to for delivery. And another portent appeared in heaven; behold, a great red dragon, with seven heads and ten horns, and seven dia- dems upon his heads. His tale swept down a third of the stars of heaven, and cast them "And I heard a loud voica in heaven you, O earth and sea, for the devil has come down to you in great wrath, because he knows that his time is short !".. And when the dragon saw that he had been thrown down to the earth, he pursued the woman to the earth. And the dragon stood before the woman who was about to bear a child, dragon was angry with the woman, (for he who had borne the male child... then the could not reach her) and went off to make brought it forth: She brought forth a male child, one who is to rule al the nations with a Rod of Iron, but Her child was cuught up to mandments of God and bear testimony to war on the rest of her offspring (that's us my friends) on those who keep the com- God and to His Throne, and the woman fled into the wilderness, where she has a place prepared by God..." Jesus" (in our Agya Chakra). (Revelation 12.11 to 17) (Revelation 12) Friends, brothers and sisters, let us take The war in the Invisible, of which Shri Mataji spoke many a time is then vividly very seriously the repeated warnings of Shri Mataji. Sahaja Yogis who are half baked, luke warm, slothful, irresponsible or trying pictured: "Now war arose in heaven, Michael to use Sahaja Yoga with their egos will not (Bhairava) and his angels fighting against (Contd. on Page No. 24) 22 Nirmala Yoga

 you count them or find out about their nature and history ? If you are a master cleaner you can do a lot in one sweep. Western life has been attacked from 1919 by many devils who introduced ideas even in architecture and music. These destruc- tive ideas have removed the western people LETTER OF MATAJI My Dearest Son Jeremy, from their roots, from the Dharma that is Tomorrow morning I am going to New the basic for the ascent. You must admit York for four days. I hasten to write this that Sahaja Yoga has definitely created fetter because I would like to inform you in Dharmic people if not perfect ones. the right time what is happening to you. All drugs take you away from your aware- think you are confused between left ness. So how can you have side experiences and the spiritual expe- attention to make your spirit shine ? Reality rience. Those who are on the left side can should be acheived in complete awareness sometimes even see my past and show otherwise whatever you feel is illusion much more awesome respect and Iove but know the reason behind it and thus I never that Sahaja Yoga is spreading slowly, it encourage them. If you take cannabis you does not matter; but if it is truth, how can are definitely dragged into Ida nadi and the you acheive in a dreamy state ? I want all ego receeds for the time being. So you feel my chlldren to be awakened to walk into the this emotional carnal love, But when you Kingdom of God, not into the left sided hell take more you start feeling a universal car- of illusion. I because you are in a dream. It appears nal love. Thus the fall of man starts be- cause he gets out of the void towards the left side. My experience about the druggist and chemist has been a painful one. Those who For your information I am quite aware of come were very slow. Actually very few other Sahaja Yogis and their condition. You come, so your theory that the seeking of must know that after realization there is no- thing like rituals but it becomes actual living They have been very weak and vulnerable process. May be it is not done with perfec- to left-sided attacks. The example is shown tion but still it is done by a realized soul. It the way you all fell for a fake person like definitely evokes my vibrations to flow more Ichel. They are mostly facing very dange- and has helped all of them to awaken their rous diseases like cancer and many other deities. Of course I do not know all the incurable diseases. If you want to marry filth and dirt people have accepted in the Karen, it is alright; but do not do it under past, also the amount of illusiory life they the effect of drugs becausse it heightens left have taken to but it is not necessary to side so much that there is no balance of know. Do you know all the dirt and filth the will left to guide you to right decision by of your household which you sweep ? Do vibrations. God starts with drugs Is not true at all. Nirmala Yoga 23

 Actually drugs were condemned by all the Prophets and thus our laws do it be- cause the basis of laws come from our void. our Dharma, I would like you all to see the sanity of law and not its fault. Gandhiji everywhere. Into everywhere you go, So try was opposed to slaves, but he was much to master your Agnya. Ii's the master of more against drugs. He would not allow yourself. Those who have a good Agnya can any druggist to enter his Ashram campus master anything. You can really become the even if he had given up. "It's difficult to master of yourselves. Mother wants us to have spread Sahaja Yoga in the west"; I also felt the most powerful Agny as, so when people see it, but the roots can not be sacrificed. There you they will know Christ is reborn again can be no compromise with the principles within you May God Bless You. that nourish Sahaja Yaga. But now I think the media has taken over and we wil be AGNYA (Contd. from Page No. 21) Om Sri Mataji Nirmala Ma Namoh Namah. reaching stronger and righteous people for Sahaja Yoga. Already it has taken its flight and I can feel it. I am sorry for the druggist. They have to use their will to accept the challenge and give up their slavery to drugs. The sick druggist and lunatics have taken so much time. They do not impress any one of Shri Kalki's wrath (R. 19.11) in which the because mostly they are so much in the air forces of Satan, the hosts of evil will be and in personality, shabby and depressive. chastised. To waste our time now is a sin They are very lazy and always oppose any- we cannot anymore aflord. one who tries to wake them for Sahaja Yoga. attention ? Where our priorities ? Where John's Vision of Shri Mataji in the book of Revelation (Contd. from Page No. 22) manage to stay in God's camp until the day Jeremy, I knew you were a left-sided mediocrity and where the glory ? The Lord person and you need more activity, The bus driving was a good idea but if you take to drugs God save the passengers. has come on our Kurukshetra. Let us seize our weapons and fight. Laughing and roa- Fing, we are the Children of the Devi, of Sakshat Shri Nirmala Devi. You did not write a word about vibra- tions. They are your guide. Not your ego which judges others or your super ego which is self indulgent. This is not joy this is illusion. -Gregoire Articles and Slow and steady achieve your reality in collectivity. Xperiences May God bless you. are requested Your loving Mother, -Nirmala 1982 24 Nirmala Yoga

 otherwise you cannot develop your Sahaja Yoga. Whoever talks negatively, do not go Her Holiness Mataji's near him. ADVICE 5. It is for you people to become dynamic and to have confidence within you. You know every Chakra, you know the rising of Kundalini. You know everything, so you can take it upon yourself. 1. There is a compulsory Bandhan on you of your Mother. If you try to drink, you will vomit. It you do anything wrong your sto- mach will go out, if you'll try to avoid Sahaja get angry with thenm. To get angry is the Yoga you will have to be there. Because easiest way for you, then there will be no though you are not feeling it, you have felt problem. Once I get angry with you all, I inside your self the charm of Sahaja Yoga. You have to treat the people and not 6. will have my own peace and no problems. 2. You have to live in the present and you But you have to be really very very patient with all of them. Extremely patient-your language must improve. So we come to one point. We must read from our heart, cannot conceptualise me. Your concepts are limited. 3. It is better to see your own problems, we must feel from our heart, that we must your own defects and come out of it. To be save this man, we have to help him. very kind to yourself is that, you get rid, of these serpents and scorpions and all these things that are hanging around, and become should think "why have we come to Sahaja pure. The light has come. In that light you should start seeing what is the truth. can we get ? Where do we go wrong ? What Then your misidentifications will drop out should we do further ? Where are our pit- and your real identification will be establish- falls ? What have we left and taken for our ed. Otherwise it cannot be done. You growth?" I find, even after comming to Sahaja must learn to face yourself and never justify, Yoga, in most of our wakeful time, we think 7. All should clean their inner beings. You Yoga ? What benefits have we got and what of external things. We must see how much 4. Try to go to a person who is positive, loving and devoted to God, we are. FESTIVALS 14th January 19th January Makar Sankranti Vasant Panchami (Puja of Mother Earth) 11th February 21st March Maha Shivratri Her Holiness Mataji's Birthday 28th & 29th March Holi (Colour Festival) 61st Birthday celebration of Shri Mataji in Bombay 31st March Nirmala Yoga 25

 JAI MATAJI Dear brothers and sisters, from Her. That, with Her Love caring for you all the time, at every instant, the only This is to announce the coming depar- thipg that you have to do is to remain at ture of worries from the realm of this body. Her Lotus Feet-the most heavenly place and 'enjoy' your 'Self'. On this occasion, I'm happy to anounce that there are no worries about me. This is only because of the fact that Shri Mataji *the Most Loving and Kind Mother' is all the time caring, guiding, evolving me, 'cradling' nappens on it's own--'Spontaneously'! ! me in the arms of Her Love-leaving me with- out any fears-just full of joy and happiness. Oh! all this is truly so, so very beauti- ful, wonderful and joy giving. But all this don't do anything. "Mother" Does it. Her Love' 'Sahaja' does it. Ah I yes, yes, yes it is most truly so. It Then also, there are no worries about my thR. Divine truth. The Adishakti Does Family-the most fortunate family on earth , And this body, the instrument --because all of 'us' have recognized the "Greatest and Hjghest Incarnation' Sakshat Adishakti. Under Her Pure Love and Pro really do nothing. tection, we have the feeling of complete "safety and comfor!' everything. of the Divine, is used by Her. Indeed, we And to think that we've been worrying all this while, as if it matters, as if it makes any difference, as if it has any meaning. She' is 'the Saviour'. "She' is 'the Com- Worrving. Ha ! Ha ! That's the end of you. forter'. The only thing that matters is that we are little children of our dearest Mother- Then there are no worries about those who are not in our 'Family' yet. Their being The Immaculate Goddess, The Holy Spirit In' or out of the Family is all done under in Reality. And anything and everything is the guidance of Divine. My worrying only takes the attention to irrelevant things where- as I should be all 'bliss and joy'. done by Her. And that Her love is always flowing in and around us -as vibrations saving, cur- I have no worries about the future or ing, quiding, always bestowing Her Bless- about the past Both do not exist both béing inos Her Love. As very young and ignorant the subsidiaries of the 'Ego" (which is just children we may do something wrong, but an 'illusion'-nothing. Her love corrects and improves us. Then what do I 'do' now ? Worrying is one thing that has occupied me for so long. The only thing that matters is:- Myself in Maa, Maa in all. I stand amidst the waterfall- within the Ocean, within the Virata, within Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi. Well, then what you should da, is to "Realize the greatness' of what you have received. And that your 'Mother, most loving as She is, is the Origin the 'Ocean' of 'Love. That, all Bliss and Joy emanates JAI MATAJI Nirmala Yoga 26

 BEATING THE DEADLINE When we focus too much on planning speed and are result oriented. What hap- and efficiency we become a meticulous pens to such people when they try to society. Everything becomes result orient- meditate ? ed. Our thinking and actions get geared towards achievement. Everything is gauged in terms of success or failure. There is a expect something to happen quickly and constant momentum within, towards attai- They mostly seek instant results. They some of them even believe that the more ning certain targets. This momentum with- they pay for it the better the results they in develops into a hurry. People are always will achieve. So they pick up the most hurrying to finish their tasks. Such people expensive courses and the most expensive do not have patience any more. t Gurus from the Guru Business Catalogues. easily provoked and irritated by the other Now, these gurus have become wise and person's slow or inefficient response. A they realise that if some sort of results are great demand is constantly hanging over not instantly produced their client will lose the head and such a society gains great interest and go elsewhere and thus they speed. They get would run out of business. So they concoct all kinds of methods It also happens that as we get over- speeded we exceed the limits of our own under the labal of meditational techniques capacity to handle the situation. This taxes to entertain the cllent. Some give them our nervous system and strains us, leading visualization exercises by which the imagi- to nervous breakdowns. Like a machine nation of the client is stimulated and he is working on overload finally breaks down. led to believe that he is getting heavenly experiences. A quick one is to give a God gave great flexibility to the human mantra. As you go on repeating the mantra body. He foresaw the possibility of man exceeding his boundaries and placed with- in a monotone and work yourself into self- in him an organ called the spleen. nypnoSis, this retards you and diverts the organ meets the emergency situations. When man is under great mental pressure Ihe spleen tries to meet the demands of the tike biofed courses and supplement the This focus from the pressing load of worries. The more sophisticated one uses gadgets body by throwing more blood cells in the psychiatrist tasks thus keeping the client body. However when the person lives in a busy and satisfy his opposite result. The state of emergency constantly, then the body addicts are the easiest to handle. Just spleen also goes out of gear and starts keep them busy in doing all kinds of move- throwing crazy blood cells in the blood ments. When they achieve perfection in stream which, Mataji points out, leads to cancer. Whether from the East or West and thus keep them busy. As the client we are all busy trying to catch up with sees this, his result oriented mind is satis- one position create a more difficult posture Nirmala Yoga 27

 The seeker should simply practice living life on a daiły basis according to Sahaja Yoga for this. He does not have to be a recluse or reside in a special place. He fied and his ego is happy that he has achieved some!hing. Actually you cannot do meditation. Meditation is a happening. If you think that just has to remain vigilant to preserve his it is a race, the faster you run the quicker Dharma, In Sahaja Yoga this can be done you reach the target, you will be disappoin- ted. Meditation is a spontaneous process very easily by checking our system through vibrations. If we simply preserve our vib- rations then Mother works out the rest. which happens when the kundalini rises and stations itself at the seventh chakra. Now Ofcourse preserving the vibrations involves righteous living and following the code of Dharma. It means being patient, being in the present But if you are worrying all the time when enlightenment will happen then you only agilate your mind and the Chakras. The process of speed calches up for someone this may happen inslantly, for another it may take a long time. Those who are fortunate enough to receive Mother's blessings received it very easily. Now a question which always comes for a medita tor is what he should do. He need not climb a mountain but he can practice living and you are not relaxed. life by the law of the spirit. This is where the modern mind finds difficulty. willing to do anything as long as it is piece are relaxed. It is a state of relaxation. meal, when he performs a task for a period Hence hurry and relaxation are incompatible and then is done with it. And then must be with each other. Even the greatest moments a target and expected time by which he of creativity are when we are most relaxed. should be able to achieve it but this cannot Thus a med tator should not be result orien- have any time limit. Time is an artificial ted. For him the means are more impor- concept created by the human mind. This tant than the end. is beyond the mind, it is a process of nature and works itself through its own law Не is Meditation can happen only when you -Story of a Seeker Subscribers are requested to renew their subscription in time and also extend their cooperation in making new subscribers from Sahaja Yogis. The magazine is posted promptly, however, if the same is not received please intimate us. Nirmala Yoga 28

 SURRENDER Surrender, O Shri Mother, is Thy most Thee more than dear parents, wife, husband, precious gift, for it is Thy presence, from children for it is through Thee only that within, which allows us to loose ourselves everything which is dear is dear. Thou are a bit more in Thy cosmic body. And the the taste and the fragrance of Love in all flute, becoming aware, is grateful to the that exists. My bondages are gone! posses- melody which has chosen its hollowness sion is'nt any more binding a sahaja yogi's as the medium of its manifestation. Thro- capacity to love. Surrender is inviting the ugh surrender, Shri Mother, the sacred Ocean in the cup...and it comes ! Emptiness settles within us-no thoughts, no wants, no needs, no expectations, no fears, no demands, no doubts-and in this vade, without any expectations for returns emptiness of Surrender we are driven fur- or rewards or results, to relish the joy of ther on the shining path of pure freedom, witnessing the state of surrender, to melt To surrender is thus to let serenity per- our asperities. Without asperities we our the one that leads to God's abode. To Tunderstand surrender is to understand real Decome subtle and subtlely allows us to Freedom. The secret of this magic equa- tion is this : pass through any obslacies. Surrender is Shraddha, Faith, faith in the Reality and not the illusion, faith in the The sacred emptiness of Surrender, of pure Master and not in the familiar donkey freedom, expresses within us the "NI" Tarwa of "Nirmala". When we realise this we called ego. Faith, joy-full faith, whether we feel the vibrations or whether we are all realise that surrender is the most subtle gift of our Shri Mata of Thee who is Nira- right or whether we are catching, feeling omama, Nirlepa, Nirvikara, Niris- or not feeling the Union, balanced or off the center. Yes, surrender is holding to the right attitude no matter what happens. In any siluation let our dedication to "those Feet"chanted by Blake and Shankaracharya vara, Niranjana, Nirguna, Nirbhava, Nirvi- kalpa Ni Ni Ni.. is neither passivity nor Surrender fatalism for it is the amazing creation of remains unshaken. the inner space in which the Self will mani- fest and hence we experience peace. Peace please help us to surrenaer more and more, because we accept fully that whatever Thou especially when it seems to be most diffi- decide is the best for us. Thy criteria are perfect, based on Thy omniscience and much and for this, from the bottom of our eternal values while ours are within time, heart, we thank you. We bow to the eter- within the two well known balloons, the nal flow of Beauty. We bow to the Lord of Shri Mother, Shri Mataji, Shri Jagatguru, cult. But it is not. We have already grown yellow and the dark ones. those who are detached, to Yogeshwari. To surrender is to be detached, to love Rome, December 82 Ruth L. Nirmala Yoga 29

 Om Twameva Sakshat Sri Adi Shakti Adi Maya Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Namo Namah Jerusalem I O fount of hope and Joy! With bended knee we come to thee, O source of our renewal. O Great Mother of us all O Holiest of holies, We come to Thee with bended knee, with eyes cast to the ground and hearts awash with Joy. Sing Albion the fair! O holy Land, 'pon whose ground Sri Adi Shakti Mataji, Blessed are these eyes, that have gazed upon thy Perfect Form. Great Mother of us all Blessed are these ears, has trodden. that have heard the music Those feet, the fairest in all the Universe have touched thy soil, O Albion, Rejoice ! of Thy voice. Blessed is this head, 'pon which Thy gentle and mighty hand has rested. Blessed are these feet, that have walked behind Thee. The Heart, long slumbering Blessed, blessed, a thousandfold blessed are we. has now awakened, rising as the Phoenix from its ashes. Arise ! Arise dear brothers! With bended knee we pray to Thee, Great Mother of us all Arise sweet sisters ! Unsheath your swords of light ! See, the darkness is receding. Send forth your heralds that we be worthy of Thy mercy. to the four corners of the earth that all may know Let us go forth and proclaim Thy Name, O Comforter, O Saviour, O Mother of us all, that all may know that that She is come The Comforter, The Redeemer, The Mother of us all. Thou art come. Nirmala Yoga 30

 Istarted realizing that, the whole day long, we become what we think: thoughts are shaping us. 1 became convinced that our thoughts have power for good or for bad. So, I started thinking about beautiful things, about God, about Jesus, how great they must be. I thought about love and started searching for good in the people. Then I realized, that Jesus has promised Mother, when I sit down and think about many things, I tho ught that if this all is all this I get tears in my eyes. You came true ! It has been promised, I kept telling TOWARDS SHRI MOTHER when I needed you most. Mother, only the divine could have led me to you that Tues- day in September. myself : "It has been promised... One day a book about Zen Meditation came into my hands and I decided that I Long ago I already knew there was could try this also. Just to sit down, be more to life than just what we feel, do, and quiet, relax and not think about anything. know. I remember being always a líttle bit Of course I couldn't stop thinking But I different in my ideas than others. I some- didn't give up. I also noticed that, if I how refused to play the same game marriage for me was living and sharing could keep the thoughts out for a while. together and not existing one besides another. But my husband could not under- stand this. Also concentrated on a prayer for example, I Then, I started reflecting upon what my prayer should be like. It should not be something stupid. It should be supreme, The situation has become even worse it should be something good, something after the divorce, because I found myself that God might bear. being more and more caught up in the norms of todays modern society. But in I started praying for the good of all the back of my mind, I always knew that this people around me and at the end as the climax of my prayer I asked for my highest Self Realization, not knowing what this is not it. One day, shortly before you came, I said : "Finished ! I know there is more !", and so, I decided to look for it, regardless of how strange I would seem to people Imust say, it did me a lot of good. I was actually was. I was doing so for weeks and weeks and, becoming quieter, nicer, happier. but apart from that nothing happened and I started around me. I searched among the various Yogas, Joosing my patience. but could'nt get involved in any of them. They all seemed something one cannot practice in the West while having a job. came and I got almost desperate in my However, somehow I noticed the importance prayer to Jesus. I said : "Jesus, if I of a dharmic life and love. Then this Monday of September 1982 whish my Self Realization so much, then it Nirmala Yoga 31

 is You who gave me this desire ! My God, happy, but so much into doubts at the same please, do something about it ! Icannot go time, just didn't understand anylhing any- on like this ! Send me somebody who can more, help me !" That last night after the programme you Mother, on that Monday you were had me repeat again and again: "Mother, are you the Holly Ghost ?" Then you ans- wered: "Yes, I am, but I want you to know already in Vienna. On Tuesday I came in my office and my that. You have to trust me !" Then you boss told me about you. He knew nothing took something away from the top of my about Yogas, while explaining, but I didn't care.I knew they had put on the air conditioning !1 was used wrong expressions head and, oh, I looked up to see whether I must see you. ashamed of this reaction and I started came to the programme. A young man laughing. I was just smiling. You kissed was there first explaining to the public me on my cheeks and I walked away smil- about the different centers placed within the ing. But back at home I thought again: human beings. I didn't miss a single word "Who are you really Mother ?" he said nor a movement or a glance he made. I was all excited with expectations. Today, after two months and a half, I can feel who you are, Mother. Sometimes Then, Mother, you came. You looked still Mr. Ego plants thoughts of distrust into my mind, but I can recognize them and tell body who has all the authority, but who is them to leave, or I sinply overwhelm them with the question: "Mother, let me recog- nize you with my heart," and you answer with joy that penetrates into every cell of very normal, but you also looked like some- sweet anyway. You talked and there was nothingI could question or add to it. Everything of my being. seemed true and quite logical to me. I noticed there were some other people around who all had their hands sireched you. I know, I still have a lot to learn. towards you. I didn't know why, until at the Sometimes it seems difficult because of end you asked us to do the same. Imme- diately I felt the cool breeze on my hands and I started smiling. But on the top of my tell him he is not needed anymore, because head I felt nothing. It seemed to be even hoter than before. thought: "I who want it so much, shouldI not get it ? It cannot be !'" Mother, I don't find the words to thank Mr. Ego who keeps on blocking up the Please, Mother, make him leave, gates. now we are protected by the divine. By You, Mother. I was very sad and 1 May Sahaja Yoga spread to my country, Returning home my ego started planting Yugoslavia, and to the whole world. doubts in my mind, but I was fighting it. On the day of the last lecture managed to have a cup of tea with you. I was so With love, Vienna, 10.12.1982 Zorana 32 Nirmala Yoga

 Slow down, my busy brain, behavel It's time you changed I You're not the slave of every dark, conditioned thought that rises from the past unsought; you're not an engine shuffling facts and shaping them to future acts; nor yet a pendulum that scans the tos and fros from past to plans. Each time you swing from "what's to do' to "what's been done" you flicker through the precious present, wherein lies a glint of God's great enterprise. If we could stretch that moment where you're thoughtless, still, and yet aware, then we, my brain, might start to sense creation's vast magnificence, Oh Mother, slow my bustling brain: detach it from the brash, insane, dishonest, pampering, uncouth illusions that conceal the truth; and Mother, that I might fulfil my part of the Creator's Will, in-turn my mind and teach it how to live the ever-presect Now. Nirmala Yoga 33

 Registered with the Registrar of Newspapers under Regn. No. 36999/81 WITH COMPLIMENTS FROM MAHADEVI CHARITABLE TRUST DELH I Edited & Published by Sh. S, C. Rai, 43, Bunglow Road, Delhi-110007 and Printed at Ratnadeep Press, Darya Gani, New Delhi-110002. One Issue Rs. 6.00. Annual Subscription Rs. 30.00 Foreign [ By Airmail E 6 $101



----------------------

1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Nirmala Yoga
Vol. 12
Bi-Monthly
Year 2
Nov.-Dec, '82
+
Om Twamewa Sakshat, Shri Kalki Sakshat, Shri Sahastrar Swamini,
Moksha Pradaini, Bhagwati Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Namo Namaha.
"Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns all the religions and
seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga-THE UNION"
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-1.txt 
 Editorial
Moksha is commonly understood, as liberation from the cycle of birth and death.
Attainment of this state is the cherished objective of every spiritual seeker. Even those
who never think of their Spirit and feel contented by superficial worshipping and morti-
fication keep the desire of achieving so called Moksha. However no one knows whether
such a state really exists and if exists when it is granted.
Idea of Moksha presupposes binding, for, Lunless one is bound, one cannot be freed
andthat binding is limitations of one's awareness. Every individual being has its
separate existence on account of 'I' consciousness which is the real experience of life.
Impressions of past experiences and unsatisfied desires are associated with 'I' cons-
ciousness. According to Patanjali's aforisms on Yoga, even the fulfilled desires leave
behind subtle impressions of the experiences, which become the cause of further desires.
Add to it new desires and impressions accumulated every day and reactions to external
impulses. Even the desire for so called Moksha would strengthen the attachment to life.
Shri Jnaneshwar in his following verse has described a liberated Yogi :-
आकाश है माझे मस्तक बापा चिद्ूपा नाद उठती
आधारा पासोनी सहस्र दलावरली, नि:शब्द निरंतर नाडी एक
ज्ञानदेव म्हणे ऐसा अनुभव जेथ तोचि एक योगी जीवन मुक्त
Transcription
Ākash he māze mastaka bapä, chidroopă nād uthati
Ādhārā pāsoni sahastra dalāvarali, nishabda nirantar nādi eka
Jnānadeva mhane aisă anubhava jeth tochi eka Yogi jeevan mukta.
Translation
Only that Yogi is liberated from life (Jeevan Mukta) who experiences that his head L.e.
attention is the sky (Brahmarandhra) where sounds arise and there is endless and
soundless channel (Nadi) from Muladhar to Sahasrar.
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-2.txt 
 However despite this clear advice people are still clinging to their old belief. Moksha
or Jeevan Mukti or liberation is possible only in Sahaja Yoga, it is not the deliverance
as commonly believed. It is totally severing the connections with past and future.
When Kundalini is in Sahasrar and deflates ego and superego, links with past are dis-
rupted and future becomes non-existent, as 'l' consciousness fades away in thoughtless
awareness. With that go away other attachments arising out of individuality.
Our beloved mother has freed us from our past Karmas, with our full knowledge and
understanding. We are the most fortunate of all human beings. We have risen above
the limitations of time and place. We are deathless because we have transcended above
the physical, psychic and vital beings. We are truly liberated. We are proud children
of the Supreme Goddess, Param Parameshwari, Adi Shakti, Moksha Pradayini.
A Prayer
O Mother,
You see me, son of Your life-birth-
staggering and tottering, learning to stand up.
You hold your helping hands back, letting me fall a few times,
so that from a baby toddler, I may grow to be a man
at one with the Holy Spirit.
Spreading God's truth amongst all the peoples of the world,
so that they may know that which they are.
I see Your Motherly concern and, behind that,
the strength which Our Father gives You, His Consort, so freely.
Yet you know that we have to play the drama and grow up in our world-
to reflect purely that glorious globe of truth,
in the mirrors of our soul.
May we learn only to cleanse, nourish and love our Souls, O Mother,
may You know fully our eternal gratitude and awe-full respect,
and may all the beauty of this world be redeemed.
From a Sahaja Yogi in the Heart of this Universe...
Nirmala Yoga
2.
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Yoga
Nirmala
43, Bunglow Road, Delhi-110007 (India)
Founder : Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Editoria! Board: Dr. S. K. Mathur, Sri A. S. Mishra, Sri R. D. Kulkarni
Representatives
:CHERYL HYNES-10, Clarence Road, Burwood, N.S..W. 2134, Australia.
Australia
U. K.
GAVIN BROWN-Nirmala Palace, 99, Nightingale Lane, Clapham South,
Balham, London SW 12 U.K.
U. S. A.
: CHRISTINE RIEGER-215 West 92 ND Street, APT. 7 E. New York,
NY 10025
: RECHARD PAYMENT-1950, East 5th Avenue, Vancouver, B. C.
Canada V5N 1M2.
Canada
Switzerland: CHARLES AND MRS. MAGDA MATHYS-5, Chemin Des Mouldins,
1256, Troinex (Canton de Geneva), Switzerland.
: MARIE ROUGER-175, Av. Ledru RIlin, Paris-750001.
France
Hong Kong : EMILIE P. SHI- Cliff Rence Bros. Co. Ltd., 1610, Wing On Centre,
111, Connaught Road Central, Hong Kong.
: M.B. RATNANNAVAR-13, Merwan Mansion, Genjwala Lane, Borivali
(W), Bombay-400 092.
RAJARAM SHANKAR RAJWADE 840, Sada Shiva Peth, Pune-411030.
India
CONT ENTS
Page
1. Editorial
2. A Prayer
3. Representatives
4. Translation of Her Holiness Mataji's old Marathi letter
5. Kalki
6. The 51 Names of Shri Mary Mahalakshmi
7. Agnya
8. John's Vision of Shri Mataji in the book of Revelation
9. Letter of Mataji
10. Her Holiness Mataji's Advice
11. Festivals
12. Jai Mataji
13. Beating the Deadline
14. Surrender
2.
4.
15
17
22
23
25
25
26
27
29
30
Poem
15.
16. Towards Shri Mother
17. Poem
31
33
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Translation of
Her Holiness
Mataji's
old Merathi letter
At that time waves of bliss start flowing
because it is the Spirit that is saying', how
My dear Nirmala
Many Blessings
Received your loving letter. I have also can any thought come at that time ?
very much enjoyed Navaratri Puja.
People pour their wine in the glass.
But Puja is also an external offering. Your Puja is like that. In that, wine is your
Even your heart has said so. But you should faith and the glass is the recitation of Man-
tras and the worshipping. When you are
drinking that wine forgetting everything,
how can a thought come ! Then only bath-
A Puja or a prayer grows from your heart. ing in the ocean of bliss ! How can that
Mantras are the words of your Kundalini. joy be expressed in thoughts? Who will pour
But it Puja is not performed from heart or if that wine, back in the giass, which is to be
Kundalini is not associated with recitation drunk and that t0o in the inferior glass of
of Mantras then that Puja becomes a ritual. thoughts ? However, the joy that you get
understand how you get the reward or
blessings of the Puja and Its prasad.
If you become thoughtless in Puja, koow after drinking the wine is eternal and ever-
that your heart is also involved in it. Collect present. It becomes your asset.
the Puja material and offer it sincerely.
There should be no formality or bindings in in my presence. Every time a big wave
the offerings. It is correct to wash hands, comes and take you to a new land. Expe-
but is your heart washed ? When attention riences of many such lands become your
is on heart it does not go to others. Al-
though you remain quiet from outside, you and open new gates of joy.
are speaking from within. Hence you should
not be silent for long time. If man's heart
is not clean, then the silence becomes very photo by looking at it, can be placed in
harmful. At the same time loose talks can heart or, after the Puja, its view goes to
bring catastrophies.
Many such Pujas have been performed
They glve vastness to personality
own.
Best is worshipping in the heart. If, the
heart, then the joy which you get only at
that time, can become everiasting and ever-
Show this letter to all Sahaja
You should say the Mantras in Puja but present.
with great faith (Shraddha). There is no Yogi's and send its copies.
alternative to Shraddha. You should per-
form the Puja when Shraddha grows deep,
so that heart itself gets all Puja performed.
Your Mother
Nirmala
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-5.txt 
 This is the most important time because
Sahaja Yoga is the last judgement. It is
fantastic to have this but that's a fact & is
the truth. Though you can understand, that
mother's love makes it very easy for you to
SHRI KALKI
*****
get through your realisation & that the
whole story of the last judgement looks such
as horrifying experience has been made
very beautiful & very tender & delicate and
Today I am going to speak in English as does not disturb you. But Ihis is the last
decided. Even
tomorrow I may have to
judgement I tell you, and you all are going
to be judged through Sahaja Yoga, whether,
speak in foreign language.
Today's subject is relationship between you can enter into the kingdom of God or
Kundalini & Kalki. The word Kalki is actually not.
an abbreviation of the word Nishkalank
Now in Sahaja Yoga people come in
means the same as my name is which means
Nirmala That means it is spotlessly clean. There could be people who have too much
Something that is spotlessly clean is of gratait (Tamsivrati) and what you call
(Nishkalank) without any spot or marks.
with different kinds of attentions or 'chitta'.
inerlia or the more sort of sluggishness or
slow movement temperament. These when
Now, this incarnation has been described
In many Puranas and will be coming on this they are exaggerated, people take to addiction
earth on a white horse, in a village of
Sambhalpur as they call it.
interesting how people take everything
literally. The word Sambhal means-'Bhal' is
Forehead, means at that stage, that means
Kalki is situaled on your Bhal Bhal is the they want to win the whole world. And
forehead & here he is going to be born that they want to become something independent
is the real meaning of the word. For us, in do not want to keep their relationship with
between Christ & this destroying incarnation God. You can see in Kaliyuga, how people
of Mahavishnu
time given to human beings to rectify them- are very much indulging into the too much of
selves, for them to enter in the kingdom alcoholism or you can call it something
of God, which in the Bible is called as the running away from your awareness or from
Last Judgement. That you will be Judged, your self, from truth and beauty. The others
all of you will be judged on this earih. The are denying, they are denying everything
population of the world is maximum, say, that is beautiful and are ego oriented. So
because all those, practically, all those who we have people, who are super-ego oriented,
have aspirations to enter into the kingdom very much conditioned, and lethargic and
of God are born in the modern times and lazy and absolutely revolting.
sor take to alcohol or some such things which
lake you away from reality and make you
numb. The other side as you know, is right
hand side people who have got too much
ambitions: That extremely ambitious people,
It is very
on their own-malignant & cancerous. They
called as Kalki, there is a have gone to extremes. Some of them are
The other
side people who are extremely ambitious,
are going to be born very soon.
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-6.txt 
 dominating and are destroying each other the people will also go with him, in
by their ambition & competition. These two SAHAJA-YOGA itself. This has been
types of people of extreme nature are rather happening in Bombay very often. This has
been a common thing that is going on, but
this is known as "Yoga Bhrastta", where
his Yoga, comes
easily absorbed in the Sahaja Yoga. More- down trom his Yoga because Sahaja Yoga
over people who are less complicated, simple gives vou all the freedom, whether to fall or
difficult to enter into Sahaja Yoga.
But people who are in the center are
a person falls from
hearted as they are in villages are very
to come up But if you go to any other Guru,
easily absorbed by Sahaja Yoga and they doing other sort of yoga, in which purifica-
take to it without any difficulty. In the city tion takes place and where people are trained
you can see the result of so much of work
of mine Ihat there are hardly about 2 to 3
hundred people today here. But if I go to
village, the whole village of 5 to 6 thou-
sand people come round and all of them get badly that you have no connections with any
their realisation without any difficulty. Beca: body else; like an operation. They take out
use here people are supposed to be very
busy. There are so many other preoccupa-
and disciplined from the very childhood. In
that yoga the Guru sees that somehow or
other you are injured or you are hurt so
that personality and throw him out.
In Sahajyoga it is left to your freedom.
They think other things are much To understand that, you have to keep to the
more important than Seeking God and mains: you have to keep to the growth, you
wasting your time in such pursuits like have to keep to the whole and not to one
tions.
seeking God.
person here and there, who is trying to over-
Under such circumstances, Sahaja Yoga power the rest. In Sahajyoga anybody who
tries to come up too much is put down; be-
takes its roots, very sweetly into the heart
of all the seekers. It works very spontan- cause in Nature, you must have seen that no-
thing grows out of bounds; like humanbeings
are of certain height, the trees are of
certain heights. Everything is controlled. You
cannot try to show-off in Sahaja Yoga neit-
her you can make groups of some special
When we talk of 'KALKI' we have to thing. Specially I have seen in Sahaja
eously, you get your realisation without any
difficulty, without any efforts, without paying
for it, without going into any sort of strenu-
ous exercise.
EOU
remember that between getting our realisa- Yoga, that there are people, who come up
tion and entering into the kingdom of God, and ask others to touch their feet. It is
we can falter very much. This is called as
"Yoga Bhrasta
yoga, enter into the yoga, and are still that they are gone out of Sahaja Yoga. it
enchanted by their Pravarultis e.g. an
ego oriented man,
man who wants to dominate, can form a for a while; their vibrations may be there, but
group of people, whom he will dominate by they come down and down till they are com-
his ideas, can go in for a fall and the rest of pletely finished.
more surprising that invariably such people
to will get exposed in no time, and one knows
Sthiti'
people take
is because their chakras are caught, very
or a money oriented badly caught, though they may not feel it
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-7.txt 
 This Yogabhrasta sthiti is the worst Iam telling to the whole world today that
thing that can happen to any sahaja yogi.
First of all you don't get your yoga, and if not try to take advantage of others, and do
you get yoga and then jump into this sort not try to show off your own powers.
of condition about which Shri Krishna has Because if once this destruction starts in
described, that you go to the Rakshasa your life you won't know how to stop it.
"Be careful". Do not try to harm others. Do
Yoni.
Once I had been to Andhra Pradesh, and
told the people there, that you should not
grow the tobacco. They were very angry
Those who come to sahaja yoga must
know that you have to stick on to one thing with me and they thought that I am affecting
properly, otherwise what is the yoni you get there living. They would not listen. I have
if you die without yoga ! May be that you also warned them that be careful. The
will be born again as a human being, may Kalki in the sea, will take its spite on you.
be but this life is wasted. If you try such
tricks after coming to sahaja yoga, and try happened there. Same was the case with
to impress on others, thal you are very Morvi, Last year some big people from
great realised soul that you have achieved Morvi met me, They believed in a very
this and achieved that all this nonsense horrible 'saint, who has really destroyed
that you have been doing before getting the families after families. I asked them why
realisation, then there is a very serious
offence and you are punished for that. This attention to Materialistic things. Why do
is the power of Kalki which is secretly wor-
king behind sahaja yoga.
It will come on you You already know what
do you belleve this man ? He is taking your
you believe ? Every house in Morvi has a
picture of this horrible fellow. When I told
them they would not listen to me. They
Kalki means there are eleven powers,
which are guarding the beauty of sahaja thought that I am jealous of that fellow.
yoga. Anybody who tries to play around And you know what happened at Morvi. It's
with sahaja yoga is harmed very badly. So a tact. The same was the case of pandas
today is the day of telling you about the I had warned them to leave
dangers of playing with the Divine. So far their notorious activities or the Ganges will
people have been taking them for granted. one day ruin you completely. And when the
They have fortured great saints. All the
time human beings are tortured. Now I am
warning them in almost every lecture of are running away with their belongings.
mine, that don't try this trick today, because
Kalaki is already on. Don't try to trouble
anybody who is a saintly person, who is a
good person. Be careful about it because
Kalki is on. And once this power comes on
of Mathura.
loods came in rivers Jamuna and Ganga, I
saw it on T.V. in London, that all the pandas
When you associate or live with these
horrible fellows, you also suffer. The inno-
cents suffer. Why should you be impres-
sed by such people ? That's the thing you
have to pay for. When you are impressed,
you are so compromising. After all it
doesn't matter if we go there. He is a panda
Not only to the sahaja yogis, but this of our forefather so must we give some-
you, you would not know how to hide your-
self.
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-8.txt 
 thing to this fellow ? Imagine ! The river and understanding it through our developed
of love and the river of joy is flowing there brain. We just go on adding to it. That is
and these people are sitting with their backs what Icall people as Tamasi, who do not
towards the river, and asking money from use their Brains. They are Moodh Buddhis.
you. What silly people they are ? such They just fall on somebody because there
stupid, useless people, and you pay them is some sort of Hypnotic influence, or some
money and think that you have done a great sort of Charismatic movement. That is why
in the west you can see that these charis-
matic people will take thousands of rupees
This sort of life we have been leading, of from them, and will give them Epilepsy,
Punya.
compromising. Not understanding what is
truth ? and what is not ? One side is that sort of things, and people are running
complete blind faith, into all these things after them like madmen and adding up to
are going on not only in India but also all the destruction by piling up sins after sins,
Gangarin, if not that, madness, lunacy and
over the world. We are simple innocent
people with lot of 'Havikta' within. But that
does not mean that we should be stupid
and fools. The other day in a meeting at precious time and one has to be very care-
Avadgaon near Rahuri, I said that those ful and alert about oneself. One should not
people in the Vithal Mandir at Pandharpur depend on any other person for help in this;
called as Badwe, should be nicely punished but should try to completely consolidate
for the way they are ill-treating these pil- one's own being into the kingdom of God,
grims, and something must be done to them. and occupy the highest seat in the heart
Everybody was little annoyed, when I said of the God Almighty. Because when Kalki
this because for those pilgrims, these will come, He will slaughter all these people,
Badwas who are 'Rakshasas Incarnate' are without any compassion. He is devoid of
something great. They break the heads of any compassion. There are 'Eleven Rudras'
people, who walk the thousands of miles, in Him means there are eleven destructive
just like coconuts, when they bow down for powers, absolutely powerfully settled in
Namaskar. Such cruelty they commit on Him. When I see all that, because I can
these innocent simple people. Do you think see all that, and this emergency grows into
that I should support them when I stand for
truth and religion and for compassion ? play fool with Him. Don't take it easy and
Thank God within 3 months time, the whole do not compromise, with these nonsensical
thing was taken over by Government.
instead of cleansing themselves.
This time what we have got is a most
me and Itell you 'Beware of Him'. Don't
people. Stick on to the right. Otherwise
the day is very near when Kalki is going to
It is so common with us that we see with
come.
our open eyes what is happening. Still we
will be going on with the same things in the
temple. Even in the name of God we are through their intelligence. They have deni-
doing sins after sins. We are adding sins ed God.
to our sins and instead of clearing it out is not God, it is all nonsense. Science is
The other type of people are, who think
They say where is God ? There
Nirmala Yoga
8.
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-9.txt 
 everything. What has science done so far ? I can ask people to put their hands, and
Let us see that ! Science has done nothing there can be thousands, who will get Rea-
so far. It has done only dead work.
made you Ego oriented. All the west is My being is a fact, why anybody should feel
Ego oriented. They are finding all the angry about it ? Why your ego should hurt
methods of committing sin. How to commit you, it I am like that ? Why should you feel
worst sins ? There are some Gurus in bad, if somebody is a Divine Personality ?
India, who supply them knowledge of how
to commit even worst and worst of sins. So why did you feel bad that Christ was a
that they can easily go with two easy jumps Him ? Why did you kill Him ? Why did
to Hell
Whether it is to-day, tomorrow or yesterday
or thousands of years back whatever is
wrong for your Dharma or suslenance is
wrong. The New phase is-What's wrong people, running after all kinds of wrong
in this ? What's wrong in that ? This types of useless misguiding people. There
question will be answered by Kalki only. I are so many now who have come to mis-
am just telling you that it is wrong. It is guide you. They are taking money from you
extremely wrong. It is against your Ascent. for misguiding. They are taking money from
It is against your being, and then you will you for giving out sins. When I say about
not have any time to repent, and will not them, the people feel hurt that why should
have any time to ask this question what's Mataji taik about these Gurus. They are not
wrong ? You will be chopped off. That is
what is the Kalki Incarnation. He is going devils will go to Hell. Then people got
It has lisation. It is a fact, that this emitting from
divine personalty ? Why did you murder
Whatever is wrong, is wrong !
you torture all the saintly people ? You
were very wise and sSweet ! Isn't it ?
You have been
very kind and nice
Gurus. They are Rakshasas. Once Christ
said that these devils and children of these
to come on a white Horse, they say, It's
tremendous thing that is going to work out.
s a after Him and said why did you say such
things against them ? They don't say any-
Every Human Being is going to be sorted thing against each other ! Christ said the
out and nobody can then claim, see, every
thing has been advertised, everything has
been published. Even this microphone, that each other. They are properly organised.
is created by science, can be used for
spreading Sahaja Yoga. You know very ness and the kind of ego orientation and
well that if I put it on my chakra, you get the money orientation. We are all the time busy
vibrations and you get the Realisation. The with this money. I call it "Bhrama' call it a
whole science is subservient to Sahaja 'Halucination'. It's a big halucination with
Yoga. Like the other day some T.V. people you people; that you are running after money.
came to me and said Mother, we want a
T.V. Programme from you,
careful before doing it. I don't want any two mirages that you are running after. What
publicity; but whatever you do, do it pro- are you going to get out of this money ?
perly. Through T.V. we can give Sahaja Just go and see somebody who is a very
Yoga. WhenI am there on T.V. screen very rich man. Is he a happy man ? What
Satan is not going to speak against his
own house, They are very friendly with
The otherside of this kind of ambitious-
Itis another halucination that you are running
said you be after 'Prelatmas', dead bodies. These are
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-10.txt 
 is the analysis of his life ? The so called see me, his eight year old son also came
successful people, you just go and see with him, very good boy, had a realisation,
them. What is the success they have ! but had a very bad Swadhisthana. So I
Who respects them ? When they turn their asked the doctor "Does this man come to
back, people say Oh God' let me go and your house ?" He said "yes, Mother, he
wash my face. Are you auspicious ? If comes very often". Despite my warnings
anybody sees you does anything good he would go there and entertain him, ins-
comes out of you ? Same Shubha happens pite of my telling him that you go to Mother
to that person ? Are you 'Kalyanmaya' ? and get yourself cleaned out 1 They are
Are you 'Mangalmaya' ? What sort of intoxicated and hypnotised by such a per-
personality are you ? Just judge yourself son. Then I said, go and beat shoes to
and that judgement will take place here in this man, as we do in sahaja yoga, and that
Sahaja Yoga. We had a patient who came to boy got cured. Do you want to ruin your
Sahaja Yoga, and he told me "Mother I am family, your children and everybody, because
a young boy and I don't know what has you are adhering to some hypnotic fellow ?
happened to me that I have become inaus- At least have same consideration for them !
picious" I sald "How do you know ?" He There are many like these, but in sahaja
said "Wherever I go there is a quarrel bet- yoga it is very easy to desert and even in
ween husband and wife, something goes London I know who is going where and what
wrong with the children, the children start they are doing ? I write to them, I tell them
crying and shouting and screaming. Now don't do it.
I am hated by everybody and everybody you must understand that our Mother knows
says that something is wrong with me." I these things. She knows and if She has
found out what was the malter with him he told, then it is to be done.
got cured. Now he is emitting beautiful ed. Did you get your vibrations by argu-
Just don't do it Immediately
Not to be argu-
vibrations.
ment ? But still in Sahaja Yoga you can
falter and that is the worst thing that you
can do. Because Yogabhrashtas are the
You can have very negetive vibrations
going out of you. You might be doing sins most condemned. Where will they go ?
without your knowledge and will say "Oh
Mother I am getting all the vibrations, I am
I have to warn all the sahaja yogis who
Such people always decide are here. Because sahaja yoga is the last
about themselves and others. Who is judgement not only that you will be judged,
going to judge you ? It is your deed. What that you are entering into the kingdom of
good have you done to others ? Recently God, but you become the citizens of God is
we had a mishap like that; and I tound out correct. Apart from that you are capable of
that all those people who were touched by being there where you have the complete
that gentleman, had left Swadhisthana cat- surrendering and understanding of divine
ching very badly. When I told them that it's love, Even it you are belonging to, say,
India and you are a citizen of India, and if
There you do thefts and commit criminal offence,
you will be punished even then. So even
a wrong thing to do to make this man so
important, they all got after my life.
was a sahaja Yogi doctor who had come to
Nirmala Yoga
10
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-11.txt 
 if you are a citizen of God, you have to be will be absolutely sorted out, and the last
killing will be done by Him. I wish it is just
a killing. It is not going to be ordinary
very very careful about it.
The second thing I would like to tell you Hanana, like even the Devi has done. Devi
about, is the destroying powers of 'Kalki'. has killed all the Rakshasas, thousands of
Today's lecture is going to be very sharp vear back, but they are back in the seat
for you, because the incarnation that you
have asked me to speak on is a very sharp
again.
Now the problem is very different at the
Krishna's incarnation, for example. He has present moment: which you should try to
Hanan Shakti. He has killed Kansa, so understand. in the old days during Shri
Is the sharpest of all.
We had
one,
many Rakshasas, you know as a child also Krishna's time, when He said ET ta
He has killed Putana but He had 'Leela' घर्मस्य ग्लानीभवती भारत: । परित्राणायच साधुनां
also. He had love and He did give conces- fanTa The last stanza you
sions to people, He forgave people. Christ must understand faai a means to
is the embodiment of forgiveness. For- destroy the cruel people, or the negative
giveness of Christ is nothing but is the forces and to save the saints
विनाशायाच
power of sustenance within him. If He
Explodes, the whole forgiveness will come
on us as a big disaster, if you are not able the problem of Kaliyuga, is that there is not
to understand the value of his forgiveness. pure and simple person as a Sadhu or Rak-
He has said very clearly that "Anything shasas. So many Rakshasas have entered
said against me will be tolerated; but a
word against Holy Ghost won't be tolera- people, who are wrong and who are doing
ted." Now you have to understand that Wrong, who are doing all sorts of wrong
Holy Ghost is Adishakti.
I am going to come again and again but
Into your brains. You side with so many
things in the name of Religion, in the name
of politics, progress and education and all
One has to understand that such a Incar- that. Once you have sided with them, then
nation is imminent, and Shri Krishna's they are in your brains, they are within you.
Powers are given to Him, which is only When they are having within you how to
Hanana Shakti. Bramha Deva's Powers destroy the ad ? You may be a good
which are only Hanana Shakti are given to
Him. Siva's Powers, which are also Hanana you are having them in your heads. So
Shakti, i.e. a part of his Tandav' is given to there is not hard and fast rule to say, who
Him. Similarly Bhairava's Khadaga Shri is a real negative and who is a real positive
Ganesha's Parshu, Shri Hanumana's Gada person ? Only Sahaja Yoga is going to
and the Siddhis which are going to destroy cleanse you and make you absolutely posi-
are given to Him. Buddha's forgiveness and tive, positively for the good and positive
Mahavira's Ahimsa, are going to turn up- people. This is the only way when your
side down. All these Eleven powers are Ankura (Sprouting), when it starts giving
going to come. On the top of us when we you Realisation, you feel your Self.
will be finished with Sahaja Yoga; when we with that Self, you know that you are Your-
person, but you may be destroyed because
And
Nirmala Yoga
11
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-12.txt 
 self and not this Mirage. You start enjoy- is the time coming ? If this is a living pro-
ing that Self. When you start enjoying it, cess ! When the work will be finished ?
you give up all the things that make you When you see that there is not more chance
compromise and make
mixedup person. All this confusion will then time. Kalki will come down. Let us see
go along. So it is essential that you take how many come in ! But for that there is a
to Sahaja Yoga, in a most dedicated manner limit also. So I will request you lo go out
and free ourselves of all the wrong doings in the world, call your relatives, call your
and also the others, whom we know. This neighbours, all of them. Tomorrow is the
is the only thing we can give to our friends, last day of my programme of Navaratri, when
you a hortible of having any more people coming in this
invite others for dinner what you give them? they are going to have a little felicitation of
the Mother; To me the greatest felicitation
Nothing. Then give presents on a birthday,
or send greeting, garlands, etc. In London Will be, that in this Bombay, I will find more
during X'mas the cards pile up in post people realised, taking to Sahaja Yoga
office to such an extent that no letters can seriously. After coming to Sahaja Yoga not
go for 10 days prior to X'mas, But where to indulge in backbiting and small pettimin-
is Christ ? On the day when Christ is born dedness and getting angry with each other,
they will go in for a champaign. Such but being loving and wise. It is most sur-
foolish people, If somebody dies, they prising that those who are supposed to be
will go for a champaign. Champaign is the Cream of the Nation, the most sophesti-
their Religion now and whisky is their cated people are so pettyminded ! I have
to tell you these things, because of the
immediate emergency that is coming for-
Kundalini.
They cannot understand God. How can ward before me. I only pray that it should
they, when they have made God according not be in Bombay, that it should start, Bom-
to their own conception of falsehood. As bay had gone into the verge, if you remem-
a Mother I have to warn you. Be Careful ! ber the day when Rajesh Shah phoned me
Don't play about with your Self! Do not to say that Mother "what about rain ! What
go down, but come up! come up ! and come about rain I I did not answer him, when he
up. I am here to help you I am here to work said "I know Mother you are angry with
for you Day and Night. You know that I work Bombay people, but still forgive them once
very hard for you. I spare no efforts, to again" That is the night when you started
help you, and do everything that is possible getting the rain once again. Next calamity!
to make you all right; to make you pass this
examination of last judgement; but you have
to cooperate with me, and you have to go people. Every timeI come back, I find this
headlong about it, and devote most of your kind of nonsense of these Sahaja Yogis,
time for Sahaja Yoga and for imbibing all getting after one man, somewhere and get-
that is great and noble.
I have to tell all Bombay
Beware of it !
ting lost. The other thing is that Bombay
people are still most unaware of what is
Kalki is a very big subject. If you see going to fall on them. Most unware, of
Kalki Purana, it is such a big book. When how they are made from Amoeba to this
Nirmala Yoga
12
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-13.txt 
 stage ! What God has done for them ! person when he is going to get it. When
And what they have to do for God ? It is a the Kalki Chakra is caught up, all your fin-
very very sad affair, extremely sad for the gers start burning, on the hands on the
whole of this country, because people try to palms and same time in the body you get
follow this Bom bay. Many peopie like to terrible burning. A person's Kalki Chakra
tollow actors and actresses, than to follow catching means that he will be down with a
God. This is the trouble with our super- horrible desease like Cancer, may be lep-
ficial temperaments. Tomorrow we have a
rosy or may be that he is about to collapse
very good programme of releasing the book into some sort of calamity. So the Kalki
There are at
Chakra must be kept all right:
Advent; written by G. de Kalbermatten who
is the son of a Baron, a Swiss boy. VWhen least eleven Sukshma Chakras in the Kalki
he came to me, I could see clearly that he Chakra. Out of that atleast try to keep some
I had to work hard with him for of them alive, so that others can be restor-
is a seeker,
a year, to bring him round to his normal ed, If all the eleven Chakras are ruined
senses. But when there is not any seeking then it is very difficult to give Realisation.
within you, and when you go back astray,
what will happen to you, I don't know, So
be careful. Be very very careful. To day Keep the kalki alright. To keep your Kalki
is the day of warning you because you have
What is the thing that one should do to
Chakra all right you must have an Awe for
God. If you do not have awe for God, if you
are not afraid of God, if you are not afraid,
asked me to speak on Kalki.
He is placed on our forehead. When that if you do wrong, He is there with his
the chakra of Kalki is caught up, the whole wrath! And that He is a wrathful God, that
of Murdha, which is on the top goes out of He is full of poison for us, if you try to do
order. In
the Kundalini awakening, we anything wrong; if there is no fear of that.
find that if the Murdha goes out of order, Not that it is to be hidden from Me or from
the Kundalini doesn't rise. The whole head anybody else, but you yourself know that
become logged. Such people do not allow you are doing wrong. If you are doing
the Kundalini to rise above the Hansa something wrong and in your Hearts of the
Chakra. At the most they might try to raise hearts you know it, then please don't do it.
it upto Agnya, but then it drops down. Otherwise your Kalki will go out.
There is another reason also, as I have said
that if you put your head on the feet of
wrong Gurus, you suffer. Too much thinking when you know that God is all pervading, all
also creates problem at the right hand side powerful. He has the powers to raise us to
and one of the aspects of Kalki gels spoiled; this state of higher being and also He has
and there is an imbalence created on this powers to bestow all the blessings that He
side. The whole forehead, if it is full of lot has. He is the most compassionate God
of bumps, then we must know that the Kalki or we can say, the compassionate father,
Chakra is out of order. If it is out of order that one can think of. But in the same way,
then the person is about to go into some he has a wrath; and that wrath when falls
sort of very bad calamity it is a sign on a upon you be very very careful about the
When you have that Awe for God, and
Nirmala Yoga
13
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-14.txt 
 wrath of your Father, because if He comes Self Realisation you will be placed in the
on you with that wrath, nobody can slip it. highest position.
Nobody can stop it! And the compassion
of the mother will not be listened to
because He may say that "you have spolied nare you may be the richest, may be biggest
your children by giving them too much loo- political leader and all that nonsense; in the
seness." So I have to tell you, please don't presence of God those who are dear to God
do anything that is wrong, and do not make will be placed at the highest position and
Me feel bad about it, because for Mother it not all these worldly things, which looks so
is very difficult to tell these things It is interesting and enchanting to you.
very hard for a Mother, who has a very ten- most important thing is where are you as
der heart, a kind heart for you to say all far as God is concerned ? That relation
these things But I have to request you you must eslablish, by first finding out your
"Don't play about, because your Father is Self, your Atma, to Sahaja Yoga and then
full of wrath, He can punish you for doing relating yourself to that.
anything wrong." But if you do anything
for Him, or for your own being or for your
Today, you may be the biggest millio-
The
May God Bless You All.
Wither
Compliments
Sroig
WOODWORD & DICKERSON (P) LTD.
15-E, Vasant Lok, Vasant Vihar, New Delhi
Nirmala Yoga
14
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-15.txt 
 THE 51 NAMES OF
SHRI MARY MAHALAKSHMI
Name in Latin
Chorus
English translation
Sancta Maria
Ora Pro Nobis
(pray for us) Holy Mary
Sancta Dei Genitrix
Holy Mother of God
Sancta Virgo Virginium
Holi Virgin among all Virgins
Mater Christi
Mother of Christ
Mater Divinae Gratiae
Mother of Divine Grace
Mother very pure
Mater Purissima
Mater Castissima
Mother most chaste
Mater Inviolata
Mother without any blemishes
Mater Intemerata
Fearless Mother
Mater Amabilis
Lovable Mother
Mater Admirabilis
Admirable Mother
Mater Boni Concilii
Mother who is a good councellor
Mater Creatoris
Mother of the creator
Mater Salvatoris
Mother of the saviour
Virgo Prudentissima
Virgin very careful
Virgo Veneranda
Virgin to be worshipped
Virgo Predicanda
Virgin who preaches
Virgo Potens
Powerful Virgin
Virgo Clemens
Compassionate Virgin
Virgo Fidelis
Trustworthy Virgin
Speculum Justitiae
Mirror of justice
16
Sedes Sapientiae
Seat of wisdom
Causa Nostra Laetitia
Cause of our joy
Vas Spirituale
Vase of spirituality
Vas Honorabilis
Honorable vase
Vas Insignae Devotionis
Vase of extraordinary devotion
Rosa Majestica
Majestuous rose
Turris Davidica
Tower of David
Nirmala Yoga
15
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Chorus
Name in Latin
English translation
Ora Pro Nobis
(Pray for us) Tower of ivory
Turris Eburnea
House of gold
Domus Aurea
Foederis Arca
Arch of the union
Janus Caeli
Gate of Heaven
Stella Matutina
Morning star
Salus Infirmorum
Salvation of those who suffer
Refugium Peccatorum
Shelter of the sinners
Consolatrix Afflictorum
Comforter of the afflicted
Regina Angelorum
Queen of the Angels
Regina Patriarcharum
Queen of the elders
Regina Prophetarum
Queen of the prophets
Queen of the spreaders of truth
Regina Apostolorum
Queen of the martyrs
Regina Martyrum
Queen of the learned
Regina Confessorum
Queen of the virgins
Regina Virginium
Queen of all the saint
Regina Sanctorum Omnium
Regina Sine Labe Originalis Concepta
Queen immaculate
Queen of the sacred rosary
Regina Sacratissimi Rosarii
Queen of peace
Regina Pacis
Queen of love
Regina Amoris
Regina Beatitudinis
Queen of bliss
Imperatrix Mundi
Emperess of the world
Light of sahaj truth
Lumen Sahajae Veritatis
Om Twameva Sakshat Shri Omkara Sakshat Shri Jesus Mahavishnu Sakshat Shri Mary
Mahalakshmi Sakshat Shri Adi Shakti Bhagwati Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Namoh Namah
Nirmala Yoga
16
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Caxton Hall, 18.12.1978
H. H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
AGN
YA
A
GNYA means the witness. Was Christ at this stage. He is the Principle.
created in the human being when he What is our Principle ? The Kundalini you
can say. Creation, the whołe creation, is
have a language we cannot think. Before, the Principle and support. At this creation,
thought was inspiration. Thoughts that He represents the essence of creation, i.e,
come to us are in light and shade. After in the family, the husband and wife and
realization, it's only light and shade like a child. The child is the essence of the hus-
pattern-lighthouse. It's a language, these band and wife-the essence of the house.
thoughts are conditions on us. We bounce Until they had the child, there was no mea-
from one thought to another, like the sea- ning. Like Christ was the essence of the
waves reach the shore and then go back first sound OM. When the Primordial
and come again. It can become maddening. Father and Mother separated they made that
Sometimes negative and sometimes positive. sound, He is that sound that supports and
looks after, more the support of all the Uni-
Because He is just the essence, the
ego on the right-hand side. Conditioning essence never dies. My essence is Spirit-
is on the right-hand side and gives us the the Spirit never dies. The body dies but
fears and dangers. There is no need to the essence is there. He is the most impor-
A
started thinking. Language-If we didn't
пе
Ego is on the left-hand side and super- verse.
have a thought about the past or the future tant incarnation.
-animals do not. When they know an ani-
mal is coming, O.K.-why think about it ?
Humans think about everything and think where the optic nerve and optic thalamus
that it is wise to sit down and think. It
He is placed in our Agnya in the centre,
cross : it's a very subtle point. It creates
two sounds Hum and Kshum. Hum on right-
should be spontaneous, like inspiratian, it
should just come to you. Thinking is the hand side-superego, and Kshum on the
playing of the dead.
left-hand side- ego. Hum and Kshum create
two kinds of vibrations. The Hum sound
This is the centre of Christ, He resides creates the vibration. I AM, I AM. Hum,
in this centre. He developed into Maha this comes from our existence power that
Vishnu. Actually Christians don't know we know we have to live in this world, and
anything about His Becoming, how He be- we are not going to die. Any human being
came Christ and why God didn't come down who tries to kill himself is considered not
Himself and do the job. It's a most impor- normal. Normally, every human being or
tant incarnation. He is the principle of animal tries to retain its life, that is through
creation, "Tattwa". Ganesha resides in the the power of Hum-I AM, the superego on
Mooladhara chakra gradually evolves to be the right-hand side and ego on the left-hand
Nirmala Yoga
17
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-18.txt 
 side is Kshum. This superego, you are how he befools us, he goes on befooling us
conditioned by so many things, that you are all the time.
worried because these experiences make
By thinking, you get your ego. There is
mind, and this fear is settled in the super- no wisdom with a great ego. He behaves
It starts from your Amoeba stage and in such a childish manner, it doesn't matter
until today stored there-you are afraid of about the age. How is it that our parents
Police, this and that. Some people are not are so stupid and we are searching God ?
afraid of these things, but are afraid of May be because of the War, they are dis-
something else. Whatever have been your turbed. Ego is a thing that makes you think
conditions, your experiences, all are in the about everything-e.g., making plans ahead
This centre sends messages about getting here or there, the journey is
am, I am, you are Hum, don't spoiled because it didn't work out as plan-
you the kind of person to have fear in the
ego.
superego.
Hum, Hum,
be afraid.
ned. A sensible person will take it in his
stride, why get upset ? Mr. Ego doesn't
want you to be happy or relaxed, always
gives you ideas you must do this or that and
the other, until you are finished ! There's
no advantage.
You can discriminate between the two
types : one are very aggressive, one are
subordinated, frightened.
vibrations will drive away the fear. It's how
you can get help from the Divine by saying
HUM.
HUM say-the
From morning until evening ask for for-
giveness and pull your ears from both the
Ego is a colossal problem. Solution is sides-say, "Oh God, forgive me". Remem-
by forgiving others. You have to learn to
forgive if they feel hurt and to ask for for-
giveness. Too much ego means you've ego. He did everything possible so you
pampered it too much. Try to humble down wouldn't develop your ego He was born as
in your heart. Your heart is the Spirit and
too much ego covers the heart-it takes you ordinary conditions, kept Himself behind the
away from your spirit It makes you stupid whole scene
and foolish-you will know an egotistical Roman Emperor. He took His birth even
person when he's blowing his own trumpet where not even ordinary people take their
because he will immediately become stupid. birth-but there was light and joy. We have
Without understanding what's happening lost the joy because we forget God Al-
people will wonder what's wrong with him, mighty. When we forget Him-He is love
especially children. You become so stupid, and Joy. People have affluence and money
because you forget the existence of God,
and your relationship with the Divine. Mr.
Ego makes us do the stupid things in the not at all normal human beings, they are
country-making a law for a son-in-law to
marry a mother-in-law; impossible, she is
your mother-absurd. It's not easy to see
ber Him from morning till evening. All the
time remembering Christ brings down your
an ordinary carpenter's son, lived in very
He could have been born a
but still they are not happy-whatever you
say to them they will be angry. They are
sick.
It's not hard to ask for forgiveness-we
Nirmala Yoga
18
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-19.txt 
 don't even ask once a day, not even once a so you can rise in your spirit that you are,
month, not even once a year. On Christ- that's the boundary you have to cross. We
mas Day, you don't ask for forgiveness, have to ask help from Christ. Christ cruci-
instead you have champagne and all the fied Himself Why ? What did He do ?
arrogant things. Ego presses the superego Loot people ? He just challenged the ego
so much sometimes that others are hurt by of the Romans and the Jews. That's why
what you say, cutting and painful to others. he was crucified. And now we have to
The way people talk to each other in Parlia- crucify our egos through His Cross, other-
ment, they behave so badly : not even ani- wise wa are going to do the same, crucify
mals treat or back at each other like that. our Christ in our ego optic thalamus is
Egos are always dashing at each other where He lives. You have to awaken him to
There's always, "I have made this or that crucify the ego. You have to stand in
point"-but they have lost the joy. Argu- thoughtlessness. Thoughts, we are beyond
ment is a sign of tomfoolerly-won't lead thoughts. Agnya is a very importent chakra
you to any knowledge, only with an ego.
-immediately there is no thought when Kun-
dalini crosses the Agnya-thereis nothought
All Western Societies are ego-orienta- from ego or superego. We have to steady
ted. We've to lead the underdeveloped coun-
tries-the ego in Western Society is always
our Agnya. Agnya is placed at the crossing
of our nerves also, optic and thalamus.
pampered.
members of Parliament to keep good heaith.
To keep good health you don't work like eyes, you will have a wobbling Agnya, You
mad, you've to be a wise and sensible have to steady the eyes to soothe them. The
person. Wisdom is to be sought to keep. most soothing thing for the eyes is the
good health and not by ego - orientated green grass. If you could see the green
things, like possessions, showing off your grass with your eyes, you walk with your
great car, houses, etc. They're like jokers- eyes on the ground. That's why Christ,
even if they've no food in the house, they've He talked about adulterous eyes. Every
to have a great car-nothing but to pamper woman, a man must see ! Every man a
the ego. All the advertisements are ego woman must see ! Christ said you must
pamperers. When you fight Nature, the ego not have adulterous eyes. You have to be
develops in you. We can't think of our lives very deep and loving. You receive through
without ego. "T", "I", "I", it's indecent to your eyes If your eyes are closed, your
talk like that; putting your opinions first
People run around like mad
Now it is sald that if you have wobbling
thoughts are less because you cannot see
so much to put your attention to. If your
Who are you ? I am the Spirit, the eter- eyes are open, there are more thoughts
nal being. We have lost faith in God be- rushing in, because everywhere your eyes
cause those in charge of God are so arro-
gant-and so egotistical, it's impossible to thoughts and create more. Your attention
think of God beyond our ego. Ego is so has to go to your Spirit, to God, has to
superficial like a bubble, like a balloon that shine through the window of the Divine.
can burst-just like that. And it has to burst, This beautiful thing is ruined the way we
go, your a ttention goes, you add more
Nirmala Yoga
19
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-20.txt 
 use our eyes and we do not respect them. glance. Only with a glance of your eyes you
There is nothing as pure as the grass on can raise a Kundalini; with the glance of your
the ground. We should put our heads at eves you can cure people. Only with your
the ground instead of looking at other glance you can bring joy into the destroyed,
people.
ruined people, with your eyes, they are the
window of your being. Your spirit is through
From Sahaja Yoga point of view : an en-
tity might enter your eyes when flirting. At your eyes and when the Kundalini rises
parties, they exchange entities from person your eyes become dilated. There Is a tre-
to person all the time the attention is diver- mendous difference between a realized
ted. We don't always know why we feel souls eyes and a non-realized soul's eyes.
attracted. Nothing is gained by looking at A realized soul's eyes sparkle like diamonds.
a person, only wasting so much energy. It's If your eyes are not pure, your spirit will not
sure and certain sign of a person going show through. We have to give up all the
mad-wobbling eyelids and eyes. 80% of impurities of the mind. We have to respect
our attention and thoughts come through our eyes.
the eyes. Useless activity has to be stop-
ped. Christ's aspects have to be respected.
He saved a prostitute. A good woman you Agnyas. There are two types of mental
spoil, give her ideas. Young small girls sufferings. Psychologists aren't capable of
who are virgins are spoiled by your dirty curing or giving relief to anyone suffering
glances. You are doing the opposite that mentally. One is where people oppress you
Christ has done. "You have to be a pros. very much
titute for Christ to save us"- madness.
When you are realized and when you Cross-a very wrong idea about Christ.
glance at someone you might suddenly get a Anyone who tries to make a slave out of
headache or feel like a dart has just hit your you, you should deny it absolutely. You
head, you might feel you're blinded by should say, HUM I-I AM! Who are you
someone-that's how important your eyes to dominate anyone in this whole world.
Everything all nervousn ss can be Then they are running away from the duty
The psychologists have the worst
You shouldn't enslave to any-
one whatsoever. You shouldn't bear the
are.
cured if you have pure eyes.
of themselves. We have to rise in our self-
It's such a vicious circle, that all the bad respect.
is gathered in the Agnya and you have to
clear the Agnya to clear the eyes. We have Christ's level never suffer. Every human
to ask for forgiveness. We have to bring being has to have self-respect and everyone
Christ into our Agnya. We have to give up has to respect his Self, which is the spirit
drugs and all intoxicants which will come within him. Nothing should dominate him,
naturally in Sahaja Yoga. Eyes express the whether you belong to that country or this
whole of our being-your brain, your bodies, country, that ism or this ism, All that will
your limbs, everything. If your Agnya is all break down under the rule of God. No one
right, then your eyes are perfectly all righ1. has a right to dominate anyone's spirit. You
They emit nothing but love wherever they don't know how to use your freedom-by
People who bear the Cross, people of
Nirmala Yoga
20
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-21.txt 
 domineering others ? You're on top of don't be afrald. You will be amazed at how
everyone's soul, dominating by land, pro- much they will give you.
perty or possession. Either this or that
way you are against yourself. Just be in the
centre, and see for yourself.
are you emitiing love towards another person
If you are a slave, how can you love ?-you Try to look at a tree with love and you'll find
cannot. If you are free and abundant, how the tree itself is giving you the joy of its
can you love ? Lore has its own bondages Creation, because you will become thought-
-very sweet and beautiful. You have to live less and the Creator who has made that
with them. If a little child comes to your beautiful tree will be giving all that joy that
house and he will spoil your house, and he is stored into it. Every human being is a
should do and you should enjoy that spoil- store of joy unlimite'd. Don't waste it be-
ing. And your freedom, if it is challenged cause someone's not properly dressed or
by a little child's crying, then you are not he is not what you would like him to be,
wise people, it's abandonment, or it's lone- what you learned at your public school.
liness, it's cutting off from the primordial, Every doorstep, everywhere there is beauty
from the large one that you are-not being lying-do not miss it. But if you have a
able to tolerate other people's freedom. We possessiveness or an admitting of it, you
Mother is a living example of this. Libe-
rate your wisdom and intelligence. These
poisons outside and inside, tırow them away,
Just look at in:
?
That store of all that
can never enjoy it all.
have to be free, i.e., when a little child can-
not cry in its own home, what kind of free- beauty wealth which is in every human
dom is that ? If a boy can't eat what he being, every moment it is bubbling.
wants in his own home-what kind of free-
dom is that ? It's such a confusion of
For Agnya, it's a good thing. a time when
Shri Mataji has to wish us a happy Christ-
things. It's the opposite of enslavement.
But in the middle is love. Every moment is
filled with little bondages, i.e., if a husband
says he wants something to eat and the Obey your Self-and not your ego. Then you
wife says, "Oh, you...", she should be
happy to know what he wants and be glad
to make such a small thing that will make EverytRing in the world, Everything you can
him so happy. What have you gained, the
way you are fighting ? Such dryness, lone-
liness and emptiness exists. If you want
to lead a good life, you are not sacrificing
anything, you are gaining by leading a good Agnya must have Christ there-your Agnya
life. The Truth has to be told. If you want
to be happy, you have to come down to reality. Support awakened within you, which is all-
mas. One must know what to order and how
to obey. Obey the Divine. Obey our elders,
can order also others. Not only human beings,
bitt the Sun and the Moon and the winds, and
contral with this Agnya. If you know some-
one is going to do something wrong, take his
name to your Agnya and he will not do it. It's
a trick for realised souls. Anything you order
on your Agnya must be res pected. But your
has to be clear
Beeause you have the great
Friends - what kind of relationship do we
pervading into all small molecules and atoms
have ?-e.g., if we don't receive a Christmas
card we feel bad. Try to be bound by others.
(Contd. on Page No. 24)
Nirmala Yoga
21
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-22.txt 
 (The Apocalypse)
JOHN'S VISION OF SHRI MATAJI
IN THE BOOK OF REVELATION
We all know that John was the most the dragon; and the dragon and his angels
centered of Shri Jesus' disciples for he fought, but they were defeated and there was
related to his Master from the heart. So he no longer any place for them in heaven. And
was gran'ed a mighty and yet mysterious the great dragon was thrown down, that
vision as he was staying on the Greek is- ancient serpent, who is called the Devil
land of Patmos. In this vision the struggle and Satan, the deceiver of the whole world
of the last days is being described, that is, -he was thrown down to the earth, and his
the struggle of which Shri Mataji says : "I angels were thrown down with him."
warn you : a big war is on; don't loose time,
mature fast; time is short".
(Revelarion 12.7.)
Now the sequence is described in which
Shri Mataji appears in this vision as She the fight takes place on this earth with all
the demonic forces trying to destroy the
is giving birth to Shri Kalki:
"And a great portent appeared in Heaven sahaja yogis.
a woman clothed with the Sun, with the Moon
under Her feet, and on Her head a crown of saving: "Now the salvation and the power
Twelve Stars She was with child and She and the kingdom of our God and the autho-
cried out in Her Pangs of Birth, in anguish rity of his Christ have come but woe to
for delivery. And another portent appeared
in heaven; behold, a great red dragon, with
seven heads and ten horns, and seven dia-
dems upon his heads. His tale swept down
a third of the stars of heaven, and cast them
"And I heard a loud voica in heaven
you, O earth and sea, for the devil has come
down to you in great wrath, because he
knows that his time is short !".. And when
the dragon saw that he had been thrown
down to the earth, he pursued the woman
to the earth. And the dragon stood before
the woman who was about to bear a child, dragon was angry with the woman, (for he
who had borne the male child... then the
could not reach her) and went off to make
brought it forth: She brought forth a male
child, one who is to rule al the nations with a
Rod of Iron, but Her child was cuught up to mandments of God and bear testimony to
war on the rest of her offspring (that's us
my friends) on those who keep the com-
God and to His Throne, and the woman fled
into the wilderness, where she has a place
prepared by God..."
Jesus" (in our Agya Chakra).
(Revelation 12.11 to 17)
(Revelation 12)
Friends, brothers and sisters, let us take
The war in the Invisible, of which Shri
Mataji spoke many a time is then vividly very seriously the repeated warnings of Shri
Mataji. Sahaja Yogis who are half baked,
luke warm, slothful, irresponsible or trying
pictured:
"Now war arose in heaven, Michael to use Sahaja Yoga with their egos will not
(Bhairava) and his angels fighting against
(Contd. on Page No. 24)
22
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-23.txt 
 you count them or find out about their
nature and history ? If you are a master
cleaner you can do a lot in one sweep.
Western life has been attacked from 1919
by many devils who introduced ideas even
in architecture and music. These destruc-
tive ideas have removed the western people
LETTER OF MATAJI
My Dearest Son Jeremy,
from their roots, from the Dharma that is
Tomorrow morning I am going to New the basic for the ascent. You must admit
York for four days. I hasten to write this that Sahaja Yoga has definitely created
fetter because I would like to inform you in Dharmic people if not perfect ones.
the right time what is happening to you.
All drugs take you away from your aware-
think you are confused between left ness. So how can you have
side experiences and the spiritual expe- attention to make your spirit shine ? Reality
rience. Those who are on the left side can should be acheived in complete awareness
sometimes even see my past and show otherwise whatever you feel is illusion
much more awesome respect and Iove but
know the reason behind it and thus I never that Sahaja Yoga is spreading slowly, it
encourage them. If you take cannabis you does not matter; but if it is truth, how can
are definitely dragged into Ida nadi and the you acheive in a dreamy state ? I want all
ego receeds for the time being. So you feel my chlldren to be awakened to walk into the
this emotional carnal love, But when you Kingdom of God, not into the left sided hell
take more you start feeling a universal car- of illusion.
I because you are in a dream. It appears
nal love. Thus the fall of man starts be-
cause he gets out of the void towards the
left side.
My experience about the druggist and
chemist has been a painful one. Those who
For your information I am quite aware of come were very slow. Actually very few
other Sahaja Yogis and their condition. You come, so your theory that the seeking of
must know that after realization there is no-
thing like rituals but it becomes actual living They have been very weak and vulnerable
process. May be it is not done with perfec- to left-sided attacks. The example is shown
tion but still it is done by a realized soul. It the way you all fell for a fake person like
definitely evokes my vibrations to flow more Ichel. They are mostly facing very dange-
and has helped all of them to awaken their rous diseases like cancer and many other
deities. Of course I do not know all the incurable diseases. If you want to marry
filth and dirt people have accepted in the Karen, it is alright; but do not do it under
past, also the amount of illusiory life they the effect of drugs becausse it heightens left
have taken to but it is not necessary to side so much that there is no balance of
know. Do you know all the dirt and filth the will left to guide you to right decision by
of your household which you sweep ? Do vibrations.
God starts with drugs Is not true at all.
Nirmala Yoga
23
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-24.txt 
 Actually drugs were condemned by all
the Prophets and thus our laws do it be-
cause the basis of laws come from our void.
our Dharma, I would like you all to see the
sanity of law and not its fault. Gandhiji everywhere. Into everywhere you go, So try
was opposed to slaves, but he was much to master your Agnya. Ii's the master of
more against drugs. He would not allow yourself. Those who have a good Agnya can
any druggist to enter his Ashram campus master anything. You can really become the
even if he had given up. "It's difficult to master of yourselves. Mother wants us to have
spread Sahaja Yoga in the west"; I also felt the most powerful Agny as, so when people see
it, but the roots can not be sacrificed. There you they will know Christ is reborn again
can be no compromise with the principles within you May God Bless You.
that nourish Sahaja Yaga. But now I think
the media has taken over and we wil be
AGNYA
(Contd. from Page No. 21)
Om Sri Mataji Nirmala Ma Namoh Namah.
reaching stronger and righteous people for
Sahaja Yoga. Already it has taken its flight
and I can feel it. I am sorry for the druggist.
They have to use their will to accept the
challenge and give up their slavery to drugs.
The sick druggist and lunatics have taken so
much time. They do not impress any one of Shri Kalki's wrath (R. 19.11) in which the
because mostly they are so much in the air forces of Satan, the hosts of evil will be
and in personality, shabby and depressive. chastised. To waste our time now is a sin
They are very lazy and always oppose any- we cannot anymore aflord.
one who tries to wake them for Sahaja Yoga. attention ? Where our priorities ? Where
John's Vision of Shri Mataji
in the book of Revelation
(Contd. from Page No. 22)
manage to stay in God's camp until the day
Jeremy, I knew you were a left-sided mediocrity and where the glory ? The Lord
person and you need more activity, The
bus driving was a good idea but if you take
to drugs God save the passengers.
has come on our Kurukshetra. Let us seize
our weapons and fight. Laughing and roa-
Fing, we are the Children of the Devi, of
Sakshat Shri Nirmala Devi.
You did not write a word about vibra-
tions. They are your guide. Not your ego
which judges others or your super ego
which is self indulgent. This is not joy this
is illusion.
-Gregoire
Articles
and
Slow and steady achieve your reality in
collectivity.
Xperiences
May God bless you.
are requested
Your loving Mother,
-Nirmala
1982
24
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-25.txt 
 otherwise you cannot develop your Sahaja
Yoga. Whoever talks negatively, do not go
Her Holiness Mataji's
near him.
ADVICE
5. It is for you people to become dynamic
and to have confidence within you. You
know every Chakra, you know the rising of
Kundalini. You know everything, so you can
take it upon yourself.
1. There is a compulsory Bandhan on you
of your Mother. If you try to drink, you will
vomit. It you do anything wrong your sto-
mach will go out, if you'll try to avoid Sahaja get angry with thenm. To get angry is the
Yoga you will have to be there. Because easiest way for you, then there will be no
though you are not feeling it, you have felt problem. Once I get angry with you all, I
inside your self the charm of Sahaja Yoga.
You have to treat the people and not
6.
will have my own peace and no problems.
2. You have to live in the present and you But you have to be really very very patient
with all of them. Extremely patient-your
language must improve. So we come to
one point. We must read from our heart,
cannot conceptualise me. Your concepts
are limited.
3. It is better to see your own problems, we must feel from our heart, that we must
your own defects and come out of it. To be save this man, we have to help him.
very kind to yourself is that, you get rid, of
these serpents and scorpions and all these
things that are hanging around, and become should think "why have we come to Sahaja
pure. The light has come. In that light
you should start seeing what is the truth. can we get ? Where do we go wrong ? What
Then your misidentifications will drop out should we do further ? Where are our pit-
and your real identification will be establish- falls ? What have we left and taken for our
ed. Otherwise it cannot be done. You growth?" I find, even after comming to Sahaja
must learn to face yourself and never justify, Yoga, in most of our wakeful time, we think
7. All should clean their inner beings. You
Yoga ? What benefits have we got and what
of external things. We must see how much
4. Try to go to a person who is positive, loving and devoted to God, we are.
FESTIVALS
14th January
19th January
Makar Sankranti
Vasant Panchami (Puja of Mother Earth)
11th February
21st March
Maha Shivratri
Her Holiness Mataji's Birthday
28th & 29th March
Holi (Colour Festival)
61st Birthday celebration of
Shri Mataji in Bombay
31st March
Nirmala Yoga
25
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-26.txt 
 JAI MATAJI
Dear brothers and sisters,
from Her. That, with Her Love caring for
you all the time, at every instant, the only
This is to announce the coming depar- thipg that you have to do is to remain at
ture of worries from the realm of this body.
Her Lotus Feet-the most heavenly place
and 'enjoy' your 'Self'.
On this occasion, I'm happy to anounce
that there are no worries about me. This is
only because of the fact that Shri Mataji
*the Most Loving and Kind Mother' is all the
time caring, guiding, evolving me, 'cradling' nappens on it's own--'Spontaneously'! !
me in the arms of Her Love-leaving me with-
out any fears-just full of joy and happiness.
Oh! all this is truly so, so very beauti-
ful, wonderful and joy giving. But all this
don't do anything. "Mother" Does it. Her
Love' 'Sahaja' does it.
Ah I yes, yes, yes it is most truly so. It
Then also, there are no worries about my thR. Divine truth. The Adishakti Does
Family-the most fortunate family on earth , And this body, the instrument
--because all of 'us' have recognized the
"Greatest and Hjghest Incarnation' Sakshat
Adishakti. Under Her Pure Love and Pro really do nothing.
tection, we have the feeling of complete
"safety and comfor!'
everything.
of the Divine, is used by Her. Indeed, we
And to think that we've been worrying all
this while, as if it matters, as if it makes
any difference, as if it has any meaning.
She' is 'the Saviour'. "She' is 'the Com-
Worrving. Ha ! Ha ! That's the end of you.
forter'.
The only thing that matters is that we
are little children of our dearest Mother-
Then there are no worries about those
who are not in our 'Family' yet. Their being The Immaculate Goddess, The Holy Spirit
In' or out of the Family is all done under in Reality. And anything and everything is
the guidance of Divine. My worrying only
takes the attention to irrelevant things where-
as I should be all 'bliss and joy'.
done by Her.
And that Her love is always flowing in
and around us -as vibrations saving, cur-
I have no worries about the future or ing, quiding, always bestowing Her Bless-
about the past Both do not exist both béing inos Her Love. As very young and ignorant
the subsidiaries of the 'Ego" (which is just children we may do something wrong, but
an 'illusion'-nothing.
Her love corrects and improves us.
Then what do I 'do' now ? Worrying is
one thing that has occupied me for so long.
The only thing that matters is:-
Myself in Maa, Maa in all.
I stand amidst the waterfall-
within the Ocean, within the Virata,
within Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi.
Well, then what you should da, is to
"Realize the greatness' of what you have
received. And that your 'Mother, most loving
as She is, is the Origin the 'Ocean' of
'Love. That, all Bliss and Joy emanates
JAI MATAJI
Nirmala Yoga
26
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-27.txt 
 BEATING THE DEADLINE
When we focus too much on planning speed and are result oriented. What hap-
and efficiency we become a meticulous pens to such people when they try to
society. Everything becomes result orient- meditate ?
ed. Our thinking and actions get geared
towards achievement. Everything is gauged
in terms of success or failure. There is a expect something to happen quickly and
constant momentum within, towards attai-
They mostly seek instant results. They
some of them even believe that the more
ning certain targets. This momentum with- they pay for it the better the results they
in develops into a hurry. People are always will achieve. So they pick up the most
hurrying to finish their tasks. Such people expensive courses and the most expensive
do not have patience any more. t Gurus from the Guru Business Catalogues.
easily provoked and irritated by the other Now, these gurus have become wise and
person's slow or inefficient response. A they realise that if some sort of results are
great demand is constantly hanging over not instantly produced their client will lose
the head and such a society gains great interest and go elsewhere and thus they
speed.
They get
would run out of business.
So they concoct all kinds of methods
It also happens that as we get over-
speeded we exceed the limits of our own under the labal of meditational techniques
capacity to handle the situation. This taxes to entertain the cllent. Some give them
our nervous system and strains us, leading visualization exercises by which the imagi-
to nervous breakdowns. Like a machine nation of the client is stimulated and he is
working on overload finally breaks down.
led to believe that he is getting heavenly
experiences. A quick one is to give a
God gave great flexibility to the human mantra. As you go on repeating the mantra
body. He foresaw the possibility of man
exceeding his boundaries and placed with-
in a monotone and work yourself into self-
in him an organ called the spleen. nypnoSis, this retards you and diverts the
organ meets the emergency situations.
When man is under great mental pressure
Ihe spleen tries to meet the demands of the tike biofed courses and supplement the
This
focus from the pressing load of worries.
The more sophisticated one uses gadgets
body by throwing more blood cells in the psychiatrist tasks thus keeping the client
body. However when the person lives in a busy and satisfy his opposite result. The
state of emergency constantly, then the body addicts are the easiest to handle. Just
spleen also goes out of gear and starts keep them busy in doing all kinds of move-
throwing crazy blood cells in the blood ments. When they achieve perfection in
stream which, Mataji points out, leads to
cancer. Whether from the East or West and thus keep them busy. As the client
we are all busy trying to catch up with sees this, his result oriented mind is satis-
one position create a more difficult posture
Nirmala Yoga
27
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-28.txt 
 The seeker should simply practice living
life on a daiły basis according to Sahaja
Yoga for this. He does not have to be a
recluse or reside in a special place. He
fied and his ego is happy that he has
achieved some!hing.
Actually you cannot do meditation.
Meditation is a happening. If you think that just has to remain vigilant to preserve his
it is a race, the faster you run the quicker Dharma, In Sahaja Yoga this can be done
you reach the target, you will be disappoin-
ted. Meditation is a spontaneous process
very easily by checking our system through
vibrations. If we simply preserve our vib-
rations then Mother works out the rest.
which happens when the kundalini rises and
stations itself at the seventh chakra. Now
Ofcourse preserving the vibrations involves
righteous living and following the code of
Dharma. It means being patient, being in
the present But if you are worrying all
the time when enlightenment will happen
then you only agilate your mind and the
Chakras. The process of speed calches up
for someone this may happen inslantly, for
another it may take a long time. Those who
are fortunate enough to receive Mother's
blessings received it very easily. Now a
question which always comes for a medita
tor is what he should do. He need not
climb a mountain but he can practice living and you are not relaxed.
life by the law of the spirit. This is where
the modern mind finds difficulty.
willing to do anything as long as it is piece are relaxed. It is a state of relaxation.
meal, when he performs a task for a period Hence hurry and relaxation are incompatible
and then is done with it. And then must be with each other. Even the greatest moments
a target and expected time by which he of creativity are when we are most relaxed.
should be able to achieve it but this cannot Thus a med tator should not be result orien-
have any time limit. Time is an artificial ted. For him the means are more impor-
concept created by the human mind. This tant than the end.
is beyond the mind, it is a process of nature
and works itself through its own law
Не is
Meditation can happen only when you
-Story of a Seeker
Subscribers are requested to renew their subscription in time and also
extend their cooperation in making new subscribers from Sahaja Yogis.
The magazine is posted promptly, however, if the same is not received
please intimate us.
Nirmala Yoga
28
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-29.txt 
 SURRENDER
Surrender, O Shri Mother, is Thy most Thee more than dear parents, wife, husband,
precious gift, for it is Thy presence, from children for it is through Thee only that
within, which allows us to loose ourselves everything which is dear is dear. Thou are
a bit more in Thy cosmic body. And the the taste and the fragrance of Love in all
flute, becoming aware, is grateful to the that exists. My bondages are gone! posses-
melody which has chosen its hollowness sion is'nt any more binding a sahaja yogi's
as the medium of its manifestation. Thro- capacity to love. Surrender is inviting the
ugh surrender, Shri Mother, the sacred Ocean in the cup...and it comes !
Emptiness settles within us-no thoughts,
no wants, no needs, no expectations, no
fears, no demands, no doubts-and in this vade, without any expectations for returns
emptiness of Surrender we are driven fur- or rewards or results, to relish the joy of
ther on the shining path of pure freedom, witnessing the state of surrender, to melt
To surrender is thus to let serenity per-
our asperities.
Without asperities we
our
the one that leads to God's abode. To
Tunderstand surrender is to understand real Decome subtle and subtlely allows us to
Freedom. The secret of this magic equa-
tion is this :
pass through any obslacies.
Surrender is Shraddha, Faith, faith in
the Reality and not the illusion, faith in the
The sacred emptiness of Surrender, of pure Master and not in the familiar donkey
freedom, expresses within us the "NI" Tarwa
of "Nirmala". When we realise this we
called ego. Faith, joy-full faith, whether we
feel the vibrations or whether we are all
realise that surrender is the most subtle
gift of our Shri Mata of Thee who is Nira- right or whether we are catching, feeling
omama, Nirlepa, Nirvikara, Niris-
or not feeling the Union, balanced or
off the center. Yes, surrender is holding
to the right attitude no matter what happens.
In any siluation let our dedication to "those
Feet"chanted by Blake and Shankaracharya
vara, Niranjana, Nirguna, Nirbhava, Nirvi-
kalpa Ni Ni Ni..
is neither passivity nor
Surrender
fatalism for it is the amazing creation of remains unshaken.
the inner space in which the Self will mani-
fest and hence we experience peace. Peace please help us to surrenaer more and more,
because we accept fully that whatever Thou especially when it seems to be most diffi-
decide is the best for us. Thy criteria are
perfect, based on Thy omniscience and much and for this, from the bottom of our
eternal values while ours are within time, heart, we thank you. We bow to the eter-
within the two well known balloons, the nal flow of Beauty. We bow to the Lord of
Shri Mother, Shri Mataji, Shri Jagatguru,
cult. But it is not. We have already grown
yellow and the dark ones.
those who are detached, to Yogeshwari.
To surrender is to be detached, to love Rome, December 82
Ruth L.
Nirmala Yoga
29
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-30.txt 
 Om Twameva Sakshat Sri Adi Shakti Adi Maya Mataji
Shri Nirmala Devi Namo Namah
Jerusalem I O fount of hope
and Joy!
With bended knee we come to thee,
O source of our renewal.
O Great Mother of us all
O Holiest of holies,
We come to Thee
with bended knee,
with eyes cast to the ground
and hearts awash with Joy.
Sing Albion the fair!
O holy Land,
'pon whose ground
Sri Adi Shakti Mataji,
Blessed are these eyes,
that have gazed upon thy
Perfect Form.
Great Mother of us all
Blessed are these ears,
has trodden.
that have heard the music
Those feet, the fairest
in all the Universe
have touched thy soil,
O Albion,
Rejoice !
of Thy voice.
Blessed is this head,
'pon which Thy gentle and
mighty hand has rested.
Blessed are these feet,
that have walked behind
Thee.
The Heart, long slumbering
Blessed, blessed, a thousandfold
blessed are we.
has now awakened,
rising as the Phoenix from its ashes.
Arise ! Arise dear brothers!
With bended knee
we pray to Thee,
Great Mother of us all
Arise sweet sisters !
Unsheath your swords of light !
See, the darkness is receding.
Send forth your heralds
that we be worthy
of Thy mercy.
to the four corners of the earth
that all may know
Let us go forth and proclaim
Thy Name,
O Comforter, O Saviour,
O Mother of us all,
that all may know that
that She is come
The Comforter,
The Redeemer,
The Mother of us all.
Thou art come.
Nirmala Yoga
30
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-31.txt 
 Istarted realizing that, the whole day
long, we become what we think: thoughts
are shaping us. 1 became convinced that
our thoughts have power for good or for
bad. So, I started thinking about beautiful
things, about God, about Jesus, how great
they must be. I thought about love and
started searching for good in the people.
Then I realized, that Jesus has promised
Mother, when I sit down and think about many things, I tho ught that if this all is
all this I get tears in my eyes. You came true ! It has been promised, I kept telling
TOWARDS
SHRI MOTHER
when I needed you most. Mother, only the
divine could have led me to you that Tues-
day in September.
myself : "It has been promised...
One day a book about Zen Meditation
came into my hands and I decided that I
Long ago I already knew there was could try this also. Just to sit down, be
more to life than just what we feel, do, and quiet, relax and not think about anything.
know. I remember being always a líttle bit Of course I couldn't stop thinking But I
different in my ideas than others. I some- didn't give up. I also noticed that, if I
how refused to play the same game
marriage for me was living and sharing could keep the thoughts out for a while.
together and not existing one besides
another. But my husband could not under-
stand this.
Also concentrated on a prayer for example, I
Then, I started reflecting upon what my
prayer should be like. It should not be
something stupid. It should be supreme,
The situation has become even worse it should be something good, something
after the divorce, because I found myself that God might bear.
being more and more caught up in the
norms of todays modern society. But in
I started praying for the good of all
the back of my mind, I always knew that this people around me and at the end as the
climax of my prayer I asked for my highest
Self Realization, not knowing what this
is not it.
One day, shortly before you came, I
said : "Finished ! I know there is more !",
and so, I decided to look for it, regardless
of how strange I would seem to people Imust say, it did me a lot of good. I was
actually was.
I was doing so for weeks and weeks and,
becoming quieter, nicer, happier. but apart
from that nothing happened and I started
around me.
I searched among the various Yogas, Joosing my patience.
but could'nt get involved in any of them.
They all seemed something one cannot
practice in the West while having a job. came and I got almost desperate in my
However, somehow I noticed the importance prayer to Jesus. I said : "Jesus, if I
of a dharmic life and love.
Then this Monday of September 1982
whish my Self Realization so much, then it
Nirmala Yoga
31
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-32.txt 
 is You who gave me this desire ! My God, happy, but so much into doubts at the same
please, do something about it ! Icannot go time, just didn't understand anylhing any-
on like this ! Send me somebody who can more,
help me !"
That last night after the programme you
Mother, on that Monday you were had me repeat again and again: "Mother,
are you the Holly Ghost ?" Then you ans-
wered: "Yes, I am, but I want you to know
already in Vienna.
On Tuesday I came in my office and my that. You have to trust me !" Then you
boss told me about you. He knew nothing took something away from the top of my
about Yogas,
while explaining, but I didn't care.I knew they had put on the air conditioning !1 was
used wrong expressions
head and, oh, I looked up to see whether
I must see you.
ashamed of this reaction and I started
came to the programme. A young man laughing. I was just smiling. You kissed
was there first explaining to the public me on my cheeks and I walked away smil-
about the different centers placed within the ing. But back at home I thought again:
human beings. I didn't miss a single word "Who are you really Mother ?"
he said nor a movement or a glance he
made. I was all excited with expectations.
Today, after two months and a half, I
can feel who you are, Mother. Sometimes
Then, Mother, you came. You looked still Mr. Ego plants thoughts of distrust into
my mind, but I can recognize them and tell
body who has all the authority, but who is them to leave, or I sinply overwhelm them
with the question: "Mother, let me recog-
nize you with my heart," and you answer
with joy that penetrates into every cell of
very normal, but you also looked like some-
sweet anyway.
You talked and there was nothingI
could question or add to it. Everything of my being.
seemed true and quite logical to me. I
noticed there were some other people
around who all had their hands sireched you. I know, I still have a lot to learn.
towards you. I didn't know why, until at the Sometimes it seems difficult because of
end you asked us to do the same. Imme-
diately I felt the cool breeze on my hands
and I started smiling. But on the top of my tell him he is not needed anymore, because
head I felt nothing. It seemed to be even
hoter than before.
thought: "I who want it so much, shouldI
not get it ? It cannot be !'"
Mother, I don't find the words to thank
Mr. Ego who keeps on blocking up the
Please, Mother, make him leave,
gates.
now we are protected by the divine. By
You, Mother.
I was very sad and 1
May Sahaja Yoga spread to my country,
Returning home my ego started planting Yugoslavia, and to the whole world.
doubts in my mind, but I was fighting it.
On the day of the last lecture managed
to have a cup of tea with you. I was so
With love,
Vienna, 10.12.1982
Zorana
32
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-33.txt 
 Slow down, my busy brain, behavel
It's time you changed I You're not the slave
of every dark, conditioned thought
that rises from the past unsought;
you're not an engine shuffling facts
and shaping them to future acts;
nor yet a pendulum that scans
the tos and fros from past to plans.
Each time you swing from "what's to do'
to "what's been done" you flicker through
the precious present, wherein lies
a glint of God's great enterprise.
If we could stretch that moment where
you're thoughtless, still, and yet aware,
then we, my brain, might start to sense
creation's vast magnificence,
Oh Mother, slow my bustling brain:
detach it from the brash, insane,
dishonest, pampering, uncouth
illusions that conceal the truth;
and Mother, that I might fulfil
my part of the Creator's Will,
in-turn my mind and teach it how
to live the ever-presect Now.
Nirmala Yoga
33
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-35.txt 
 Registered with the Registrar of Newspapers under Regn. No. 36999/81
WITH
COMPLIMENTS
FROM
MAHADEVI CHARITABLE TRUST
DELH I
Edited & Published by Sh. S, C. Rai, 43, Bunglow Road, Delhi-110007 and
Printed at Ratnadeep Press, Darya Gani, New Delhi-110002.
One Issue Rs. 6.00. Annual Subscription Rs. 30.00 Foreign [ By Airmail E 6 $101
