Nirmala Yoga fनिर्मला योग Bi-Monthly Vol. 7 Jan.-Feb. '82 Year 2 + t "Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns all the religions and seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga-THE UNION'*

 Om Twamev Sakshat Shri Adishakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Namoh Namah PROTOCOL TO BE OBSERVED AT PUJA On the eve of the arrival of our Holy or he/she is seating at far distant place Mother to India this winter, as a brother 1 from Mataji. The place so given by the take it as my prime duly to tell you, through Almighty is the proper place for the Sadhak the experience and with the grace of our Mother, the holy rules that each one of us should follow during Poojan of our Mother Sahaja Yoga is based on collectivity and which definitely helps in attaining the higher during Poojan of H. H. Mataji, the vibra- for his/her advancement in the search of the Truth-the Divine. The functioning of tions with various Powers are emitted by the Mother which cleanup the chakras of various Sadhakas through the representa- planned at a right place and a right time by tives selected for Poojan. Further, many of plane in the life of the Seeker. The function of Poojan of Mataji is the Divine. Hence Sahaj Yogi brathers and sisters should not insist on any specific such powers are gained by seekers during such Poojans, Hence during such occa- time and place of their choice. Further, at sions of Poojan Sadhakas should not waste the place of Poojan all actions should be time allowing himself/herself to think of carried out peacefully. All should assemble at the place of Poojan always before arrival of other things around, but should concentrate on Poojan of Her Holiness Mataji and try that is given out by the Mother all should sit in meditation by Mataji. Every fraction of second, during arrival of Her Holiness Mataji. Tll to gain maximum taking Bandhan. All should standup when Mother arrives and pay respects and should Yogi brothers and sisters should try to gain not sit down unless Mo ther takes Her seat. To avoid diversification af attention the Seekers should not come with empty sto- mach and tight clothes. Poojan is thus very precious and the Sahaja maximum from the opportunity that they get at the occasions of such Poojans. Every- body should remember that he/she is sitting in front of Sakshat Adishakti during such Poojans and should not close the eyes un- H. H. Mataji asks any one or few of the Sahaja Yogis to perform the Holy Poojan of The Chitta should be always towards the Mataji as the representatives. In Sahaja Poojan and should not get disturbed because Yoga everything is preplanned by the Divine of the temporary troubles that are experien- and Sadhaks should not leave the place ced in front of Mataji by the new which he/she has occupied, unless for the specific reasons, and should not feel ner- vous for the reasons that he/she is not chosen to represent the group for poojan will divert his/her attention outside should less specifically instructed by the Mother. comers to such functions. should not bring such persons who have not yet got the Jagruti. Any action which Sahaja Yogis Contd. on 3rd Cover

 EDIT ORI AL Nirmala Yoga has completed first year. A child of Her Holiness Mataji, like Sahaja Yogis, it is growing on Her affection and under Her watchful eyes. A totterind child gets its strength and confidence from its Mother, but stumbles when feels over-confident and independient. Pray, Mother may we never be over-confident. Sahaja Yoga and Her Holiness Mataji are profound subjects to write on. Very few, like Adi-Shankaracharya, could do it. Even he says "How can one without virtue pros- trale or praise you, who is venerated by the three deities of creation, protection and destruction ?" People entrusted with the work of Nimala Yoga, äre not able to do it. without Mataji's inspiration and loving grace and brother Sahaja Yagis' assistance. It is the collective work performed collectively for the expansion of collective conscious- ness. O Mother, kindly grant us the boon, so that our minds ever rest at your lotus feet, and our hands write your words. May even our heart-beats sound your name. May the empire of Sahaja Yoga spread all over the world. जयो जल्पः शिल्पं सकलमपि मुद्राविरवना । प्रादक्षिण्यक्रमरगमवना] दाहति विधिः ॥ सुखमलिलमात्मापसादूशा । विलसितम् ।। गतिः संवेशः समर्यापर्यास्तव प्रणाम यन्मे भवतु Japo Jalpah Shilpam Gatih Praadakshinya-krampna mashanaa dyaahuti vidhih Pranaam sanveshah sukhama-khilamaatmaarpana-drushaa Samaryaaparyaas-tava Sakalamapi Mudraavirachanaa bhavatu vilasitam yanme (a-as in olher; aa-as in Amen) Through the sight of self surrender let my prattle become recitation of your name; the movement of my limbs, gestures of your worships, my walk, perambulation around you; my food, sacrificial offering to you, my lying down, prostration to you; whatever I do for my pleasure, let it become transformed into an act of worship to you. Nirmala Yoga 1

 Nirmala Yoga 43 Bunglow Road, Delhi-110007 (India) Founder-Her Holiness MATAJI SHRI NIRMALA DEVI Editorial Board : Dr. S. K. Mathur, Shri A. S. Mishra, Shri R. D. Kulkarni. Representatives : Gavin Brown London: Cheryl Hynes 10, Clarence Road, Burwood, N.S.W. 2134, Australia. Australia: Brown's Geological Information Services Ltd., 160 North Gower Street, NW1 2ND (UK) London. Mr. Subhash B. Pradhan U, S. A. : 12416, Reva St., Cerritos California-90701 U.S.A. Hong Kong: Emilie P SHI Clif Rence Bros. Co. Ltd., 1610, Wing On Centre, 111, Connaught Rd., Central. Switzerland : Arneau de Kalbermatten Binningerstrasse 5, 4123, Allschwil (BL) Switzerland. M. B. Ratnannavar 13, Merwan Mansion, Genjwala Lane, Borivali (W), Bombay-400 092. Bombay: Marie Rougher 175, Av. Ledru Rollin, France : Paris-75001, CONTENTS Page 1. Editorial 2. The Knowledge Within 12 3. In Flight to U.S.A. with Mother 13 4. Prayer 14 5. Shri Mataji Prasanna (in Hindi) 24 6. Shri Mataji in Italy All Correspondence should be addressed to: 1. Shri S. C. Rai, C/o. Straw Products Ltd., Nehru House, 4 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi-110002. 2. Dr. S. K. Mathur, 43 Bunglow Road (Suite No. 1), Delhi-110007. Nirmala Yoga 2.

 THE K NOWL EDGE WITHIN+ Today we have gathered here to know you electric shock, some say that you start something about our Self. If the knowledge jumping like a Is from the boaks or from some person who start flying in the air. Such a confusion, says that he knows about the Self, how far while you are seekers, seekers of ages you will it reach us. ? It can only go upto mental have been seeking. You are genuine see- level and we can only understand it ihrough our mental understanding. The mental where to go and what to expect; you jump understanding comes to us through our rationality, through bur intellect which in itself is a limited thing. frog and some say that you kers and then while seeking you don't know into problems. The other day when I went to Switzerland, one of my children, who had arranged the understanding programme, he told me "Mother, here people eg. if I tell you are very sceptical about Indian Gurus." that there is a Self which resides in our I anm very happy about it. really very very happy that they have started thinking about which is all the time waiting for an occasion it because they have been deluded and to give you your second birth, it tell you deceived and now they are disillusioned And they find it impossible mentally. This has all been said älready, to beleve anyone who talks of God. So the first topic that he wanted me to discuss give it in a very modern fashion, something during my stay there was Demystification quite intellectual which will make you have of Gurus". Quite a challenging topic. But this I said in 1970 in India, in 1973 in Ame- rica, but no one would like me for that. They say, "Why should you criticise others", So we enter into another which is still very limited. heart and that there is a power within us that, then you will only understand me completely. what is so new about it ? At the most I can more mental feats to go round and round. You will sit down and analyse and reach nowhere. I say there is a power, no doubt, which is called "KUNDALINI" within us. say that because it is written long time back. of those people who are here that how you Thousands of years back. Christ has said it that you are to be born again, that you are to be baptised, not by theological collage stand because you have gone beyond it now people, but by somebody like John, the baptist, who had the authority from the that money is not going to give you joy. Divine. This power does lie dormant within you but everybody writes differently about it. Very few really agree. confusion one faces. That there is a power lying within us and some say that it gives you some sort of a jargon and receive lot of Falsehood is falsehood and reality is So many reality. You will now know through some have been misled, how you have been deceived for money which you cannot under- You are seeking beyond money. You know You know that very well But those who have not yet known that still they are climbing up the cusp, they have not seen the ditch below. Such people try to come up and try to give This is another * H. H. Mataji's address given at Kingston (UK) on 11th June 1980 Nirmala Yoga

 But there it reality and that it exists within you and that there is Self within you and once discovered, you find your Absolute. To tell you that you should become a very quiet and serene person would be absurd. have copies of that ? If there are no flowers, To tell you that you should be such a mas- how will you create plastic flowers ? So, if ter over your passions and your lust and you find somebody so unreal, you must your greed that nothing should sort of dominate you, this is like giving a big money from you. affair, I feel myself. It is a very shameful But that does not mean that there is no reality. If there is no reality, how can we know that y ou have to find out the Real. And when you are finding the real, you must know that you must keep yourself absolutely alert about it that you are not going to lecture to you. It has no meaning. You have gripped it yourself these things and how will you leave it, when your grip is so strong. You have to grip something else. It is simple common sense. If you find something, much more valueable, much accept anything but real. But you can be hypnotised, you can be brain-washed, because you do not know all these things. Somebody says some words in Sanskrit language, you get so enamoured by that as it Sanskrit language is something out of the blue, e.g. some of the disciples, who went to certain Gurus, got "Mantras" which if more dynamic, much more joy giving, esta- blishing your sense of security, you will give up all these nonsensical things. But see how it works out. A gentleman, who came from a horrible Guru to me, who was absolutely pestered and finished by you tell an Indian, he will laugh out his stomach; like a Mantra given AINGA". Now tell any Indian and he will laugh and peaple that Guru. He used to deliver only intro- had paid three hundred pounds for such a nonsense ike that which means nothing, get 300 people for introductory lectures in which cannot be a Mantra. Why do you need a Guru for Mantra ? There is a science about it. Because we do not go into tne ductory lectures. And he said, I used to the same hall in which you are giving lecture Mother". What do you say to people there, isn't it queer? He is a well known person who charges you money, who gives you courses; understanding of it and we just jump on to Tbecause they want you to, because they he has ruined so many people. It is like, want money. Simple thing. It is an enter- just as I was watching people going into a pub and coming out of it all drunk. Others are attracted much more, seeing them drunk like that. Sometimes it is impossible to understand human nature and when the prise. You have given up everything for the sake of your seeking. You have seen that tne value of these material. things wilI not take you anywhere, you have seen beyond. Reality stands before you, you crucify that. How do you explain all this ? And the acceptance of reality is your glorification. value system of some people is different Are you going to add anything to Reality? Supposing I wear a diamond necklace, it is Your value system is different but if the from you they can exploit you. So the natural reaction, I can understand very well, going to adorn me not to the diamond neck- lace. This is billions and billions of times should be such. Nirmala Yoga

 more briliant than all these things which that He sits like a magistrate and calls you adorn us. If you accept that, you will be glorious, you will be lusturous, Is'it it ? Think about it. Because we are charmed about these outside things, their deceptive one by one "come along" and then you have a pleader there, sitting. But in a subtler way, He has already put ways, their Cunning ways, and that we are the judging forces within you. See in the hypnotised. That is the only explanationt. That's how they have managed so far. One after another this hypnosis spreads like fire. You ask them what did you find. Don't ask us, we are very happy people". After 3 days you find that the person has committed family He saved Elephant He saved many suicide. evolution he has worked It out, In the evo- ution, how beautifully He has worked it out. From amoeba to this stage, how have we come ? Many animals were discarded. He saved some animals eg. from Mammoth We are not aware still that this is and so many were discarded one by one all these years. In the same way, human belngs who have been very much on the extremes have bean discarded You se the history. Now you won't find anyone the most important, the most and vital time in the history of human beings. The last judgement has started. We are facing the last judgement today. Wa are killing his seven wives these days, not aware of it. And all the Satanic Forces impossible, you cannot do it. Person like have come out like the wolves in sheeps' clothes. And they are trying to attract you and you do not judge them. You only sit tion or anything, vas finished. Those ideas down and judge the Reality. Ithas started, It is a fact. It has slarted. Hitler came up Finished. Anybody who came up with any extreme ideas of domina- die out. People are ashamed of them and new ideas come up into human beings- accepting balance, tranquili Now, let us see from God's point of view how He is going to judge you. It is quite peace.. We are talking about it. People talk about peace, but are we really wanting peace within ourselves ? And if we are easy lo say that we do not believe in God. Very easy to say that we don't believe in this Govt. but if you do anything wrong, then really wanting it, what are we doing about you know there is a Govt. acting. same way it is very easy to say that we donot believe in God. He is so compassio- whole magistracy within you. nate, He is so loving, He is so kind, that He magistrates are already sitting down there. has given us our freedom to know ourselves. And we rely on Him. we take Him for gran- ted. He has made us human beings from amoeba to this slage. He has spread out down within you on different Centres in your such a beautiful world around us. He has spinal chord and in your brain. done all that. But there is a judgement which we have to face now and the judge- ment that is going to come from God. It is are like a panel sitting in your brain and not going to be the way that we understand In the it ?Actually the judgment has started and to judge you God has already placed the All the Christ has said, "Those who are not against me are with me". These are the magis- trates. And these magistrates have settled It is very interesting and all these seats when the light of Kundalini rises through Nirmala Yoga 5.

 these centres, when these centres are tive consciousness. Very clearly it has been enlightened within you, you start enlighten- said by these people. Then we must expect ment being manifested on your fingers. The end of your fingers get enlightened, the our collective conscionsness. It is not that sensitivity of your fingers tell you what cen- because I am saying it or anybody else is tres are there affected within you, This saying it but it has to happen to you. Kundalini rises and comes upto this point, the fontanel bone area or the Talloo as they call it. the soft bone here in your What is happening with some one. Some childhood, and it breaks it. Actually it people did get their vibrations, they did feel breaks it. You can see in a person, who something of that nature where we jump into The other day I was in Hamstead, I know the cool breeze coming from their hands but does not have much hair here, the thing just Some did not. They said that they have got going down a little. First it pulsates. You il and they just disappeared. This is not can even see the pulsation of the Kundalini in the triangular bone which is sacrum and when this Kundalini rises, you can see even the movement of this Kundalini. Not in all but in some, Because if the person is the way you are going to treat yourself, you are to love yourself and you have to adore your seeking and you have to get your fulfil- ment. As your mother l must tell you this is a very serious matter. There is no Guru first class or you can say if the aeroplane is Shopping going on here, you have to get first class the landing is first class, its shooting off is first class. In such a person, your realization. You have to get it. It is so fortunate that the time has come, when you are living and that you can have it be- cause of that you took your birth during this time because you are Seekers of very ancient times as I told you. there is no obstruction, you cannot see the Kundalini pushing up. For example, whenl came to this place there was no problem on the traffic, so we just smoothly came away, nobody noticed us. But if there was a traffic problem, there would be jamming India-called as "Nala-Akhyan". When Nala, here and jamming there In the same way when this Kundalini rises in a person who hold of the Kali. It is said that now is the has a problem on its Cenires, it shows. You can see with your naked eyes. It is written in one of our scriptures in one of the tortured souls by Kali, caught rule of Kall. Kali is the sinister fellow, the one who brings all confusion and con- fuses people He contused Nala. By that This is what is Kundalini awakening. he got separated from his wife. So when Not that some people say that they started Nala got hold of this Kali, he said, "Now, I am going to kill you. I am going to kill you once for all, so that you do not create con- fusion into people anymore". So Kali said, "Alright, you can kill me, I will accept it but become birds, after becoming human beings? first of all you should know my MAHATMYA (importance) I do have some (MAHATMYA) of them, believe that you have to jump importance". Nala said, "What importance into your unconscious-achieving your collec- can you have ? You create confusion in the. jumping like a frog. Now, we must use our brains. Brains have to be intact in modern times. Are we going to become frogs now after becoming human beings ? Are we to Your sciences, like psychology itseif, I mean Nirmala Yoga 9.

 minds of people, what importance can you places and I am very happy to come to this have ? He said that, "When I will be ruling old city of Kingston, where the stone for the Le. when he will as in these modern times enthroning of the king was put. Must be ruling means creating confusion in our minds. something special about it. Everything has become relative We talk like that, "yes it may be But the people have lost their sensitivity now. alright, may not be airight, may be good, to Reality, not only in this country but every may not be good". That is the time when the confusion will ba reigning on this earth prised. They are all getting sophisticated. that is Kali Yuga (the modern times). Then They are gelting developed. They do not those great saints and those great people know what you have found by your develop- the Seekers, the Sadhakas who have been ment. If anybody tells them, they think, searching God in the hills and dales and in: the caves where, much more in India, you will be sur- "you want to enjoy all the fruits of develop- will come back as ordinäry ment and you are just telling us lies". and they will householders get the So it is very necessary for you to under- REALITY. In this confusion only, they are going to get the vision of REALITY, they stand for definite purposes that the Judge- are going to become the REALITY. They ment has started. And for that Kundalini is placed within you, are going lo get their self-realisation". And Nala forgot all his vindictiveness and his a great Judge, you will not find such a Judge He anywhere in the whole universe, because She is your own mother. And, She is anger and what Kali had done to him, said, "On this point I forgive you because I respect them so much. For that collective Nirvyaj She is just giving. She does not good I give up all my personal problems. want anything from you, nothing whatsoever. Let this happen." She wants that you must get your property. You must get your Self. You must get all That only in Kali-Yuga, the sun of your powers. She does'nt want anything Sat-Yuga, the World of Truth, the age of from you. That you should know your Selt. enlightenment is going to come and those That you should become your Absolute. Saints who were seeking the reality in the That is what She wants, forests are born today in this World. You can see them, they are saintly. They can has recorded all your problems you have see the joke of artificial life so clearly. They created for yourself for Her ascent. She know it is all absurd but then they do not knows everything about you and She judges know what is the Real. But the time has you on this point, "how much you are sin- come and it has to be worked out and it will cerely wishing your ascent". That's all. be worked out. She is your Mother born again and again with you. She She knows you out and out. When She It häs worked out in your great country rises, She shows those symptoms, She and now, say, a thousand people are there shows what is wrong with you. But She is very much in it who have understood it. your own, absolutely your own. There is no one greater your own than She. She is your There must be about at leäst 300 people who are actively working it out at different friend and She judges you because you Nirmala Yoga

 must get the Best; because She knows what they come to me and they get cured. But I is the Best for you. For, a child may like to am not sitting down here to cure Cancer, put his hands in the electric socket but the not at all nor any Sahaja-Yogi is interested Mother says, "Don't do it, Don't do it". But in Cancer patients. But if you want to have the child does not listen, he gets angry. your Realisation your Cancer will be cured, Still She says, "No, No, you cannot do it." Because She loves you, Loves in the purest alright. i mean those who have realization, form, where you do not expect anything from are sitting here, had been suffering phy- the other person. And such a power lies sically or mentally, some of them were dormant within you, which is just waiting even epilepfic and had very bad physical for an occasion that when She rises, when probiems, there She sprouts fike the germinating power in blood-cancer,, some of them had other type a seed, when She comes up, then there of physical problems. should be some one who should look after I16 you There should be some one who should With all these things you are faced with guide, there should be someone who should the Divine-Love of God-His desire. Kunda- decode and tell you what you feel on the lini is the representative of His Desire. fingers mean, and what is happening to you. Desire of the ocean, of the Compassion and Otherwise you will not know your moorings, of Love. That He wants to bestow His you will not know where you are going and kingdom upon you-That He wants to make you will fall into a trap of ignorance or may you the prince of His kingdom. This is a be you may be still there not knowing much. Tom troubles will be cured, your health will be were some who had very very serious thing and we have to concentrate'upon this point. n meill T9PVSO she wants to use somebody there as the mouth piece. It is that the Unconscious has to speak through someone. And that is a power within us which is to judge. This The judgement has to be done and there someone has to be a person of the same nature as the Kundalini is. Those who make money from you and extort you and leave you in the lurch, how can they be called as Gurus ? They are the thieves standing stand against our freedom. But his desire outside the door. They are just waiting for an opportunity to catch hold of you because they have already been judged, but it does not force you, it does not take power is the desire of God, of that God who is Almighty, who has given us our freedom. He is not going to challenge it. His might, His strength, His powers are not going to is within you existing on the Kundalini and this desire rises within you, enlightens you discarded and they are going to the Jail m and they want more people to go with them. away your freedom It enlightens you to see. You have freedom to be in this room This Kundalini when She rises, She It is not forced that you sit here or there Nothing is forced upon l are given a room which is first soothes you physically. That is you or walk away. can say aS Health, e. g. Cancer cannot be cured with- enlightened. So you use your freedom in a out the Kundalini awakening. This I have betler way with more understanding, because been saying. When doctors get cancer, you are enlightened, you can see and then Nirmala Yoga

 that moment when She will give you what She is there for. What a blessing I Where you know what to accept and what not to accept. can you find all this ? It is all within you First thing is to enlighten you. Unless which has to work out. and until you are enlightened you are in confusion, you cannot see through. Then It is left to your freedom to decide. So She cures you, She improves you, She bestows all the blissful things upan you. She takes But even when they get their realization, I find, they just disappear, even after reall- zation. Can you imagine ? Progress in the west has been like that: You move 3 steps forwards and 4 steps backwards. Really you will be amazed. I don't know what has gone wrong with the Western mind which is disillusioned by the material gains. But when it comes to Sahaja Yoga, their calibre you away from the worries of grosser level like after realization, many people have sol- ved their material problems. Not that they have become Mr. Ford or someone like that but the attitude changes and the material problems get solved. Because there is a Is just of the lowest type, sometimes, one Centre for that also within us. Your family cannof understan d. Now can these people problems get solved. Husband wife prob- have no self-esteem, while in the villages of lems get solved, so that you are freed. Your grip over these things that worry you, is ho rumblings, nothing. They are just there. released and that now you can see with Complications are there, I agree. But you greater freedom what you have to choose, must have what course to take. After giving all these really makes you feel sick. concessions and all these advantages and all the possible help, then you are judged. Can you think of any magistrate that gene- India people get it and have it just like that It sometimes, Perhaps you donot know that in this country I have worked on seven or eight people for four years. For four years, can you believe it ? Not that there is something wrong with you. You are seekers, you are saints born in this country. What has hap- pened to your saintliness ? Why so flippant, Why don't you touch rous ? And such a thing exists within us. VWe have to be very thankful to God for what He has done for us. We have no idea. We have taken Him for granted. For everything why so superficial ? within us we have taken Him for granted. it deeply ? Why don't you understand your We have not been able to thank Him for Seit ? 1 just fail to understand why don't what he has done for us and how kind He you respect your Self. I respect you and has been to us. For a small thing we try to get rid of Him from our hearts. Still He exists, the Kundalini exists within us. Try anything against it, She exists. I have seen some people having Kundalini which is beaten up, there has been horrible marks of pain and anguish and She is just turning Her sides in anguish but still She exists for You have to become absolutely dynamic and I love you very much because I know you, I know you from ages. You are the lost children, I know that but I don't know how to establish that within you. Sometimes my condition is the same as that of your Kundalini. You have to be in a great haste to get it. Nirmala Yoga

 blow it out and talk to the people that this is the situation and emergency. Can't you see what is happening in the World ? Can't ing to walls, eg, you will find that some you see the confusion ? But the situation is taken for granted. Even if it is faced, it is faced in a very intellectual way that you feel guilty about say. Vietnam. Very good idea, sitdown here. Easy chair politicians, thin- king about Vietnam or file it up. We donot realize where we are today, we donot realize. Sometimes I feel, I am talk- people are slaves of watches. They have no time. "I have no time, I am so very busy". Why are you saving time ? Why has this idea come to you ? Our fore-fathers never did thāt. Why are you saving time ? For what ? "becoming" not for wasting it in the parks or in horrible places like races etc. You are saving time for the You are the chosen ones who have to receive It and it has to happen. But to take Reality you think hundred times and to get into dirty, filthy circle-it just clicks. Whom should I blame for this ? These horrible chiselled out yourself. You are not saving Gurus or these horrible people, who have it for wasting. I mean the best advertise- put up a show for you or it is your knave You are saving time for "becoming'" because you are a diamond. You are to be ment will be "Save fifty pounds to spend three thousand". Something like that. You attitude towards the morality. 1 shudder to are saving your time not to waste it. Saving see the way the things are sometimes and the way the people are taking things for it for something extremely precious, granted also. It is your responsibility today, tremely vital and important, something that the ones who are supposed to be the See- you have been seeking. But I do not know kers to see that you bring forth the Reality how some times to keep you on that level to the people and tell them that please see and get It. Because you are their fellow beings. You are their kith and kin. How can you leave them even it you get your own ex- of depth. Of course some of the people are of such high calibre even in this country that they are very satisfied. You do not know how much has been done in this Even if you enter into the country also by God. For example, I went Kingdom of Heavens, you will not forget to see Stonehenge, Stone-henge is the them, you will think of them and you cannot creation of Mother Earth. You can see the be happy. Even when you get your realiza- vibrations. You can feel it. There are so tion also, unless and until all those saints many things done in this country. Kingston who, out of their ignorance, are lost, you will itself is so vibrating, I was amazed. What think of them. I have to work out through did you find ? At least 100 people went If I could into that carriage and some came in here realization ? you. I cannot work it out alone. then there would have been no difficulty. If walking, going up and down. Some walked in, some got out. They are'nt decided still. Still no proximity to sensitivity. No sensiti- God could work out just like this, give them Establish them realization, just finished. alright. But it will not. Because you have vity towards the Reality. They cannot feel. the freedom. Why you have the freedom ? May be-may be, it will work out. I am sure Because without your freedom you cannot it will work out. I am the most optimistic come to that calibre by which you are raised. person you can ever see. See, optimism is Nirmala Ygoa 10

 my nature, 1 believe. It is going to become. you suddenly jump on to the sun or to the Only thing your so called "freedom" comes In the way. So try to understand that this get ? You could not understand anything. freedom is given to you so that you can become your Self and not that you should become an animal. An animal; what is the use of giving realization to, say, a chicken ? Can I give also ? That is the point. moon. Even going to moon what did you So you have to go into all the areas of your being because the movement will start inside. You have to take your attention to all the areas within you, You have to settle down your attention and now attention will lose the grip over non-sensical things. All the priorities will change. The greatest thing Is that when IT pierces ithe Sahastrara, the Many people say, "Mother, I have done lots of good things". I ask, things have you done", "I don't eat chicken". Now, I say, "Why are you saving chickens "What good joy starts pouring and you start feeling that cool breeze coming through your hands- the cool breeze of the Holy Ghost and you start feeling every where. You can tind out. Now you can judge others and yourself. You can help others automatically. You have not to go oul for that, you have not to get medicines, you don't have to get anyth- ing. Just you being there, you help others in their Salvation as if the whole mechanism starts working. The whole technique starts working and you start seeing the whole thing. You will be amazed. for me, you better save your self". All sorts of funny ideas they have. It is you, the Seeker, the buds on this beautiful Tree of Life, they are the ones for whom this creation is created. They are the ones who have to get It. They are the ones who have to have It. The whole universe has blossomed into them and they want to become what-werms ? Just think about it. By God's grace we start the programme of realization, which may take perhaps a split of a second, it might have already worked it out because today I was little going to much, I think. Kingston is a good place. May be one day it will become a very great place, I feel. But let us see how much you use the power that is flowing in the area. I hope something will work out. You have to know how to work it out on your own self and others. It is a great fun. We are all in the Great Fun mood and you should also enjoy with us. wonderful. No time for misery. Only thing one feels is that why these people are doing like this, Like grown ups and mature people we look at little children why are they putting their hands in the fire. TO And it is Now after realization you have to take It up seriously. because after finding it also, it is not that You have to work it out May God Bless You. Subscribers are requested to renew their subscription in time and also extend their cooperation in making new subscribers from Sahaja Yogis. The magazine is posted promptly, however, if the same is not received please intimate us. 11 Nirmala Yoga

 IN FLIGHT TO U.S.A. WITH MOTHER Those who do not recognise this and Dear Brothers and Sisters, content themselves with old "individualist" ideas and actions and feeling will go down spiritually. The reward for growing with the Collective Being will be tremendous growth So at last our Beloved Mother is on Her U.S.A. What lies ahead very way to much depends upon how hungry the seekers show themselves to be. On the one hand towards the full establishment of Self-Rea- Mother says that She will announce Her ization, All will get better and better vibra- tions and feel the joy and watch the ego and hand She fears that many may miss out super-ego grow smaller and smaller. Mother uses Australia often as an example of how affected by the impure knowledge and false great is the Recognition and She says that this comes from the innocence, which is Innocence knows Truth when it Advent, publicly, in America, on the other because they are so far into the ego and gurus; this land of America is the Visshuddi chakra of the Universe and so, is where intrinsic. the ego begins Let's pray that the impure meets it : and so even if the superficial knowledge can become Nirmala Vidya and damage is extensive, the speed with which the ego can recognise that all the knowledge recognition comes helps to very smoothly 50 far acquired is of little use and is, in fact, and quickly repair the damage. a severe limitation to Seif-Realisation. In fact the Recognition has been so strong in Australia, says Mother, that the visit and Her Love and Compassion is over- next stage of surrender is reached very soon. When this happens, the real Integra- tion can happen. But there's a danger al things that Her chakras become so active this point-Surrender/Integration has to be that it is almost unbearable for Her. The part and parcel of a growth and Collectivity. Mother has said again and again that "it is not enough just to love Mataji only by pting to step outside the Collective Being. loving each other, in collectivity, can you I have seen some amazing examples of really please Adi Shakti". So many Sahaja what happens in Britain when people go Yogis have surrendered to Mother (they say they have !) and yet are not at all loving and But Mother wants many to get it in this flowing more than ever. Sometimes back In Britain the Deities become so angry with Deities recede from people who are dama- ging themselves or others or who are attem- against their Spirit or the Collectivity and it is not very nice ! Mother says there have caring for all their brothers and sisters and been several cases in Australia (as else- often very uncollective. Mother will not say much here for it is a lesson that each individual" must learn for him or her self. He has learnt the lesson when he/she loses his "individuality" And then and only Collective Being of the realised Souls of the then, can the final integration stage where) and the people/groups have been given a 'not-so-gentle' warning. Now that Mother goes to America, the Universe has to grow and become strong. commence. 12 Nirmala Yoga

 Mother is the Collective Being of God vity. If it is, you will increasingly feel the and so Surrender to Collectivity is the only joy and the love for all your brothers and way to know Her. And this is the point at sisters and so the love for our Divine Mother. which we must be absolutely honest with ourselves ! Again I say, Mother won't say much and in fact you may appear to be gro- growth of Sahaja Yoga in U.S.A. and the wing, when in fact you are going down. world. Your attention must be kept pure This is how the Maya works so that you get and steady. Do the Sahaja Yoga practices 'bumped' in order to learn. So She urges and reduce mental activity to a minimum. that you sincerely and honestly assess the Just enjoy Mother's Grace. -LOVE way in which your collectivity is growing with your surrender As I said, if it isn't, then it isn't really surrender at all-just mental acti- Every Sahaja Yogi should pray for the WARREN 17-9-81 PRAY ER विश्वेश्वरि त्वं परिपारसी विश्वम् विश्वात्मिका धारयसीति विश्वम् । Those who are devoted to you them- selves become supporters of the universe. प्रणतानां प्रसीद त्वं देवि विश्वातिहारिणी । तर लोक्य वासिनामीडये लोकानां वरदा भव ।। विश्वेश वन्द्या भवती भवन्ति विश्वाश्रया ये त्वयि भक्तिनम्राः ।। Prana-taanaam praseeda twam devi Vishwa- Vishwe-shwari twam Paripaasi Vishwam Vishwaatmika dhaarayaseeti vish wam, Vishwesh-vandyaa Vishwaa-shrayaa ye twayi bhakti namraaha. arti-haarini. Trailokya bhavanti varadaa bhawa. vaasinaa-meedye lokaanaam bhavatee (Pronunciation-a-Other aa-Amen ee-meet.) Translation : Translation: e quar- Queen of the universe, you are its guar- O Devi, the remover of the affliction of universe, be pleased to us who are prostrat- dian. In the form of the universe, you are its ing on your feet. receptacle. O Devi, who are worthy of all praise by the dwellers of three worlds, grant boons to all the people. You are worshipped by the Lords of the universe. Nirmala Yoga 13

 LF श्री माताजी प्रसन्न 5े क पं० पु० माताजीनो दिनांक-१८ १६८० रोजीं राहरों येथे सर्व सहज योग्यानी केलेसा उपदेश ही उपदेश अत्यंत महत्वाचा आहे कारण जानेवारी वरगरे सर्व साहो असते. की त्यापूढे वरतो कही घण वर्गर होती हैं तक्षांतसूद्धा गहात ताही। पृण स । है जे काहीं यामध्ये प० पू० माताजीनी आपल्या नावाचा बाहयोतल आहेतो सगळा भ्रम आहे। "है नाही या कवदाचा अर्थ विदद करन हे पहिल्यादा तुम्ही लक्षांत ठेवते पाहिजे । "नि" दाब्दाची जर तुम्ही स्थापना केली, की है नाही आहे। कोणताही विचार आपल्यामध्यें उठला की म्हणायचे आतां आपण इथे सगळी सहजयोगी मंडळो है नाही।" "हे ते नाही" इथून सुरवात करायची। आहोत। एका अर्थनि हैं फार बरें आहे को आपण या "नेती नेती बचने-विगमों अबोच्ुस" है नाही आहे । हा विचार नाहीं आहे। परत हा विचार गोष्टो करु शकतो, आणि त्यावदुदल ज कोही ताही आहे। असे म्हणत गेले, म्हणजे 'निः" शब्द जो आहे. विस्गासहित नि आहे | त्याचा अर्थ तागलो। जो भ्रम आपल्याला दिसतो तो अ्रम नाहीं। ल स्थाच्यापसिकडे काहीतरी आहे। हया त्रमा- पसवां मो सागितले की आपण स्वत.लो कस मुध्ये आपण इतके भरमसाठ दिवस घालवले आहेत स्वच्छ केलें पाहिजे । कारण आपल्या आईचे नावच आपलें आयूष्य इतकें व्यर्थ घालवले आहे की ज मुळों निर्मला आहे। आणि या नांवामघ्ये पुण्कळ ताही ते महत्वाचें वाटतं। आणि त्यामुळे आपण गायच म्हणजे हा सगळा अम आहे म्हणजे ' निर्मली सांगितला । असे भेटलों, न्हणजे आपआपल्या हिंतगुजाच्या बारीकमारिक अमेल त सुद्धां एक दरस-२ शकतो । -पना सामु शकत्या आहेत । पुण्वाळ पापांचे होग एकत्र केले । हया गोष्टीत आनंद मिळ ल, त्या गोष्टींत आनंद मिळेल. त्याच्यामध्ये १।। पहिला राब्द ' । सुख मिळेल, हयाच्यामध्ये सुख मिळ ल, असा जे नाहों पण जे आहे, असेवाटतं म्हणतात महामाया । विचार करुन आपण जे काही उपभोगण्याचा प्रयत्न स्थाच नांच आहे महामाया । तसच है सर्व संसाराचे केला त्याच्यामध्य आपल्याला कांही मिळाले नाहीं। आहे । हें दिसते आई, पण हैं काही नाहीं आहे ह्याला जर आपण बंधितले आणि ह्याच्यात जर आहे। आपण फसलेले असलो, की असे वाटते की है संगळे कांही हैब आहे । आर्थिक परिस्थिती वाईट आहे, सामाजिकपरिस्थिती वाईट आहे, संसारिक हैं सगळ साफ झूट आहे। ब्रम्ह फक्त एक सत्य आहे। परिस्थिती बाईट आहे । सगळे वाईट दिसते चंगलें काही दिसत नाही। समुद्राच्या वरच्या जायचे। मग "सहज योगाला" अर्थ लागतो। अ्रावरचे पाणी अत्यंत गइ्ळ, पाण रडे, त्याच्यामव्यें म्हणजे होते काय की बहतेक सहजयोगी पार काहीं वस्तु तरंगत सुद्धां असतात खोलांत गेलं कीं इतके सौदर्य संपदा, निः' आहे । नि:म्हणजे नाही े । सारे निःस्सार आहे। त्याच्यांत सार नाही, निसत्य लेव्हां अशी दूष्टी ठेवायची की "हैं नाही आहे" । बाकी सर्व झूट आहे। असा विचार करीत स्यांना असे वाटतें की पण त्यच्यिा झाल्यावर, शक्ति आतां पार झालों । तर माताजीचा आमच्यावर । आपण Nirmala Yoga 14

 आशिर्वाद आहे। मग आमच्याजवळ ऐश्वर्य का येत याचा। म्हणजे इकडून एखादी जर गाडी आली, नाहीं ? म्हणजे ऐदवर्यामध्ये परमेश्वर आहे असे तर त्याला दूसरी गाडी जर रेटली, तर दोन्ही त्यांनां वाटतें। पण पार भालों तरी आमचा स्वभाव गाडया मग कुठेतरी मधीमघ येतिल । एका अर्थनि का वदलत नाहीं असा पहिल्यांदा विचार केला वरोबर आहे, पण कधी कधीं त्याने पाहिजे । तेव्हां मग लक्षांत येईल की आपला स्वभाव शकते। म्हणजे तिकडून एक विचार येतो आहे बदलत नाहीं। 'स्वभाव' शब्द किती सुन्दर आहेत आणि आपण इकडून एक चांगला विचार काढला. बघा। "स्व" स्वम्हणजे आत्मा त्याचा भाव । मिळवला आहे का आपण ? स्व" चा "भाव" जर तर ती विचार दबुन परत जुपचाप बसेल आणि आपण मिळवला, तर बाहयांत कांहीही जर असले कुठेतरी एकदमच निवेल असेंही होऊ शकते । तरी आंतले जें इतके सुन्दर आणि अनुपम आहे की आणि असे पुष्कळांचे होते। दाबून ठेवले विचार, त बाह्यांतलें नुसते नाटकासारखें वाटलें पाहिजे। कांहीं तरी चांगले केलें पाहिजे, नेहमी चांगले है साक्षी स्वरूपत्य जे आहे ते जोपयंत तुमच्यामध्ये वागले पाहिजे, दुस- पूर्ण ण जागृत होत नाहीं तो पर्यंत नि: शब्रदाचा असे बिचार घेऊन लोक चालले की त्रास होतो। अर्थ तुम्ही लावलेला नाही, आणि त्याचा उपयोगही एकदम कधींतरी तो राग निघतो कधींतरी एकदम केला नुक्सान होऊ तो की तो हरा विचाराच्या उलटा आपण घालायचा, याशी चांगले राहिले पाहिजे २ नाही। असे जर मनुष्य लक्षांत घेईन, को तो संताप होतो की लोकांनां समजत नाहीं को है आपण अजुनही 'निः' वर बसलेलो नाही. आणि एव्ढे शहाणपणाने वागणारे एवढे चिडले कसे ? अ ज्ूनही आपण कधीं तरो भावनेच्या आहारी आंतली शांती सुद्धां सुटते आपली आणि आंतले जे जातो, आरिणि कधी कधीं सत्तेच्या आहारीं। दूस- काही सोदयं आहे ते नष्ट होऊन जाते : तेव्हां काय यावर जबरदस्ति करतो किंवा कांही तरी उगीचच करायचे ? तर निर्विचारीतेंत राहावयाचे । विचार सहन करीत बसतो व त्याच्या वहल आपण रडत होचे निशिद्ध ठेवला पाहिजे । अगदी निर्विचारितेंत असतो की आपण एवढे सहन केल । मध आपली स्थिती आहे "नि:" वर । म्हणजे हेही आपण आलों। विचारच सोडायचा । एकदम प्रयत्न नाहीं तही नाही। ती स्थिती ध्यानामध्ये फार उत्तम कला पाहिजे। आतां लोकांनां असे वाटेल की माता- होते। नुसत्या 'निः' शब्दाचा जरी तुम्ही माग जी विचारा शिवाय कसें होणार ? विचारा शिवाय केलात तरी सुद्धां होऊ शकते। 'नि:विचारिता' त्याच्या मधो- आपण राहिलों, म्हणजे मधोमध "बिलंबात". कसे चालायचे ? पण हे विचार आहेत काय ? पोकळ गोष्टी आहेत । निर्विचारतंत तुम्ही आलांत पहिले नि्विचारतत यायचे । कोणताहिं विचार, की तुम्ही आणि परमेश्वराची शक्ती एकाकार मग कसाहि असना का ? सुष्ट दुष्ट कसाहि असेना झालेली असते । म्हणजे का त्यातिरचारावर जर का उड़यासारायला सुरवात सागरांत आला । तैव्हां त्याची शक्ति तुमच्यांत झाली, एकदा जर का ते Jumping सुरु झालें, आली आतां है बोट काय विचार करते काय ? की तुम्हांला तो एक प्रकारचा "इनरशिया। किवा पण फिरत ना ? विचार 'त्याला घायचा, तु कर म्हणायचे तर स्थिती स्थापित होते। आणि ती आमचा विचार। पण कठीण जातें । कारण आपण स्थिती झाली म्हणजे, तुम्ही प्रत्येक विचारावर नि्विचारितत असतो। पुष्कळ म्हणतात आम्ही उडतच असता । हया विचारावरुन त्या विचारावर सगळे समर्पण केले । पण तसे कांही जूळत नाहीं, त्या विचारायरुन दूस-या विचारावर । म्हणून जुळत नाही, वोलायच्याच गोष्टी होतात कारण इतरेजनांनी असे सांगितले की, एखादा वाईट विचार समरपण बोलायचे नसते । निर्विचबारता गाठायची आला की त्याला सुष्ट विचाराचा विरोध कराव- म्हणजे समपंण । म्हणजे विचारच आपण सोडला। तुमचा बिदू परमेश्वराच्या 15 Nirmala Yoga

 विचार सोडल्यावरोबर मधोमघ् आलो । मधोमध आल्याबरोबर आपण 'निर्विचारतेत कोणताही विषय आकलन करतांना निर्वचा- म्हणजे रिता साधता आली पाहिजे । आपोआप समोर परमेश्वर शक्तीशीं एकाकार झलों । परमेश्वर गोष्टी येतात । आता तृम्ही संशोधन करता । संशो- डाक्तिशीं एकाकार झालों की तोच सगळ बघतो बन करतांनांसुद्धा ते निविचारितेंत करा। हात आपले 'बारिक, 'सारिक आपल्य ला आश्चर्ष चालवायने पव्त, निर्वित्रारतित । वरोबर संशोधन वाटेल तर हे करून बघण्या सारखें आहे। आणि जमेल तुम्हाला । आतां मी कितीतरी गोष्ती सांगते । करुन बधितल्यानंतर तुमच्या लक्षात येईल की तो मी कधी जन्मात सायन्स वाचले नाही । तसले, पण सगळे सांगते । हे। सगळे ज्ञान कोठून येते ? तर त्या निविचारितंतून। तर आपण फकत निर्विचारतंत राहिल्या बरो- मी नुसती बोलून राहिले आहे । नुसती बघते आहे बर सर्व प्रेरणा, सर्व गवत्या सर्व कांहि मिळेल। जाते आहे ते। ते सगळे आधी तयार केले होते, अगदी निर्विचारितत राहिल्यावरोबर जी कल्पना Computer मध्य । तो बोलतो आहे आपला सटा- आपल्यामध्य येते, ती प्रेरणात्मक असते । आणि सट पण तुम्ही जर निविचारतत आला नाहीत, तर आपल्याला आइचर्य वाटेल की, सर्वे कहीं समोर तुमचा Computer तुम्ही बापरत नाहीत तुम्ही त्या भाषणाला उभे Computer चया वर आपले डोके लावल आहे । कॉम्प्यूटर बनवलेला आहे, त्याची म पूर्वीचा मार्ग चुकिचा होता । मला काही माहित नाहीं। ताट वाढल्यासारखे वाटेल । राहिले । नि्विचारितत उभे राहायचं, काही विचार तो एवढा ये ऊ छावयाचे नाहीत। नुसत तुम्ही नि विचारतित एवढी मेहनत केली आहे । त्याच एवढ अचूक सगळ उभेरहिलात आणि बोलायला लागलात तर ज्यान काम करूने ठेवलेले आहे, आणि तुम्ही त्या कॉम्प्यू- कधोहो भाषण दिल तुब्हते, ज्याला भाषण कसे टरचे न ऐकताच आल व च-हाट लावलेले आहे, तर घायचे हैं माहित नाहीं, ज्याला कांही विशेष ज्ञान तुमच्या हातून चुका होणारच। त्याला कांही अरथ नाहीं । असे असून ही तुम्ही वोलायला उभें राहि- आहे ? ल्यावर असे बोलाल, की लोकांना अआश्चर्य वाटेल की एचढे जान हयांच्याकहे कुठून आलें ? कारण नि्विचारीतत तार लागली, की है सगळ तिथून वर्गरेला आपण 'प्र' शब्द वापरतो । 'प्र' म्हणजे येते । तुमच्या होवयांतून कंहीच येत नाही । आता निर्विचारीतत ज काहीं वडते ते सगळ 'प्र' आहे। आमच आम्ही सांगतो आपल्याला प्रार्थना केली की आई आमचें हे कार्य करु न पण चंडावरती 'प्र आहे दे । ले आम्ही विचारांत घेत ताही। आश्चर्याचो असे 'प्र' | हया जब्दाचा अर्थ असा आहे की En- गोष्ट हो। निविचारतित घेतो नि्विचारितत घेतले lightened प्रकशित आहे । प्रकाश बोलतो का की तिकडे सगळी मशिनरी तयार आहे । तिच्यांत काहीं ? आतां समजा हया खोलींत आपण प्रकाश घालायचं कीं खट खट खट तयार होऊन समोर केला, तर तो कहीं बोलत नाहीं, की विचार देत हजर त्या। मशिनरीला काम करु घावयाचे । नाहीं, तर दाखवतो स्पष्ट कीं हैं आहे ते आहे । Silent मशिनरी म्हटली पाहिजे । त्या शांत मशि- तसाच निर्विचारीतेचा प्रकाश आहे । तो नि आणि नरी मध्ये आपले प्रश्न घातले पाहिजेत बृद्धीजीवी लोकांना फार कठीण कारण प्रत्येक निराकार, असे अनेक शब्द 'नि' पासून येतात । गोष्टीत विचार कारायची संवय लागली। जुना 1. तर याला शुब्द 'प्र' आहे। आणि प्रशिक्षण आतां आपणे ते इतके 'प्रचंड आहे, पहा 'प्र-चंड' प चंड आहेत 'पाशित' 'प्रज्ञ', । । पण तें हा निः हयालाच नि्विचार, निर्वाज्य निरंकारी, मग निविकल्पांत येतां येतं । आधि निर्विचार व्हा- Nirmala Yoga 16

 'प्र आला । जे बाहन करतो परंतू 'प्र' । 'एनलाई- "पडेता प्रवाही आपल ज आहे ना ? तसेन निर्वाणि रक्षावे यचे माग निर्विकल्स, मंग विकल्प सुटतात म्हणजे कळते की काही तरी शक्ति आहे । आणि ती सगळ टन्ड जो आहे, त्या प्रवाहाति पडा । कार्य करते। पटापट । आणि ती कशी कार्य करते, अगदी बारीक असते तिचे काम । तुम्हाला अगदी आमचे जेव्हा निर्वाण होईल तेव्हां तुम्ही आमचे आश्चर्य वाटेल की असे कसे घडते पुण तस च आहे । म्हणून आम्ही घडयाळात कधी परमेश्वराला म्हणतो । पण आम्हीच आमचे रक्षण वघत नाहीं। क्धी कधी कडयाळ बद पडले म्हणजे करत बसलों आहोत मंग परमेश्वर कशाला तुमचे १ভपा वेळेता ३/४ वाजलेले असतात । पण आमचे रक्षण करणार ? तो म्हणतो, चला ! चला ! चालू ्खर घडयाळ निविचारितेत असते । तें थाबलेले दे थोडेसे। होउ दे त्यांचे रक्षण ! तूर मुद्दा असा घडयाळ आहे। PERMANENT ज्या वेळजा की आपण आपल्या गाभि्यात उतरायला शिकले ज करायचे से घड़ूत येते घडब्रुन येते । मग कोही पाहिजे । है निविवारितंतल समजले पाहिजे म्हणजे वा्जाट नाहीं वाटत उशीर झाला तरो, नाही झाला निर्विकल्प होणार। 'निरासक्त आसक्तता तरी, । माझा मुलगा, माझी मुलगी, हैं । आतां वेळेचे रक्षण करा । रक्ष रक्ष परमेश्वर असे आपण े काही जाल तरी आपण आहोत ना जिथ नसली पाहिजे आहोंत तिथे ? आता काल गाडी पल झालो, पण आम्हो बसली आरामात। कारण आम्हाला बघायते तिकडे माझा मूलगा, माझी मूलगी नसते । मी फक्त आपल्याकडे विशेष आहे | इंग्लिडला उलट आहे। होते तारे । चांद्या वगरे । आमच्या लड़नला तारे कुधी बघाचला मिळत नाहीत । त एक सौदिय पहि माझे माझे चालले की शेबटी तसन होते। शेवटी यचं होते। रयावेळे ता आकाशामध्ये त्याच प्रत्ुड मग मीच राहन जाते । माझे कांही नाहीं तूझेंच माइयापुरत । इकडे माझा मूलगा माझे घर असे वैभव पसरलले होत। तर आकाशाला वाटले माता- जीन आपल हैं सौदर्यं पहावे । कधी कधी त्यांच्या कीं बकरो जेव्हा जिवत असते तेव्हा व व करीत कडेही वधितल पाहिजे ना ? मजा वाटत होती। असते । परंतु तीला मारल्यानंतर तिच्या आतंडया- म्हण जे काय आहे की आपण कोणा ची बरदीश करा- यवी नाही । परमेश्वर आपल्याला अगदी होतावर सभाळून संगळी कडे नेतो। सगळी व्यवस्था तो करती। त्याला कही सांगावे लागत नाही त्याला सगळ माहित आहे । पण तुम्ही त्या प्रवाहांत आहोत का नाहीत, है पहिले पाहिजे । आणि जर तुम्ही त्या प्रवाहांत नाहीत, तर मात्र तुम्ही अजून काठावरच अडकलेत । मग तो प्रवाह येतो, दृकलतो, दोन तिनदा काढतो पण ललितेत्रा शब्द आहे । ' परत चालले त्या काठावर । मंग म्हण। यच माताजी आहे। है देवीचें वरदान आहे । हैं देवोचे अस्त्र आमचे कांही जुळत च : तुम्ही अडकलेत ना। आपली गणेशस्टतुती फार किवा शक्ति जेव्हा लालित होते जालित म्हणजे सुदर आहे प्रवाही शब्द वापरलेला अहे| प्रवाहात जेव्हा हातात लहरी आहेत. हया लाटा, हातांमध्य हया आम्ही पडतो, प्रवाह । प्रवाहात वाहायच म्हणजे ह्या लाटा येउन राहिल्या आहेत. ही शाक्ति जेव्हा त्याच्यामध्ये आपला प्रवाह नको प्र-्वाह- परत कार्यान्वित होते; त्या शक्तिला ललिता' शक्ति सगळ आहे । कत्रीरान कार सुदर लिहिलेले आहे क्या तारा करुन त्या जेव्हा धुमकीला लावलात फक्त नि्विचारितत राहिल की तेव्हां त्याच्यातू न 'तूही तू ही । तु च एक आहेस । तु एक आहेस असा ध्वती निधुतो। तसे आपले झाल पाहिजे । । मी नाहीं माझे अस्तित्वच नाही अस आपण एकदा ठरबल म्हणजे नि शब्दालाअ थे लागतो । म नतर आपण ला शब्द घेउ या। ला शब्द हो माझे दूसरे नांव ललिता नाही । होतच नाहीं। पण आहे । 'ला म्हणजे देवी जेव्हां ललित होते कार्यशिल - तिच्यामध्ये नेव्हा लहरी येतात, तुमच्या । त्यात म्हटले आहे पडता प्रवाही', Nirmała Yoga 17

 हणतात । ती अत्यंत सौदर्यशाली आहे। प्रेममय । प्रेमाची शक्ति जेव्हां कार्यान्वित होते ती ही ला नाही मला माहित नाही । माणसांचे मला समजत जवित । आणि सगळोकडे तुमच्यावर आवरण आहे। नाहीं एवढे । पण तस मला बाटत। वा बाह । काय। ती कार्यान्वित आहे। ती कार्यात्वित असल्याबर मग प्रेम वाहत आहे ? ज सा एखादा स्वरकार किया केशला काळ जी कराय बी ? तुमची कार्य हो शक्ति एवादा कलाकार जेव्हा आपले संगीतात मग्न होतो, आहे ? अहोएकाही झाडातून तूम्ही फळ का दू शकत तेव्हा जसे स्याला वाटते की काय आपलें संगीत नाही ।एकाही ! काइन दाखवा पाहू । पळ। च सोडा। वाहन राहित आहे ? तसे है प्रम नुसत अवाधित तुम्ही एक पान मुद्धा काहू शकत नाही । एक पूळ बाहिल म्हणजे तो ललाम दाक्ति तोच हुया कोड शकत नाहीं । मग है ज सर्व काय जो शक्ति सुाटांची शक्ति आणि तो च ही ललित शक्ति आहे । करते ती ला शवित आहे । इतक च नाही, तर तुर त्या जलिता' शक्तिला प्राप्त झाले पाहिज तुम्हाला पार केलं ती सुद्धां ला' शक्ति आहे । स् वक्तितृनच म शवित आणि नि शक्ति अशा जी दष्टि असते ती कशी आहे त्याच्याकडे आपण दोन्ही शक्त्या निधालेल्या आहेत । म्हण जे निः' कति हो वहादेवाी शक्ति सरस्वती ही आहे आणि सरस्वती' शक्तिमध्ये मनुष्याला नि पणा आला पाहिजे । नि: पणा म्हणजे छान वाटते वर ? परण तसे तुम्हलिा वाटत की याच्यामध्य पहिले असे की दूस-याकडे आपली लक्ष दिलें पाहिजे । म्हणजे खालच्या प्रतिच्या, । म्हणजे निम्नस्तरावरच्या लोकांची दुष्टी दुस-याच्या- कडे नेहमी अशी असत की हयांचे काय मारायच, पूर्णपण अना- हयांच्याकडन आपल काम कमाप्रकार करुन व्या- वयाचं | अशो ही निम्नस्तरांतिल लोकांची दष्टि कॉही लोक असे असतात अनासक्तंता यायला पाहिज। ला । आणि तीन श्ति इत रशी असते । त्याच्यावर दूसरे सपतता । क्तिमव्ये प्रेम आहे पला सबंध जोडते । ललाम, 'लावण्य' हया स्व कीं दूस-याचे काय वैगृण्य असेल ते बघत असायचे । शब्दामच्ये ला शब्द येतो। 'ल हया दाब्दाला एक स्यांच्यात त्यांना काय आनंद मिळतो मला माहित गोडबा आहे । आणि त्या गोडव्याने आपण सर्वाना भारउन टीकले पाहिज । सगळयांशे बोलताना तोडच वाकडे आहे, त्याचें घरांत पटतच नाही वगरे आपण तो शक्ति वापरली पाहिज । म्हणज संगळी कडे चराबरामध्य तो शकती. तो प्रेमशक्ति पसरली अशाने माणसंधाणा होतो, आणि त्यानी माणसाला असतानां आपण कार्य केले पाहिजे ? एक तर विनार स्वतःला त्रास होतो तेव्हा स्वतःला त्रास कसा करुन सोडना पाहिजे पहिल्या शक्तिचा शक्तिमुळे विचार उत्पन्न होतात। आणि शेवटल्या कहीं त जमत नाहीं। शक्तिमध्ये काय केले पाहिजे ? जी ला शक्ति आहे । भेटले की केवड़ा आनंद होतो। त्या शक्तिमध्ये आण, त्या प्रेमाचा आन द घेतला पाहिजे । तो कसा चेणार? एकाकार, तन्मय होऊन । आपले प्रेम दुस-यावर किती आहूं हे कोणी कधी त्याशक्तिला आपण असे वापरलें पाहिजे की दूस- मोजत का ? ते माजल पाहिज । काय मजा येते यांच्याकडे पहातानां आपण नि्विचारितत जावे । अगदीं । वा: किती आपले प्रेम आहे होसगळय विर ? निर्विचारितत गेल्यावरोबर त्या माणसांतही निवि- असे कधी येते की नाहीं तुमच्या डक्यांत ? माझ चारता येईल । म्हणन मो म्हणते बंधन द्या। 'नि त सेच असते। नेहमीं च । की मला है वाटते की शक्ति आणि 'ला' शक्तिला जर बंधने दिली, म्हणजे काय हो हे प्रेम बाहत राहिले आहे बरे ? किती ला शक्तिला जर 'नि' मध्यं आणले तर फार फायदा ताही । हया माणसाला हेंच नाहीं आहे । त्याच - पण त्योनी काय मिळणार आहे आपल्याला ? मनुष्य कारण पहिल्या ध्यायचा त माणसाकडूनच शिकल पाहिजे अहो मला तर संगळ्यांनां । । मला तर ही ललाम शक्ति जी आहे, जी बापरायची. Nirmala Yoga 18

 होतो। आ्तां पूष्कळांना सांगावे लागते की डावी आहे अने जर काणो विचारले, तर माइया लक्षांतच बाजु उचला व उजवीकडे घाला । अती गर्वी येत लोकांना म्हणजे, मी फार कार्य करित आहे असे म्हणजे कार्य ? दोन मिनिटाची गोष्ट । आज नदी ज्या लोकना वाटत किंया ज फार कार्यरत असतात त्यांना सांगते की डाबी उजवीकडे घाला। म्हणजे स्वत:चे ज प्रम आहे ते आपल्या पांत्रही तत्वांत मुक्कामावर बसला आहुति ते पाहायचे आहे । भरावच । जस कनव्हासवर आपण रंग भरतो। तुम्ही जर इकडेच बसलात घाणीत तर इथे वाहाते तसे आपल्या हृदयांतले ज प्रेम आहे, ती त्रिती जो आहे ते विक्षिप्त वाटणारत तुम्हांला। आम्ही साग- आह, तो आणुन आपल्या कार्याची जी शक्ति आह स्याच्यामध्ये ही शकत्रित भरायची । ती शकित एकदां आहे त आम्हाला माहित आहे। आणि परिवर्तन है भरली की त्या अश माणसाला रंग चढ़तो। आणि सहजयोगांत नेहमी होत असते। तेव्हा कोणत्याही तो हळे हळे असा पस रतो. त्याचो प्रिती अशी वाहते. मराठीत एक शब्द आहे स्नेहाळते', त्याची कृती जी अगदी कामातून गेलेला आहे. आतां हा कही आहे तो स्नेहाळते । आणि अशामाणसाला असा कही रंग चढ़तो व असा काही आकर्षं क बनतो असा माणसामध्य परिवतन होणार, आणि झालेच माणस । अशा माणसाजवळ तासनतास बसल तरी पाहिजे । नाहीत रो आपल्या सहजयोगाचे कार्य असे वाटत की आपण बसलो आहोंत कुट तरी। छान निर्वात असे. तर ती प्रिती स्नेहाळली पाहिजे, व त्याना उपयोग असा होतों की माणसे जोडली म्हणता कामा नये की 'हा कामातून गेला । प्रत्येक जातात । आपलेपणा वाढतो। समळयानां वाटते की माणसाला हुयाी पूर्ंपण सवलत दिली पाहिजे । कूठ तरी असे स्थान आहे. जिथं आपल्याला प्रेम आतां आपणच वघतां की आम्ही कोठे होतो व कोठे स्नेह संगळे मिळणार आहे। तर ही प्रे माची शक्ति आहे, तिला जोपासली पाहिजे । असा जर विचार केला, तर तुम्ही स्वतःची तर आपल्यामध्ये जर असे विचार आले कोणतेही तर इज्जत कराल व पण दूस-याची] पण कराल, स्वतःची आपण समजले पाहिजे की आपण त्या गंगेमध्ये उया माणसाला इज्जत नसते तो दूस-याची करत घाण टाकतो आहे। असा जर आपण विचार ठेवला नसतो। तेव्हा ललाम शक्तिला खुप बाहवलें तर आपली जी ला शक्ति आहे, प्र मळ शक्ति याहिजे । हयाच्यावर बोलायला लागले तर एक आहे ती पूर्णाण स्वच्छ राहिल । अगदीं स्वच्छ पुस्तकन लिहावें लागेल, पण त्याची मजा काय आहे राहिल आणि त्याच्या स्वच्छतत आपल्याला खुप ते मो तुम्हाला सांगू शकणार नाही। कारण ते आनंद वाटेल । दुस-यांच्या कडे पहाध्याच्या दष्टि- शब्दांत घालता येत नाही। शब्द फारच अपूरे पड- मध्ये कोणतीही चिकित्सकता असता कामा नये। मला जर तुम्ही कोणाविषयो विचारलत कीं है जस स्मित जर तुम्ही अंकित करायच म्हटले, तर गृहस्थ कसे आहेत. तर मी फारतर कु डलिनोवर फारतर त्याचे स्नायु तुम्ही अंकित कराल। पण सांगू शकेन की हयांचे कोठल चक्र पकडल आहे. त्याचे इफेक्टस तुम्ही सांगू शकणार नाहीत त्यांतलेंच किवा त्यांचे हे धरतें कधी कधी। पण त्याच्यापलि- आहे ते । हया शक्तिला खूप बाव दिला पाहिजे, कड, है गृहस्थ कसे आहत, त्यांचा स्वभाव कसा वाढवली पाहिजे । नाहीं ती गोष्ट । मी मस्हणते, अहो स्वभाव इथे वाहाते आहे. तर उघा कोठे वाहाणार आहे ? कांही सांगतां येणार नाहीं। आतां तुम्ही कोणत्या ग। राकइत पाहात आहोत तर ही नदी कूठे येणार माणसाला असा ठपका देऊ नये । की हा मनुष्य कामाचा नाही। तर असं नाही म्हणायचे । प्रत्येक म्हणजे परिवर्तनच आहे । ते्हां ज्यावा सहजयोगा- वरविश्वास आहे. त्यानी कोणत्याही माणसाला असे ग्रंभूची जी कोठ आलो। आणि आतां नदी कुठे चालली पूढ़े । का तात । हया गोष्टीला शब्दांत घालायच म्हटल तर Nirmala Yoga 19

 लंजाम गंकित, त्यानी माणसाला एक सोदर्य, एक आकर्षकता, एक फार मिळतो। बोलतांनां, वागण्यात, सर्व गोष्टी मध्ये नुसता सरबवंधच्या सबंध आनंद लूटीत असतो। आणि आपण है बधितले पाहिजे की ललाम झक्ति चाटते ही स्थिती सगळ्यांत अत्युत्तम आहे । त्याला असे का ? म्हणजे एमादया माणसाच्या रागावण्यांत आहूं तस आहे. किंवा त्याची काशाशी तुलना करा- सुद्धां इतका गोइवा असतो, की त रागावण्ण सूद्धो यची, किया अलंकारीक भाषत त वर्णन करण्यापेक्षा गोड असते वितला ललिता शक्ति अस म्हणतात । त्याता अगदीं विमेयास लोकांनी करुन ठेवलेला लोकचे असे म्हणणे आहे की ललित दाक्ति फक्त आतून अनुभवायचे आहे। तो संहारक वर्गरे असते । । अत्यंत सूदर आणि फारच कारिगरीवाली असते। ही एवढी कला्मक असते की समजा तुम्हो एक बी पेरलत तर स्पा बो मवले काही अवयव नष्ट होतात ती ललिता वक्ति । यण ते अंगदीं हळ च, सहज आपली धर्म शक्ति, तशीच आपली उत्क्रांतीची ही त्याच्यावर मग झाड येणार। स्याला मग पाने शक्ति आहे। 'म शद्वामध्ये माणसाला घडपड येणार, पान गळतात सुद्धां पण तेहीं अगदी सहज । करावी लागते। गोष्ट आत्मसात करावी लागते तयाच्या नंतर मग फूले आली, आणि त्या फुलांना आंतमध्ये ध्यावे लागते, आकलन करावे लागते । जेव्हा फळ येतात तेव्हां फूलांत-लही काही प्रकार दोन्ही करण जसा एखादा कलाकार आपल्या 'ला गळतात, आणि फळे येतात। पूढे फळेहो कापावी शक्तिने आपल्या कृतीची कल्पना करतो नतर नी लागतात, आणि खावी लागतात । आणि जो आस्वाद येतो तोही तो शक्त । इ्याप्रमाण या करायच्या वेळेला तो म शवित वापरती । प्रत्येक दोन्हीं ही शक्न्या म्हणजे कहीतरों काटछाट केल्या- वेळला बधतो ठीक आहे का ? नाही। मग परत विवाय जशा मूल्तयां बनत नाहींत, तसेच ही काटछाट- करायचे, परत वघायचे, असे करित रहातो। ती 'म' सुद्धा, व्याच्यांतलाच एक भाग आहे अस जेव्हा शक्ति झाली । म्हणजे हें ठीक नाहींना ? मग दुसरे आपल्या लक्षति येईल, ते्हा आपल्या होतुून जर करायचे तिसर करावच । हे जे 'ठीक करायचे काम काहीं काटछाट होत असली तर तो वाईट आहे अस आहे त्याला श्रोडी वडपड पाहिजे । स्वत:लाहि ठोक समजले नाही पाहिजे त्याचीही गरज़ आहे । पण करित राहावे लाभत ती काटछाट एवादा कलाकार कलात्मक रितीन तर उत्क्रांती झाली नसतो। परमेश्वराला फार करती। व एादा बोथट माणूस ती बोथटपणाने धडपड करावी लागते। म्हण जे ्ही 'म' जात्ति आप- करतो । । आणि त्या शक्तिला चित्रे असतात की ती बागला स्वभाव स्थापित होते। निविचारिता स्थापित होऊन मनुष्य वघितली कीं निविचारिता । अशा फारत गोड आणि मधुमय नुसता त्याना मनसोवत आनंद व्यायचा। 'रसस्वाद तसा रसस्वाद बेतराहायचे आहे । कीं त्याला शब्द नाहीत त्याला वर्णन नाही आहे। त्याला अनुभव संगळ- म्हणतात त्याला । । पुण तस मुळींच नाहीं । ही यांनां वडला पाहिजे आता में मधला शब्द फार मजेदार आह। । 'म हा महालक्ष्मीचा शब्द आहे । 'म म्हणजे खाल्यावर शक्तिती त्याची रचना करती, आणि त्याला ठीक । तें जर आपल्यामध्ये नसतें तुमच्यामध्यं किती कलात्म कता आहे त्या- ल्याला हस्तगत करावी लागते च्यावर ही शक्ति अवलंबन असते । च्ित्र आपण वघावें, आणि ते वघतच राहावे असे जर आले नाही तर दोन्हीही शक्त्या झडून पड़तात। वाटते। कोणी विचारलें की हया चित्रांत एवढे कारण ही शक्ति मध्यविदृ आहे । Centre of Gra- काय आहे, तर ते शब्दांत सांगता येत नाही बुवा ! vity आहे । तेव्हाँ मध्य विदुमध्ये असायला पाहिजे, तें नुसते बघतो आम्ही। तेव्हां कांहीं कांहीं अशी आणि 'मध्यविद' ही म शक्ति आहे. आपल्या आतां एखादें प्राप्त होण्यासाठी टिकवावे लागते । ते टिकवणें 20 Nirmala Yoga

 उत््रातीची। आाणि त्या उत्करातीच्या शञाक्तिवर बालून ते निघते । ते काही भांडत नाहीं । आणि जेव्हा तुम्ही वाढत जाल, तेव्हांच या दोन्ही शकत्या जर हथा अउचणी नसव्या तर ते झाडाला मुळी म्हणून त्या अडचणी मात्र पूर्णापण समन यावयास पाहिजे, आणि त्याची पाहिजेत । अडचणी असल्याशिवाय तुमची प्रगतीच जोपासना केली पाहिजे । म्हणजे असे की "असेल होणार नाहीं । पण त्या अडचणीवर कशी मात माझा हरी तर देईल खाटल्पावरी । । तुमच्या मधुन कार्यान्वित होतील। पण 'मं शक्तिची धरुच शकणार नाही । आगृुती होई करावयाची ते ज शिकवते ती ही म शक्ति आहे. पर्यंत ठीक आहे । तो देईल वाटल्याव री । कबुल, आणि म्हणन तो मा शक्ति आहे । ती आईची त्याच्यापूढे ? त्याच्यामध्ये ही 'म' शक्ति जो आहे, ती शक्ति आहे । म्हणजे व्याला सगळयांत प्रथम आपल्यामध्ये दोत्हींचे सतुलन वेऊन करावी लागतो मनुष्यामध्य सुजता म्हणजे ज्याला Wisdom ्हणतात । ते पाहिज । समजा एखादा माणसाचा तसच आपल्याला स्वभाव गरीब आहे। तर तो म्हणतो माताजी आम्ही हया दोन्ही शक्तिचे नि आणि 'ला यांचे संतुलन आपले गरीब आहोत कारय करणार । अहो बदला साधावे लागते । ते संतुलन साधण्यासाठी, आपल्याला तुम्ही ! सिंह व्हा, बरे एखादा सिंह आहे ! तर त । असे केल्याशिवाय होणार निधन जाते ज्यांनी है साधले, तो सहजयोगी उच्च- नाही। आपल्या पद्धती बदलायला पाहिजेत । ज्या स्थितीला गेला । फार जास्त 'इमीनल सहजयोगी माणसाला आपल्या पद्धति बदलता येणार नाहीत काही कामाचा नाहीं । तसच फार जास्त कार्यरत तो मनुष्य कधीही सहजयोग वाढवू शकणार नाहीं । पण जो आपल्या कारण तो एका पद्धतीला चिकटला । लोक कंटाळले पद्धतिला । आतां काहीं तरी नवीन पद्धत पाहिजे। वोअर होतो ना मनुष्य । तर हो 'म' कार्यपद्धती । स्हणजे आज आपले काही तरी निराळे काढतात । है तुम्ही पोहे केले । मग उद्या करजा, परवां असेंच कांहीतरी पाहिले असेल की प्रत्येक वेळेला माझ काहोतरी म्हणजे नेहमी बदलत जायाचे | पुरुषालाही नेहमी नवीन असते । नवीन पद्धत असते । त्यांत हैं नाहीं उत्सुकता असत की आज घरी काय 'बेत' असणार ? तेर ही जी स्थिती आहे, ज्यांनी मनुष्य संतूलन साधतो। ज्यानी मनुष्य 'एकरसता प्राप्त करतो । ह्या शक्तिला जेव्हा तुम्ही उच्च स्थितिला नेता, ते- व्हां हे जे व्यहायत्र शन्स आहत ते फुटतात हे जे प्रत्येकाने आपली पद्धती फिक्स नाहीं करायची । व्हायत शन्स आहेत ते सबंध संतुलनांत, संबंध सुज्ञते- सकाळी उठले कुक लावले, माताजींना नमस्कार तच वाहातात । जर तुमच्यात सुज्ञता नसली, तर हे रंगाच जस आपण संतूलन करतो, रागदारीत जस आपण स्वराचे संतुलन करतो, आपल्यातून पुष्कळदा आतों तुम्ही शेळी व्हा धड़पड करावी लागते। सहजयोगो सुद्धा कामाचा नाही। प्रेमशक्तिला कार्य रत करतो. आणि वार वार त्याचे त्या सिंहा वलोकन करतो, म्हणजे समजा आमची कांही पद्धती। ही बायकांनां चांगली साधते आहे । त्यात प्रत्येक वेळला माताजी आ जमल तर दूसरे काहीतरी करुन बधायच । त नाही जमल तर तिसर जर डोक्यातून नाही जमल तर शेप- टाकडून । कधी हसबून करते। कधी रडवून करते। कधो समजावून करते । कधी प्रेमाने सांगते । तसच आ। केला, की मेकेनिकल झाले । तुमची ही जीवंत वहायब्र शन्स वाहाणार नाहीत। ज्या माणसामधुन पद्धती नाही । जिवंत पद्धतीमध्ये न विन नविन व्हायत्र शन्स अत्यंत येतात तो सुज्ञ आहे । त्याची पद्धती शोधून काढायच्या। जसे मी नेहमी मुळाचं सुज्ञताच वाहाते आहे, हे लक्षांत ठेवलें पाहिजे । उदाहरण देते । की एक मुळ निघाले । ते मुळ हळू तुम्ही जरी कितीही मोठे सहजयोगी आहांत असे इळ खाली जमीनींत पेरत जाते। आतां जिथे जिथे दिसते तरी ते पायावर दिसते । पकड येणार, त्या त्याला अडचणी येतात तिथे तिथे ते बरोबर वळसा पकड़ी आल्या म्हणजे समजायचे की आपले संतुलन Nirmala Yoga 21

 सुटलें आहे म्हण जे असले पाहिजे ग्रॅव्हीटो असली पाहिजे, नवीन नवीन हणून त-हेने विचार केला पाहिजे लोकांज्री बोलण्याच्या मुटलेल आहे। आणि संतुलन काय तर आपल्यामध्ये 'म' शक्ति कमी आहे आमचे नाव बरोखर माताजी' जे काडलेलें आहे, पदधती सुद्धां नवीन काढल्या पाहिजेत, सहजयोग स्यांतला है पाहिले अक्ष र मा च आहे। आई आह। पसरवण्याच्या शक्त्या बापरल्या पाहिजेत । आणि आणि आमच्या या मा' शक्तिमुळे हे कार्य घ्डून या शकया जर तुम्ही नीट बापरायच्या तर त्याला आले आहे । आतो जर 'ल शक्ति असती तर काही 'निः शक्ति म्हणजे कार्यशक्ति फार जबरदस्त असा- जमले नसते । निः' शक्ति असती तरीही काही गला पाहिजे । आणि मग ती जर शक्ति जमली जमल तसत । आम्ही या तिन्ही शक्या वेऊत आलो पण खरच याच्यावर ात आहे ती 'मा शक्तिची। ती पाहिजे । पुण प्रेमन क्ति कार्यान्वीत आणावची ति आणि 'मा' शक्तिच तुम्ही पाहिले आहे की आईचे :निः शक्तिने। पण तेहीं जमले नाही तर दूसरें । पाहिल्यांदा है सिद्ध डाले पाहिजे की ही आमतरी पहिल्यांदा नाल आणि पिचला रंग वापरु | हे जर आई आहे। अहो आता कोणोही आले आणि म्हणाले योग्य नाहीं झाले तर हिरवा लाल वापरु तेही की मी तुमची 'मा' आहे, तर तुम्ही मानाल का नाही मानणार। आईची सिद्धता व्हायाला पाहिमे की टेवता कामा नये । हट्टी स्वभाव असला की ही आमची आई आईे । नाही, म्हणजे अ्थात ला शक्षित मूल्य प्रेम शव्ति । नाहीच जमल तर तिसर । हे ज सुज्ञ पणाचे बाहे ? हैट्ट की सहजयोगति जमणार नाही। आपल्याला काम ं सहजयोगच पसरवायचा आहे ना ? मग है नाहीं । आई म्हणजे काय ? आमच स्थान आहे ती । आमचा तिच्यावर पूर्ण अधिकार आहे आणि तिना आमच्याव र कारण ती जमले तर त केते, तहीं नाही जमले तर आणखी आमच्यावर एवढे प्रेम करते । । हट्टाला फार बळी प्रम आहे । तो आमची हितचितक आहे | ती आमचे पडते। कारण मला है माहित आहे की माणसाचें नेहमी संगल चितीत असते, आणि नि च्या हृदयांत आमच्यासारखे नाही आहे आमच्या विपयीच्या प्रेमाविवाय दुसरे कांहीही नाहीं । टाकेल सांगतां येत नाहीं ! तेव्हां माणसाच्या जं आम्हाला म्हणजे 'स्व ला सुशोभित आहे तच हृट्टाला केव्हहीपेटवता कामा नये । हे आम्हाला तिच्यामध्ये आहे. असे अर लक्षांत आाले तरच समजते तेही म' शक्रितिने पण आपला हट्ट सोडला आईवर विक्वास वसणार आहे । तर ती सिद्धता पाहिजे माताजीनां हुट्ट नसतो। ज आहे ते खरें द । आणि तच सहज आहे । जे काहीं करायचे त विशेष आहे. म्हणन कस अगदी निव्यजि तिथ कही केले आतं मी तुमच्या । ्यंचा हट्ट काय करुन दुस-याना पढवूत दिली पाहिजे योग्यांना साधलें पाहिजे आणि इत रांना वाटल करायच आतां आम्हाला काही इच्छा नाही आहे। पाहिजे की हा एक सुज्ञ आहे । आणि त्याच्या करितां आमच्या मध्ये काही 'ला जक्ति नाही की 'निः संतूलन यायला पाहिजे। ते संतुलन प्रेमाचे आणि शक्ति नाही की म शक्ति नाही। कांहीही नाहीं । कार्य शक्तिवें असे सुदर साधले पाहिजे की लोकांनां त्या शक्या आम्ही आहोंत हैही आम्हाला माहित नकळतच, त्या माणसाचा प्रभाव किंवा परिणाम नाही सर्वावर पडला पाहिजे । हें सहजयोग्यानी साधायला सगळा खेळ । पाहिजे । आम्हो काही नाही नुसते बधत असतो । असले जीवन जेव्हां होउन जात तेव्हांच, मानवा- मध्ये सिद्ध महज योगी तयार होतील । अजून सिद्ध आतं या तिब्ही शक्या कशा बापरायच्या त्या झालेले नाहींत । सिद्धता साधली पाहिजे । सिद्ध कार्यान्वीत कशा करायच्या वर्गरे तुम्ही घरी विचार सहजयोगी जो असतो, तो अगदी एकतान होऊन करा | म्हणजे 'निः शक्तिने धरामध्ये सगळे सोदर्य (Contd. on Page No. 24) Nitmala Yoga 22

 SHRI MATAJI IN ITALY The coming of H. H. Shri Mataji to Rome the last evening. The Goddess had been meant a lot to me : alongwith the moment of pleased by what had been happening at the my Self-realization it was the most impor- end of each collective meditation. People tant event in my life. Ihad been previously were queuing to be able to talk to Her advised to pray Mother in order to receive individually, or to be cleansed by Her, or to the grace of recognising Her with the heart. show Her a picture of their child, or to bring And there She was at the airport, smiling, to Her the sick of their family, or just to bow in front of Her and to thank Her. Such a loving, affectionate. The prayer had been more than fulfilled and joy poured in. veneration was permeating the atmosphere Twenty sahaja yogis had come from Switzer- that, while Her Holiness made Her way to- land and the entire welcome committee was wards the exit, some would thrive to touch gathered in a mood both happy and medita- Her saree ! And, as each eve would pass: by, more would take the vibrations, take off their shoes and bow before leaving. O Mother, how wonderful it was to witness the way these Italians have recognized you, how their heart opened right away, how the and one puja. The two first public functions worship of the Virgin Mary is deeply rooted live to welcome Her. So, that was the beginning of Shri Mataji's successful and impressive stäy in Italy. Four programmes on four evenings took place in a bookstore in the old centre of Rome, which had been all set up for this The room got jam-packed with and alive in them! occasion. As they repeated all together, on the last people climbing on ladders to better see evening, with a moving fervour "Mother Mother, others were staying in front of the Thou arth the Holy Ghost" we could see bookstore, on the street. Two amazing them enjoying the flow of vibrations as a observations came to the minds of those result of their sincerity. What a joy for nus, used to the ways of the Italians. Indeed sahaja yogis, to witness the change on the they are well known to be exhuberant, indi- faces which were closed the first day and vidualist and undisciplined. Yet they really gradually became bright, happy and serene ! behaved themselves, many returning to Catherine, Gregoire and myself have been a hundred times rewarded for having prepa- red Mother's coming. To begin with, the mere organisation has been great fun ! Selecting a poster ("the face of a Madonna" said the photographer), rushing after work to the city's main centers to fix these power- ful posters, distributing invitation letters in all the places where the seekers were to be Mother was looking so young and radiant on found, admiring the adds in the newspa- every programme which were attended to by 150 to 200 people at a time. The assiduity of the audience was encouraged by Mother's great idea of delivering a cycle of speeches. It was like a tale : people wanted to know what was happening next and kept on coming. A new born Sahaja Yogini said that our Nirmala Yoga 23

 pers. all these situations offered countless to be crucified for that purpose. Thus there occasions for enjoyable hours and good isn't any further need for karma and suffe- ring which aliments this intruding, useless of being able to enjoy Mother's darshan for catholic sense of guilt. But as Christ was an Incarnaltion he did not suffer on the laughters. And we then relished the luck five days, including a wondertul touring trip to Florence, The Swiss sahaja yogis parti- Divine level, as a consequence of his re- demptory task. Hence he was not a miser- ed railway strike the day they were supposed able, cadaveric pitiable person as often to return home Mother really adapts Her- represented in christian art, especially on the cross. He was strong, beautiful, joyous liarities, making use of them in the most and powerful, just as Michelangelo painted Where there are so many him in "the last Judgement" of the Sixtine So why should christian constantly grieve and be afflicted ? On the contrary, they must enjoy them- selves, as their burden has been taken away the first crop of Mother's Italian children. by Christ. Life has to be enjoyed says cipated in all this, thanks to a most weicom- self with light-speed to each country's pecu- humorous way. strikes, let there be strikes, when convenient Chapel, in the Vatican. to the sahaja yogis ! It is too early to give an appreciation on but the atmosphere of the follow up meetings is quite good. Shri Mataji's lectures were of definite interest to all sahaja yogis, particu- larly to those educated within Christianism. Her Holiness spoke mostly of Christ, the One who came on Earth to take over the burden of humanity's sufferings and who even accepted Shri Mataji, and how else could it be for Her children, to whom She dedicated so much love, patience, to whom She gives so much joy ? Rome, 11-12-81 -Ruth L. [Contd. from Page 22] परमेश्वराला आपल्या कावू त करुन घेतो। सगळ है सिद्ध आहेत, इकड़े काळ जी बेतली पाहिजे । असे कोही त्याच्या हातून व्हाव लागते । आतां मी जात जर झाल तर सगळे उत्तम होईल । आहे। माझ्या माग तुमची सिद्धता कशी कशी व कुठ वापरता ते वधायच आहे। आणि मी मधुन मधून प्रत्येकाला सांगत असते की असे करु नका, तलगना आपल्याक डे जेवायला किवा हळदी कु क- तर त्याने वाओट नाही वाटून ध्यायचे म्हणजे 'म' वाला बोलवा। आमच्याकड़े फार मोठी पूजा आहे । शक्तिमध्ये वाट वाटून ध्यायचे नाहीं। म्हणजे अस सगळयांना सांगायचे । बरोबर काही सहजयोगी मला सांगायलाच पाहिजे । पण पुकळाना वाईट बोलवायचे, व आलेल्यानां जागृती द्यायची असे जर वाटते । आम्ही सिद्ध झाले पाहिजे, ही गोष्ट जर आपण वर्षभर केलत तर पुष्कळ फायदा होईल । लक्षात घरली आम्ही सिद्ध आहोंत है सगळ्यांनी सर्वा ऽना अनेकोतम आशीर्वाद । मानल पाहिजे, बघितल्या बरोबर पटल पाहिजे की मी एकदां सांगितल आहे की एकदा आापल्या ना. THM Nirmala Yoga 24

 Contd. from 2nd Cover be avoided and thus the Sadhakas should and pay respects and say Jay Jay Kar of the try to remain by heart at the function of Mother. No one should leave the place Poojan every second and try to gain the without taking the Prasad. maximum. "Jai Mataji" After the function of Poojan, if permitted by the Mother, the Seekers should take holy Madhukar Dhumal Rahuri, Distt. Ahmed Nagar, Darshan of the Mother. Nobody should touch the Poojan materials unless permitted by the Mother. When Mother leaves the place of Poojan everybody should get up Maharashtra, India. FESTIVALS Vasant Panchami: Spring festival 30th January, 1982 Pooja of Mother Earth. Maha Shivratri. 22nd February, 1982 Holi. 10th March, 1982 H. H. Mataji's birthday. 21st March, 1982 Shri Rama Navami; Birth- day of Shri Rama. 2nd April, 1982 Shri Hanumana Jayanti3; Birthday of Shri Hanumana 6th April, 1982 Easter Sundar. 11th April, 1982 Budha Purnima. 7th May, 1982 TILL1 TENTATIVE PROGRAMME OF SHRI MATAJI 14th Jan. '82 to 14th Feb. '82 Maharashtra including Bombay & Camp at Lonawala 18th Feb. to 28th Feb. '82 New Delhi 2nd-17th March '82 Australia 21st-23rd March '82 Bombay

 Registered with the Registrar of Newspapers under Regn. No. 36999/81 WITH BEST COMPLIMENTS FROM MANSFIELD CABLES 8, KRISHNA MARKET KALKAJI, NEW DELHI-100019 Works . Manufacturers: PVC Wires, Underground B-42 & 43, Sector-VI Noida Ind. Complex, Distt. Ghaziabad (U. P.) Armoured, Control Cables, Auto & Welding Cables, AAC & ACSR Conductors (ON D. G. S. & D. RATE CONTRACT) With best compliments from: WITH BEST COMPLIMENTS FROM Super Foods Pvt. Ltd. Shetye Tyre & Noida, Distt. Ghaziabad, U. P. Rubber Industries Radhakrishna Industrial Estate Manufacturers of High Class Quality BICHOLIM-GOA BISCUITS Edited & Published by Sh. S. C. Rai, 43. Bunglow Road, Delhi-110007 and Printed at Ratnadeep Press, Darya Ganj. New Delhi-110002. One IsBue Rs. 5.00 Annual Subscription Rs. 20.00 Foreign [By Airmail E4 S8



----------------------

1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Nirmala Yoga
fनिर्मला योग
Bi-Monthly
Vol. 7
Jan.-Feb. '82
Year 2
+
t
"Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns all the religions and
seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga-THE UNION'*
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-1.txt 
 Om Twamev Sakshat Shri Adishakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Namoh Namah
PROTOCOL TO BE OBSERVED AT PUJA
On the eve of the arrival of our Holy or he/she is seating at far distant place
Mother to India this winter, as a brother 1 from Mataji. The place so given by the
take it as my prime duly to tell you, through Almighty is the proper place for the Sadhak
the experience and with the grace of our
Mother, the holy rules that each one of us
should follow during Poojan of our Mother Sahaja Yoga is based on collectivity and
which definitely helps in attaining the higher during Poojan of H. H. Mataji, the vibra-
for his/her advancement in the search of
the Truth-the Divine. The functioning of
tions with various Powers are emitted by
the Mother which cleanup the chakras of
various Sadhakas through the representa-
planned at a right place and a right time by tives selected for Poojan. Further, many of
plane in the life of the Seeker.
The function of Poojan of Mataji is
the Divine. Hence Sahaj Yogi brathers
and sisters should not insist on any specific
such powers are gained by seekers during
such Poojans, Hence during such occa-
time and place of their choice. Further, at sions of Poojan Sadhakas should not waste
the place of Poojan all actions should be time allowing himself/herself to think
of
carried out peacefully. All should assemble
at the place of Poojan always before arrival
of
other things around, but should concentrate
on Poojan of Her Holiness Mataji and try
that is given out by
the Mother all should sit in meditation by Mataji. Every fraction of second, during
arrival
of Her Holiness Mataji. Tll
to gain maximum
taking Bandhan. All should standup when
Mother arrives and pay respects and should Yogi brothers and sisters should try to gain
not sit down unless Mo ther takes Her seat.
To avoid diversification af attention the
Seekers should not come with empty sto-
mach and tight clothes.
Poojan is thus very precious and the Sahaja
maximum from the opportunity that they get
at the occasions of such Poojans. Every-
body should remember that he/she is sitting
in front of Sakshat Adishakti during such
Poojans and should not close the eyes un-
H. H. Mataji asks any one or few of the
Sahaja Yogis to perform the Holy Poojan of The Chitta should be always towards the
Mataji as the representatives. In Sahaja Poojan and should not get disturbed because
Yoga everything is preplanned by the Divine of the temporary troubles that are experien-
and Sadhaks should not leave the place ced in front of Mataji by the new
which he/she has occupied, unless for the
specific reasons, and should not feel ner-
vous for the reasons that he/she is not
chosen to represent the group for poojan will divert his/her attention outside should
less specifically instructed by the Mother.
comers to such functions.
should not bring such persons who have
not yet got the Jagruti. Any action which
Sahaja Yogis
Contd. on 3rd Cover
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-2.txt 
 EDIT ORI AL
Nirmala Yoga has completed first year. A child of Her Holiness Mataji, like Sahaja
Yogis, it is growing on Her affection and under Her watchful eyes. A totterind child
gets its strength and confidence from its Mother, but stumbles when feels over-confident
and independient. Pray, Mother may we never be over-confident.
Sahaja Yoga and Her Holiness Mataji are profound subjects to write on. Very few,
like Adi-Shankaracharya, could do it. Even he says "How can one without virtue pros-
trale or praise you, who is venerated by the three deities of creation, protection and
destruction ?" People entrusted with the work of Nimala Yoga, äre not able to do it.
without Mataji's inspiration and loving grace and brother Sahaja Yagis' assistance.
It is the collective work performed collectively for the expansion of collective conscious-
ness. O Mother, kindly grant us the boon, so that our minds ever rest at your lotus
feet, and our hands write your words. May even our heart-beats sound your name. May
the empire of Sahaja Yoga spread all over the world.
जयो जल्पः शिल्पं सकलमपि मुद्राविरवना ।
प्रादक्षिण्यक्रमरगमवना]
दाहति विधिः ॥
सुखमलिलमात्मापसादूशा ।
विलसितम् ।।
गतिः
संवेशः
समर्यापर्यास्तव
प्रणाम
यन्मे
भवतु
Japo Jalpah Shilpam
Gatih Praadakshinya-krampna mashanaa dyaahuti vidhih
Pranaam sanveshah sukhama-khilamaatmaarpana-drushaa
Samaryaaparyaas-tava
Sakalamapi Mudraavirachanaa
bhavatu
vilasitam
yanme
(a-as in olher; aa-as in Amen)
Through the sight of self surrender let my prattle become recitation of your name;
the movement of my limbs, gestures of your worships, my walk, perambulation around
you; my food, sacrificial offering to you, my lying down, prostration to you; whatever I do
for my pleasure, let it become transformed into an act of worship to you.
Nirmala Yoga
1
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Nirmala Yoga
43 Bunglow Road, Delhi-110007 (India)
Founder-Her Holiness MATAJI SHRI NIRMALA DEVI
Editorial Board : Dr. S. K. Mathur, Shri A. S. Mishra, Shri R. D. Kulkarni.
Representatives :
Gavin Brown
London:
Cheryl Hynes
10, Clarence Road,
Burwood, N.S.W. 2134,
Australia.
Australia:
Brown's Geological
Information Services Ltd.,
160 North Gower Street,
NW1 2ND (UK) London.
Mr. Subhash B. Pradhan
U, S. A. :
12416, Reva St., Cerritos
California-90701 U.S.A.
Hong Kong: Emilie P SHI
Clif Rence Bros. Co. Ltd.,
1610, Wing On Centre,
111, Connaught Rd., Central.
Switzerland : Arneau de Kalbermatten
Binningerstrasse 5,
4123, Allschwil (BL)
Switzerland.
M. B. Ratnannavar
13, Merwan Mansion,
Genjwala Lane,
Borivali (W),
Bombay-400 092.
Bombay:
Marie Rougher
175, Av. Ledru Rollin,
France :
Paris-75001,
CONTENTS
Page
1. Editorial
2. The Knowledge Within
12
3. In Flight to U.S.A. with Mother
13
4. Prayer
14
5. Shri Mataji Prasanna (in Hindi)
24
6. Shri Mataji in Italy
All Correspondence should be addressed to:
1. Shri S. C. Rai, C/o. Straw Products Ltd., Nehru House, 4 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg,
New Delhi-110002.
2. Dr. S. K. Mathur, 43 Bunglow Road (Suite No. 1), Delhi-110007.
Nirmala Yoga
2.
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-4.txt 
 THE K NOWL EDGE WITHIN+
Today we have gathered here to know you electric shock, some say that you start
something about our Self. If the knowledge jumping like a
Is from the boaks or from some person who start flying in the air. Such a confusion,
says that he knows about the Self, how far while you are seekers, seekers of ages you
will it reach us. ? It can only go upto mental have been seeking. You are genuine see-
level and we can only understand it ihrough
our mental understanding. The mental where to go and what to expect; you jump
understanding comes to us through our
rationality, through bur intellect which in
itself is a limited thing.
frog and some say that you
kers and then while seeking you don't know
into problems.
The other day when I went to Switzerland,
one of my children, who had arranged the
understanding programme, he told me "Mother, here people
eg. if I tell you are very sceptical about Indian Gurus."
that there is a Self which resides in our I anm very happy about it. really very very
happy that they have started thinking about
which is all the time waiting for an occasion it because they have been deluded and
to give you your second birth, it tell you deceived and now they are disillusioned
And they find it impossible
mentally. This has all been said älready, to beleve anyone who talks of God. So the
first topic that he wanted me to discuss
give it in a very modern fashion, something during my stay there was Demystification
quite intellectual which will make you have of Gurus". Quite a challenging topic. But
this I said in 1970 in India, in 1973 in Ame-
rica, but no one would like me for that. They
say, "Why should you criticise others",
So we enter into another
which is still very limited.
heart and that there is a power within us
that, then you will only understand me completely.
what is so new about it ? At the most I can
more mental feats to go round and round.
You will sit down and analyse and reach
nowhere.
I say there is a power, no doubt, which is
called "KUNDALINI" within us.
say that because it is written long time back. of those people who are here that how you
Thousands of years back. Christ has said
it that you are to be born again, that you are
to be baptised, not by theological collage stand because you have gone beyond it now
people, but by somebody like John, the
baptist, who had the authority from the that money is not going to give you joy.
Divine. This power does lie dormant within
you but everybody writes differently about it.
Very few really agree.
confusion one faces. That there is a power
lying within us and some say that it gives you some sort of a jargon and receive lot of
Falsehood is falsehood and reality is
So many reality. You will now know through some
have been misled, how you have been
deceived for money which you cannot under-
You are seeking beyond money. You know
You know that very well But those who have
not yet known that still they are climbing up
the cusp, they have not seen the ditch below.
Such people try to come up and try to give
This is another
* H. H. Mataji's address given at Kingston (UK) on 11th June 1980
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-5.txt 
 But there it reality and that it exists
within you and that there is Self within you
and once discovered, you find your Absolute.
To tell you that you should become a very
quiet and serene person would be absurd.
have copies of that ? If there are no flowers, To tell you that you should be such a mas-
how will you create plastic flowers ? So, if ter over your passions and your lust and
you find somebody so unreal, you must your greed that nothing should sort of
dominate you, this is like giving a big
money from you.
affair, I feel myself.
It is a very shameful
But that does not mean that there is no
reality. If there is no reality, how can we
know that y ou have to find out the Real.
And when you are finding the real, you must
know that you must keep yourself absolutely
alert about it that you are not going to
lecture to you. It has no meaning.
You have gripped it yourself these things
and how will you leave it, when your grip is
so strong. You have to grip something
else. It is simple common sense. If you
find something, much more valueable, much
accept anything but real. But you can be
hypnotised, you can be brain-washed,
because you do not know all these things.
Somebody says some words in Sanskrit
language, you get so enamoured by that as
it Sanskrit language is something out of the
blue, e.g. some of the disciples, who went
to certain Gurus, got "Mantras" which if
more dynamic, much more joy giving, esta-
blishing your sense of security, you will give
up all these nonsensical things.
But see how it works out. A gentleman,
who came from a horrible Guru to me, who
was absolutely pestered and finished by
you tell an Indian, he will laugh out his
stomach; like a Mantra given AINGA". Now
tell any Indian and he will laugh and peaple that Guru. He used to deliver only intro-
had paid three hundred pounds for such a
nonsense ike that which means nothing, get 300 people for introductory lectures in
which cannot be a Mantra. Why do you
need a Guru for Mantra ? There is a science
about it. Because we do not go into tne
ductory lectures. And he said, I used to
the same hall in which you are giving lecture
Mother". What do you say to people there,
isn't it queer? He is a well known person who
charges you money, who gives you courses;
understanding of it and we just jump on to
Tbecause they want you to, because they he has ruined so many people. It is like,
want money. Simple thing. It is an enter-
just as I was watching people going into a
pub and coming out of it all drunk. Others
are attracted much more, seeing them drunk
like that. Sometimes it is impossible to
understand human nature and when the
prise.
You have given up everything for the
sake of your seeking. You have seen that
tne value of these material. things wilI not
take you anywhere, you have seen beyond.
Reality stands before you, you crucify that.
How do you explain all this ? And the
acceptance of reality is your glorification.
value system of some people is different Are you going to add anything to Reality?
Supposing I wear a diamond necklace, it is
Your value system is different but if the
from you they can exploit you. So the
natural reaction, I can understand very well,
going to adorn me not to the diamond neck-
lace. This is billions and billions of times
should be such.
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-6.txt 
 more briliant than all these things which that He sits like a magistrate and calls you
adorn us. If you accept that, you will be
glorious, you will be lusturous, Is'it it ?
Think about it. Because we are charmed
about these outside things, their deceptive
one by one "come along" and then you have
a pleader there, sitting.
But in a subtler way, He has already put
ways, their Cunning ways, and that we are the judging forces within you. See in the
hypnotised. That is the only explanationt.
That's how they have managed so far. One
after another this hypnosis spreads like fire.
You ask them what did you find. Don't
ask us, we are very happy people". After 3
days you find that the person has committed family He saved Elephant He saved many
suicide.
evolution he has worked It out, In the evo-
ution, how beautifully He has worked it out.
From amoeba to this stage, how have we
come ? Many animals were discarded. He
saved some animals eg. from Mammoth
We are not aware still that this is and so many were discarded one by one all
these years. In the same way, human
belngs who have been very much on the
extremes have bean discarded You se
the history. Now you won't find anyone
the most important, the most and vital time
in the history of human beings.
The last judgement has started. We are
facing the last judgement today. Wa are killing his seven wives these days,
not aware of it. And all the Satanic Forces impossible, you cannot do it. Person like
have come out like the wolves in sheeps'
clothes. And they are trying to attract you
and you do not judge them. You only sit tion or anything, vas finished. Those ideas
down and judge the Reality. Ithas started,
It is a fact. It has slarted.
Hitler came up Finished. Anybody who
came up with any extreme ideas of domina-
die out. People are ashamed of them and
new ideas come up into human beings-
accepting balance, tranquili
Now, let us see from God's point of view
how He is going to judge you. It is quite
peace..
We are talking about it. People talk
about peace, but are we really wanting
peace within ourselves ? And if we are
easy lo say that we do not believe in God.
Very easy to say that we don't believe in
this Govt. but if you do anything wrong, then really wanting it, what are we doing about
you know there is a Govt. acting.
same way it is very easy to say that we
donot believe in God. He is so compassio- whole magistracy within you.
nate, He is so loving, He is so kind, that He magistrates are already sitting down there.
has given us our freedom to know ourselves.
And we rely on Him. we take Him for gran-
ted. He has made us human beings from
amoeba to this slage. He has spread out down within you on different Centres in your
such a beautiful world around us. He has spinal chord and in your brain.
done all that. But there is a judgement
which we have to face now and the judge-
ment that is going to come from God. It is are like a panel sitting in your brain and
not going to be the way that we understand
In the it ?Actually the judgment has started and
to judge you God has already placed the
All the
Christ has said, "Those who are not against
me are with me". These are the magis-
trates. And these magistrates have settled
It is very interesting and all these seats
when the light of Kundalini rises through
Nirmala Yoga
5.
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-7.txt 
 these centres, when these centres are tive consciousness. Very clearly it has been
enlightened within you, you start enlighten- said by these people. Then we must expect
ment being manifested on your fingers. The
end of your fingers get enlightened, the our collective conscionsness. It is not that
sensitivity of your fingers tell you what cen- because I am saying it or anybody else is
tres are there affected within you, This saying it but it has to happen to you.
Kundalini rises and comes upto this point,
the fontanel bone area or the Talloo as
they call it. the soft bone here in your What is happening with some one. Some
childhood, and it breaks it. Actually it people did get their vibrations, they did feel
breaks it. You can see in a person, who
something of that nature where we jump into
The other day I was in Hamstead, I know
the cool breeze coming from their hands but
does not have much hair here, the thing just Some did not. They said that they have got
going down a little. First it pulsates. You il and they just disappeared. This is not
can even see the pulsation of the Kundalini
in the triangular bone which is sacrum
and when this Kundalini rises, you can see
even the movement of this Kundalini. Not
in all but in some, Because if the person is
the way you are going to treat yourself, you
are to love yourself and you have to adore
your seeking and you have to get your fulfil-
ment. As your mother l must tell you this
is a very serious matter. There is no Guru
first class or you can say if the aeroplane is Shopping going on here, you have to get
first class the landing is first class, its
shooting off is first class. In such a person,
your realization. You have to get it. It
is so fortunate that the time has come, when
you are living and that you can have it be-
cause of that you took your birth during this
time because you are Seekers of very
ancient times as I told you.
there is no obstruction, you cannot see the
Kundalini pushing up. For example, whenl
came to this place there was no problem on
the traffic, so we just smoothly came away,
nobody noticed us. But if there was a
traffic problem, there would be jamming India-called as "Nala-Akhyan". When Nala,
here and jamming there In the same way
when this Kundalini rises in a person who hold of the Kali. It is said that now is the
has a problem on its Cenires, it shows. You
can see with your naked eyes.
It is written in one of our scriptures in
one of the tortured souls by Kali, caught
rule of Kall. Kali is the sinister fellow, the
one who brings all confusion and con-
fuses people He contused Nala. By that
This is what is Kundalini awakening. he got separated from his wife. So when
Not that some people say that they started Nala got hold of this Kali, he said, "Now, I
am going to kill you. I am going to kill you
once for all, so that you do not create con-
fusion into people anymore". So Kali said,
"Alright, you can kill me, I will accept it but
become birds, after becoming human beings? first of all you should know my MAHATMYA
(importance) I do have some (MAHATMYA)
of them, believe that you have to jump importance". Nala said, "What importance
into your unconscious-achieving your collec- can you have ? You create confusion in the.
jumping like a frog. Now, we must use our
brains. Brains have to be intact in modern
times. Are we going to become frogs now
after becoming human beings ? Are we to
Your sciences, like psychology itseif, I mean
Nirmala Yoga
9.
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-8.txt 
 minds of people, what importance can you places and I am very happy to come to this
have ? He said that, "When I will be ruling old city of Kingston, where the stone for the
Le. when he will as in these modern times enthroning of the king was put. Must be
ruling means creating confusion in our
minds.
something special about it.
Everything has become relative
We talk like that, "yes it may be
But the people have lost their sensitivity
now.
alright, may not be airight, may be good, to Reality, not only in this country but every
may not be good". That is the time when
the confusion will ba reigning on this earth prised. They are all getting sophisticated.
that is Kali Yuga (the modern times). Then They are gelting developed. They do not
those great saints and those great people know what you have found by your develop-
the Seekers, the Sadhakas who have been ment. If anybody tells them, they think,
searching God in the hills and dales and in:
the caves
where, much more in India, you will be sur-
"you want to enjoy all the fruits of develop-
will come back as ordinäry ment and you are just telling us lies".
and they will
householders
get the
So it is very necessary for you to under-
REALITY. In this confusion only, they are
going to get the vision of REALITY, they stand for definite purposes that the Judge-
are going to become the REALITY. They ment has started. And for that Kundalini
is placed within you,
are going lo get their self-realisation". And
Nala forgot all his vindictiveness and his a great Judge, you will not find such a Judge
He anywhere in the whole universe, because
She is your own mother. And, She is
anger and what Kali had done to him,
said, "On this point I forgive you because I
respect them so much. For that collective Nirvyaj She is just giving. She does not
good I give up all my personal problems. want anything from you, nothing whatsoever.
Let this happen."
She wants that you must get your property.
You must get your Self. You must get all
That only in Kali-Yuga, the sun of your powers. She does'nt want anything
Sat-Yuga, the World of Truth, the age of from you. That you should know your Selt.
enlightenment is going to come and those That you should become your Absolute.
Saints who were seeking the reality in the That is what She wants,
forests are born today in this World. You
can see them, they are saintly. They can has recorded all your problems you have
see the joke of artificial life so clearly. They created for yourself for Her ascent. She
know it is all absurd but then they do not knows everything about you and She judges
know what is the Real. But the time has you on this point, "how much you are sin-
come and it has to be worked out and it will cerely wishing your ascent". That's all.
be worked out.
She is your
Mother born again and again with you. She
She knows you out and out. When She
It häs worked out in your great country rises, She shows those symptoms, She
and now, say, a thousand people are there shows what is wrong with you. But She is
very much in it who have understood it. your own, absolutely your own. There is no
one greater your own than She. She is your
There must be about at leäst 300 people
who are actively working it out at different friend and She judges you because you
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-9.txt 
 must get the Best; because She knows what they come to me and they get cured. But I
is the Best for you. For, a child may like to am not sitting down here to cure Cancer,
put his hands in the electric socket but the not at all nor any Sahaja-Yogi is interested
Mother says, "Don't do it, Don't do it". But in Cancer patients. But if you want to have
the child does not listen, he gets angry. your Realisation your Cancer will be cured,
Still She says, "No, No, you cannot do it."
Because She loves you, Loves in the purest alright. i mean those who have realization,
form, where you do not expect anything from are sitting here, had been suffering phy-
the other person. And such a power lies sically or mentally, some of them were
dormant within you, which is just waiting even epilepfic and had very bad physical
for an occasion that when She rises, when probiems, there
She sprouts fike the germinating power in blood-cancer,, some of them had other type
a seed, when She comes up, then there of physical problems.
should be some one who should look after I16
you There should be some one who should With all these things you are faced with
guide, there should be someone who should the Divine-Love of God-His desire. Kunda-
decode and tell you what you feel on the lini is the representative of His Desire.
fingers mean, and what is happening to you. Desire of the ocean, of the Compassion and
Otherwise you will not know your moorings, of Love. That He wants to bestow His
you will not know where you are going and kingdom upon you-That He wants to make
you will fall into a trap of ignorance or may you the prince of His kingdom. This is a
be you may be still there not knowing much.
Tom
troubles will be cured, your health will be
were some who had
very very serious thing and we have to
concentrate'upon this point. n
meill
T9PVSO she wants to use somebody there as
the mouth piece. It is that the Unconscious
has to speak through someone. And that is a power within us which is to judge. This
The judgement has to be done and there
someone has to be a person of the same
nature as the Kundalini is. Those who
make money from you and extort you and
leave you in the lurch, how can they be called
as Gurus ? They are the thieves standing stand against our freedom. But his desire
outside the door. They are just waiting
for an opportunity to catch hold of you
because they have already been judged, but it does not force you, it does not take
power is the desire of God, of that God who
is Almighty, who has given us our freedom.
He is not going to challenge it. His might,
His strength, His powers are not going to
is within you existing on the Kundalini and
this desire rises within you, enlightens you
discarded and they are going to the Jail m
and they want more people to go with them.
away your freedom It enlightens you to
see. You have freedom to be in this room
This Kundalini when She rises, She It is not forced that you sit here or there
Nothing is forced upon
l are given a room which is
first soothes you physically. That is you or walk away.
can say aS
Health, e. g. Cancer cannot be cured with- enlightened. So you use your freedom in a
out the Kundalini awakening. This I have betler way with more understanding, because
been saying. When doctors get cancer, you are enlightened, you can see and then
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-10.txt 
 that moment when She will give you what
She is there for. What a blessing I Where
you know what to accept and what not to
accept.
can you find all this ? It is all within you
First thing is to enlighten you. Unless which has to work out.
and until you are enlightened you are in
confusion, you cannot see through. Then
It is left to your freedom to decide. So She
cures you, She improves you, She bestows
all the blissful things upan you. She takes
But even when they get their realization,
I find, they just disappear, even after reall-
zation. Can you imagine ? Progress in the
west has been like that: You move 3 steps
forwards and 4 steps backwards. Really
you will be amazed. I don't know what has
gone wrong with the Western mind which is
disillusioned by the material gains. But
when it comes to Sahaja Yoga, their calibre
you away from the worries of grosser level
like after realization, many people have sol-
ved their material problems. Not that they
have become Mr. Ford or someone like that
but the attitude changes and the material
problems get solved. Because there is a Is just of the lowest type, sometimes, one
Centre for that also within us. Your family cannof understan d. Now can these people
problems get solved. Husband wife prob- have no self-esteem, while in the villages of
lems get solved, so that you are freed. Your
grip over these things that worry you, is ho rumblings, nothing. They are just there.
released and that now you can see with Complications are there, I agree. But you
greater freedom what you have to choose, must have
what course to take. After giving all these really makes you feel sick.
concessions and all these advantages and
all the possible help, then you are judged.
Can you think of any magistrate that gene-
India people get it and have it just like that
It sometimes,
Perhaps you donot know that in this
country I have worked on seven or eight
people for four years. For four years, can
you believe it ? Not that there is something
wrong with you. You are seekers, you are
saints born in this country. What has hap-
pened to your saintliness ? Why so flippant,
Why don't you touch
rous ?
And such a thing exists within us. VWe
have to be very thankful to God for what He
has done for us. We have no idea. We
have taken Him for granted. For everything why so superficial ?
within us we have taken Him for granted. it deeply ? Why don't you understand your
We have not been able to thank Him for Seit ? 1 just fail to understand why don't
what he has done for us and how kind He you respect your Self. I respect you and
has been to us. For a small thing we try to
get rid of Him from our hearts. Still He
exists, the Kundalini exists within us. Try
anything against it, She exists. I have seen
some people having Kundalini which is
beaten up, there has been horrible marks of
pain and anguish and She is just turning
Her sides in anguish but still She exists for You have to become absolutely dynamic and
I love you very much because I know you,
I know you from ages. You are the lost
children, I know that but I don't know how
to establish that within you. Sometimes my
condition is the same as that of your
Kundalini.
You have to be in a great haste to get it.
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-11.txt 
 blow it out and talk to the people that this is
the situation and emergency. Can't you see
what is happening in the World ? Can't ing to walls, eg, you will find that some
you see the confusion ? But the situation
is taken for granted. Even if it is faced, it is
faced in a very intellectual way that you feel
guilty about say. Vietnam. Very good idea,
sitdown here. Easy chair politicians, thin-
king about Vietnam or file it up.
We donot realize where we are today, we
donot realize. Sometimes I feel, I am talk-
people are slaves of watches. They have
no time. "I have no time, I am so very
busy". Why are you saving time ? Why
has this idea come to you ? Our fore-fathers
never did thāt. Why are you saving time ?
For what ?
"becoming" not for wasting it in the parks
or in horrible places like races etc.
You are saving time for the
You are the chosen ones who have to
receive It and it has to happen. But to take
Reality you think hundred times and to get
into dirty, filthy circle-it just clicks. Whom
should I blame for this ? These horrible chiselled out yourself. You are not saving
Gurus or these horrible people, who have it for wasting. I mean the best advertise-
put up a show for you or it is your knave
You are saving time for "becoming'"
because you are a diamond. You are to be
ment will be "Save fifty pounds to spend
three thousand". Something like that. You
attitude towards the morality. 1 shudder to
are saving your time not to waste it. Saving
see the way the things are sometimes and
the way the people are taking things for it for something extremely precious,
granted also. It is your responsibility today, tremely vital and important, something that
the ones who are supposed to be the See- you have been seeking. But I do not know
kers to see that you bring forth the Reality how some times to keep you on that level
to the people and tell them that please see
and get It. Because you are their fellow
beings. You are their kith and kin. How
can you leave them even it you get your own
ex-
of depth. Of course some of the people
are of such high calibre even in this country
that they are very satisfied. You do not
know how much has been done in this
Even if you enter into the country also by God. For example, I went
Kingdom of Heavens, you will not forget to see Stonehenge, Stone-henge is the
them, you will think of them and you cannot creation of Mother Earth. You can see the
be happy. Even when you get your realiza- vibrations. You can feel it. There are so
tion also, unless and until all those saints many things done in this country. Kingston
who, out of their ignorance, are lost, you will itself is so vibrating, I was amazed. What
think of them. I have to work out through did you find ? At least 100 people went
If I could into that carriage and some came in here
realization ?
you. I cannot work it out alone.
then there would have been no difficulty. If walking, going up and down. Some walked
in, some got out. They are'nt decided still.
Still no proximity to sensitivity. No sensiti-
God could work out just like this, give them
Establish them
realization, just finished.
alright. But it will not. Because you have vity towards the Reality. They cannot feel.
the freedom. Why you have the freedom ? May be-may be, it will work out. I am sure
Because without your freedom you cannot it will work out. I am the most optimistic
come to that calibre by which you are raised.
person you can ever see. See, optimism is
Nirmala Ygoa
10
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-12.txt 
 my nature, 1 believe. It is going to become. you suddenly jump on to the sun or to the
Only thing your so called "freedom" comes
In the way. So try to understand that this get ? You could not understand anything.
freedom is given to you so that you can
become your Self and not that you should
become an animal. An animal; what is the
use of giving realization to, say, a chicken ?
Can I give also ? That is the point.
moon. Even going to moon what did you
So you have to go into all the areas of your
being because the movement will start
inside. You have to take your attention to
all the areas within you, You have to settle
down your attention and now attention will
lose the grip over non-sensical things. All
the priorities will change. The greatest thing
Is that when IT pierces ithe Sahastrara, the
Many people say, "Mother, I have done
lots of good things". I ask,
things have you done", "I don't eat chicken".
Now, I say, "Why are you saving chickens
"What good
joy starts pouring and you start feeling that
cool breeze coming through your hands-
the cool breeze of the Holy Ghost and you
start feeling every where. You can tind out.
Now you can judge others and yourself.
You can help others automatically. You
have not to go oul for that, you have not to
get medicines, you don't have to get anyth-
ing. Just you being there, you help others
in their Salvation as if the whole mechanism
starts working. The whole technique starts
working and you start seeing the whole
thing. You will be amazed.
for me, you better save your self". All sorts
of funny ideas they have.
It is you, the Seeker, the buds on this
beautiful Tree of Life, they are the ones for
whom this creation is created. They are the
ones who have to get It. They are the ones
who have to have It. The whole universe
has blossomed into them and they want to
become what-werms ? Just think about it.
By God's grace we start the programme
of realization, which may take perhaps a split
of a second, it might have already worked
it out because today I was little going to
much, I think. Kingston is a good place.
May be one day it will become a very great
place, I feel. But let us see how much you
use the power that is flowing in the area.
I hope something will work out.
You have to know how to work it out on
your own self and others. It is a great fun.
We are all in the Great Fun mood and you
should also enjoy with us.
wonderful. No time for misery. Only thing
one feels is that why these people are doing
like this, Like grown ups and mature people
we look at little children why are they putting
their hands in the fire.
TO
And it is
Now after realization you have to take It
up seriously.
because after finding it also, it is not that
You have to work it out
May God Bless You.
Subscribers are requested to renew their subscription in time and also
extend their cooperation in making new subscribers from Sahaja Yogis.
The magazine is posted promptly, however, if the same is not received
please intimate us.
11
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-13.txt 
 IN FLIGHT TO U.S.A. WITH MOTHER
Those who do not recognise this and
Dear Brothers and Sisters,
content themselves with old "individualist"
ideas and actions and feeling will go down
spiritually. The reward for growing with the
Collective Being will be tremendous growth
So at last our Beloved Mother is on Her
U.S.A. What lies ahead very
way to
much depends upon how hungry the seekers
show themselves to be. On the one hand
towards the full establishment of Self-Rea-
Mother says that She will announce Her ization, All will get better and better vibra-
tions and feel the joy and watch the ego and
hand She fears that many may miss out super-ego grow smaller and smaller. Mother
uses Australia often as an example of how
affected by the impure knowledge and false great is the Recognition and She says that
this comes from the innocence, which is
Innocence knows Truth when it
Advent, publicly, in America, on the other
because they are so far into the ego and
gurus; this land of America is the Visshuddi
chakra of the Universe and so, is where intrinsic.
the ego begins Let's pray that the impure meets it : and so even if the superficial
knowledge can become Nirmala Vidya and damage is extensive, the speed with which
the ego can recognise that all the knowledge recognition comes helps to very smoothly
50 far acquired is of little use and is, in fact, and quickly repair the damage.
a severe limitation to Seif-Realisation.
In fact the Recognition has been so
strong in Australia, says Mother, that the
visit and Her Love and Compassion is over- next stage of surrender is reached very
soon. When this happens, the real Integra-
tion can happen. But there's a danger al
things that Her chakras become so active this point-Surrender/Integration has to be
that it is almost unbearable for Her. The part and parcel of a growth and Collectivity.
Mother has said again and again that "it is
not enough just to love Mataji only by
pting to step outside the Collective Being. loving each other, in collectivity, can you
I have seen some amazing examples of really please Adi Shakti". So many Sahaja
what happens in Britain when people go Yogis have surrendered to Mother (they say
they have !) and yet are not at all loving and
But Mother wants many to get it in this
flowing more than ever. Sometimes back
In Britain the Deities become so angry with
Deities recede from people who are dama-
ging themselves or others or who are attem-
against their Spirit or the Collectivity and
it is not very nice ! Mother says there have caring for all their brothers and sisters and
been several cases in Australia (as else- often very uncollective. Mother will not say
much here for it is a lesson that each
individual" must learn for him or her self.
He has learnt the lesson when he/she loses
his "individuality" And then and only
Collective Being of the realised Souls of the then, can the final integration stage
where) and the people/groups have been
given a 'not-so-gentle' warning.
Now that Mother goes to America, the
Universe has to grow and become strong. commence.
12
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Mother is the Collective Being of God vity. If it is, you will increasingly feel the
and so Surrender to Collectivity is the only joy and the love for all your brothers and
way to know Her. And this is the point at sisters and so the love for our Divine Mother.
which we must be absolutely honest with
ourselves ! Again I say, Mother won't say
much and in fact you may appear to be gro- growth of Sahaja Yoga in U.S.A. and the
wing, when in fact you are going down. world. Your attention must be kept pure
This is how the Maya works so that you get and steady. Do the Sahaja Yoga practices
'bumped' in order to learn. So She urges and reduce mental activity to a minimum.
that you sincerely and honestly assess the Just enjoy Mother's Grace. -LOVE
way in which your collectivity is growing with
your surrender As I said, if it isn't, then it
isn't really surrender at all-just mental acti-
Every Sahaja Yogi should pray for the
WARREN
17-9-81
PRAY ER
विश्वेश्वरि त्वं परिपारसी विश्वम्
विश्वात्मिका धारयसीति विश्वम् ।
Those who are devoted to you them-
selves become supporters of the universe.
प्रणतानां प्रसीद त्वं देवि विश्वातिहारिणी ।
तर लोक्य वासिनामीडये लोकानां वरदा भव ।।
विश्वेश वन्द्या भवती भवन्ति
विश्वाश्रया ये त्वयि भक्तिनम्राः ।।
Prana-taanaam praseeda twam devi Vishwa-
Vishwe-shwari twam Paripaasi Vishwam
Vishwaatmika dhaarayaseeti vish wam,
Vishwesh-vandyaa
Vishwaa-shrayaa ye twayi bhakti namraaha.
arti-haarini.
Trailokya
bhavanti varadaa bhawa.
vaasinaa-meedye
lokaanaam
bhavatee
(Pronunciation-a-Other aa-Amen ee-meet.)
Translation :
Translation:
e quar-
Queen of the universe, you are its guar-
O Devi, the remover of the affliction of
universe, be pleased to us who are prostrat-
dian.
In the form of the universe, you are its ing on your feet.
receptacle.
O Devi, who are worthy of all praise by
the dwellers of three worlds, grant boons to
all the people.
You are worshipped by the Lords of the
universe.
Nirmala Yoga
13
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-15.txt 
 LF श्री
माताजी प्रसन्न 5े
क
पं० पु० माताजीनो दिनांक-१८
१६८० रोजीं राहरों येथे सर्व सहज योग्यानी केलेसा
उपदेश ही उपदेश अत्यंत महत्वाचा आहे कारण
जानेवारी
वरगरे सर्व साहो असते. की त्यापूढे वरतो कही
घण वर्गर होती हैं तक्षांतसूद्धा गहात ताही। पृण
स । है
जे काहीं
यामध्ये प० पू० माताजीनी आपल्या नावाचा बाहयोतल आहेतो सगळा भ्रम आहे। "है नाही
या कवदाचा अर्थ विदद करन हे पहिल्यादा तुम्ही लक्षांत ठेवते पाहिजे । "नि"
दाब्दाची जर तुम्ही स्थापना केली, की है नाही आहे।
कोणताही विचार आपल्यामध्यें उठला की म्हणायचे
आतां आपण इथे सगळी सहजयोगी मंडळो है नाही।" "हे ते नाही" इथून सुरवात करायची।
आहोत। एका अर्थनि हैं फार बरें आहे को आपण या "नेती नेती बचने-विगमों अबोच्ुस" है नाही
आहे । हा विचार नाहीं आहे। परत हा विचार
गोष्टो करु शकतो, आणि त्यावदुदल ज कोही ताही आहे। असे म्हणत गेले, म्हणजे 'निः" शब्द
जो आहे. विस्गासहित नि आहे | त्याचा अर्थ
तागलो। जो भ्रम आपल्याला दिसतो तो अ्रम नाहीं।
ल स्थाच्यापसिकडे काहीतरी आहे। हया त्रमा-
पसवां मो सागितले की आपण स्वत.लो कस मुध्ये आपण इतके भरमसाठ दिवस घालवले आहेत
स्वच्छ केलें पाहिजे । कारण आपल्या आईचे नावच आपलें आयूष्य इतकें व्यर्थ घालवले आहे की ज
मुळों निर्मला आहे। आणि या नांवामघ्ये पुण्कळ ताही ते महत्वाचें वाटतं। आणि त्यामुळे आपण
गायच म्हणजे हा सगळा अम आहे
म्हणजे ' निर्मली
सांगितला ।
असे भेटलों, न्हणजे आपआपल्या हिंतगुजाच्या
बारीकमारिक अमेल त सुद्धां एक दरस-२
शकतो ।
-पना सामु
शकत्या आहेत ।
पुण्वाळ पापांचे होग एकत्र केले । हया गोष्टीत आनंद
मिळ ल, त्या गोष्टींत आनंद मिळेल. त्याच्यामध्ये
१।।
पहिला राब्द ' । सुख मिळेल, हयाच्यामध्ये सुख मिळ ल, असा
जे नाहों पण जे आहे, असेवाटतं म्हणतात महामाया । विचार करुन आपण जे काही उपभोगण्याचा प्रयत्न
स्थाच नांच आहे महामाया । तसच है सर्व संसाराचे केला त्याच्यामध्य आपल्याला कांही मिळाले नाहीं।
आहे । हें दिसते आई, पण हैं काही नाहीं आहे
ह्याला जर आपण बंधितले आणि ह्याच्यात जर आहे।
आपण फसलेले असलो, की असे वाटते की है
संगळे कांही हैब आहे । आर्थिक परिस्थिती वाईट
आहे, सामाजिकपरिस्थिती वाईट आहे, संसारिक हैं सगळ साफ झूट आहे। ब्रम्ह फक्त एक सत्य आहे।
परिस्थिती बाईट आहे । सगळे वाईट दिसते
चंगलें काही दिसत नाही। समुद्राच्या वरच्या जायचे। मग "सहज योगाला" अर्थ लागतो।
अ्रावरचे पाणी अत्यंत गइ्ळ, पाण रडे, त्याच्यामव्यें म्हणजे होते काय की बहतेक सहजयोगी पार
काहीं वस्तु तरंगत सुद्धां असतात
खोलांत गेलं कीं इतके सौदर्य संपदा,
निः' आहे । नि:म्हणजे नाही
े । सारे निःस्सार आहे। त्याच्यांत सार नाही, निसत्य
लेव्हां अशी दूष्टी ठेवायची की "हैं नाही आहे"
। बाकी सर्व झूट आहे। असा विचार करीत
स्यांना असे वाटतें की
पण त्यच्यिा झाल्यावर,
शक्ति आतां पार झालों । तर माताजीचा आमच्यावर
।
आपण
Nirmala Yoga
14
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-16.txt 
 आशिर्वाद आहे। मग आमच्याजवळ ऐश्वर्य का येत याचा। म्हणजे इकडून एखादी जर गाडी आली,
नाहीं ? म्हणजे ऐदवर्यामध्ये परमेश्वर आहे असे तर त्याला दूसरी गाडी जर रेटली, तर दोन्ही
त्यांनां वाटतें। पण पार भालों तरी आमचा स्वभाव गाडया मग कुठेतरी मधीमघ येतिल । एका अर्थनि
का वदलत नाहीं असा पहिल्यांदा विचार केला वरोबर आहे, पण कधी कधीं त्याने
पाहिजे । तेव्हां मग लक्षांत येईल की आपला स्वभाव शकते। म्हणजे तिकडून एक विचार येतो आहे
बदलत नाहीं। 'स्वभाव' शब्द किती सुन्दर आहेत आणि आपण इकडून एक चांगला विचार काढला.
बघा। "स्व" स्वम्हणजे आत्मा त्याचा भाव ।
मिळवला आहे का आपण ? स्व" चा "भाव" जर तर ती विचार दबुन परत जुपचाप बसेल आणि
आपण मिळवला, तर बाहयांत कांहीही जर असले कुठेतरी एकदमच निवेल असेंही होऊ शकते ।
तरी आंतले जें इतके सुन्दर आणि अनुपम आहे की आणि असे पुष्कळांचे होते। दाबून ठेवले विचार,
त बाह्यांतलें नुसते नाटकासारखें वाटलें पाहिजे। कांहीं तरी चांगले केलें पाहिजे, नेहमी चांगले
है साक्षी स्वरूपत्य जे आहे ते जोपयंत तुमच्यामध्ये वागले पाहिजे, दुस-
पूर्ण ण जागृत होत नाहीं तो पर्यंत नि: शब्रदाचा असे बिचार घेऊन लोक चालले की त्रास होतो।
अर्थ तुम्ही लावलेला नाही, आणि त्याचा उपयोगही एकदम कधींतरी तो राग निघतो कधींतरी एकदम
केला
नुक्सान होऊ
तो की तो हरा विचाराच्या उलटा आपण घालायचा,
याशी चांगले राहिले पाहिजे
२
नाही। असे जर मनुष्य लक्षांत घेईन, को तो संताप होतो की लोकांनां समजत नाहीं को है
आपण अजुनही 'निः' वर बसलेलो नाही. आणि एव्ढे शहाणपणाने वागणारे एवढे चिडले कसे ?
अ ज्ूनही आपण कधीं तरो भावनेच्या आहारी आंतली शांती सुद्धां सुटते आपली आणि आंतले जे
जातो, आरिणि कधी कधीं सत्तेच्या आहारीं। दूस- काही सोदयं आहे ते नष्ट होऊन जाते : तेव्हां काय
यावर जबरदस्ति करतो किंवा कांही तरी उगीचच करायचे ? तर निर्विचारीतेंत राहावयाचे । विचार
सहन करीत बसतो व त्याच्या वहल आपण रडत होचे निशिद्ध ठेवला पाहिजे । अगदी निर्विचारितेंत
असतो की आपण एवढे सहन केल ।
मध आपली स्थिती आहे "नि:" वर । म्हणजे हेही आपण आलों। विचारच सोडायचा । एकदम प्रयत्न
नाहीं तही नाही। ती स्थिती ध्यानामध्ये फार उत्तम कला पाहिजे। आतां लोकांनां असे वाटेल की माता-
होते। नुसत्या 'निः' शब्दाचा जरी तुम्ही माग जी विचारा शिवाय कसें होणार ? विचारा शिवाय
केलात तरी सुद्धां होऊ शकते। 'नि:विचारिता'
त्याच्या मधो- आपण राहिलों, म्हणजे मधोमध "बिलंबात".
कसे चालायचे ? पण हे विचार आहेत काय ?
पोकळ गोष्टी आहेत । निर्विचारतंत तुम्ही आलांत
पहिले नि्विचारतत यायचे । कोणताहिं विचार, की तुम्ही आणि परमेश्वराची शक्ती एकाकार
मग कसाहि असना का ? सुष्ट दुष्ट कसाहि असेना झालेली असते । म्हणजे
का त्यातिरचारावर जर का उड़यासारायला सुरवात सागरांत आला । तैव्हां त्याची शक्ति तुमच्यांत
झाली, एकदा जर का ते Jumping सुरु झालें, आली आतां है बोट काय विचार करते काय ?
की तुम्हांला तो एक प्रकारचा "इनरशिया। किवा पण फिरत ना ? विचार 'त्याला घायचा, तु कर
म्हणायचे तर स्थिती स्थापित होते। आणि ती आमचा विचार। पण कठीण जातें । कारण आपण
स्थिती झाली म्हणजे, तुम्ही प्रत्येक विचारावर नि्विचारितत असतो। पुष्कळ म्हणतात आम्ही
उडतच असता । हया विचारावरुन त्या विचारावर सगळे समर्पण केले । पण तसे कांही जूळत नाहीं,
त्या विचारायरुन दूस-या विचारावर । म्हणून जुळत नाही, वोलायच्याच गोष्टी होतात कारण
इतरेजनांनी असे सांगितले की, एखादा वाईट विचार समरपण बोलायचे नसते । निर्विचबारता गाठायची
आला की त्याला सुष्ट विचाराचा विरोध कराव- म्हणजे समपंण । म्हणजे विचारच आपण सोडला।
तुमचा बिदू परमेश्वराच्या
15
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-17.txt 
 विचार सोडल्यावरोबर मधोमघ् आलो । मधोमध
आल्याबरोबर आपण 'निर्विचारतेत
कोणताही विषय आकलन करतांना निर्वचा-
म्हणजे रिता साधता आली पाहिजे । आपोआप समोर
परमेश्वर शक्तीशीं एकाकार झलों । परमेश्वर गोष्टी येतात । आता तृम्ही संशोधन करता । संशो-
डाक्तिशीं एकाकार झालों की तोच सगळ बघतो बन करतांनांसुद्धा ते निविचारितेंत करा। हात
आपले 'बारिक, 'सारिक आपल्य ला आश्चर्ष चालवायने पव्त, निर्वित्रारतित । वरोबर संशोधन
वाटेल तर हे करून बघण्या सारखें आहे। आणि जमेल तुम्हाला । आतां मी कितीतरी गोष्ती सांगते ।
करुन बधितल्यानंतर तुमच्या लक्षात येईल की तो मी कधी जन्मात सायन्स वाचले नाही । तसले,
पण सगळे सांगते । हे।
सगळे ज्ञान कोठून येते ? तर त्या निविचारितंतून।
तर आपण फकत निर्विचारतंत राहिल्या बरो- मी नुसती बोलून राहिले आहे । नुसती बघते आहे
बर सर्व प्रेरणा, सर्व गवत्या सर्व कांहि मिळेल। जाते आहे ते। ते सगळे आधी तयार केले होते,
अगदी निर्विचारितत राहिल्यावरोबर जी कल्पना Computer मध्य । तो बोलतो आहे आपला सटा-
आपल्यामध्य येते, ती प्रेरणात्मक असते । आणि सट पण तुम्ही जर निविचारतत आला नाहीत, तर
आपल्याला आइचर्य वाटेल की, सर्वे कहीं समोर तुमचा Computer तुम्ही बापरत नाहीत तुम्ही त्या
भाषणाला उभे Computer चया वर आपले डोके लावल आहे ।
कॉम्प्यूटर बनवलेला आहे, त्याची
म
पूर्वीचा मार्ग चुकिचा होता ।
मला काही माहित नाहीं।
ताट वाढल्यासारखे वाटेल ।
राहिले । नि्विचारितत उभे राहायचं, काही विचार तो एवढा
ये ऊ छावयाचे नाहीत। नुसत तुम्ही नि विचारतित एवढी मेहनत केली आहे । त्याच एवढ अचूक सगळ
उभेरहिलात आणि बोलायला लागलात तर ज्यान काम करूने ठेवलेले आहे, आणि तुम्ही त्या कॉम्प्यू-
कधोहो भाषण दिल तुब्हते, ज्याला भाषण कसे टरचे न ऐकताच आल व च-हाट लावलेले आहे, तर
घायचे हैं माहित नाहीं, ज्याला कांही विशेष ज्ञान तुमच्या हातून चुका होणारच। त्याला कांही अरथ
नाहीं । असे असून ही तुम्ही वोलायला उभें राहि- आहे ?
ल्यावर असे बोलाल, की लोकांना अआश्चर्य वाटेल
की एचढे जान हयांच्याकहे कुठून आलें ? कारण
नि्विचारीतत तार लागली, की है सगळ तिथून वर्गरेला आपण 'प्र' शब्द वापरतो । 'प्र' म्हणजे
येते । तुमच्या होवयांतून कंहीच येत नाही । आता निर्विचारीतत ज काहीं वडते ते सगळ 'प्र' आहे।
आमच आम्ही सांगतो आपल्याला
प्रार्थना केली की आई आमचें हे कार्य करु न पण चंडावरती 'प्र आहे
दे । ले आम्ही विचारांत घेत ताही। आश्चर्याचो असे 'प्र' | हया जब्दाचा अर्थ असा आहे की En-
गोष्ट हो। निविचारतित घेतो नि्विचारितत घेतले lightened प्रकशित आहे । प्रकाश बोलतो का
की तिकडे सगळी मशिनरी तयार आहे । तिच्यांत काहीं ? आतां समजा हया खोलींत आपण प्रकाश
घालायचं कीं खट खट खट तयार होऊन समोर केला, तर तो कहीं बोलत नाहीं, की विचार देत
हजर त्या। मशिनरीला काम करु घावयाचे । नाहीं, तर दाखवतो स्पष्ट कीं हैं आहे ते आहे ।
Silent मशिनरी म्हटली पाहिजे । त्या शांत मशि- तसाच निर्विचारीतेचा प्रकाश आहे । तो नि आणि
नरी मध्ये आपले प्रश्न घातले पाहिजेत
बृद्धीजीवी लोकांना फार कठीण कारण प्रत्येक निराकार, असे अनेक शब्द 'नि' पासून येतात ।
गोष्टीत विचार कारायची संवय लागली।
जुना
1.
तर याला शुब्द 'प्र' आहे। आणि प्रशिक्षण
आतां आपणे ते इतके 'प्रचंड आहे, पहा 'प्र-चंड' प चंड आहेत
'पाशित' 'प्रज्ञ',
।
। पण तें हा निः हयालाच नि्विचार, निर्वाज्य निरंकारी,
मग निविकल्पांत येतां येतं । आधि निर्विचार व्हा-
Nirmala Yoga
16
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-18.txt 
 'प्र आला । जे बाहन करतो परंतू 'प्र' । 'एनलाई-
"पडेता प्रवाही
आपल ज आहे ना ? तसेन निर्वाणि रक्षावे
यचे माग निर्विकल्स, मंग विकल्प सुटतात म्हणजे
कळते की काही तरी शक्ति आहे । आणि ती सगळ टन्ड जो आहे, त्या प्रवाहाति पडा ।
कार्य करते। पटापट । आणि ती कशी कार्य करते,
अगदी बारीक असते तिचे काम । तुम्हाला अगदी आमचे जेव्हा निर्वाण होईल तेव्हां तुम्ही आमचे
आश्चर्य वाटेल की असे कसे घडते
पुण तस च आहे । म्हणून आम्ही घडयाळात कधी परमेश्वराला म्हणतो । पण आम्हीच आमचे रक्षण
वघत नाहीं। क्धी कधी कडयाळ बद पडले म्हणजे करत बसलों आहोत मंग परमेश्वर कशाला तुमचे
१ভपा वेळेता ३/४ वाजलेले असतात । पण आमचे रक्षण करणार ? तो म्हणतो, चला ! चला ! चालू
्खर घडयाळ निविचारितेत असते । तें थाबलेले दे थोडेसे। होउ दे त्यांचे रक्षण ! तूर मुद्दा असा
घडयाळ आहे। PERMANENT ज्या वेळजा की आपण आपल्या गाभि्यात उतरायला शिकले
ज करायचे से घड़ूत येते घडब्रुन येते । मग कोही पाहिजे । है निविवारितंतल समजले पाहिजे म्हणजे
वा्जाट नाहीं वाटत उशीर झाला तरो, नाही झाला निर्विकल्प होणार। 'निरासक्त आसक्तता
तरी, । माझा मुलगा, माझी मुलगी, हैं
। आतां वेळेचे रक्षण करा । रक्ष रक्ष परमेश्वर असे आपण
े
काही जाल तरी आपण आहोत ना जिथ नसली पाहिजे
आहोंत तिथे ? आता काल गाडी पल झालो, पण
आम्हो बसली आरामात। कारण आम्हाला बघायते तिकडे माझा मूलगा, माझी मूलगी नसते । मी फक्त
आपल्याकडे विशेष आहे | इंग्लिडला उलट आहे।
होते तारे । चांद्या वगरे । आमच्या लड़नला तारे
कुधी बघाचला मिळत नाहीत । त एक सौदिय पहि माझे माझे चालले की शेबटी तसन होते। शेवटी
यचं होते। रयावेळे ता आकाशामध्ये त्याच प्रत्ुड मग मीच राहन जाते । माझे कांही नाहीं तूझेंच
माइयापुरत ।
इकडे माझा मूलगा माझे घर असे
वैभव पसरलले होत। तर आकाशाला वाटले माता-
जीन आपल हैं सौदर्यं पहावे । कधी कधी त्यांच्या कीं बकरो जेव्हा जिवत असते तेव्हा व व करीत
कडेही वधितल पाहिजे ना ? मजा वाटत होती। असते । परंतु तीला मारल्यानंतर तिच्या आतंडया-
म्हण जे काय आहे की आपण कोणा ची बरदीश करा-
यवी नाही ।
परमेश्वर आपल्याला अगदी होतावर सभाळून संगळी
कडे नेतो। सगळी व्यवस्था तो करती। त्याला कही
सांगावे लागत नाही त्याला सगळ माहित आहे ।
पण तुम्ही त्या प्रवाहांत आहोत का नाहीत, है पहिले
पाहिजे । आणि जर तुम्ही त्या प्रवाहांत नाहीत, तर
मात्र तुम्ही अजून काठावरच अडकलेत । मग तो
प्रवाह येतो, दृकलतो, दोन तिनदा काढतो पण ललितेत्रा शब्द आहे । '
परत चालले त्या काठावर । मंग म्हण। यच माताजी आहे। है देवीचें वरदान आहे । हैं देवोचे अस्त्र
आमचे कांही जुळत च :
तुम्ही अडकलेत ना। आपली गणेशस्टतुती फार किवा शक्ति जेव्हा लालित होते जालित म्हणजे
सुदर आहे
प्रवाही शब्द वापरलेला अहे| प्रवाहात जेव्हा हातात लहरी आहेत. हया लाटा, हातांमध्य हया
आम्ही पडतो, प्रवाह । प्रवाहात वाहायच म्हणजे ह्या लाटा येउन राहिल्या आहेत. ही शाक्ति जेव्हा
त्याच्यामध्ये आपला प्रवाह नको प्र-्वाह- परत कार्यान्वित होते; त्या शक्तिला ललिता' शक्ति
सगळ आहे । कत्रीरान कार सुदर लिहिलेले आहे
क्या तारा करुन त्या जेव्हा धुमकीला लावलात
फक्त नि्विचारितत राहिल की तेव्हां त्याच्यातू न 'तूही तू ही । तु च एक आहेस ।
तु एक आहेस असा ध्वती निधुतो। तसे आपले
झाल पाहिजे । ।
मी नाहीं माझे अस्तित्वच नाही
अस आपण एकदा ठरबल म्हणजे नि शब्दालाअ थे
लागतो ।
म
नतर आपण ला शब्द घेउ या। ला शब्द हो
माझे दूसरे नांव ललिता
नाही । होतच नाहीं। पण आहे । 'ला म्हणजे देवी जेव्हां ललित होते
कार्यशिल - तिच्यामध्ये नेव्हा लहरी येतात, तुमच्या
। त्यात म्हटले आहे पडता प्रवाही',
Nirmała Yoga
17
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-19.txt 
 हणतात । ती अत्यंत सौदर्यशाली आहे। प्रेममय ।
प्रेमाची शक्ति जेव्हां कार्यान्वित होते ती ही ला नाही मला माहित नाही । माणसांचे मला समजत
जवित । आणि सगळोकडे तुमच्यावर आवरण आहे। नाहीं एवढे । पण तस मला बाटत। वा बाह । काय।
ती कार्यान्वित आहे। ती कार्यात्वित असल्याबर मग प्रेम वाहत आहे ? ज सा एखादा स्वरकार किया
केशला काळ जी कराय बी ? तुमची कार्य हो शक्ति एवादा कलाकार जेव्हा आपले संगीतात मग्न होतो,
आहे ? अहोएकाही झाडातून तूम्ही फळ का दू शकत तेव्हा जसे स्याला वाटते की काय आपलें संगीत
नाही ।एकाही ! काइन दाखवा पाहू । पळ। च सोडा। वाहन राहित आहे ? तसे है प्रम नुसत अवाधित
तुम्ही एक पान मुद्धा काहू शकत नाही । एक पूळ बाहिल म्हणजे तो ललाम दाक्ति तोच हुया
कोड शकत नाहीं । मग है ज सर्व काय जो शक्ति सुाटांची शक्ति आणि तो च ही ललित शक्ति आहे ।
करते ती ला शवित आहे । इतक च नाही, तर तुर त्या जलिता' शक्तिला प्राप्त झाले पाहिज
तुम्हाला पार केलं ती सुद्धां ला' शक्ति आहे ।
स् वक्तितृनच म शवित आणि नि शक्ति अशा जी दष्टि असते ती कशी आहे त्याच्याकडे आपण
दोन्ही शक्त्या निधालेल्या आहेत । म्हण जे निः'
कति हो वहादेवाी शक्ति सरस्वती ही आहे
आणि सरस्वती' शक्तिमध्ये मनुष्याला नि पणा
आला पाहिजे । नि: पणा म्हणजे
छान वाटते वर ? परण तसे तुम्हलिा वाटत की
याच्यामध्य पहिले असे की दूस-याकडे आपली
लक्ष दिलें पाहिजे । म्हणजे खालच्या प्रतिच्या,
।
म्हणजे निम्नस्तरावरच्या लोकांची दुष्टी
दुस-याच्या-
कडे नेहमी अशी असत की हयांचे काय मारायच,
पूर्णपण अना- हयांच्याकडन आपल काम कमाप्रकार करुन व्या-
वयाचं | अशो ही निम्नस्तरांतिल लोकांची दष्टि
कॉही लोक असे असतात
अनासक्तंता यायला पाहिज। ला
। आणि तीन श्ति इत रशी असते । त्याच्यावर दूसरे
सपतता ।
क्तिमव्ये प्रेम आहे
पला सबंध जोडते । ललाम, 'लावण्य' हया स्व कीं दूस-याचे काय वैगृण्य असेल ते बघत असायचे ।
शब्दामच्ये ला शब्द येतो। 'ल हया दाब्दाला एक स्यांच्यात त्यांना काय आनंद मिळतो मला माहित
गोडबा आहे । आणि त्या गोडव्याने आपण सर्वाना
भारउन टीकले पाहिज । सगळयांशे बोलताना तोडच वाकडे आहे, त्याचें घरांत पटतच नाही वगरे
आपण तो शक्ति वापरली पाहिज । म्हणज संगळी
कडे चराबरामध्य तो शकती. तो प्रेमशक्ति पसरली अशाने माणसंधाणा होतो, आणि त्यानी माणसाला
असतानां आपण कार्य केले पाहिजे ? एक तर विनार स्वतःला त्रास होतो तेव्हा स्वतःला त्रास कसा करुन
सोडना पाहिजे पहिल्या शक्तिचा
शक्तिमुळे विचार उत्पन्न होतात। आणि शेवटल्या कहीं त जमत नाहीं।
शक्तिमध्ये काय केले पाहिजे ? जी ला शक्ति आहे । भेटले की केवड़ा आनंद होतो।
त्या शक्तिमध्ये आण, त्या प्रेमाचा आन द घेतला
पाहिजे । तो कसा चेणार? एकाकार, तन्मय होऊन ।
आपले प्रेम दुस-यावर किती आहूं हे कोणी कधी त्याशक्तिला आपण असे वापरलें पाहिजे की दूस-
मोजत का ? ते माजल पाहिज । काय मजा येते यांच्याकडे पहातानां आपण नि्विचारितत जावे ।
अगदीं । वा: किती आपले प्रेम आहे होसगळय विर ? निर्विचारितत गेल्यावरोबर त्या माणसांतही निवि-
असे कधी येते की नाहीं तुमच्या डक्यांत ? माझ चारता येईल । म्हणन मो म्हणते बंधन द्या। 'नि
त सेच असते। नेहमीं च । की मला है वाटते की शक्ति आणि 'ला' शक्तिला जर बंधने दिली, म्हणजे
काय हो हे प्रेम बाहत राहिले आहे बरे ? किती ला शक्तिला जर 'नि' मध्यं आणले तर फार फायदा
ताही । हया माणसाला हेंच नाहीं आहे । त्याच
-
पण त्योनी काय मिळणार आहे आपल्याला ? मनुष्य
कारण पहिल्या ध्यायचा त माणसाकडूनच शिकल पाहिजे
अहो मला तर संगळ्यांनां
।
। मला
तर ही ललाम शक्ति जी आहे, जी बापरायची.
Nirmala Yoga
18
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-20.txt 
 होतो। आ्तां पूष्कळांना सांगावे लागते की डावी आहे अने जर काणो विचारले, तर माइया लक्षांतच
बाजु उचला व उजवीकडे घाला । अती गर्वी येत
लोकांना म्हणजे, मी फार कार्य करित आहे असे म्हणजे कार्य ? दोन मिनिटाची गोष्ट । आज नदी
ज्या लोकना वाटत किंया ज फार कार्यरत असतात
त्यांना सांगते की डाबी उजवीकडे घाला। म्हणजे
स्वत:चे ज प्रम आहे ते आपल्या पांत्रही तत्वांत मुक्कामावर बसला आहुति ते पाहायचे आहे ।
भरावच । जस कनव्हासवर आपण रंग भरतो। तुम्ही जर इकडेच बसलात घाणीत तर इथे वाहाते
तसे आपल्या हृदयांतले ज प्रेम आहे, ती त्रिती जो आहे ते विक्षिप्त वाटणारत तुम्हांला। आम्ही साग-
आह, तो आणुन आपल्या कार्याची जी शक्ति आह
स्याच्यामध्ये ही शकत्रित भरायची । ती शकित एकदां आहे त आम्हाला माहित आहे। आणि परिवर्तन है
भरली की त्या अश माणसाला रंग चढ़तो। आणि सहजयोगांत नेहमी होत असते। तेव्हा कोणत्याही
तो हळे हळे असा पस रतो. त्याचो प्रिती अशी वाहते.
मराठीत एक शब्द आहे स्नेहाळते', त्याची कृती जी अगदी कामातून गेलेला आहे. आतां हा कही
आहे तो स्नेहाळते । आणि अशामाणसाला असा
कही रंग चढ़तो व असा काही आकर्षं क बनतो असा माणसामध्य परिवतन होणार, आणि झालेच
माणस । अशा माणसाजवळ तासनतास बसल तरी पाहिजे । नाहीत रो आपल्या सहजयोगाचे कार्य
असे वाटत की आपण बसलो आहोंत कुट तरी।
छान निर्वात असे. तर ती प्रिती स्नेहाळली पाहिजे,
व त्याना उपयोग असा होतों की माणसे जोडली म्हणता कामा नये की 'हा कामातून गेला । प्रत्येक
जातात । आपलेपणा वाढतो। समळयानां वाटते की माणसाला हुयाी पूर्ंपण सवलत दिली पाहिजे ।
कूठ तरी असे स्थान आहे. जिथं आपल्याला प्रेम आतां आपणच वघतां की आम्ही कोठे होतो व कोठे
स्नेह संगळे मिळणार आहे। तर ही
प्रे माची शक्ति आहे, तिला जोपासली पाहिजे । असा जर विचार केला, तर तुम्ही स्वतःची तर
आपल्यामध्ये जर असे विचार आले कोणतेही तर इज्जत कराल व पण दूस-याची] पण कराल, स्वतःची
आपण समजले पाहिजे की आपण त्या गंगेमध्ये उया माणसाला इज्जत नसते तो दूस-याची करत
घाण टाकतो आहे। असा जर आपण विचार ठेवला नसतो। तेव्हा ललाम शक्तिला खुप बाहवलें
तर आपली जी ला शक्ति आहे, प्र मळ शक्ति याहिजे । हयाच्यावर बोलायला लागले तर एक
आहे ती पूर्णाण स्वच्छ राहिल । अगदीं स्वच्छ पुस्तकन लिहावें लागेल, पण त्याची मजा काय आहे
राहिल आणि त्याच्या स्वच्छतत आपल्याला खुप ते मो तुम्हाला सांगू शकणार नाही। कारण ते
आनंद वाटेल । दुस-यांच्या कडे पहाध्याच्या दष्टि- शब्दांत घालता येत नाही। शब्द फारच अपूरे पड-
मध्ये कोणतीही चिकित्सकता असता कामा नये।
मला जर तुम्ही कोणाविषयो विचारलत कीं है जस स्मित जर तुम्ही अंकित करायच म्हटले, तर
गृहस्थ कसे आहेत. तर मी फारतर कु डलिनोवर फारतर त्याचे स्नायु तुम्ही अंकित कराल। पण
सांगू शकेन की हयांचे कोठल चक्र पकडल आहे. त्याचे इफेक्टस तुम्ही सांगू शकणार नाहीत त्यांतलेंच
किवा त्यांचे हे धरतें कधी कधी। पण त्याच्यापलि- आहे ते । हया शक्तिला खूप बाव दिला पाहिजे,
कड, है गृहस्थ कसे आहत, त्यांचा स्वभाव कसा वाढवली पाहिजे ।
नाहीं ती गोष्ट । मी मस्हणते, अहो स्वभाव
इथे वाहाते आहे. तर उघा कोठे वाहाणार आहे ?
कांही सांगतां येणार नाहीं। आतां तुम्ही कोणत्या
ग।
राकइत पाहात आहोत तर ही नदी कूठे येणार
माणसाला असा ठपका देऊ नये । की हा मनुष्य
कामाचा नाही। तर असं नाही म्हणायचे । प्रत्येक
म्हणजे परिवर्तनच आहे । ते्हां ज्यावा सहजयोगा-
वरविश्वास आहे. त्यानी कोणत्याही माणसाला असे
ग्रंभूची जी कोठ आलो। आणि आतां नदी कुठे चालली पूढ़े ।
का
तात । हया गोष्टीला शब्दांत घालायच म्हटल तर
Nirmala Yoga
19
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-21.txt 
 लंजाम गंकित, त्यानी माणसाला एक सोदर्य,
एक आकर्षकता, एक फार
मिळतो। बोलतांनां, वागण्यात, सर्व गोष्टी मध्ये नुसता सरबवंधच्या सबंध आनंद लूटीत असतो। आणि
आपण है बधितले पाहिजे की ललाम झक्ति चाटते ही स्थिती सगळ्यांत अत्युत्तम आहे । त्याला असे
का ? म्हणजे एमादया माणसाच्या रागावण्यांत आहूं तस आहे. किंवा त्याची काशाशी तुलना करा-
सुद्धां इतका गोइवा असतो, की त रागावण्ण सूद्धो यची, किया अलंकारीक भाषत त वर्णन करण्यापेक्षा
गोड असते
वितला ललिता शक्ति अस म्हणतात । त्याता
अगदीं विमेयास लोकांनी करुन ठेवलेला
लोकचे असे म्हणणे आहे की ललित दाक्ति फक्त आतून अनुभवायचे आहे। तो
संहारक वर्गरे असते । ।
अत्यंत सूदर आणि फारच कारिगरीवाली असते।
ही एवढी कला्मक असते की समजा तुम्हो एक बी
पेरलत तर स्पा बो मवले काही अवयव नष्ट होतात
ती ललिता वक्ति । यण ते अंगदीं हळ च, सहज आपली धर्म शक्ति, तशीच आपली उत्क्रांतीची ही
त्याच्यावर मग झाड येणार। स्याला मग पाने शक्ति आहे। 'म शद्वामध्ये माणसाला घडपड
येणार, पान गळतात सुद्धां पण तेहीं अगदी सहज । करावी लागते। गोष्ट आत्मसात करावी लागते
तयाच्या नंतर मग फूले आली, आणि त्या फुलांना आंतमध्ये ध्यावे लागते, आकलन करावे लागते ।
जेव्हा फळ येतात तेव्हां फूलांत-लही काही प्रकार दोन्ही करण जसा एखादा कलाकार आपल्या 'ला
गळतात, आणि फळे येतात। पूढे फळेहो कापावी शक्तिने आपल्या कृतीची कल्पना करतो नतर नी
लागतात, आणि खावी लागतात । आणि
जो आस्वाद येतो तोही तो शक्त । इ्याप्रमाण या करायच्या वेळेला तो म शवित वापरती । प्रत्येक
दोन्हीं ही शक्न्या म्हणजे कहीतरों काटछाट केल्या- वेळला बधतो ठीक आहे का ? नाही। मग परत
विवाय जशा मूल्तयां बनत नाहींत, तसेच ही काटछाट- करायचे, परत वघायचे, असे करित रहातो। ती 'म'
सुद्धा, व्याच्यांतलाच एक भाग आहे अस जेव्हा शक्ति झाली । म्हणजे हें ठीक नाहींना ? मग दुसरे
आपल्या लक्षति येईल, ते्हा आपल्या होतुून जर करायचे तिसर करावच । हे जे 'ठीक करायचे काम
काहीं काटछाट होत असली तर तो वाईट आहे अस आहे त्याला श्रोडी वडपड पाहिजे । स्वत:लाहि ठोक
समजले नाही पाहिजे त्याचीही गरज़ आहे । पण करित राहावे लाभत
ती काटछाट एवादा कलाकार कलात्मक रितीन तर उत्क्रांती झाली नसतो। परमेश्वराला फार
करती। व एादा बोथट माणूस ती बोथटपणाने धडपड करावी लागते। म्हण जे ्ही 'म' जात्ति आप-
करतो । । आणि त्या शक्तिला
चित्रे असतात की ती
बागला स्वभाव स्थापित होते। निविचारिता स्थापित होऊन मनुष्य
वघितली कीं निविचारिता
। अशा फारत गोड आणि मधुमय नुसता त्याना मनसोवत आनंद व्यायचा। 'रसस्वाद
तसा रसस्वाद बेतराहायचे
आहे । कीं त्याला शब्द नाहीत त्याला वर्णन नाही आहे। त्याला
अनुभव संगळ-
म्हणतात त्याला ।
।
पुण तस मुळींच नाहीं । ही यांनां वडला पाहिजे
आता में मधला शब्द फार मजेदार आह।
। 'म हा महालक्ष्मीचा शब्द आहे । 'म म्हणजे
खाल्यावर शक्तिती त्याची रचना करती, आणि त्याला ठीक
। तें जर आपल्यामध्ये नसतें
तुमच्यामध्यं किती कलात्म कता आहे त्या- ल्याला हस्तगत करावी लागते
च्यावर ही शक्ति अवलंबन असते ।
च्ित्र आपण वघावें, आणि ते वघतच राहावे असे जर आले नाही तर दोन्हीही शक्त्या झडून पड़तात।
वाटते। कोणी विचारलें की हया चित्रांत एवढे कारण ही शक्ति मध्यविदृ आहे । Centre of Gra-
काय आहे, तर ते शब्दांत सांगता येत नाही बुवा ! vity आहे । तेव्हाँ मध्य विदुमध्ये असायला पाहिजे,
तें नुसते बघतो आम्ही। तेव्हां कांहीं कांहीं अशी आणि 'मध्यविद' ही म शक्ति आहे. आपल्या
आतां एखादें प्राप्त होण्यासाठी टिकवावे लागते । ते टिकवणें
20
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-22.txt 
 उत््रातीची। आाणि त्या उत्करातीच्या शञाक्तिवर बालून ते निघते । ते काही भांडत नाहीं । आणि
जेव्हा तुम्ही वाढत जाल, तेव्हांच या दोन्ही शकत्या जर हथा अउचणी नसव्या तर ते झाडाला मुळी
म्हणून त्या अडचणी
मात्र पूर्णापण समन यावयास पाहिजे, आणि त्याची पाहिजेत । अडचणी असल्याशिवाय तुमची प्रगतीच
जोपासना केली पाहिजे । म्हणजे असे की "असेल होणार नाहीं । पण त्या अडचणीवर कशी मात
माझा हरी तर देईल खाटल्पावरी । ।
तुमच्या मधुन कार्यान्वित होतील। पण 'मं शक्तिची धरुच शकणार नाही ।
आगृुती होई करावयाची ते ज शिकवते ती ही म शक्ति आहे.
पर्यंत ठीक आहे । तो देईल वाटल्याव री । कबुल, आणि म्हणन तो मा शक्ति आहे । ती आईची
त्याच्यापूढे ? त्याच्यामध्ये ही 'म' शक्ति जो आहे, ती शक्ति आहे । म्हणजे व्याला सगळयांत प्रथम
आपल्यामध्ये दोत्हींचे सतुलन वेऊन करावी लागतो मनुष्यामध्य सुजता म्हणजे ज्याला Wisdom
्हणतात । ते पाहिज । समजा एखादा माणसाचा
तसच आपल्याला स्वभाव गरीब आहे। तर तो म्हणतो माताजी आम्ही
हया दोन्ही शक्तिचे नि आणि 'ला यांचे संतुलन आपले गरीब आहोत कारय करणार । अहो बदला
साधावे लागते । ते संतुलन साधण्यासाठी, आपल्याला तुम्ही ! सिंह व्हा, बरे एखादा सिंह आहे ! तर
त । असे केल्याशिवाय होणार
निधन जाते ज्यांनी है साधले, तो सहजयोगी उच्च- नाही। आपल्या पद्धती बदलायला पाहिजेत । ज्या
स्थितीला गेला । फार जास्त 'इमीनल सहजयोगी माणसाला आपल्या पद्धति बदलता येणार नाहीत
काही कामाचा नाहीं । तसच फार जास्त कार्यरत तो मनुष्य कधीही सहजयोग वाढवू शकणार नाहीं ।
पण जो आपल्या कारण तो एका पद्धतीला चिकटला । लोक कंटाळले
पद्धतिला । आतां काहीं तरी नवीन पद्धत
पाहिजे। वोअर होतो ना मनुष्य । तर हो 'म'
कार्यपद्धती । स्हणजे आज
आपले काही तरी निराळे काढतात । है तुम्ही पोहे केले । मग उद्या करजा, परवां असेंच कांहीतरी
पाहिले असेल की प्रत्येक वेळेला माझ काहोतरी म्हणजे नेहमी बदलत जायाचे | पुरुषालाही नेहमी
नवीन असते । नवीन पद्धत असते । त्यांत हैं नाहीं उत्सुकता असत की आज घरी काय 'बेत' असणार ?
तेर ही जी स्थिती आहे, ज्यांनी मनुष्य संतूलन
साधतो। ज्यानी मनुष्य 'एकरसता प्राप्त करतो ।
ह्या शक्तिला जेव्हा तुम्ही उच्च स्थितिला नेता, ते-
व्हां हे जे व्यहायत्र शन्स आहत ते फुटतात हे जे
प्रत्येकाने आपली पद्धती फिक्स नाहीं करायची । व्हायत शन्स आहेत ते सबंध संतुलनांत, संबंध सुज्ञते-
सकाळी उठले कुक लावले, माताजींना नमस्कार तच वाहातात । जर तुमच्यात सुज्ञता नसली, तर हे
रंगाच जस आपण संतूलन करतो, रागदारीत जस
आपण स्वराचे संतुलन करतो,
आपल्यातून पुष्कळदा आतों तुम्ही शेळी व्हा
धड़पड करावी लागते।
सहजयोगो सुद्धा कामाचा नाही।
प्रेमशक्तिला कार्य रत करतो. आणि वार वार त्याचे त्या
सिंहा वलोकन करतो, म्हणजे समजा आमची कांही
पद्धती। ही बायकांनां चांगली साधते
आहे । त्यात प्रत्येक वेळला माताजी
आ
जमल तर दूसरे काहीतरी करुन बधायच । त नाही
जमल तर तिसर जर डोक्यातून नाही जमल तर शेप-
टाकडून । कधी हसबून करते। कधी रडवून करते।
कधो समजावून करते । कधी प्रेमाने सांगते । तसच
आ।
केला, की मेकेनिकल झाले । तुमची ही जीवंत वहायब्र शन्स वाहाणार नाहीत।
ज्या माणसामधुन
पद्धती नाही । जिवंत पद्धतीमध्ये न विन नविन व्हायत्र शन्स अत्यंत येतात तो सुज्ञ आहे । त्याची
पद्धती शोधून काढायच्या। जसे मी नेहमी मुळाचं सुज्ञताच वाहाते आहे, हे लक्षांत ठेवलें पाहिजे ।
उदाहरण देते । की एक मुळ निघाले । ते मुळ हळू तुम्ही जरी कितीही मोठे सहजयोगी आहांत असे
इळ खाली जमीनींत पेरत जाते। आतां जिथे जिथे दिसते तरी ते पायावर दिसते । पकड येणार, त्या
त्याला अडचणी येतात तिथे तिथे ते बरोबर वळसा पकड़ी आल्या म्हणजे समजायचे की आपले संतुलन
Nirmala Yoga
21
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-23.txt 
 सुटलें आहे म्हण जे असले पाहिजे ग्रॅव्हीटो असली पाहिजे, नवीन नवीन
हणून त-हेने विचार केला पाहिजे लोकांज्री बोलण्याच्या
मुटलेल आहे। आणि संतुलन
काय तर आपल्यामध्ये 'म' शक्ति कमी आहे
आमचे नाव बरोखर माताजी' जे काडलेलें आहे, पदधती सुद्धां नवीन काढल्या पाहिजेत, सहजयोग
स्यांतला है पाहिले अक्ष र मा च आहे। आई आह। पसरवण्याच्या शक्त्या बापरल्या पाहिजेत । आणि
आणि आमच्या या मा' शक्तिमुळे हे कार्य घ्डून या शकया जर तुम्ही नीट बापरायच्या तर त्याला
आले आहे । आतो जर 'ल शक्ति असती तर काही 'निः शक्ति म्हणजे कार्यशक्ति फार जबरदस्त असा-
जमले नसते । निः' शक्ति असती तरीही काही गला पाहिजे । आणि मग ती जर शक्ति जमली
जमल तसत । आम्ही या तिन्ही शक्या वेऊत आलो
पण खरच याच्यावर ात आहे ती 'मा शक्तिची। ती पाहिजे । पुण प्रेमन क्ति कार्यान्वीत आणावची ति
आणि 'मा' शक्तिच तुम्ही पाहिले आहे की आईचे :निः शक्तिने। पण तेहीं जमले नाही तर दूसरें ।
पाहिल्यांदा है सिद्ध डाले पाहिजे की ही आमतरी पहिल्यांदा नाल आणि पिचला रंग वापरु | हे जर
आई आहे। अहो आता कोणोही आले आणि म्हणाले योग्य नाहीं झाले तर हिरवा लाल वापरु तेही
की मी तुमची 'मा' आहे, तर तुम्ही मानाल का
नाही मानणार। आईची सिद्धता व्हायाला पाहिमे की टेवता कामा नये । हट्टी स्वभाव असला
की ही आमची आई आईे
।
नाही, म्हणजे अ्थात ला शक्षित मूल्य प्रेम शव्ति
।
नाहीच जमल तर तिसर । हे ज सुज्ञ पणाचे बाहे
?
हैट्ट
की सहजयोगति जमणार नाही। आपल्याला काम
ं सहजयोगच पसरवायचा आहे ना ? मग है नाहीं
। आई म्हणजे काय ?
आमच स्थान आहे ती । आमचा तिच्यावर पूर्ण
अधिकार आहे आणि तिना आमच्याव र कारण ती जमले तर त केते, तहीं नाही जमले तर आणखी
आमच्यावर एवढे प्रेम करते । । हट्टाला फार बळी
प्रम आहे । तो आमची हितचितक आहे | ती आमचे पडते। कारण मला है माहित आहे की माणसाचें
नेहमी संगल चितीत असते, आणि नि च्या हृदयांत आमच्यासारखे नाही आहे
आमच्या विपयीच्या प्रेमाविवाय दुसरे कांहीही नाहीं । टाकेल सांगतां येत नाहीं ! तेव्हां माणसाच्या
जं आम्हाला म्हणजे 'स्व ला सुशोभित आहे तच हृट्टाला केव्हहीपेटवता कामा नये । हे आम्हाला
तिच्यामध्ये आहे. असे अर लक्षांत आाले तरच समजते तेही म' शक्रितिने पण आपला हट्ट सोडला
आईवर विक्वास वसणार आहे । तर ती सिद्धता पाहिजे माताजीनां हुट्ट नसतो। ज आहे ते खरें
द । आणि तच सहज आहे । जे काहीं करायचे त विशेष आहे. म्हणन
कस
अगदी निव्यजि तिथ कही केले
आतं मी तुमच्या
। ्यंचा हट्ट काय करुन
दुस-याना पढवूत दिली पाहिजे
योग्यांना साधलें पाहिजे आणि इत रांना वाटल करायच आतां आम्हाला काही इच्छा नाही आहे।
पाहिजे की हा एक सुज्ञ आहे । आणि त्याच्या करितां आमच्या मध्ये काही 'ला जक्ति नाही की 'निः
संतूलन यायला पाहिजे। ते संतुलन प्रेमाचे आणि शक्ति नाही की म शक्ति नाही। कांहीही नाहीं ।
कार्य शक्तिवें असे सुदर साधले पाहिजे की लोकांनां त्या शक्या आम्ही आहोंत हैही आम्हाला माहित
नकळतच, त्या माणसाचा प्रभाव किंवा परिणाम नाही
सर्वावर पडला पाहिजे । हें सहजयोग्यानी साधायला सगळा खेळ ।
पाहिजे ।
आम्हो काही नाही नुसते बधत असतो
।
असले जीवन जेव्हां होउन जात तेव्हांच, मानवा-
मध्ये सिद्ध महज योगी तयार होतील । अजून सिद्ध
आतं या तिब्ही शक्या कशा बापरायच्या त्या झालेले नाहींत । सिद्धता साधली पाहिजे । सिद्ध
कार्यान्वीत कशा करायच्या वर्गरे तुम्ही घरी विचार सहजयोगी जो असतो, तो अगदी एकतान होऊन
करा | म्हणजे 'निः शक्तिने धरामध्ये सगळे सोदर्य
(Contd. on Page No. 24)
Nitmala Yoga
22
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-24.txt 
 SHRI MATAJI IN ITALY
The coming of H. H. Shri Mataji to Rome the last evening. The Goddess had been
meant a lot to me : alongwith the moment of pleased by what had been happening at the
my Self-realization it was the most impor- end of each collective meditation. People
tant event in my life. Ihad been previously were queuing to be able to talk to Her
advised to pray Mother in order to receive individually, or to be cleansed by Her, or to
the grace of recognising Her with the heart. show Her a picture of their child, or to bring
And there She was at the airport, smiling,
to Her the sick of their family, or just to bow
in front of Her and to thank Her. Such a
loving, affectionate. The prayer had been
more than fulfilled and joy poured in. veneration was permeating the atmosphere
Twenty sahaja yogis had come from Switzer- that, while Her Holiness made Her way to-
land and the entire welcome committee was wards the exit, some would thrive to touch
gathered in a mood both happy and medita-
Her saree ! And, as each eve would pass:
by, more would take the vibrations, take off
their shoes and bow before leaving.
O Mother, how wonderful it was to witness
the way these Italians have recognized you,
how their heart opened right away, how the
and one puja. The two first public functions worship of the Virgin Mary is deeply rooted
live to welcome Her.
So, that was the beginning of Shri
Mataji's successful and impressive stäy in
Italy. Four programmes on four evenings
took place in a bookstore in the old centre
of Rome, which had been all set up for this
The room got jam-packed with
and alive in them!
occasion.
As they repeated all together, on the last
people climbing on ladders to better see evening, with a moving fervour "Mother
Mother, others were staying in front of the Thou arth the Holy Ghost" we could see
bookstore, on the street. Two amazing them enjoying the flow of vibrations as a
observations came to the minds of those result of their sincerity.
What a joy for
nus,
used to the ways of the Italians. Indeed sahaja yogis, to witness the change on the
they are well known to be exhuberant, indi- faces which were closed the first day and
vidualist and undisciplined. Yet they really gradually became bright, happy and serene !
behaved themselves, many returning to
Catherine, Gregoire and myself have been
a hundred times rewarded for having prepa-
red Mother's coming. To begin with, the
mere organisation has been great fun !
Selecting a poster ("the face of a Madonna"
said the photographer), rushing after work
to the city's main centers to fix these power-
ful posters, distributing invitation letters in
all the places where the seekers were to be
Mother was looking so young and radiant on found, admiring the adds in the newspa-
every programme which were attended to by
150 to 200 people at a time. The assiduity
of the audience was encouraged by Mother's
great idea of delivering a cycle of speeches.
It was like a tale : people wanted to know
what was happening next and kept on
coming.
A new born Sahaja Yogini said that our
Nirmala Yoga
23
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-25.txt 
 pers. all these situations offered countless to be crucified for that purpose. Thus there
occasions for enjoyable hours and good isn't any further need for karma and suffe-
ring which aliments this intruding, useless
of being able to enjoy Mother's darshan for catholic sense of guilt. But as Christ was
an Incarnaltion he did not suffer on the
laughters. And we then relished the luck
five days, including a wondertul touring trip
to Florence, The Swiss sahaja yogis parti- Divine level, as a consequence of his re-
demptory task. Hence he was not a miser-
ed railway strike the day they were supposed able, cadaveric pitiable person as often
to return home Mother really adapts Her- represented in christian art, especially on
the cross. He was strong, beautiful, joyous
liarities, making use of them in the most and powerful, just as Michelangelo painted
Where there are so many him in "the last Judgement" of the Sixtine
So why should
christian constantly grieve and be afflicted ?
On the contrary, they must enjoy them-
selves, as their burden has been taken away
the first crop of Mother's Italian children. by Christ. Life has to be enjoyed says
cipated in all this, thanks to a most weicom-
self with light-speed to each country's pecu-
humorous way.
strikes, let there be strikes, when convenient
Chapel, in the Vatican.
to the sahaja yogis !
It is too early to give an appreciation on
but the atmosphere of the follow up meetings
is quite good. Shri Mataji's lectures were of
definite interest to all sahaja yogis, particu-
larly to those educated within Christianism.
Her Holiness spoke mostly of Christ, the One
who came on Earth to take over the burden of
humanity's sufferings and who even accepted
Shri Mataji, and how else could it be
for Her children, to whom She dedicated
so much love, patience, to whom She gives
so much joy ?
Rome, 11-12-81
-Ruth L.
[Contd. from Page 22]
परमेश्वराला आपल्या कावू त करुन घेतो। सगळ है सिद्ध आहेत, इकड़े काळ जी बेतली पाहिजे । असे
कोही त्याच्या हातून व्हाव लागते । आतां मी जात जर झाल तर सगळे उत्तम होईल ।
आहे। माझ्या माग तुमची सिद्धता कशी कशी व
कुठ वापरता ते वधायच आहे। आणि मी मधुन
मधून प्रत्येकाला सांगत असते की असे करु नका, तलगना आपल्याक डे जेवायला किवा हळदी कु क-
तर त्याने वाओट नाही वाटून ध्यायचे म्हणजे 'म' वाला बोलवा। आमच्याकड़े फार मोठी पूजा आहे ।
शक्तिमध्ये वाट वाटून ध्यायचे नाहीं। म्हणजे अस सगळयांना सांगायचे । बरोबर काही सहजयोगी
मला सांगायलाच पाहिजे । पण पुकळाना वाईट बोलवायचे, व आलेल्यानां जागृती द्यायची असे जर
वाटते । आम्ही सिद्ध झाले पाहिजे, ही गोष्ट जर आपण वर्षभर केलत तर पुष्कळ फायदा होईल ।
लक्षात घरली आम्ही सिद्ध आहोंत है सगळ्यांनी सर्वा ऽना अनेकोतम आशीर्वाद ।
मानल पाहिजे, बघितल्या बरोबर पटल पाहिजे की
मी एकदां सांगितल आहे की एकदा आापल्या ना.
THM
Nirmala Yoga
24
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-26.txt 
 Contd. from 2nd Cover
be avoided and thus the Sadhakas should and pay respects and say Jay Jay Kar of the
try to remain by heart at the function of Mother. No one should leave the place
Poojan every second and try to gain the without taking the Prasad.
maximum.
"Jai Mataji"
After the function of Poojan, if permitted
by the Mother, the Seekers should take holy
Madhukar Dhumal
Rahuri,
Distt. Ahmed Nagar,
Darshan of the Mother. Nobody should
touch the Poojan materials unless permitted
by the Mother. When Mother leaves the
place of Poojan everybody should get up
Maharashtra, India.
FESTIVALS
Vasant Panchami: Spring
festival
30th January, 1982
Pooja of Mother Earth.
Maha Shivratri.
22nd February, 1982
Holi.
10th March, 1982
H. H. Mataji's birthday.
21st March, 1982
Shri Rama Navami; Birth-
day of Shri Rama.
2nd April, 1982
Shri Hanumana Jayanti3;
Birthday of Shri Hanumana
6th April, 1982
Easter Sundar.
11th April, 1982
Budha Purnima.
7th May, 1982
TILL1
TENTATIVE PROGRAMME OF SHRI MATAJI
14th Jan. '82 to 14th Feb. '82
Maharashtra including Bombay & Camp at Lonawala
18th Feb. to 28th Feb. '82
New Delhi
2nd-17th March '82
Australia
21st-23rd March '82
Bombay
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-27.txt 
 Registered with the Registrar of Newspapers under Regn. No. 36999/81
WITH BEST COMPLIMENTS FROM
MANSFIELD CABLES
8, KRISHNA MARKET
KALKAJI, NEW DELHI-100019
Works .
Manufacturers:
PVC Wires, Underground
B-42 & 43, Sector-VI
Noida Ind. Complex,
Distt. Ghaziabad (U. P.)
Armoured, Control Cables,
Auto & Welding Cables,
AAC & ACSR Conductors
(ON D. G. S. & D. RATE
CONTRACT)
With best compliments from:
WITH BEST COMPLIMENTS FROM
Super Foods Pvt. Ltd.
Shetye Tyre
&
Noida, Distt. Ghaziabad, U. P.
Rubber Industries
Radhakrishna Industrial Estate
Manufacturers of High Class Quality
BICHOLIM-GOA
BISCUITS
Edited & Published by Sh. S. C. Rai, 43. Bunglow Road, Delhi-110007 and
Printed at Ratnadeep Press, Darya Ganj. New Delhi-110002.
One IsBue Rs. 5.00 Annual Subscription Rs. 20.00 Foreign [By Airmail E4 S8
