Nirmala Yoga Vol. 11 Sept.-Oct, '82 Bi-Monthly Year 2 t Om Twamewa Sakshat, Shri Kalki Sakshat, Shri Sahastrar Swamini, Moksha Pradaini, Bhagwati Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Namo Namaha. "Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns all the religions and seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga-THE UNION"

 To my flower children You are angry with Life Like small children Whose Mother is lost in Darkness Your sulk expressing despair At the fruitless end of your journey You wear ugliness to discover Beauty You name everything false in the name of truth You drain out emotions to fill the cup of Love My sweet children, my darling How can you get peace by waging war With yourself, with your being, with joy itself Enough are your efforts of renunciation The artificial mask of consolation Now rest in the petals of the lotus flower In the lap of your gracious Mother I will adorn your life with beautiful blossoms And fill your moments with joyful fragrance I will annoint your head with divine love For I cannot bear your torture anymore Let me engulf you in the ocean of joy So you lose your being in the Greater one Who is smiling in your calyx of self Secretly hidden to tease you all the while Be aware and you will find Him Vibrating your every fibre with blissful joy Covering the whole universe with light. --MOTHER NIRMALA With the belssings of our Divine Mother, regular meditation centers at the following places have been established. 10.00 A.M. Sunday Wednesday Saturday 1. Universal Sahaja Temple 78 Krishna Nagar Opp, B 4/29 Safdarjung Enclave New Delhi-110029 } 6.00 P.M. 2. Poona Club Ltd. 6, Bund Garden Road Sunday 8.00 to 9 00 A.M. Poona-411 001

 EDIT ORIAL Navaratri Puja ends on Dussehra day, which is the tenth day. This day is also known as 'Vijaya Dashami' L.e. the tenth day of victory when it is said that Shri Rama returned to Ayodhya, his capital, after killing Ravana, As a Mahabharata story goes, on this day Pandavas came out openly in arms against Kauravas, after the exile of 12 years. Navaratri Puja itself is performed in the memory of the victory of Adi-Shakti over demons and to pray for Her continued protection. "'Devi-Mahatmya' tells us how Gods beseeched the supreme Goddess to protect them, every time demons vanguished them, and they could win back their kingdoms only after She came to their rescue, It is Her powers that acted through Shri Rama and Shri Krishna and other Gods. Satanic forces could not be defeate d without her biessings. According to 'Devi-Mahatmya' She has promised to take incarnations whenever asuras would create 'badhas' in this world. In ancient days, as we know from various scriptures, asuras could be distingui- shed and also they attacked openly. Now they have come back in subtle forms and with most deceptive appearances. They attack the inner systems, our thinking and lure us into their traps. In order to counter their tricks, Mother has come back to distribute the bliss en mass to Her children, to make them spiritually strong and to make them saints, so that the false sadhus and gurus would vanish. She has given Brahma Shakti (Vibrations) to detect, and drive away the negativity, 'bandhan' to use as shield. against the attacks and as noose to bind it. The shakti increases with progress in Sahaja Yoga. More we give, more we get. More we fight more we are protected. Sahaja Yogis are the soldiers of Her army, and the channels for Her powers. With every per- son that gets realisation, demonic forces are pushed back. She is the Deity of all Gods and they are happy when She is pleased. She is within us and all pervading but it is our individuality that is separating us from Her. Nirmala Yoga

 Pray, Mother, may we get over our 'l consciousness' so that the drops that we are, integrate with the ocean that is You. इन्द्रियाणां अधिष्ठात्री भूतानां चाखिलेयु या । भूतेषु सततं तस्यै व्याप्तिदेव्ये नमो नमः ।। चितिरूपेण या कुत्स्नमेतद्व्याप्य स्थिता जगत् । नमस्तस्यै नमस्तस्यं नमस्तस्य नमो नमः ।। Indriyāņām adhishthatri bhootānām chākhileshu ya I Bhooteshu satatam tasyai vyāpti devyai namo namalh II chitiroopen yā kritsna-metadvyāpya sthitā jagat I Namastasyai Namastasyai Namastasyai Namo Namah II Translation Obeisance to that Goddess who is foundational to all organs of beings and who is ever present within all beings. That Goddess who has pervaded the whole universe in the form of conscious- ness, obeisance to Her, obeisance to Her, obeisance to Her. Mother Mahalakshmi सिद्धिबुद्धिप्रदे देवि मुक्तिमुक्ति प्रदायिनी । मन्त्रमूर्ते सदादेवि महालक्ष्मि नमोsस्तुते।। अद्यन्तरहिते दवि आद्यशक्त महेश्वरि । योगजे योगसम्भूते महालक्ष्मि नमोsस्तुते || पद्मासनस्थिते देवि परत्रह्मस्वरूपिणि । परमेशि जगन्मातर्महालक्षिम नमोsस्तुते ।| -PADMA PURĀNA Siddhibuddhiprade Devi Bhuktimukti pradāyeni! Mantramurte sada Devi Mahälakshmi namustu te !! Devi Adyshakte Maheshwari! Yogje yogsambhute Mahãlakshmi namastu te !! Adyantrahite Padmāsan sthite Devi Parbrahma swarupiņi! Parmeshi jaganmātr Mahālakshmi namostu te !! Translation O Devi, giver of intelligence and success and of worldly enjoyment and liberation (as well), Thou hast always the Mantras as Thy form, O Mahalakshmi, obeisance to Thee. O Devi, Maheshwari, without a beginning or an end, O Primeaval Energy, born of Yoga, O Mahalakshmi obeisance to Thee. O Devi, seated on the lotus, who art the Parabrahma, the great Lord and Mother of the universe, O Mahalakshmi, obeisance to Thee. Nirmala Yoga 2.

 Letter Dear Mr. Subramanyamji, This is a statue of Neptune (God of the Sea) that we can see in Madrid, Spain where we went with some Sahaja Yogis to prepare Her Holiness Mataji's visit. It was a beautiful experience to see so many seekers coming and through Her Holiness Mataji's grace get their realization. Sahaja Yoga is spreading much quicker in the West. It is a new speed. Her Holiness Mataji was talking these last days about dedication. She said, "dedication to ME, not to Sahaja Yoga is the only way you can evolve". To be one with spirit is such a beautiful state as the heart lets all the love flow. This is what we have discovered in India. In Delhi heart is very opened. We enjoyed so much our stay. Hope to come next winter. Now we are going to Switzerland and Austria for Her Holiness Mataji's programme. Let us pray that many seekers will come. With all our affection. -Philip and Marie Laure Nirmala Yoga

 Yog Nirmala a 43, Bunglow Road, Delhi-110007 (India) Founder: Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Editorial Board: Dr. S. K Mathur, Sri A. S. Mishra, Sri R. D. Kulkarni Representatives : CHERYL HYNES-10, Clarence Road, Burwood, N.S. W. 2134, Australia. : GAVIN BROWN-Nirmala Palace, 99, Nightingale Lane, Clapham South, Australia U. K. Balham, London SW 12 U.K. : CHRISTINE RIEGER-215 West 92 ND Street, APT. 7E. New York, NY 10025. U. S. A. : RECHARD PAYMENT-1950, Easf 5th Avenue, Vancouver, B. C. Canada V5N 1M2. Canada Switzerland : CHARLES AND MRS. MAGDA MATHYS-5, Chemin Des Mouldins, 1256, Troinex (Canton de Geneva), Switzerland. : MARIE ROUGER-175, Av. Ledru Rollin, Paris-75001. France Hong Kong : EMILIE P. SHI-Cliff Rence Bros. Co. Ltd., 1610, Wing On Centre, 111, Connaught Road Central, Hong Kong. : M.B. RATNANNAVAR-13, Merwan Mansion, Genjwala Lane, Borivali (W), Bombay-400 092. India RAJARAM SHANKAR RAJWADE 840, Sada Shiva Peth, Pune-411009. 9 ON T ENTS Page 1. Editorial 2. Mother Mahalakshmi 3. Letter 4. Representatives 5. Subtlity 6. Jai Mataji 7. Cowley Manor Seminar 8. Prayer to Bhoomi Devi 9. H. H. Mataji's Letters (Translation) 10. Fight for Collectivity (Part III) 11. Shri Mataji in the Temple 12. Observances 13 21 24 25 27 29 30 13. Our Holy Mother 14. Victory in Vienna 15. To My Flower Children 31 32 2nd Cover Nirmala Yoga

 Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Dollis Hill, London June 8, 1980 SUBTLETY And it is only possible for people who people when they find there is something are of a subtler nature to understand the available, come in and go away. Another value of Sahaja Yoga, to hold to the values kind may be which is coming here, is the of Sahaja Yoga, and to retain it in this frag- one which is extremely gross, can think that mented world. he can make some living out of our work The world is fragmenfed and everybody here by having connections with different is acting towards one's own destruction. All people, he can exploit it and make some the values which people follow are gross money out of it. values. Most of the values are absolutely a very gross thing. It is very gross thing. gross. So for Sahaja Yoga we have to have If people are money-minded then Sahaja people who are trying to justify their subtle- Yoga does not work out well with them. ties. Such subtle people have always been a little different from the mundane crowd. These people always express themselves in insurance, about how the carpet is spoilt, such a manner that their existence itself this has happened, that happened; such suggests that they are trying to cement the people are very difficult. But lower than whole world. Sort of, you can feel that this are the people who come here to have those who can feel that there is an element some sort of an exploitation out of Sahaja within us which makes us laugh at the Yoga. Such gross people also come in and stupidity of others who may appear to them- when they find that they cannot work out selves very seriously doing things but to us their plans, they walk out. it seems as if its rather stupid to waste type of people who come here come for their life. This is the calibre of different some material gain from Sahaja Yoga. May people. First these people, with that calibre, be physical gain also. Like somebody is with that dynamism within them, will be sick so they come for their sickness. A settled in Sahaja Yoga. Not the ordinary or If you always think about money, of your very gross way of looking at things is to come to Sahaja Yoga for getting cured. So gross type. But because our doors are open to every- when they get cured they disappear. Quite one, because there is no charge or anything, stupid isn't it ? Then some people come for anything, all sorts of people come in. with the idea that may be with Mother's And when they come in, they do not know blessings our financial problems will be what they want. Out of them some could solved; only with that idea. Then they also be the grossest of all. Some might be just get their financial problems solved and they walking in to take out something, just to get out. But some of them do not. Some steal something, possibly. I have seen all of them cannot manage to get what they kinds of people come to Sahaja Yoga. Such want and they get upset. Nirmala Yoga

 Now the best calibre of the subtlest form way and rush back. Some of them come is that, which is just seeking "Sahaja Yoga", this side and get out from the otherside. which is just seeking ""Union with God". But those who stay are people who are Nothing else. That is the best calibre. That subtler by nature. Il is a very subtle hap- calibre works hard, it has very concentrated pening. If you have lost your subtleties, effort. It understands Sahaja Yoga very say some people, as I said, even doing hard quickly. Only thing is that because of work with your fingers, you become insen- western habit of thinking some of the peo- sitive, even physical disrespect to your fin- ple, though they have a calibre, circulate gers you become little bit insensitive. Even around themselves. They go on thinking when you get your realization, you may not about it, discussing about it, arguing about feel your vibrations that good. But that is it and then they become stationed at a point, not important. Of course, vibrations you otherwise it goes little round and round it- must feel for realisation. But may be due self. They have a calibre, they have a height, they definitely have. As we call due to some physical problem you may get they have that 'weight'. They can feel their element, but still they go on as a habit, you tions so much. But doubts would not rise see, because they are used to it they go on n your minds because there are not vibra- encircling round and round They have to tions. steady themselves.But calibre of a person who just wants to 'be', to 'become', can never be deterred by anything. Because he if the doubts come in, a subtle person will is subtle in a way. In his life-time he feels fight it, will argue it out, but a gross person the subtleties of the Unconscious.) He has would not. to some external reasons also, or may be a situation where you may not feel vibra- You would just think that 'the vibra- tions are not there. I must get my Vishuddhi Chakra all right. But it is there'. And even felt his archetype images of these deities. He has known them. He has these erup- The subtle person is a brave man, and his bravery comes from his built in capacity of these subtleties. He does not succumb tallies them with Sahaja Yoga and Sanaja to doubts. He just sees it, he fights it. He tions within him. He identifies and he re- cognizes the subtleties he has felt and he Yoga gets him like that. Now these subtle- ties which I am describing to you, come to does not succumb to it. But Sahaja Yoga is such a wonderful thing that even those people who at one time looked very gross, you, not through your mental effort of this lifetime, But comes to you from tne expe- suddenly came out with such beautiful suddenly manifestation of subleties that it is surpri- riences of many lives you have gone through. And as soon as you come near Sahaja Yoga you start sucking. That is the best calibre. sing ! But that is exceptional. The mind in the human brain is subtle But because the door is open ajar, the on certain points and gross on some points. grossest of the grossest also come. But It's most surprising ! May be the back- sometimes they come this way and go back ground. It is a very subtle subject you see. the same way. Some of them, come half Please pay attention. Nirmala Yoga

 If a genius is created. Now we can say the images of his Spirit. If such a person we call it a prodigy. But 1 would call it a is a realised soul, then the expression is genius There is a difference between a 'heavenly'. The fashioning of his expres- prodigy and a genius. Prodigy is a person who, for a short time of their life span, sud- dings, the different atmosphere, the tradi- denly become very talented and after some tions and all that in which the people have time the talent goes away. fived. That is the fashioning part of it, but gious person may be mentally absolutely the universal essence of it, that element very-very low, low very low. So it is done by some sort of a spirit possession. But a person who is a genius is a person who has cular fashion. The more a person is nearer those sensitivities. The mind which is to his Self even the fashioning is universal covered with thoughts, which is thickened, in nature Then such a person does not which is gross can be thinned out at certain try to be moulded by tradition so much. points and can be very sensitive at certain points. For example, some people could be meditativeness or through realised souls very sensitive to music. art. Some could be to human beings. Some could be to other things which might ally in every country, in every place, till it make them something of rare people. But reaches the point where people start under- these subtler things which create your per- standing them in meditation. sonality always indicate in your being that there is something of the beyond which is One is the fashioning that comes from out- throwing some images within you. Such side, the other from inside. people are conscious of that-that there that comes from inside could be the teach- are some images which are throwing these ings of the "Great Masters'", who are realis- subtle ideas within you, they are erupting ed souls and your own understanding of some new commotion within you and once the work of these Great Masters. you start seeing them you are compelled to another style, type, could be, you see what put them down somewhere. That's how the people have been producing all of them the poets are created, musicians are crea- ted, great masters are created. sion is of course determind by the surroun- And a prodi- which is universal is manifested in a parti- But tradition which have come through definitely give hima better chance of expres- sion Some could be to So the fahioning also evolves gradu- Now there are two. types of fashioning. The fashioning The and you gather out of that and fashi on your manifestation accordingly. In the second type of thing they may be realised, they may Now, the fashioning of these subtle not be realised. ideas is another job. But the beauty of these subtle ideas is that they are universal person who is not a genius, who has never in nature. If they were not, they would not been a genius, who had no idea of any Now when we go to Sahaja Yoga even a be so much appealing to every one. So special expression in life can get realisation there is something universal in these. And and of the highest type. May be much more that universality when manifested or fashion- ed into some expression then it is absorbed have become a geni-ass by now. You see universally. Now it depends on the person his ego must have bloated out and he how much he is closer to those images and might be a geni-ass instead of a genius. than a genius, because the genius may Nirmala Yoga 7.

 But a Sahaja Yogi when he gets his of the family so the sociely improves-all realisation, this realisation is a sign not of this is all right. But that's not the end of it. his subtleties but of his Kundalini-in what In India you will find many families like that condition She is. If the Kundalini is ab- Husband, wife are carrying on nicely, chil- solutely frozen that means the person has eren are nice and money is in the bank. no desire to have realisation. He is coming When they die money goes to the children. to Sahaja Yoga to make some money out of Then the children are married nicely, then it or to make some näme out of it or he they have their children. Money goes to the could be a burglar coming as a Sahaja Yogi bank. When they die the money goes to to burgle away, say, My shoes. Such a the children...Goes on day in and day ot. person can be very difficult for realisation, Nothing. It is so mundane. That does not but may be with some people who have mean I believe in divorces. Of course, that some basic problems also can have their is something nonsensical. But to be mar- ried means you have entered into life. At Kundalini completely frozen up. least you should enter into life. That is But people of very ordinary appearances, important. As far as entering is concerned of very ordinary life, could be very subtle. -basic. But that's just the basic. That's Much more than these geni-asses and geni- not the end of the life. uses put together. Because they can feel this Self Such people do not cheat them- selves or others, no question. Their whole think what is your advantage monetarily or attitude towards Sahaja Yoga is like a person what you are doing, what is the thing, what who is dying and gasping for air, they are, gains you have got. Of course you will see just struggling to get the Truth. They have that, as Yoga is established, Kshema will no other interest in life, but to get to the If you are a subtler person, you will not be established, your well-being will be esta- blished. You will see that clearly. It is to Truth. be seen, to be thankful. And the Kshema Such people could be very strong head- is alright because you should not have ed, could be very different from normal. worry, Kshema, But you should have free They may think many things stupid. Even, time to devote yourself to meditation and to you see, just to have a wife, and children, Sahaja Yoga. So that you do not have too and family, is quite stupid, isn't it ? That's much worry. not the end of life. That's quite a stupid comes in. But when the Kshema comes in thing to do. I don't say you give up that. But is not the end of life. a part of it. That is how the Kshema also one may start going into the same It's all right, It's Circle of greediness having more and more money, more and more this, better clothes, This circle We believe that marriage is important. may start. There is no end to it. So you We believe that in the marriage husband have to cut it down. Tam not saying that and wife should be very much understand- you just have one dress and all your life you ing of each other. There should be love end up with one dress. It doesn't mean between the two, there should be enjoy- that. Because you knów if I say anything ment so that children also feel the security people will shoot off to the other end. I am You are not to be lost in it. better house, how to get this ? Nirmala Yoga

 trying to keep it in the centre. That not too baba ! he's coming; go from the other much attention would be required on one road. Ooh I that fellow with the stone heart!' side or the other of indulgences or of asce- And you feel you are all right, you are a You are not to very good person because you are stone- None of these, ticism nannounce anything, neither you have to hearted. You think you can dominate the indulge into anything. whole world because you are stone-hearted. You can give psychological treatment to But feel your subtleties, Feed them, nou- others,-'keep quiet, don't talk to anyone,' rish them. Look after them. You should shout at others, do whatever you please, be proud of your subtleties, that you have because you have a stone heart. Nothing these subtler values while others don't have. happens to a stone there. Now this stone- And that itself will be so self-sustaining, heartedness is the sign that you should not that you can withhold all these values be any more in Sahaja Yoga. which you get from your subtletles against the whole world. Because the world is so fragmented, so cut off, that everybody feels has. Pulsating with love, with Compassion, lonely. But that does not by any chance with Joy, with Happiness, with Giving. That mean that you should be arrogant to others, should be the attitude. you should be fighting with others, No. But in darkness a light shines. The whole is darkness. If the light accepts darkness Feeling for the pains of others. Feeling for then it becomes dark. The light must accept their longing and feeling for their aspira- that, "I am the light. I am the path," and should stand. That does nof in any way Desire to be the Whole,' to be the Ocean itself mean any arrogance to others, any showing is so fulfilling. off to others. But it is the light and the light by itself emits. You must have a heart as your Mother Not rationality. Nothing. It is to feel. Just feel within yourself, 'is there tions. We should not have our ideals among Like, she does this so why ourselves. When this happens to you, you, will not should I do. He does this so why should hate yourself, first of all, but you will laugh do. It's very mediocre. It's a very low- and respect yourself and respect the yirtues grade businens. To see others, to worry in you and not your grossness itself makes you subtler and subtler. But if tremely low grade. you are a stone what can Kundalini do ? Now it is for you to see where you are stone. There should be a lot of heart- searching...The greatest 'stone-age' is now a-days ! move. When talking to others it does not what will be My position ? I can't do it, you move. It has no ripple in it. There is'nt any see. joy in it. It is like stone. Sitting there to hate everyone. If any one sees you-'Oh Kundalini about others, to talk about others is ex- A person who is of a calibre has his standards much higher that he cannot compare himself with others. It's really true. Heart is like a stóne. Doesn't So if I start comparing Myself with you, Then you say it's all right for you, Mother. A Nirmala Yoga

 It's perfect, I agree. It is all right for Me as ted Her child, and the first sound that wi I am, but, you can be like Me also. But if I created was the Child and that sound is ti start comparing and thinking 'Oh God ! sound what we call as Brahma or the Log: What is this Then I should give up doing as they call it. So now what is the differen between God and God's desire? What i ti difference between Sun and sunlight. Wha the difference between Moon and Moonlig What is the difference between the wo anything, thinking where have I come. But when you know that you are not com- paring, you are just Giving, question of com- parison should not arise at all. At all. 1t is and the meaning. just 'feeling'. I just feel. In the same way you feel each other. So the God Almighty, Him, who peop understand is just a witness. The day the Not in a artificial courteous way. Some two Things will meet, there won't be a people think that If they have given seat to world lelt. Till they are separated all tho some one, they have been really the gene- things happen. When they meet and mer rous people, the greatest generous people. into each other, there is nothing left. Just be yoursell now. Let's see. Just be yourself. And that you are the light! What is the comparison ! The comparison exists when our calibre is low. If it is 24 carat gold. What is the comparison ? It's Absolute. merged together as God and His Powi If you are at an absolute point there's no We cannot understand anything like th comparison. So try to see that your calibre because there is no parallel. Now, you c is that. That you are of that calibre. And rationally also see things; that people, whi don't worry about gross people. Gross are they bend before me, their Kundalini star gross, will remain gross, you just don't worry moving. about them. You keep your calibre all right at the feet of Adi Shakti this would happs just becomes the sound, Brahma-nothin We cannot understand these things b cause we have never seen two things th It is written in the scriptures on and that is the most essential part of Sahaja Not only that, but you people who have n been through any austere life have got yo realisation and that your own power is g ing them realisation. Isn't it ? There is Yoga. Thank you very much. Paul : They always tell me you are one in the whole world today, there may actually God. Well I can't see that at all. some realised souls, who can give the w you give realisation. You go and talk some great Gurus, they are jealous of yo wards me. Ask the question, It's simple, They know who I am. They have told pe Mother: All right. Put your hands to- like computer. Work out your computer. Just ask the question. Finished. ple who I am. But they are jealous that th don't understand why of all the thing She (Kundalini) is the one who is the have given you these powers while they d desire of God Almighty. She is the power of n't have; they can't give realisation the w God and it is only She who incarnates. If you give; in a second like this, nobody ca You can go and have a look at them. Th you read the Vedas it is said that She crea- Nirmala Yo 10

 ? Because I are great people no doubt But your Kunda have got it so easily. Why finis work like jets They move like elephan- recognize that subtleties in you. ts from one Chakra to another Chakra. The Gurus recognize Me. They know about Me. Kundalini does not move that way as it They know who I am. They are telling moves, because I have given the Authority. others. They're so many of them like that. You can go and meet them and they will tell you. There are thousands of people they have got disciples them to me. They say "Mother' you will got thêm because I have Chosen you. AlI find your calibre! These gross people you right. Good, see now, leave it to us. We will manage them. We will send them later on, just now you find These First of all know that you have these But they donot send powers within you. Then know that you have Only thing you get rid of your egos which give you ideas. Sometimes they come like big balloons, so tell yourself, "Mr. your subtle people. Why Sahaja Yogis are few is because Ego, Please get out. These powers I have got there are very few subtle people in this because Mother has chosen me, has loved world of that calibre. That is why I am me, has nourished me and has accepted me always requesting you, do not divert your as Her child." attention here and there. Settle down. Become good Sahaja Yogis. Unless and until you really become good Sahaja Yogis give realisation, I tell you, You go and tell I cannot move to the second strata because anybody. You should; but they are not the first strata is not yet settled down, they going to believe you, If this flower says are worrying about nonsensical things i that I can become the lamp in a light house, mean I just sometimes feel very unhappy nobody is going to believe it, because the to see you fight amongst yourselves. I mean light in the lighthouse is made in a special this is something so painful; that you say tactory. But supposing this flower says, harsh words to each other, I mean you are It is a fact. Nobody can believe that you or if this flower says that I can cure your the cream for Me. You go and ask any one of diseases, then nobody will believe you, but the Gurus if they can move the Kundalini it may! When some thing fantastic happens, we have to believe that there is Divine acting and acting so dynamically! Only thing, do not waste your energies in gross hankerings and gross wanderings and ramblings. Try to be on their fingers as you do it. These powers cannot be given by an ordinary person. I look ordinary no doubt, I have to, but also you have seen Me in subtler and subtler. other forms-that's not important. The im- p.rtant thing is you should see your own transformation and how many powers are Now you think it from God's point of view. manifesting. If you go and tell somebody You are to be given realisation, first job, that I have started giving realisation and Its a headache, you know. Somebody has raising Kundalini they will say You are mad, to take up the headache of Giving Realisa- How can this be ? Impossible." Nobody tion. It's much easier to be crucified once is going to believe you at all. You see, you There is nothing that I have to ask for. but to be giving realisation a hundred times. Nirmala Yoga 11

 to all kinds of funny Kundalinis to be raised, Love, through that you will understand Me you cannot imagine. And then after giving better. Its much easier to understand Me realisation to tell you all about it. To decode through your heart than through your brains. all chakras, to show you all the chakras Because I am very good at blasting them; to tell you all about Deities, these achetypes and I play about with you lots of things by and everything. And every word of it is true which I really give you a very difficult time and Acts and Works. You have experimen- Because if you start thinking, I make you ted and found out Somebody has to come think more. If you start doubting I make down. you doubt more. So best thing is to see. As I told the other day that whatever is in JE has been My lot lo conme. I don't mind the next room, betfer to go in and see, than and as I told the other day, one of you takes to sit down here and doubt. Or to accept my seat l'll be very happy to be a Sahaja it and sit down here. No. Go and see for Yogi sitting down there. I will be the hap- piest person. I will give you fine garlands like this and all the flowers from the market, I will bring for you-if you could sit here how Tremendous It is ! Just sit down and and do the job for Me. yourself. You have seen it yourself. But just think think how greal It is, how Dynamic It is, that you have seen Il with your Own eyes. Just think that you have Felt it, that You are the people who have got it. You are the first few who have known It. They may be thousands and thousands later, the whole Universe may It is very easy to doubt, but can you do the job ? You can not. This is the trouble with the western mind, is -that it doubts. What are you doubting about ? What is there to doubt ? I cannot doubt Mysell. take it up but you are the first few. You That's very difficult. When you know that this is the Truth how can you doubt ? prove your calibre. Come up. Now if you doubt what can I do ? How to prove it ? Best way is to understand My May God bless you. MANTRA Om Twamewa Sakshat Shri Mahalaxmi, Mahasaraswati, Mahakali, Trigunatmika, Kundalini, Sakshat Shri Adi Shakti. Shri Nirmala Devi Namo Namaha. Om Twamewa Sakshat Shri Kalki, Sakshat Shri Adi Shakti, Shri Nirmala Devi Namo Namah. Om Twamewa Sakshat Shri Kalki, Sakshat Shri Sahastrar Swamini, Maksha Pradaini, Bhagwati Mataji, Shri Nirmala Devi Namo Namah. Nirmala Yoga 12

 JAI MATAJI Translation of Her Holiness Mataji's Speech in Marathi, wherein she has explained the meaning of her own name Nirmala. It is good that all Sahaja Yogis have come together. When we meet like this, we can discuss many things of mutual interest The illusion that you see is not just the illusion, but there is something beyond that. However, we have wasted so many years of lives in it that we give importance to all that actually does not exist and in doing that we have made heaps of sins. We have tried to derive the pleasure from many things. We have received nothing from whatever we have tried to enjoy. Essentially, it is all nothing. and tell even small details about them to each other. The other day I told you how to clean yourself as your Mother's name itself is Nirmala and it contains many powers. The first word is NIH (:) which means not. Something that actually does ot exist but appears to exist, is called Mahă- māyā (illusion) and the whole world is like that. It is seen but it is not true. If we are involved into it we feel that it is the only point everywhere in life. Then you will know So, the outiook should be, it is all that no- thing, it is all false. Only Brahma is real the rest all is false. You have to adopt this view thing we have to live for. Then we feel that economic conditions are unsatisfactory, most of the Sahaja Yogis after realisation, is social and domestic conditions are bad, that they think, "now that we are realised everything around us is bad and we are not happy about anything. what Sahaja Yoga is. What happens with we have Mataji's blessings, Then why are we not prosperous?". That means they think God is in the prosperity. if you find out why your nature does not change even Water on the sea surface is very dirty and turbid. Many objects are seen floating after realisation you will know that our on it But if we go deep into the sea there "Swabhāv the nature of our spirit, does not is so much beauty, wealth and power that change. See, how beautiful is this word we forget that on the surface the water is so bad. Swabhav Swa' is Atman i.e. the spirit and bhấy is the nature, Have you become the nature of your Self ? If you become your self there is so much beauty within, that all that goes on outside would appear like drama. So long as this witness state is not blish 'NIH' you have to tell yourself, whenever fully awakened within you, you have not a thought comes, say it is not there, another followed the word NIH' (:) and also you have not practised it. Suppose you are aware that you have not established 'NIH' The point is that everything that you see around is illusion. You must remember first of all it is all nothing. If you have to esta- thought comes, say it is not there. You have to feel this again and again. Then you will understand the meaning of word 'NIH'. within you and even now you become some- Nirmala Yoga 13

 time emotional oregoistical, coersive or sub- which is God. Hence His power also comes missive and feel sad about it, then the state to you. Does this finger think ? Is it not still of being on 'NIH' is at the centre of these moving ? Give your thoughts to God and extremes. You are neither in this state nor ask Him to think about you. But it is rather difficult, because you are not thought less. in that. This state can be best achieved in the meditation, Just by following the idea of "NIH' in your life you will become (Nirvicha) Many people say "we have surrender- ed everything' because they do it only in talking. ", but it does not happen thoughtless. Surren- First of all you should become thought- dering is not talking. You have to surrender less. Once you start jumping on a thought to attain thoughtiessness. That is you have however good or bad it may be, you go into some sort of inertia and in that state you jump from one thought to another. So some people have said that a bad thought should be opposed by a good thought. In other words if a vehicle or train coming from one stopped thinking. When you stop thinking you come to the centre., When at the centre, immediately you go into thoughtless awar- ness, i.e. become one with God's power and when you are one with the God's power, He looks after you. He takes care of your small things also. You will be amazed. it is worth trying and after that you will realise that what you were doing earlier was wrong. So once you are in thoughtlessness you will get all inspirations, all powers and every- direction, is pushed back by another one, both will stop somewhere at the centre. It is good but ocassionally it can become harmful. A bad thought when put down by a good thought remains supressed but it can suddenly come up and it happens with many people. They press down their nor- mal thoughts and always tell themselves surprised. Everything will come to you as that they must be good to others and must be well behaved etc. These people can some- times be in trouble. Suddenly they get ex- asperated and others cannot understand, why these well behaved people are annoyed. Also they lose their inner peace. All the beauty within them is destroyed. So we thing. The idea that you get in thought- lessness is an inspiration. You will be if on a plate. You are sianding to give a speech. Just be thoughtless and start. Although you have never given a speech earlier or do not even know how to do it or have no special knowledge of any subject, you will speak so well that others will be astonished how you know so much. But once you are deep in the thoughtless state all comes from there and not from your should be always thoughtless. Ban all thoughts from your mind and then you would automatically remain at the centre. brain. I tell you about Me. You pray 'Mother You must make all efforts. Now you kindly see that such and such happens to would ask "Mother how can we do anything me' and I do not think about that. It is amaz- without thinking ?" But what are thoughts ? ing. I put all that in the thoughtlessness. ll They are hollow. In thoughtless state you machinery is working there. Just put it to that machinery and it is all ready. Allow that machinery, you can call it silent are one with the God's power that is, the drop, which is you, comes in the ocean Nirmala Yoga 14

 This is also about time. I never see Sometimes it stops and shows, when the time is 3 or 4. But my real watch is in the thoughtlessness It is permanently stopped. If anything is to be done, it takes machinery, to work. You should put all your probla.ns lo it. But it is very difficult for watch. intellectuals because their habit is to go on thinking about everything. You should be able to go into thought- place at the right time. Then there are no lessness while trying to understand a sub- regrets whether it is late or not. Whatever ject, all becomes clear automatically. Research that you are doing should also be in thoughtless state. Let your hands work while you are thoughtless. You can do your research extremely well in this way. I tell you many things. T have never read science in my life and know nothing about it. Still I tell you all that. Where does all the knowledge come from ? thoughtlessness; I only speak and see all should not be a slave of anything. that is going on. It was all kept ready in that computer which is speaking. If you are not in the thoughtless state you do not use everywhere as if on his hands. He makes your computer and put your brain on top of all arrangements. He knows everything and it. It is such on old computer and lot of there is no need to tell him about anything. accurate work has been done on it. You are bound to make mistakes if you use your own brain and do not consult the com- you are stuck up somewhere on the bank; it may be I am not bothered. Yesterday my car failed but I was relax- Ing because I wanted to see the stars. That beauty is not visible in London and I wanted to see it. Its splendour was spread all over the sky. The sky thought Mataji should see it. Sometimes I must look at that also ! 1 was enjoying it. In short, you From the If you are thoughtless God takes you But you must see whether you are in the main stream or not. If you are not in it then puter. then current comes and takes you in, twice or thrice but again you are on the bank. Then you say Malaji nothing goes smoolhly for me'. It won't. Because you are entangled. All that happens in the thoughtless state is enlightened. Whenever suffix Pra is used (in Sanskrit, Hindi or Marathi) it means enlightened. Light never talks. If you switch on the light in the room, the light won't speak or give you any ideas. It would just stream (Pravāha)" which means enlightened make everything visible. Same is about the light of thoughilessness. Shri Ganesha's praise that you sing is excellent. It says, "flowing in the main main stream. You should not bring your own separate, current in it. The Arti of Shri Ganesha also says Nirvāni Raksháve, i.e. protect me when I am dying. You also pray 'Raksha Raksha Parameshwara O God That 'NIH' is common in all such words like 'Nirvichar (Thoughtless), Nirahankara (egoless) you establish it and then you come into doubt- less state. First bacome thoughtless and then doubtless (Nirvikal pa). doubts go and you know that there is some power that works. It works very fast and says "let him protect himself." What I want is all subtle. You will be amazed how it happens. protect me, but you want to protect yourself. Why should, then, God protect you ? He Then all your to emphasise is that you must learn to go deep and realise all this in the thoughtless- Nirmala Yoga 15

 ness then you can become Nirvikalpa is becoming completely unattached. You must become completely unattached. (doubtless). You must have no attachment (Nirāsakta). We have here, (India) 'my son, my daughter'. In England, it is just the opposite. There, they Lävanya'. Word LA has a sweetness of its are not attached to son or daughter. They are worried only about themselves you have this attachment; my son, my daughter, my house etc., everything is mine Shakti the power of love, is spread every- and at the end you are left only with mine ! You should say "Nothing is mine and every- thing is yours." Kabir says "so long as a goat is alive it is bleating 'main, main' (1, 1) but when it is cut the taut strings of its guts LA, shakti has love in it. She relates Word LA comes in Lalām. us to others own and you should impress others with it. You should use this Shakti while speaking to others. What should you do when this Неге where in moving and non-moving things? You should leave all thoughts to the first power because thoughts come from the first power. What should you do in the last power, i.e. LA Shakti ? You should enjoy the bliss of love. How ? By forgeting your- self. Has anyone measured how much one loves others ? It should grow. How you sound on an instrument"; "Toohie, Toohie" (you alone are.) You must become like that. Once you are established in the idea I am nought, I have no existence, then only you will understand the word "NIH'. Does it occur to you, how much you love others ? 1 always enjoy loving Let us consider the word LA. It is others; feel, how the love is flowing every- enjoy it ? Lalita's word. My second name is Lalita It is the blessing of Devi. It is Her weapon. When LA i.e. goddess becomes Lalit or where. I do not know whether you feel or | cannot understand much about human beings. But I feel how the love is when the Shakti becomes Lállr. which flowing all over. Like a musician who for- means active that is when the vibrations gets himself in his own melodies and feels not. rise within Her the vibrations which you are how his music is flowing everywhere. feeling on your palms that shakti is Lalitā Similarly love must flow without any inter- When ruption. That is, you should achieve Lalām Shakti, which is the power of vibrations, becomes LA Shakti. She envelops you from ie. Lalita Shakti. Therefore, you should Shakti. It is full of beauty and love. of love becomes active, it the power all sides, When she is active, what is first achieve Lalita Shakti. the worry ? What is your power ? Can you make even one fruit from tree Leave fruit, you cannot make even a leaf or a root! Only LA" shakti does all the work. The category look at others with an idea to realisation that you have got is also from steal something or to get some benefit. this power. From this Shakti have come MA' Shakti and 'NIH Shakti, 'NIH' Shakti ing other people's faults. I do not know is Shri Brahmadeva's Power Shri Saraswati what pleasure they get, but they keep look- Shakti. And in Saraswati Shakti you must ing for other's shortcomings. This way attain the qualities of 'NIH'. Attaining 'NIH they become aloof and then suffer. Only first find out how you You must Some others. people of low view There are some, who are interested in find- Nirmala Yoga 16

 You should never be critical of others. man can teach how to invite troubles. It is nol possible for Me. How glad am I to If you ask me about some person, meet all. can on ly tell you regarding his kundalini and on which chakra he is caught at present or gets frequently caught. I cannot understand You should use Lalām Shaktt in such a way that you should go into thoughtless- anything beyond that; how he is or how his ness while looking at other person. That person also will then become thoughtless. Hence I ask you to do bandhan'. It is help- ful to do 'Bandhan' to NIH' Shakti and L Shakti which is transfering LA Shakti into 'NIH Shakti. I have to tell many people to raise their left sides. I tell those people to raise their left sides, who are very proud or think they are working very hard or are very busy. It is filling our own love into Love in our hearts nature is etc. If I am asked, I say 'what is nature ? It is so changing ! River is fiow- Who can tell where it will be in Ing here. Tuture? You have to see where you stand. If you are on this side, you are bound to Teel it unusual that the river is flowing here. I see from the side of the ocean so I know where it comes from. So never brand any- body as useless. Every person changes and he must change. The work of Sahaja Yoga is to bring about the change. Those who believe in Sahaja Yoga should never say that such and such person has become use- own five elements. or the power of that love from our hearts should be filled into the power of action as if you are painting with colours on a canvas. When the power of love is filled in the power of action in a person, he becomes extremely loving and that love gradually thinK this way you will not only respect your- shines through his behaviours and in his personality and flows to others. It makes less. Everybody must be given the freedom. You all know how we stand now ! If you self but will also respect others. One who has no regard for himself never gives his every action enjoyable to others. Such regards to others. person becomes so alluring that you feel relaxed and happy in his company for hours. So, your love should become enjoyable and winning other people's hearts. This be- comes useful in such a way that we get friends and the affection for each other We must develop Lalam Shakti. I can- not adequately describe the joy of it even by writing a book, because it cannot be expres- ed through words they are very much inade- quate. In other words if you have to des- cribe smile you can only tell how the grows. Everyone feels that there is a place where one can get all love and arfection.of the smiles. You should allow this power Hence we must cultivate the God's power of Love. muscles move but you cannot tell the effects to be effective and develop it. Man gels a kind of beauty, an elegance If we get any thought we must tell our- selves that we are throwing dirty things in and good nature from Lalām' Shakti. You the Ganges of God's power. With this atti- tude of mind our LA' Shakti the power of your speech, behaviour and other activities. love will remain absolutely clean and we will enjoy that cleanliness. must see that this power grows through Some person's annoyance is also pleasant. That sweet and pleasant power is called Nirmala Yoga 17

 Lalita Shakti. People have completely dis- of Mahalakshmi. torted its idea. They say that it is the power of destruction. But it is not at all correct, of our evolution. In 'MA' Shakti you have This power is extremely beautiful, creative to comprehend, assimilate and get Mas- and artistic. Suppose you sow a seed, then tery. For example, an artist conceives the some of its parts get destroyed this is idea of his creation with his 'LA Shakti, he Lalita Shakti. But the destruction is very makes it with 'NIH' Shakti and then uses MA is the power of Dharma (Righteousness) and also the power gentle and easy. The seed then grows into a tree that has leaves. Those leaves also his idea. At every stage he checks whether fall, which is again very simple and easy. it agrees with his idea and tries to improve, Then come the flowers. When the flowers if it does not. MA Shakti to bring it in conformity with He does that again and become fruits some of its components fall again. This is MA Shakti. That is, if and then come the fruits. Those fruits are something is not good do it again, once, also cut for eating, The taste that you get twice and so on. after eating is also this power. In this way these two powers work. You should under- stand that you cannot make any statue with- out cutting and chopping If you understand that this chip-chopping is of the same kind, impossible. God has to make enormous you should not feel bad, if you have to do it sometimes: That is also necessary. But S If it is not done, This job of improving involves efforts. We have to improve ourselves also. But for this, the evolution would have been We have to accomplish 'MA' eflorts. Shakti and preserve it an artist does it artistically whereas an art- less person does it bluntly. So this power depends on how much art is in you. other two powers fall off, because this power is the centre of gravity. So you should be at the centre of gravity, and the centre Some times you look at a picture and of gravity is 'MA Shakti of our evolution. you want to keep looking. If someone asks you what is so nice in that picture, you can- not express it in words. You only look at the picture. Some pictures are such that you become thoughtless just by looking at them. In that thoughtless state you are enjoying the whole pleasure of it, and this state is the very best. Instead of compa- ring it with something or describing it with similes you should enjoy the bliss of this state, to your hearts' content. There are no words or no expression to describe it. You Other two powers will bocome active in you only when you grow along the power of evolution. But you must fully understand and develop MA' Shakti. So long as you are not realised, it is alright to say that if God loves you He should come to you, but thereafter you can- not say so. to balance other two powers. In melody you balance the tunes; while painting a picture For with MA' Shakti you have have to experience it from within. All you bring about the balance of different colours. Similarly you have to achieve the balance of NIH Shakti and "LA' Shakti. You have to work for attaining this balance. should have this experience. Word MA' which is between 'NIH and "LA is very interesling. MA is the word On many occasions you lose it. That Nirmala Yoga 18

 Sahaja Yogi who can maintain it, rises to a very high level. Ladies are expert in it. They make different recipes everyday and the husbands are eager to know the menu. Very emotional Sahaja Yogi is not good. Similar ly very busy Sahaja Yogi is also not very good. One should activate one's power plish your balance and concentration. When of love and see how it has worked so far. Suppose I follow certain method but even vibrations flow from your balance and wis- in that every time I do something different. You must have seen that everytime, I come wisdom. out with something new, some new method. vibrations are flowing is a wise person; in If this dces not work, try some other thing. If that also does not work, do something else Nobody should fix his method. You Yogi you are. rise in the morning apply vermilion, pay obeisance to Mataji; this is all mechanical. It is not living process. In living process you should find out different new methods. I always give the example of the root of a tree. It penetrates deeper and deeper into the soil circumventing the obstacles. It Mataji is MA that is mother and this work does not fight with them and it would not have been able to hold the tree without the This is the shakti with which you accom- you take it to the highest state, you get the dom and will not flow if you do not have Person from whom the maximum fact it is his wisdom that is fiowing. On this basis, it can be assessed how great Sahaja You will naturally be caught on your chakras. You should know when you are caught that you have lost your balance. The imbalance shows that MA Shakti is weak in you. The first letter from any real name has been done only by MÃ' shakti within me. This was not possible if only LA shakti' and 'NIH shakti' were there. I have obstacles. Hence the problems are neces- sary because you cannot progress without the problems. The power that teaches you how to overcome these problems is "MA' Shakti. Therefore it is MA Shakti i.e. Mother's power. required is wisdom. come with all the three powers but MA shakti is on top. You have seen that MA shakfi is Mother's power. It must be proved that She is our Mother. Will you accept if someone comes and says "I am For that first thing your Mother." You won't Mother must be proved. What is Mother ? Suppose a person is very mild natured and says, "Mother I am very soft what can I do ?" I tell him to change himself and be- We have a place in Her heart. We have every right on Her and She has on us, be- cause She loves us very much. Her love is absolutely disinterested. She always wishes well of us and has nothing in Her heart ex- methods. Person who cannot change his cept love for us. You will have faith in the Mother only if you understand that all that decorates you i.e. your spirit, is in Her. You should prove all these to others. Sahaja This is how 'MA Shakti works. Yogi should be able to do that. Other peo- come a lion. If some other person is a lion I tell him to become a goat. Otherwise it won't work. You have to change your methods cannot spread Sahaja Yoga be- cause he sticks to only one way, with which people get bored. You should find new ways. 19 Nirmala Yoga

 no desire. There is no LĂ' Shakti or NIH' Shakti or MA' Shakti within me. There is ple should know that he is a wise person. For that you need the balance; the balance between the powers of love and action and nothing. I even do not know that I am these it should be so beautiful that people are Influenced by such person without their knowledge. Sahaja Yogi should accom- plish it. powers. Ionly witness all the play. When the life is changed like this there will be Siddha' Sahaja Yogis (i. e. those who have complete mastery over Sahaja You think at home how to activate these Yoga) among human beings. So far they three powers and use them. "NIH Shakti have not become siddhas. You have to should give all beauty and gravity to your achieve the mastery. Siddha Sahaja Yogi You should device new ways and is the one who becomes completely one means of contacting the people. These powers should be used to propagate Sahaja everything for that. am now going After Yoga. For their proper use your "NIH that, it is to be seen how and where you use Shakti i.e. the power of action should be your mastery. with God and wins Him over. He has to do very strong. Albeit, you must have main LÄ' Shakti that is the power of love. But LA Shakti is to be activated with 'NIH things. You should not feel bad about that. Shakti. But if one way does not work, find You should not feel sorry in MA' Shakti be- some other way, try first red and yellow if it cause I must tell you all that. Some people does not suit, take red and green and if that feel sorry. You must remember that you have also does not help do something else. It to become master (Siddha). All others must would be wise not to be adamant. An ada- mant man cannot do anything in Sahaja Yoga. All that you want to do is to spread that you are Siddha. You must ensure this. Sahaja Yoga, then try different ways. agree to do what you insist on because I know that human beings are not like me. You can never tell what an obstinate person will do, you should not allow him to go to an extremity. I know all this from MA' you are arranging a big puja. Also call some Some times I tell you not to do certain accept that you are Siddha. It should be clear to them the very moment they see you I If It happens everything will be fine. One day I told you that you should invite your friends and relations for lunch or din- ner or for some function or tell them that Sahaja Yogis on that day and give realiza- tion to all your guests. If you do this for one year it will be very beneficial. But you should not insist on Shakti. particular things. Mataji does not insist. Whatever is there, you should accept. Whatever you do you should have in mind that you are doing an important work. I have May God Bless You. Nirmala Yoga 20

 July 1982 COWLEY MANOR SEMINAR Cowley Manor is set amongst some of powerfully, Her eyes closed for most of the England's most beautiful green pastures time, Mother talked of the need for complete and clouded hills. Near Cheltenham, in dedication to Herself, rather than Sahaja the West Country, the manor lies in its Yoga which is just one of Her aspects. She own parklands, with lakes, fountains and asked why we were not progressing as fast gardens. This was the venue for the July as we should. People get caught up, She week-end seminar, graced by the presence said, and they go down because their dedica- Why of Our Divine Mother, and attended by tion and reverence is not established. Sahaja Yogis from Britain, Europe, America is this dedication such an important part of the ascent? Because at this time when the and Australia. world is in a precarious position, when it Mother's arrival was greeted with flowers, could be destroyed completely, it is impor- victory cries and a Ganesha made of flower tant to cling on to that which is going to save petals. us - complete faith. We must cling to it with all our might. Possessions, family, job and finances all must be forgotten. Devotion must be sustained and ever-growing. Only through dedication can we grow to full ma- turity and become capable of fulfilling the In the afternon Mother presided over a question and answer session. Assisting Her with the answers were Warren Reeves from Australia, Gavin Brown representing England, Robbert Ruigrok from Belgium, Christine Rieger from America, Marie Rou- plan the Divine wants to work out through us. ger from France and Marie Laure Ward from Switzerland. Topics discussed included the proofs a Sahaja Yogi could give when ego must be surrendered, otherwise free- challenged to state to what Sahaja Yoga dom becomes disfigured, disgraced, made offered that other "religions" and "cults" ugly. The surrender of ego can only happen did not, the way to raise born realised chil- in meditation. It is only when we have dedi- dren and how to handle parents who are cation in meditation that the melody of God unsympathetic to Sahaja Yoga. To gain full freedom, Mother told us, the can be played through us. DEDICATION We are in the maya of ignorance and sin, In the evening Shri Mataji spoke to the Mother said, and the only way to get out, assembly about dedication. Slowly and the only way the Parabrahma Himself can Nirmala Yoga 21

 pull us out one by one, is for us to be com- pletely dedicated, We must become the spirit, Mother said. Then sacrifice is not sacrifice because the spirit's quality is to give, There is complete surrender to the false gurus. Mother said, but Sahaja Yogis do not surrender completely. We still cling to rising, steadiast. Is preparing to fight the possessions, family, and finances. But even so we are nourished. The blessings flow. destroy God's work. We are the ones capa- Health, wealth, the mind, relations, condi- ble of God's joy on earth, Mother sald, and tions, all improve. Ashrams, advantages. we are the flutes that are going to play the But we forget what this nourishment is for. melody of God. It is for our higher ascent. For getting out of the maya. Dedication is getting out of the maya. Is battle against the negativity that is out to Where there is a life of dedication, of understanding, extracting all the nourish- ment, then everything works out. "You And basic to this ascent, Mother point- become the ocean, moon, sun, earth, ether, ted out, is the love Sahaja Yogis must have firmament and spirit. You work for all of for one another. All of us are Her children. them. All the stars in the universe you In Mother's womb of love we have all resi- become. Take up their work. Jump on to ded. From Mother's heart we have all received the tatwa. Surrender to your subtler being. blessings. We must get out of the maya of Your kundalini is the same as the Adi the part. Must climb. The ascent has to Kundalini, and the power is the same. The come from us. Has to be worked out by us. ship is built, brought to sea, tried and Dedication, without fanaticism, gets rid of found to be seaworthy Now the second all problems. phase. Sail out to sea. Set out. You know everything about the ship, you know every- As an example, Mother talked of a fana- thing about the sea. There is no need to tical person who quotes Mother as saying fear the lyphoons. There is no need to fear that Sahaja Yogis are not to go to doctors. anything. When the fanatic is sick herself she will come to Mother and demand to be looked after. Surrender means accepting whether PUJA May God bless you". If She wants to cure, Mother cures or nol. On Sunday morning Mother graciously She will. If not, not. It is Her whim. Dedi- allowed Puja to Her as Adi Shakti to be cation is accepting either. Or both. performed. During the evocation of Shri Ganesha, the children washed Mother's Christ was crucified for His Mother. feet The day, which had started misty and Christ was so sure of His devotion and cotd, burst into joyous sunshine as ths Puja dedication that Mary Mahalakshmi could ask Him to sacrifice His life. How many progressed, and this joy was felt by all who have the dedication of Christ, Mother asked. shared the blessings which flowed. He went through horrible sufferings for His Mother, yet She suffered more than Him. After Puja Mother spent time with each of the babies and young children. Nirmala Yoga 22

 It enlightens plants and animals, and all HAVAN Before the Havan in the afternoon, that has been created. Mother talked about the word 'swaha'. How it is a capacity, an essence of the nabhi should invoke the swaha shakti at Havan, chakra. How it burns like the fire burns. Mother said. Those who are weak in their How it purifies by discriminating between faith spoil it for all those others who want things that burn and things that do not. It the atmosphere cleaned, want the emanci- has the power, like Kundalini, to go against pation of human beings, want peace to gravity. It can give brilliance. It can join descend and the blessings of God to come. Only those who are strong in their faith things by melting them together. PUBLIC MEETING Mother pointed out that fire has been worshipped by Gurus and Prophets for a very long time. A public meeting was held in Chelten- ham on the Sunday evening. The hall was full. Many Sahaja Yogis had to listen to Mother's talk from outside. Mother spoke We should have the qualites of fire, of the nature of seeking and the happening Mother said. When a Realised soul invokes of Self Realisation. Many received the gift the essence of fire, which is swaha, and of their Moksha, and Mother spent time with this essence, once evoked, grants to him all each, clearing chakras and giving advice. the subtle qualities of fire. It burns away negativity (like a candle in front of Mother's RIVER THAMES photograph will become enlightened, will assume the swaha state, and will be capa- attending the seminar had returned to their ble of burning away any negativity present). homes, Mother drove to Seven Springs, The fire within us, when enlightened, en- which is the source of the River Thames. lightens our attention. It discriminates She stood in the pool where the spring- between what is inflammable and what is waters meet and Rustom Burjorjee washed not. It gives brilliance to the face and a glint to the eye. On Monday morning, after most of those Her feet and invented appropriate mantras. Mother asked how many Sahaja Yogis were present and, when it was found that there Mother told us how food is digested by were thirty five, She pointed out that there the fire within us. When an enlightened were thirty five crores of Devas. person digests food, whatever is produced from that power within, is pure. When we vibrate food and it goes to the stomach, it ing Mother vibrating the most important excites the swaha shakti- all the good river in the United Kingdom, the river on It was a wonderful experience witness- powers of the fire-and these powers make which London stands. the food act like medicine, After a visit to Cheltenham Spa, Mother returned to London. At Havan, Mother said, we put everything to the universal nabhi, which, using its dis- cretion, burns out all that is bad. It cleans event, and all who attended (nearly a hun- the atmosphere, purifies the ether, chases dred and fifty) were deeply appreciative of away the negativity, the lethargy and inertia. Mother's generous blessings. The whole weekend was a remarkable 23 Nirmala Yoga

 A Prayer to Sri Bhoomi Devi OM Sakshat Sri Bhoomi Devi Namo Namah. Upon you beloved Mother Earth we stand at this the crossroads of man's destiny. Only through your kind love of your children are we here now. You have graciously sustained us thus far. You have given us food, water, clothing and shelter. 'O' beloved Mother Earth, with our heads bowed we thank you. And with our heads bowed we come humbly to you asking further sustenance strength for the many long days ahead. 'O' beloved Mother Earth, now that we have grown a little and stand firmer each day, We pray to you to help clear the way as we begin to march forwards. We long for the cleansing of all lands, so that upon you beloved Mother Earth the righteous may return to their divine home. We hope to be many. 'O' beloved Mother Earth, give us patience as we search for our brothers and sisters and Give us detachment from all distractions. Give us perseverance in our task. 'O' beloved Mother Earth, most of all, help us, as your seas cleanse the shores, to clean our hearts, so that we may desire only that which is right. 'O' beloved Mother Earth support us to that we may soon stand upon you in great numbers and invoke with one mighty voice the dance of Lord Shiva. These things we most humbly pray. OM Sakshat Sri Bhoomi Devi Namo Namah. Bolo Sri Bhoomi Devi, Sri Mataji, Sri Nirmala Devi Ki Jai. With best compliments from: D. R. EXPORTS (P) LTD. Exporters of Handicrafts H-28, Green Park Extn., New Delhi Phone : 660203 24 Nirmala Yoga

 Translation of Her Holiness Mataji's Marathi lettersen of 17 th August and October 1978 opened. People should be cured of their Many blessings, diseases and their attention should be drawn towards God realisation. Please Received your Rakhis conveying your deep love. Rakhi is protecting power. It's show this letter to all Sahaja Yogis. bond is very strong and extremely tender because it symbolises the noble love of sister. Customarily, tying a Rakhi to some- one is establishing a place of pure protec- To. tion. However, man's ability to understand love has become so feeble that tying of Rakhi has become merely a mechanical pro- DIL Always remembering you Your Mother Nirmala II All Sahaja Yogis, Many blessings Today is the first day of Navaratri. Today beautiful human All traditions cess. become lifeless and dry formalities if there your attention should be on Shri Ganesha. is no warmth of faith in them. His devotion is infinite. He has never wor- shipped anybody else except Mother. Hence I have taken birth in this world in the He is so great. All other Gods appear very binding of Sahaja Yogis and have been strong. Everyone has some speciality. moving around only in their binding. I am What is Mother's speciality ? desireless and hence my everything depends (aham) is nowhere felt by others. Hence Her ego upon your desires. Shri Ganesha who has surrendered to such You have to ask something with Rakhi. Mother, is so wise and venerable. Mother Please consult all Sahaja Yogis and ask has nothing with Her. Her very name begins with 'Ni e.g. "Nishakanchan'-having no wealth, 'Nirlepa'-unaffected; Nirvichara- I am keeping good health because you thoughtless; Nishprayojana -having no mo- are desiring it. There will be only minor tives, Nigarvita--egoless-Niriccha-desire- what you want by writing a collective letter. operation on my ear and it should not make less etc. Therefore, surrendering to such Moreover, I have no Mother, who has nothing with Her, needs some kind of subtle thought, in that, Mother has nothing with Her and therefore, nothing can be asked from Her. It shows how Shri cance. On that day you should ask for Ganesha by himself, is fully satisfied. Where make big decisions and keep does this contentment of Shri Ganesha you anxious at all. trouble whatsoever. So do not worry. Rakhi Purnima is a day of great signifi- perfection, attention on high ideals. should not destroy their attention on trifle issues. Lot of work has yet to be done. Sahaja Yogis come from ? It is own power. When the gate of the Self opens, nothing Those Sahaja Yogis who have progressed else is required. It is the Mother who opens should get busy. New centres should be this gate and therefore, She is so dear to Nirmala Yoga 25

 Shri Ganesha. Complete Self-Realisation myself will observe fast and clean your is that stage atlaining which nothing else is right side, so that your power to do the required. Thereafter, only enjoying the work increases and you start Sahaja Yoga work with new vigour. However, left side can be kept clean by discriminating between You are made in the pattern of Shri good and bad deeds and strictly doing only Ganesha. Therefore, your power Is un- that which is good. That means you have bliss and the satisfaction of fulfilment. matched, but for that, you should have devotion and innocence like Shri Ganesha's to do only that which is auspicious and Then Mother would admire you and the nelpful. Right side can be activated by whole world would witness that beautiful discipline. Balance is very importa t in Sahaja Yoga. Age old maxim, "Ati Sarvatra Varjayet" (extremes should be avoided sight. I have worked in the operation and Ida everywhere) really holds good. Nadi of all has become much lighter. Ida means past and all good and bad impres- sions. All that is bad should be removed like cleaning of an excellent cloth that gets back its colour and new look, thereafter. But right side improves by discipline. I I am very eager to meet you all. Your Mother -Nirmala With beot complimento from UNITED DAIRIES PRIVATE LIMITED N-19, Connaught Circus, New Delhi-110001 Nirmala Yoga 26

 THE FIGHT FOR COLLECTIVITY (Part three) with what the Unconscious wants me to Politics is no longer the boring, yet noisy tale of the conflicts which are tearing apart that is "the bonum commune" (the comm good). I aim at the greatest well being the greatest Whole. Hence whenever we for the collectivity we should really d from the sahasrara : our action will rightly inspired. the city of men. It has become the unifying factor of the City of God... B U Er, we are talk- ing about sahaja politics of course. Being collective is a new Art which Shri Mataji's yoga opens for us, in a way which can be said to express the pure aesthetics I become collectively conscious : t of a new kind of human behaviour. We, does not mean only sensations in the Children, are learning to smoothly com- fingertips ! Gradually I realise : as a cel I am ba plement each other and to articulate our bathing in the blood of the body various qualities into one manifestation, ing in the vibrations of Chaitanya and thi a vibrations are the blood of someone's bo one cemmunity, one togetherness. As a matter of fact, this had always been, through My fulfillment as a cell is not therefore assert my individuality which would lead cancerous disorder of human politics but work out the greater order of the or nism. Implementing the laws of the or nism is the beginning and the end the millenia, the basic riddle which puzzled political thought: how to bring together conflicting egos into one optimal, harmo- nious society ? Should it be the polity, the empire, the nation state ? sahaja politics. If History is "a tale told by an idiot" as old brother Shakespeare wearily noticed, it is beçause it could not provide any answer to this question, Well, someone did recently provide the answer and that is why the course of History is going to change. This someone, this rather special someone is Our Mataji. Sahaja politics could be framed, for Ir tance, in a few principles: As Shri Ganesha is the darling ch of Shri Mataji I better try to emula Shri Ganesha. -As Shri Brahmadeva is the Doer better allow Him to act through r own detachment. Indeed when the Goddess grants us our rebirth the following changes do take place -As Shri Vishnu is the Master oft Play I better learn from Him son tricks (that's already going into app ed courses of sahaja political science ask Narada !), within us. I can put my attention on the sahasrara. When my attention is there I cannot any- more be lured by individualistic motivations. As sahasrara is the chakra of integration what I do then is necessarily integrated -As Shri Shiva is the Enjoyer I bett realise that it is He Ifeel whenev there is joy within. O Lord I Nirmala Yoga

 -As Shri Ganesha so is Lord Jesus. Seekers of the last days, come to Mother's shelter. For if you stand in the rain we are drenched, if you are hurt we feel the pain. Who are And I am silence. -As Shri Krishna is Virata sahajis are For you also are part of us. the Orchestra (not only flutes but vio- WE ? lin, sitar, cello, drums, shehnai and even, why not, pianos). The 5th May 1970 Kalki married Padma -As Shri Mataji Nirmala Ma takes in Shambalpur, the sahasrara of the Adi seat in my sahasrara I better lose Shakti. We are born of this Union, born in streams of Amrit and cosmic rays of light. Lao Tseu said : come to the children, you myself in Shri Mataji to be seated in my sahasrara. will know the Mother accordingly. And as you are me there is no "you" nor any "me". O brothers and sisters, at this stage the words become silly. Let us love, let us love as much as we can. After Om Twamewa Sakshat Shri Sarva Sahaja Yogi Sakshat Shri Sarva Sahaja Yogini Sakshat Shri Adi Shakti Bhag- wati Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Namo Namah. all, we are Her children, we should be good at it. They will recognize the mother in the children, they will see the difference, they will come to us, they will be convinced. -Gregoire With best compliments from : 256869 253477 Phone : RAWALPINDI JEWELLERS te (AIR CONDITIONED SHOW ROOM) Latest Designs in: DIAMOND JEWELLERY & GOLD ORNAMENTS 2298, Near Clock Tower, Subzi Mandi, Delhi-110007. s- W Nirmala Yoga 28

 Geneva, Aug. 22-24, 1982 Shri Mataji in the Temple Sahaja Yogis poured from Italy, France, believe it. A sahaja yogi said later to Shri England as Mother arrived in Geneva for a Mataji : "Mother, this meeting was histori- Sunday Ganesha Puja. In this joyful cere- cal not only for Sahaja Yoga but also for the mony followed by a Havan Mother empha city of Geneva". She, the Magnificent One, sized how much the Divine was fond of answered : "It was historical for the whole "FUN": we did not guess then how much world. Because, after having declared war of it we were to enjoy the next day. on the false prophets, we have now declar- ed war on all the religious fanatics." And Could you imagine Mother preaching to- then She added with a smile : "I enjoyed day in front of the Kaaba in Mecca or with- myself quite a lot with this incident; it was in the Saint Peter basilic in the Vatican ? all getting a bit too mundane for me." And Unlikely is'nt it ? Yet that's exactly what we thought we saw a mischievous twinkle in happend in Geneva, the intellectual capital Her eyes. of Protestantism where Shri Mataji deliver- ed three stunning speeches in the famous The next programme proved to be equally tremendous. We witnessed in this Tempie the Vishnu tattwa manifesting itself to a Temple de la Fusterie, "A guru woman in the Temple", "Shri stunned audience and to world history. She, Mataji who are you?", "The amazing Sahaja who guides Evolution, defiantly raised the Yoga of Shri Mataji". Such were the head- lines of some articles which came out in blasted the hypocrisy of the Western the big French speaking newspapers. Most nations, the racism of the British, the licen- of the eight articles or so were very posi- tiousness of the French, the brulallty of the tive ! Somehow people felt that something German, the aggressiveness of the United historical was happening. But what was it ? States and last but not least, the Swiss banner of Dharma. Shri Mataji forcefully banking system which works as a hiding The first evening, in front of three hun- place and as a laundry for all the dirty dred people, some tried to disturb the meeting. There was a of exploiters. "I admire this woman for the big turmoil for about fifteen minutes but courage she is showing in saying such the magic of it all appeared in the fact that things here" said a puzzled listener. the more negativity manifested, the stronger came the vibrations from Shri Mataji. She was extramely majestic and absolutely powerful. After audience sided with Her; the intruders left. testing. But He will just chop you off into Hundreds of people got their realisation in hell. Please, understand, get your realisa- less than five minutes. We could hardly tion now. Now it's the time of the judge- "christian" fanatics money of the world, money of thugs, money From the Geneva Temple the Goddess warned the whole world : "When Christ sometime the whole will come some Protestant will still be pro- Nirmala Yoga 29

 ment, now is the time of resurrection. Be careful : I see what is coming It will be very serious !" This evening again, many got their realisation. A deaf heard, a blind saw, a paralytic walked away. Let those who have ears hear. Let those who have eyes see. Let She, the Auspicious one, the Great Queen, grant us to be victorious in spreading Sahaja Yoga. To the Devi, to the Mahadevi, we bow again and again. -The Sahaja Yogis of Switzerland OBSERVANCES 1. Meditation does not end when all coming from Her. We should begin with chakras become pure, but begins from that praying to Her to kindly grant realisation or stage Therefore, all precautions should be cure, to that person. taken to avoid catches and to clear them. 5. However, undue importance to inner cleanliness, even at the cost of meditation, Those, who are established in Sahaja Yoga, know various methods and treatments to clean themselves. They should help and is not advisable. If chakras are subtle, the spirit is subtler still. Hence attention advise new comers about these. should be on the spirit, in which state the 2. No Sahaja Yogi should feel diffident cleansing is effortless. to help another Sahaja Yogi having a prob- lem or to a new comer, for the fear of attracting a problem. It must be remem- bered that our beloved Mother is always protecting us. Moreover, for one who is established in Sahaja Yoga, catches become of truth, existence and bliss. When we merely recordings which fade away in no keep our attention on Her we keep it on the time, without giving any trouble. After Self which is of that same nature. When passing the vibrations, 'shoe-beating' of one's own name and also of that person's, tion to the seven chakras we start experien- would be very useful. 6. The Mother is the ultimate truth. In the context of meditation, is reproduced below a passage from Advent. "The Divine Mother is the quintessence we meditate on Her Holiness Mataji in rela- cing that our seven selves are indeed part of the deities and that the deities are one with Her Holiness Mataji. Meditation on this identity opens the deeper stage of doubtless awareness. As we try to medi- tate on Her Haliness Mataji's Kundalini, we it should never really get lost like a drop in the Ocean; we are absoluely silent." (Note : This should be practised only on Her Holiness Mataji's 3. However, while handling a very bad case, it is better to give 'lime and chille treatment, to evict the 'badhas' before ex- tending personal help through vibrations. 4. While helping others be forgotten, that it is the Mother who in effect is helping that person and we are merely the instruments in Her hands or photo and not when She is present in channels to pass the vibrations, which are person). Nirmala Yoga 30

 OUR HOLY MOTHER You are the Sun, Our Holy Mother, You are the Moon, You are the Star, Who resides everywhere, Holy is your name. That shines in the doom. Truly you are Nirmala, And the three worlds, You are the living, Sing your fame. You are the life, You are Mahashakti, And you are the Earth, You are Kalki, Yours is the last judgement. That bears life. You are joy, You are the Creater, And you are Happiness, And one who prays to you, Gets Eternal Happiness. You are the Preserver, To destroy the evil you came. You are the teacher, You are the knowledge, You are the literature, To understand the knowledge The Mother of Lord Ganesha, Kartike and Jesus are You, O' Mother accept us sahaja yogis, As your children too You are the poetry. You are the literature, You are the speech, And you are the silence. -Jayen Modi Guru Purnima, 1982 ONCE BUILT LASTS EVER USE FOR ALL CONSTRUCTION WORK BJM CHETAK BRAND PORTLAND CEMENT Manufacturers5 WORKS BIRLA CEMENT CHITTORGARH-321 091 (RAJASTHAN) Nirmala Yoga 31

 Victory in Vienna Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi arrived in tions at the time of the collective rising of Austria for the first time on the 25th Sept. the Knndalini. A great number of people 1982 and stayed unlil October first. Sahaja got their realisation. We organised follow Yogis came from Italy, Switzerland and up meeting right after the departure of Shri other countries; for the whole week we en- Mataji and, yesterday evening, sixty people joyed "the nest of the blessed ones", that came to the second follow up meeting and is, a joyful, very loving and family like atmos- ten new people got their realisation. It phere in the direct proximity of the Great should be mentioned here that, on Sunday Goddess. True are Her names which ex- the 26th September we celebrated a tremen- press how She radiates fulfillment and bliss dous Durga puja with the worship of diffe- rent weapons. During the aarti the Goddess held in Her hands the conch and the sword. At this occasion Rustom recited a new around Her! worked out Collectivity among us smoothly and efficlently; the work to be done was done swiftly and well with a spe- cial word of praise to our great italian cooks. But this collectivity went, of course, beyond the human race : all the devas were most helpful. Shri Indra got the sky over- cast during the week end so that people during Her very first visit to Austria "it has would not be tempted to escape to the to spread from the void" She said. We countryside instead of coming to the pro- should recall here that Her 1982 visits to grammes. But Shri Surya shone magnifi- Rome, Paris, Geneva had also been very ciently when Shri Mataji decided to visit the Schoenbrunn palace where we discover- ed that the 18th Century ruler of Austria, series of Nirmala Mantra which touched the core of Shri Mata's Adi chakras. Really things are moving fast now ! As Europe is the void Shri Mataji was quite prassanna that everything went so well successful. In Vienna we were helped by a very positive and intelligent article on Shri queen Maria Theresia was a born realised Mataji which appeared in the leading Aus- trian newspaper and by an excellent inter- view of Shri Mataji on" Blue Danube Radio" Shri Mataji gave four public programmes. which was broadcasted for half an hour at A full reportage with pictures is 400 people attended the last programme. due next week in a big magazine. Once The public was respectful and disciplined, more the proof has been given : to get peo- obediently following Shri Mataji's instruc- ple to the programmes, to do some justice soul. Everytime the hall was jampacked Over peak time Nirmala Yoga 32

 of Shri Mataji's visit. us, we were merely privileged to be the instruments and, above all, the witnesses to Shri Mataji we have to use the medias ! This is very important. tration As for allowed us, sahaja yogis, to clearly unders of sakshat Shri Jayashalini, the roval and stand one simple truth: We are no the Doers Indeed the organisation of the pro- gramme was so sahaja that we could not we thank You for all these new born bro- victorious One. O Mother, from the bottom of our hearts, miss the point: all the ganas, all the angels, devas and devatas are to be very thers and sisters. humbly thanked for their brilliant orches- -Gregoire The true quality of every UNISTAR cable often begins where the cable ends-with the performance Even the most technologically advanced process does not have to mean the most superior power cable. What is really important is the capacity of the cable to per- form-dependably and relably, under even the most demanding conditions. Because a UNISTAR cable is not only a marvel of technology, it is a blend of the genius and dedi- cation of the people who make it. Today, in industrial complexes, national power projects, state power stations and other industries, UNISTAR cable are a vital pre-requisite. Because there is a UNISTAR cable for every need. Now UNISTAR offers the highly superior PEX (Crosslinked Polyethylene) Power cab- les, in technical collaboration with ASEA KABEL, Sweden. UNISTAR range of cable also include : Paper Insulated Power Cables, Thermoplas- tic and Elastomeris Cables, Railway Signalling Cables, Mining Cables, Airfield Defence Cables, Shipbuilding Cables, Quarry Trailing Cables, Lift Cables, Drill Cables and Locomotive Cables. UNISTAR-Precision-engineered quality cable that stand the test of time. Always for more information, Simply write to us. In the end, it's the performance that counts, UNIVERSAL CABLES LIMITED P. O. Birla Vikas, Satna-485 005 (M. P.) Nirmala Yoga 33

 Registered with the Registrar of Newspapers under Regn. No. 36999/81 WITH (OMPUMENTS FROM ge 20 SHANTILAL HARAKHCHAND & CO. 298, NARSHI NATHA STREET, BOMBAY-400 003 Edited & Published by Sh. S. C. Rai, 43, Bunglow Road, Dalhl-110007 and Printed at Ratnadeep Press, Darya Gani, New Delhi-110002. One Issue Rs, 6.00 Annual Subscription Rs 30.00 Foreign [By Airmail £ 5 $ 10 ]



----------------------

1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Nirmala Yoga
Vol. 11
Sept.-Oct, '82
Bi-Monthly
Year 2
t
Om Twamewa Sakshat, Shri Kalki Sakshat, Shri Sahastrar Swamini,
Moksha Pradaini, Bhagwati Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Namo Namaha.
"Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns all the religions and
seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga-THE UNION"
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-1.txt 
 To my flower children
You are angry with Life
Like small children
Whose Mother is lost in Darkness
Your sulk expressing despair
At the fruitless end of your journey
You wear ugliness to discover Beauty
You name everything false in the name of truth
You drain out emotions to fill the cup of Love
My sweet children, my darling
How can you get peace by waging war
With yourself, with your being, with joy itself
Enough are your efforts of renunciation
The artificial mask of consolation
Now rest in the petals of the lotus flower
In the lap of your gracious Mother
I will adorn your life with beautiful blossoms
And fill your moments with joyful fragrance
I will annoint your head with divine love
For I cannot bear your torture anymore
Let me engulf you in the ocean of joy
So you lose your being in the Greater one
Who is smiling in your calyx of self
Secretly hidden to tease you all the while
Be aware and you will find Him
Vibrating your every fibre with blissful joy
Covering the whole universe with light.
--MOTHER NIRMALA
With the belssings of our Divine Mother, regular meditation centers at the following places
have been established.
10.00 A.M.
Sunday
Wednesday
Saturday
1. Universal Sahaja Temple
78 Krishna Nagar
Opp, B 4/29 Safdarjung Enclave
New Delhi-110029
}
6.00 P.M.
2. Poona Club Ltd.
6, Bund Garden Road
Sunday
8.00 to 9 00 A.M.
Poona-411 001
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-2.txt 
 EDIT ORIAL
Navaratri Puja ends on Dussehra day, which is the tenth day. This day is also
known as 'Vijaya Dashami' L.e. the tenth day of victory when it is said that Shri Rama
returned to Ayodhya, his capital, after killing Ravana, As a Mahabharata story goes,
on this day Pandavas came out openly in arms against Kauravas, after the exile of 12
years. Navaratri Puja itself is performed in the memory of the victory of Adi-Shakti over
demons and to pray for Her continued protection.
"'Devi-Mahatmya' tells us how Gods beseeched the supreme Goddess to protect
them, every time demons vanguished them, and they could win back their kingdoms only
after She came to their rescue, It is Her powers that acted through Shri Rama and Shri
Krishna and other Gods. Satanic forces could not be defeate d without her biessings.
According to 'Devi-Mahatmya' She has promised to take incarnations whenever asuras
would create 'badhas' in this world.
In ancient days, as we know from various scriptures, asuras could be distingui-
shed and also they attacked openly. Now they have come back in subtle forms and
with most deceptive appearances. They attack the inner systems, our thinking and lure
us into their traps. In order to counter their tricks, Mother has come back to distribute
the bliss en mass to Her children, to make them spiritually strong and to make them
saints, so that the false sadhus and gurus would vanish. She has given Brahma
Shakti (Vibrations) to detect, and drive away the negativity, 'bandhan' to use as shield.
against the attacks and as noose to bind it. The shakti increases with progress in
Sahaja Yoga. More we give, more we get. More we fight more we are protected. Sahaja
Yogis are the soldiers of Her army, and the channels for Her powers. With every per-
son that gets realisation, demonic forces are pushed back.
She is the Deity of all Gods and they are happy when She is pleased. She is
within us and all pervading but it is our individuality that is separating us from Her.
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Pray, Mother, may we get over our 'l consciousness' so that the drops that we are,
integrate with the ocean that is You.
इन्द्रियाणां अधिष्ठात्री भूतानां चाखिलेयु या ।
भूतेषु सततं तस्यै व्याप्तिदेव्ये नमो नमः ।।
चितिरूपेण या कुत्स्नमेतद्व्याप्य स्थिता जगत् ।
नमस्तस्यै नमस्तस्यं नमस्तस्य नमो नमः ।।
Indriyāņām adhishthatri bhootānām chākhileshu ya I
Bhooteshu satatam tasyai vyāpti devyai namo namalh II
chitiroopen yā kritsna-metadvyāpya sthitā jagat I
Namastasyai Namastasyai Namastasyai Namo Namah II
Translation
Obeisance to that Goddess who is foundational to all organs of beings and who
is ever present within all beings.
That Goddess who has pervaded the whole universe in the form of conscious-
ness, obeisance to Her, obeisance to Her, obeisance to Her.
Mother Mahalakshmi
सिद्धिबुद्धिप्रदे देवि मुक्तिमुक्ति प्रदायिनी ।
मन्त्रमूर्ते सदादेवि महालक्ष्मि नमोsस्तुते।।
अद्यन्तरहिते दवि आद्यशक्त महेश्वरि ।
योगजे योगसम्भूते महालक्ष्मि नमोsस्तुते ||
पद्मासनस्थिते
देवि परत्रह्मस्वरूपिणि
।
परमेशि जगन्मातर्महालक्षिम नमोsस्तुते ।|
-PADMA PURĀNA
Siddhibuddhiprade Devi Bhuktimukti pradāyeni!
Mantramurte sada Devi Mahälakshmi namustu te !!
Devi Adyshakte Maheshwari!
Yogje yogsambhute Mahãlakshmi namastu te !!
Adyantrahite
Padmāsan sthite Devi Parbrahma swarupiņi!
Parmeshi jaganmātr Mahālakshmi namostu te !!
Translation
O Devi, giver of intelligence and success and of worldly enjoyment and liberation
(as well), Thou hast always the Mantras as Thy form, O Mahalakshmi, obeisance to Thee.
O Devi, Maheshwari, without a beginning or an end, O Primeaval Energy, born of
Yoga, O Mahalakshmi obeisance to Thee.
O Devi, seated on the lotus, who art the Parabrahma, the great Lord and Mother
of the universe, O Mahalakshmi, obeisance to Thee.
Nirmala Yoga
2.
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Letter
Dear Mr. Subramanyamji,
This is a statue of Neptune (God of the Sea) that we can see in Madrid, Spain
where we went with some Sahaja Yogis to prepare Her Holiness Mataji's visit. It was a
beautiful experience to see so many seekers coming and through Her Holiness Mataji's
grace get their realization. Sahaja Yoga is spreading much quicker in the West. It is
a new speed. Her Holiness Mataji was talking these last days about dedication. She
said, "dedication to ME, not to Sahaja Yoga is the only way you can evolve".
To be one with spirit is such a beautiful state as the heart lets all the love
flow. This is what we have discovered in India. In Delhi heart is very opened. We
enjoyed so much our stay. Hope to come next winter. Now we are going to Switzerland
and Austria for Her Holiness Mataji's programme. Let us pray that many seekers will
come. With all our affection.
-Philip and Marie Laure
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Yog
Nirmala
a
43, Bunglow Road, Delhi-110007 (India)
Founder: Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Editorial Board: Dr. S. K Mathur, Sri A. S. Mishra, Sri R. D. Kulkarni
Representatives
: CHERYL HYNES-10, Clarence Road, Burwood, N.S. W. 2134, Australia.
: GAVIN BROWN-Nirmala Palace, 99, Nightingale Lane, Clapham South,
Australia
U. K.
Balham, London SW 12 U.K.
: CHRISTINE RIEGER-215 West 92 ND Street, APT. 7E. New York,
NY 10025.
U. S. A.
: RECHARD PAYMENT-1950, Easf 5th Avenue, Vancouver, B. C.
Canada V5N 1M2.
Canada
Switzerland : CHARLES AND MRS. MAGDA MATHYS-5, Chemin Des Mouldins,
1256, Troinex (Canton de Geneva), Switzerland.
: MARIE ROUGER-175, Av. Ledru Rollin, Paris-75001.
France
Hong Kong : EMILIE P. SHI-Cliff Rence Bros. Co. Ltd., 1610, Wing On Centre,
111, Connaught Road Central, Hong Kong.
: M.B. RATNANNAVAR-13, Merwan Mansion, Genjwala Lane, Borivali
(W), Bombay-400 092.
India
RAJARAM SHANKAR RAJWADE 840, Sada Shiva Peth, Pune-411009.
9 ON T
ENTS
Page
1. Editorial
2. Mother Mahalakshmi
3. Letter
4. Representatives
5. Subtlity
6. Jai Mataji
7. Cowley Manor Seminar
8. Prayer to Bhoomi Devi
9. H. H. Mataji's Letters (Translation)
10. Fight for Collectivity (Part III)
11. Shri Mataji in the Temple
12. Observances
13
21
24
25
27
29
30
13. Our Holy Mother
14. Victory in Vienna
15. To My Flower Children
31
32
2nd Cover
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Dollis Hill, London
June 8, 1980
SUBTLETY
And it is only possible for people who people when they find there is something
are of a subtler nature to understand the available, come in and go away. Another
value of Sahaja Yoga, to hold to the values kind may be which is coming here, is the
of Sahaja Yoga, and to retain it in this frag- one which is extremely gross, can think that
mented world.
he can make some living out of our work
The world is fragmenfed and everybody here by having connections with different
is acting towards one's own destruction. All people, he can exploit it and make some
the values which people follow are gross money out of it.
values. Most of the values are absolutely a very gross thing. It is very gross thing.
gross. So for Sahaja Yoga we have to have If people are money-minded then Sahaja
people who are trying to justify their subtle- Yoga does not work out well with them.
ties. Such subtle people have always been
a little different from the mundane crowd.
These people always express themselves in insurance, about how the carpet is spoilt,
such a manner that their existence itself this has happened, that happened; such
suggests that they are trying to cement the people are very difficult. But lower than
whole world. Sort of, you can feel that this are the people who come here to have
those who can feel that there is an element some sort of an exploitation out of Sahaja
within us which makes us laugh at the Yoga. Such gross people also come in and
stupidity of others who may appear to them- when they find that they cannot work out
selves very seriously doing things but to us their plans, they walk out.
it seems as if its rather stupid to waste type of people who come here come for
their life. This is the calibre of different some material gain from Sahaja Yoga. May
people. First these people, with that calibre, be physical gain also. Like somebody is
with that dynamism within them, will be sick so they come for their sickness. A
settled in Sahaja Yoga. Not the ordinary or
If you always think about money, of your
very gross way of looking at things is to
come to Sahaja Yoga for getting cured. So
gross type.
But because our doors are open to every- when they get cured they disappear. Quite
one, because there is no charge or anything, stupid isn't it ? Then some people come
for anything, all sorts of people come in. with the idea that may be with Mother's
And when they come in, they do not know blessings our financial problems will be
what they want. Out of them some could solved; only with that idea. Then they also
be the grossest of all. Some might be just get their financial problems solved and they
walking in to take out something, just to get out. But some of them do not. Some
steal something, possibly. I have seen all of them cannot manage to get what they
kinds of people come to Sahaja Yoga. Such want and they get upset.
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Now the best calibre of the subtlest form way and rush back. Some of them come
is that, which is just seeking "Sahaja Yoga", this side and get out from the otherside.
which is just seeking ""Union with God". But those who stay are people who are
Nothing else. That is the best calibre. That subtler by nature. Il is a very subtle hap-
calibre works hard, it has very concentrated pening. If you have lost your subtleties,
effort. It understands Sahaja Yoga very say some people, as I said, even doing hard
quickly. Only thing is that because of work with your fingers, you become insen-
western habit of thinking some of the peo- sitive, even physical disrespect to your fin-
ple, though they have a calibre, circulate gers you become little bit insensitive. Even
around themselves. They go on thinking when you get your realization, you may not
about it, discussing about it, arguing about feel your vibrations that good. But that is
it and then they become stationed at a point, not important. Of course, vibrations you
otherwise it goes little round and round it- must feel for realisation. But may be due
self. They have a calibre, they have a
height, they definitely have. As we call due to some physical problem you may get
they have that 'weight'. They can feel their
element, but still they go on as a habit, you tions so much. But doubts would not rise
see, because they are used to it they go on n your minds because there are not vibra-
encircling round and round They have to tions.
steady themselves.But calibre of a person
who just wants to 'be', to 'become', can
never be deterred by anything. Because he if the doubts come in, a subtle person will
is subtle in a way. In his life-time he feels fight it, will argue it out, but a gross person
the subtleties of the Unconscious.) He has would not.
to some external reasons also, or may be
a situation where you may not feel vibra-
You would just think that 'the vibra-
tions are not there. I must get my Vishuddhi
Chakra all right. But it is there'. And even
felt his archetype images of these deities.
He has known them. He has these erup-
The subtle person is a brave man, and
his bravery comes from his built in capacity
of these subtleties. He does not succumb
tallies them with Sahaja Yoga and Sanaja to doubts. He just sees it, he fights it. He
tions within him. He identifies and he re-
cognizes the subtleties he has felt and he
Yoga gets him like that. Now these subtle-
ties which I am describing to you, come to
does not succumb to it. But Sahaja Yoga
is such a wonderful thing that even those
people who at one time looked very gross,
you, not through your mental effort of this
lifetime, But comes to you from tne expe- suddenly came out with such beautiful
suddenly
manifestation of subleties that it is surpri-
riences of many lives you have gone through.
And as soon as you come near Sahaja
Yoga you start sucking. That is the best
calibre.
sing ! But that is exceptional.
The mind in the human brain is subtle
But because the door is open ajar, the on certain points and gross on some points.
grossest of the grossest also come. But It's most surprising ! May be the back-
sometimes they come this way and go back ground. It is a very subtle subject you see.
the same way. Some of them, come half Please pay attention.
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-8.txt 
 If a genius is created. Now we can say the images of his Spirit. If such a person
we call it a prodigy. But 1 would call it a is a realised soul, then the expression is
genius There is a difference between a 'heavenly'. The fashioning of his expres-
prodigy and a genius. Prodigy is a person
who, for a short time of their life span, sud- dings, the different atmosphere, the tradi-
denly become very talented and after some tions and all that in which the people have
time the talent goes away. fived. That is the fashioning part of it, but
gious person may be mentally absolutely the universal essence of it, that element
very-very low, low very low. So it is done
by some sort of a spirit possession. But a
person who is a genius is a person who has cular fashion. The more a person is nearer
those sensitivities. The mind which is to his Self even the fashioning is universal
covered with thoughts, which is thickened, in nature Then such a person does not
which is gross can be thinned out at certain try to be moulded by tradition so much.
points and can be very sensitive at certain
points. For example, some people could be meditativeness or through realised souls
very sensitive to music.
art. Some could be to human beings.
Some could be to other things which might ally in every country, in every place, till it
make them something of rare people. But reaches the point where people start under-
these subtler things which create your per- standing them in meditation.
sonality always indicate in your being that
there is something of the beyond which is One is the fashioning that comes from out-
throwing some images within you. Such side, the other from inside.
people are conscious of that-that there that comes from inside could be the teach-
are some images which are throwing these ings of the "Great Masters'", who are realis-
subtle ideas within you, they are erupting ed souls and your own understanding of
some new commotion within you and once the work of these Great Masters.
you start seeing them you are compelled to another style, type, could be, you see what
put them down somewhere. That's how the people have been producing all of them
the poets are created, musicians are crea-
ted, great masters are created.
sion is of course determind by the surroun-
And a prodi-
which is universal is manifested in a parti-
But tradition which have come through
definitely give hima better chance of expres-
sion
Some could be to
So the fahioning also evolves gradu-
Now there are two. types of fashioning.
The fashioning
The
and you gather out of that and fashi on your
manifestation accordingly. In the second
type of thing they may be realised, they may
Now, the fashioning of these subtle not be realised.
ideas is another job. But the beauty of
these subtle ideas is that they are universal person who is not a genius, who has never
in nature. If they were not, they would not been a genius, who had no idea of any
Now when we go to Sahaja Yoga even a
be so much appealing to every one. So special expression in life can get realisation
there is something universal in these. And and of the highest type. May be much more
that universality when manifested or fashion-
ed into some expression then it is absorbed have become a geni-ass by now. You see
universally. Now it depends on the person his ego must have bloated out and he
how much he is closer to those images and might be a geni-ass instead of a genius.
than a genius, because the genius may
Nirmala Yoga
7.
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-9.txt 
 But a Sahaja Yogi when he gets his of the family so the sociely improves-all
realisation, this realisation is a sign not of this is all right. But that's not the end of it.
his subtleties but of his Kundalini-in what In India you will find many families like that
condition She is. If the Kundalini is ab- Husband, wife are carrying on nicely, chil-
solutely frozen that means the person has eren are nice and money is in the bank.
no desire to have realisation. He is coming When they die money goes to the children.
to Sahaja Yoga to make some money out of Then the children are married nicely, then
it or to make some näme out of it or he they have their children. Money goes to the
could be a burglar coming as a Sahaja Yogi bank. When they die the money goes to
to burgle away, say, My shoes. Such a the children...Goes on day in and day ot.
person can be very difficult for realisation, Nothing. It is so mundane. That does not
but may be with some people who have mean I believe in divorces. Of course, that
some basic problems also can have their is something nonsensical. But to be mar-
ried means you have entered into life.
At
Kundalini completely frozen up.
least you should enter into life. That is
But people of very ordinary appearances, important. As far as entering is concerned
of very ordinary life, could be very subtle. -basic. But that's just the basic. That's
Much more than these geni-asses and geni- not the end of the life.
uses put together. Because they can feel
this Self Such people do not cheat them-
selves or others, no question. Their whole think what is your advantage monetarily or
attitude towards Sahaja Yoga is like a person what you are doing, what is the thing, what
who is dying and gasping for air, they are, gains you have got. Of course you will see
just struggling to get the Truth. They have that, as Yoga is established, Kshema will
no other interest in life, but to get to the
If you are a subtler person, you will not
be established, your well-being will be esta-
blished. You will see that clearly. It is to
Truth.
be seen, to be thankful. And the Kshema
Such people could be very strong head- is alright because you should not have
ed, could be very different from normal. worry, Kshema, But you should have free
They may think many things stupid. Even, time to devote yourself to meditation and to
you see, just to have a wife, and children, Sahaja Yoga. So that you do not have too
and family, is quite stupid, isn't it ? That's much worry.
not the end of life. That's quite a stupid comes in. But when the Kshema comes in
thing to do. I don't say you give up that.
But is not the end of life.
a part of it.
That is how the Kshema
also one may start going into the same
It's all right, It's Circle of greediness having more and more
money, more and more this, better clothes,
This circle
We believe that marriage is important. may start. There is no end to it. So you
We believe that in the marriage husband have to cut it down. Tam not saying that
and wife should be very much understand- you just have one dress and all your life you
ing of each other. There should be love end up with one dress. It doesn't mean
between the two, there should be enjoy- that. Because you knów if I say anything
ment so that children also feel the security people will shoot off to the other end. I am
You are not to be lost in it.
better house, how to get this ?
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-10.txt 
 trying to keep it in the centre. That not too baba ! he's coming; go from the other
much attention would be required on one road. Ooh I that fellow with the stone heart!'
side or the other of indulgences or of asce- And you feel you are all right, you are a
You are not to very good person because you are stone-
None of these,
ticism
nannounce anything, neither you have to hearted. You think you can dominate the
indulge into anything.
whole world because you are stone-hearted.
You can give psychological treatment to
But feel your subtleties, Feed them, nou- others,-'keep quiet, don't talk to anyone,'
rish them. Look after them. You should shout at others, do whatever you please,
be proud of your subtleties, that you have because you have a stone heart. Nothing
these subtler values while others don't have. happens to a stone there. Now this stone-
And that itself will be so self-sustaining, heartedness is the sign that you should not
that you can withhold all these values be any more in Sahaja Yoga.
which you get from your subtletles against
the whole world. Because the world is so
fragmented, so cut off, that everybody feels has. Pulsating with love, with Compassion,
lonely. But that does not by any chance with Joy, with Happiness, with Giving. That
mean that you should be arrogant to others, should be the attitude.
you should be fighting with others, No. But
in darkness a light shines. The whole is
darkness. If the light accepts darkness Feeling for the pains of others. Feeling for
then it becomes dark. The light must accept their longing and feeling for their aspira-
that, "I am the light. I am the path," and
should stand. That does nof in any way Desire to be the Whole,' to be the Ocean itself
mean any arrogance to others, any showing is so fulfilling.
off to others. But it is the light and the
light by itself emits.
You must have a heart as your Mother
Not rationality. Nothing. It is to feel.
Just feel within yourself, 'is there
tions.
We should not have our ideals among
Like, she does this so why
ourselves.
When this happens to you, you, will not should I do. He does this so why should
hate yourself, first of all, but you will laugh do. It's very mediocre. It's a very low-
and respect yourself and respect the yirtues grade businens. To see others, to worry
in you and not your grossness
itself makes you subtler and subtler. But if tremely low grade.
you are a stone what can Kundalini do ?
Now it is for you to see where you are
stone. There should be a lot of heart-
searching...The greatest 'stone-age' is now
a-days !
move. When talking to others it does not what will be My position ? I can't do it, you
move. It has no ripple in it. There is'nt any see.
joy in it. It is like stone. Sitting there to
hate everyone. If any one sees you-'Oh
Kundalini about others, to talk about others is ex-
A person who is of a calibre has his
standards much higher that he cannot
compare himself with others. It's really true.
Heart is like a stóne.
Doesn't
So if I start comparing Myself with you,
Then you say it's all right for you, Mother.
A Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-11.txt 
 It's perfect, I agree. It is all right for Me as ted Her child, and the first sound that wi
I am, but, you can be like Me also. But if I created was the Child and that sound is ti
start comparing and thinking 'Oh God ! sound what we call as Brahma or the Log:
What is this Then I should give up doing as they call it. So now what is the differen
between God and God's desire? What i ti
difference between Sun and sunlight. Wha
the difference between Moon and Moonlig
What is the difference between the wo
anything, thinking where have I come.
But when you know that you are not com-
paring, you are just Giving, question of com-
parison should not arise at all. At all. 1t is and the meaning.
just 'feeling'. I just feel. In the same way
you feel each other.
So the God Almighty, Him, who peop
understand is just a witness. The day the
Not in a artificial courteous way. Some two Things will meet, there won't be a
people think that If they have given seat to world lelt. Till they are separated all tho
some one, they have been really the gene- things happen. When they meet and mer
rous people, the greatest generous people. into each other, there is nothing left.
Just be yoursell now. Let's see. Just be
yourself. And that you are the light! What
is the comparison ! The comparison exists
when our calibre is low. If it is 24 carat
gold. What is the comparison ? It's Absolute. merged together as God and His Powi
If you are at an absolute point there's no We cannot understand anything like th
comparison. So try to see that your calibre because there is no parallel. Now, you c
is that. That you are of that calibre. And rationally also see things; that people, whi
don't worry about gross people. Gross are they bend before me, their Kundalini star
gross, will remain gross, you just don't worry moving.
about them. You keep your calibre all right at the feet of Adi Shakti this would happs
just becomes the sound, Brahma-nothin
We cannot understand these things b
cause we have never seen two things th
It is written in the scriptures on
and that is the most essential part of Sahaja Not only that, but you people who have n
been through any austere life have got yo
realisation and that your own power is g
ing them realisation. Isn't it ? There is
Yoga.
Thank you very much.
Paul : They always tell me you are one in the whole world today, there may
actually God. Well I can't see that at all.
some realised souls, who can give the w
you give realisation. You go and talk
some great Gurus, they are jealous of yo
wards me. Ask the question, It's simple, They know who I am. They have told pe
Mother: All right. Put your hands to-
like computer. Work out your computer.
Just ask the question. Finished.
ple who I am. But they are jealous that th
don't understand why of all the thing
She (Kundalini) is the one who is the have given you these powers while they d
desire of God Almighty. She is the power of n't have; they can't give realisation the w
God and it is only She who incarnates. If you give; in a second like this, nobody ca
You can go and have a look at them. Th
you read the Vedas it is said that She crea-
Nirmala Yo
10
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-12.txt 
 ? Because I
are great people no doubt But your Kunda have got it so easily. Why
finis work like jets They move like elephan- recognize that subtleties in you.
ts from one Chakra to another Chakra. The Gurus recognize Me. They know about Me.
Kundalini does not move that way as it They know who I am. They are telling
moves, because I have given the Authority. others. They're so many of them like that.
You can go and meet them and they will tell
you. There are thousands of people they
have got disciples
them to me. They say "Mother' you will got thêm because I have Chosen you. AlI
find your calibre! These gross people you right. Good, see now,
leave it to us. We will manage them. We
will send them later on, just now you find
These
First of all know that you have these
But they donot send powers within you. Then know that you have
Only thing you get rid of your egos
which give you ideas. Sometimes they
come like big balloons, so tell yourself, "Mr.
your subtle people.
Why Sahaja Yogis are few is because Ego, Please get out. These powers I have got
there are very few subtle people in this because Mother has chosen me, has loved
world of that calibre. That is why I am me, has nourished me and has accepted me
always requesting you, do not divert your as Her child."
attention here and there. Settle down.
Become good Sahaja Yogis. Unless and
until you really become good Sahaja Yogis give realisation, I tell you, You go and tell
I cannot move to the second strata because anybody. You should; but they are not
the first strata is not yet settled down, they going to believe you, If this flower says
are worrying about nonsensical things i that I can become the lamp in a light house,
mean I just sometimes feel very unhappy nobody is going to believe it, because the
to see you fight amongst yourselves. I mean light in the lighthouse is made in a special
this is something so painful; that you say tactory. But supposing this flower says,
harsh words to each other, I mean you are
It is a fact. Nobody can believe that you
or if this flower says that I can cure your
the cream for Me. You go and ask any one of diseases, then nobody will believe you, but
the Gurus if they can move the Kundalini it may! When some thing fantastic happens,
we have to believe that there is Divine acting
and acting so dynamically! Only thing, do not
waste your energies in gross hankerings and
gross wanderings and ramblings. Try to be
on their fingers as you do it.
These powers cannot be given by an
ordinary person. I look ordinary no doubt,
I have to, but also you have seen Me in subtler and subtler.
other forms-that's not important. The im-
p.rtant thing is you should see your own
transformation and how many powers are Now you think it from God's point of view.
manifesting. If you go and tell somebody You are to be given realisation, first job,
that I have started giving realisation and Its a headache, you know. Somebody has
raising Kundalini they will say You are mad, to take up the headache of Giving Realisa-
How can this be ? Impossible." Nobody tion. It's much easier to be crucified once
is going to believe you at all. You see, you
There is nothing that I have to ask for.
but to be giving realisation a hundred times.
Nirmala Yoga
11
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-13.txt 
 to all kinds of funny Kundalinis to be raised, Love, through that you will understand Me
you cannot imagine. And then after giving better. Its much easier to understand Me
realisation to tell you all about it. To decode through your heart than through your brains.
all chakras, to show you all the chakras Because I am very good at blasting them;
to tell you all about Deities, these achetypes and I play about with you lots of things by
and everything. And every word of it is true which I really give you a very difficult time
and Acts and Works. You have experimen- Because if you start thinking, I make you
ted and found out Somebody has to come think more. If you start doubting I make
down.
you doubt more. So best thing is to see.
As I told the other day that whatever is in
JE has been My lot lo conme. I don't mind the next room, betfer to go in and see, than
and as I told the other day, one of you takes to sit down here and doubt. Or to accept
my seat l'll be very happy to be a Sahaja it and sit down here. No. Go and see for
Yogi sitting down there. I will be the hap-
piest person. I will give you fine garlands
like this and all the flowers from the market,
I will bring for you-if you could sit here how Tremendous It is ! Just sit down and
and do the job for Me.
yourself.
You have seen it yourself. But just think
think how greal It is, how Dynamic It is, that
you have seen Il with your Own eyes. Just
think that you have Felt it, that You are the
people who have got it. You are the first few
who have known It. They may be thousands
and thousands later, the whole Universe may
It is very easy to doubt, but can you do
the job ? You can not. This is the trouble
with the western mind, is -that it doubts.
What are you doubting about ? What is
there to doubt ? I cannot doubt Mysell. take it up but you are the first few. You
That's very difficult. When you know that
this is the Truth how can you doubt ?
prove your calibre.
Come up.
Now if you doubt what can I do ? How
to prove it ? Best way is to understand My
May God bless you.
MANTRA
Om Twamewa Sakshat Shri Mahalaxmi, Mahasaraswati, Mahakali, Trigunatmika,
Kundalini, Sakshat Shri Adi Shakti. Shri Nirmala Devi Namo Namaha.
Om Twamewa Sakshat Shri Kalki, Sakshat Shri Adi Shakti, Shri Nirmala Devi
Namo Namah.
Om Twamewa Sakshat Shri Kalki, Sakshat Shri Sahastrar Swamini, Maksha Pradaini,
Bhagwati Mataji, Shri Nirmala Devi Namo Namah.
Nirmala Yoga
12
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-14.txt 
 JAI MATAJI
Translation of Her Holiness Mataji's Speech in Marathi,
wherein she has explained the meaning of her own name Nirmala.
It is good that all Sahaja Yogis have
come together. When we meet like this, we
can discuss many things of mutual interest
The illusion that you see is not just the
illusion, but there is something beyond that.
However, we have wasted so many years of
lives in it that we give importance to all that
actually does not exist and in doing that we
have made heaps of sins. We have tried to
derive the pleasure from many things. We
have received nothing from whatever we
have tried to enjoy. Essentially, it is all
nothing.
and tell even small details about them to
each other. The other day I told you how to
clean yourself as your Mother's name itself
is Nirmala and it contains many powers.
The first word is NIH (:) which means
not. Something that actually does ot
exist but appears to exist, is called Mahă-
māyā (illusion) and the whole world is like
that. It is seen but it is not true. If we are
involved into it we feel that it is the only point everywhere in life. Then you will know
So, the outiook should be, it is all that no-
thing, it is all false. Only Brahma is real the
rest all is false. You have to adopt this view
thing we have to live for. Then we feel
that economic conditions are unsatisfactory, most of the Sahaja Yogis after realisation, is
social and domestic conditions are bad, that they think, "now that we are realised
everything around us is bad and we are not
happy about anything.
what Sahaja Yoga is. What happens with
we have Mataji's blessings, Then why are
we not prosperous?". That means they
think God is in the prosperity. if you find
out why your nature does not change even
Water on the sea surface is very dirty
and turbid. Many objects are seen floating after realisation you will know that our
on it But if we go deep into the sea there "Swabhāv the nature of our spirit, does not
is so much beauty, wealth and power that change. See, how beautiful is this word
we forget that on the surface the water is
so bad.
Swabhav Swa' is Atman i.e. the spirit and
bhấy is the nature, Have you become the
nature of your Self ? If you become your
self there is so much beauty within, that all
that goes on outside would appear like
drama. So long as this witness state is not
blish 'NIH' you have to tell yourself, whenever fully awakened within you, you have not
a thought comes, say it is not there, another followed the word NIH' (:) and also you
have not practised it. Suppose you are
aware that you have not established 'NIH'
The point is that everything that you see
around is illusion. You must remember first
of all it is all nothing. If you have to esta-
thought comes, say it is not there. You have
to feel this again and again. Then you will
understand the meaning of word 'NIH'.
within you and even now you become some-
Nirmala Yoga
13
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-15.txt 
 time emotional oregoistical, coersive or sub- which is God. Hence His power also comes
missive and feel sad about it, then the state to you. Does this finger think ? Is it not still
of being on 'NIH' is at the centre of these moving ? Give your thoughts to God and
extremes. You are neither in this state nor ask Him to think about you. But it is rather
difficult, because you are not thought less.
in that. This state can be best achieved in
the meditation, Just by following the idea of
"NIH' in your life you will become (Nirvicha)
Many people say "we have surrender-
ed everything'
because they do it only in talking.
", but it does not happen
thoughtless.
Surren-
First of all you should become thought- dering is not talking. You have to surrender
less. Once you start jumping on a thought to attain thoughtiessness. That is you have
however good or bad it may be, you go into
some sort of inertia and in that state you
jump from one thought to another. So some
people have said that a bad thought should
be opposed by a good thought. In other
words if a vehicle or train coming from one
stopped thinking. When you stop thinking
you come to the centre., When at the centre,
immediately you go into thoughtless awar-
ness, i.e. become one with God's power and
when you are one with the God's power,
He looks after you. He takes care of your
small things also. You will be amazed. it
is worth trying and after that you will realise
that what you were doing earlier was wrong.
So once you are in thoughtlessness you will
get all inspirations, all powers and every-
direction, is pushed back by another one,
both will stop somewhere at the centre. It
is good but ocassionally it can become
harmful. A bad thought when put down by
a good thought remains supressed but it
can suddenly come up and it happens with
many people. They press down their nor-
mal thoughts and always tell themselves surprised. Everything will come to you as
that they must be good to others and must be
well behaved etc. These people can some-
times be in trouble. Suddenly they get ex-
asperated and others cannot understand,
why these well behaved people are annoyed.
Also they lose their inner peace. All the
beauty within them is destroyed. So we
thing. The idea that you get in thought-
lessness is an inspiration.
You will be
if on a plate. You are sianding to give a
speech. Just be thoughtless and start.
Although you have never given a speech
earlier or do not even know how to do it or
have no special knowledge of any subject,
you will speak so well that others will be
astonished how you know so much. But
once you are deep in the thoughtless state
all comes from there and not from your
should be always thoughtless. Ban all
thoughts from your mind and then you
would automatically remain at the centre.
brain.
I tell you about Me. You pray 'Mother
You must make all efforts. Now you kindly see that such and such happens to
would ask "Mother how can we do anything me' and I do not think about that. It is amaz-
without thinking ?" But what are thoughts ? ing. I put all that in the thoughtlessness. ll
They are hollow. In thoughtless state you machinery is working there. Just put it to
that machinery and it is all ready. Allow
that machinery, you can call it silent
are one with the God's power that is, the
drop, which is you, comes in the ocean
Nirmala Yoga
14
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-16.txt 
 This is also about time. I never see
Sometimes it stops and shows,
when the time is 3 or 4. But my real watch
is in the thoughtlessness It is permanently
stopped. If anything is to be done, it takes
machinery, to work. You should put all your
probla.ns lo it. But it is very difficult for watch.
intellectuals because their habit is to go on
thinking about everything.
You should be able to go into thought- place at the right time. Then there are no
lessness while trying to understand a sub- regrets whether it is late or not. Whatever
ject, all becomes clear automatically.
Research that you are doing should also be
in thoughtless state. Let your hands work
while you are thoughtless. You can do
your research extremely well in this way.
I tell you many things. T have never read
science in my life and know nothing about
it. Still I tell you all that. Where does all
the knowledge come from ?
thoughtlessness; I only speak and see all should not be a slave of anything.
that is going on. It was all kept ready in
that computer which is speaking. If you are
not in the thoughtless state you do not use everywhere as if on his hands. He makes
your computer and put your brain on top of all arrangements. He knows everything and
it. It is such on old computer and lot of there is no need to tell him about anything.
accurate work has been done on it. You
are bound to make mistakes if you use your
own brain and do not consult the com- you are stuck up somewhere on the bank;
it may be I am not bothered.
Yesterday my car failed but I was relax-
Ing because I wanted to see the stars.
That beauty is not visible in London and I
wanted to see it. Its splendour was spread
all over the sky. The sky thought Mataji
should see it. Sometimes I must look at
that also ! 1 was enjoying it. In short, you
From the
If you are thoughtless God takes you
But you must see whether you are in the
main stream or not. If you are not in it then
puter.
then current comes and takes you in, twice
or thrice but again you are on the bank.
Then you say Malaji nothing goes smoolhly
for me'. It won't. Because you are entangled.
All that happens in the thoughtless state
is enlightened. Whenever suffix Pra is
used (in Sanskrit, Hindi or Marathi) it means
enlightened. Light never talks. If you switch
on the light in the room, the light won't
speak or give you any ideas. It would just stream (Pravāha)" which means enlightened
make everything visible. Same is about the
light of thoughilessness.
Shri Ganesha's praise that you sing is
excellent. It says, "flowing in the main
main stream. You should not bring your
own separate, current in it. The Arti of
Shri Ganesha also says Nirvāni Raksháve,
i.e. protect me when I am dying. You also
pray 'Raksha Raksha Parameshwara O God
That 'NIH' is
common in all such words like 'Nirvichar
(Thoughtless), Nirahankara (egoless) you
establish it and then you come into doubt-
less state. First bacome thoughtless and
then doubtless (Nirvikal pa).
doubts go and you know that there is some
power that works. It works very fast and says "let him protect himself." What I want
is all subtle. You will be amazed how it
happens.
protect me, but you want to protect yourself.
Why should, then, God protect you ? He
Then all your
to emphasise is that you must learn to go
deep and realise all this in the thoughtless-
Nirmala Yoga
15
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-17.txt 
 ness then you can become Nirvikalpa is becoming completely unattached. You
must become completely unattached.
(doubtless).
You must have no attachment (Nirāsakta).
We have here, (India) 'my son, my daughter'.
In England, it is just the opposite. There, they Lävanya'. Word LA has a sweetness of its
are not attached to son or daughter. They
are worried only about themselves
you have this attachment; my son, my
daughter, my house etc., everything is mine Shakti the power of love, is spread every-
and at the end you are left only with mine !
You should say "Nothing is mine and every-
thing is yours." Kabir says "so long as a
goat is alive it is bleating 'main, main' (1, 1)
but when it is cut the taut strings of its guts
LA, shakti has love in it. She relates
Word LA comes in Lalām.
us to others
own and you should impress others with it.
You should use this Shakti while speaking
to others. What should you do when this
Неге
where in moving and non-moving things?
You should leave all thoughts to the first
power because thoughts come from the first
power. What should you do in the last
power, i.e. LA Shakti ? You should enjoy
the bliss of love. How ? By forgeting your-
self. Has anyone measured how much one
loves others ? It should grow. How you
sound on an instrument"; "Toohie, Toohie"
(you alone are.) You must become like that.
Once you are established in the idea I am
nought, I have no existence, then only you
will understand the word "NIH'.
Does it occur to you, how much
you love others ? 1 always enjoy loving
Let us consider the word LA. It is others; feel, how the love is flowing every-
enjoy it ?
Lalita's word. My second name is Lalita
It is the blessing of Devi. It is Her weapon.
When LA i.e. goddess becomes Lalit or
where. I do not know whether you feel or
| cannot understand much about
human beings. But I feel how the love is
when the Shakti becomes Lállr. which flowing all over. Like a musician who for-
means active that is when the vibrations gets himself in his own melodies and feels
not.
rise within Her the vibrations which you are
how his music is flowing everywhere.
feeling on your palms that shakti is Lalitā Similarly love must flow without any inter-
When ruption. That is, you should achieve Lalām
Shakti, which is the power of vibrations,
becomes LA Shakti. She envelops you from ie. Lalita Shakti. Therefore, you should
Shakti. It is full of beauty and love.
of love becomes active, it
the power
all sides, When she is active, what is first achieve Lalita Shakti.
the worry ? What is your power ? Can you
make even one fruit from tree Leave fruit,
you cannot make even a leaf or a root!
Only LA" shakti does all the work. The category look at others with an idea to
realisation that you have got is also from steal something or to get some benefit.
this power. From this Shakti have come
MA' Shakti and 'NIH Shakti, 'NIH' Shakti ing other people's faults. I do not know
is Shri Brahmadeva's Power Shri Saraswati what pleasure they get, but they keep look-
Shakti. And in Saraswati Shakti you must ing for other's shortcomings. This way
attain the qualities of 'NIH'. Attaining 'NIH they become aloof and then suffer. Only
first find out how you
You must
Some
others.
people of low
view
There are some, who are interested in find-
Nirmala Yoga
16
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-18.txt 
 You should never be critical of others.
man can teach how to invite troubles. It
is nol possible for Me. How glad am I to If you ask me about some person,
meet all.
can
on ly tell you regarding his kundalini and on
which chakra he is caught at present or
gets frequently caught. I cannot understand
You should use Lalām Shaktt in such a
way that you should go into thoughtless- anything beyond that; how he is or how his
ness while looking at other person. That
person also will then become thoughtless.
Hence I ask you to do bandhan'. It is help-
ful to do 'Bandhan' to NIH' Shakti and L
Shakti which is transfering LA Shakti into
'NIH Shakti. I have to tell many people
to raise their left sides. I tell those people
to raise their left sides, who are very proud
or think they are working very hard or are
very busy. It is filling our own love into
Love in our hearts
nature is etc. If I am asked, I say 'what is
nature ? It is so changing ! River is fiow-
Who can tell where it will be in
Ing here.
Tuture? You have to see where you stand.
If you are on this side, you are bound to
Teel it unusual that the river is flowing here.
I see from the side of the ocean so I know
where it comes from. So never brand any-
body as useless. Every person changes and
he must change. The work of Sahaja Yoga
is to bring about the change. Those who
believe in Sahaja Yoga should never say
that such and such person has become use-
own five elements.
or the power of that love from our hearts
should be filled into the power of action as
if you are painting with colours on a canvas.
When the power of love is filled in the
power of action in a person, he becomes
extremely loving and that love gradually thinK this way you will not only respect your-
shines through his behaviours and in his
personality and flows to others. It makes
less. Everybody must be given the freedom.
You all know how we stand now ! If you
self but will also respect others. One who
has no regard for himself never gives
his every action enjoyable to others. Such regards to others.
person becomes so alluring that you feel
relaxed and happy in his company for hours.
So, your love should become enjoyable and
winning other people's hearts. This be-
comes useful in such a way that we get
friends and the affection for each other
We must develop Lalam Shakti. I can-
not adequately describe the joy of it even by
writing a book, because it cannot be expres-
ed through words they are very much inade-
quate. In other words if you have to des-
cribe smile you can only tell how the
grows. Everyone feels that there is a place
where one can get all love and arfection.of the smiles. You should allow this power
Hence we must cultivate the God's power
of Love.
muscles move but you cannot tell the effects
to be effective and develop it.
Man gels a kind of beauty, an elegance
If we get any thought we must tell our-
selves that we are throwing dirty things in and good nature from Lalām' Shakti. You
the Ganges of God's power. With this atti-
tude of mind our LA' Shakti the power of your speech, behaviour and other activities.
love will remain absolutely clean and we
will enjoy that cleanliness.
must see that this power grows through
Some person's annoyance is also pleasant.
That sweet and pleasant power is called
Nirmala Yoga
17
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-19.txt 
 Lalita Shakti. People have completely dis- of Mahalakshmi.
torted its idea. They say that it is the power
of destruction. But it is not at all correct, of our evolution. In 'MA' Shakti you have
This power is extremely beautiful, creative to comprehend, assimilate and get Mas-
and artistic. Suppose you sow a seed, then tery. For example, an artist conceives the
some of its parts get destroyed this is idea of his creation with his 'LA Shakti, he
Lalita Shakti. But the destruction is very makes it with 'NIH' Shakti and then uses
MA is the power of
Dharma (Righteousness) and also the power
gentle and easy. The seed then grows into
a tree that has leaves. Those leaves also his idea. At every stage he checks whether
fall, which is again very simple and easy. it agrees with his idea and tries to improve,
Then come the flowers. When the flowers if it does not.
MA Shakti to bring it in conformity with
He does that again and
become fruits some of its components fall again. This is MA Shakti. That is, if
and then come the fruits. Those fruits are
something is not good do it again, once,
also cut for eating, The taste that you get twice and so on.
after eating is also this power. In this way
these two powers work. You should under-
stand that you cannot make any statue with-
out cutting and chopping If you understand
that this chip-chopping is of the same kind, impossible. God has to make enormous
you should not feel bad, if you have to do it
sometimes: That is also necessary. But S If it is not done,
This job of improving involves efforts.
We have to improve ourselves also. But
for this, the evolution would have been
We have to accomplish 'MA'
eflorts.
Shakti and preserve it
an artist does it artistically whereas an art-
less person does it bluntly. So this power
depends on how much art is in you.
other two powers fall off, because this
power is the centre of gravity. So you should
be at the centre of gravity, and the centre
Some times you look at a picture and of gravity is 'MA Shakti of our evolution.
you want to keep looking. If someone asks
you what is so nice in that picture, you can-
not express it in words. You only look at
the picture. Some pictures are such that
you become thoughtless just by looking at
them. In that thoughtless state you are
enjoying the whole pleasure of it, and this
state is the very best. Instead of compa-
ring it with something or describing it with
similes you should enjoy the bliss of this
state, to your hearts' content. There are no
words or no expression to describe it. You
Other two powers will bocome active in you
only when you grow along the power of
evolution. But you must fully understand
and develop MA' Shakti.
So long as you are not realised, it is
alright to say that if God loves you He
should come to you, but thereafter you can-
not say so.
to balance other two powers. In melody you
balance the tunes; while painting a picture
For with MA' Shakti you have
have to experience it from within. All you bring about the balance of different
colours. Similarly you have to achieve the
balance of NIH Shakti and "LA' Shakti.
You have to work for attaining this balance.
should have this experience.
Word MA' which is between 'NIH and
"LA is very interesling.
MA is the word On
many occasions you lose it. That
Nirmala Yoga
18
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-20.txt 
 Sahaja Yogi who can maintain it, rises to
a very high level.
Ladies are expert in it. They make different
recipes everyday and the husbands are
eager to know the menu.
Very emotional Sahaja Yogi is not good.
Similar ly very busy Sahaja Yogi is also not
very good. One should activate one's power plish your balance and concentration. When
of love and see how it has worked so far.
Suppose I follow certain method but even vibrations flow from your balance and wis-
in that every time I do something different.
You must have seen that everytime, I come wisdom.
out with something new, some new method. vibrations are flowing is a wise person; in
If this dces not work, try some other thing.
If that also does not work, do something
else Nobody should fix his method. You Yogi you are.
rise in the morning apply vermilion, pay
obeisance to Mataji; this is all mechanical.
It is not living process. In living process
you should find out different new methods.
I always give the example of the root of a
tree. It penetrates deeper and deeper into
the soil circumventing the obstacles. It Mataji is MA that is mother and this work
does not fight with them and it would not
have been able to hold the tree without the
This is the shakti with which you accom-
you take it to the highest state, you get the
dom and will not flow if you do not have
Person from whom the maximum
fact it is his wisdom that is fiowing. On this
basis, it can be assessed how great Sahaja
You will naturally be caught on your
chakras. You should know when you are
caught that you have lost your balance. The
imbalance shows that MA Shakti is weak
in you. The first letter from any real name
has been done only by MÃ' shakti within
me. This was not possible if only LA
shakti' and 'NIH shakti' were there. I have
obstacles. Hence the problems are neces-
sary because you cannot progress without
the problems. The power that teaches
you how to overcome these problems is
"MA' Shakti. Therefore it is MA Shakti
i.e. Mother's power.
required is wisdom.
come with all the three powers but MA
shakti is on top. You have seen that MA
shakfi is Mother's power. It must be
proved that She is our Mother. Will you
accept if someone comes and says "I am
For that first thing your Mother." You won't Mother must be
proved.
What is Mother ?
Suppose a person is very mild natured
and says, "Mother I am very soft what can I
do ?" I tell him to change himself and be-
We have a place in Her heart. We have
every right on Her and She has on us, be-
cause She loves us very much. Her love is
absolutely disinterested. She always wishes
well of us and has nothing in Her heart ex-
methods. Person who cannot change his cept love for us. You will have faith in the
Mother only if you understand that all that
decorates you i.e. your spirit, is in Her. You
should prove all these to others. Sahaja
This is how 'MA Shakti works. Yogi should be able to do that. Other peo-
come a lion. If some other person is a
lion I tell him to become a goat. Otherwise
it won't work. You have to change your
methods cannot spread Sahaja Yoga be-
cause he sticks to only one way, with which
people get bored. You should find new
ways.
19
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-21.txt 
 no desire. There is no LĂ' Shakti or NIH'
Shakti or MA' Shakti within me. There is
ple should know that he is a wise person.
For that you need the balance; the balance
between the powers of love and action and nothing. I even do not know that I am these
it should be so beautiful that people are
Influenced by such person without their
knowledge. Sahaja Yogi should accom-
plish it.
powers. Ionly witness all the play.
When the life is changed like this there
will be Siddha' Sahaja Yogis (i. e. those
who have complete mastery over Sahaja
You think at home how to activate these Yoga) among human beings. So far they
three powers and use them. "NIH Shakti
have not become siddhas. You have to
should give all beauty and gravity to your achieve the mastery. Siddha Sahaja Yogi
You should device new ways and is the one who becomes completely one
means of contacting the people. These
powers should be used to propagate Sahaja everything for that. am now going After
Yoga. For their proper use your "NIH that, it is to be seen how and where you use
Shakti i.e. the power of action should be your mastery.
with God and wins Him over. He has to do
very strong. Albeit, you must have main
LÄ' Shakti that is the power of love. But
LA Shakti is to be activated with 'NIH things. You should not feel bad about that.
Shakti. But if one way does not work, find You should not feel sorry in MA' Shakti be-
some other way, try first red and yellow if it cause I must tell you all that. Some people
does not suit, take red and green and if that feel sorry. You must remember that you have
also does not help do something else. It to become master (Siddha). All others must
would be wise not to be adamant. An ada-
mant man cannot do anything in Sahaja
Yoga. All that you want to do is to spread that you are Siddha. You must ensure this.
Sahaja Yoga, then try different ways.
agree to do what you insist on because I
know that human beings are not like me.
You can never tell what an obstinate person
will do, you should not allow him to go to
an extremity. I know all this from MA' you are arranging a big puja. Also call some
Some times I tell you not to do certain
accept that you are Siddha. It should be
clear to them the very moment they see you
I If It happens everything will be fine.
One day I told you that you should invite
your friends and relations for lunch or din-
ner or for some function or tell them that
Sahaja Yogis on that day and give realiza-
tion to all your guests. If you do this for
one year it will be very beneficial.
But you should not insist on
Shakti.
particular things. Mataji does not insist.
Whatever is there, you should accept.
Whatever you do you should have in mind
that you are doing an important work. I have
May God Bless You.
Nirmala Yoga
20
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-22.txt 
 July 1982
COWLEY MANOR SEMINAR
Cowley Manor is set amongst some of powerfully, Her eyes closed for most of the
England's most beautiful green pastures time, Mother talked of the need for complete
and clouded hills. Near Cheltenham, in dedication to Herself, rather than Sahaja
the West Country, the manor lies in its Yoga which is just one of Her aspects. She
own parklands, with lakes, fountains and asked why we were not progressing as fast
gardens. This was the venue for the July as we should. People get caught up, She
week-end seminar, graced by the presence said, and they go down because their dedica-
Why
of Our Divine Mother, and attended by tion and reverence is not established.
Sahaja Yogis from Britain, Europe, America is this dedication such an important part of
the ascent? Because at this time when the
and Australia.
world is in a precarious position, when it
Mother's arrival was greeted with flowers, could be destroyed completely, it is impor-
victory cries and a Ganesha made of flower tant to cling on to that which is going to save
petals.
us - complete faith. We must cling to it with
all our might. Possessions, family, job and
finances all must be forgotten. Devotion
must be sustained and ever-growing. Only
through dedication can we grow to full ma-
turity and become capable of fulfilling the
In the afternon Mother presided over a
question and answer session. Assisting
Her with the answers were Warren Reeves
from Australia, Gavin Brown representing
England, Robbert Ruigrok from Belgium,
Christine Rieger from America, Marie Rou- plan the Divine wants to work out through us.
ger from France and Marie Laure Ward from
Switzerland. Topics discussed included
the proofs a Sahaja Yogi could give when ego must be surrendered, otherwise free-
challenged to state to what Sahaja Yoga dom becomes disfigured, disgraced, made
offered that other "religions" and "cults" ugly. The surrender of ego can only happen
did not, the way to raise born realised chil- in meditation. It is only when we have dedi-
dren and how to handle parents who are cation in meditation that the melody of God
unsympathetic to Sahaja Yoga.
To gain full freedom, Mother told us, the
can be played through us.
DEDICATION
We are in the maya of ignorance and sin,
In the evening Shri Mataji spoke to the Mother said, and the only way to get out,
assembly about dedication. Slowly and the only way the Parabrahma Himself can
Nirmala Yoga
21
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-23.txt 
 pull us out one by one, is for us to be com-
pletely dedicated,
We must become the spirit, Mother said.
Then sacrifice is not sacrifice because the
spirit's quality is to give,
There is complete surrender to the false
gurus. Mother said, but Sahaja Yogis do
not surrender completely. We still cling to rising, steadiast. Is preparing to fight the
possessions, family, and finances. But even
so we are nourished. The blessings flow. destroy God's work. We are the ones capa-
Health, wealth, the mind, relations, condi- ble of God's joy on earth, Mother sald, and
tions, all improve. Ashrams, advantages. we are the flutes that are going to play the
But we forget what this nourishment is for. melody of God.
It is for our higher ascent. For getting out
of the maya.
Dedication is getting out of the maya. Is
battle against the negativity that is out to
Where there is a life of dedication, of
understanding, extracting all the nourish-
ment, then everything works out.
"You
And basic to this ascent, Mother point- become the ocean, moon, sun, earth, ether,
ted out, is the love Sahaja Yogis must have firmament and spirit. You work for all of
for one another. All of us are Her children. them. All the stars in the universe you
In Mother's womb of love we have all resi- become. Take up their work. Jump on to
ded. From Mother's heart we have all received the tatwa. Surrender to your subtler being.
blessings. We must get out of the maya of Your kundalini is the same as the Adi
the part. Must climb. The ascent has to Kundalini, and the power is the same. The
come from us. Has to be worked out by us. ship is built, brought to sea, tried and
Dedication, without fanaticism, gets rid of found to be seaworthy Now the second
all problems.
phase. Sail out to sea. Set out. You know
everything about the ship, you know every-
As an example, Mother talked of a fana- thing about the sea. There is no need to
tical person who quotes Mother as saying fear the lyphoons. There is no need to fear
that Sahaja Yogis are not to go to doctors.
anything.
When the fanatic is sick herself she will
come to Mother and demand to be looked
after. Surrender means accepting whether PUJA
May God bless you".
If She wants to cure,
Mother cures or nol.
On Sunday morning Mother graciously
She will. If not, not. It is Her whim. Dedi- allowed Puja to Her as Adi Shakti to be
cation is accepting either. Or both.
performed. During the evocation of Shri
Ganesha, the children washed Mother's
Christ was crucified for His Mother. feet The day, which had started misty and
Christ was so sure of His devotion and cotd, burst into joyous sunshine as ths Puja
dedication that Mary Mahalakshmi could
ask Him to sacrifice His life. How many progressed, and this joy was felt by all who
have the dedication of Christ, Mother asked.
shared the blessings which flowed.
He went through horrible sufferings for His
Mother, yet She suffered more than Him.
After Puja Mother spent time with each
of the babies and young children.
Nirmala Yoga
22
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-24.txt 
 It enlightens plants and animals, and all
HAVAN
Before the Havan in the afternoon, that has been created.
Mother talked about the word 'swaha'. How
it is a capacity, an essence of the nabhi should invoke the swaha shakti at Havan,
chakra. How it burns like the fire burns. Mother said. Those who are weak in their
How it purifies by discriminating between faith spoil it for all those others who want
things that burn and things that do not. It the atmosphere cleaned, want the emanci-
has the power, like Kundalini, to go against pation of human beings, want peace to
gravity. It can give brilliance. It can join descend and the blessings of God to come.
Only those who are strong in their faith
things by melting them together.
PUBLIC MEETING
Mother pointed out that fire has been
worshipped by Gurus and Prophets for a
very long time.
A public meeting was held in Chelten-
ham on the Sunday evening. The hall was
full. Many Sahaja Yogis had to listen to
Mother's talk from outside. Mother spoke
We should have the qualites of fire, of the nature of seeking and the happening
Mother said. When a Realised soul invokes of Self Realisation. Many received the gift
the essence of fire, which is swaha, and of their Moksha, and Mother spent time with
this essence, once evoked, grants to him all each, clearing chakras and giving advice.
the subtle qualities of fire. It burns away
negativity (like a candle in front of Mother's RIVER THAMES
photograph will become enlightened, will
assume the swaha state, and will be capa- attending the seminar had returned to their
ble of burning away any negativity present). homes, Mother drove to Seven Springs,
The fire within us, when enlightened, en- which is the source of the River Thames.
lightens our attention. It discriminates She stood in the pool where the spring-
between what is inflammable and what is waters meet and Rustom Burjorjee washed
not. It gives brilliance to the face and a
glint to the eye.
On Monday morning, after most of those
Her feet and invented appropriate mantras.
Mother asked how many Sahaja Yogis were
present and, when it was found that there
Mother told us how food is digested by were thirty five, She pointed out that there
the fire within us. When an enlightened were thirty five crores of Devas.
person digests food, whatever is produced
from that power within, is pure. When we
vibrate food and it goes to the stomach, it ing Mother vibrating the most important
excites the swaha shakti- all the good river in the United Kingdom, the river on
It was a wonderful experience witness-
powers of the fire-and these powers make which London stands.
the food act like medicine,
After a visit to Cheltenham Spa, Mother
returned to London.
At Havan, Mother said, we put everything
to the universal nabhi, which, using its dis-
cretion, burns out all that is bad. It cleans event, and all who attended (nearly a hun-
the atmosphere, purifies the ether, chases dred and fifty) were deeply appreciative of
away the negativity, the lethargy and inertia. Mother's generous blessings.
The whole weekend was a remarkable
23
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-25.txt 
 A Prayer to Sri Bhoomi Devi
OM Sakshat Sri Bhoomi Devi Namo Namah.
Upon you beloved Mother Earth we stand at this the crossroads of man's destiny.
Only through your kind love of your children are we here now.
You have graciously sustained us thus far.
You have given us food, water, clothing and shelter.
'O' beloved Mother Earth, with our heads bowed we thank you.
And with our heads bowed we come humbly to you asking further sustenance
strength for the many long days ahead.
'O' beloved Mother Earth, now that we have grown a little and stand firmer each day,
We pray to you to help clear the way as we begin to march forwards.
We long for the cleansing of all lands, so that upon you beloved Mother Earth the
righteous may return to their divine home.
We hope to be many.
'O' beloved Mother Earth, give us patience as we search for our brothers and sisters
and
Give us detachment from all distractions.
Give us perseverance in our task.
'O' beloved Mother Earth, most of all, help us, as your seas cleanse the shores, to
clean our hearts, so that we may desire only that which is right.
'O' beloved Mother Earth support us to that we may soon stand upon you in great
numbers and invoke with one mighty voice the dance of Lord Shiva.
These things we most humbly pray.
OM Sakshat Sri Bhoomi Devi Namo Namah.
Bolo Sri Bhoomi Devi, Sri Mataji, Sri Nirmala Devi Ki Jai.
With best compliments from:
D. R. EXPORTS (P) LTD.
Exporters of Handicrafts
H-28, Green Park Extn., New Delhi Phone : 660203
24
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-26.txt 
 Translation of Her Holiness Mataji's Marathi lettersen
of 17 th August and October 1978
opened. People should be cured of their
Many blessings,
diseases and their attention should be
drawn towards God realisation.
Please
Received your Rakhis conveying your
deep love. Rakhi is protecting power. It's show this letter to all Sahaja Yogis.
bond is very strong and extremely tender
because it symbolises the noble love of
sister. Customarily, tying a Rakhi to some-
one is establishing a place of pure protec- To.
tion. However, man's ability to understand
love has become so feeble that tying of
Rakhi has become merely a mechanical pro-
DIL
Always remembering you Your Mother
Nirmala
II
All Sahaja Yogis,
Many blessings
Today is the first day of Navaratri. Today
beautiful human
All
traditions
cess.
become lifeless and dry formalities if there your attention should be on Shri Ganesha.
is no warmth of faith in them.
His devotion is infinite. He has never wor-
shipped anybody else except Mother. Hence
I have taken birth in this world in the He is so great. All other Gods appear very
binding of Sahaja Yogis and have been strong. Everyone has some speciality.
moving around only in their binding. I am What is Mother's speciality ?
desireless and hence my everything depends (aham) is nowhere felt by others. Hence
Her ego
upon your desires.
Shri Ganesha who has surrendered to such
You have to ask something with Rakhi. Mother, is so wise and venerable. Mother
Please consult all Sahaja Yogis and ask has nothing with Her. Her very name begins
with 'Ni e.g. "Nishakanchan'-having no
wealth, 'Nirlepa'-unaffected; Nirvichara-
I am keeping good health because you thoughtless; Nishprayojana -having no mo-
are desiring it. There will be only minor tives, Nigarvita--egoless-Niriccha-desire-
what you want by writing a collective letter.
operation on my ear and it should not make less etc. Therefore, surrendering to such
Moreover, I have no Mother, who has nothing with Her, needs
some kind of subtle thought, in that, Mother
has nothing with Her and therefore, nothing
can be asked from Her. It shows how Shri
cance. On that day you should ask for Ganesha by himself, is fully satisfied. Where
make big decisions and keep does this contentment of Shri Ganesha
you anxious at all.
trouble whatsoever. So do not worry.
Rakhi Purnima is a day of great signifi-
perfection,
attention on high ideals.
should not destroy their attention on trifle
issues. Lot of work has yet to be done.
Sahaja Yogis come from ? It is own power.
When the gate of the Self opens, nothing
Those Sahaja Yogis who have progressed else is required. It is the Mother who opens
should get busy. New centres should be this gate and therefore, She is so dear to
Nirmala Yoga
25
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-27.txt 
 Shri Ganesha. Complete Self-Realisation myself will observe fast and clean your
is that stage atlaining which nothing else is right side, so that your power to do the
required. Thereafter, only enjoying the work increases and you start Sahaja Yoga
work with new vigour. However, left side
can be kept clean by discriminating between
You are made in the pattern of Shri good and bad deeds and strictly doing only
Ganesha. Therefore, your power Is un- that which is good. That means you have
bliss and the satisfaction of fulfilment.
matched, but for that, you should have
devotion and innocence like Shri Ganesha's to do only that which is auspicious and
Then Mother would admire you and the nelpful. Right side can be activated by
whole world would witness that beautiful discipline. Balance is very importa t in
Sahaja Yoga. Age old maxim, "Ati Sarvatra
Varjayet" (extremes should be avoided
sight.
I have worked in the operation and Ida everywhere) really holds good.
Nadi of all has become much lighter. Ida
means past and all good and bad impres-
sions. All that is bad should be removed
like cleaning of an excellent cloth that gets
back its colour and new look, thereafter.
But right side improves by discipline. I
I am very eager to meet you all.
Your Mother
-Nirmala
With beot complimento from
UNITED DAIRIES PRIVATE LIMITED
N-19, Connaught Circus, New Delhi-110001
Nirmala Yoga
26
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-28.txt 
 THE FIGHT FOR COLLECTIVITY
(Part three)
with what the Unconscious wants me to
Politics is no longer the boring, yet noisy
tale of the conflicts which are tearing apart
that is "the bonum commune" (the comm
good). I aim at the greatest well being
the greatest Whole. Hence whenever we
for the collectivity we should really d
from the sahasrara : our action will
rightly inspired.
the city of men. It has become the unifying
factor of the City of God...
B
U
Er, we are talk-
ing about sahaja politics of course.
Being collective is a new Art which Shri
Mataji's yoga opens for us, in a way which
can be said to express the pure aesthetics
I become collectively conscious : t
of a new kind of human behaviour. We, does not mean only sensations in
the Children, are learning to smoothly com- fingertips ! Gradually I realise : as a cel
I am ba
plement each other and to articulate our bathing in the blood of the body
various qualities into one manifestation, ing in the vibrations of Chaitanya and thi
a vibrations are the blood of someone's bo
one cemmunity, one togetherness. As a
matter of fact, this had always been, through My fulfillment as a cell is not therefore
assert my individuality which would lead
cancerous disorder of human politics but
work out the greater order of the or
nism. Implementing the laws of the or
nism is the beginning and the end
the millenia, the basic riddle which puzzled
political thought: how to bring together
conflicting egos into one optimal, harmo-
nious society ? Should it be the polity, the
empire, the nation state ?
sahaja politics.
If History is "a tale told by an idiot" as
old brother Shakespeare wearily noticed, it
is beçause it could not provide any answer
to this question, Well, someone did recently
provide the answer and that is why the
course of History is going to change. This
someone, this rather special someone is
Our Mataji.
Sahaja politics could be framed, for Ir
tance, in a few principles:
As Shri Ganesha is the darling ch
of Shri Mataji I better try to emula
Shri Ganesha.
-As Shri Brahmadeva is the Doer
better allow Him to act through r
own detachment.
Indeed when the Goddess grants us our
rebirth the following changes do take place
-As Shri Vishnu is the Master oft
Play I better learn from Him son
tricks (that's already going into app
ed courses of sahaja political science
ask Narada !),
within us.
I can put my attention on the sahasrara.
When my attention is there I cannot any-
more be lured by individualistic motivations.
As sahasrara is the chakra of integration
what I do then is necessarily integrated
-As Shri Shiva is the Enjoyer I bett
realise that it is He Ifeel whenev
there is joy within. O Lord I
Nirmala Yoga
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-29.txt 
 -As Shri Ganesha so is Lord Jesus. Seekers of the last days, come to Mother's
shelter. For if you stand in the rain we are
drenched, if you are hurt we feel the pain.
Who are
And I am silence.
-As Shri Krishna is Virata sahajis are For you also are part of us.
the Orchestra (not only flutes but vio- WE ?
lin, sitar, cello, drums, shehnai and
even, why not, pianos).
The 5th May 1970 Kalki married Padma
-As Shri Mataji Nirmala Ma takes in Shambalpur, the sahasrara of the Adi
seat in my sahasrara I better lose Shakti. We are born of this Union, born in
streams of Amrit and cosmic rays of light.
Lao Tseu said : come to the children, you
myself in Shri Mataji to be seated in
my sahasrara.
will know the Mother accordingly.
And as you are me there is no "you"
nor any "me". O brothers and sisters, at
this stage the words become silly. Let us
love, let us love as much as we can. After
Om Twamewa Sakshat Shri Sarva
Sahaja Yogi Sakshat Shri Sarva Sahaja
Yogini Sakshat Shri Adi Shakti Bhag-
wati Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Namo
Namah.
all, we are Her children, we should be good
at it. They will recognize the mother in the
children, they will see the difference, they
will come to us, they will be convinced.
-Gregoire
With best compliments from :
256869
253477
Phone :
RAWALPINDI JEWELLERS
te (AIR CONDITIONED SHOW ROOM)
Latest Designs in:
DIAMOND JEWELLERY & GOLD ORNAMENTS
2298, Near Clock Tower, Subzi Mandi, Delhi-110007.
s- W Nirmala Yoga
28
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-30.txt 
 Geneva, Aug. 22-24, 1982
Shri Mataji in the Temple
Sahaja Yogis poured from Italy, France, believe it. A sahaja yogi said later to Shri
England as Mother arrived in Geneva for a Mataji : "Mother, this meeting was histori-
Sunday Ganesha Puja. In this joyful cere- cal not only for Sahaja Yoga but also for the
mony followed by a Havan Mother empha city of Geneva". She, the Magnificent One,
sized how much the Divine was fond of answered : "It was historical for the whole
"FUN": we did not guess then how much world. Because, after having declared war
of it we were to enjoy the next day.
on the false prophets, we have now declar-
ed war on all the religious fanatics." And
Could you imagine Mother preaching to- then She added with a smile : "I enjoyed
day in front of the Kaaba in Mecca or with- myself quite a lot with this incident; it was
in the Saint Peter basilic in the Vatican ? all getting a bit too mundane for me." And
Unlikely is'nt it ? Yet that's exactly what we thought we saw a mischievous twinkle in
happend in Geneva, the intellectual capital Her eyes.
of Protestantism where Shri Mataji deliver-
ed three stunning speeches in the famous
The next programme proved to be equally
tremendous. We witnessed in this Tempie
the Vishnu tattwa manifesting itself to a
Temple de la Fusterie,
"A guru woman in the Temple", "Shri stunned audience and to world history. She,
Mataji who are you?", "The amazing Sahaja who guides Evolution, defiantly raised the
Yoga of Shri Mataji". Such were the head-
lines of some articles which came out in blasted the hypocrisy of the Western
the big French speaking newspapers. Most nations, the racism of the British, the licen-
of the eight articles or so were very posi- tiousness of the French, the brulallty of the
tive ! Somehow people felt that something German, the aggressiveness of the United
historical was happening. But what was it ? States and last but not least, the Swiss
banner of Dharma. Shri Mataji forcefully
banking system which works as a hiding
The first evening, in front of three hun- place and as a laundry for all the dirty
dred people, some
tried to disturb the meeting. There was a of exploiters. "I admire this woman for the
big turmoil for about fifteen minutes but courage she is showing in saying such
the magic of it all appeared in the fact that things here" said a puzzled listener.
the more negativity manifested, the stronger
came the vibrations from Shri Mataji. She
was extramely majestic and absolutely
powerful. After
audience sided with Her; the intruders left. testing. But He will just chop you off into
Hundreds of people got their realisation in hell. Please, understand, get your realisa-
less than five minutes. We could hardly tion now. Now it's the time of the judge-
"christian" fanatics
money of the world, money of thugs, money
From the Geneva Temple the Goddess
warned the whole world : "When Christ
sometime
the whole
will come some Protestant will still be pro-
Nirmala Yoga
29
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-31.txt 
 ment, now is the time of resurrection. Be
careful : I see what is coming It will be
very serious !" This evening again, many
got their realisation. A deaf heard, a blind
saw, a paralytic walked away.
Let those who have ears hear.
Let those who have eyes see.
Let She, the Auspicious one, the Great
Queen, grant us to be victorious in
spreading Sahaja Yoga.
To the Devi, to the Mahadevi, we bow
again and again.
-The Sahaja Yogis of Switzerland
OBSERVANCES
1. Meditation does not end when all coming from Her. We should begin with
chakras become pure, but begins from that praying to Her to kindly grant realisation or
stage Therefore, all precautions should be cure, to that person.
taken to avoid catches and to clear them.
5. However, undue importance to inner
cleanliness, even at the cost of meditation,
Those, who are established in Sahaja Yoga,
know various methods and treatments to
clean themselves. They should help and is not advisable. If chakras are subtle, the
spirit is subtler still. Hence attention
advise new comers about these.
should be on the spirit, in which state the
2. No Sahaja Yogi should feel diffident cleansing is effortless.
to help another Sahaja Yogi having a prob-
lem or to a new comer, for the fear of
attracting a problem. It must be remem-
bered that our beloved Mother is always
protecting us. Moreover, for one who is
established in Sahaja Yoga, catches become of truth, existence and bliss. When we
merely recordings which fade away in no keep our attention on Her we keep it on the
time, without giving any trouble. After Self which is of that same nature. When
passing the vibrations, 'shoe-beating' of
one's own name and also of that person's, tion to the seven chakras we start experien-
would be very useful.
6. The Mother is the ultimate truth. In
the context of meditation, is reproduced
below a passage from Advent.
"The Divine Mother is the quintessence
we meditate on Her Holiness Mataji in rela-
cing that our seven selves are indeed part
of the deities and that the deities are one
with Her Holiness Mataji. Meditation on
this identity opens the deeper stage of
doubtless awareness. As we try to medi-
tate on Her Haliness Mataji's Kundalini, we
it should never really get lost like a drop in the Ocean; we
are absoluely silent." (Note : This should
be practised only on Her Holiness Mataji's
3. However, while handling a very bad
case, it is better to give 'lime and chille
treatment, to evict the 'badhas' before ex-
tending personal help through vibrations.
4.
While helping others
be forgotten, that it is the Mother who in
effect is helping that person and we are
merely the instruments in Her hands or photo and not when She is present in
channels to pass the vibrations, which are person).
Nirmala Yoga
30
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-32.txt 
 OUR HOLY MOTHER
You are the Sun,
Our Holy Mother,
You are the Moon,
You are the Star,
Who resides everywhere,
Holy is your name.
That shines in the doom.
Truly you are Nirmala,
And the three worlds,
You are the living,
Sing your fame.
You are the life,
You are Mahashakti,
And you are the Earth,
You are Kalki,
Yours is the last judgement.
That bears life.
You are joy,
You are the Creater,
And you are Happiness,
And one who prays to you,
Gets Eternal Happiness.
You are the Preserver,
To destroy the evil you came.
You are the teacher,
You are the knowledge,
You are the literature,
To understand the knowledge
The Mother of Lord Ganesha,
Kartike and Jesus are You,
O' Mother accept us sahaja yogis,
As your children too
You are the poetry.
You are the literature,
You are the speech,
And you are the silence.
-Jayen Modi
Guru Purnima, 1982
ONCE BUILT LASTS EVER
USE
FOR ALL CONSTRUCTION WORK
BJM CHETAK BRAND PORTLAND CEMENT
Manufacturers5
WORKS
BIRLA CEMENT
CHITTORGARH-321 091 (RAJASTHAN)
Nirmala Yoga
31
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-33.txt 
 Victory in
Vienna
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi arrived in tions at the time of the collective rising of
Austria for the first time on the 25th Sept. the Knndalini. A great number of people
1982 and stayed unlil October first. Sahaja got their realisation. We organised follow
Yogis came from Italy, Switzerland and up meeting right after the departure of Shri
other countries; for the whole week we en- Mataji and, yesterday evening, sixty people
joyed "the nest of the blessed ones", that came to the second follow up meeting and
is, a joyful, very loving and family like atmos- ten new people got their realisation.
It
phere in the direct proximity of the Great should be mentioned here that, on Sunday
Goddess. True are Her names which ex- the 26th September we celebrated a tremen-
press how She radiates fulfillment and bliss dous Durga puja with the worship of diffe-
rent weapons. During the aarti the Goddess
held in Her hands the conch and the sword.
At this occasion Rustom recited a new
around Her!
worked out
Collectivity among us
smoothly and efficlently; the work to be
done was done swiftly and well with a spe-
cial word of praise to our great italian
cooks. But this collectivity went, of course,
beyond the human race : all the devas were
most helpful. Shri Indra got the sky over-
cast during the week end so that people during Her very first visit to Austria "it has
would not be tempted to escape to the to spread from the void" She said. We
countryside instead of coming to the pro- should recall here that Her 1982 visits to
grammes. But Shri Surya shone magnifi- Rome, Paris, Geneva had also been very
ciently when Shri Mataji decided to visit
the Schoenbrunn palace where we discover-
ed that the 18th Century ruler of Austria,
series of Nirmala Mantra which touched the
core of Shri Mata's Adi chakras.
Really things are moving fast now ! As
Europe is the void Shri Mataji was quite
prassanna that everything went so well
successful. In Vienna we were helped by
a very positive and intelligent article on Shri
queen Maria Theresia was a born realised Mataji which appeared in the leading Aus-
trian newspaper and by an excellent inter-
view of Shri Mataji on" Blue Danube Radio"
Shri Mataji gave four public programmes. which was broadcasted for half an hour at
A full reportage with pictures is
400 people attended the last programme. due next week in a big magazine. Once
The public was respectful and disciplined, more the proof has been given : to get peo-
obediently following Shri Mataji's instruc- ple to the programmes, to do some justice
soul.
Everytime the hall was jampacked Over peak time
Nirmala Yoga
32
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-34.txt 
 of Shri Mataji's visit.
us, we were merely privileged to be the
instruments and, above all, the witnesses
to Shri Mataji we have to use the medias !
This is very important.
tration
As for
allowed us, sahaja yogis, to clearly unders of sakshat Shri Jayashalini, the roval and
stand one simple truth: We are no the
Doers Indeed the organisation of the pro-
gramme was so sahaja that we could not we thank You for all these new born bro-
victorious One.
O Mother, from the bottom of our hearts,
miss the point: all the ganas, all the
angels, devas and devatas are to be very
thers and sisters.
humbly thanked for their brilliant orches-
-Gregoire
The true quality of every UNISTAR cable often
begins where the cable ends-with the performance
Even the most technologically advanced process does not have to mean the most
superior power cable. What is really important is the capacity of the cable to per-
form-dependably and relably, under even the most demanding conditions. Because a
UNISTAR cable is not only a marvel of technology, it is a blend of the genius and dedi-
cation of the people who make it.
Today, in industrial complexes, national power projects, state power stations and
other industries, UNISTAR cable are a vital pre-requisite. Because there is a UNISTAR
cable for every need.
Now UNISTAR offers the highly superior PEX (Crosslinked Polyethylene) Power cab-
les, in technical collaboration with ASEA KABEL, Sweden.
UNISTAR range of cable also include : Paper Insulated Power Cables, Thermoplas-
tic and Elastomeris Cables, Railway Signalling Cables, Mining Cables, Airfield Defence
Cables, Shipbuilding Cables, Quarry Trailing Cables, Lift Cables, Drill Cables and
Locomotive Cables.
UNISTAR-Precision-engineered quality cable that stand the test of time. Always
for more information, Simply write to us.
In the end, it's the performance that counts,
UNIVERSAL CABLES LIMITED
P. O. Birla Vikas, Satna-485 005 (M. P.)
Nirmala Yoga
33
 1982_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-35.txt 
 Registered with the Registrar of Newspapers under Regn. No. 36999/81
WITH
(OMPUMENTS
FROM
ge
20
SHANTILAL HARAKHCHAND & CO.
298, NARSHI NATHA STREET,
BOMBAY-400 003
Edited & Published by Sh. S. C. Rai, 43, Bunglow Road, Dalhl-110007 and
Printed at Ratnadeep Press, Darya Gani, New Delhi-110002.
One Issue Rs, 6.00 Annual Subscription Rs 30.00 Foreign [By Airmail £ 5 $ 10 ]
