Nirmala Yoga Year 3 Vol. 14 Bi-Monthly March-April '83 t. 45 "Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns all the religions and seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga -THE UNION* +-

 NIRM ALA YOGA 43, Bunglow Road, Delhi-110007 (India) Founder: Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Editorial Board: Dr. S. K. Mathur, Sri A. S. Mishra, Sri R. D. Kulkarni Representatives : CHERYL HYNES-1267, Burke Road, KEW 3101, VICTORIA. Australia U. K. : MR. GAVIN BROWN-Brown's Geological Information Service Ltd., 160, North Gower St., London NW1 2 ND. 225 Adams St., 1/E. Brooklyn, NY 11201. : CHRISTINE PETRUNIA - U. S. A. : LORI TODRICK-4518, Woodgreen Drive, West Vancouver, B. C. Canada V7S 2V1. Canada Switzerland : CHARLES AND MRS. MAGDA MATHYS-5, Chemin Des Mouldins, 1256, Troinex (Canton de Geneva), Switzerland. :DANIEL & ROXANA DEVINE-Angel Luis De Herran, Torre 3-8, 6, 4, Madrid-33. Spain : MARIE ROUGER-175, Av. Ledru RIlin, Paris-750001. France : RUTH LEDERBERGER : Via Mercalli-46, 00197 Rome, Italy. Italy : M.B. RATNANNAVAR-13, Merwan Mansion, Genjwala Lane, Borivali (W), Bombay-400 092. RAJARAM SHANKAR RAJWADE-840, Sada Shiva Peth, Pune-411030. India CONT ENTS Page 1. Editorial 2. International Sahaja School 3. Shri Mataji's Advice given at the occasion of Mahakali Puja at Lonawala 4. Translation of Her Holiness Mataji's old Marathi Letters 5. Letter 6. Ray Harris's reflections on Pluto as inspired by Shri Mataji's Words 7. The 108 Names of Shri Mahakali 8. The Holy Mother Nirmala Devi Srivastava & K.P. 9. Shri Mataji's Australian Tour-1983 10. Sahaja Yoga & Physical Cure-II 11. Festivals 12. The First Sahaja Yoga Seminar in Austria 13. Maria Smith's account of the miracle at Bedford and the event leading to it 1 10-13 14 16 19 24 29 33 34 35 36 38 14. Little Stories from Rome Center 15. In memory of a Great Man 16. Her Holiness Shri Mataji's Advice 17. Alpha & Omega 18. From Delhi 40 41 43 3rd & 4th Cover

 EDITORIAL Dvija is the one who is twice born, which also means a Brahmin. In India customarily a boy becomes a Dvija after a religious function in which a ritual is performed with reci- tation of certain mantras. Although in modern days, the function has become merely a religious formality with accent on celebration and social get-together, in ancient times the mantras were recited by realized brahmins and the child was given 'Diksha' by them for undertaking further education while leading the life of austerities at the residence of a realized Guru. At the end of the function the boy would go to his mother and request 'Om bhavati bhiksham dehi' (Mother please give alms). His mother would give him sweets and with that her love and blessings. One who utters the words Om bhavati bhiksham dehi would automatically become humble in heart and that would help getting over one's ego problem and establishing the eternal relation of mother and child. We Sahaja Yogis, who are Dvijas in its real meaning get our second birth from Adi- Shakti, when we get our realization. How many of us are really humble in our hearts ? Is our surrender to Her, total ? Mother of the Universe, very mother principle, has given us our rebirth and Diksha and Mahadiksha, but have we become like the eternal child, innocent, completely dedicated to our Mother ? Mother has understood the desire of our spirits and granted the supreme knowledge to us. She has given to us the alms of divine bliss which is the real food for our spirits as well as the physical beings to grow on. She is Annapurneshwari, the supreme Goddess, the bestower of food and nourish- ment. Adi-Shankaracharaya has bowed before Her and begged for supreme knowledge and Vairagya (complete detachment). Nirmala Yoga 1

 नित्यानन्द करी वराभय करी सौंदर्य रत्नाकरी। निर्धुताखिल घोरपाप निकरी प्रत्यक्ष माहेश्वरी ॥ प्रालेयाचल वंश पावनकरी काशीपूराधीश्वरी । भिक्षादेही कृपावलम्बन करी मातान्नपूर्ोशव री Niryananda kari Varābhaya kari Saundarya ratnākari ! Nirdhootakhila-ghora-pāpa-nikari pratyaksha-maheshwari ! kāshipurādhishwari! dehi krpävalambana-kari Matanna-pur Prāleyā-chala-vansha-pävanakari rneshwari !! Bhikshü O Mother Anna-purneshwari! you are the bestower of eternal bliss, you give boon with one hand and fearlessness with other, you are the ocean of beauty and the destroyer of all sin, you are verily the supreme goddess. You have purified the clan of Himalaya (Parvati was the daughter of king Himalaya or Himavan). Kindly be pleased and give me the alms. नाना रत्न विचित्राभूषण करी हेमाम्बराडम्बरी । मुक्ताहार विडम्ब मान विलसदृक्षोज कुम्भान्तरी ॥ कश्मोराग रुवासितांग रुचिरे-काशीपुराधीश्व री । भिक्षदिही कृपावलम्बनकरी मातानपूरणइ्वरी ।॥ Nänä-ratna-vichitră-bhooshana kari hemāmbarā dambari! Muktā-hāra-vidamba-māna-viłasad-dakshoja Kumbhāntari !! - ruchire kāshipurādhishwari! Bhikshām dehi Krpävalumbana-kari Matanna-purneshwari !! Kashmirāga- ruvāsitāng Your hands are bedecked with different ornaments of jewels and diamonds. Your throne has golden canopy. Your clothes are shining. Necklaces of pearls are adding to your splendour. You have applied safiron, musk, sandalwood paste and other scented materials to your body which are enhancing your beauty. O Mother Anna-purneshwari ! be pleased with me and give me the alms. योगानन्द करी रिपुक्षय करी धर्मकनिष्ठाक री। चन्द्राक्कानल भासमान लहरी त्रेलोक्य रक्षाकरी ॥ सर्वश्वर्य करी तपःफलक री काशीपूराधीश्वरी । भिक्षा देही कृपावलम्बनकरी मातान्नपूर्णंश्वरी ।। Yogānanda kari ripukshaya-kari dharmatka-nishthā kari! - - Sarvai-shwarya-kari tapah-phala-kari kāshi purādhishwari! lahari trailokya rakshākari!! Chandrārkanal bhāsamāna Bhikshām dehi krpävalambana-kari mātānna-purneshwari !! You are the bestower of the joy of Yoga. You strengthen the allegiance to Dharma. You are the destroyer of enemies. Resplendence of your being reminds us of the light Nirmala Yoga 2.

 of the sun, the moon and the fire. You are the protector of Trailokya" (the earth, heaven and netherworld). You give all prosperity and reward of penances. O Mother Anna- purneshwari I be pleased and give me the alms. केलासाचल कन्दरालयकरी गौरी उमा शাङुरी । कौमारी निगमार्थगोचरकरी ओंकार बीजाक्षरी। ॥ मोक्षद्वार कपाटषाटनकरी काशीपुराधीश्वरी । भिक्षदिही कृपावलम्बनकरी मातान्नपूर्णेश्वरी ।। Kailasachala-kanda-rälaya kari Gauri Uma Shankari! Kaumari nigamārtha gochara kari Onkāra beejäkshari !! Moksha-dwär - kapāta- pātanakari käshi purādhishwari!! Bhikshām dehi krpāvalambana kari mātânna-purneshwari !! You are residing in the caves of Kailasa. You are Gauri, Uma, Shankari (the consort of Shri Shankara) Kaumari (mother of Kumar, i.e. Kartikeya). It is by your blessings alone that the true meaning of Vedas becomes clear. You are the first letter Om. You are all beeja-ksharas (Primordial letters. These are the sounds produced when kunda- Ini pierces chakras). You open the gates of Moksha for your devotees. O Mother Anna-purneshwari ! be pleased and give me the alms.. Shri Adi-Shankaracharaya has further praised the Divine Mother. He says, 'O Mother you are looking after and guiding those visible and invisible Gods and officials, your belly is the receptacle of entire universe, you are conducting all the play and the drama that is this universe, you are lighting the lamp of knowledge, you are foundational to all letters from H (a) to (Ksha), you give victory to your devotees, you are the ocean of mercy, you are the supreme Goddess who gives food. He ends the prayer as follows: अन्नपूरण सदापूर्ण शब्कर प्राण वल्लभे। ज्ञानवराज्य माता च पार्वती देवी पिता देवो महेश्वरः । सिद्धयर्थं भिक्षां देहि च पार्वति | बान्धवाः शिवभक्ताश्च स्वदेयों भुवनत्रय म् ।। Annapurne Sadapurne Shankar-präna-vallabhe ! Inäna vairāgya siddhyartham bhiksham deht cha Parvati I! Matā cha Pārvati devi pita devo Maheshwarah ! Bändhaväh Shiva-bhaktāsheha Swadesho bhuvanatrayam !! O Mother Annapurna, you are always complete. You are the beloved of Shri Shankara. Please give me the alms of success in attaining the true knowledge and vairagya (com- plete detachment). Parvati is my mother and Shiva is my father. All the devotees of Nirmala Yoga 3

 Shiva are my brothers and all the three worlds is my country. Let us all Sahaja Yogis get over our egos and join Shri Adi-Shankaracharya to praise our Mother. We invoke the eternal child Shri Ganesha to be present within us and make us humble, innocent and loving children. We open our both hands and beg 'Bhiksham dehi Krpavalambana kari Mata Sahaja Yogeshwari, International Sahaja School On the auspicious occasion of Her as recreation. What else do children want ? 60th birthday, Shri Mataji the project of starting an International for the concepts of the parents. Sahaja School primarily for the children of all the Sahaja yogis. The site for the school is about an hour and a half drive away from Yogis hipe up so that the school opens by Bombay, midway on the Bombay Poona the forthcoming India Tour in December. highway. It is off the main road, situated (let's count on it..give it a bandhan). on a hillock facing the majestic Maha- rashtra plateau. A little stream sings along to high school. The first group will be for to provide the drinking water. announced The scool is for growing children and not Let us hope that the Bombay Sahaja The school will be gradually upgraded children above age 6. Sahaja yogis who Questioned if the school would be run wish to send their children may enguire along the pattern of old English schools, the address below. A brochure will be in Shri Mataji replied, "I don't want any soft circulation shortly. ladies, I want strong, grounded, hardy Sahaja yogis." Students would sleep on the floor, eat and study on the floor. spartan but grounded with basic sanitation facilities, with mountain climbing as major sport and working with Mother Earth Yogi Mahajan C/o Universal Sahaja Temple, 78, Krishna Nagar (Gali No. 3) Safdarjung Enclave, It would be New Delhi-110029 Nirmala Yoga

 MATAJI SHRI NIRMALA DEVI Advice given at the occasion of Mahakali Puja, at Lonawala 19th December, 1982 The first hurdle that you face as soon as WELCOME to you all Sahaja Yogis to this great country of Yoga. Kyou get your realisation is that you just You start Today, first of all we have to establish thinking, "My mother has not got it, my our desire within ourselves, that we are father has not got it, my wife has not got it, seekers and that we have to achieve our full my children have not got it." You must start thinking of your family. growth and maturity. Today's Puja is for the whole universe. The whole universe should krit is LOKIK (if), they are not ALOKIK have to be enlightened with this desire. Your (la), they are not beyond the worldly desire should be so intense that they should relations. These are worldly relations, and emit out the pure vibrations of Mahakall these attachments are worldly. So if you Shakti which is the pure desire of attaining play into that force, as you know that Maha the Spirit. That's the real desire. AIl the Maya Shakti allows you to play with, You other desires are like mirage. know that these relations are worldly; Sans- go ahead as long as you like. People bring You are the people who are chosen by me on their relations, their parents, this God specially, first to express the desire and thät and ultimately they discover that and then to achieve that intense desire of that this was a very wrong thing they did. purity. You have to purify the whole world, They lost so many precious moments, so not only the seekers but even those who many hours, so many years, wasting their eniergy on people who never deserved any are not seekers. You have to create an aura around this universe of desire to achieve attention of the Mother. the Ultimate-the Spirit. Sooner you realise the better, that this Without desire this universe would not desire may be within you and may not be in have existed. This desire of God is the any one of your so called worldly relations, one that is the Holy Ghost. It is the all makes 'no' difference. pervading power, it is the Kundalini within us. Kundalini has only one desire-it is to be the Spirit and anything else if you desire sisters are waiting outside, He said, "Who the Kundalini doesn't rise. Only when IT are my brothers and who are my sisters ? knows that this desire is going to be fulfill- So one has to realise that those people who ed by somebody who is facing the seeker, involve themselves into the problems of IT is awakened. If you do not have a desire their family all the time and attract My no one can raise IT. Sahaja Yogi should attention-you must know that I am just never try to force his desire on other people. playing about. It is of no value to you. For As Christ was told that His brothers and Nirmala Yoga

 your ascent it is important first of all to have no dasire, the pure desire in your Mahakali power, which is manifesting, kith and kin. This is the first principle of comes to us in so many ways. As I told establishment of Mahakali power, Specially you first of all it comes to us after realiza- in India where people are too much attached tion because you are all Sahaja Yogis, to do to their family, it is a very big problem. If something about our relations. Then the you give realization to one person, you are second desire that comes to us, that let us amazed to see that, all the relationship they try to cure people who are our relations. have is with a big bunch of bhoots. And This is the second desire. You should feel once you give realization to one person you yourself and see that this has happened to are in for trouble, and all the bhoots walk in many of you So, right from leprosy to any slowly, torturing My life, wasting My energy small thing like cold or sneezing, whatever and 'absolutely of no use. It should han- they have they think they should bring to pen to you to understand that this is not Mother. And all the worries of the family auspicious. If you want to waste your time, I will allow you to waste your time. But if wwhich are so natural are brought into your you want to have the ascent fast first of all attention. So when you have them in your one must remember that these are relations attention, say, go ahead with it, try to which are 'absolutely' worldly relations and solve it, if possible'. BUT IF YOU DON'T this is not your pure desire. this desire within us, which is the Now, should be brought to Me-simple thing like pregnancy or sneezing, very simple things, HAVE ANY OF THEM IN YOUR ATTEN- TION THEN THEY ARE IN MY ATTEN- So try to separate your pure desire from TION. You leave them in my attention, I your wordly desire. It does not by any will manage that But then it is a viscious means suggest that you give up your family, circle, it is very subtle projection of the you give up your mother, you give up your mind that thinks, 'All right. Mother, we don't sister. Nothing, but you witness them and have this thing in our attention, you better you would see anybody else look after it". But this is not the way. We and see for yourself whether they are really should have only one intense desire within us, desirous or not. If they are well and good, ourselves, have I become the Spirit ? Have they should not be disqualified, because Tachieved my ultimate ? Have I risen above they are your relations. It works both ways, the worldly desires ? PURIFY. Once you as as they cannot be qualified because they start purifying, whatever falls out, are your relations; they cannot be disquali- after thai. This is just an assurance but fied because they are your relations In not a guarantee. If it deserves My attention. Sahaja Yoga, you make your desire a pure value vour attention, as I value My attention desire. You have to get out of So many I think vou have to value much more of I will definitely look after it. You have to things but for people who are attached to their family and are bound by their family, they have to see to it that they do not force than Me because I can your attention manage very well things within Myself because everything is in my attention. Sahaja Yoga on any of your relations. At least don't force them on Me. But, you try to purify your desires away Nirmala Yoga

 form the worldly problems that are facing you. So, if you extend it more, then you What is your responsibility to Sahaja Yoga start thinking, 'Mother what about the prob- -which is the work of God, which has star- lems of our country ?" All right, give Me ted and you are My hands. You have to do the map of your country. Finished, that is the work of God and you have to fight the anti more than sufficient. Then purify yourself, God Elements-the Satanic Element. You -the desire that you have, you leave it. are not responsible for your family any And once you are purified, that area will be more. Those who are, are the half-baked covered through your attention. It is very Sahaja Yogis- said are useless, abso- interesting. When you get over it, then only lutely good for nothing. All such will drop you can throw light. But if you are inside, out, their families will suffer and I know that your light is hidden. There is no light this is going to happen. Because, now the Then, your responsibility to Sahaja Yogal emitted. forces are gathering in such a way that You have to rise above that desire. sorting out will start. Every time you get a desire, you rise above that till your light is emitted on that wider problem that you are facing, which you think Spirit; your responsibility to Sahaja Yoga3B should be solved by Me. These are all my your responsibility to understand Me better headaches which you are putling on your- self. You have to do only one thing, is to become the Spirit. That's all. It is simple you; your responsibility to understand how thing-rest of it is My headache. Your responsibility to yourself to be the and better and better; your responsibility to understand this mechanism that is within this mechanism works out and behaves. Responsibility is to how to become a Guru Now, the problem that should take your yourself. Your responsibility to be a digni- desire on to the collective, should be very fied and glorified personality. Responsibi- different. To substantiate your purity, to lity to be respectable personality and not a be fragrant with your purity, your attention cheap personality. Everyone of you is should be on the other side. Now you are worth the whole universe, if you want to not facing Me, you are facing with Me the rise to that height. Universes of universes whole werld. See, the whole attitude will change. The attitude should be: what can I give ? How can I give ? What is my is within you to foster. mistake in giving ? I have to be more alert, where is my attention ? I have to be more alert towards myself, what am I doing ? very low level cannot rise. For example, the What is my responsibility ? You must Western Sahaja Yogis have certain problems desire that you should be pure. You should of committing the sin against the Mother and be pure desire that means you should be the Eastern Sahaja Yogis have the prob- Spirit. But what is your responsibility to lems of committing sin against the Father. yourself ? You should desire that your responsibility to yourself should be mani- it. The attention is to be kept pure, In fested should be complete. can be thrown away at your feet, if you want to rise to that height, to that magnitude that Those people who still want to live on a It is not difficult at all for you to get out of Sahaja Yoga you know all the methods, Nirmala Yoga iww.

 how this altention one can keep it pure. this aura and enlighten the world. But your If the attention is not pure, then this desire outlook should be how much have I contri. will be always altacked by all petty, nonsen- buted to this ? AmI still thinking of other sical things which has no meaning in your people ? AmI still thinking of petty smal ascent Now, a person who is a good problems or I am thinking of my Spirit ? Sahaja Yogi is not bothered about his clothes, what others say to him, what others Am 1 sil So, the left side starts and ends with Shri Ganesha has only are talking to him, how they are behaving Shri Ganesha. towards him. The attention is not on that basic one quality- that He is completely criticism that this person is like this, that surrendered to His MOTHER. He does no person is like that. Nor there is the aggres- know any other God. He does not even know siveness of anyone else because nobody is His father. He only knows His MOTHER the other. But the problem is, when I say and completely surrender to HER. But this that, no one thinks that I am saying about pure desire has to have action and abou you each person. Those who are aggres- which I will tell you later as we will be sive take the role and those who are non- having more Pujas and more Pujas. Bul aggressive think the other way. Like I say today let us establish ourselves into that something for a person who is aggressive, pure desire to be the Spirit. the non aggressive will immediately think of the person who is aggressive not about him. You immediately start shifting your mind to other person, finding fault wilth other Shankaracharya wrote Vivek Chudamani and Now, as it is the Western mind will say how ? It always comes, how to do it ? Should I tell you, it is very simple ! Ad people. So, this desire becomes gradually lower and lower and lower because of the loads that are put on it. so many other books and treatises and then all these big intellectuals got alter hia life and they said, have this and have that and have it. He said, forget these people. Then he wrote SAUNDARYA LAHIRI - just the So, the alertness is very important, com- plete alertness, SATARKTA (ia1), that we should keep our attention purely for the description of his MOTHER and his devo- Sustenance of our pure desire. tion to Her. And every couplet that he Desire comes from your heart and you are so built wrote is a Mantra. It is not the surrender that your BRAHMARANDHRA (a) is also of your mind through your mind but the the heart. If you do not have a clean heart surrender of your heart. It is absolutely the it won't keep clean. For the people who think surrender of your heart Western Sahaja if they talk about Sahaja Yoga big and all Yogis know very well how there have been attacks and attacks of negativity on them, that, they are alright. But they are cheat- Ing themselves, if the heart is not open, So specially when the horrible people like Freud came to destroy their basics, the roots. And how the West accepted it blindfolded and I hope today when you do this Puja and put them on the path of hell. All that has you do the worship of Mahakali and this to be brought out. That is all nonsense, is special Yagna, we will definitely establish wrong absolutely and that is the anti-God try to open your heart. Nirmala Yoga

 a Sahaja Yogi. Not at all. Air India has fight fully, say, 'this is the destruction of our nothing to do with Sahaja Yoga. All our all our everything, they have the source of everything that is sublime, nothing to do with Sahaja Yoga. So what ? noble, all that is nourishing, all that is eleva- So, you be patriotic and use your own airline, ting, emancipating, you are cutting us from for Heaven's sake. When you arrive here our roots". You have been dealt with, I you will see that the people are too inno- think, as animal-like creature and he wants cent. They cannot understand Freud. You all of us to go down to that low level of cannot talk to them, it is beyond them. They human beings, which exist as pathological are higher type of people in this respect, cases, I don't know. So, it is important for because they ars not attacked, while you you to understand all attacks that came on are higher in a way that though you are you and be alert and don't be identified with attacked, you have come out ot it. You just turn your faces and you are on the other Then you will realise that you will activity. basics, our roots. When our MOTHER is Railways, anyone of them. side. That is something great. Last, I would say, you have come to this country to see the roots and not the shoots. Change your attitude of Western style. Telephones are no good, you cannot pet same way as you believe, in this big country any telephones done. Postage is horrible. Railways are worst, (I should not say be- cause we are in Railway bunglow). But, the people are excellent. They know what is "Dharma', They are not being attacked Somehow or the other as this baing the Gauri, you can say Ganesh, Gauri's day, KUNDALINI, Shri Ganesha is sitting here foday, Though according to the schedule How dare anybody attack this great Maha- rashtra, has got eight Ganeshas protecting tevel, the desire to be pure and to be them ? 1 don't know if Maharashtrians know this fact. And so many Marutis, so who things that are within us can attack this country. There is no nega- So, you will also have a confidence that there are many people who believe the where there is big population to support. So you should not feel lost. Thus, today we.have to start with Puja of Mahakali Tatwa. And this is the day of time, it may not be but according to Me, let us establish within ourselves at our subtler cleansed of out all the barriers and unclean tive attack except that they themselves are rather money minded sort That only curse they have. If they can get out of it, they are a great people. Desire to be great Sahaja Yogis. Desire to be responsible Sahaja Yogis. Desire to be surrendered to your Mother. It is not difficult. That is the ego, the last one to go because what you surrender ? I don't want So, you have come to this country not to anything from you except that you accept enjoy the comforts of the West, but that My Love, Surrender just means that you comfort of the Spirit. So you change your open your heart to accept My Love, Give up attitude towards India. I don't mean Air- this EGO, that's all and it will work out. I am India, by any chance. This is a wrong idea trying to push Myself into your heart and I that you come by Air-India because you are will definitely settle down there. Nirmala Yoga

 Translation of Her Holiness Shri Mataji's Old Marathi Letter-1 My dear Modi and other Sahaja Yogis, Many blessings. Received your letter. I Bhawani, Twam Durga, Twam Ambika etc." am very glad to know that your Ida Nadi has become clean and I hope, Ida Nadis of all established in Sahaja Yoga, you will have have become clean at least to some extent. to say 'Aham Bhavani'. However this Mantra Here I had told all, that I would work, while can be said only when your purity becomes under anaesthesia, to clean the Ida chan- one with that of "Aham Bhavani' and I tell neis of all. E worked for 3 days cleaning it you now Itself that this will happen. by vomitting nearly 50 times every day and it Is nice that the cleaning has become possible. This physical being has to be awakening Pingala Nadi. Sahaja Yogis had Used for the mission for which it has been become rather lelhargic due to the condi- taken and therefore am not bothered by tioning of Ida Channel. Laziness and a the iliness and other troubles are good for Ida Channel, but when you are After cleaning the Ida Channel I am tendency of avoiding the work was domina- On the contrary all such and different experiments ting in them. Their attention was being with this incarnation will have to be perfor- fritlered away on avoiding the work. But I Why are you so anxious about it ? have now started the work of awakening Imed. What else is the use of thiis body ? I never Pingala Channel. All of you should raise have any pains. All I want is that, in the your right hand from right side over your laboratory of this body, some work or the head and leave it on the left side but while other must go on. Time is short while the doing it, you must apply your will power so work to be done is very big. that your desires will awakening of collectivity, you will have many people to share your work which you materialize. With the You cannot do the cleaning of Ida chan- nel only on the strength of your realisation. are doing alone. I knew that it had to be cleaned from within. In ancient days all seekers had to do this action (Kriya) constantly right from their heart. When conditioning of heart is reduc- childhood at the residences of their gurus ed, as If the glass of a lamp becomes clean, at isolated places. The seekers had to do rays of ever resplendant Spirit awaken it individually in many lives. Because, now you have attained the state of collectivity I spreads, which is felt in Sahasrar. This have done it in collective consciousness. light enlightens all Although you say I have done it, the distinc- heart and decorates it with the qualities tion of you and I should not be there in which can be described as pleasing, bliss- collective consciousness. Mantras "Twam The sphere of Sahasrar envelops your Sahasrar sheath and the light of bliss light enlightens ll sides of Colourful (Continued on Page No. 39) Nirmala Yoga 10.

 Translation of HER HOLINESS SHRI MATAJI'S OLD MARATHI LETTER-2 Thave received tetters from all of you but have not been able to write because now fix. All your auto suggestions will materia- in London Sahaja Yoga work has started lise. The remedy that is to be used is: your with great drive. You can altain any desti nation that you atention should be on Me and you should make the following conditioning of thoughts on your Agnya "How fortunate we are to Delhi Sahaia Yogis write very few letters but most of them are happy. Sahaja yogis have been realized I We are Sahaja Yogis. of Bombay are alright, Sahaja Yogis of Gad has chosen us. How can we work if Rahuri are enjoying. Sahaja Yogis of Bom- bay have great responsibility and therefore had to face many attacks. The first attack We can do it and we will do it". On heart came when I was in U.S.A. At that time we remain weak ? Adi Shakti has given us the Power to redeem the whole mankind. many Sahaja Yogis were affected and many you should criticise with these thoughts fell away. Later on when an attack was on all London Sahaja Yogis collectively follow- given us the realization. He is the ocean ed wrong path which was full of dangers and harms. Many wicked people from that He is working hard day and night for our part are, still hiding themselves in some welfare and, instead of praying for His for- Sahaja Yogis in the form of 'badhas'. You giveness of our mistakes, we are making have to vigorously use Sahala Yoga methods complaints against Him and blaming Him"! against them. These wickeds attack you The following thoughts will please your from Agnya and Heart. From Agnya they Hearts, O God, please give us the power of send Anti-Sahaja Yoga ideas in your mind Your love. May I be the drop in the ocean and from Heart they make complaints. If of Your love that is enveloping the whole you identify them they will become ineffec- universe, so that its loving pulsation is tive. There is one remedy for it which can vibrated through my life and I remain engro- be applied only after the realization. ssed In that bliss. Because if your car does not start, your brakes and accelerators are of no use, But if you do not use the accelerator even after Divine love. Always loving you, much more it starts, how will your car move ? "How deep is God's love for us ! He has of mercy. ignoring all our mistakes, May your life be flooded by the waves of than myself. Your Mother, -NIRMALA Nirmala Yoga 11

 TRANSLATION OF OLD MARATHI LETTER FROM HOLINESS SHRI MATAJI-3 MAN wants peace, weaith, power etc. but limited. Your attention is on material things God is the origin of all these, Then why and you are talking about eternity ! You should not there be the desire for God ? should merge in eternity so that you wil Why should there be no aspiration and have eter nal life. ambition to meet the God ? We should pray to the God for peace and keep the desire to meet the God who is peace itself, then why are you sulking ? All deities art This should be the difference in satisfac- your elder brothers in this kingdom. They tion of a common man and that of a Sahaja are present in many forms along the path Yogi. Once should be ready to surrender of Kundalini. You should recognise then the very desire to meet God at the God's and attain them. Kundalini is your Mother holy feet. All attention must be on Him. Learn to always remain under Her care. B For that, one must have dedication, deter- her child and she will take you to the ulti mination and concentration (tapasvita) and mate-Once you accomplish that from wher in that all material attachments should be everything is born you will have the rest ver destroyed. What is there in this world to easily. cling to ? You must realize the glory of those feet in which all fades and becomes You are the officials of God's kingdon But you are not consistent in the prac peaceful. Only then you will have your glory. tice of meditation, love and peaceful life Bu You are taking casually even to me Why should one brag of one's achieve- ments ? You must understand that what- how eager you are in worldly matters ? Hov you become adamant on having what yor ever is being done by you, is all God's want ? Why are you not casual in tha power, i.e. working of Adi-Shakti and you respect ? Do not run away from the realit are only the witnesses to see these because I am Mahamaya. Attain me. I an Attain me. 1an For achieving that stage you yours. lam for you. I have given you thae miracles should pray "May our T consciousness fade away, may the truth that all of us are small parts of your being be assimilated within us, o that your Divine bliss would resonate every particle of our bodies and this life would be filled with beautiful melo- dies enchanting the whole mankind and would show - light to the whole world." birth. Let love flow from your hearts, Love is un- that: find the meaning of SWA (Self which has been beyond the reach of ver great sages and saints, How will you maki use of it ? You have been given a big assel Thousands of stars and planets were creat ed with it's just one wave. There is great significance to your re But you yourself have to achievi Nirmala Yog 12

 Sahaja Yogis can do it. It is a big contri- you have been selected as officials. If you vance. I have tald you the secret but what ignore it, on the one hand you will be dep- have you achieved ? Nobody sulks having rived of the great source of joy and on the been benefted. You are unhappy means other, you will lose your authority due to in- you have not been benefited. If you achieve complete knowledge of Sahaja Yoga, Hence the trick, you will open the gate of joy and be wise and stand firm. Every moment forget yourself while enjoying that bliss. has thousands of directions. Let your rays Nobody becomes happy from wordly spread in different directions, You will matters. I have given you the key to the welfare, to the whole world. treasure, which others haven't got But you inaction to act. You are to captains. Let must work to open the door. You have God's melodies be sounded from your taken everything casually. You want Mataji flutes. to feed you, to wake you up in the morning and make you sit in the meditation, to clear you of your anger hatred etc. Get over your Transcend in your feelings above those who have not been realised and blessed and God's kingdom will be yours. May you get Today is the day of Guru Puja. What that auspiciousness. All my efforts are for *Guru Dakshina' (Gitt to the Guru) have you that You have been made like temples. given me ? Understand, that your money Keep it clean. is not worth the dust on the feet your Mother - Guru. You should give your hearts3; Some of you are enjoying in the ocean only clean and holy hearts. You must clean of bliss. My blessings are that all of you your physical beings. Do not be lazy in should be happy. Your wordly life and that Take a vow. You must get up early satisfaction should be of the same level. in the morning and spend at least one hour Sahaja Yogi's satisfaction and the circums- in meditation and worshipine, perform tances he is in are balanced. Our both legs grow together. If one leg is shorter than the other, you will become lame. I do not want to tell you to lower the level of your circumstances if contentment is less. But 'Arti' and meditation in the evening, Satan's desciples work hard at a funeral place. I cannot understand why you are taking everything so casually. gossiping. Leave jealousies and quar- Sahaja Yogi's satisfaction does not depend rels. Time never waits for anyone. Do you want to go empti-handed despite having the key to the treasure ? Stop all on tbe circumstances. He is happy in the circumstances that are prevailing. If he is not, then his satisfaction is superficial and not from within. May God grant you eter- If you do not accept God's kingdom neral place at His feet. Satan's kingdom will come and you will have yourself to blame for it. Remember, be- cause you Sahaja Yogis ate dear people, Yours Mother -NIRMALA 13 Nirmala Yoga

 Sakshat Prematatwa Sakshat Prema- Dayini Sakshat Prema-Shakti Sakshat Adishakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Namo Namah It is truly the greatest divine blessing that now in Sahaja Yoga each one of us' has been granted our reality and most important our Dearest Loving Mataji. Our dearest Mother loves us so much; and how She takes care of us at every instant ! Her compas- sion and love are so great. She is verily the source from where all LOVE originates and flows. In this blissful ocean of Love we all are playing, jumping with joy, dancing with each other in harmony, singing together-which, in turn, leads to ever more vibrations and joy. To be amongst Sahaja Yogis and share this love is always wonderful. The divine love flowing among Sahaja brothers and sisters is verily the hand that plays the harp of divine music. Where there is love, no negativity dare stay, no 'badhas', no problems. This, Shri Mahamaya showed to us very clearly on the very first day of the shivir at Lonavala (Dec. 82). One Sahaja Yogi was "caught up () and feeling not too well: Others were working with him for some time with littie improvement. Suddenly the Kundalini shot up and everything was all right, Heart and Sahasrara opened and the. person started feeling quite nice and beautiful. The reason for this tranofsrmation was very apparent. Just then a group of Sahajas from Europe had arrived and met their brothers and sisters from India who were there- and how beautiful such meetings are ! As they hugged each other they shrieked and laughed with joy; love flowing from their hearts and happiness made their eyes shine and smiles lighted their radiant faces. The Oneness was just overwhelming - and Sakshat Prem-Dayini, Sakshat Sarwavyapini Shri Mataji showered more and more of Her Love, vibrations on Her joyful children. As the children of Shri Prema-Swarupa, met each other, with Her love flowing through each and elevating each, the place was greatly blessed and in this supreme living atmosphere no negativity could dare stay. There have been so many such instances when we realize that Shri Adi Shakti's 'Love' is All Powerful and All Mighty, So secure are we cradled in Shri Jagadamba's 'arms' of love that nothing whatsover need disturb or distract us. She has readied for us, the stallions of courage and fearlessness. She has made us the warriors to ride them. If we only just realize that it is Her' Sword of love that we hold in our hand; it is 'Her' Shield of love that protects us; it is Her' Support of love that guides and steadies us, then we have the confidence to be Her humble little instruments. Nirmala Yoga 14

 Let us ride out and proclaim the victory of Sahaja Yoga over all small, insignificant mounds of negativity and ring aloud throughout the world the great mantra- JAI SHRI MATAJI As Shri William Blake has written: Bring me my Bow of burning gold, Bring me my Arrows of Desire, Bring me my Spear! O Cloud unfold ! Bring me my Chariot of Fire! 1 shall not cease from mental fight! Nor shall my soul sleep in my hand. And to these melodious lines may one add: Till we have built the Kingdom of God, In this beautiful world Our Mother has made ! And to achieve this we can 'only' pray ! "Shri Mataji, You are Shri Mahata Ahankara Complete worlds are created from the tiniest speck gathered from the dust of Your lotus-fet, We, Your ignorant little children, bow at Your Feet Mother, we pray, grant us that May we be the channels of your breath, the flute in your hands May we be the channels of Your love, the harp in Your hands And May we ever remain in Sahaja Yoga, Your dancing, prancing, joyful, playful children." JAI SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI SAHAJA SMILE Shri Mataji "You must remind me to re turn your money else I will have to repay it in the next life". *That's fine by me, Mother". Kay 15 Nirmala Yoga

 Pluto. Scorpio is also the ruler of the planet Mars, which is the planet of Shri Ganesha. Mars is the little youth and war- rior while Pluto is the effect and substrate Ray Harris's reflections on Pluto as inspired by of war, or one can say that if Mars is Shri Ganesha then Pluto is Shri Mahaganesha. This is the same as Lord Jesus Christ and as Christ returned as Shri Kalaki, with the Shri Mataji's Words LAST autumn, In Exeter, England, Shri elevenfold destroying powers of Christ Who Mataji told us that Pluto is the planet of Shrl comes at the end of the age on a white Kalaki, and is Her seat in the solar system horse. in this incarnation. The astronomers dis- covered Pluto in 1931, soon after Shri Adi Shakti took Her birth on earth in this Her long been recognised as highly significant greatest incarnation. Ironically, the planet in terms of world history Nostradamus was actually discovered by a young farmboy assumed that 1999 would be the last year who was an assistant to the astronomers before the new age. the Jewish calendar is assigned to the task. As far as the astro- appreaching the number of 6000 years and logers are concerned Pluto is associated William Blake talks about reawakening after with death, rebirth, destruction and the six thousand years But how specific should manifestation of the deep collective uncon- we be ? Astrologically we are in a unique scious. The planet is still il understood both in terms of its highly irregural orbit and just entering its own sign but at the same Its effects on our collective psyche. The time ls entering the orbit of Neptune. Now The present age in which we live has position with Pluto : not only is the planet other major planets circle the sun on the Neptune is the God of the ocean, and is same plane but Pluto slices across them at an angle, follows an oval path, and at times bolic of the three nadis or the three gunas even enters the orbit of Neptune so itis no or three basic aspects of Shri Adi Kundalini longer the furthest planet so fer discovered Shri Maha Laxshmi, Shri Maha Saraswati in the sun's family. depicted holding a trident- perhaps sym- and Shri Maha Kali. Within us Neptune is the Swadisthana, the outermost limit of the Pluto came within the orbit of Neptue void or Bhavsagara, the ocean of tilusion In 1979 and remains there until 1999. In and of material existence. Neptune is the November 1983 Pluto also moves into the sign of Scorpio, which in astrological terms totality of all that we experience and com- is the sign of its rulership, where it is most prehend within the ocean of relative exis- powerful. (Scorpio is the sign of the guru and that of death and resurrection.) In Indian Astrology Neptune is Varuna, the planet of change, of death, destruction and God of the Waters and Pluto itself is the deep transformation, i.e. Shri Kalki has God of the underwarld or of hidden unfatho- mable depths. Astrology recognises the i,e. the orbit of Neptune at this time until transforming power of Scorpio as fired by 1999. It is interesting that most seekers tence, beyond which is unknown to sense perception or the intellect. So Pluto, the come within the field of human awareness, Nitmala Yoga 16

 our work and the necessity for humanity to have Pluto strongly aspected in their astro- logical charts. The ocean of the void is get its collective enlightenment. if Pisces Bhavsagara and Pluto is just for a short is uncertainty then Aquarius has to be cer- while active within our awareness. But why tainty for the human race. There will not is this so special ? Pluto has no doubt be much left to be uncertain about if Sahaja been within the orbit of Neptune many Yoga does not take off and become esta- times about every 250 years and has also blished soon. been within the limits of its own sign Scor- pio equally as often, about ance every 200- 250 years or so. Compute the two together position of Pluto-entering Neptune's orbit, or the answer is about every 6000 years. entering its own sign of Scorpio and the So the likelihood of both these events hap- earth entering the age of Aquarius, all at pening simultaneously are exceedingly rare, the same time. Transformation will take If we look back at history in the west for place with or without us. example, we see that each time Pluto is in Scorpio there is a time of laxity and hedo- nism lollowed by a period of and the rise of new religious ideas. The American Revolution, the Renaissance and the zenith of the Middle Ages are some examples. Each time Pluto goes into its own sign long lasting and dramatic changes occur in the collective consciousness of mankind. This is all underlined by the present MIRE The temperature on the surface of Pluto puritanism IS just about the coldest anywhere. It is about 3 degrees above absolute zero and only just above the ambient temperature of the void of interspace between the stars and galaxies. Coldness is the quality of the Spirit. Pluto is composed largely of frozen or solidified of Methane Even as far away from the sun as Jupiter and Saturn this is in a gaseous or liquid state and only solidi- In addition lo all this we are now on the fies at just above absolute zero, the tempe- cusp of a new world age, the Age of Aqua- rature of the Spirit. Methane is CH4, or 4 rius. It is rather complicated to explain Hydrogen atoms plus one carbon atom this to a layman, but there are twelve ages, (tetravalent). It is the basic bullding block like the twelve signs of the Zodiac, and the of organic compounds.. Carbon itselt is a earth stays in each one for two thousand very hard black or occasionally diamond years, The Age of Lord Jcsus was the age like substance. It cannot form life on its own but becomes a support for further evo- of Pisces and we are now at the end of that, astrologically speaking. Pisces is the lution of life by its four-fold valency, hence Maya-the epitome of the Age of Illusion it is like Shri Ganesh. Methane or CH4 as whereas Aquarius is the Water Carrier- often as not is the end decay product of the collective vessel of the waters of the organic dissolution. For example it is found Spirit, the Kundalini l.e. the Sahaja Yogis. in very old oil resevoirs as natural Gas, or Therefore the Sahaja Yogis must be the in ancient swamps and marsh gas. instruments to allow Shri Mataji to carry So even here Pluto or Shri Kalaki has final dis- solution and rebirth embodied in its chemi- ili mankind through to the new age and we must realise the awesome magnitude of cal makeup. 17 Nirmala Yoga

 A 'day' on Pluto, or rather one revolution supported on Her head and of course Pluto. of the planet on its axis is almost seven of In this incarnation She has Pluto as a vehi- our days which is perhaps significant. It cle-Shri Kalaki-the power of final dis- has also been recently discovered by obser- solution. We must therefore at this time ving the further eccentricities of its orbit look towards our inner spiritual develop- and shape that it has a moon. This has ment, that part which is beyond material been given the name of Charon after the decay, and forget the outside concerns all boatman who terries the souls across the the time. This is the moment when we are river of death to the underworld in Greek taking a big jump in evolution, the jump is moon was discovered certain but which way we go is up to us round about 1979, i.e. - Pluto is also known for its connection with vant to the transformation of human cons- Joint emotional and financial ventures in clousness connected with the planet seem- conventional astrology, and it is interesting ed to happen and also around about the that in December/January of 82/3 Pluto time when Shri Mataji began teling us that approached to within of the Constella- Shri Kalaki was starting to manifest. The lion of Scorpio, and the world currencies moon is very large in relation to the size of such as the pound sterling, dropped drama- mythology. This when everylhing rele- ticaly and unaccountably. One has only to read some pages of Willlam Blake's the planet itself and it is almost like a double planet system. Charon is the white horse of Kalaki, or the vehicle Shri Kalaki "Jerusalem"or "Millon" to appreciate thatin judges without mercy and Charon is like the The next few years any efforts of mankind Which are not directed towards the spirit. for example such things as concentrating vehicle of Pluto just as Sahaja Yoga is the vehicle of Shri Kalaki. It is a means to an enormous amounts of effort on such things as economics based on currencies, will flounder dramatically as the manifestation end and not an absolute. Only the Spirit is absolute. The irregularities of Pluto's orbit bring draslic changes to humanity and of Kalaki urges man to put his attention on we must surrender to the Spirit whafever higher values. Where will all that time higher values. Where will all that time wasted on business and money have led us, changes must come about as a single race of beings. when the universe is marching on to ano- Pluto only has an atmosphere some of ther level of expression, and man with it ? the time when occasionally the faint sun- It will slowly become obvious to mankind light vaporises the methane. This is when the planet comes nearer to the sun in its through surrender to the Spirit and death of eccentric orbit and when the moon is not the ego and superego of individuals, nations in the way, and even then it is only on the and races will mankind survive. The blos- side facing the sun. This is like the sym- bol of the manifestation of Pluto's power Spiritual rebirth be very plentiful, for other- by the all powerful sun which is the oppo- site of Pluto's dark eternal cold Shri Mataji has three main seats in the solar system: Venus in Her heart, the moon is as a whole that only by transformation som time is coming, let the harvest of the wise even a small shift in the equilibrium on the material level of this planet could cause great discomtart and suffering. This (Continued on Page No. 23) Nirmala Yoga 18

 We, the Children, are bowing to the Immaculate Desire of God the Almighty. THE 108 NAMES OF SHRI MAHAKALI Om Twamewa Sakshat Shri 1. MAHAKALI mThe seed energy of God's desire . Wish-fulfilling cow 2. KAMADHENU Whose form is desire 3. KAMASWARUPA 4. VARADA Bestower of boons 5. JAGADANANDAKARINI Cause of the total bliss of the Universe 6. JAGATJIVAMAYI Total life-force of the Universe 7. VAJRAKANKALI Transforms the human skull into a thunderbolt 8. SHANTA Peace 9. SUDHASINDHUNIVASINI Dwelling in the cosmic ocean of nectar 10. NIDRA Sleep 11. TAMASI Generating and presiding over the tamo guna Pleasing eyeryone 12. NANDINI 13. SARVANANDASWARUPINI Embodying universal joy 14. PARAMANANDARUPA The highest form of divine bliss 15. STUTYA The most fitted for all adoration and worship 16. PADMALAYA Residing in the purest lotus The sacred immutable object of adoration 17. SADAPUJYA Universal wish-fulfilling divine energy 18. SARVAPRİYANKARI The Auspiciousness of the Cosmos 19. SARVAMANGALA Perfect, complete 20. PURNA Ocean of joy 21. VILASINI ... Mother whose darshan seldom goes unrewarded 22. AMOGHA 23. BHOGAWATI ... The supreme enjoyer of the Universe Nirmala Yoga 19:

 Bestowing perfect happiness on Her devotees 24. SUKHADA Desireless 25. NISHKAMA Killer of Madhu and Kaitaba 26. MADHUKAITABHAHANTRI ... Slayer of Mahishasura 27. MAHISHASURAGHATINI Destroyer of Raktabija 28. RAKTABIJAVINASHINI Destroyer of Narak 29. NARAKANTAKA Fire, hailstorm and fury 30. UGRACHANDESHWARI Cosmic wrath 31. KRODHINI Radiance of fury 32. UGRAPRABHA Killer of Chanda and Munda 33. CHAMUNDA 34. KHADGAPALINI She rules by the sword Whose fierce radiance destroys the demonic forces 35. BHASWARASURI The slayer of the enemies of the saints 36. SHATRUMARDINI .. Mastering the science of wars and battles 37. RANAPANDITA Whose sparkling teeth are red with blood 38. RAKTADANTIKA Who is fond of blood 39. RAKTAPRİYA Holding a skull in Her hand 40. KAPALINI Confronting demonic hests and all sins of the world 41. KURUKULAVIRODHINI Dark bodied 42. KRISHNADEHA Wearing a garland of human skulls 43. NARAMUNDALI 44. GALATRUDHIRABHOSHANA . Whose clothes are dripping with blood ... The spirit of the cosmic dance of dissolution 45. PRAITANRITYAPARAYANA With Her tongue coming out 46. LOLAJIVHA Residual energy of the Holy Spirit 47. KUNDALINI ... The virgin serpent 48. NAGAKANYA Devoted wife 49. PATIWRATA Nirmala Yoga 20

 50. SHIVASANGI ... Eternal companion of Shri Shiva 51. VISANGI Without any companion 52. BHUTAPATIPRIYA Fond of the protector of the bhoots i.e. Shiva 53. PRETABHUMIKRITALAYA Dwelling in the land of bhoots and ghosts 54. DAITYENDRAMATHINI The victorious chief demon-slayer Of the form and cooling radiance of the moon 55. CHANDRASWARUPINI 56. PRASANNAPADMAVADANA .. Having a bright, smiling lotus-like face The Divine Mother with smiling 57. SMERAVWAKTTRA countenance 58. SULOCHANA .. With such beautiful eyes Having marvellous glittering teeth 59. SUDANTEE 60. SINDURARUNAMASTAKA Who puts the red sindur on Her fore- head 61. SUKAISHI With magnificent long, dark hair 62. SMITAHASYA Eternally smiling to Her devotees 63. МАНАТКUCHA ... Her heavy breasts give milk to the whole Universe Gifted with loving eloquence 64. PRIYABHASINI 65. SHUBHASHINI Her speech is soft and sound 66. MUKTAKAISHI Her dishevelled hair grants liberation 67. CHANDRAKOTISAMAPRABHA.. Shining with the lustre of a million moons Whose immeasurable beauty enchants the Universe 68. AGADHARUPINI Magnetic and fascinating so that She wins the hearts 69. MANOHARA *. Highest divine grace and charm to please all 70. MANORAMA Celestial charmer enticing all in Her web of love 71. VASHYA 72. SARVASAUNDARYANILAYA Home of all beauty Nirmala Yoga 21

 Red is Her colour 73. RAKTA 74. SWAYAMBHUKUSUMAPRANA. She is the life force of the self-created flowers 75. SWAYAMBHUKUSUMANMADA Intoxicated with the self-created flowers (chakras) 76. SHUKRAPUJYA Worshipped as the whiteness of purity Surrounded by a halo of purity and whiteness 77. SHUKRASTHA Soul of purity and sacredness 78. SHUKRATMIKA 79. SHUKRANINDAKANASHINI Committed to destroying the foes of holiness 80. NISHUMBHASUMBHA- SANHARTRI Slayer of Shumba and Nishumba 81. VANHIMANDALA- MADHYASTA Sitting at the centre of the blazing cosmic fire 82. VIRAJANANI Mother of the brave 83. TRIPURAMALINI Wearing as a trophy the head of the demon Tripura 84. KARALI Presiding over cosmic dissolution 85. PASHINI Holding the noose of death 86. GHORARUPA Terrifying form 87. GHORADANSHTRA Having fierce jaws 88. CHANDI in Her Destroys evil tendencies disciples 89. SUMATI Mother of the purest wisdom 90. PUNYADA Showering virtues 91. TAPASWINI Ascetic 92. KSHAMA Forgiveness 93. TARANGINI Bubbling with life and energy 94. SHUDDHA Saintly chastity 95. SARVAISHWARI Mistress of the Cosmos 96. GARISHTHA Manifesting Her joy at the sight of Her disciples 22 Nirmala Yoga

 **. Royal and victorious Wish-fulling Gem 97. JAYASHALINI 98. CHINTAMANI He Enjoyer of non-duality 99. ADVAITABHOGINI 100. YOGESHWARI Detached . Fulfilled intensity of all pleasures, joy, bliss 101. BHOGADARINI Fulfilled by the pure love of Her disciples 102. BHAKTABHAWITA 103. SADHAKANANDASANTOSHA. Fulfilled by the joy of Her disciples Cherishing those who worship Her 104. BHAKTAVATSALA ... Source of the eternal joy of Her disciples 105. BHAKTANANDAMAYI Bringing the desires of Her disciples to fruition 106. BHAKTASHANKARI 107. BHAKTISAMYUKTA Bestower of devotion Pure 108. NISHKALANKA JAI JAI JAI MATAJI RAY HARRIS'S REFLECTIONS (Continued from Page No. 18) is not scaremongering, but we must take to cure is to bow to the Lotus feet of Shri Sahaja Yoga and establish ourselves as Mataji and allow Her to transform us instruments for this next most dramatic through the vehicle of Sahaja Yoga, Shri stage of human development as directed by Mataji has asked us to pray for Her health Shri Mataji. In Delhi this year Shri Mataji at this time, March 83, and Her body said in one lecture that Pluto can be both reflects the collective health of the Sahaja the cause and cure of many diseases found Yogis. Therefore it is vital that we allow in today's world. Let us pray that we may the transforming power of Pluto to cure us surrender to the power of Pluto in a fashion individually and collectively, so that our be- that may allow for the cure to take place, loved Mother does not have to suffer for us not only of diseases on the individual level, in Her boundless love. but that mankind as a whole may discover Koran, for the man who has eyes to see and the simple cure for the collective diseases ears to hear, the evidence of God and his which cause the entire race of men to suffer works and plans are everywhere. and be allenated from one another. The As is written in the Nirmala Yoga 23

 The Holy Mother Nirmala Devi Srivastava & K. P. by Shri T. Y. CHAUDHARI THE horoscope discussed in this article pertains to Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Srivastava, who, to Her innumerable Sahajyogi devotees spread all over the five continents, is an incarnation. Sun Venus Mars Mars Saturn VI Venus Jupiter VII Mercury Mercury Mercury Mars Kethu Saturn Sun VII Saturn Mars IX Jupiter Jupiter Her Holiness Mataji is reported to have Mars Ketu X1 been born at 12 noon on Wednesday, the 21st March 1923, at Chhindwara (Lat. 23 3 North and Long. 78.59' East). The following is the horoscope prepared in accordance with the principles of Krishnamurti Padhdhati : Aya- Mars Venus Sun Venus XII Censtellation Lord Sub-Lord Plansts Mercury Sun Saturn namsa used 22°.41' (K.P.) Mars Venus Moan Rahu Venus Mars Mars 19 28 Moon 17° 25 XI 5' 05° Jupiter Mercury Jupiter Sun 6 57 X 03 Lagna 11 46 XII 9° 48 Jupiter Jupiter Ketu Rahu Venus Mars Rahu Saturn Mars Ketu 27 27 Herschel 21 48 Merc 20 23 IX 1 13 || 5" 34 Nep. 23 3 For. 25 15 Sun Rahu Moon Venus Jupiter Ketu Balance of Venus Dasa: 13y 10m - 15 days In the case of a divine personality the spiritual aspect of the horoscope has to be ordinarily considered from an examination of the Lagna, and the 5th. 9ih, 10th, 11th, and 12th houses. The planets to be studied are Sun, the Almakaraka, Moon, the Mana- karaka, Jupiter and Ketu indicating spiritual knowledge and Saturn for tapasya. In Krishnamurti Paddhati, spiritual realisation is Inicated if the sub-lord of the cusp of the 11th house signi fies houses 5 (initiation), 1 1 13 Venus24 33' VIII 5 34 Rahu 27 27 IV 1 03' V 5 05 Jup. 25 52 Sat 25 23 VI 9 48 VII 11 46 Cuspal Position: pioy qne 10 (sadhana) and 11 (siddhi). Sub Lord Constellation Lord Lord House Saturn Rahu Ascendant Mercury Mercury Venus powerfully aspected by Saturn by his 10th Rahu aspect and Jupiter by his 9th aspect. Mer- The Lagna in the above horoscope is Satrun Moon %3D Ketu Sun II Sun Mercury IV Nirmala Yoga 24

 cury, the lord o! Lagna, is powerfully aspec- in acquarius and this sign Is symbolised ted by Jupiter. Saturn as sub-lord of lagna with one pouring water from a vessel. This and lord of 9th by his aspect on Lagna con- and the airy sign occupied by Lagna, Jupi- fers the faculty of perfect concentration and ter, Mercury and Ketu explain, the cool meditation and makes the personality fit for breeze (Chaitanya Lahari) that always ema divine action. Saturn is in the star of Mars, nate from the Holy Mother or Her photo- ford of Aries, and in the sub of Rahu, graph. The divine energy or cool vibrations representing Sun in the 10th. This assures endlessly flowing from the Holy mother or Her success in meditation and awakening of the photograph results in creating thoughtess soul. Jupiter as lord of 10th is posited in awareness in the devotees. his own star, in the 5th house of intelligence and love and is in the sub of Ketu (indica- ting spiritual knowledge) in the 9th house. in 3rd house in the Uttara star ruled by Sun. This shows the expansive divine love, the the Atmakaraka, occupant of 10th house Holy Mother radiates as also peace, harmony and is aspected by Mercury lord o Lagna and divine wisdom, as an attribute of spiri- from the 9th house. Rahu is in the sub of fual knowledge. The aspect of strong Jupi- Moon in the 11th house. The sub-lord ter lord of 10 from an airy sign, on the Moon is conjoined with Mars, lord of 11th intellectual planet Mercury, ford and sub- and both Moon and Mars are powerfully lord of Lagna and also on Lagna and the aspecied by Jupiter. Rahu is thus connec- Moon, clearly indicates true wisdom beyond ted with the 5th, 10th and 11th houses, all mere human intellect, and intuition of a very beneficial houses indicating spiritual realil- high order. The Holy Mother is indeed sation. Rahu is also connected with the knowledge beyond human comprehension, planets Mercury, Sun and Moon represen- knowledge of the infinite, of divine incarna- ting intellect, soul and mind. Rahu there- Rahu, the star lord of Lagna, Is posited fore, promises honour, status and success As a spiritual leader and as a Teacher of tions and of the Kundalini. The Ascendant falls in Gemini owned of malters spiritual. Rahu represents the by Mercury, that is to say, in the star of Kundalini or the serpent power in the Rahu and in the sub of Saturn. The sub- human body. Rahu is the female and that lord Saturn as lord of 9 is posited in a is why Kundalini is referred to as the She friendly sign Virgo in the Star of Mars, lord Serpent (See Hatha-Yoga Pradeepika and of 11 is aspecting lagna powerfully. Mer- Shiv Samhita). Kundalini which is absolute cury and Saturn have got parivarthana by divine knowledge is, therefore. the source sign position. The aspect is indicative of a of spiritüal enlightenment. It may be inci- life dedicated to tapasya, dharma and to dentally pointed out that in every non-rea- matters of spiritual nature, Mercury stands lised person, Kundalini lies in a dormant for electrical energy and from the point of state coiled up, in the triangular bone, at vibrations represents vayu or locomotion the base of the spine and is the residuary and its symbol is wings Mercury is in the divine power in every human being. It is star and sub of Jupiter, the lord of divine the store house of absolute divine know- knowledge and dharma himself. Mercury is ledge and arises and manifests to perform Nirmala Yoga 25

 its funotions at the will of Bhagwati; but ed above and is a great benefic and the chief only at the appropriate time, according to source of spiritual transformation. Venus, the Karma of the individual. This has been the sign-lord is posited in Rahu sub in the 8th house and is stronger benefic to give effect of the Kundalini power. Jupiter is - posited in Sth house, In his own star, ll verified through K.P. in several cases. The cusp of the 2nd house, which indi- cates among other matters voice and this shows the meritorious deeds done in speech, is jointly ruled by Moon as sign- previous lives and abundance of poorva lord, Saturn as the star lord and Mercury punya. Jupiter, Venus and Rahu show that as sub-lord The sub-lord Mercury discus- in view of the poorva punya the Holy sed above, stands for higher mind and Mother chose to take Her birth as a highly heart and indicates that the soft and melo- spiritual and enlightened personality, with al dious voice and the gospel truth the Holy the knowledge and powers that the Mother Mother teaches, comes directly from the Kundalini conters, according to the sacrec Universal Mind itself. Venus by its aspect texts. on the 2nd house makes the speech sweet and genial. Marn aspecting the 2nd makes the speech forceful and vests it with dlvine as a sign-lord, Mars as star-lord and Mer- authorily. It is only when she refers to the cury as sub-lord. This Mercury has beer damage done by the fake Gurus, or tantriks discussed above. This explains the righte that Her volce assumes a harsh tone. In ous conduct and divine purity of thought this respect she says that "these fake word and deed, of the Holy Mother. Venus Gurus spoil the Kundalini of innocent peo- in the 8th indicates vegetable kingdom and ple and rob them of their divine right to be it is but appropriate that the only offering: spiritually liberated". Venus in Rahu sub to the Holy Mother consist of the choices in the 8th house (which is the seat of Kun- of flowers Venus as the lord of the 12th dalini) aspecting the 2nd house shows that house and lord of 5th occupies the 8th Her mere look is a blessing of the Kunda- house, the seat of Kundalini and indicate: lini power itself. It also explains why in the that the Holy Mother is a purified persona glow of Her eyes and the caress of Her lity and is no longer subject to the cycle o voice, motherhood vibrates in the fulliness births and deaths. of divine love, tenderness and sweetness, It seems that Goddess Parvall, the Sup. reme Mother of the Universe, represented Jupiter as sign and star-lord and Mars a by the sign cancer, is Herself showering the sub-lord. The 10th house is occuple grace after grace on the people. The 9th house is jointly ruled by Saturr The 10th cusp is jointly ruled b by the Sun. Rahu alone is in the star o Sun Mercury, Jupiter and Ketu are il The 5th house indicates poorva punya Jupiter's stars, Mercury, Ketu, Jupiter an and spiritual transformation on initiation Rahu are therefore, strong significators o etc. It is jointly ruled by Venus as sign-lord the 10th house. The Yoga, the Holy Mothe and Mars as the star-lord and Venus as teaches, is the Kundalini Yoga, indicated b sub lord-Mars and Sun have been discuss- Rahu in the 3rd house, being 9th to th 26 Nirmala Yog

 seekers. In the other Yogas, cleansing discussed above, is another strong sign l- of the body and mind is a pre-requisite. In ficator of houses 5 and 10. Mercury in Jupi- Sahaja Yoga, self-realisation is first and ter star and sub is however stronger. Mer- cleansing automatically follows. due to Mercury's position, Mataji gives self- there is no planet in their stars. It was on realization to hundreds of people at one the 5th May 1970 during the dasa of Rahu, This is cury and Kethu occupy the 9th house, and This is done by activating bhukti of Mercury, anthara of Saturn that and same time. the Kundalini in the individual. It seems the Holy Mother discovered her amazing as if the Kundalini arises in Her presence powers about her mastery over the myste- as a mark of respect to the Holy Mother In rious Kundalini. On that day, Rahu was case of a person, who has lived a virtuous transiting in aquarious in his own star and life, self-realisation is conterred by the in the sub of Venus. Mercury, Kothu and Holy Mother in a matter of minutes: The process is extremely simple and effortless. Saturn in Venus star, Rahu sub, over the As proof of self-realisation, one notices natal Mars in the 11th house. cool vibrations flowing through the fingers includes the power to cure diseases like and palms and thoughtless awareness cancer, paralysis etc. which defy modern manifests immediately. The flow of vibra- allopathic medicines. This is indicated by tions deepens with the entry of the Kunda- Rahu, in the sub of Moon in the 11ih house. lini in the limbic region and with practice, The disciples also have the power to invoke the devotee is blessed with deep contem- the Kundalini to arise and many of them plative sensitivity and doubtless awareness. are at present busy throughout the five Mataji says that "when the Kundalini gets continents granting self-realisation to hun- connected with the Universal Unconscious, dreds of persons and alleviating human you can have direct communication with sufferings. In fact the position and asso- Reality, totally purifying and entightening the ciation of Rahu, Mercury, Jupiter, Saturn mind". She teaches you also the ways and Venus have conferred on the Holy Mother means of healing the body and mind inclu- all the gifts of the Spirit, the gifts of tea- ding the causes of the various afflictions ching, healing, mercy and all other atitribu- and the particular chakra on the Sushumna tes of divinity through the Kundalini power Nadi, that needs attention for remedying the particular affliction. No spiritual teacher, it seems, Is known to have done such a Moon were transiting in Venus star and The siddhi To the traditional astrology, the above horoscope would reveal the aristocratic surroundings at birth, pleasant childhood, marriage with a very high executive, happy miracle on so vast scale. ith The 11th house confers siddhi. The married life and a command over wealth, sub-lords of the cusps of the 5th, 9th, 10th together with the comforts that wealth ordi- and 11th houses show siddhi following ini- narily confers. It is only Krishnamurti Padh- tiation. As stated before, Rahu signifying dhati that correctly reveals the immense the Kundalini is connected with Lagna and spiritual siddhi of the Holy Mother, her houses 5, 10, 11 and 12. Saturn and Venus mastery over the Kundalini power, and the in Rahu sub are equally strong Jupiter as royal ascetic life she lives. May Krishna- 27 Nirmala Yoga

 murti Padhdhali, by the grace of the Holy April 1947, a Monday and a Swathi star day Mother, illuminate the minds of students of Jupiter confers divine love and understan astrology. ding in conjugal matters and this has bee evidence ever since the date of marriage According to Krishnamurti Padhdhati, one Venus In 8th makes her a sumangali. Mata becomes a Sanyasin if, the sub-lord of the cusp of Lagna is in any manner connected with Saturn and the 10th and 12th houses. Saturn, the sub-lord of Lagna, is in the star of Mars and sub of Rahu, representing 10th Sahaja Yoga ever since 1970, when Rah and 11th house. But Jupiter is also lord of dasa, Mercury bhukti was operating. On th 7th and aspected by Moon lord of 2nd 25th January 1972 during Rahu dasa, Venu house. Mercury occupies the 9th house in conjunction with Kethu, an agent of Saturn. siting in Moon star Rahu sub and Venus wa This connection with Saturn and 10th house transiting in Rahu star Venus sub) the Ho indicates Parlok Sadhana and an aversion Mother selected twelve disciples and gra for worldly pleasures, while leading a nor- ted them selt-realisation. The bhukti mal family life. Mataji is not a Sanyasin Venus and Mars which followed witnessi in the sense the term is ordinarily under- a steady increase in the number of persoi is a very devoted wite, mother and gran mother par excellence. The Holy Mother has been preachin n bhukti and anthara, (when Rahu was trai She does not advise sanyas or getting sell-realisation and the establis stood. wearing of saffron robes for spiritual disci- ment of centres for Sahaja Yoga. Jupit pline. As a Mother, she encourages her Maha dasa started on the 6th Feb 1978 a disciples to enter into a disciplined married will last till the 5th February 1994. By natu Jupiter stands for expansion. Consequen during Jupiter bhukti, Sahaja Yoga spre life. Houses 2, 7 and 11 are considered for with great speed to several countries. T marriage, family life etc. Houses 2 and 7 bhukti of Saturn runs during 24th Mar are not occupied by any planet. Moon lord 1980 to 5th October 1982. of 2 in 11 in the star of Venus and sub of Mars lord of 11 is very auspicious for a happy family life. Jupiter, lord of 7th, posi- being in Mars star, Rahu sub, its bhu ted in the 5th in his own star aspected by saw thousands of taithful seekers geti Moon, lord of 2nd, and Mars, lord of 11, pro- initiated into Sahaja Yoga. The bhukti mises a very happy married life with chil- Mercury runs during 6th October 1982 a dren. The 7th house is jointly ruled by 12th January 1985 and that of Kethu the Jupiter as sign-lord, Kethu as star lord and after upto 18th December 1985, Mercur Mercury as sub lord. Kethu is in the star posited in Jupiter star and sub; and Kel of Jupiter, lord of 7th house in the 5th is in Jupiter star and Venus sub, It house. Mercury is in the star of Jupiter during these periods, that there would and Rahu is in the sub of Moon. This ex- further expansion of Sahaja Yoga on a v plains why Moon dasa, Jupiter Rahu anthara gave marriage on the 7th Saturn, although restrictive by natu bhukti. huge scale. Nirmala Y 28

 Shri Mataji's Australian Tour, 1983 On Thursday 17th March, 1983 in the Early in the tour our Beloved Mother Maccabean Hall, Sydney, Dr. Warren decided to visit only four cities, each of Reeves introduced the second last program them a State capital. There were two pub- lic meetings in each of the smaller cities, Perth and Adelaide, three in Melbourne and of Our Holy Mother's Australian tour. A journalist and a photographer from a major newspaper were present as Dr. Warren gave an introduction totally diffe- rent from any used before. As he spoke of Adelalde, a city where negativity had often the previous incarnations of the Adi Shakti, stifled the efforts of the resident Sahaja of Her manifestations as the Holy Mother of Yogis to expand. Shri Mataji's first pro- Christ, as Fatima, and all the other great gram was on Saturday, March 5. Austra- Incarnations that have come, a thrill went lians who had toured India with Mother had through every Sahaja Yogi gathered in Shri arrived back to find an unexpected national Mataji's presence. We all knew we were election day coinciding with the first Ade- sharing a momentous occasion. four in Sydney. The most spectacular success was in laide program. Naturally the media was At the end of his introduction Dr. War- attractive to them than spiritual matters, ren declared to the world that Her Holiness but nevertheiess a very thorough postering is the incarnation of the Holy Ghost, the of the city with a beautiful full colour pos- Adi Shakti that has come again and again ter, a small article in the press the Monday when Her Prensence was needed. before announcing Shri Mataji's visit, and When Shri Mataji rose to speak a fow several well placed advertisements let the moments later absolute silence relgned. In seekers know Our Mother was coming. And a very quiet voice She said simply, "It is despite all the difficulties they came to Her. true," and a new age had begun. The first meeting on election night was darshan well attended, but the Monday night meet- Mother had told of Her decision to speak ing following television and radio appea- openly to the world on this but left the time rances that morning was a stunning suc- "Perhaps tomorrow night," cess. The seats were full, the floor at the front crowded and people standing round Earlier that morning at a mystery. She said. the sides and back of the hall. After the It was a fitling climax to the public sec- tion of a triumphant tour. From the first feet, something that would normally not day in Perth on March 2, a steady stream of seekers had come. So had the press, demonstration of the defeat of the negativity. radio and television people opening the way for Mother to speak directly to millions of meeling many of them came to Mother's occur in Australia. It was a very beautiful On the Sunday morning Mother had held a workshop in a park on the banks of the Australians. Nirmala Yoga 29

 River Torrens which a large number atten- conference. Some were cynical, some pro- ded, and on the Monday morning the Sahaja fessional, and some had already recognised the very special Being who was coming. Yogis of Adelaide were blessed with a superb new ashram, large, well situated The press conference concluded with a television interview which was broadcast and handsome. In just three days our Beloved Molher transformed this difficult that eyening in the main news bulletin, the most highly rated program in Australian Over a million people saw city. Perth had been a beautiful but quieter Mother as She actually gave realisation opening to the tour. Most of the newspaper over this powerful medium, and in the days end radio coverage didn't reach the public that followed many came to the programs until after the two programs in Perth Town as the result of the experience they had felt. Hall. Even so the seekers came, the hard- Following the broadcast the phones at the working Perth Sahaja Yogis had also thoro- T.V. station rang continually as people ughly postered the city and suburbs. This called to find out more. The same expe- plus several newspaper ads let them know where Mother would be. The Divine Mother Mother appeared on an evening radio pro- held a puja shortly after arrival and the next gram. Again the phones rang and rang. few days showed the obstacles had truly been removed. Many new people are set- tling into their realisation and regularly manifested in the form of miracles. One attending the Perth ashram, These two small girl watching the television had been new centres, never visited before by our born with a stiff wrist and all medical at- Beloved Mother are now very solidly esta- blished and growing thanks to Her Grace. rience was repeated the following day when As usual the power of the Adi Shakt tempts to correct it had falled. watching the television she felt the co breeze in her hands and suddenly the wrist was freed as the Divine Grace flowed over Sitting As Shri Mataji left the western States to travel eastwards, fierce bushfires were rag- ning across much of south-eastern Austra- lia. Following four years of drought the country was very dry with no water to fight her. The Divine Grace also flowed over Mel bourne in a special way. A critical water t problem had existed there for years. One But as Mother travelled east the morning Mother decided to have a puja to soothing rain came with Her, a very special the sea Everyone in the ashram journeyec fires. blessing on this land of Lord Ganesha. It some distance to the shore where Mother has continued after Her departure, a sign presided over a simple beautiful ceremon) of the great changes Our Mother has during which She constructed a Shr wrought. Ganesha on the sand, Afterwards Mother told the assembled Sahaja Yogis that Mel Melbourne, March 8, and as the Divine bourne's water problem was permanentl) Mother flew in from Adelaide members of the press and television were gathering at Melbourne's Windsor Hotel for a press solved. Not only the Sahaja Yogis associated Nirmala Yoga 30

 Mother's visit with the rain, but at the press She had been part of their. tives for a year conference one lady from a T.V. station or more. Once again this puja to Lord quietly asked several Sahajas if rain would Ganesh and the Adi Shakti cleared the come. On the drive from the airport Mother obstacles away, though for a short while had said to those in the car, "Now I've next morning for some of us the Maya was come it will have to rain." This was told in full play. to the T.V. lady and as the press confe- rence broke up several Sahajas were car- rying equipment out to cars. lady stepped out onto the pavement the on a major radio program called City Extra first drops of rain fell on her. She stop- on the A.B.C., the ational broadcasting ped, looked up, then smiled her acknow- Mother's first engagement on the mor- As the T.V. ning of Tuesday, the 15th was as a guest network. As elsewhere the rain had fol- ledgement as she walked away. The rain lowed the Holy Mother and as the car head- developed into the first steady rain seen In Melbourne far a long time. ed into the city in the morning peak hour traffic there was chaos No matter what alternative route was tried the traffic was But more was to come for Melbourne: snarled. It soon became obvious to those several successful radio broadcasts, and in the car that Mother would arrive at the gradually increasing numbers at the public studio after the time arranged for Her programs. This culminated on Sunday, the appearance. 13th with a workshop in the spacious grounds of the new Melbourne ashram. The Herself reassured them that all would be fine gardens were crowded with visitors who as She put it into bandhan, Arriving at the had come to learn more about their realisa- studio 15 minutes late it was found another tion. They were blessed with a special guest scheduled to appear after Our Mother, lunch cooked by Mother Herself. It had had arrived early and was already on air. been a joyous week for everyone. The other four in the car were perurbed to various degrees, Mother This proved to be an American manage- ment consultant who taiked glibly and shal- Mother's arrival at Sydney Airport start- lowly about stress relief and management led many people. Although it was a late It proved to be a perfect prelude as the night flight a large group of Sahaja Yogis interviewer with immense respect introduc- were waiting when our Beloved Mother arri- ved almost two years after Her last visit. Many celebrities on the plane were puzzled as they were ignored in the joyous crowd surrounding Shri Mataji. ed Mother and revealed the shallowness of what had gone before. What followed was a magical twenty minules The depth, warmth, compassion The following evening Mother held a and wisdom that flowed enriched everyone puja, as she had on arrival in each of the who heard it. After the broadcast even the cities. The marvellous vibrations that normally blase station staff for whom cele- flowed that evening were a special benefit brities were an everyday occurrence came to many established Sahaja Yogis who were to pay their respects. On the way home meeling Mother for the first time, though Mother gently pointed out how the Divine Nirmala Yoga 31

 works this out. It was a lesson not to be Birthday. Sahaja Yogis came from all over forgotten. Australia to share it with Her and no words can describe the beauty and depth of the puja that day. It will forever stay in the memories of all who were privileged to at- tend. As the puja finished heavy rain pour- ed down and with a beautiful smile Mother Again in Sydney an interview with Shri Mataji appeared on the main evening news bulletin to over a million viewers and ano- ther television channel interviewed Mother in depth and aiso filmed part of the second Sydney public program. looked out at it and said, "All nature is washing my feet." To us it seemed like all Early in the tour Mother had expressed Creation. Her thoughts that televislon was the best medium, and so it proved. That night to celebrate, one of the few sitar players in Australia arrived to play for Each night brought bigger crowds, and Mother. The ashram became a totally rela- the Sunday workshop, though held in pou- xed, warm home though there were 80 peo- ring rain stretched the ashram limils as two ple present, and when Mother joined us hundred visitors plus Sahaja Yogis jammed with Her hair down and wearing a softly inside to hear Mother and enjoy Her bles- patterned sari, the warmth was overwhel- sings, including another meal cooked by ming. Marvellous music flowed from the sitarist and from several Sahajas who play- Then came Her. ed to honour Mother. The public programs over, there was time for Mother to relax a little and an the giant birthday cake (in the form of a Swas- Saturday a picnic was held in the Lane tika) much to the joy of the small children. Cove River National Park, Here on the green riverside lawns, She was surrounded by the fragrant Australian bush with Her children seated on the grass around her. It was a day of laughter and relaxation as Mother in a green sari that blended pér- large crowd, Mother left Australia. Her bles- As was fitting, a joyous Mother flnished the evening by bestowing on the sitarist and his two accompanists Her greatest gift: realisation. At midday next day. farewelled by a fectly with the surroundings, nursed and named the new babies and talked gently night new seekers are coming, old ones are with parents about the raising of children. The informality even extended to Molner sings however have remained. Night after progressing, and Sahaja Yoga is growing before our eyes. teaching the men how to tie dhotis in the manner of Shri Krishna. Every now and then the paddle wheel ferry chugged along all over the world and by Divine Grace what the river with its passengers staring at the we have experienced here in Australia may joyous group on the banks and wondering be repeated elsewhere. With full hearts we May the triumph of this tour be repeated all shout : what was going on. JAI MATAJI The highlight of the tour however, was Monday, March 21, our Beloved Mother's -The Australian Sahaja Yogis Nirmala Yoga 32

 Sahaja Yoga & Physical Cure-II Asthma :- It is a problem of left side in not get exposed to cold weather after bath which lungs become lethargic causing diffi- for 2-3 hours. culties in breathing. Feeling of insecurity or bad relations with one's father can also Jaundice:- Right Nabhl and Swadhisthan be the root cause of this disease, in which are atfected, Our beloved Mother has pres- case centre Heart or right Heart respectively a very simple medicine for this are affected, In this case WBC outnumber disease, which doctors find very difficult to RBC, which is due to the catch on Jaft cure. Fresh raddish leaves be boiled and Nabhi and Swadhisthan. cribed candy sugar be mixed in this boiled water which is drunk for 3 days instead of plain Tuberculosis :- This is also a problem water. Fried food, proteins etc. may be of left side and is caused by mal-nutrition avoided and the disease is cured in 3 days. and lack of protein and other left side prob- Mantra to be said 10 times Mother you are lems Chakras affected are left nabhi, Swa- my Guru', with left hand on stomach and dhisthan and centre Heart. both the diseases, should raise right side Diabetes:- Right nabhi and Swadhisthan and add the God's grace into left side, take are affected, Left sympathelic may be raised salt-water treatment with left hand towards and God's grace be passed into right sym- the photo and right hand raised. Eat nutri- tious food. Also, take vibrations to affected Patients of right towards photo of Shri Mataji. pathetic 108 times every day. Foot-soaking in luke-warm salt water, placing right hand on pancreas. These patients should take chakras. Common Cold:- In this problem. either lot of vibrated salt and say the Mantra In left vishudhi or right vishudhi is caught. front of the photo of Shri Mataji "Mother I Hamsa is also affected. If suffering from am my own Guru" This mantra may be left Vishudhi, nose is blocked, if suffering . It is necessary to give up from right Vishudhi, nose is running. For the habit of planning one's tuture. flowing nose, one should burn Ajwain on Insomnja :- This is due to over-active charcoal and inhale its lumes. Also drink decoction of Tulsi leaves, ajwain, ginger God's prace added into right sympathetic. and sugar and take rest in the bed. If ose The following mantra may be recited: Is blocked, one should add clarified butter in the nose. repeated 10 times right side. Left side may be raised and या देवी सर्वभूतेषु निद्रा रूपेण संस्थिता । नमस्तस्य नमस्तस्य नसस्तस्य नमो नमः । ॥ In order to avoid the problems of lungs and throat, it is necessary to change our Ideas regarding bath. Cold water bath is preferable in the summer. In the winter one should bathe in luke warm water but should Yã Devi sarvabhooteshu nidra roopena samsthita! Namastasyai Namastasyai Nanastasyai Namo Namah !! Nirmala Yoga 33

 Lack of Memory:-Lett side may be raised or over-work and over-anxious nature regar- and God's grace added into right side. ding one's responsibilities. Imbalance in The following Mantra may be recited thrice: sympathetic may be corrected and affected parts be treated with vibrations and vibrated kerosine, and foot-soaking in luke-warm salt या देवी सर्व भूतेषु स्मृति रूपेण संस्थिता । नमस्तस्यैं नमस्तस्यै नमस्तस्यै नमो नमः । water. Yâ devi saryabhooteshu smruti roopena Sciatica:- This is a problem of left-sym- pathetic. Left Nabhi and Swadhisthan are affected. Imbalance may be corrected by adding God's grace in left sympathetic ner- This could be due to the vous system and treating affected chakras problem of left or right sympathetic nervous with vibrations and massaging with vibrated samasthita I Namastasyal Namastasyai Namastasyai Namo Namah ! Spendylosis :- system, owing to respectively, malnutrition kerosine. FESTIVALS Date according to English Calendar Date according to Indian Calendar Festivals 31st August 1983 Shravan-Month Janmashtami (Birthday of Shri Krishna) Krishna Paksha-Dark Fortnight Ashtami -8th day 10th September 1983 Shri Ganesha Chaturthi (Shri Ganeshas' Birthday) Bhadrapad-Month Shukla Paksha-Bright Fortnight Chaturthi-4th day 7th October 1983 Ashin-Month Navaratri (Puja of Shri Devi Durga Shukla Paksha-Bright Fortnight Pratipada-1st day to Navami-9th day to 15th October 1983 for 9 days) 16th October 1983 Ashwin-Month Shukla Paksha-Bright Fortnight Dashami-10th day Dussehra Nirmala Yoga 34

 THE FIRST SAHAJA YOGA SEMINAR IN AUSTRIA Our Holy Mother visited Vienna in Sep- children of the manager of the youth hostel tember 82, gave Her blessings to the whole were attracted to us one after the other and city and realisation to about 600 seekers. About 25 remained in Sahaja Yoga in an sweet ! active capacity and gathered to our first seminar in April. they all got their realisation; it was really All this sounds very nice, yet there is much work to do in Austria. With the help You can't imagine, it was such a bles- and guidance of the Divine we will spread sing to attend it! Just thinking about it Sahaja Yoga until the last valley of our one gets breathless but we have to go be- Alps will be vibrated. And we now need yond thought anyway, We had a wonderful an ashram to adore our Mother, who is programme of videos, workshop, meditation, Beauty and Bliss itself and to set the exchange of experiences and above all, a example of a new life style to this Austria. beautiful Shiva-Shakti-Ganesha Puja, which No doubt, all problems will be solved if we surrender ourselves to the Enlighten- ed One, the Spirit We pray to our Shri We gathered together to surrender to Mother that She opens our hearts for Her according to the vibrations, was kindly accepted by the deities. the realm of joy and silence, to get the Grace, compassion and guidance. Divine Vibrations fiowing from the Eter- nal One. This happened in such a way, that, in a very shart remarkably strong in our yoga. This was your shining love without shadow in our possible, because the collectivity in the eyes. Let us always remember that we are group was very good. Fixing the attention Your children, playing with Your gifts. to the Spirit and not to the outward appea- O Devi, who else but you can take away me, we grew our misidentifications so that we can face ti rance of a person, we somehow melted together. Finally nobody could bear to see the end of the seminar coming The thre Thank You ! Guent her Om Twamewa Sakshat Shri Sarra Sahaja Yogi Sakshat Shri Sarva Sahaja Yogini Sukshat Shri Adi Shakti Bhagawati Mataji Skri Nirmala Devi Namoh Namaha Nirmala Yoga 35

 Maria Smith's account of the miracle at Bedford and the events leading up to it. Bedford is a provincial town in the mid- phoned Shri Mataji and our Holy Mother lands of England. Sahaja Yoga programmes explained that something was taking place were started there about eighteen months ago, during which time a number of people yond our ability to control. Shri Mataji had were given realisation and three became consulted the stars and deities so that they Sahaja Yogis. In 1982 Shri Mataji was invited by local Sahaja Yogis to come to knows best. Bedford and other neighbouring cities. on a level beyond our awareness and be- would work it in the way that the Divine After some weeks a series of extremely Initially, absolutely nothing worked out violent rain storms occured, One minute as far as arrangements for Shri Mataji's the summer skies would be clear and blue; trip were concerned. There was total nega- the next they would be filled with unnatu- tivity and opposition from the media, and rally heavy clouds which seemed to come even the Sahaja Yogis were sucked into the out of nowhere. The rain was so heavy vortex of inertia. A lot of energy wasS lost that people could hardly believe it and it in the process of trying to make people was accompanied by lightning which rent understand the importance of this visit by the skies from end to end and frightful and and intellectual reasoning None of the approaches to media or any of overflowed on to the surrounding lands. the plans bore fruit through complete lack After every storm there would be specta- of local interest. As a result the visit was temporarily called off by Shri Mataji. We bow, but many bows all crossing each persuasion. deafening thunder. The rivers flooded and cular rainbows-not a normal, single rain- realised at this point that we had been other. completely drained and wasted by going delicht everyone with their beauty, and These spectacular shows would about things in a human rather than a Sahaja fashion. So collectively, the Enalish people would even stop their cars to watch Sahaja Yogis decided to work on the mid- lands area by cleansing and strengthening tians will recall that God sent Noah a rain- themselves and the area by doing pujas and by asking the elements to help in the this heavenly wonder. All Jews and Christ- bow after the great fiood as a symbol of His love and as a promise that He would never Every Sunday we would have flood the earth again so completely. process. pujas in one of the three main towns and would work on the map of the district in the presence of Shri Mataji's photograph. We Mataji suggested more dates for program- would use the vibrations coming from diffe- rent parts of the map to feel and work out the collective problems of a particular town etc, was gone, but due to one timely phone After a month or two of all this Shri mes which She would attend in the mid- All the money for hiring halls lands area call the right person appeared at the right Just before all this took place, when the moment to help with this side of things. meetings had been cancelled, Maria tele- The second boon was that the media were Nirmala Yoga 36

 totally positive; the newspapers, radio and "Indian lady' at any time, and Shri Mataji TV were only too delighted to co- was at that time visibly giving realisa- operate. It seemed almost as if everyone tion in the hall in another part of Bedford. connected with the media had been pre- The next day the young man, Jason Hay- viously convinced about Shri Mataji and Sahaja Yoga prior to our visiting them. even nes, saw a photograph of Shri Mataji in the local paper and was certain beyond Shri Mataji arrived and was on two TV doubt that this was the 'mysterious lady programmes, and the Sahaja programmes were jam packed with people standing in who had helped him. The following day some Sahaja Yogis were accompanying Shri Mataji in Her car the corridors outside. It was during the first meeting at Bed- to the meeting at Cambridge. One person ford that the greatest miracle occured. Shri complained that she was suffering from a Mataji was driven to the meeting and rea- ched the hall at about 7.30 p.m. Our Mother Mataji is instructive for all: our Mother left at about 11 00 p.m. and was in the hall explained that it was not this lady's left constantly in between. bad left nabhi catch. The reply of Shri nabhi, but the collective catch of the whole area which was being felt. She was told to At about 9.15 p.m. a young man named open her chakras, and pray to the particular Jason Haynes, who lived in Bedford, was deity, then vibrations could be emitted knocked off his motor bike in one of the through that person's chakra out to the streets of the town and was lying seriously whole environment. thus The problem was injured waiting for the ambulance to arrive. that of the whole area and the lady was to Some minutes later he was aware of a kind stop assuming that the catch revolved about Indian lady standing over him, touching him the problems of her small self; it was some- where he was most injured and each time thing much bigger. She touched him the pain left that part of the body. Then She left, and later the ambulance arrived and took him to the completely so that we may be worthy instru- hospital, where he was treated for minor ments for the great work You are accom- injuries and shock. The onlookers at the plishing on this earth of Yours which you scene of the accident did not see any have so graciously given us to enjoy. Mother, please let us surrender to You Nirmala Yoga 37

 Little Stories from the Rome Center It was the first time I was going to the I started my study as I was 23, with a lot apartment where the Sahaja Yogis meet of insecurify and fear of the exams. During and I could not remember the indications the first series of exams after my realisa- my husband gave me to find their house tion I was still afrald though feeling the Pre- As I did not want to go all the way back sence of Shri Mataji in the room. Then some- home I decided to experiment with the gui- thing strange happend: the examiners, well dance from the vibrations on the hands. So, known for being harsh and nasty, started I went on in the street till arrived in front beaming with smiles, became so human and of the right gate and pushed on the right so nice as soon as they proceeded with the interphone button. When I got the confir- girls of my group. Everything went so well mation that I had indeed found the flat I was as if a good fairy had entered the room on a cloud sparkling with beauty. The same -RITA thing repeated itself for all the exams I had to go through. The wonderful thing about it is that my girl friends noted the change looking for I just couldn't believe it. occurring every time, and now, funnily eno- Shortly after my realisation I was told by ugh, they all wanted to be examined at the the Sahaja Yogis that my right visshuddhi same time as me. was catching as smokers' visshuddhis usually do. I don't smoke but in my office they all do it. That same day the Sahaja Yogis also told me that, as a child of Shri Mataji, I was protected; I could not really understand what they meant. -CRISTINA • Before meeting Shri Mataji, Anny and myself were keeping in our bedroom the picture of a "guru" whose meditation tech- In my office there had been regular discus- niques we had followed for a while. Altho- sions on the need to stop smoking but ugh we had found that his system did not without any results. Yet the day after these give any results we were still intellectually comments of the Sahaja Yogis and after convinced that he was a saint. Hence his had bitterly complained to them about all picture remained on the wall, fortunately those smokers, without any apparent rea- sons, all the colleagues in the office deci- The night Anny and myself received our ded to stop smoking in the room, sudden they were all taking care of my right Her picture for meditation. Returning happily vishuddhi. was stunned, happy, and, from home, we fixed Her picture on the wall near the bottom of my heart, I thanked Shri the one of the "guru". (We did not know Hanumana and Shri Mataji. at the foot of the bed. All of a realisation from Shri Mataji we received 14ppnysn anything about protocol but probably we -EDUARDO have been forgiven for sleeping that night 38 Nirmala Yoga

 with the feet towards our Mother). The Her angels should not be too harsh with the next morning we were amazed to find that thisves. My husband told me to go to the the picture of the "guru" had fallen down police right away but I refused :1 was on the floor. Only the picture of Shri deeply convinced that the bag would be It had to be so as lam a daugh- I felt that we should not sleep with our ter of Shri Mataji. I went to bed, praying as usual to Shri Mother, and, confidently,I went to sleep. The next day, I hardly -ANTONIO and ANNY remembered what had happened when the Mataji remained. After thiu event, semehow, returned. feet towards the picture of ShriMataji. doorbell rang it was the doorman holding the bag in his hand. A street cleaner had found it on a lawn and brought It back to Nothing had been eIt was 9.30 pm. was returning home when suddenly some boys forcefully took away my bag. It contained pictures of touched. Just an old amulet that I had for- Shri Mataji, money, gold jewels that i wanted to sell, a shawl from India, my keys and newspapers to look for a place suitable for our ashram. On arriving home I prayed to Mother that k the correct address. gotten in a side pocket of the purse. It had been smashed into pieces... my identification papers, -EMMA JAI MATAJI (Continued from Page 10) ful etc. Gracdually this state will grow and flame if water is mixed in the oil ? How can become stable within you Most of the those Sahaja Yogis have enlightenment who Sahaja Yogis should try this method, but there should not be merely the mechanical own petty problems ? movement of hands. Whatever you do, it Cod give them the enlightenment ? Light- should be done with the faith that you have houses do not show light to themselves in worshipping, zeal of a w arrior and sensi- tivity of an artist. There should be complete considered so important and are looked purity in the recitation of Mantras to awaken the deities and your heart must be involved in It. Only then the awakening will take place. You should understand a simple Sahaja Yogis. principle. How can a big fire be lit with a small match stick ? Will a wick hold the are using Sahaja Yoga to solve only their And why should even for a moment. Therafore, they are after. Please circulate this letter among all Your Mother -NIRMALA Nirmala Yoga 39

 technology to other continents without rea- lizing that only too often the colonial powers behave with gross brutality: they destroyed in the process of their so quote "civilizing mission" the delicate fabric of human and social values which, in the light of spiritual life, were by far superior to their own. The real victory of Gandhi was to beat the major colonial power of the time merely by resorting to these values, IN MEMORY OF A GREAT MAN $*** ******* In many ways the mode of action of Gandhiji was sahaj. For instance, he firmly derived his political activity from a couple of dharmic principles and he refused to com- THE prize winning film of R. Attenborough promise with what was wrong. These prin- on Mahatma Gandhi has been seen by many ciples, his very firmness, stemmed from his Sahaja Yogis throughout the world, For (correct0 conviction that it is God who once the link between Gandhi and Sahaja leads history. Thus God answered back the Yoga cannot be stressed enough : in enab- call, or, in other wards, the Unconscious ling Bharata to regain its political freedom. started working for Gandhi. Gandhi brought back to the land of yoga ils lost dignity without which it could not un- veil to other civilisalions the priceless sec- How did it happen ? -Gandhi's grea- test leverage was his command over the ret of its spiritual tradition : Kundalini Yoga. Indian masses. He gained such a command because the simple folk could recognize He was, in this way, the precursor of this little girl who was staying in his ashram. I that he was inspired from above. The ped- ple felt it from their own individual uncons- refer to Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi of course. Gandhiji used to call Her "Nepali" which, cious and thus they believed in the legiti- indeed, was quite accurate: the Devi is the macy and the credibility of his leadership: daughter of Himavat, the king of the moun- they, indeed. called him "Mahatma", gave tains, and the sahasrara of Ihe planet is in him confidence in his mission, lent him in any possible way their support. Theref ore, to take but one example, merely by his hunger strike the Mahatma could control the Nepal, in the Himalayas. On a general level the film on Gandhi brings to a wide public's attention some behaviour of millions of people. But alas, features in the life of this remarkable man this process cannot work outside of India, that Sahaja Yogis can, perhaps, best ana- in countries where the common man does lyse. not have the required level of sensitivity to Young Europeans do not always realise his own unconscious. This is why Gandhi's what colonialism really meant to the rest of schemes of peaceful revolution has not yet the world. They often consider that, after been implemented anywhere else in the all, it was a good thing to bring science and (Continued on Page 42) Nirmala Yoga 40

 Her Holiness Shri Mataji's ADV ICE 1. 1want you to resolve that you all will 3. You have to know that truth is not going become absolutely 'Dharmik'. It is hard to to fall at your feet. You have to fall at the be a Dharmik'. The Society and environ- feet of truth, if you want to achieve it. ment force you to be Adharmik. You are born in innocence and later you go on 4. In Sahaja Yoga when one is realized, compromising and accepting Adharmic one starts seeing one's own faults. Man is so much identified with himself that he does not want to know his faults, and when patterns as normal. For a Sahaja Yogi, it is difficult to be Adharmic. If he tries to do a wrong thing, he knows them he wants to run away. But he is corrected by the vibrations. But if you it is better that, instead of carrying the bur- go on killing your awakened conscience, den ofyour faults from life to life, you know You are free to do so and kill all your them and correct them. chances of ascent. you There is nothing in it to be scared of. If litile steady you will In Sahaja Yoga you have to torget the you make yoursell a little steady you will past as you have been bathed with Divine understand how powerful is the Shakti Love, like a newly born baby. Purity of which not only brings into light the faults Heart expressed as fidelity in marriage for within you but also completely removes both husband and wife is the most enjoy- them. able virtue and is the most power ful. When you understand the purity of relationship, 5 Karmas are done by your ego. You must you enjoy them the most. have observed that after coming to Sahaja Steady your attention by keeping your Yoga, you can very clearly see your ego attention on the Mother earth. Thus you (Ahankar) and the way it works. In Sahaja get the loving Bandhan' of your Grand- Yoga also you come across many tempta- mother and you become free of enslavement tions and in that, when your ego dominates, to your lust. you forget whether you have to go to Sahaja Yoga or Sahaja Yoga is to come to you. 2. Divinity is not a fashion. It is the way Many people when they succumb to their of life. It is the need of your being. You have to become THAT. ego, turn their backs to Sahaja Yoga, expec- ting Sahaja Yoga to follow them. Nirmala Yoga 41

 So long as your ego is enveloping you, so long as the eye of your Spirit is not you cannot have the glimpse of your Spirit opened and you should not even make But it is useless to fight with your ego. In efforts to understand Sahaja Yaga you do not have to fight with eye of your Spirit. your ego but you have just to see, because your attention itself gets awakened Your ego cools down by Just seeing, as the sea ranjivas' surrender to you. They are watch- ing is illuminating In that light you wit- ing you. You are their responsibility. All ness the play of your ago and laugh at it. anything against the deities, immediately As you start seeing yourself your ego starts thay will harm you. If a person who has got getting defiated and as ego is deflated you realization, goes to a place which is not to rise in your light. First you open the 7. Once you get the realization, the 'Chi- the deities are awakened in you. If you do be seen or which is not to be felt or which is not a good place, or to a fake Guru, 6. Man's intellect comes up with many immediately he will feel heated up. If he doubts. The first doubt that comes, which does not run away and if he still goes on, is very common, is "Who is Mataji ?" I want he will lose his vibrations and he will to tell you that you cannot understand Me become like any other ordinary person. (Continued from Page 40) world. Other countries could, possibly have of all times. As Shri Mataji can transform their own Gandhi. But would these lone the basic cell of society, man, transform voices be heard, let alone listened to and him, that is, into a higher being, the gradual impact of this positive transtormation will be felt in all the dimensions of society. As Even in India the elite of the country, the ihis transformation will be duly opposed, clever people, missed the best part ofł there will be crises and clashes: the earth They have largely may shiver, the seas may rise. But the borrowed the western ways of the western outcome can be predicted with the kind of power they were supposed to have expelled quiet certainty which distinguishes Nature's and, in this respect, remained colonized, doings. At the given time some eggs be- Perhaps this has been Gandhi's greatest come chicken, some flowers turn into fruits, some people become Sahaja Yogis. Like but he could not transform men. He could Gandhi we should be collective and wish this new freedom for many, many more And we from conditionings and ego. In other words, should be confident about it. For not only is Nature doing the job, She has even taken an incarnated form to explain us how She dees it! Really we can only wish to Gandhiji obeyed ? Gandhi's teachings. shortcoming. He could transform a country bring political freedom but not the freedom he could not raise Kundalinis. Well, Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi can ! This is why the spiritual revolution She has to be back as one of us... triggered with Sahaja Yoga is simply the most practical, the most effective revolution -Gregoire Nirmala Yoga 42

 Alpha and Omega Here is a poem which hopetully expläins two passages in the book of Revela- tions, which is the last book of the New Testament of the Bible. The Revelations is a book considered very obscure and difficult to understand and is a prophetic work deal- ing with the coming of the New Jerusalem. John of Patmos, who wrote the book, was somewhat supraconscious and therefore not to be taken too literally, although much is very true and relevant to the present time. First the passages from Revelations, and then the poem, the first part of which is intended for groping western seekers rather than Sahaja Yogis. *I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending.' saith the Lord, 'which is, and which was, and which is to come, the Almighty'"" Chap. I, verse 8. "And there appeared a great wonder in heaven; a woman clothed in the sun, and And She being the moon un der Her feet, and upon Her head a crown of twelve stars with child cried, travailing in birth and pained to be delivered. And there appeared another wonder in heaven; and behold a red dragon, having seven heads and ten horns and seven crowns upon his heads. And his tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven and did cast them upon the earth : and the dragon stood before the woman which was ready to be delivered for to devour Her child as soon as it was born. And She brought forth a man child who was to rule all nations with a rod of iron: and Her child was caught up unto God and to His throne. And the woman fled into the wilderness, where She had a place prepared of God that they should feed Her there..." Chap. 12, verses l-6. "The woman' is of course Shri Mataji, 'the dragon' the negativity in the form of the false gurus, and 'the rod of iron' must refer to the Kundalini, which is also descri- bed in this manner in the beautiful 23rd Psalm. This is the poem: In the book of Revelations very little is revealed, From the furtive intellectual are the answers well concealed. Perhaps if we stop asking questions we may hope to crack the code, Maybe the desire for inner wisdom will lead us on the road. What are the cogent questions of the great quest for life ? Who are the real protagonists that lead men ever on to strife ? How can we find the answers if we don't know where to start ? How join in the cosmic drama if we don't know our own part ? Nirmala Yoga 43

 We've tried to categorize the universe with laws of probability and chance Denying the possibility of an ordered, eternal dance. We dare not face the Dancers; our great egos are too bent, So we persist in the delusion-creation must be a chance event! Let us make the great experiment, the experiment of the soul: Let us surrender our mental wanderings in the search for the goal, Let us abandon our aggression and our passion to control. We have endeavoured to use our minds to make matter our slave And have pursued material happiness from the cradle to the grave. But when all is said and done what paths to heaven did it pave ? This road of disaster leads surely to the atomic bomb, So some foolhard youngsters explored other paths (equally wrong), The path of inner blasting via fake gurus, drugs and violent song. Where is the One who is Alpha and Omaga ? Where is the One who will call it the day ? Did the seers of old merely write stirring stories ? No. They foresaw through the tunnel of time where the war is. This war's raging within us; the prize mankind's soul, Because man is a mirror, microcosm of God. The dragons and devils are here now, among us, All doing their best to appear-Oh, so good! Bombardments of evil sport disguises of freedom, Self-destruction's allowed, nothing's barred from us now. But the Woman is here, with the stars in Her crown, And we are Her manchild, if we understand how. She is here to effect a transmuting of consciousnesS: If She doesn't, there'll soon be naught left to transmute. When She gives the great secrets, quite freely, in earnestness, Then Her Spirit will fill us as sound fills a flute, Then we'll dance for the Dancers, the Lords of Creation, And we'll bow to Our Maker in wonder and love. But first we must seek Her, concealed in our wilderness, Not argue and question what comes from above. When in silent humility we'll admit we'ere just human, Then She'll come as a human bringing heaven on earth. She'll show us our Spirit and make us divine, And Her Son will through man have His own second birth. Om twamewa sakshat Shri. Kalki, sakshat Shri Adi Shakti, sakshat Shri Mataji, Shri Nirmala Devi, Namo Namah. Twamekam Sharanyam gacchami. Nirmala Yoga 44

 From Delhi 15 April '83 It has been raining vibrated water and vibrations these last few days in Delhi. The Shri Mataji flowing through our dearest weathermen may call it unseasonal, but we brothers and sisters was really miraculous say such showers are always timely because in certain homes and in all cases without Delhi is always in need of a thorough exception, our sincerity as seekers and "washing'. The result of having so much love from Sahaja Yogis increased appreciably. We Sahaja Yogis know how much atten- tion Shri Mataji has been giving to Delhi. well attended in that no huge throngs of Like every year we had Mother's pro- seekers came. But our everloving Mother grammes almost every day for about two gifted to us many more brothers and sisters weeks. Her blessings are just proving, The public programmes were not very who are settling in Sahaja Yoga, this year than any of the preceding years. For Delhi This year was more unique for HER Sahaja Yogis it just has been coming- Children in Delhi. SHE blessed them with flowing, flowing, fiewing, ever increasing, the chance to meet so many sainis, our without effort on their part. dear brothers and sisters trom distant lands As if to show to us that Divine Grace is and learn from them more about dedication, sürrender, sincerity and collectivity. What infinite and never does it stop flowing to more could have been asked for ? We those in need Shri Paramananda Pradayini actually had them to stay with us for a Shri Moksha Pradayini Mataji came again whole week! It must really be a great for- to Delhi. On 28th March, Shri Mataji blessed tune to have in your home brave tittle chil- dren of Adishakti, your own loving dear felicitate HER on HER 60th BIRTH ANNI- brothers and sisters. Delhi by giving us a heavenly chance to How we came to VERSARY. deserve such a wonderful blessing amazes us ! Truly the compassion of Shri Mataji is beyond words or imagination! The celebrations were unique and ex- tremely beautiful & joyful to say the least. In fact any celebration would be, if the is "SHRI Hanuman must have been kept very busy MAHAMAYA SHRI ADI SHAKTI MATAJI SHRI NIRMALA DEVI. The Chief Guest to felicitate HER was Sahaja Yogi, as digni- e honoured beautiful days, Shri "person" to be During those stregthening the roots of Sahaja Yoga within the homes. And what better instruments could He have had than Sahaja Yogis-who fied and humble as Dr. Nagendra Singh, had for a full month been with Shri Adi who delivered his address in the form of Stuti (praise) of his Sadguru and Divine At this function of joy, whoever Spoke, spoke beautifully. And we witnessed Shakti in Maharashtra, (the great land) and had come overflowing with vibrations to Mother Delhi.

 Registered with the Registrar of Newspapers under Regn. No. 36999/81 the creation of a New Raga in Indian classi- obeissance at HER lotus feet-and that cal Music created by a Sahaja Yogi and gave more joy and we clapped and sang dedicated to SHRI ADIMA SHRI SARAS- and danced to Shri Krishna's tune with joy. WATI SHRI MATAJI named the raga, with bliss pouring and showering on us. SWANANDESHRI (divine joy of Self). And It did produce within us the SWANAND- it was really joyful to see Mother creatỉng JAI JAI JAI SHRI MATAJI Divine music, vibrations from HER instru- ment, Debu Chaudhary, as so many of us had earlier seen at a public programme JAI SHRI RADHA, JAI SHRI KRISHNA, Our Mother is so Gracious, so Benevo- lent: She has really spared no efforts to establish Sahaja Yoga in Delhi, which is still a weak Centre, which Just means it Seven weeks before t We had a very great surprise when we offers the greatest promise 50 much is learnt of Puja to be held the next day which come, 50 much more is walting to be was Holi, the festival of colours. At the Puja SHRI RADHA SHRI MATAJI did away with all the seriousness of Puja, much like, as she told us, Shri Krishna had done MAHA MAYA on centuries ago. "Dearest Mother, may Delhi become a step- and relived the Holi that Shri Radha and ping stone firm enough and strong enough Shri Krishna used to play It because the to sustain and assist in the final flying realised, to be uncovered. So all of US, all the different parts of mother Earth join together (with JAI SHRI our lips) and pray, Thereafter we experienced festival of great joy that it was made to be. leaf of Sahaja Yoga", JAI MATAJI. Sahaja Yogis danced and laughed and in the traditional way hugged and put RUPINI SHRI colours on each other. Some sang Bhajans SHRI NIRMALA DEVI, we bow at your PARAM PUJYA SHRI SARWASWA- ADI SHAKTI MATAJI in praise of Shri Krishna as Shri Radha totus feet sprinkled colours at HER CHILDREN paying ... Edited & Published by Sh. 5. C Rai, 43, Bungiow Road, Delhi-110007 and Printed at Ratnadeep Press. Darya Gani, New Delhi-110002. One Issue Rs. 6:00, Annual Subscription Rs 30.00 Foreiagn [ By Airmail E5 S10I



----------------------

1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Nirmala Yoga
Year 3
Vol. 14
Bi-Monthly
March-April '83
t.
45
"Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns all the religions and
seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga -THE UNION*
+-
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-1.txt 
 NIRM ALA YOGA
43, Bunglow Road, Delhi-110007 (India)
Founder: Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Editorial Board: Dr. S. K. Mathur, Sri A. S. Mishra, Sri R. D. Kulkarni
Representatives
: CHERYL HYNES-1267, Burke Road, KEW 3101, VICTORIA.
Australia
U. K.
: MR. GAVIN BROWN-Brown's Geological Information Service Ltd.,
160, North Gower St., London NW1 2 ND.
225 Adams St., 1/E. Brooklyn, NY 11201.
: CHRISTINE PETRUNIA -
U. S. A.
: LORI TODRICK-4518, Woodgreen Drive, West Vancouver, B. C.
Canada V7S 2V1.
Canada
Switzerland : CHARLES AND MRS. MAGDA MATHYS-5, Chemin Des Mouldins,
1256, Troinex (Canton de Geneva), Switzerland.
:DANIEL & ROXANA DEVINE-Angel Luis De Herran, Torre 3-8, 6, 4,
Madrid-33.
Spain
: MARIE ROUGER-175, Av. Ledru RIlin, Paris-750001.
France
: RUTH LEDERBERGER : Via Mercalli-46, 00197 Rome, Italy.
Italy
: M.B. RATNANNAVAR-13, Merwan Mansion, Genjwala Lane, Borivali
(W), Bombay-400 092.
RAJARAM SHANKAR RAJWADE-840, Sada Shiva Peth, Pune-411030.
India
CONT ENTS
Page
1. Editorial
2. International Sahaja School
3. Shri Mataji's Advice given at the occasion of Mahakali Puja at Lonawala
4. Translation of Her Holiness Mataji's old Marathi Letters
5. Letter
6. Ray Harris's reflections on Pluto as inspired by Shri Mataji's Words
7. The 108 Names of Shri Mahakali
8. The Holy Mother Nirmala Devi Srivastava & K.P.
9. Shri Mataji's Australian Tour-1983
10. Sahaja Yoga & Physical Cure-II
11. Festivals
12. The First Sahaja Yoga Seminar in Austria
13. Maria Smith's account of the miracle at Bedford and the event leading to it
1
10-13
14
16
19
24
29
33
34
35
36
38
14. Little Stories from Rome Center
15. In memory of a Great Man
16. Her Holiness Shri Mataji's Advice
17. Alpha & Omega
18. From Delhi
40
41
43
3rd & 4th Cover
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-2.txt 
 EDITORIAL
Dvija is the one who is twice born, which also means a Brahmin. In India customarily
a boy becomes a Dvija after a religious function in which a ritual is performed with reci-
tation of certain mantras. Although in modern days, the function has become merely a
religious formality with accent on celebration and social get-together, in ancient times
the mantras were recited by realized brahmins and the child was given 'Diksha' by them
for undertaking further education while leading the life of austerities at the residence
of a realized Guru. At the end of the function the boy would go to his mother and
request 'Om bhavati bhiksham dehi' (Mother please give alms). His mother would give
him sweets and with that her love and blessings.
One who utters the words Om bhavati bhiksham dehi would automatically become
humble in heart and that would help getting over one's ego problem and establishing
the eternal relation of mother and child.
We Sahaja Yogis, who are Dvijas in its real meaning get our second birth from Adi-
Shakti, when we get our realization. How many of us are really humble in our hearts ?
Is our surrender to Her, total ? Mother of the Universe, very mother principle, has given
us our rebirth and Diksha and Mahadiksha, but have we become like the eternal child,
innocent, completely dedicated to our Mother ? Mother has understood the desire of
our spirits and granted the supreme knowledge to us. She has given to us the alms of
divine bliss which is the real food for our spirits as well as the physical beings to grow
on. She is Annapurneshwari, the supreme Goddess, the bestower of food and nourish-
ment. Adi-Shankaracharaya has bowed before Her and begged for supreme knowledge
and Vairagya (complete detachment).
Nirmala Yoga
1
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-3.txt 
 नित्यानन्द करी वराभय करी सौंदर्य रत्नाकरी।
निर्धुताखिल घोरपाप निकरी प्रत्यक्ष माहेश्वरी ॥
प्रालेयाचल वंश पावनकरी काशीपूराधीश्वरी ।
भिक्षादेही कृपावलम्बन करी मातान्नपूर्ोशव री
Niryananda kari Varābhaya kari Saundarya ratnākari !
Nirdhootakhila-ghora-pāpa-nikari pratyaksha-maheshwari !
kāshipurādhishwari!
dehi krpävalambana-kari Matanna-pur
Prāleyā-chala-vansha-pävanakari
rneshwari !!
Bhikshü
O Mother Anna-purneshwari! you are the bestower of eternal bliss, you give boon with
one hand and fearlessness with other, you are the ocean of beauty and the destroyer of
all sin, you are verily the supreme goddess. You have purified the clan of Himalaya
(Parvati was the daughter of king Himalaya or Himavan). Kindly be pleased and give me
the alms.
नाना रत्न विचित्राभूषण करी हेमाम्बराडम्बरी ।
मुक्ताहार विडम्ब मान विलसदृक्षोज कुम्भान्तरी ॥
कश्मोराग रुवासितांग रुचिरे-काशीपुराधीश्व री ।
भिक्षदिही कृपावलम्बनकरी मातानपूरणइ्वरी
।॥
Nänä-ratna-vichitră-bhooshana kari hemāmbarā dambari!
Muktā-hāra-vidamba-māna-viłasad-dakshoja Kumbhāntari !!
- ruchire kāshipurādhishwari!
Bhikshām dehi Krpävalumbana-kari Matanna-purneshwari !!
Kashmirāga- ruvāsitāng
Your hands are bedecked with different ornaments of jewels and diamonds. Your
throne has golden canopy. Your clothes are shining. Necklaces of pearls are adding to
your splendour. You have applied safiron, musk, sandalwood paste and other scented
materials to your body which are enhancing your beauty. O Mother Anna-purneshwari !
be pleased with me and give me the alms.
योगानन्द करी रिपुक्षय करी धर्मकनिष्ठाक री।
चन्द्राक्कानल भासमान लहरी त्रेलोक्य रक्षाकरी ॥
सर्वश्वर्य करी तपःफलक री काशीपूराधीश्वरी ।
भिक्षा देही कृपावलम्बनकरी मातान्नपूर्णंश्वरी ।।
Yogānanda kari ripukshaya-kari dharmatka-nishthā kari!
- -
Sarvai-shwarya-kari tapah-phala-kari kāshi purādhishwari!
lahari trailokya rakshākari!!
Chandrārkanal
bhāsamāna
Bhikshām dehi krpävalambana-kari mātānna-purneshwari !!
You are the bestower of the joy of Yoga. You strengthen the allegiance to Dharma.
You are the destroyer of enemies. Resplendence of your being reminds us of the light
Nirmala Yoga
2.
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-4.txt 
 of the sun, the moon and the fire. You are the protector of Trailokya" (the earth, heaven
and netherworld). You give all prosperity and reward of penances. O Mother Anna-
purneshwari I be pleased and give me the alms.
केलासाचल कन्दरालयकरी गौरी उमा शাङुरी ।
कौमारी निगमार्थगोचरकरी ओंकार बीजाक्षरी। ॥
मोक्षद्वार कपाटषाटनकरी काशीपुराधीश्वरी ।
भिक्षदिही कृपावलम्बनकरी मातान्नपूर्णेश्वरी ।।
Kailasachala-kanda-rälaya kari Gauri Uma Shankari!
Kaumari nigamārtha gochara kari Onkāra beejäkshari !!
Moksha-dwär - kapāta- pātanakari käshi purādhishwari!!
Bhikshām dehi krpāvalambana kari mātânna-purneshwari !!
You are residing in the caves of Kailasa. You are Gauri, Uma, Shankari (the consort
of Shri Shankara) Kaumari (mother of Kumar, i.e. Kartikeya). It is by your blessings
alone that the true meaning of Vedas becomes clear. You are the first letter Om. You
are all beeja-ksharas (Primordial letters. These are the sounds produced when kunda-
Ini pierces chakras). You open the gates of Moksha for your devotees. O Mother
Anna-purneshwari ! be pleased and give me the alms..
Shri Adi-Shankaracharaya has further praised the Divine Mother. He says, 'O Mother
you are looking after and guiding those visible and invisible Gods and officials, your
belly is the receptacle of entire universe, you are conducting all the play and the drama
that is this universe, you are lighting the lamp of knowledge, you are foundational to all
letters from H (a) to (Ksha), you give victory to your devotees, you are the ocean of
mercy, you are the supreme Goddess who gives food. He ends the prayer as follows:
अन्नपूरण सदापूर्ण शब्कर प्राण वल्लभे।
ज्ञानवराज्य
माता च पार्वती देवी पिता देवो महेश्वरः ।
सिद्धयर्थं भिक्षां देहि च पार्वति |
बान्धवाः शिवभक्ताश्च स्वदेयों भुवनत्रय म् ।।
Annapurne Sadapurne Shankar-präna-vallabhe !
Inäna vairāgya siddhyartham bhiksham deht cha Parvati I!
Matā cha Pārvati devi pita devo Maheshwarah !
Bändhaväh Shiva-bhaktāsheha Swadesho bhuvanatrayam !!
O Mother Annapurna, you are always complete. You are the beloved of Shri Shankara.
Please give me the alms of success in attaining the true knowledge and vairagya (com-
plete detachment). Parvati is my mother and Shiva is my father. All the devotees of
Nirmala Yoga
3
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Shiva are my brothers and all the three worlds is my country.
Let us all Sahaja Yogis get over our egos and join Shri Adi-Shankaracharya to praise
our Mother. We invoke the eternal child Shri Ganesha to be present within us and
make us humble, innocent and loving children. We open our both hands and beg
'Bhiksham dehi Krpavalambana kari Mata Sahaja Yogeshwari,
International Sahaja School
On the auspicious occasion of Her as recreation. What else do children want ?
60th birthday, Shri Mataji
the project of starting an International for the concepts of the parents.
Sahaja School primarily for the children of
all the Sahaja yogis. The site for the school
is about an hour and a half drive away from Yogis hipe up so that the school opens by
Bombay, midway on the Bombay Poona the forthcoming India Tour in December.
highway. It is off the main road, situated (let's count on it..give it a bandhan).
on a hillock facing the majestic Maha-
rashtra plateau. A little stream sings along to high school. The first group will be for
to provide the drinking water.
announced The scool is for growing children and not
Let us hope that the Bombay Sahaja
The school will be gradually upgraded
children above age 6. Sahaja yogis who
Questioned if the school would be run wish to send their children may enguire
along the pattern of old English schools, the address below. A brochure will be in
Shri Mataji replied, "I don't want any soft circulation shortly.
ladies, I want strong, grounded, hardy Sahaja
yogis." Students would sleep on the floor,
eat and study on the floor.
spartan but grounded with basic sanitation
facilities, with mountain climbing as
major sport and working with Mother Earth
Yogi Mahajan
C/o Universal Sahaja Temple,
78, Krishna Nagar (Gali No. 3)
Safdarjung Enclave,
It would be
New Delhi-110029
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-6.txt 
 MATAJI SHRI
NIRMALA
DEVI
Advice given at the occasion of Mahakali Puja, at Lonawala
19th December, 1982
The first hurdle that you face as soon as
WELCOME to you all Sahaja Yogis to this
great country of Yoga.
Kyou get your realisation is that you just
You start
Today, first of all we have to establish thinking, "My mother has not got it, my
our desire within ourselves, that we are father has not got it, my wife has not got it,
seekers and that we have to achieve our full my children have not got it." You must
start thinking of your family.
growth and maturity. Today's Puja is for the
whole universe. The whole universe should krit is LOKIK (if), they are not ALOKIK
have to be enlightened with this desire. Your (la), they are not beyond the worldly
desire should be so intense that they should relations. These are worldly relations, and
emit out the pure vibrations of Mahakall these attachments are worldly. So if you
Shakti which is the pure desire of attaining play into that force, as you know that Maha
the Spirit. That's the real desire. AIl the Maya Shakti allows you to play with, You
other desires are like mirage.
know that these relations are worldly; Sans-
go ahead as long as you like.
People bring
You are the people who are chosen by me on their relations, their parents, this
God specially, first to express the desire and thät and ultimately they discover that
and then to achieve that intense desire of that this was a very wrong thing they did.
purity. You have to purify the whole world, They lost so many precious moments, so
not only the seekers but even those who many hours, so many years, wasting their
eniergy on people who never deserved any
are not seekers. You have to create an aura
around this universe of desire to achieve attention of the Mother.
the Ultimate-the Spirit.
Sooner you realise the better, that this
Without desire this universe would not desire may be within you and may not be in
have existed. This desire of God is the any one of your so called worldly relations,
one that is the Holy Ghost. It is the all makes 'no' difference.
pervading power, it is the Kundalini within
us. Kundalini has only one desire-it is to
be the Spirit and anything else if you desire sisters are waiting outside, He said, "Who
the Kundalini doesn't rise. Only when IT are my brothers and who are my sisters ?
knows that this desire is going to be fulfill- So one has to realise that those people who
ed by somebody who is facing the seeker, involve themselves into the problems of
IT is awakened. If you do not have a desire their family all the time and attract My
no one can raise IT. Sahaja Yogi should attention-you must know that I am just
never try to force his desire on other people. playing about. It is of no value to you. For
As Christ was told that His brothers and
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-7.txt 
 your ascent it is important first of all to
have no dasire, the pure desire in your Mahakali power, which is manifesting,
kith and kin. This is the first principle of comes to us in so many ways. As I told
establishment of Mahakali power, Specially you first of all it comes to us after realiza-
in India where people are too much attached tion because you are all Sahaja Yogis, to do
to their family, it is a very big problem. If something about our relations. Then the
you give realization to one person, you are second desire that comes to us, that let us
amazed to see that, all the relationship they try to cure people who are our relations.
have is with a big bunch of bhoots. And This is the second desire. You should feel
once you give realization to one person you yourself and see that this has happened to
are in for trouble, and all the bhoots walk in many of you So, right from leprosy to any
slowly, torturing My life, wasting My energy small thing like cold or sneezing, whatever
and 'absolutely of no use. It should han- they have they think they should bring to
pen to you to understand that this is not Mother. And all the worries of the family
auspicious. If you want to waste your time,
I will allow you to waste your time. But if wwhich are so natural are brought into your
you want to have the ascent fast first of all attention. So when you have them in your
one must remember that these are relations attention, say, go ahead with it, try to
which are 'absolutely' worldly relations and solve it, if possible'. BUT IF YOU DON'T
this is not your pure desire.
this desire within us, which is the
Now,
should be brought to Me-simple thing like
pregnancy or sneezing, very simple things,
HAVE ANY OF THEM IN YOUR ATTEN-
TION THEN THEY ARE IN MY ATTEN-
So try to separate your pure desire from TION. You leave them in my attention, I
your wordly desire. It does not by any will manage that But then it is a viscious
means suggest that you give up your family, circle, it is very subtle projection of the
you give up your mother, you give up your mind that thinks, 'All right. Mother, we don't
sister. Nothing, but you witness them and have this thing in our attention, you better
you would see anybody else look after it". But this is not the way. We
and see for yourself whether they are really should have only one intense desire within us,
desirous or not. If they are well and good, ourselves, have I become the Spirit ? Have
they should not be disqualified, because Tachieved my ultimate ? Have I risen above
they are your relations. It works both ways, the worldly desires ? PURIFY. Once you
as
as they cannot be qualified because they start purifying, whatever falls out,
are your relations; they cannot be disquali- after thai. This is just an assurance but
fied because they are your relations In not a guarantee. If it deserves My attention.
Sahaja Yoga, you make your desire a pure value vour attention, as I value My attention
desire. You have to get out of So many I think vou have to value much more of
I will definitely look after it. You have to
things but for people who are attached to
their family and are bound by their family,
they have to see to it that they do not force
than Me because I can
your attention
manage very well things within Myself
because everything is in my attention.
Sahaja Yoga on any of your relations. At
least don't force them on Me.
But, you try to purify your desires away
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-8.txt 
 form the worldly problems that are facing
you. So, if you extend it more, then you What is your responsibility to Sahaja Yoga
start thinking, 'Mother what about the prob- -which is the work of God, which has star-
lems of our country ?" All right, give Me ted and you are My hands. You have to do
the map of your country. Finished, that is the work of God and you have to fight the anti
more than sufficient. Then purify yourself, God Elements-the Satanic Element. You
-the desire that you have, you leave it. are not responsible for your family any
And once you are purified, that area will be more. Those who are, are the half-baked
covered through your attention. It is very Sahaja Yogis- said are useless, abso-
interesting. When you get over it, then only lutely good for nothing. All such will drop
you can throw light. But if you are inside, out, their families will suffer and I know that
your light is hidden. There is no light this is going to happen. Because, now the
Then, your responsibility to Sahaja Yogal
emitted.
forces are gathering in such a way that
You have to rise above that desire. sorting out will start.
Every time you get a desire, you rise above
that till your light is emitted on that wider
problem that you are facing, which you think Spirit; your responsibility to Sahaja Yoga3B
should be solved by Me. These are all my your responsibility to understand Me better
headaches which you are putling on your-
self. You have to do only one thing, is to
become the Spirit. That's all. It is simple you; your responsibility to understand how
thing-rest of it is My headache.
Your responsibility to yourself to be the
and better and better; your responsibility to
understand this mechanism that is within
this mechanism works out and behaves.
Responsibility is to how to become a Guru
Now, the problem that should take your yourself. Your responsibility to be a digni-
desire on to the collective, should be very fied and glorified personality. Responsibi-
different.
To substantiate your purity, to lity to be respectable personality and not a
be fragrant with your purity, your attention cheap personality. Everyone of you is
should be on the other side. Now you are worth the whole universe, if you want to
not facing Me, you are facing with Me the rise to that height. Universes of universes
whole werld. See, the whole attitude will
change. The attitude should be: what can
I give ? How can I give ? What is my is within you to foster.
mistake in giving ? I have to be more alert,
where is my attention ? I have to be more
alert towards myself, what am I doing ? very low level cannot rise. For example, the
What is my responsibility ? You must Western Sahaja Yogis have certain problems
desire that you should be pure. You should of committing the sin against the Mother and
be pure desire that means you should be the Eastern Sahaja Yogis have the prob-
Spirit. But what is your responsibility to lems of committing sin against the Father.
yourself ? You should desire that your
responsibility to yourself should be mani- it. The attention is to be kept pure, In
fested should be complete.
can be thrown away at your feet, if you want
to rise to that height, to that magnitude that
Those people who still want to live on a
It is not difficult at all for you to get out of
Sahaja Yoga you know all the methods,
Nirmala Yoga
iww.
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-9.txt 
 how this altention one can keep it pure. this aura and enlighten the world. But your
If the attention is not pure, then this desire outlook should be how much have I contri.
will be always altacked by all petty, nonsen- buted to this ? AmI still thinking of other
sical things which has no meaning in your people ? AmI still thinking of petty smal
ascent Now, a person who is a good problems or I am thinking of my Spirit ?
Sahaja Yogi is not bothered about his
clothes, what others say to him, what others
Am 1 sil
So, the left side starts and ends with
Shri Ganesha has only
are talking to him, how they are behaving Shri Ganesha.
towards him. The attention is not on that basic one quality- that He is completely
criticism that this person is like this, that surrendered to His MOTHER. He does no
person is like that. Nor there is the aggres- know any other God. He does not even know
siveness of anyone else because nobody is His father. He only knows His MOTHER
the other. But the problem is, when I say and completely surrender to HER. But this
that, no one thinks that I am saying about pure desire has to have action and abou
you each person. Those who are aggres- which I will tell you later as we will be
sive take the role and those who are non- having more Pujas and more Pujas. Bul
aggressive think the other way. Like I say today let us establish ourselves into that
something for a person who is aggressive, pure desire to be the Spirit.
the non aggressive will immediately think
of the person who is aggressive not about
him. You immediately start shifting your
mind to other person, finding fault wilth other Shankaracharya wrote Vivek Chudamani and
Now, as it is the Western mind will say
how ? It always comes, how to do it ?
Should I tell you, it is very simple ! Ad
people. So, this desire becomes gradually
lower and lower and lower because of the
loads that are put on it.
so many other books and treatises and then
all these big intellectuals got alter hia life
and they said, have this and have that and
have it. He said, forget these people. Then
he wrote SAUNDARYA LAHIRI - just the
So, the alertness is very important, com-
plete alertness, SATARKTA (ia1), that we
should keep our attention purely for the description of his MOTHER and his devo-
Sustenance of our pure desire.
tion to Her. And every couplet that he
Desire
comes from your heart and you are so built wrote is a Mantra. It is not the surrender
that your BRAHMARANDHRA (a) is also of your mind through your mind but the
the heart. If you do not have a clean heart surrender of your heart. It is absolutely the
it won't keep clean. For the people who think surrender of your heart Western Sahaja
if they talk about Sahaja Yoga big and all Yogis know very well how there have been
attacks and attacks of negativity on them,
that, they are alright. But they are cheat-
Ing themselves, if the heart is not open, So specially when the horrible people like Freud
came to destroy their basics, the roots. And
how the West accepted it blindfolded and
I hope today when you do this Puja and put them on the path of hell. All that has
you do the worship of Mahakali and this to be brought out. That is all nonsense, is
special Yagna, we will definitely establish wrong absolutely and that is the anti-God
try to open your heart.
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-10.txt 
 a Sahaja Yogi. Not at all. Air India has
fight fully, say, 'this is the destruction of our nothing to do with Sahaja Yoga. All our
all our everything, they have
the source of everything that is sublime, nothing to do with Sahaja Yoga. So what ?
noble, all that is nourishing, all that is eleva- So, you be patriotic and use your own airline,
ting, emancipating, you are cutting us from for Heaven's sake. When you arrive here
our roots". You have been dealt with, I you will see that the people are too inno-
think, as animal-like creature and he wants cent. They cannot understand Freud. You
all of us to go down to that low level of cannot talk to them, it is beyond them. They
human beings, which exist as pathological are higher type of people in this respect,
cases, I don't know. So, it is important for because they ars not attacked, while you
you to understand all attacks that came on are higher in a way that though you are
you and be alert and don't be identified with attacked, you have come out ot it. You just
turn your faces and you are on the other
Then you will realise that you will
activity.
basics, our roots. When our MOTHER is Railways,
anyone of them.
side. That is something great.
Last, I would say, you have come to this
country to see the roots and not the shoots.
Change your attitude of Western style.
Telephones are no good, you cannot pet same way as you believe, in this big country
any telephones done. Postage is horrible.
Railways are worst, (I should not say be-
cause we are in Railway bunglow). But, the
people are excellent. They know what is
"Dharma', They are not being attacked
Somehow or the other as this baing the Gauri, you can say Ganesh, Gauri's day,
KUNDALINI, Shri Ganesha is sitting here foday, Though according to the schedule
How dare anybody attack this great Maha-
rashtra, has got eight Ganeshas protecting tevel, the desire to be pure and to be
them ? 1 don't know if Maharashtrians know
this fact. And so many Marutis, so who things that are within us
can attack this country. There is no nega-
So, you will also have a confidence that
there are many people who believe the
where there is big population to support.
So you should not feel lost.
Thus, today we.have to start with Puja
of Mahakali Tatwa. And this is the day of
time, it may not be but according to Me, let
us establish within ourselves at our subtler
cleansed of out all the barriers and unclean
tive attack except that they themselves are
rather money minded sort That only curse
they have. If they can get out of it, they are
a great people.
Desire to be great Sahaja Yogis. Desire
to be responsible Sahaja Yogis. Desire to
be surrendered to your Mother. It is not
difficult. That is the ego, the last one to go
because what you surrender ? I don't want
So, you have come to this country not to anything from you except that you accept
enjoy the comforts of the West, but that My Love, Surrender just means that you
comfort of the Spirit. So you change your open your heart to accept My Love, Give up
attitude towards India. I don't mean Air- this EGO, that's all and it will work out. I am
India, by any chance. This is a wrong idea trying to push Myself into your heart and I
that you come by Air-India because you are will definitely settle down there.
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Translation of Her Holiness Shri Mataji's
Old Marathi Letter-1
My dear Modi and other Sahaja Yogis,
Many blessings. Received your letter. I Bhawani, Twam Durga, Twam Ambika etc."
am very glad to know that your Ida Nadi has
become clean and I hope, Ida Nadis of all established in Sahaja Yoga, you will have
have become clean at least to some extent. to say 'Aham Bhavani'. However this Mantra
Here I had told all, that I would work, while can be said only when your purity becomes
under anaesthesia, to clean the Ida chan- one with that of "Aham Bhavani' and I tell
neis of all. E worked for 3 days cleaning it you now Itself that this will happen.
by vomitting nearly 50 times every day and
it Is nice that the cleaning has become
possible. This physical being has to be awakening Pingala Nadi. Sahaja Yogis had
Used for the mission for which it has been become rather lelhargic due to the condi-
taken and therefore am not bothered by tioning of Ida Channel. Laziness and a
the iliness and other troubles
are good for Ida Channel, but when you are
After cleaning the Ida Channel I am
tendency of avoiding the work was domina-
On the
contrary all such and different experiments ting in them. Their attention was being
with this incarnation will have to be perfor- fritlered away on avoiding the work. But I
Why are you so anxious about it ? have now started the work of awakening
Imed.
What else is the use of thiis body ? I never Pingala Channel. All of you should raise
have any pains. All I want is that, in the your right hand from right side over your
laboratory of this body, some work or the head and leave it on the left side but while
other must go on. Time is short while the doing it, you must apply your will power so
work to be done is very big.
that your desires will
awakening of collectivity, you will have
many people to share your work which you
materialize. With the
You cannot do the cleaning of Ida chan-
nel only on the strength of your realisation. are doing alone.
I knew that it had to be cleaned from within.
In ancient days all seekers had to do this
action (Kriya) constantly right from their heart. When conditioning of heart is reduc-
childhood at the residences of their gurus ed, as If the glass of a lamp becomes clean,
at isolated places. The seekers had to do rays of ever resplendant Spirit awaken
it individually in many lives. Because, now
you have attained the state of collectivity I spreads, which is felt in Sahasrar. This
have done it in collective consciousness. light enlightens all
Although you say I have done it, the distinc- heart and decorates it with the qualities
tion of you and I should not be there in which can be described as pleasing, bliss-
collective consciousness. Mantras "Twam
The sphere of Sahasrar envelops your
Sahasrar sheath and the light of bliss
light enlightens ll
sides of Colourful
(Continued on Page No. 39)
Nirmala Yoga
10.
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-12.txt 
 Translation of
HER HOLINESS SHRI MATAJI'S
OLD MARATHI LETTER-2
Thave received tetters from all of you but
have not been able to write because now fix. All your auto suggestions will materia-
in London Sahaja Yoga work has started lise. The remedy that is to be used is: your
with great drive.
You can altain any desti nation that you
atention should be on Me and you should
make the following conditioning of thoughts
on your Agnya "How fortunate we are to
Delhi Sahaia Yogis write very few letters
but most of them are happy. Sahaja yogis have been realized I We are Sahaja Yogis.
of Bombay are alright, Sahaja Yogis of Gad has chosen us. How can we work if
Rahuri are enjoying. Sahaja Yogis of Bom-
bay have great responsibility and therefore
had to face many attacks. The first attack We can do it and we will do it". On heart
came when I was in U.S.A. At that time
we remain weak ? Adi Shakti has given us
the Power to redeem the whole mankind.
many Sahaja Yogis were affected and many you should criticise with these thoughts
fell away. Later on when an attack was on
all London Sahaja Yogis collectively follow- given us the realization. He is the ocean
ed wrong path which was full of dangers
and harms. Many wicked people from that He is working hard day and night for our
part are, still hiding themselves in some welfare and, instead of praying for His for-
Sahaja Yogis in the form of 'badhas'. You giveness of our mistakes, we are making
have to vigorously use Sahala Yoga methods complaints against Him and blaming Him"!
against them. These wickeds attack you The following thoughts will please your
from Agnya and Heart. From Agnya they Hearts, O God, please give us the power of
send Anti-Sahaja Yoga ideas in your mind Your love. May I be the drop in the ocean
and from Heart they make complaints. If of Your love that is enveloping the whole
you identify them they will become ineffec- universe, so that its loving pulsation is
tive. There is one remedy for it which can vibrated through my life and I remain engro-
be applied only after the realization. ssed In that bliss.
Because if your car does not start, your
brakes and accelerators are of no use, But
if you do not use the accelerator even after Divine love. Always loving you, much more
it starts, how will your car move ?
"How deep is God's love for us ! He has
of mercy. ignoring all our
mistakes,
May your life be flooded by the waves of
than myself.
Your Mother,
-NIRMALA
Nirmala Yoga
11
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-13.txt 
 TRANSLATION OF OLD MARATHI LETTER
FROM
HOLINESS SHRI MATAJI-3
MAN wants peace, weaith, power etc. but limited. Your attention is on material things
God is the origin of all these, Then why and you are talking about eternity ! You
should not there be the desire for God ? should merge in eternity so that you wil
Why should there be no aspiration and have eter nal life.
ambition to meet the God ? We should
pray to the God for peace and keep the
desire to meet the God who is peace itself, then why are you sulking ? All deities art
This should be the difference in satisfac- your elder brothers in this kingdom. They
tion of a common man and that of a Sahaja are present in many forms along the path
Yogi. Once should be ready to surrender of Kundalini. You should recognise then
the very desire to meet God at the God's and attain them. Kundalini is your Mother
holy feet. All attention must be on Him. Learn to always remain under Her care. B
For that, one must have dedication, deter- her child and she will take you to the ulti
mination and concentration (tapasvita) and mate-Once you accomplish that from wher
in that all material attachments should be everything is born you will have the rest ver
destroyed. What is there in this world to easily.
cling to ? You must realize the glory of
those feet in which all fades and becomes
You are the officials of God's kingdon
But you are not consistent in the prac
peaceful. Only then you will have your glory. tice of meditation, love and peaceful life
Bu
You are taking casually even to me
Why should one brag of one's achieve-
ments ? You must understand that what-
how eager you are in worldly matters ? Hov
you become adamant on having what yor
ever is being done by you, is all God's want ? Why are you not casual in tha
power, i.e. working of Adi-Shakti and you respect ? Do not run away from the realit
are only the witnesses to see these because I am Mahamaya. Attain me. I an
Attain me. 1an
For achieving that stage you yours. lam for you. I have given you thae
miracles
should pray "May our T consciousness
fade away, may the truth that all of us are
small parts of your being be assimilated
within us, o that your Divine bliss would
resonate every particle of our bodies and
this life would be filled with beautiful melo-
dies enchanting the whole mankind and
would show - light to the whole world." birth.
Let love flow from your hearts, Love is un- that: find the meaning of SWA (Self
which has been beyond the reach of ver
great sages and saints, How will you maki
use of it ? You have been given a big assel
Thousands of stars and planets were creat
ed with it's just one wave.
There is great significance to your re
But you yourself have to achievi
Nirmala Yog
12
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Sahaja Yogis can do it. It is a big contri- you have been selected as officials. If you
vance. I have tald you the secret but what ignore it, on the one hand you will be dep-
have you achieved ? Nobody sulks having rived of the great source of joy and on the
been benefted. You are unhappy means other, you will lose your authority due to in-
you have not been benefited. If you achieve complete knowledge of Sahaja Yoga, Hence
the trick, you will open the gate of joy and be wise and stand firm. Every moment
forget yourself while enjoying that bliss.
has thousands of directions. Let your rays
Nobody becomes happy from wordly spread in different directions, You will
matters. I have given you the key to the welfare, to the whole world.
treasure, which others haven't got But you inaction to act. You are to captains. Let
must work to open the door. You have God's melodies be sounded from your
taken everything casually. You want Mataji flutes.
to feed you, to wake you up in the morning
and make you sit in the meditation, to clear
you of your anger hatred etc.
Get over your
Transcend in your feelings above those
who have not been realised and blessed and
God's kingdom will be yours. May you get
Today is the day of Guru Puja. What that auspiciousness. All my efforts are for
*Guru Dakshina' (Gitt to the Guru) have you that You have been made like temples.
given me ? Understand, that your money Keep it clean.
is not worth the dust on the feet your
Mother - Guru. You should give your hearts3;
Some of you are enjoying in the ocean
only clean and holy hearts. You must clean of bliss. My blessings are that all of you
your physical beings. Do not be lazy in should be happy. Your wordly life and
that Take a vow. You must get up early satisfaction should be of the same level.
in the morning and spend at least one hour Sahaja Yogi's satisfaction and the circums-
in meditation and worshipine, perform tances he is in are balanced. Our both legs
grow together. If one leg is shorter than
the other, you will become lame. I do not
want to tell you to lower the level of your
circumstances if contentment is less. But
'Arti' and meditation in the evening,
Satan's desciples work hard at a funeral
place. I cannot understand why you are
taking everything so casually.
gossiping. Leave jealousies and quar- Sahaja Yogi's satisfaction does not depend
rels. Time never waits for anyone. Do you
want to go empti-handed despite having the
key to the treasure ?
Stop all
on tbe circumstances. He is happy in the
circumstances that are prevailing. If he is
not, then his satisfaction is superficial and
not from within. May God grant you eter-
If you do not accept God's kingdom neral place at His feet.
Satan's kingdom will come and you will have
yourself to blame for it. Remember, be-
cause you Sahaja Yogis ate dear people,
Yours Mother
-NIRMALA
13
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-15.txt 
 Sakshat Prematatwa Sakshat Prema- Dayini Sakshat Prema-Shakti
Sakshat Adishakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Namo Namah
It is truly the greatest divine blessing that now in Sahaja Yoga each one of us' has
been granted our reality and most important our Dearest Loving Mataji. Our dearest
Mother loves us so much; and how She takes care of us at every instant ! Her compas-
sion and love are so great. She is verily the source from where all LOVE originates
and flows.
In this blissful ocean of Love we all are playing, jumping with joy, dancing with each
other in harmony, singing together-which, in turn, leads to ever more vibrations and joy.
To be amongst Sahaja Yogis and share this love is always wonderful. The divine love
flowing among Sahaja brothers and sisters is verily the hand that plays the harp of
divine music. Where there is love, no negativity dare stay, no 'badhas', no problems.
This, Shri Mahamaya showed to us very clearly on the very first day of the shivir at
Lonavala (Dec. 82). One Sahaja Yogi was "caught up () and feeling not too well:
Others were working with him for some time with littie improvement. Suddenly the
Kundalini shot up and everything was all right, Heart and Sahasrara opened and the.
person started feeling quite nice and beautiful.
The reason for this tranofsrmation was very apparent. Just then a group of Sahajas
from Europe had arrived and met their brothers and sisters from India who were there-
and how beautiful such meetings are ! As they hugged each other they shrieked and
laughed with joy; love flowing from their hearts and happiness made their eyes shine
and smiles lighted their radiant faces. The Oneness was just overwhelming - and
Sakshat Prem-Dayini, Sakshat Sarwavyapini Shri Mataji showered more and more of
Her Love, vibrations on Her joyful children. As the children of Shri Prema-Swarupa,
met each other, with Her love flowing through each and elevating each, the place was
greatly blessed and in this supreme living atmosphere no negativity could dare stay.
There have been so many such instances when we realize that Shri Adi Shakti's 'Love'
is All Powerful and All Mighty, So secure are we cradled in Shri Jagadamba's 'arms'
of love that nothing whatsover need disturb or distract us.
She has readied for us, the stallions of courage and fearlessness. She has made us
the warriors to ride them. If we only just realize that it is Her' Sword of love that we
hold in our hand; it is 'Her' Shield of love that protects us; it is Her' Support of love
that guides and steadies us, then we have the confidence to be Her humble little
instruments.
Nirmala Yoga
14
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Let us ride out and proclaim the victory of Sahaja Yoga over all small, insignificant
mounds of negativity and ring aloud throughout the world the great mantra-
JAI SHRI MATAJI
As Shri William Blake has written:
Bring me my Bow of burning gold, Bring me my Arrows of Desire,
Bring me my Spear! O Cloud unfold ! Bring me my Chariot of Fire!
1 shall not cease from mental fight! Nor shall my soul sleep in my hand.
And to these melodious lines may one add:
Till we have built the Kingdom of God,
In this beautiful world Our Mother has made !
And to achieve this we can 'only' pray !
"Shri Mataji,
You are Shri Mahata Ahankara
Complete worlds are created from the tiniest speck
gathered from the dust of Your lotus-fet,
We, Your ignorant little children, bow at Your Feet
Mother, we pray, grant us that
May we be the channels of your breath, the flute in your hands
May we be the channels of Your love, the harp in Your hands
And May we ever remain in Sahaja Yoga,
Your dancing, prancing, joyful, playful children."
JAI SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
SAHAJA SMILE
Shri Mataji "You must remind me to re turn your money else
I will have to repay it in the next life".
*That's fine by me, Mother".
Kay
15
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Pluto. Scorpio is also the ruler of the
planet Mars, which is the planet of Shri
Ganesha. Mars is the little youth and war-
rior while Pluto is the effect and substrate
Ray Harris's reflections
on Pluto as inspired by
of war, or one can say that if Mars is Shri
Ganesha then Pluto is Shri Mahaganesha.
This is the same as Lord Jesus Christ and
as Christ returned as Shri Kalaki, with the
Shri Mataji's Words
LAST autumn, In Exeter, England, Shri elevenfold destroying powers of Christ Who
Mataji told us that Pluto is the planet of Shrl comes at the end of the age on a white
Kalaki, and is Her seat in the solar system horse.
in this incarnation. The astronomers dis-
covered Pluto in 1931, soon after Shri Adi
Shakti took Her birth on earth in this Her long been recognised as highly significant
greatest incarnation. Ironically, the planet in terms of world history Nostradamus
was actually discovered by a young farmboy assumed that 1999 would be the last year
who was an assistant to the astronomers before the new age. the Jewish calendar is
assigned to the task. As far as the astro- appreaching the number of 6000 years and
logers are concerned Pluto is associated William Blake talks about reawakening after
with death, rebirth, destruction and the six thousand years But how specific should
manifestation of the deep collective uncon- we be ? Astrologically we are in a unique
scious. The planet is still il understood
both in terms of its highly irregural orbit and just entering its own sign but at the same
Its effects on our collective psyche. The time ls entering the orbit of Neptune. Now
The present age in which we live has
position with Pluto : not only is the planet
other major planets circle the sun on the Neptune is the God of the ocean, and is
same plane but Pluto slices across them at
an angle, follows an oval path, and at times bolic of the three nadis or the three gunas
even enters the orbit of Neptune so itis no or three basic aspects of Shri Adi Kundalini
longer the furthest planet so fer discovered Shri Maha Laxshmi, Shri Maha Saraswati
in the sun's family.
depicted holding a trident- perhaps sym-
and Shri Maha Kali. Within us Neptune is
the Swadisthana, the outermost limit of the
Pluto came within the orbit of Neptue void or Bhavsagara, the ocean of tilusion
In 1979 and remains there until 1999. In and of material existence. Neptune is the
November 1983 Pluto also moves into the
sign of Scorpio, which in astrological terms totality of all that we experience and com-
is the sign of its rulership, where it is most prehend within the ocean of relative exis-
powerful. (Scorpio is the sign of the guru
and that of death and resurrection.) In
Indian Astrology Neptune is Varuna, the planet of change, of death, destruction and
God of the Waters and Pluto itself is the deep transformation, i.e. Shri Kalki has
God of the underwarld or of hidden unfatho-
mable depths. Astrology recognises the i,e. the orbit of Neptune at this time until
transforming power of Scorpio as fired by 1999. It is interesting that most seekers
tence, beyond which is unknown to sense
perception or the intellect. So Pluto, the
come within the field of human awareness,
Nitmala Yoga
16
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-18.txt 
 our work and the necessity for humanity to
have Pluto strongly aspected in their astro-
logical charts. The ocean of the void is get its collective enlightenment. if Pisces
Bhavsagara and Pluto is just for a short is uncertainty then Aquarius has to be cer-
while active within our awareness. But why tainty for the human race. There will not
is this so special ? Pluto has no doubt be much left to be uncertain about if Sahaja
been within the orbit of Neptune many Yoga does not take off and become esta-
times about every 250 years and has also blished soon.
been within the limits of its own sign Scor-
pio equally as often, about ance every 200-
250 years or so. Compute the two together position of Pluto-entering Neptune's orbit,
or the answer is about every 6000 years. entering its own sign of Scorpio and the
So the likelihood of both these events hap- earth entering the age of Aquarius, all at
pening simultaneously are exceedingly rare, the same time. Transformation will take
If we look back at history in the west for place with or without us.
example, we see that each time Pluto is in
Scorpio there is a time of laxity and hedo-
nism lollowed by a period of
and the rise of new religious ideas. The
American Revolution, the Renaissance and
the zenith of the Middle Ages are some
examples. Each time Pluto goes into its own
sign long lasting and dramatic changes
occur in the collective consciousness of
mankind.
This is all underlined by the present
MIRE
The temperature on the surface of Pluto
puritanism IS just about the coldest anywhere. It is
about 3 degrees above absolute zero and
only just above the ambient temperature of
the void of interspace between the stars
and galaxies. Coldness is the quality of the
Spirit. Pluto is composed largely of frozen
or solidified of Methane Even as far away
from the sun as Jupiter and Saturn this is
in a gaseous or liquid state and only solidi-
In addition lo all this we are now on the fies at just above absolute zero, the tempe-
cusp of a new world age, the Age of Aqua- rature of the Spirit. Methane is CH4, or 4
rius. It is rather complicated to explain Hydrogen atoms plus one carbon atom
this to a layman, but there are twelve ages, (tetravalent). It is the basic bullding block
like the twelve signs of the Zodiac, and the of organic compounds.. Carbon itselt is a
earth stays in each one for two thousand very hard black or occasionally diamond
years, The Age of Lord Jcsus was the age like substance. It cannot form life on its
own but becomes a support for further evo-
of Pisces and we are now at the end of
that, astrologically speaking. Pisces is the lution of life by its four-fold valency, hence
Maya-the epitome of the Age of Illusion it is like Shri Ganesh. Methane or CH4 as
whereas Aquarius is the Water Carrier- often as not is the end decay product of
the collective vessel of the waters of the organic dissolution. For example it is found
Spirit, the Kundalini l.e. the Sahaja Yogis. in very old oil resevoirs as natural Gas, or
Therefore the Sahaja Yogis must be the in ancient swamps and marsh gas.
instruments to allow Shri Mataji to carry
So
even here Pluto or Shri Kalaki has final dis-
solution and rebirth embodied in its chemi-
ili
mankind through to the new age and we
must realise the awesome magnitude of cal makeup.
17
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-19.txt 
 A 'day' on Pluto, or rather one revolution supported on Her head and of course Pluto.
of the planet on its axis is almost seven of In this incarnation She has Pluto as a vehi-
our days which is perhaps significant. It cle-Shri Kalaki-the power of final dis-
has also been recently discovered by obser- solution. We must therefore at this time
ving the further eccentricities of its orbit look towards our inner spiritual develop-
and shape that it has a moon. This has ment, that part which is beyond material
been given the name of Charon after the decay, and forget the outside concerns all
boatman who terries the souls across the the time. This is the moment when we are
river of death to the underworld in Greek taking a big jump in evolution, the jump is
moon was discovered certain but which way we go is up to us
round about 1979, i.e. - Pluto is also known for its connection with
vant to the transformation of human cons- Joint emotional and financial ventures in
clousness connected with the planet seem- conventional astrology, and it is interesting
ed to happen and also around about the that in December/January of 82/3 Pluto
time when Shri Mataji began teling us that approached to within of the Constella-
Shri Kalaki was starting to manifest. The lion of Scorpio, and the world currencies
moon is very large in relation to the size of such as the pound sterling, dropped drama-
mythology. This
when everylhing rele-
ticaly and unaccountably. One has only
to read some pages of Willlam Blake's
the planet itself and it is almost like a
double planet system. Charon is the white
horse of Kalaki, or the vehicle
Shri Kalaki "Jerusalem"or "Millon" to appreciate thatin
judges without mercy and Charon is like the The next few years any efforts of mankind
Which are not directed towards the spirit.
for example such things as concentrating
vehicle of Pluto just as Sahaja Yoga is the
vehicle of Shri Kalaki. It is a means to an
enormous amounts of effort on such things
as economics based on currencies, will
flounder dramatically as the manifestation
end and not an absolute. Only the Spirit
is absolute. The irregularities of Pluto's
orbit bring draslic changes to humanity and
of Kalaki urges man to put his attention on
we must surrender to the Spirit whafever higher values. Where will all that time
higher values. Where will all that time
wasted on business and money have led us,
changes must come about as a single race
of beings.
when the universe is marching on to ano-
Pluto only has an atmosphere some of ther level of expression, and man with it ?
the time when occasionally the faint sun- It will slowly become obvious to mankind
light vaporises the methane. This is when
the planet comes nearer to the sun in its through surrender to the Spirit and death of
eccentric orbit and when the moon is not the ego and superego of individuals, nations
in the way, and even then it is only on the and races will mankind survive. The blos-
side facing the sun. This is like the sym-
bol of the manifestation of Pluto's power Spiritual rebirth be very plentiful, for other-
by the all powerful sun which is the oppo-
site of Pluto's dark eternal cold Shri
Mataji has three main seats in the solar
system: Venus in Her heart, the moon is
as a whole that only by transformation
som time is coming, let the harvest of the
wise even a small shift in the equilibrium
on the material level of this planet could
cause great discomtart and suffering. This
(Continued on Page No. 23)
Nirmala Yoga
18
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-20.txt 
 We, the Children, are bowing to the
Immaculate Desire of God the Almighty.
THE 108 NAMES OF SHRI MAHAKALI
Om Twamewa Sakshat Shri
1. MAHAKALI
mThe seed energy of God's desire
. Wish-fulfilling cow
2. KAMADHENU
Whose form is desire
3. KAMASWARUPA
4. VARADA
Bestower of boons
5. JAGADANANDAKARINI
Cause of the total bliss of the Universe
6. JAGATJIVAMAYI
Total life-force of the Universe
7. VAJRAKANKALI
Transforms the human skull into a
thunderbolt
8. SHANTA
Peace
9. SUDHASINDHUNIVASINI
Dwelling in the cosmic ocean of nectar
10. NIDRA
Sleep
11. TAMASI
Generating and presiding over the
tamo guna
Pleasing eyeryone
12. NANDINI
13. SARVANANDASWARUPINI
Embodying universal joy
14. PARAMANANDARUPA
The highest form of divine bliss
15. STUTYA
The most fitted for all adoration and
worship
16. PADMALAYA
Residing in the purest lotus
The sacred immutable object of
adoration
17. SADAPUJYA
Universal wish-fulfilling divine energy
18. SARVAPRİYANKARI
The Auspiciousness of the Cosmos
19. SARVAMANGALA
Perfect, complete
20. PURNA
Ocean of joy
21. VILASINI
... Mother whose darshan seldom goes
unrewarded
22. AMOGHA
23. BHOGAWATI
... The supreme enjoyer of the Universe
Nirmala Yoga
19:
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Bestowing perfect happiness on Her
devotees
24. SUKHADA
Desireless
25. NISHKAMA
Killer of Madhu and Kaitaba
26. MADHUKAITABHAHANTRI
... Slayer of Mahishasura
27. MAHISHASURAGHATINI
Destroyer of Raktabija
28. RAKTABIJAVINASHINI
Destroyer of Narak
29. NARAKANTAKA
Fire, hailstorm and fury
30. UGRACHANDESHWARI
Cosmic wrath
31. KRODHINI
Radiance of fury
32. UGRAPRABHA
Killer of Chanda and Munda
33. CHAMUNDA
34. KHADGAPALINI
She rules by the sword
Whose fierce radiance destroys the
demonic forces
35. BHASWARASURI
The slayer of the enemies of the saints
36. SHATRUMARDINI
.. Mastering the science of wars and
battles
37. RANAPANDITA
Whose sparkling teeth are red with
blood
38. RAKTADANTIKA
Who is fond of blood
39. RAKTAPRİYA
Holding a skull in Her hand
40. KAPALINI
Confronting demonic hests and all sins
of the world
41. KURUKULAVIRODHINI
Dark bodied
42. KRISHNADEHA
Wearing a garland of human skulls
43. NARAMUNDALI
44. GALATRUDHIRABHOSHANA . Whose clothes are dripping with blood
... The spirit of the cosmic dance of
dissolution
45. PRAITANRITYAPARAYANA
With Her tongue coming out
46. LOLAJIVHA
Residual energy of the Holy Spirit
47. KUNDALINI
... The virgin serpent
48. NAGAKANYA
Devoted wife
49. PATIWRATA
Nirmala Yoga
20
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-22.txt 
 50. SHIVASANGI
... Eternal companion of Shri Shiva
51. VISANGI
Without any companion
52. BHUTAPATIPRIYA
Fond of the protector of the bhoots
i.e. Shiva
53. PRETABHUMIKRITALAYA
Dwelling in the land of bhoots and
ghosts
54. DAITYENDRAMATHINI
The victorious chief demon-slayer
Of the form and cooling radiance of
the moon
55. CHANDRASWARUPINI
56. PRASANNAPADMAVADANA .. Having a bright, smiling lotus-like face
The Divine Mother with smiling
57. SMERAVWAKTTRA
countenance
58. SULOCHANA
.. With such beautiful eyes
Having marvellous glittering teeth
59. SUDANTEE
60. SINDURARUNAMASTAKA
Who puts the red sindur on Her fore-
head
61. SUKAISHI
With magnificent long, dark hair
62. SMITAHASYA
Eternally smiling to Her devotees
63. МАНАТКUCHA
... Her heavy breasts give milk to the
whole Universe
Gifted with loving eloquence
64. PRIYABHASINI
65. SHUBHASHINI
Her speech is soft and sound
66. MUKTAKAISHI
Her dishevelled hair grants liberation
67. CHANDRAKOTISAMAPRABHA.. Shining with the lustre of a million
moons
Whose immeasurable beauty enchants
the Universe
68. AGADHARUPINI
Magnetic and fascinating so that She
wins the hearts
69. MANOHARA
*. Highest divine grace and charm to
please all
70. MANORAMA
Celestial charmer enticing all in Her
web of love
71. VASHYA
72. SARVASAUNDARYANILAYA
Home of all beauty
Nirmala Yoga
21
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-23.txt 
 Red is Her colour
73. RAKTA
74. SWAYAMBHUKUSUMAPRANA. She is the life force of the self-created
flowers
75. SWAYAMBHUKUSUMANMADA Intoxicated with the self-created
flowers (chakras)
76. SHUKRAPUJYA
Worshipped as the whiteness of purity
Surrounded by a halo of purity and
whiteness
77. SHUKRASTHA
Soul of purity and sacredness
78. SHUKRATMIKA
79. SHUKRANINDAKANASHINI
Committed to destroying the foes of
holiness
80. NISHUMBHASUMBHA-
SANHARTRI
Slayer of Shumba and Nishumba
81. VANHIMANDALA-
MADHYASTA
Sitting at the centre of the blazing
cosmic fire
82. VIRAJANANI
Mother of the brave
83. TRIPURAMALINI
Wearing as a trophy the head of the
demon Tripura
84. KARALI
Presiding over cosmic dissolution
85. PASHINI
Holding the noose of death
86. GHORARUPA
Terrifying form
87. GHORADANSHTRA
Having fierce jaws
88. CHANDI
in Her
Destroys evil tendencies
disciples
89. SUMATI
Mother of the purest wisdom
90. PUNYADA
Showering virtues
91. TAPASWINI
Ascetic
92. KSHAMA
Forgiveness
93. TARANGINI
Bubbling with life and energy
94. SHUDDHA
Saintly chastity
95. SARVAISHWARI
Mistress of the Cosmos
96. GARISHTHA
Manifesting Her joy at the sight of
Her disciples
22
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-24.txt 
 **. Royal and victorious
Wish-fulling Gem
97. JAYASHALINI
98. CHINTAMANI
He Enjoyer of non-duality
99. ADVAITABHOGINI
100. YOGESHWARI
Detached
. Fulfilled intensity of all pleasures, joy,
bliss
101. BHOGADARINI
Fulfilled by the pure love of Her
disciples
102. BHAKTABHAWITA
103. SADHAKANANDASANTOSHA. Fulfilled by the joy of Her disciples
Cherishing those who worship Her
104. BHAKTAVATSALA
... Source of the eternal joy of Her
disciples
105. BHAKTANANDAMAYI
Bringing the desires of Her disciples
to fruition
106. BHAKTASHANKARI
107. BHAKTISAMYUKTA
Bestower of devotion
Pure
108. NISHKALANKA
JAI JAI JAI MATAJI
RAY HARRIS'S REFLECTIONS
(Continued from Page No. 18)
is not scaremongering, but we must take to cure is to bow to the Lotus feet of Shri
Sahaja Yoga and establish ourselves as Mataji and allow Her to transform us
instruments for this next most dramatic through the vehicle of Sahaja Yoga, Shri
stage of human development as directed by Mataji has asked us to pray for Her health
Shri Mataji. In Delhi this year Shri Mataji at this time, March 83, and Her body
said in one lecture that Pluto can be both reflects the collective health of the Sahaja
the cause and cure of many diseases found Yogis. Therefore it is vital that we allow
in today's world. Let us pray that we may the transforming power of Pluto to cure us
surrender to the power of Pluto in a fashion individually and collectively, so that our be-
that may allow for the cure to take place, loved Mother does not have to suffer for us
not only of diseases on the individual level, in Her boundless love.
but that mankind as a whole may discover Koran, for the man who has eyes to see and
the simple cure for the collective diseases ears to hear, the evidence of God and his
which cause the entire race of men to suffer works and plans are everywhere.
and be allenated from one another. The
As is written in the
Nirmala Yoga
23
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-25.txt 
 The Holy Mother Nirmala Devi Srivastava & K. P.
by Shri T. Y. CHAUDHARI
THE horoscope discussed in this article
pertains to Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala
Devi Srivastava, who, to Her innumerable
Sahajyogi devotees spread all over the five
continents, is an incarnation.
Sun
Venus
Mars
Mars
Saturn
VI
Venus
Jupiter
VII
Mercury
Mercury
Mercury
Mars
Kethu
Saturn
Sun
VII
Saturn
Mars
IX
Jupiter
Jupiter
Her Holiness Mataji is reported to have
Mars
Ketu
X1
been born at 12 noon on Wednesday, the 21st
March 1923, at Chhindwara (Lat. 23 3 North
and Long. 78.59' East). The following is the
horoscope prepared in accordance with the
principles of Krishnamurti Padhdhati : Aya-
Mars
Venus
Sun
Venus
XII
Censtellation
Lord
Sub-Lord
Plansts
Mercury
Sun
Saturn
namsa used 22°.41' (K.P.)
Mars
Venus
Moan
Rahu
Venus
Mars
Mars 19 28
Moon
17° 25
XI 5' 05°
Jupiter
Mercury Jupiter
Sun 6 57
X 03
Lagna
11 46
XII 9° 48
Jupiter
Jupiter
Ketu
Rahu
Venus
Mars
Rahu
Saturn
Mars
Ketu 27 27
Herschel
21 48
Merc 20 23
IX 1 13
|| 5" 34
Nep. 23 3
For. 25 15
Sun
Rahu
Moon
Venus
Jupiter
Ketu
Balance of Venus Dasa:
13y 10m
- 15 days
In the case of a divine personality the
spiritual aspect of the horoscope has to be
ordinarily considered from an examination
of the Lagna, and the 5th. 9ih, 10th, 11th,
and 12th houses. The planets to be studied
are Sun, the Almakaraka, Moon, the Mana-
karaka, Jupiter and Ketu indicating spiritual
knowledge and Saturn for tapasya. In
Krishnamurti Paddhati, spiritual realisation
is Inicated if the sub-lord of the cusp of the
11th house signi fies houses 5 (initiation),
1 1 13
Venus24 33'
VIII 5 34
Rahu
27 27
IV 1 03'
V 5 05
Jup. 25 52 Sat 25 23
VI 9 48
VII 11 46
Cuspal Position:
pioy qne
10 (sadhana) and 11 (siddhi).
Sub Lord
Constellation
Lord
Lord
House
Saturn
Rahu
Ascendant Mercury
Mercury
Venus powerfully aspected by Saturn by his 10th
Rahu aspect and Jupiter by his 9th aspect. Mer-
The Lagna in the above horoscope is
Satrun
Moon
%3D
Ketu
Sun
II
Sun
Mercury
IV
Nirmala Yoga
24
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-26.txt 
 cury, the lord o! Lagna, is powerfully aspec- in acquarius and this sign Is symbolised
ted by Jupiter. Saturn as sub-lord of lagna with one pouring water from a vessel. This
and lord of 9th by his aspect on Lagna con- and the airy sign occupied by Lagna, Jupi-
fers the faculty of perfect concentration and ter, Mercury and Ketu explain, the cool
meditation and makes the personality fit for breeze (Chaitanya Lahari) that always ema
divine action. Saturn is in the star of Mars, nate from the Holy Mother or Her photo-
ford of Aries, and in the sub of Rahu, graph. The divine energy or cool vibrations
representing Sun in the 10th. This assures endlessly flowing from the Holy mother or Her
success in meditation and awakening of the photograph results in creating thoughtess
soul. Jupiter as lord of 10th is posited in awareness in the devotees.
his own star, in the 5th house of intelligence
and love and is in the sub of Ketu (indica-
ting spiritual knowledge) in the 9th house. in 3rd house in the Uttara star ruled by Sun.
This shows the expansive divine love, the the Atmakaraka, occupant of 10th house
Holy Mother radiates as also peace, harmony and is aspected by Mercury lord o Lagna
and divine wisdom, as an attribute of spiri- from the 9th house. Rahu is in the sub of
fual knowledge. The aspect of strong Jupi- Moon in the 11th house. The sub-lord
ter lord of 10 from an airy sign, on the Moon is conjoined with Mars, lord of 11th
intellectual planet Mercury, ford and sub- and both Moon and Mars are powerfully
lord of Lagna and also on Lagna and the aspecied by Jupiter. Rahu is thus connec-
Moon, clearly indicates true wisdom beyond ted with the 5th, 10th and 11th houses, all
mere human intellect, and intuition of a very beneficial houses indicating spiritual realil-
high order. The Holy Mother is indeed sation. Rahu is also connected with the
knowledge beyond human comprehension, planets Mercury, Sun and Moon represen-
knowledge of the infinite, of divine incarna- ting intellect, soul and mind. Rahu there-
Rahu, the star lord of Lagna, Is posited
fore, promises honour, status and success
As a spiritual leader and as a Teacher of
tions and of the Kundalini.
The Ascendant falls in Gemini owned of malters spiritual. Rahu represents the
by Mercury, that is to say, in the star of Kundalini or the serpent power in the
Rahu and in the sub of Saturn. The sub- human body. Rahu is the female and that
lord Saturn as lord of 9 is posited in a is why Kundalini is referred to as the She
friendly sign Virgo in the Star of Mars, lord Serpent (See Hatha-Yoga Pradeepika and
of 11 is aspecting lagna powerfully. Mer- Shiv Samhita). Kundalini which is absolute
cury and Saturn have got parivarthana by divine knowledge is, therefore. the source
sign position. The aspect is indicative of a of spiritüal enlightenment. It may be inci-
life dedicated to tapasya, dharma and to dentally pointed out that in every non-rea-
matters of spiritual nature, Mercury stands lised person, Kundalini lies in a dormant
for electrical energy and from the point of state coiled up, in the triangular bone, at
vibrations represents vayu or locomotion the base of the spine and is the residuary
and its symbol is wings
Mercury is in the divine power in every human being. It is
star and sub of Jupiter, the lord of divine the store house of absolute divine know-
knowledge and dharma himself. Mercury is ledge and arises and manifests to perform
Nirmala Yoga
25
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-27.txt 
 its funotions at the will of Bhagwati; but ed above and is a great benefic and the chief
only at the appropriate time, according to source of spiritual transformation. Venus,
the Karma of the individual. This has been the sign-lord is posited in Rahu sub in the
8th house and is stronger benefic to give
effect of the Kundalini power. Jupiter is
- posited in Sth house, In his own star, ll
verified through K.P. in several cases.
The cusp of the 2nd house, which indi-
cates among other matters voice and this shows the meritorious deeds done in
speech, is jointly ruled by Moon as sign- previous lives and abundance of poorva
lord, Saturn as the star lord and Mercury punya. Jupiter, Venus and Rahu show that
as sub-lord The sub-lord Mercury discus- in view of the poorva punya the Holy
sed above, stands for higher mind and Mother chose to take Her birth as a highly
heart and indicates that the soft and melo- spiritual and enlightened personality, with al
dious voice and the gospel truth the Holy the knowledge and powers that the Mother
Mother teaches, comes directly from the Kundalini conters, according to the sacrec
Universal Mind itself. Venus by its aspect texts.
on the 2nd house makes the speech sweet
and genial. Marn aspecting the 2nd makes
the speech forceful and vests it with dlvine as a sign-lord, Mars as star-lord and Mer-
authorily. It is only when she refers to the cury as sub-lord. This Mercury has beer
damage done by the fake Gurus, or tantriks discussed above. This explains the righte
that Her volce assumes a harsh tone. In ous conduct and divine purity of thought
this respect she says that "these fake word and deed, of the Holy Mother. Venus
Gurus spoil the Kundalini of innocent peo- in the 8th indicates vegetable kingdom and
ple and rob them of their divine right to be it is but appropriate that the only offering:
spiritually liberated". Venus in Rahu sub to the Holy Mother consist of the choices
in the 8th house (which is the seat of Kun- of flowers Venus as the lord of the 12th
dalini) aspecting the 2nd house shows that house and lord of 5th occupies the 8th
Her mere look is a blessing of the Kunda- house, the seat of Kundalini and indicate:
lini power itself. It also explains why in the that the Holy Mother is a purified persona
glow of Her eyes and the caress of Her lity and is no longer subject to the cycle o
voice, motherhood vibrates in the fulliness births and deaths.
of divine love, tenderness and sweetness,
It seems that Goddess Parvall, the Sup.
reme Mother of the Universe, represented Jupiter as sign and star-lord and Mars a
by the sign cancer, is Herself showering the sub-lord. The 10th house is occuple
grace after grace on the people.
The 9th house is jointly ruled by Saturr
The 10th cusp is jointly ruled b
by the Sun. Rahu alone is in the star o
Sun Mercury, Jupiter and Ketu are il
The 5th house indicates poorva punya Jupiter's stars, Mercury, Ketu, Jupiter an
and spiritual transformation on initiation Rahu are therefore, strong significators o
etc. It is jointly ruled by Venus as sign-lord the 10th house. The Yoga, the Holy Mothe
and Mars as the star-lord and Venus as teaches, is the Kundalini Yoga, indicated b
sub lord-Mars and Sun have been discuss- Rahu in the 3rd house, being 9th to th
26
Nirmala Yog
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-28.txt 
 seekers. In the other Yogas, cleansing discussed above, is another strong sign l-
of the body and mind is a pre-requisite. In ficator of houses 5 and 10. Mercury in Jupi-
Sahaja Yoga, self-realisation is first and ter star and sub is however stronger. Mer-
cleansing automatically follows.
due to Mercury's position, Mataji gives self- there is no planet in their stars. It was on
realization to hundreds of people at one the 5th May 1970 during the dasa of Rahu,
This is cury and Kethu occupy the 9th house, and
This is done by activating bhukti of Mercury, anthara of Saturn that
and same time.
the Kundalini in the individual. It seems the Holy Mother discovered her amazing
as if the Kundalini arises in Her presence powers about her mastery over the myste-
as a mark of respect to the Holy Mother In rious Kundalini. On that day, Rahu was
case of a person, who has lived a virtuous transiting in aquarious in his own star and
life, self-realisation is conterred by the in the sub of Venus. Mercury, Kothu and
Holy Mother in a matter of minutes: The
process is extremely simple and effortless. Saturn in Venus star, Rahu sub, over the
As proof of self-realisation, one notices natal Mars in the 11th house.
cool vibrations flowing through the fingers includes the power to cure diseases like
and palms and thoughtless awareness cancer, paralysis etc. which defy modern
manifests immediately. The flow of vibra- allopathic medicines. This is indicated by
tions deepens with the entry of the Kunda- Rahu, in the sub of Moon in the 11ih house.
lini in the limbic region and with practice, The disciples also have the power to invoke
the devotee is blessed with deep contem- the Kundalini to arise and many of them
plative sensitivity and doubtless awareness. are at present busy throughout the five
Mataji says that "when the Kundalini gets continents granting self-realisation to hun-
connected with the Universal Unconscious, dreds of persons and alleviating human
you can have direct communication with sufferings. In fact the position and asso-
Reality, totally purifying and entightening the ciation of Rahu, Mercury, Jupiter, Saturn
mind". She teaches you also the ways and Venus have conferred on the Holy Mother
means of healing the body and mind inclu- all the gifts of the Spirit, the gifts of tea-
ding the causes of the various afflictions ching, healing, mercy and all other atitribu-
and the particular chakra on the Sushumna tes of divinity through the Kundalini power
Nadi, that needs attention for remedying the
particular affliction. No spiritual teacher,
it seems, Is known to have done such a
Moon were transiting in Venus star and
The siddhi
To the traditional astrology, the above
horoscope would reveal the aristocratic
surroundings at birth, pleasant childhood,
marriage with a very high executive, happy
miracle on so vast scale.
ith
The 11th house confers siddhi. The married life and a command over wealth,
sub-lords of the cusps of the 5th, 9th, 10th together with the comforts that wealth ordi-
and 11th houses show siddhi following ini- narily confers. It is only Krishnamurti Padh-
tiation. As stated before, Rahu signifying dhati that correctly reveals the immense
the Kundalini is connected with Lagna and spiritual siddhi of the Holy Mother, her
houses 5, 10, 11 and 12. Saturn and Venus mastery over the Kundalini power, and the
in Rahu sub are equally strong Jupiter as royal ascetic life she lives. May Krishna-
27
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-29.txt 
 murti Padhdhali, by the grace of the Holy April 1947, a Monday and a Swathi star day
Mother, illuminate the minds of students of Jupiter confers divine love and understan
astrology.
ding in conjugal matters and this has bee
evidence ever since the date of marriage
According to Krishnamurti Padhdhati, one Venus In 8th makes her a sumangali. Mata
becomes a Sanyasin if, the sub-lord of the
cusp of Lagna is in any manner connected
with Saturn and the 10th and 12th houses.
Saturn, the sub-lord of Lagna, is in the star
of Mars and sub of Rahu, representing 10th Sahaja Yoga ever since 1970, when Rah
and 11th house. But Jupiter is also lord of dasa, Mercury bhukti was operating. On th
7th and aspected by Moon lord of 2nd 25th January 1972 during Rahu dasa, Venu
house. Mercury occupies the 9th house in
conjunction with Kethu, an agent of Saturn. siting in Moon star Rahu sub and Venus wa
This connection with Saturn and 10th house transiting in Rahu star Venus sub) the Ho
indicates Parlok Sadhana and an aversion Mother selected twelve disciples and gra
for worldly pleasures, while leading a nor- ted them selt-realisation. The bhukti
mal family life. Mataji is not a Sanyasin Venus and Mars which followed witnessi
in the sense the term is ordinarily under- a steady increase in the number of persoi
is a very devoted wite, mother and gran
mother par excellence.
The Holy Mother has been preachin
n bhukti and anthara, (when Rahu was trai
She does not advise sanyas or getting sell-realisation and the establis
stood.
wearing of saffron robes for spiritual disci- ment of centres for Sahaja Yoga. Jupit
pline. As a Mother, she encourages her Maha dasa started on the 6th Feb 1978 a
disciples to enter into a disciplined married will last till the 5th February 1994. By natu
Jupiter stands for expansion. Consequen
during Jupiter bhukti, Sahaja Yoga spre
life.
Houses 2, 7 and 11 are considered for with great speed to several countries. T
marriage, family life etc. Houses 2 and 7 bhukti of Saturn runs during 24th Mar
are not occupied by any planet. Moon lord 1980 to 5th October 1982.
of 2 in 11 in the star of Venus and sub of
Mars lord of 11 is very auspicious for a
happy family life. Jupiter, lord of 7th, posi- being in Mars star, Rahu sub, its bhu
ted in the 5th in his own star aspected by saw thousands of taithful seekers geti
Moon, lord of 2nd, and Mars, lord of 11, pro- initiated into Sahaja Yoga. The bhukti
mises a very happy married life with chil- Mercury runs during 6th October 1982 a
dren. The 7th house is jointly ruled by 12th January 1985 and that of Kethu the
Jupiter as sign-lord, Kethu as star lord and after upto 18th December 1985, Mercur
Mercury as sub lord. Kethu is in the star posited in Jupiter star and sub; and Kel
of Jupiter, lord of 7th house in the 5th is in Jupiter star and Venus sub, It
house. Mercury is in the star of Jupiter during these periods, that there would
and Rahu is in the sub of Moon. This ex- further expansion of Sahaja Yoga on a v
plains why Moon dasa, Jupiter
Rahu anthara gave marriage on the 7th
Saturn, although restrictive by natu
bhukti. huge scale.
Nirmala Y
28
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-30.txt 
 Shri Mataji's Australian Tour, 1983
On Thursday 17th March, 1983 in the
Early in the tour our Beloved Mother
Maccabean Hall, Sydney, Dr. Warren decided to visit only four cities, each of
Reeves introduced the second last program them a State capital. There were two pub-
lic meetings in each of the smaller cities,
Perth and Adelaide, three in Melbourne and
of Our Holy Mother's Australian tour.
A journalist and a photographer from a
major newspaper were present as Dr.
Warren gave an introduction totally diffe-
rent from any used before. As he spoke of Adelalde, a city where negativity had often
the previous incarnations of the Adi Shakti, stifled the efforts of the resident Sahaja
of Her manifestations as the Holy Mother of Yogis to expand. Shri Mataji's first pro-
Christ, as Fatima, and all the other great gram was on Saturday, March 5. Austra-
Incarnations that have come, a thrill went lians who had toured India with Mother had
through every Sahaja Yogi gathered in Shri arrived back to find an unexpected national
Mataji's presence. We all knew we were election day coinciding with the first Ade-
sharing a momentous occasion.
four in Sydney.
The most spectacular success was in
laide program. Naturally the media was
At the end of his introduction Dr. War- attractive to them than spiritual matters,
ren declared to the world that Her Holiness but nevertheiess a very thorough postering
is the incarnation of the Holy Ghost, the of the city with a beautiful full colour pos-
Adi Shakti that has come again and again ter, a small article in the press the Monday
when Her Prensence was needed.
before announcing Shri Mataji's visit, and
When Shri Mataji rose to speak a fow several well placed advertisements let the
moments later absolute silence relgned. In seekers know Our Mother was coming. And
a very quiet voice She said simply, "It is despite all the difficulties they came to Her.
true," and a new age had begun.
The first meeting on election night was
darshan well attended, but the Monday night meet-
Mother had told of Her decision to speak ing following television and radio appea-
openly to the world on this but left the time rances that morning was a stunning suc-
"Perhaps tomorrow night," cess. The seats were full, the floor at the
front crowded and people standing round
Earlier that
morning
at
a mystery.
She said.
the sides and back of the hall. After the
It was a fitling climax to the public sec-
tion of a triumphant tour. From the first feet, something that would normally not
day in Perth on March 2, a steady stream
of seekers had come. So had the press, demonstration of the defeat of the negativity.
radio and television people opening the way
for Mother to speak directly to millions of
meeling many of them came to Mother's
occur in Australia.
It was a very beautiful
On the Sunday morning Mother had held
a workshop in a park on the banks of the
Australians.
Nirmala Yoga
29
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-31.txt 
 River Torrens which a large number atten- conference. Some were cynical, some pro-
ded, and on the Monday morning the Sahaja fessional, and some had already recognised
the very special Being who was coming.
Yogis of Adelaide were blessed with a
superb new ashram, large, well situated The press conference concluded with a
television interview which was broadcast
and handsome. In just three days our
Beloved Molher transformed this difficult that eyening in the main news bulletin, the
most highly rated program in Australian
Over a million people saw
city.
Perth had been a beautiful but quieter Mother as She actually gave realisation
opening to the tour. Most of the newspaper over this powerful medium, and in the days
end radio coverage didn't reach the public that followed many came to the programs
until after the two programs in Perth Town as the result of the experience they had felt.
Hall. Even so the seekers came, the hard- Following the broadcast the phones at the
working Perth Sahaja Yogis had also thoro- T.V. station rang continually as people
ughly postered the city and suburbs. This called to find out more. The same expe-
plus several newspaper ads let them know
where Mother would be. The Divine Mother Mother appeared on an evening radio pro-
held a puja shortly after arrival and the next gram. Again the phones rang and rang.
few days showed the obstacles had truly
been removed. Many new people are set-
tling into their realisation and regularly manifested in the form of miracles. One
attending the Perth ashram, These two small girl watching the television had been
new centres, never visited before by our born with a stiff wrist and all medical at-
Beloved Mother are now very solidly esta-
blished and growing thanks to Her Grace.
rience was repeated the following day when
As usual the power of the Adi Shakt
tempts to correct it had falled.
watching the television she felt the co
breeze in her hands and suddenly the wrist
was freed as the Divine Grace flowed over
Sitting
As Shri Mataji left the western States to
travel eastwards, fierce bushfires were rag-
ning across much of south-eastern Austra-
lia. Following four years of drought the
country was very dry with no water to fight
her.
The Divine Grace also flowed over Mel
bourne in a special way. A critical water
t problem had existed there for years. One
But as Mother travelled east the morning Mother decided to have a puja to
soothing rain came with Her, a very special the sea Everyone in the ashram journeyec
fires.
blessing on this land of Lord Ganesha. It
some distance to the shore where Mother
has continued after Her departure, a sign presided over a simple beautiful ceremon)
of the great changes Our Mother has during which She constructed a Shr
wrought.
Ganesha on the sand, Afterwards Mother
told the assembled Sahaja Yogis that Mel
Melbourne, March 8, and as the Divine bourne's water problem was permanentl)
Mother flew in from Adelaide members of
the press and television were gathering at
Melbourne's Windsor Hotel for a press
solved.
Not only the Sahaja Yogis associated
Nirmala Yoga
30
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-32.txt 
 Mother's visit with the rain, but at the press She had been part of their. tives for a year
conference one lady from a T.V. station or more. Once again this puja to Lord
quietly asked several Sahajas if rain would Ganesh and the Adi Shakti cleared the
come. On the drive from the airport Mother obstacles away, though for a short while
had said to those in the car, "Now I've next morning for some of us the Maya was
come it will have to rain." This was told in full play.
to the T.V. lady and as the press confe-
rence broke up several Sahajas were car-
rying equipment out to cars.
lady stepped out onto the pavement the on a major radio program called City Extra
first drops of rain fell on her. She stop- on the A.B.C., the ational broadcasting
ped, looked up, then smiled her acknow-
Mother's first engagement on the mor-
As the T.V. ning of Tuesday, the 15th was as a guest
network. As elsewhere the rain had fol-
ledgement as she walked away. The rain lowed the Holy Mother and as the car head-
developed into the first steady rain seen In
Melbourne far a long time.
ed into the city in the morning peak hour
traffic there was chaos No matter what
alternative route was tried the traffic was
But more was to come for Melbourne: snarled. It soon became obvious to those
several successful radio broadcasts, and in the car that Mother would arrive at the
gradually increasing numbers at the public studio after the time arranged for Her
programs. This culminated on Sunday, the appearance.
13th with a workshop in the spacious
grounds of the new Melbourne ashram. The Herself reassured them that all would be fine
gardens were crowded with visitors who as She put it into bandhan, Arriving at the
had come to learn more about their realisa- studio 15 minutes late it was found another
tion. They were blessed with a special guest scheduled to appear after Our Mother,
lunch cooked by Mother Herself. It had had arrived early and was already on air.
been a joyous week for everyone.
The other four in the car
were perurbed to various degrees, Mother
This proved to be an American manage-
ment consultant who taiked glibly and shal-
Mother's arrival at Sydney Airport start- lowly about stress relief and management
led many people. Although it was a late It proved to be a perfect prelude as the
night flight a large group of Sahaja Yogis interviewer with immense respect introduc-
were waiting when our Beloved Mother arri-
ved almost two years after Her last visit.
Many celebrities on the plane were puzzled
as they were ignored in the joyous crowd
surrounding Shri Mataji.
ed Mother and revealed the shallowness of
what had gone before.
What followed was a magical twenty
minules The depth, warmth, compassion
The following evening Mother held a and wisdom that flowed enriched everyone
puja, as she had on arrival in each of the who heard it. After the broadcast even the
cities. The marvellous vibrations that normally blase station staff for whom cele-
flowed that evening were a special benefit brities were an everyday occurrence came
to many established Sahaja Yogis who were to pay their respects. On the way home
meeling Mother for the first time, though Mother gently pointed out how the Divine
Nirmala Yoga
31
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-33.txt 
 works this out. It was a lesson not to be Birthday. Sahaja Yogis came from all over
forgotten.
Australia to share it with Her and no words
can describe the beauty and depth of the
puja that day. It will forever stay in the
memories of all who were privileged to at-
tend. As the puja finished heavy rain pour-
ed down and with a beautiful smile Mother
Again in Sydney an interview with Shri
Mataji appeared on the main evening news
bulletin to over a million viewers and ano-
ther television channel interviewed Mother
in depth and aiso filmed part of the second
Sydney public program.
looked out at it and said, "All nature is
washing my feet." To us it seemed like all
Early in the tour Mother had expressed Creation.
Her thoughts that televislon was the best
medium, and so it proved.
That night to celebrate, one of the few
sitar players in Australia arrived to play for
Each night brought bigger crowds, and Mother. The ashram became a totally rela-
the Sunday workshop, though held in pou- xed, warm home though there were 80 peo-
ring rain stretched the ashram limils as two ple present, and when Mother joined us
hundred visitors plus Sahaja Yogis jammed with Her hair down and wearing a softly
inside to hear Mother and enjoy Her bles- patterned sari, the warmth was overwhel-
sings, including another meal cooked by ming. Marvellous music flowed from the
sitarist and from several Sahajas who play-
Then came
Her.
ed to honour Mother.
The public programs over, there was
time for Mother to relax a little and an the giant birthday cake (in the form of a Swas-
Saturday a picnic was held in the Lane tika) much to the joy of the small children.
Cove River National Park, Here on the
green riverside lawns, She was surrounded
by the fragrant Australian bush with Her
children seated on the grass around her.
It was a day of laughter and relaxation as
Mother in a green sari that blended pér- large crowd, Mother left Australia. Her bles-
As was fitting, a joyous Mother flnished the
evening by bestowing on the sitarist and
his two accompanists Her greatest gift:
realisation.
At midday next day. farewelled by a
fectly with the surroundings, nursed and
named the new babies and talked gently night new seekers are coming, old ones are
with parents about the raising of children.
The informality even extended to Molner
sings however have remained. Night after
progressing, and Sahaja Yoga is growing
before our eyes.
teaching the men how to tie dhotis in the
manner of Shri Krishna. Every now and
then the paddle wheel ferry chugged along all over the world and by Divine Grace what
the river with its passengers staring at the we have experienced here in Australia may
joyous group on the banks and wondering be repeated elsewhere. With full hearts we
May the triumph of this tour be repeated
all shout :
what was going on.
JAI MATAJI
The highlight of the tour however, was
Monday, March 21, our Beloved Mother's
-The Australian Sahaja Yogis
Nirmala Yoga
32
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-34.txt 
 Sahaja Yoga & Physical Cure-II
Asthma :- It is a problem of left side in not get exposed to cold weather after bath
which lungs become lethargic causing diffi- for 2-3 hours.
culties in breathing. Feeling of insecurity
or bad relations with one's father can also Jaundice:- Right Nabhl and Swadhisthan
be the root cause of this disease, in which are atfected, Our beloved Mother has pres-
case centre Heart or right Heart respectively a very simple medicine for this
are affected, In this case WBC outnumber disease, which doctors find very difficult to
RBC, which is due to the catch on Jaft cure. Fresh raddish leaves be boiled and
Nabhi and Swadhisthan.
cribed
candy sugar be mixed in this boiled water
which is drunk for 3 days instead of plain
Tuberculosis :- This is also a problem water. Fried food, proteins etc. may be
of left side and is caused by mal-nutrition avoided and the disease is cured in 3 days.
and lack of protein and other left side prob- Mantra to be said 10 times Mother you are
lems Chakras affected are left nabhi, Swa- my Guru', with left hand on stomach and
dhisthan and centre Heart.
both the diseases, should raise right side Diabetes:- Right nabhi and Swadhisthan
and add the God's grace into left side, take are affected, Left sympathelic may be raised
salt-water treatment with left hand towards and God's grace be passed into right sym-
the photo and right hand raised. Eat nutri-
tious food. Also, take vibrations to affected
Patients of right towards photo of Shri Mataji.
pathetic 108 times every day. Foot-soaking
in luke-warm salt water, placing right hand
on pancreas. These patients should take
chakras.
Common Cold:- In this problem. either lot of vibrated salt and say the Mantra In
left vishudhi or right vishudhi is caught. front of the photo of Shri Mataji "Mother I
Hamsa is also affected. If suffering from am my own Guru" This mantra may be
left Vishudhi, nose is blocked, if suffering . It is necessary to give up
from right Vishudhi, nose is running. For the habit of planning one's tuture.
flowing nose, one should burn Ajwain on Insomnja :- This is due to over-active
charcoal and inhale its lumes. Also drink
decoction of Tulsi leaves, ajwain, ginger God's prace added into right sympathetic.
and sugar and take rest in the bed. If ose The following mantra may be recited:
Is blocked, one should add clarified butter
in the nose.
repeated 10 times
right side. Left side may be raised and
या देवी सर्वभूतेषु निद्रा रूपेण संस्थिता ।
नमस्तस्य नमस्तस्य नसस्तस्य नमो नमः । ॥
In order to avoid the problems of lungs
and throat, it is necessary to change our
Ideas regarding bath. Cold water bath is
preferable in the summer. In the winter one
should bathe in luke warm water but should
Yã Devi sarvabhooteshu nidra roopena
samsthita!
Namastasyai Namastasyai Nanastasyai
Namo Namah !!
Nirmala Yoga
33
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-35.txt 
 Lack of Memory:-Lett side may be raised or over-work and over-anxious nature regar-
and God's grace added into right side. ding one's responsibilities. Imbalance in
The following Mantra may be recited thrice: sympathetic may be corrected and affected
parts be treated with vibrations and vibrated
kerosine, and foot-soaking in luke-warm salt
या देवी सर्व भूतेषु स्मृति रूपेण संस्थिता ।
नमस्तस्यैं नमस्तस्यै नमस्तस्यै नमो नमः ।
water.
Yâ devi saryabhooteshu smruti roopena
Sciatica:- This is a problem of left-sym-
pathetic. Left Nabhi and Swadhisthan are
affected. Imbalance may be corrected by
adding God's grace in left sympathetic ner-
This could be due to the vous system and treating affected chakras
problem of left or right sympathetic nervous with vibrations and massaging with vibrated
samasthita I
Namastasyal Namastasyai Namastasyai
Namo Namah !
Spendylosis :-
system, owing to respectively, malnutrition kerosine.
FESTIVALS
Date according to
English Calendar
Date according to
Indian Calendar
Festivals
31st August 1983
Shravan-Month
Janmashtami
(Birthday of Shri Krishna) Krishna Paksha-Dark Fortnight
Ashtami -8th day
10th September 1983
Shri Ganesha Chaturthi
(Shri Ganeshas' Birthday)
Bhadrapad-Month
Shukla Paksha-Bright Fortnight
Chaturthi-4th day
7th October 1983
Ashin-Month
Navaratri
(Puja of Shri Devi Durga
Shukla Paksha-Bright Fortnight
Pratipada-1st day to
Navami-9th day
to
15th October 1983
for 9 days)
16th October 1983
Ashwin-Month
Shukla Paksha-Bright Fortnight
Dashami-10th day
Dussehra
Nirmala Yoga
34
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-36.txt 
 THE FIRST SAHAJA YOGA
SEMINAR IN AUSTRIA
Our Holy Mother visited Vienna in Sep- children of the manager of the youth hostel
tember 82, gave Her blessings to the whole were attracted to us one after the other and
city and realisation to about 600 seekers.
About 25 remained in Sahaja Yoga in an sweet !
active capacity and gathered to our first
seminar in April.
they all got their realisation; it was really
All this sounds very nice, yet there is
much work to do in Austria. With the help
You can't imagine, it was such a bles- and guidance of the Divine we will spread
sing to attend it! Just thinking about it Sahaja Yoga until the last valley of our
one gets breathless but we have to go be- Alps will be vibrated. And we now need
yond thought anyway, We had a wonderful an ashram to adore our Mother, who is
programme of videos, workshop, meditation, Beauty and Bliss itself and to set the
exchange of experiences and above all, a example of a new life style to this Austria.
beautiful Shiva-Shakti-Ganesha Puja, which
No doubt, all problems will be solved
if we surrender ourselves to the Enlighten-
ed One, the Spirit We pray to our Shri
We gathered together to surrender to Mother that She opens our hearts for Her
according to the vibrations, was kindly
accepted by the deities.
the realm of joy and silence, to get the Grace, compassion and guidance.
Divine Vibrations fiowing from the Eter-
nal One. This happened in such a way,
that, in a very shart
remarkably strong in our yoga. This was your shining love without shadow in our
possible, because the collectivity in the eyes. Let us always remember that we are
group was very good. Fixing the attention Your children, playing with Your gifts.
to the Spirit and not to the outward appea-
O Devi, who else but you can take away
me, we grew our misidentifications so that we can face
ti
rance of a person, we somehow melted
together. Finally nobody could bear to see
the end of the seminar coming The thre
Thank You !
Guent her
Om Twamewa Sakshat Shri Sarra Sahaja Yogi Sakshat Shri Sarva Sahaja Yogini
Sukshat Shri Adi Shakti Bhagawati Mataji Skri Nirmala Devi Namoh Namaha
Nirmala Yoga
35
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-37.txt 
 Maria Smith's account of the miracle at Bedford
and the events leading up to it.
Bedford is a provincial town in the mid- phoned Shri Mataji and our Holy Mother
lands of England. Sahaja Yoga programmes explained that something was taking place
were started there about eighteen months
ago, during which time a number of people yond our ability to control. Shri Mataji had
were given realisation and three became consulted the stars and deities so that they
Sahaja Yogis. In 1982 Shri Mataji was
invited by local Sahaja Yogis to come to knows best.
Bedford and other neighbouring cities.
on a level beyond our awareness and be-
would work it in the way that the Divine
After some weeks a series of extremely
Initially, absolutely nothing worked out violent rain storms occured, One minute
as far as arrangements for Shri Mataji's the summer skies would be clear and blue;
trip were concerned. There was total nega- the next they would be filled with unnatu-
tivity and opposition from the media, and rally heavy clouds which seemed to come
even the Sahaja Yogis were sucked into the
out of nowhere. The rain was so heavy
vortex of inertia. A lot of energy wasS lost that people could hardly believe it and it
in the process of trying to make people
was accompanied by lightning which rent
understand the importance of this visit by the skies from end to end and frightful and
and
intellectual reasoning
None of the approaches to media or any of overflowed on to the surrounding lands.
the plans bore fruit through complete lack After every storm there would be specta-
of local interest. As a result the visit was
temporarily called off by Shri Mataji. We bow, but many bows all crossing each
persuasion.
deafening thunder. The rivers flooded and
cular rainbows-not a normal, single rain-
realised at this point that we had been
other.
completely drained and wasted by going delicht everyone with their beauty, and
These spectacular shows would
about things in a human rather than a
Sahaja fashion. So collectively, the Enalish people would even stop their cars to watch
Sahaja Yogis decided to work on the mid-
lands area by cleansing and strengthening tians will recall that God sent Noah a rain-
themselves and the area by doing pujas
and by asking the elements to help in the
this heavenly wonder. All Jews and Christ-
bow after the great fiood as a symbol of His
love and as a promise that He would never
Every Sunday we would have flood the earth again so completely.
process.
pujas in one of the three main towns and
would work on the map of the district in the
presence of Shri Mataji's photograph. We Mataji suggested more dates for program-
would use the vibrations coming from diffe-
rent parts of the map to feel and work out
the collective problems of a particular town etc, was gone, but due to one timely phone
After a month or two of all this Shri
mes which She would attend in the mid-
All the money for hiring halls
lands area
call the right person appeared at the right
Just before all this took place, when the moment to help with this side of things.
meetings had been cancelled, Maria tele- The second boon was that the media were
Nirmala Yoga
36
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-38.txt 
 totally positive; the newspapers, radio and "Indian lady' at any time, and Shri Mataji
TV were only too delighted to co- was at that time visibly giving realisa-
operate. It seemed almost as if everyone tion in the hall in another part of Bedford.
connected with the media had been pre- The next day the young man, Jason Hay-
viously convinced about Shri Mataji and
Sahaja Yoga prior to our visiting them.
even
nes, saw a photograph of Shri Mataji in
the local paper and was certain beyond
Shri Mataji arrived and was on two TV doubt that this was the 'mysterious lady
programmes, and the Sahaja programmes
were jam packed with people standing in
who had helped him.
The following day some Sahaja Yogis
were accompanying Shri Mataji in Her car
the corridors outside.
It was during the first meeting at Bed- to the meeting at Cambridge. One person
ford that the greatest miracle occured. Shri complained that she was suffering from a
Mataji was driven to the meeting and rea-
ched the hall at about 7.30 p.m. Our Mother Mataji is instructive for all: our Mother
left at about 11 00 p.m. and was in the hall explained that it was not this lady's left
constantly in between.
bad left nabhi catch. The reply of Shri
nabhi, but the collective catch of the whole
area which was being felt. She was told to
At about 9.15 p.m. a young man named open her chakras, and pray to the particular
Jason Haynes, who lived in Bedford, was deity, then vibrations could be emitted
knocked off his motor bike in one of the through that person's chakra out to the
streets of the town and was lying seriously whole environment. thus The problem was
injured waiting for the ambulance to arrive. that of the whole area and the lady was to
Some minutes later he was aware of a kind stop assuming that the catch revolved about
Indian lady standing over him, touching him the problems of her small self; it was some-
where he was most injured and each time thing much bigger.
She touched him the pain left that part
of the body. Then She left, and later
the ambulance arrived and took him to the completely so that we may be worthy instru-
hospital, where he was treated for minor ments for the great work You are accom-
injuries and shock. The onlookers at the plishing on this earth of Yours which you
scene of the accident did not see any have so graciously given us to enjoy.
Mother, please let us surrender to You
Nirmala Yoga
37
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-39.txt 
 Little Stories from the Rome Center
It was the first time I was going to the I started my study as I was 23, with a lot
apartment where the Sahaja Yogis meet of insecurify and fear of the exams. During
and I could not remember the indications the first series of exams after my realisa-
my husband gave me to find their house tion I was still afrald though feeling the Pre-
As I did not want to go all the way back sence of Shri Mataji in the room. Then some-
home I decided to experiment with the gui- thing strange happend: the examiners, well
dance from the vibrations on the hands. So, known for being harsh and nasty, started
I went on in the street till arrived in front beaming with smiles, became so human and
of the right gate and pushed on the right so nice as soon as they proceeded with the
interphone button. When I got the confir- girls of my group. Everything went so well
mation that I had indeed found the flat I was as if a good fairy had entered the room on
a cloud sparkling with beauty. The same
-RITA thing repeated itself for all the exams I had
to go through. The wonderful thing about
it is that my girl friends noted the change
looking for I just couldn't believe it.
occurring every time, and now, funnily eno-
Shortly after my realisation I was told by ugh, they all wanted to be examined at the
the Sahaja Yogis that my right visshuddhi same time as me.
was catching as smokers' visshuddhis
usually do. I don't smoke but in my office
they all do it. That same day the Sahaja
Yogis also told me that, as a child of Shri
Mataji, I was protected; I could not really
understand what they meant.
-CRISTINA
• Before meeting Shri Mataji, Anny and
myself were keeping in our bedroom the
picture of a "guru" whose meditation tech-
In my office there had been regular discus- niques we had followed for a while. Altho-
sions on the need to stop smoking but ugh we had found that his system did not
without any results. Yet the day after these give any results we were still intellectually
comments of the Sahaja Yogis and after convinced that he was a saint. Hence his
had bitterly complained to them about all picture remained on the wall, fortunately
those smokers, without any apparent rea-
sons, all the colleagues in the office deci- The night Anny and myself received our
ded to stop smoking in the room,
sudden they were all taking care of my right Her picture for meditation. Returning happily
vishuddhi. was stunned, happy, and, from home, we fixed Her picture on the wall near
the bottom of my heart, I thanked Shri the one of the "guru". (We did not know
Hanumana and Shri Mataji.
at the foot of the bed.
All of a realisation from Shri Mataji we received
14ppnysn
anything about protocol but probably we
-EDUARDO have been forgiven for sleeping that night
38
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-40.txt 
 with the feet towards our Mother). The Her angels should not be too harsh with the
next morning we were amazed to find that thisves. My husband told me to go to the
the picture of the "guru" had fallen down police right away but I refused :1 was
on the floor. Only the picture of Shri deeply convinced that the bag would be
It had to be so as lam a daugh-
I felt that we should not sleep with our ter of Shri Mataji. I went to bed, praying
as usual to Shri Mother, and, confidently,I
went to sleep. The next day, I hardly
-ANTONIO and ANNY remembered what had happened when the
Mataji remained. After thiu event, semehow, returned.
feet towards the picture of ShriMataji.
doorbell rang it was the doorman holding
the bag in his hand. A street cleaner had
found it on a lawn and brought It back to
Nothing had been
eIt was 9.30 pm. was returning home
when suddenly some boys forcefully took
away my bag. It contained pictures of touched. Just an old amulet that I had for-
Shri Mataji,
money, gold jewels that i wanted to sell, a
shawl from India, my keys and newspapers
to look for a place suitable for our ashram.
On arriving home I prayed to Mother that
k the correct address.
gotten in a side pocket of the purse. It had
been smashed into pieces...
my identification
papers,
-EMMA
JAI MATAJI
(Continued from Page 10)
ful etc. Gracdually this state will grow and flame if water is mixed in the oil ? How can
become stable within you Most of the those Sahaja Yogis have enlightenment who
Sahaja Yogis should try this method, but
there should not be merely the mechanical own petty problems ?
movement of hands. Whatever you do, it Cod give them the enlightenment ? Light-
should be done with the faith that you have houses do not show light to themselves
in worshipping, zeal of a w arrior and sensi-
tivity of an artist. There should be complete considered so important and are looked
purity in the recitation of Mantras to awaken
the deities and your heart must be involved
in It. Only then the awakening will take
place. You should understand a simple Sahaja Yogis.
principle. How can a big fire be lit with a
small match stick ? Will a wick hold the
are using Sahaja Yoga to solve only their
And why should
even for a
moment. Therafore, they are
after.
Please circulate this letter among all
Your Mother
-NIRMALA
Nirmala Yoga
39
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-41.txt 
 technology to other continents without rea-
lizing that only too often the colonial
powers behave with gross brutality: they
destroyed in the process of their so quote
"civilizing mission" the delicate fabric of
human and social values which, in the light
of spiritual life, were by far superior to their
own. The real victory of Gandhi was to
beat the major colonial power of the time
merely by resorting to these values,
IN MEMORY OF
A GREAT MAN
$***
*******
In many ways the mode of action of
Gandhiji was sahaj. For instance, he firmly
derived his political activity from a couple of
dharmic principles and he refused to com-
THE prize winning film of R. Attenborough promise with what was wrong. These prin-
on Mahatma Gandhi has been seen by many ciples, his very firmness, stemmed from his
Sahaja Yogis throughout the world, For (correct0 conviction that it is God who
once the link between Gandhi and Sahaja leads history. Thus God answered back the
Yoga cannot be stressed enough : in enab- call, or, in other wards, the Unconscious
ling Bharata to regain its political freedom. started working for Gandhi.
Gandhi brought back to the land of yoga ils
lost dignity without which it could not un-
veil to other civilisalions the priceless sec-
How did it happen ? -Gandhi's grea-
test leverage was his command over the
ret of its spiritual tradition : Kundalini Yoga. Indian masses. He gained such a command
because the simple folk could recognize
He was, in this way, the precursor of this
little girl who was staying in his ashram. I that he was inspired from above. The ped-
ple felt it from their own individual uncons-
refer to Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi of course.
Gandhiji used to call Her "Nepali" which, cious and thus they believed in the legiti-
indeed, was quite accurate: the Devi is the macy and the credibility of his leadership:
daughter of Himavat, the king of the moun- they, indeed. called him "Mahatma", gave
tains, and the sahasrara of Ihe planet is in him confidence in his mission, lent him in
any possible way their support. Theref ore,
to take but one example, merely by his
hunger strike the Mahatma could control the
Nepal, in the Himalayas.
On a general level the film on Gandhi
brings to a wide public's attention some behaviour of millions of people. But alas,
features in the life of this remarkable man
this process cannot work outside of India,
that Sahaja Yogis can, perhaps, best ana- in countries where the common man does
lyse.
not have the required level of sensitivity to
Young Europeans do not always realise his own unconscious. This is why Gandhi's
what colonialism really meant to the rest of schemes of peaceful revolution has not yet
the world. They often consider that, after been implemented anywhere else in the
all, it was a good thing to bring science and
(Continued on Page 42)
Nirmala Yoga
40
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-42.txt 
 Her Holiness Shri Mataji's
ADV ICE
1. 1want you to resolve that you all will 3. You have to know that truth is not going
become absolutely 'Dharmik'. It is hard to to fall at your feet. You have to fall at the
be a Dharmik'. The Society and environ- feet of truth, if you want to achieve it.
ment force you to be Adharmik. You are
born in innocence and later you go on 4. In Sahaja Yoga when one is realized,
compromising and accepting Adharmic one starts seeing one's own faults. Man is
so much identified with himself that he
does not want to know his faults, and when
patterns as normal.
For a Sahaja Yogi, it is difficult to be
Adharmic. If he tries to do a wrong thing, he knows them he wants to run away. But
he is corrected by the vibrations. But if you it is better that, instead of carrying the bur-
go on killing your awakened conscience, den ofyour faults from life to life, you know
You are free to do so and kill all your them and correct them.
chances of ascent.
you
There is nothing in it to be scared of. If
litile steady you will
In Sahaja Yoga you have to torget the you make yoursell a little steady you will
past as you have been bathed with Divine understand how powerful is the Shakti
Love, like a newly born baby. Purity of which not only brings into light the faults
Heart expressed as fidelity in marriage for within you but also completely removes
both husband and wife is the most enjoy- them.
able virtue and is the most power ful. When
you understand the purity of relationship, 5 Karmas are done by your ego. You must
you enjoy them the most.
have observed that after coming to Sahaja
Steady your attention by keeping your Yoga, you can very clearly see your ego
attention on the Mother earth. Thus you (Ahankar) and the way it works. In Sahaja
get the loving Bandhan' of your Grand- Yoga also you come across many tempta-
mother and you become free of enslavement tions and in that, when your ego dominates,
to your lust.
you forget whether you have to go to Sahaja
Yoga or Sahaja Yoga is to come to you.
2. Divinity is not a fashion. It is the way Many people when they succumb to their
of life. It is the need of your being. You
have to become THAT.
ego, turn their backs to Sahaja Yoga, expec-
ting Sahaja Yoga to follow them.
Nirmala Yoga
41
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-43.txt 
 So long as your ego is enveloping you, so long as the eye of your Spirit is not
you cannot have the glimpse of your Spirit opened and you should not even make
But it is useless to fight with your ego. In efforts to understand
Sahaja Yaga you do not have to fight with eye of your Spirit.
your ego but you have just to see, because
your attention itself gets awakened Your
ego cools down by Just seeing, as the sea ranjivas' surrender to you. They are watch-
ing is illuminating In that light you wit- ing you. You are their responsibility. All
ness the play of your ago and laugh at it. anything against the deities, immediately
As you start seeing yourself your ego starts thay will harm you. If a person who has got
getting defiated and as ego is deflated you realization, goes to a place which is not to
rise in your light.
First you open the
7. Once you get the realization, the 'Chi-
the deities are awakened in you. If you do
be seen or which is not to be felt or which
is not a good place, or to a fake Guru,
6. Man's intellect comes up with many immediately he will feel heated up. If he
doubts. The first doubt that comes, which does not run away and if he still goes on,
is very common, is "Who is Mataji ?" I want he will lose his vibrations and he will
to tell you that you cannot understand Me become like any other ordinary person.
(Continued from Page 40)
world. Other countries could, possibly have of all times. As Shri Mataji can transform
their own Gandhi. But would these lone the basic cell of society, man, transform
voices be heard, let alone listened to and him, that is, into a higher being, the gradual
impact of this positive transtormation will
be felt in all the dimensions of society. As
Even in India the elite of the country, the ihis transformation will be duly opposed,
clever people, missed the best part ofł there will be crises and clashes: the earth
They have largely may shiver, the seas may rise. But the
borrowed the western ways of the western outcome can be predicted with the kind of
power they were supposed to have expelled quiet certainty which distinguishes Nature's
and, in this respect, remained colonized, doings. At the given time some eggs be-
Perhaps this has been Gandhi's greatest come chicken, some flowers turn into fruits,
some people become Sahaja Yogis. Like
but he could not transform men. He could Gandhi we should be collective and wish this
new freedom for many, many more And we
from conditionings and ego. In other words, should be confident about it. For not only
is Nature doing the job, She has even taken
an incarnated form to explain us how She
dees it! Really we can only wish to Gandhiji
obeyed ?
Gandhi's teachings.
shortcoming. He could transform a country
bring political freedom but not the freedom
he could not raise Kundalinis.
Well, Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi can !
This is why the spiritual revolution She has to be back as one of us...
triggered with Sahaja Yoga is simply the
most practical, the most effective revolution
-Gregoire
Nirmala Yoga
42
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-44.txt 
 Alpha and Omega
Here is a poem which hopetully expläins two passages in the book of Revela-
tions, which is the last book of the New Testament of the Bible. The Revelations is a
book considered very obscure and difficult to understand and is a prophetic work deal-
ing with the coming of the New Jerusalem. John of Patmos, who wrote the book, was
somewhat supraconscious and therefore not to be taken too literally, although much is
very true and relevant to the present time. First the passages from Revelations, and
then the poem, the first part of which is intended for groping western seekers rather than
Sahaja Yogis.
*I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending.' saith the Lord, 'which
is, and which was, and which is to come, the Almighty'"" Chap. I, verse 8.
"And there appeared a great wonder in heaven; a woman clothed in the sun, and
And She being
the moon un der Her feet, and upon Her head a crown of twelve stars
with child cried, travailing in birth and pained to be delivered.
And there appeared another wonder in heaven; and behold a red dragon, having
seven heads and ten horns and seven crowns upon his heads. And his tail drew the
third part of the stars of heaven and did cast them upon the earth : and the dragon
stood before the woman which was ready to be delivered for to devour Her child as
soon as it was born.
And She brought forth a man child who was to rule all nations with a rod of iron:
and Her child was caught up unto God and to His throne. And the woman fled into
the wilderness, where She had a place prepared of God that they should feed Her
there..."
Chap. 12, verses l-6.
"The woman' is of course Shri Mataji, 'the dragon' the negativity in the form of
the false gurus, and 'the rod of iron' must refer to the Kundalini, which is also descri-
bed in this manner in the beautiful 23rd Psalm.
This is the poem:
In the book of Revelations very little is revealed,
From the furtive intellectual are the answers well concealed.
Perhaps if we stop asking questions we may hope to crack the code,
Maybe the desire for inner wisdom will lead us on the road.
What are the cogent questions of the great quest for life ?
Who are the real protagonists that lead men ever on to strife ?
How can we find the answers if we don't know where to start ?
How join in the cosmic drama if we don't know our own part ?
Nirmala Yoga
43
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-45.txt 
 We've tried to categorize the universe with laws of probability and chance
Denying the possibility of an ordered, eternal dance.
We dare not face the Dancers; our great egos are too bent,
So we persist in the delusion-creation must be a chance event!
Let us make the great experiment, the experiment of the soul:
Let us surrender our mental wanderings in the search for the goal,
Let us abandon our aggression and our passion to control.
We have endeavoured to use our minds to make matter our slave
And have pursued material happiness from the cradle to the grave.
But when all is said and done what paths to heaven did it pave ?
This road of disaster leads surely to the atomic bomb,
So some foolhard youngsters explored other paths (equally wrong),
The path of inner blasting via fake gurus, drugs and violent song.
Where is the One who is Alpha and Omaga ?
Where is the One who will call it the day ?
Did the seers of old merely write stirring stories ?
No. They foresaw through the tunnel of time where the war is.
This war's raging within us; the prize mankind's soul,
Because man is a mirror, microcosm of God.
The dragons and devils are here now, among us,
All doing their best to appear-Oh, so good!
Bombardments of evil sport disguises of freedom,
Self-destruction's allowed, nothing's barred from us now.
But the Woman is here, with the stars in Her crown,
And we are Her manchild, if we understand how.
She is here to effect a transmuting of consciousnesS:
If She doesn't, there'll soon be naught left to transmute.
When She gives the great secrets, quite freely, in earnestness,
Then Her Spirit will fill us as sound fills a flute,
Then we'll dance for the Dancers, the Lords of Creation,
And we'll bow to Our Maker in wonder and love.
But first we must seek Her, concealed in our wilderness,
Not argue and question what comes from above.
When in silent humility we'll admit we'ere just human,
Then She'll come as a human bringing heaven on earth.
She'll show us our Spirit and make us divine,
And Her Son will through man have His own second birth.
Om twamewa sakshat Shri. Kalki, sakshat Shri Adi Shakti, sakshat Shri Mataji,
Shri Nirmala Devi, Namo Namah.
Twamekam Sharanyam gacchami.
Nirmala Yoga
44
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-46.txt 
 From Delhi
15 April '83
It has been raining vibrated water and
vibrations these last few days in Delhi. The Shri Mataji flowing through our dearest
weathermen may call it unseasonal, but we brothers and sisters was really miraculous
say such showers are always timely because in certain homes and in all cases without
Delhi is always in need of a thorough exception, our sincerity as seekers and
"washing'.
The result of having so much love from
Sahaja Yogis increased appreciably.
We Sahaja Yogis know how much atten-
tion Shri Mataji has been giving to Delhi. well attended in that no huge throngs of
Like every year we had Mother's pro- seekers came. But our everloving Mother
grammes almost every day for about two gifted to us many more brothers and sisters
weeks. Her blessings are just proving,
The public programmes were not very
who are settling in Sahaja Yoga, this year
than any of the preceding years. For Delhi
This year was more unique for HER Sahaja Yogis it just has been coming-
Children in Delhi. SHE blessed them with flowing, flowing, fiewing, ever increasing,
the chance to meet so many sainis, our without effort on their part.
dear brothers and sisters trom distant lands
As if to show to us that Divine Grace is
and learn from them more about dedication,
sürrender, sincerity and collectivity. What infinite and never does it stop flowing to
more could have been asked for ? We those in need Shri Paramananda Pradayini
actually had them to stay with us for a Shri Moksha Pradayini Mataji came again
whole week! It must really be a great for- to Delhi. On 28th March, Shri Mataji blessed
tune to have in your home brave tittle chil-
dren of Adishakti, your own loving dear felicitate HER on HER 60th BIRTH ANNI-
brothers and sisters.
Delhi by giving us a heavenly chance to
How we came to VERSARY.
deserve such a wonderful blessing amazes
us ! Truly the compassion of Shri Mataji
is beyond words or imagination!
The celebrations were unique and ex-
tremely beautiful & joyful to say the least.
In fact any celebration would be, if the
is "SHRI
Hanuman must have been kept very busy MAHAMAYA SHRI ADI SHAKTI MATAJI
SHRI NIRMALA DEVI. The Chief Guest
to felicitate HER was Sahaja Yogi, as digni-
e honoured
beautiful days, Shri "person" to be
During those
stregthening the roots of Sahaja Yoga within
the homes. And what better instruments
could He have had than Sahaja Yogis-who fied and humble as Dr. Nagendra Singh,
had for a full month been with Shri Adi who delivered his address in the form of
Stuti (praise) of his Sadguru and Divine
At this function of joy, whoever
Spoke, spoke beautifully. And we witnessed
Shakti in Maharashtra, (the great land) and
had come overflowing with vibrations to Mother
Delhi.
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-47.txt 
 Registered with the Registrar of Newspapers under Regn. No. 36999/81
the creation of a New Raga in Indian classi- obeissance at HER lotus feet-and that
cal Music created by a Sahaja Yogi and gave more joy and we clapped and sang
dedicated to SHRI ADIMA SHRI SARAS- and danced to Shri Krishna's tune with joy.
WATI SHRI MATAJI named the raga, with bliss pouring and showering on us.
SWANANDESHRI (divine joy of Self). And
It did produce within us the SWANAND-
it was really joyful to see Mother creatỉng JAI JAI JAI SHRI MATAJI
Divine music, vibrations from HER instru-
ment, Debu Chaudhary, as so many of us
had earlier seen at a public programme
JAI SHRI RADHA, JAI SHRI KRISHNA,
Our Mother is so Gracious, so Benevo-
lent: She has really spared no efforts to
establish Sahaja Yoga in Delhi, which is
still a weak Centre, which Just means it
Seven weeks before t
We had a very great surprise when we offers the greatest promise 50 much is
learnt of Puja to be held the next day which come, 50 much more is walting to be
was Holi, the festival of colours. At the
Puja SHRI RADHA SHRI MATAJI did
away with all the seriousness of Puja, much
like, as she told us, Shri Krishna had done MAHA MAYA on
centuries ago. "Dearest Mother, may Delhi become a step-
and relived the Holi that Shri Radha and ping stone firm enough and strong enough
Shri Krishna used to play It because the to sustain and assist in the final flying
realised, to be uncovered.
So all of US, all the different parts of
mother Earth join together (with JAI SHRI
our lips) and pray,
Thereafter we experienced
festival of great joy that it was made to be.
leaf of Sahaja Yoga", JAI MATAJI.
Sahaja Yogis danced and laughed and
in the traditional way hugged and put RUPINI SHRI
colours on each other. Some sang Bhajans SHRI NIRMALA DEVI, we bow at your
PARAM PUJYA SHRI SARWASWA-
ADI SHAKTI MATAJI
in praise of Shri Krishna as Shri Radha totus feet
sprinkled colours at HER CHILDREN paying
...
Edited & Published by Sh. 5. C Rai, 43, Bungiow Road, Delhi-110007 and
Printed at Ratnadeep Press. Darya Gani, New Delhi-110002.
One Issue Rs. 6:00, Annual Subscription Rs 30.00 Foreiagn [ By Airmail E5 S10I
