Nirmala Yoga Bi-Monthly Vol. 3 No. 16 July-August 1983 5F 5F "Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns all the religions and seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga THE UNION"

 NIRM ALA YOGA 43, Bungalow Road, Delhi-110007, (India) Founder: Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Editorial Board : Dr. S.K. Mathur, Sri A.S. Mishra, Sri R.D. Kulkarni Representatives : CHERYL HYNES-1267, Burke Road, KEW 3101, VICTORIA. :ZORANA BEDKE Gartnergasse 17/10, 1030 VIENNA. :LORI TODRICK-4518 Woodgreen Drive, West Vancouver, BC. V7S2V1. : MARIE ROUGER-175, Av. Ledru Rollin PARIS-750001. :RUTH LEDERBERGER : via Mercalli-46, 00197 ROME. : M.B. Ratnannwar-13, Merwan Mansion, Genjewala Lane, Borivali (W).. Australia Austria Canada France Italy India BOMBAY-400092. RAJARAM SHANKAR RAJWADE-840, Sadashiva Peth, PUNE-411030. : DANIEL & ROXANA DEVINE-Angel Luis De Herran, 38, 6, 4, MADRID-33. Spain :CHARLES & MRS. MAGDA MATHYS 5, Chemin Des Mouldins, 1256. Troinex (Canton de Geneva). * GAVIN BROWN-Brown's Geological Information Service Ltd., 160 North Gower St., London NW 1. 2ND. M.J. MURDOCH, 14A Bourne Ave, S. RUISLIP, MIDDLESEX, HAH 6TZ, ENGLAND. Switzerland U. K. :CHRISTINE PETRUNIA-225 Adams St., 1/E BROOKLYN, NY-11201. U.S.A. C ONT ENTS Page 1. Editorial 2 Mahalakshmi 3. Anupama's Poem 4. Spirit 5. Ekadasha Rudra 6. Importance of Havan & Puja 7. God's Work & Negativity 8. Shri Mataji's Advice 9. Leaders in Sahaja Yoga 10. Sahaja Yoga & Physical Cure-lil 11. The Sahaja of Physics (Part I) 12. Installation of Shri Ganesh 9. 10 12 13 15 19 21 22. 24 27 13. Mother's Love (Poem) 14. Advice to Sahaja Mothers 15. Sahaja Yoga & Nursery Rhymes 16. A letter from Italy 17. Sahaja Yoga Archives 18. 99 Names of Allah 19. The Joy of Sahaja World 28 29 32 34 34 35 3rd Cover 4th Cover

 Editorial केवलं ज्ञानमूर्त्तिम् ब्रह्मानन्दं परम सुखदं । द्वंद्वातीतं गगन सदशं तत्वमस्यादि लक्ष्यम् ।। एक नित्यं विमल मचलं सर्वथी साक्षिभूतम् । भवातीतं त्रिगुणरहितं सद्गुरुं तं नमामि ।। Brahmä-nandam Parama-sukhadam Kevalam Jnäna Moortim Dwandwa-teetam gagana sadrusham tatwa-masyadi lakshyam nityam vimala-machalam sarvadhee sākshibhootam sadgurum Ekam namāmi. Bhäväteetam triguna-rahitam tam TRANSLATION I bow before Shri Sadguru who is verily the bliss of Brahma, knowledge personified, giver of supreme happiness (who is) like sky, beyond all dualities (who is) the first manifestation of tatwa, (principle) (who) alone is eternal, Pure and undisturbed, witness to everything, (who is) beyond all emotions and without the three gunas. Shri Namdeva was a great saint of India, at the time when galaxy of saints like Shri Kabira, Shri Nanaka, Shri Jnaneshwar and others, decorated the holy land of India. He lived at Pandhar- pur in Maharashtra, where age-old temple of Shri Vitthal and Rukmini (Shri Krishna as the king of Dwarka is known as Shri Vitthal, and Rukmini his wife) is situated. Shri Namdeva's devotion to Shri Vitthal. from his very childhood was of such a high order that Shri Vitthal talked to him, played with him and even took food from his hands. As he grew-up, his devotion became lop-sided and he developed ego that Shri Vitthal was the only God and he was the only devotee. Shri Vitthal then directed him to meet Shri Jnaneshwar, but seeing the latter's young age, Shri Namdeva did not believe him. It was therefore suggested that Shri Namdeva would meet another saint Visoba Khechar an octogenerian devotee of Shiva who lived in a Shiva-temple, engrossed in meditation. Shri Namdeva found him sleeping with his feet resting on Shiva- linga and rebuked him for doing so. Visoba requested Namdeva to put his feet at some other place provided there was no God at that place, since he himself was very old and unable to lift Nirmala Yoga

 his feet. Shri Namdeva moved Visoba's feet from place to place and found to his great amaze- ment, that Shiva-linga was under his feet at every place. This completely deflated Shri Namdeva's ego and he was convinced that God was present every where and he himself was not the only devotee of God. Instantly he accepted Visoba as his Guru and surrendered to him. Later, Shri Namdeva, got the true knowledge and attained complete God realization. In ancient days, many great saints, and sincere seekers, had to make tremendous efforts to meet their sadguru, and they gladiy passed through all the difficulties, They were aware that howsoever evolved a person was by birth, without the correcting force of sad-guru, real spiritual growth and Ultimate unison with the Supreme was not possible. Shri Ramdas says "Can anybody explain in words how that indescribable Parabrahma is ? But even 'that' is known just from the casual talk of sadguru. By the grace of sadguru we get the realization which we could never imagine will happen and from that we enjoy innaccesible nector-like supreme bliss". Having this experience, is the fulfilment of the desire for many lives, of the Spirit, to unite with Paramatma, the Supreme Spirit. It is accomplishing the happiness, par excellence. Sadguru however would not accept them easily as his disciples. He would test their dedi- cation and earnestness of seeking in very difficult ways. Only those were entitled to receive his blessings and guidance, who could satisfy him. But the desciples did not hesitate to even stake their lives, in order to please him, because they recognised his ability, powers and greatness. It is in response to our desires of past many lives that Sakshat Adishakti, Sakshat Parabrahma has given us the shelter at Her lotus feet. It is for Her limitless compassion that She is not giving to us severe tests, and accepting us seeing the desire of our Spirits. But She is watch- ing and correcting us through Her all pervading powers. Being our mother, She is pleased to see us happy, prosperOus and progressing to accomplish the desires of our Spirits. Let us therefore surrender our 'tan (physical being) 'man' (mind) and 'dhan' (wealth) at Her lotus feet. "Tan" (physical being) cannot be parted with, She does not need our 'dhan' (wealth) as entire creation is Hers. All that we can really surrender to Her, is our 'chitta'. When that is given, completely, once surrender is total, we can establish yoga with Her, the Paramatma. She has complete command over the entire creation and would move the universe with just a thought But it is for our own inner evolution that we should work for Sahaja Yoga and request Her with all humility to accept what ever services we can render. May we be in everlasting yoga with You. May everything we have be utilized in the service of Sahaja Yoga. Mother. kindly keep your this form, which is quenching the thirsts of our Spirits, in good health for years and years, Nirmala Yoga

 KOLHAPUR 1st Jan. 83 Shri Mahalakshmi नमस्ते गरूडाखूदे कोलासुर भयंकरि। सर्वपापहरे देवि महालक्षमि नमोऽस्तुते || Namasté garudārūré kolāsur-bhayankari, sarvapāp-haré Dévi Maha Lakshmi namostu te -Padma Purāna (Salutations to thee, who is mounted on the Garuda bird and is terror to Rakshsa Kolhasura. Who is the remover of all sins, O Devi Mahalakshmi, obeisance to thee.) Today again is a new year's day. Every Mother Earth, in this particular place. That new year comes, because we have to take to means this place has got a capacity to give somethfng that is new. It has been so arranged that the sun has to move for 365 force or an intensive feeling of evolution. If days and again a new year has come. Actual- ly the whole solar-system is moving in a spiral way. So, there is definitely a higher, not so sensitive you are still so conditioned higher state of this solar system. Every year and still outside, that may not work out. I you a force. You can say, an additional you are sensitive enough you can see that, you can feel it and you can do it. If you are So it is not mean all kinds of things can be done, but if only that-it is because 365 days have passed somebody wants to remain a stone you can- because it has moved a step forward higher than what it was. that in awareness, human beings have defini- tely risen much higher than what they were, out in this place Kolhapur. Normally, this say, about 2000 years back. But, the first place should be very very warm because of system that started the whole universe was its position. But even in summer this place the first model, you can say was created. keeps very cool because of the vibrations, from And that model has to be perfect. And that the temple that is emitted. The people in this was a perfect model which then started per- place may not be so aware either. We can- fecting the rest of it. So that is the perfect not say if they are aware. Because as neg- model which is in the principle of this ascent. ativity has to come forward, there are lots of And that is working out this ascent. Now, sugar factories and lots of alcoholism going on the perfection of the rest of the universe takes here. But we have to take the hest advantane -t--- i disnntione Pu tnduan not do anything about it. Now, we can see So this Mahalakshmi principle is working TEtntalitou Theotinite foct vOU lihow e ihatis and is surrodded litCo ow dcusin ier lay to seupo Now the tede S wilf br Mananhaim E mavhob theshD n st oonedlcen i Nwal.Vou

 see that, it is in another person this exists. lakshmi tattwa cannot be established. Maha- lakshmi tattwa is strengthened through Guru Whatever I may try to say they always see in principle. Now we are lucky today because there was the birthday of Dutta, the Duttatreya negative person amongst us. You need not just the other day when we had the Pooja, be compassionate to that person. On the and other person. Now supposing there is a Mahalakshmi puja. contrary better be away. Get rid of that today is this So two things together we have got together. person, as far as possible don't have anything First was the Dutt puja and today is this to do is a definite sign of great compassion puja of Mahalakshmi. So, to have the Guru principle all right, we must make anything to do with the person who is nega- our Dharmas correct. Now these Dharmas, as I have told you many times, are ten, and we should look after these ten Dharmas away from a person who is not positive. It in a very careful manner. These are expressed outside, but whatever is inside comes out. Now I find when you people talk, and you conditioning is such that still though you have say things, I know that this person is negative, become a Guru tattwa, you don't understand that person is definitely positive. There are so many ways of expression of positivity. there is no brother, sister or any other relation- But how I know that, I cannot tell you, because I just don't know how to tell you There is no other relationship. One of these that. But I just know that such a person is principles are to be understood. Very impor- definitely positive and such a person is nega- tive. The positivity lies in understanding why ship is only to Mother end to Sahaja Yogis are we here? First of all, why are we on this earth? Why are we human beings? In understanding what are we doing about it? whether through anything else". Now this I Why are we Sahaja Yogis? Yogi has to do? What is his responsibility as a Sahaja Yogi? Then he moves forward to understand, why Mother is so kind to me? Why have I got vibrations? Why am I among very few who have got this special blessing, the special knowledge of vibratory awareness. And then to ask yourself. what am I doing supposing you have collected lots of wheat about it? Am I still very much embedded in my cheapishness or in my childishness, in all lost. It will be spread out like this; this my stupidity, in my harshness, in my aggres- side, that side, it will be all lost. But if you siveness. We always see these things in other people, not in ourseives. So we are not Sahaja Yogis. We should understand at that point, when we start seeing these things way this principle of Mahalakshmi can spread in other people, then we are not Sahaja Yogis. just across like that and can just destroy all We should see in ourselves and emit pure that Mother has given us and all that we have compassion to others. But always people had all these years, only by spreading it out. IS to yourself, if not to others. Better not have tive, if you have to come up. He may be your brother, sister, anyone. But try to be causes lots of problems. I have been telling you this and I have been requesting you, but that you have to be detached. For a Guru ship except for the relationship of the NMother. "That our relation- tart I feel is for all of you. and not to any relationship which has come to us. Whether through Sahaja Yoga or What a Sahaja have been explaining because our Maha- lakshmi Tattwa is not all right. That is why we get sort of fritter away, lost into these things. And the Mahalakshmi tattwa has to be like an ascending force, all put together. Like my father used to give an example. That it will be and you spread it on the ground, put it in a bag, it wil rise In height, naturally. It will have and it will go higher and higher. In the same those maryadas; #afer it will rise Nirmala Yoga 4.

 Now to collect it inside, s to pay atten- is. How your behaviour is. You should be tion to yourself. First of all, try to clarify your human. But sometimes, even with me, 1 ideas and your understanding 'in brain, is find people talk in a very funny manner, important. Because Mahalakshmi tattwa ulti- just don't understand, how it is that always mately works in the brain. Is the enlighten- they say the wrong thing. I mean, even if ment of the brain, is done by Mahalakshmi they have to say one sentence, they will say tattwa, It gives you the Sat, (aa) the Truth, you see. So in the brain you must clarify. It is also Vishuddhi, which is also Nabhi. Reach logically; Logically we must reach the Comes from Nabhi, because you must know conclusion I don't have to do these things. I that Vishuddhi Chakra is the ascent of the have to do these things. I have to ascend. Nabhi Chakra. So what happens, that a This is why I am here? What am I supposed to do? Now logically you convince your brain, his language, through his behaviour, through first of all. It is very important now after his face, through his nose, his eyes, every- realisation. Because if logically your brain thing, through the Vishuddhi Chakra. So the does not understand, it will always be chea- pish, childish, indignified or could be harsh, threugh the Vishuddhi Chakra. Now whatever horribly oppressive. It could be one of these. a wrong thing, It is absolutely with them. person whatever he is, is expressed through ascent of the Nabhi is expressed, shown, you have in the Nabhi, is shown here. Suppos- ing, now a person who has the Mahalakshmi tat- So, in Guru tattwa, there are ten elements. twa properly developed, such a person will have Five of them deal with the weight. "Weight". a way of dealing with another person where Guru is the weight. Weight of a person. he will have the weight, as well as the under- How much weight you have got? The gravity, standing, how far to go with the person. as we call it, Person has a gravity. When How far to carry on with that person. How he talks how much balance he has got. See far to talk to a person. in Indian Music, we call it Ta (Vazan) means about it. How much importance to be given. the weight. The weight of the person, means That is one point, is very important. when he is dealing with himself or with others, how much weight he carried. In English also they use this-weight. How much weight he magnetism you have? So you reverse back to carries with others? Means, how much he can yourself. The magnetism is a magic, is a really impress others? If you impress too, all magic of a person. A person is magnetic right, then the person will say, 'Ohl it is too because he has certain magic. Now this much.' That is a very big quality with western magic comes from your own personality. From people, is, "Ohl that is too much!" They have your own personality. So the basis of magne- an idea, you see this is all ego oriented, That is tism on the left hand side starts and that is too much. If you tell them too much, 'Ohl that basis is Shri Ganesha. Shri Ganesha is the basis is too much'. She is too much. I move slowly, slowly. It is too much for me'. It is very common. It is very common reaction, So how much weight you have. And the It is not a material stuff. But it is something second one is the quality of magnetism. Two abstract, comes from your quality of Ganesha, things weight & magnetism. First is the Shri Ganesha. Such a person is magnetic. quality of weight that's how much dignified Magnetic means such a person attracts other you are. How you talk. How your language person because of the weight of the person, How far to think And the another point is how much of that magnetism. So your innocence; inno- cence is the best way to have that magnetism, Magnetism you cannot explain in material way. Nirmala Yoga 5.

 because of the quality ot the person. Such a and much weightier, you cannot be destroyed person attracts, but does not attract for lust, by a thing that, whom you ate attracting. greed and non-sensical things. But attracts Always the greater magnet attracts the small- another person because of the fragrance of love in the subjects. Now it is always con- fused, confused because it is such an abstract charismatic temperament of a person, comes thing. So one must understand it in a very by, first of all, the Ganesh tattwa, innocence. subtle way. What is this magnetism?-that And secondly by complete dedication and one should understand. You see, there some devotion. Those who are 'completely dedic- gestures people use artificially which normally ated and devoted to Mother. Not to 'anything" they have been using just to attract other else. Ganesh tattwa again. Not to your wife, people, the way they walk, the way they dress, the way they live. All these things are of no your country, not to anyone but to Mother. use. It is something so inner, that fragrance is "Complete dedication' gives you that charisma, so inner which must be developed. But in Sahaja Yoga l have seen. people just do not person becomes really attractive and such a bother about it, just do not bother. They person has it. think the way they have been living, the way they have been doing this-say if they are English, they are English, if they are French very passive person and if anybody says any- they are French, if they are Indians they are Indians, if they are from Kolhapur they will he person you are charismatic. It is not. People from Kolhapur. These ideas first muust be curbed off. Because the fragrance spreads They like you because they can dominate you. everywhere whether you are English or any- er magnet. And that is what one should understand. This magie and this charisma, not to your husband, not to your sister, not to or that attraction. In Sahaja Yoga such a Now some people think that if you are a thing to you and you don't mind,' sort of a like you because they can dominate you. Now if you think that by your aggressiveness one. So the fragrance of a person develops and by vour shouting and by your screaming through first of all the Ganesha princinle at these people, you will achieve that charis- within. Ganesha principle is to be first of all seen to. Now a Ganesha person is not a person who is absolutely a remorse type or a person who is such a gone case that even if you beat him up and make him into a com- is by not thinking about it. Like you see some plete minsed thing, he will bear it. It's not body asked me, 'How do you manage your like that, it's not that. quality of magnetism is such that it attracts all'. Then they ask me, 'How do you solve you, to a point where 'you' are not disturbed. Now this is a very important point we should all of mine. They said, "What about your know. You see, if you have other loves, love like carnal love and all other love you have, own. "Nihi, Nihi." Everything Nihi for me. then that love you may attract the person, Then how do you sir solve your this problem. then that person can destroy you and it des- By not having it, just have no, not have it, troys you, always. But this attraction does Don't take up headaches upon yourself. See not destroy, does not destroy. The attraction when you take up headaches upon yourself, is upto that point that you are not destroyed, then only the innocence is reduced. That because you being much higher much deeper headaches like this, that this is my shawl, this matic temperament, you cannat. You cannot achieve that height. So how do you achieve it? By becoming more innocent. Now how innocence develops in a person On the contrary the Income Tax?'I said, 'By having no income at your car problem?' By not having any car at house problem?" By having no house of my 6. Nirm ala Yoga

 is my sari, this is my thing, this is this, this is this, this is this. But only one thing is that argumentation. There is no theology about "this is my Mother and I have to proclaim Her', it. It is very simple. It is the simplest thing that is all. if that is the way it is, then inno- cence starts risıng like Shri Ganesha, and by lost, why? Because our attention is in laving no other headache. This is 'mine', that is mine, This 'mine We are looking at other things. It is so simple, business causes the problem, I think. Personally you know. Today I was thinking I have to I think this must be the reason. That this 'mine' business. This is mine.' Because whatever is as it is, because there were three ladies who mine, somebody told me.-this is very good wear nine yard saris and I had to give them argument she gave,"Whatever is mine is not three nine yard saris. That is all. I just thought 1, means thatis not Sahaja. My body my head, of it. All right. I came here, I saw very nice my everything-'my'. But 17"-she gave me this idea-1'. What is 'l'? Then 'I' is separated, do you get these?" She said "You get it here'. L Whatever is not mine is 'I. So what remains said 'All right'. So you go and buy these three is your Spirit", Somebody gave me this argu- ment. I said this is good argument to work it just came into my mind that I have to buy out. Then whatever remains is the I' and that three saris. Finished. The answer is here. So I is the one we have to see to. So you go on reducing all these mines, 'mines", 'mines. So situation is so innocent that the solution is the pure spirit of innocence will rise. So the presented by innocence to innocent. Inno- idea about Spirit also, people think that if you become spiritual-I mean, I don't know what because every body has little bit of innocence people think about spiritual people. But the in every one, isn't it? So you can,-it is like a idea about spiritual people is that you have to be something terrific like a bull or l don't fifth column within you. So if any porson is know. You have to be sharp like a fox or innocent, you see he will work on your fifth you have to be intellectual like Freud or something. All sorts of ideas people have! you give bandhan () to others, what hap- No, it is not! Spiritual person is just innocent, just innocent. There is no intelligence, and the poor fellow does not know. He has nothing. Just innocence. The whole thing is his innocence within him, you capture that innocence. So whatever he talks or says innocence, that is all you have done, that's comes through innocence. It does not have how you manage. intellect as such, which here people have it out things. Only principle, the tattwa, the whole through reading and through understanding thing rests on what 'tattwa-is nothing but and by analysing. Nothing of the kind. It innocence. just has 'pure' and 'simple' innnocence and it all works out very well, It is so clean. It afa afa (Neti, Neti)-saying not this, not this. just says what it knows and what it knows is the highest. then you also-it becomes sort of a theological is to be innocent. But the innocence is different way, we are attentive to other things. buy three nine yard saris.A simple question saris being put here. So I asked her, Where saris. No analysis. nothing of the kind. It even the atmosphere is so innocent, the whole cence works out in everything, you see fifth column, you see. The innocenca is a column and will make you all right. When pens, you actually bind him by your innocence It is very simple to work So try to develop this by all these things it Not this, not this 'to all your faults. "Not this not this, not this, not this,-you reach there. So this deconditioning has to be brought "Not mine, not mine not mine, not mine-you But you should not discuss it reach there. And that is how it is, and you see the whole material world is not attacking within us. us. among yourself also. Once you start discussing 71 Nirmala Yoga

 the innocence, because they are frightened. You cannot attack. Innocence cannot be inside, inside is, we can say, there are three destroyed. It cannot be destroyed. Innoce- nce is something: is all prevading and it can- not be destroyed. So whatever. people may right. But inside is the creation, that is all try, it cannot be destroyed. But it can be the elements being created and all that. But covered, it can recede, but it cannot be inside that is the desire and inside the desire destroyed. It will act, it's own way. So try is the half-one, you can say, is Ganesha. to develop that innocence which is the basis So this Ganesh tattwa ultimately overpo- of Mahalakshmi Tattwa, we should say, 'or wers that is essence of Mahalakshmi tatva'. So the everything. And this is, I would say, that outward things, the weightage, the weight, don't think about it. Just allow your inno- the dignity, the behaviour everything. It is outward thing and the inside thing. The tattwa, dignity. That is very important to have your the pinciple, on which itis based is innocence. dignity. Like some people think if they wear So outwardly it is Mahalakshmi tattwa, but cores. The first core is Mahalakshmi tattwa, outside to look at. you see the growth all everything and permeates through cence to grow, Simple innocence and your Now if it is this, if we understand Mahala- tall clothes and walk about on the street, and kshmi tattwa within us, how it has to work out. all they are big sanyasis. It is wrong. Why? You are not being dignified and God has that, I don't want you to project your intellect given you so much why should you try to into it. and to find out. But just remain where show that you have not got anything? Just you are and you will find the answers; just to show off that you have not got anything. coming to you. Automatically. Just don't God has given. This is just a sort of thanks- project your minds into it. Just you will get giving to God you have given me so much. You have to wear the best. Like in Puja if you see the ladies here wear all their noserings and all their ornaments and everything, in the temple, everything they wear, And in the same way, men also wear their very clean dresses, very ciean things, whatever they have, they wear simple clean dresses, whatever they have. But no austentation; it is just a thing by which you express. The God has It is not intellectual. Again I would say answers to every question just like that. Beca- use innocence in eveyone is the simple ans- wer wheie all the complications drop out in- посеntly. And that is what is the love of God, is the love of God. So don't confuse this with love, with all your non-sensical love, ideas you have about people and identification, misidentifica- tion. This is pure love within us, the purity, given you this. 'O God! I. thank you. the innocence is love and which is life itself, we should say, is a part of that, the prized. But pranashakti is not Mahalakshmi, So year, on the new year day to be here on Mahalakshmi is the 'essence' and'essence' of Mahalakshmi's place of Kolhapur. And this everything. Because if creation has to take is also called Kolhapur because Kolhasura place, also, if desire of God is there, and if there is no Mahalakshmi tattwa, then what is like a fox and he was born again. Now he the use of having desire,-is finished. Supposing is again dead. Thank God! He was here and even if you have creation and you don't have now he is dead. Kolahasura died. You don't Mahalashmi tattwa, how will you work it out? think about, it, again your mind goes out. You cannot work it out, You have to have Don't think about it, I will tell you about it. Mahalakshmi tattwa. Because they don't have I have deliberately avoided the name. He any meaning, It is such a great day today to be the new was killed here. Kolhasura was horrible fellow was born again and was pitched out. So Nirmla Yoga

 this is the place where Kolhasura was killed, they tried to establish themselves. And gradu- where this was established. So Mahalakshmi ally they are being neutralised and cleaned out. incarnation came in and that is how this These tantrikas have gone into every temple place has a spacial value, that we have come of all the Goddesses, And they will be gra- here for a pilgrimage and let us be in a humble dually all out, straight out, So this is the way think about it. Actually these things attack that came through and that how these could not take place in the West. Because brahmins came down and settled in these even if they had come out of the Mother Earth places'so called' brahmins-and tried to who would have recognised them? Who preach about all tantrik method and things here would have known about them? Who would have respected them? Who would have wor- shipped them? That is why it did not happen in the West too much. But it is there, little people to develop concentration of mind so bit is there, no doubt. But here now we have that you rise above all other misidentifications these all these temples and the attack on the and get identified with the 'pure Spirit' tihrough innocence has come from the tantrikas. And your Mahalakshmi principle. so the tantrikas rented out this temple and in the temple and they'ieally' spoilt the atmos phere here. So may God bless you all. I want you May God bless you. ANUPAMA'S POEM Shri Mataji has three very beautiful grand daughters who, to the sahaja yogis, are little goddesses. (Perhaps, after all, the sahaja yogis have just there the right insight.) The youngest one, Anupama, has written the following poem : "I am a little cabbage Divided into two I give my leaves to others And my heart to you." London, July 83 Nirmala Yoga

 SPIRIT Spirit is the most precious thing that we have within ourselves. The preciousness of your Spirit is immeasurable and that is why it It is'Attention'. When it is excited (in sanskrit is called the thing of eternal value. Because it is infinite, we cannot measure. witness fike a light. But His another quality is the 'Chit', (frq) there is a very good word for excited, it is i. e. the pulsation) or when it is pulsated His attention or when it pulsates, then through Now, God the Almighty we say is 'Sat- Chit-Anand'. Sat () means the Truth', The truth, we understand, in human terminology His attention He starts creating. And He has third quality which we call is relative. But the Truth' I am telling you is 'Anand', (a). Anand is the feeling of 'Joy' the absolute, from where all the relations that He gets by His perception, by His start. Example, I will tell you, how to under- creation, the joy that He gets. All these stand. This Earth has got oceans and rivers and all kinds of waters you can say. But the earth is enveloping all of them. three things Sat Chit Anand' when they are at a zero point where they meet, then they If the mother become principte of Brahma. When these Earth was not there, there could not have three things are one, where there is complete been any of these existing. So we can say, silence nothing is created and nothing is that the mother Earth is the support, of all the manifested but the "Joy' is ane with the things that exist on earth. She is enveloping Attention' because the 'Attention' has'reached us, In the atoms, she exists, in the big mountains, she exists, because the elements to merge into 'Joy' and Joy has become one with the 'Truth'. This combination of are part of that Earth. In the same way is three qualities separate and create three God Almighty. The "Sat' part of Him, the types of phenomena. 'Anand' the joy inwards Truth' is the support of all the things that are merged with His creation and with the Truth created or not created. Another example; When "Joy starts moving with the creation, you try to understand. How, the 'Sat is the the creation starts, moving down from first, "Purush' (To), is the God who does not take the 'Sat' or Truth' stage to Asat' i.e. 'untruth actual part in the creation itself, but is a catalyst. The example can be like this, That, I am doing all the work I am creating every to 'Maya' i.e. "Illusion. And that time, the creation starts. on working out and when it starts working out, the 'Joy which is on the left thing, but I have a light in my hand. With hand side the emotional side of God also starts out the light, I cannot do anything. Light is becoming grosser and grosser, till they reach the support of my work. But the light does a stage where there is, we can say, a complete not in anyway do anything about what I do. darkness of Tamoguna, the complete ceasation In the same way, God Almighty is just the of the creativity and the complete, sleeping 10 Nirmala Yoga

 be human being. Because at this stage, you have to jump only a little bit that side, while wati. That is why Christ said, 'I am the light. you start jumping this side and that side. Because this jumping is not possible unless and until the awareness reaches that stage, absolutely gross, dormant or dead, then it where you become independent and in that reaches the second stage of creation. All independence, you find your own course. these things go deeper and deeper and become This is the position. Because your 'Self can- not be yaurs until and unless you are independent. As long as you are slave or under bondage or something that is gross, how can you enjoy that eternal joy that is within you? So it is for you to expose your- self more to that joy by opening out your "Self more and more and getting subtler and of the joy. Is it clearer? You will understand now Mahalakshmi, Mahakali and Mahasaras- Because He represents the 'Sat the light of God. And when the light of God becomes grosser. That is one part of the paraboli. Now the another part of the paraboli starts when you are Almighty. That process now gradually starts becoming higher and higher, subtler and subtler and finer and finer. In that refinement ultimately the light works for the evlutionary process. Gradually the grosser parts start becoming enlightened. You find the lower animal is not much enlightened as the higher ting self realisation, unless and until these animal. Gradually even the 'Joy' starts becom- ing subtler and subtler. We can call it not feel that you have established yourself. beautiful. Human joys are much more beauti- ful than that of animals. So the 'Joy' also start changing their manifestation. In the sense, you start more and more and wider range of "Joy' comes into your hands. For example, how will you see me ? If you are not aware to a dog beauty has no meaning: decency to hear me how will you understand me ? And has no meaning. So at a stage when you reach, when you are a human being, to that extent you develop your 'Sat' which is aware- ness; to that extent you also develop your Joy and to that extent you also develop you felt, you said "what a beautiful thing it creative action. "creativity' of God passes into the hands of the joy of creation at this stage and Man is Man, when he turns out; how the 'Joy' of God passes into the hands of Man and how His part is such a little thing. Very little it is. 'Light' comes into the heart of Man as 'Spirit. back to God attaining cleaner; so that you feel that 'Divine. Once you know this point that, after get- three things start merging together, you can- The Joy within you, must be felt through your awareness, otherwise you cannot see it. Suppose you have no eyes, then how can you see ? If you were not aware to see me, once that awareness comes to you, then only the 'Joy' awakens within you. Because only through these subtle teeling of the awareness, you are going to absorb the Joy. Just now Now you see how the is!" You felt very happy. You are feeling the summit of creation. But only the 'crown' Very little distance it crosses in no time, but It is beautiful. I have just touched, when only thing is that, three things have to be you have become a human being, people say human beings have a soul, not that others do you get Self realisation, you do not feel the not have, but light starts burning in a human silence. Because you have not become the being only. combined. And that is why you find even if "Light'. You do not feel the 'Joy' because you have not become the Anand'. That is the Because of that 'light' we talk of religion, left side of you. In everything, there is 'Joy' we talk of God and we talk of eternal things. as a human being, you start seeing Joy' in But it is really a precarious stage, that is, to patterns. You see a key box, you open it Nirmala Yoga 11

 You see the patterns. You call it the in your family people, in your relations, veneer. You call the roughness and things, the your friends, the first thing and the finest and greatest thing you can do is to give them Self- realisation which means the Joy of your out. smoothness and the harmony of it. You start feeling the matter, the Joy of His creation. But after realisation, you start feeling Spirit. Expose them to the joy of their Spirit, the 'Joy' of creation. The summit of creation is the human being and that is why for a Sahaja Yogi he must realise, if he tries to be friendly or interested or involved in a person who is at a lower level, he can never get the Joy' from that person. Only thing what he can do is, to raise that person higher to his own level there and I want you all to come into it and and make him also feel the same 'Joy' as you enjoy. It is all foryou. Whole thing was created are getting. Supposing a man who is an artist marries a blind girl. What is the use? subtler and subtler. You are wasting lot of She cannot enjoy the Arts created by this time here on very gross things, you have man. In the same way, if you are interested noticed. which is the most precious thing. And this is the reason, why people flicker and they fiddle and they feel uneasy and they lose their joy very easily at small things that has parts of it and finished. It is like the ocean before you, where I am for your enjoyment. You have to become EKADASHA RUDRA Some notes from Mother's advice on how to correct problems with the Ekadasha Rudra (given in Delhi-1981) 1) Establish your innocence. Put your eyes to mother earth. 2) Cleanse your void. If you went to a false Guru beat him with shoes. 3) Put your attention more to Nature than to other people. 4) Be careful when organizing; stop organizing if you are catching on this centre, and don't speak in public. 5) Obstinacy catches here. 6) A half-hearted commitment to Sahaja Yoga can cause a problem with the Ekadasha Rudra. 7) The Ekadasha Rudra collects from the left and the right sympathetics. Therefore the combination of a left catch with a right catch will particularly affect it. -David Spiro 12 Nirmala Yoga

 Talk given by Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Paris June 18, 1983 Importance of Puja and Havana I am so happy and joyous to be here with so many Sahaja yogis and so many of them So now the new situation arises : that you do not have a blind faith, but you have a faith that has come out of an experience. So your intellect should not fight it. It should not try to challenge it. If it start challenging it and if you hear to your intellect, you will again go down. Even if you get the glimpses of a star in the sky, then the scientist believe that there We can compare the Spirit with the sun: is a star. So in the same manner, even if you the sun can be covered with the clouds. get the glimpses of your realisation, you have There can be superimposition on the sun, but to at least believe that you are also the Spirit. sun remains as it is at this point. You cannot You go on sticking to that experience and enlighten the sun. It is illumined by itself. keeping your attention on the fact that you are Now, when the clouds are removed, the the Spirit. Tell your intellect not to cheat you superimposition are removed, the sun shines anymore. You can turn the face of your are very new, not very new to me, perhaps I have known all of you thousand of years back. In Sahaja Yoga, you have all to under- stand one simple thing, that you are the Spirit. and whatever is not the Spirit is not yourself. through the atnosphere. So our Spirit is also superimposed by ignorance. As long as there is superimposition, you cannot see the Spirit. intellect by this. Now your intellect will start working for And even when few clouds disappear, the the pursuit of the Spirit. This is what faith means. Faith gives rise to pure intelligence. clear sky to see the light of the Spirit shining Now once you have seen clouds removed, still there are clouds. So you have to use the wind to remove the clouds, wind of the Holy Ghost. And-that you know-there are many ways of taking advantage of the wind. So ption, the faith, that we are the Spirit and that the wind comes from some other source. the rest is superimposition. You have to That is the source of the Holy Ghost, your assume that within yourself. After realisation, own Kundalini. And also you have in person superimposition exists. One has to have through. There are many ways by which we can try to remove the clouds. The first and foremost thing is the assum- it should become very easy. That you are the Primordial Kundalini before you. Compared to many other seekers who came before you, you are very fortunate. something much more, something very differ- ent from what you have known so far. Nirmala Yoga 13

 Because worshipping any vigraha, any statue of self-created vibrations of the Mother just concentrate on the puja, and how the Earth people had big problems. They had to first of all do a meditation which was called as Sarvikalpa Samadhi. That means in that work is-your only method is- just to con- state you had to concentrate on such a statue, centrate on tha puja and witness. You are a vigraha. Vigraha means the one which is a vibrating statue, And then go on looking at that statue, and try to raise your Kundatini. And Kundalini used to come up to Agnya, but sees only, just sees and he is only knowledge, the jumping beyond the Sahasrara was an impossible task because one has to go from any reaction, just sees and absorbs automatic- form to formless. And it was so difficult to ally, spontaneosly, he is the seer. For me get out of form to formless, and even to sometimes it is burden-some because there concentrate on abstract or formless was another impossible task. As the Muslims did deities, some balance must be there. or many others tried to do. Under these circumstances it was necessary that the form- less had to take a form so that there were no more complications. As soon as you concent- rated on the form you became formless. Like if you have ice before you, as soon as you start touching the ice, it melts away and you start feeling the cool. For that, you must fully age on your chakras. wind is blowing. And the wind will see to it that it drives out all the clouds. So your only seer, Seer has double meaning. The one vwho he is a seer. Without any thought, without should be some parity between you and the Here you are saying all the mantras and the deities are awakened and there you are who do not want to receive any thing within Your heart. So I am the One who has to stock up all the extra energy that is produced in my Body. So it would be better if you all keep your hearts opened and watch the puja without thinking about it. Today we will So the problem is very easily solved now. reverse the method of the Puja. First we will do the Havana and then the Puja, it will be excite the forms into formless. Now your better. Because by that we will evoke the centers are the centers of energies, but they fire element which burns away all the evils. too have a guiding deity sitting on all these When you wash my Feet you do the same chakras, They are also the formless made thing and even when you evoke the fire you Puja is one of the things by which you can into forms. And when you do the puja, the do the same thing. forms melt into formless energies. And these formless energies start flowing, and then Today first we will have the havana and blows the wind. And that is how these then the puja, both are just the same. You misidentifications, these superimpositions on can worship Me with water or with fire. The essence of fire is the glow, all that is wrong, all that is evil is burnt off and then the the Spirit are removed. Now you cannot think about the puja giow shows on the faces and on the bodies of These are things which happen into a realm which is beyond thinking. So you have to understand that you cannot rationalise the Puja, You should have the maximum advant- May God bless you. the seekers. And also the atmosphere is charged with the beautiful vibrations when you have the havana. Nirmala Yoga 14

 Shri Mataji's advice 31 st. March 1983. Hampstead town Hall, ENGLAND God's Work and Negativity I realise that when something is very important from God's point of view all the so-called, our concern negative forces work out their plans on how to delay, how to put obstructions how to deviate or how to bring hinderances. It is very surprising. Today, it would be best if I tell you about God's will and how, we the human beings, try to go against it all the time. But as we start growing in our awareness for the is not for Spirit. I would say that we are like a tree down into the earth so as to stand and grow: so also the Toots we have are in our brain. And then we start growing upwards and upwards till the leaves emerge, flowers bloom and fruits are created. But on the contrary before reaching the fruit stage what happens to us is that we start creating artificial leaves and enjoying them. We take to artificiality. Once this identification with artificiality starts, we begin to move away from reality to negative thoughts or to over-positive thoughts which are actually anti-God because it is with them that we which pushes its roots God's will is extremely simple. His is divine love: He is compassion and He is the ocean of mnercy. He created this world and then created human beings just to give them the highest thing in life-joy. Joy which is a simple thing, does not have duality like borro- wed happiness. But how are we anti-God and anti-joy, and why does it happen ? make atom bombs and all that. Our awareness, as you know, grows through our brain downwards. And what starts growing downwards takes us away from God. Ultimately we have to achieve God. But first we go a little away from that They destory themselves, trouble themselves awareness of being one with God ; just to understand that freedom has to be used So, there are really two branches into which we branch off. Some people like to go towards the left side or the negative attitude. and do all kinds of things by which they can die and in the most miserable manner. They get all kinds of diseases upon themselves. They torture their body; they torture every- e ob BM 1y properly. Without that training, without that education it is no use giving freedom human beings. You have seen the free thing that they have. Then the other side is is the right hand side in which they move to torture others, to destory others, to over- power others. Both the ways are away from God, His mercy and His grace. The concern throughout should be towards the Spirit. In their freedom what have they achieved, atom bombs to kill ourselves ! It is stupidity. It is foolish. It is absurd. But we have done it. We are proud of it and are still busy on how to make it worse and worse for ourselves. This is how we move. The Only thên is the movement in the right direc- tion. But this concern breaks up very easily in human beings because they have the freedom to do it. In their ego they break it up so much that when you develop the artificial awareness that was our own, human awa- reness, was given to us for our freedom to be tested, to be experimented and to be seen. And finally, to have ultimate freedom by which you become the Spirit. way of easy-going life, then even the con- sciousness of God is lost, that He exists, that You have to become the Spirit ultimately. He is the one wha is running the show. We 15 Nirmala Yoga

 Compassion; He is Mercy: He is everything. But in His mercy only, He is going to destroy become so conscious of ourselves that we think there is nothing wrong. We do this, we do that and plunge into all kinds of problems. this world. He won't allow more sins to be What we are doing is really against ourselves, and ourselves means God because God has destroys. What is cancer ? What are all these created us and He loves us. We don't love diseases that are coming up in our body? ourselves. if we had loved ourselves, we They are nothing but our own destructive would not have abused our body and our own forces that we have built within ourselves. systems and everything that we have by There is no fear from outside ourselves or any saying "What is wrong ? Why not do it ?" You star or any extra-terrestrial attack. No, there must love this body of yours, this mind of is none. It is within us that the attack is yours and this society. You must love every- built, of which we should be aware. In the thing you have, because God has created you name of freedom we have gathered within in His love. But love itself has become a ourselves all the germs of destruction. It is a much perverted word. Now what is wrong such a built-in process that we are not even in promiscuousness ? Is it love ? If I tell you that it is not because it is against nature and are there. We are quite satisfied with our it gives you trouble, you will be in a mess. selves, our artificial life, etiquettes and super- But people may think that this lady is matronly ficial mannerisms. she is old-fashioned and Victorian. Listen. It is a fact. Why do we do things which will destroy. You can't create yourselves. You can't even create a rose for yourself, leave alone the whole body. Then why should we be anti-ourselves ? Why should we be anti-society which we have created ? Or against left in the dictionary today! Respect yourself. committed against Him. Even otherwise He aware that these attacks are coming, that they Innately, within us, resides the Spirit which wants to enlighten you, to give the peace, the bliss and the joy of our being. This beautiful lamp of yours has been created with a purpose, It has to be enlightened. Respect yourself. There is no word called 'respect', the whole nation or nations that we have created ? What are they doing-all these politicians-today ? Fighting. For what ? Just light of the Spirit and it should be enlightened. look at them. I can't understand what the the fighting is for-to create more destructive has created for us but we in our ignorance, forces, more horrible things to destroy inno- cent human beings? Those who are innocent are simply warned. They don't know what to do. They don't understand why they are to be dead tommorrow because some people going-just towards hell directly. For a mother have gone off their heads! And those who it is a thing of great concern. How to stop have gone off their heads are sitting at the this fall ? How to get them out of it ? How to helm of our affairs. That is how the negati- vity grows within us. We become negative. Both are negative attitudes because they for granted. It is a very precious life which We have to respect this lamp which has the And let us be that lamp which shows the glory too. It is such a beautiful world God in our so-called freedom, have ruined so many things. It is shocking to see where people are make them understand what is their worth, their value. You should not take human life was created out of many processes. It was created with great difficulty. Don't forget that you have to become the Spirit without which your life is a waste. Nay, the whole creation negate God. Negation of God is the first crime we have committed. We are not afraid of God. He is 16 Nirmala Yoga

 is just a waste because you are the highest in discussing things here and there.. But his attention is always focussed on the kite. Then, he says, a lady is carrying her little boy and doing her work in the house-giving water to her husband, sitting down with the kid, cooking and then rising up to do washing. creation. You are the epitome of that crea- tion. And what are you upto ? We have to form nucleuses that will talk openly about God. I was amazed to see that in this country The child is on her waist, resting. But her people do not like to talk about God. You cannot talk about God. Can you imagine such a state of affairs where you cannot talk about your creator or that religion means nothing ? Either you form some sort of a secret organisa- attention all the time is on the child. There is a woman holding a pitcher of water on her head delicately balanced. She is walking with other women. As they are walking together laughing, smiling, and talking to each other their attention is always on the pitcher of water, in now we belong to a certain cult. How the sense that the attention is on the Spirit can God have cults ? Just think of it. How can He have separate churches, separate temples and separate mosques ? How can we become fanatical in the name of God I Can have our attention on our Spirit which is the you imagine, this is what we have done to God ! We have become fanatics. There is a stone which when He touches it becomes people think that it is a lot of trash which gold. When he touches anything it becomes should not be listened to. They want to hear gold. But there must be a stone : when He the same mundane things again and again. If touches human beings, they become like it is a broadcast, say, the Conservative party or prisoners. That is why there is so much the Labour, they will listen to it for hours-such fanaticism. It is a problem how to give this mundane stuff. Every year you hear that. But news and this message that you are the if someone says "No, this is all artificial you Spirit and you have to become the Spirit. In the same way, though we have to lead a life here, it is absurd that we do not giver of the ultimate in life. But as soon as you begin to talk about something spiritual, have something more worthwhile within you and hearken to it" they think they have not come to hear all these things. "What is it that My mother-tongue is Marathi,-and thank God, I Because it is a country of saints. Thousands of saints live in that country. It is the tradition; understand what these people have done so it is so spiritual. Spirituality is the tradition of far and we have accepted it What we have the place where I great and 'rashtra' means nation. The tradition the horizon. A star is shining within us and there is of spirituality and not of alcoholism, that is our Spirit. drugism or any other' isms'. Spirituality is the tradition of that country where a very simple poet called Namdev was born. He was a tailor, just an ordinary tailor. But he has written many sweet poems. I will explain tying up their thighs and polishing their own what he says, "A little boy isflying a kite in the flesh. Just imagine ! In the name of God sky. He is looking at the sky; he is talking to doing such horrible stuff. The explanation is his friends; he is moving up and down and that 'you must undergo mortification'. Why have been born in Maharashtra. this mother is telling us ?" But now awaken On a different level we have to and arise. was born. "Maha means taken for granted for all these years is beyond People talked about it, talked about God, made another cult which said they were doing God's work. In "God's work' the ladies are Nirmala Yoga 17

 should you mortify yourself ? 'Because Christ bothered about it. I have no doubt one should feel desperate. Even the Sahaja yogis some- whatever Christ did was a waste so a little bit times get very upset and become extremely of yours was needed to add to it ! Whatever desperate saying "Give up, Mother. We have has been done has been more than sufficient finished with it and no more". But I do not because Christ was the Prince. And if a prince know how to remove my attention from the has to undergo mortification what is so great Spirit. If you can try, try your level best to did it'. Are you Christ ? And that means about it ? He has already done it and He has remove it. You cannot. for you are there. So, worked for us. He is to be enlightened within whatever it is, you will fight to save as many as possible. So, all these Sahaja yogis who get frustrated at certain intervals, I have to say, you should not be frustrated. You have to keep your courage and understanding if you have feelings for others and if you show con- cern for them, they will understand you and you will be able to get more and mare people saved, emancipated and they will enter the Kingdom of God. As you are enjoying, they us and that is how we have to get our realisa- tion. The easiest thing to do is to sit down and ask questions, but it is best to get your realisation. That is the most important thing today. Of course, under the circumstances, as human beings are, it is not going to work very fast. I am very sure of it I have tried my level best. Like mountains you have to raise the Kundalini. It is really like raising mountains. You feel so tired and wom out. But then they don't want to appreciate it. do not get hurt about it. will also enjoy. The only snag is that you will feel so many are still lost. It does not matter. You have to work hard. We have to understand that there are negative forces which are pulling them down. They are ignorant and they do not So do not feel disappointed3; Slowly and steadily I am sure, in your own eyes, people will see how your life is transfor- med into joy and bliss and understanding. know there is a life beyond this mundane They will see how loving and delighted you have become and then they are going to gradually, I am sure, it will work out. Especi- believe that there is a better life for you. Some ally, for this meeting. They have lots of ups people are in such a bad state that they see a black picture of everything. They are so disappointed that they have given up. They have just given up. They say "Now we have just finished with it. We have done everything and now we do not want to do anything will perform vour desired duties. The time is more". I have seen in France. They are discussing about the collapse and the immi- running out and that is why there is nent destruction of the world. They are discussing that "Let us be finished now. We have had enough of it. Let us have the ultimate destruction whether it is an atom strife. The eternal life of beauty and glory. But and downs and the whole thing was dis- couraged. But one must still understand that God's work is blessed by God. He will bestow all His blessings and help on you so that you passing; very little time is left now. It is increasing desperation. The desperation itself has brought forth the advent of Sahaja Yoga on this earth. And you should feel more bomb or anything else. Let us be finished" strong to fight these obstructions that, you It is so desperate! I can understand the feel, are around and work out the Ultimate desperation of those who are thinking about, of those who are concerned about it. I am Goal of this Creation. May God bless you. 18 Nirmala Yoga

 Her Holiness Shri Mataji's Advice" You should be like a king sitting on his become old still you won't get anything. That's throne. Instead, you are sitting on the throne why, if you have not got anything, it shows and weeping and begging! What should be that you are lacking in something. The moment done to such foolish people? You are king you are separate from yoursell, your faults will and you should order your five organs that you have been tolerating them and now they seen, you will feel as if you are a king on throne. should behave. When you command your- If you find your subjects are creating distur- self like this, bring yourself under control like bances, order them "Be quiet, you will not this, then only you have become a good Sahaja do it" and not just in a persuading way Yogi. Otherwise, your mind goes somewhere "don't do it." Only that person is powerful, and you say "Mother what to do, I control who is keeping himself in full command. my mind so much but still it goes there". Then, what is mind? It is a living force, it will talk. When they talk, even to me, they forget go. It will go only at that place where it whom they are talking to. What they say is should go. Our organs will be awakened really surprising. They do not at all under- and we will never like to wander here and stand what should be said and what should there, and we will give up many things. be immediately seen to you and as they are Let us take an example of how people We must control even our tongue. It becomes possible, only after you become separate from yourself and watch. You have to be careful of what you say and see that it whose hearts are clean have very few is all right, Slowly you will form new habits, not be. Among all the things we must remember only one: keep our hearts clean. Those peopie problems. That does not mean that you are thinking of bad things. Clean heart means and then you will be able to order yourself, dedi cation. You cannot grow in Sahaja Yoga, always in 3rd person. A realised person if you lack in dedication or if you think that you are some special kind of a person. There is no need for someone special or new ways, you will make new judgements never talks in first person. He tells himself. "Please go there, please sit down", etc. Generally children speak in 3rd person, they say "Nirmala will not go now. here itself", Sahaja yogis should also speak in this fashion. Slowly, you should become separate from yourself. Leaving aside your desires, your materialistic ideas, or some other ideas, say, your ideas regarding power etc, you should think as to what you are doing for You say, being some learned "Mother I have not felt anything, I have no experience". It is due to your fault and riot that of Sahaja Yoga. Sometimes, people talk as if I have taken a contract or they have paid money to me, "Mother we are coming to you for very long time." However long you may come, you may come till you Sahaja Yoga and what you should do. person. She will stay "Translation of Shri Mataji's advice given in Hindi at New Delhi on 11.3.81. Alko see NIRMALA YOGA Vol. 3 (May June 81). Nirmala Yoga 19

 This dedication is very less in India, even now: It is much more in the West. They never come and request me to cure their relations. They never tell me their material difficulties and problems. You get the reali- zation very quickly and those people, poor things, they take long time because of their mistakes. which you can remain ever-blissful. You can never get joy from anything else. Whatever, may be the thing, He is the enjoyer. So. the point is, today you get something you want, but you are not happy. Tomorrow. you would like something else and even though that is given to you and you will not be happy. Thus, you will never become You get realization very fast but you don't happy from worldly things. value it much. They are realized late, but they have great value for it. They know its worth. Just see in their eyes, their concen- tration. They listen to me attentively, even though I am speaking in Hindi. Though they enjoy? We should enjoy His bliss. What is don't understand the language, their attention is fully on how the vibrations are coming made; how many things He has given to us; with it, how they are felt on the palms, and what is happening, etc. Now, they given this shakti in us; now we can know have dedicated their lives to Sahaja Yoga. They never think that they will do this as well Paramatma is the enjoyer, and therefore all should desire Him. We should enjoy the God, who is the enjoyer of every thing. If we start enjoying Him, what else do we need to God's creation; what a beautiful world He has now we have become Sahaja yogis, God has our Atma, and can recognise the Spirit in others, how much unending grace God is Only then you will go deep. You showering on us: with these thoughts you must understand that you will grow only by should grow in inner happiness. If you start dedicating your life in Sahaja Yoga. You don't enjoying the God like this, then you will find lose anything by doing that, on the other that your heart is growing and still more as that. hand, all well being comes in you. growing and you feel as if it is encompassing entire creation. You should devote the whole life to Sahaja Yoga. You should give every moment to Sahaja Yoga. That means living spontaneously. Where will the spontaneity come from? It enjoy God, have that joy everywhere, of what comes from the living force. It comes from God has given to you, what are the things He that living force which is ever present within you. You should not think of anything else. Today, my message to you is: start enjoing the Paramatma, leaving aside all other things has given to you, be joyous about them. Then you will find that your attention has Even otherwise, you cannot enjoy. Only stabilized. In this way you will progress in God is the enjoyer. You are under wrong impression that you are Enjoying. God is the enjoyer and He alone is the Creator. You are just in between. You are just like pipes. If at blessings etc." Otherwise your complaints all you enjoy something, it is God who has will never end and your aggression will also unending love for you. This is the truth, with not stop. Sahaja yoga. Every minute you should appreciate, "I have received this. I have recived such and such Nirmala Yoga 20

 Leaders in Sahaja Yoga "O Devi yoư are modesty in the heart of the high born" Devi Mahatmyam Let us do something which is not very when the latter is not really understood. Of sahaja, that is, cast a glance at the future. course the mischief maker is-guess what- Sahaja Yoga is now taking momentum and capital E capital G capital O. We find in the we can easily foresee the need of the coming Gospels this lively story of the apostles quar- years. The new Sahaja Yogis of today will relling about who was the greatest among have to be the leaders of tomorrow. As the themselves and Christ took a child and said: collective organism is growing, more and "If you are not like a child..." It was nice of more cells are required to perform key funct- them to play this rehearsal because Christ ions. There will be a need for Sahaja Yogis could thus warn the leaders in Sahaja Yoga to run ashrams and schools, to talk to the not to again spoil the show. public and to the media people, in a position, them to remember the story; a child is simple, above all, to deal with newcomers while spontaneous, he likes to play...he also plays displaying the required mixture of love and the role of the leader, but it's a play ! firmness. The blending of these two qualities is important: love attracts and consolidates positivity. Firmness keeps negativity at bay. leadership functions, I could propose the As already mentionned in this magazine, following description of the good leader: he inside (meditation) and outside (action) growths of the Yogi will complement each other. It is good for Looking at my brothers and sisters who are in Sahaja Yoga since years and assume the does whatever the Unconscious expects him to do, without false pride and without false humility: he does'nt do but he is: he does'nt Yet Shri Mataji has warned that leaders in perform but he vibrates; he does'nt appear Sahaja Yoga are particularly exposed and should thus move about in the various fields of his Mother's qualities). Thank God, he of life with full awareness. For a Sahaja Yogi, has a sense of humour: He becomes a bit full awarness ultimately implies Atma-consci- ousness, that is, receiving, giving, perceiving through the Spirit, realising thus the higher suspicious when he forgets to praise Her: synthesis of the Vishnu-Shiva tattwa within himself. Then the fruit of spiritual maturity. thoughts: of leadership come into his mind. i.e. detachment, will free him once and for all from the various bondages which can ensnare sometimes, the wind swells his sail; he does him, such as materialism, possessiveness in family life, job's worries, sex in the attention but he shines (with, of course, the reflections suspicious when his Mother starts praising him (although he just loves it) and extremely when he cares about his "position", when He does not push himself forwards but, not climb the mountain but, sometimes, he finds himself sitting on the top: someone has done it for him. He smiles: his Mother did it again: What a wonderful sightseing: His But besides these classical traps a leader programme is to enjoy and he does'nt even has to watch very carefully difficulties which feel sorry about it. He is neither guilty nor could stem from the very status of leadership responsible. He is most responsible. His etc, etc... *"Balancing the Internal & External Growth' NIRMALA YOGA, vol, 13. (Jan-Feb. 83). Nirmala Yoga 21

 compassion is not his. He does'nt help Mahadeva, offering Him thousand lotuses. anybody: everybody is helped. He carries with great pride two diadems, two bandans of the higher worlds. As the last lotus was sparkling snow and gold: the gratification of missing, he who is pushpalochana i.e. lotus his Mother and the love of his brothers and eyed, plucked out one of his eyes and offered sisters. These are the magic of his strength it to complete his worship. Shiva was enam- and the secret of his confidence. Anyone oured and gave to Vishnu the absolute who is adorned by the contentment of the weapon, the Sudarshana chakra. Shiva is Goddess and shielded by the love of the s Sahaja Yogis will become immortal. His beautiful and melodious voice enchanted said to be Naranarayana priya i.e. fond of Nara and Narayana. We shall all go into our A last word. Shri Vishnu is the Leader of depths and experience the relationship bet- Evolution, the Master of the Quest. It is written in the Puranas how Shri Vishnu pro- pitiated Shri Shiva in the Himalayas. He undertook to chant the thousand names of ween the two Lords. When the leadership of consciousness surrenders itself to the Atma all temptations of the ego are finished. A discipte Sahaja Yoga of Physical Cure-II and tove and adoration of a simple innocent Let us consider diseases. Diseases can effect us either through the ida or the Pingala sort-spontaneous and without forethought, Nadis, since both are affected by hordes of afterthought or ritualism. dead beings. Especially the Ida The being, whose attention is fixed so closely and focally on the Mother, automati- For a disease to enter the body, its vibratory cally develops other qualities such as pure defences must be weak. The strong points wisdom, knowledge, chastity, obedience and that protect the body are the Mooladhara and Agnya Chakras and the Left Heart. These three Chakras have, above all, deities that stand for Spirit. Purity and Truth and transc- endence over matter. Of these three, the most basic is the Mooladhara Chakra. love and above all, purity. This is because the Mother is the only source of these quali- ties in the entire cosmos and what does not emanate from Her is not true. As beings created by the Goddess, we worship Her, but as Her children we have The Lord or the Swami of the Mooladhara direct access to Her, to place at Her Feet, our Chakra is Shri Genesha. His outstanding perplexities and our confusion, our weaknes- quality is respect for the Adi Shakti in the form of the Mother. This is the aspect of the Goddess which is paramount. With it go ses and our strength so that She, carefully, as Mother, may nurture and integrate them and educate and re-evolve us. To have such a qualities such as absolute faith and trust in direct relationship to the supreme evolutionary the Mother whose instinct is to sacrifice for power of the universe is a very great thing the sake of Her child.. An innocent child and in some sense condenses and summarises knows this and puts his faith and trust, his all that there is in our existence. In reson- whole heart at Her Feet; with it goes devotion ance to this, Christ was born to Shri Maha- Nirmala Yoga

 laxmi to stand at the ultimate gate of reality gross impurity. But if, impure, then any state of gross purity is only transitional and cannot last. There are only two things worthy of The Goddess is the Creator and Preserver contemplation in this universe- Paramatma and Destroyer or Liberater and Evolver of and its surrounding Shaktis, both of which and ultimate truth. this Universe, and a wise child knows this, and nothing else, and knows that She stands torm of our Holy Mother Mataji Shri Nirmala at every door and turning point of human Devi. existence, placed by Herself there, in various forms and different in powers and attributes, There is nothing else in the Universe-Only the Paramatma-And any one who puts indeed to know the absolute in human form thoughts and attention on wordly matters and to have been given the chance to re- eventually weakens both the Agnya and cognise HER-as SHE is. This is opportunity Mooladhara. Be it on well-meaning things and privilege so great that words cannot such as Science or Literature or Politics, or anything. Anything that doesn't reflect the our attention and feeling on it. Initially 1 Spirit and its great Shakti, has no meaning thought to describe the various illnesses se- in terms of development and eventually shifts parately but that would distract our attention one off balance. are really one and have incarnated in the Let us consider our position, it is very great indeed for we have been privileged express or encompass it and we must place from the essential to the non-essential, so I will not speak of it. Any shift off balance as one knowS can lead to collapse. It is only the constant flow The attention is seated in the stomach of our Mother's Kundalini and It's powerful through the Nabhi and when centred rise effortlessly through the smeothness of the balances itself, that mantains, furthers and Sushumna to touch the Feet of Shri Sadashiva Himself at the Sahasrara and then to continue its ascent to the highest levels that man can aspire to. So do not waste the attention. Keep it pure-and no disease can assail you -and no power in darkness can hinder your force constantly rebalancing that which un- pushes forward Sahaja Yoga. The essence of human beings is their awareness or attention, that decides what one is or what one becomes. Shri Mataji said that where one's awareness goes "that" one becomes. The seats of power in a human being are not material or gross, but subtle and immaterial, bound together by the subtle filaments of the awareness. If the attention is pure, then, the being is not affected by rise to the Absolute. JAI SHRI MATAJI SHRI NIRMALA MATREYA NAMOH NAMAH. -Dr. Rustom 23 Nirmala Yoga

 The Sahaja of Physics-(Part I) mathematical, immutable laws, It was all. INTRODUCTION Seen as a yoga of knowledge (jnana very satisfying for the intellect: matter was yoga), Sahaja Yoga is known to us as the matter, God its creator was something else, knowledge of integration. It should thus be possible to integrate through its scope the science's confident observations various fields of the human knowledge, to man's enquiry, That is why the French grasp these fields in their essential principles physicist and mathematician Laplace could or tattwas, to understand how these princi- tell Napoleon that he did not need God as ples relate to each other and to God. This synthesis with the higher spiritual plane is concievable because Sahaja Yoga is above have shattered these beautiful certainties of all "Nirmala vidya", that is the science of the 18th and 19th centuries and, with Albert the living, the science of the immaculate Einstein, have laid the foundations of a sahaja working of the Adi Shakti. The time is ripe physics, that is a physics which embraces for the integration of all previous knowledge the Universe as a vibrating, organic Unity. in a higher synthesis : many people who are where, so to say, the shape of God can be not yogis have already started working on guessed. How ?-Modern physics shows at it. For instance, in his book The Tao of work in the matter patterns of phenomena Physics the Austrian Capra, attempted to show that the Eastern in the more subtle, higher spiritual plane. mystical tradition and the Western new physics were describing the world in stri- kingly similar patterns. It is quite reason- able to expect that Sahaja yogis who are scientists will be able to go quite far in this in the eye of the scientist, an hypothetical direction of enquiry once that they have primordial cause. His ways, His play (leela) grasped the principles of Sahaja Yoga. Even unfolds itself even in the very laws of matter. a layman like myself can play a bit further It is, this time all very satisfying for the with Dr. Capra'a correct intuition because intellect,.. and for the heart. the knowledge granted to us by Shri Mataji cists and, therefore, with due apologies for has opened fascinating horizons! somewhere else, removed from the field of and from an hypothesis to explain the Universe. Relativity theory and Quantum theory physicist, that can be found again through Sahaja Yoga Fritjof These patterns within the physical world are, so to say, projections which reveal something about the archetypical patterns of the causal, spiritual reality. And thus God is no longer As non physi- superficiality, let us pursue in this article some such analogies between the science-revealed Classical physics had found its most elaborate expression in Newton's mechanical physical Universe and the sahaja-revealed model of the Universe. In this deterministic spiritual reality. model, matter was made of solid stuff or substance evolving within the three dimen- sional space of Eucledian geometry. Masses and motions, material particles and the forces underworld of the infinitely small to find out between them were governed by clear, what is the nature of the subatomic units of THE PARABLE OF THE SUBATOMIC MATTER Let us make a quick plunge in the strange 1. Fritjaf Capra Tao of Physics' Fontana Collins (Suffolk, 1975). Nirmala Yoga 24

 matter, or, in other words, to find out what is the diety presiding over the chakra; its formless dimension the energy it emits. Hence both are one and the same thing. Like the subatomic particle the chakra is at the stuff is matter made of? And here is the first surprise ! Matter is full of tricks: these units are very abstract enitities and have nothing to do with the same time formed and formless, position and solid objects of classical physics or with our every day perception of matter, Depen- ding on how subatomic units appear as particles, that is, as entities confined to small volume, or as waves, stretched out through larger portions of space. This dual picture provides us with an unexpected concept of the reality of matter. components identified by atomic physics are, so to say, "identity" as particles and "eneray" Advaita Vedantism, forms of Islam) but his as waves. wave, identity and energy. Furthermore, in spiritual life also the The Uncertainty principle seems to apply and the the devotee is caught in its limitations. Indeed he either usually focuses on the identity of a personal God (Jesus, Vishnu, Shiva) and his consciousness loses tracks of the all pervading cosmic manifestation of Divinity outside of this very we look at them, these an extremely IS, form; or he focuses on the abstract undifferen- ciated aspect of the Divine (Buddhism, Taoism, Its smallest heart cannot find the bliss at the Lotus Feet of the identified, recognized Beloved one. The perception of the formed Identity drives But according to Heisenberg's famous "Uncertainty principle" these two aspects can never be perceived simultane- ously. Either the observer focus on the away the perception of the formless Energy, location of the particle and he loses sights can't get at the same time location and And vice versa. As the physicists say, we of its wave like momentum; or he meaSures momentum, the momentum but loses the particle's position. That is, from the experimenter's standpoint, the subatomic unit is identity or energy. The particle perception and the to the Formed when he has the darshan wave perception, as Niels Bohr saw it, are complementary. Both are needed and both the working of the Formless when he feels provide only a partial description of the same atomic reality. Quantum theory reveals a in awareness. Yet the full identity of these basic elusiveness in the very substratum of the Universe. For a Sahaja yogi the question becomes a very practical one. He feels the relationship (physical presence) of Shri Mataji. He feels the vibrations and the consequent mutations two aspects, although perhaps understood by the mind, is not fully realised. Indeed it is one thing to rationally grasp this truth that Without going any further in our expio- the two aspects are one Fation let us make an attempt at reading, in refer in passing to Hegel's central paradigm in this finding, the parable of one very important The phenomenology of Spirit : IDENTITY aspect of spiritual reality which was the (Brahman, Ultimate Reality) IS The IDENTITY subject of Shri Mataji's enlightening speech, (one-ness) BETWEEN THE IDENTITY (the on the 18th June 1983 in Paris. Formed) AND THE NON INDENTITY (the Formless),-But it is another thing to experi- ence this truth as a state of one's own cons- The dilemma is not without importance: If I do not realise the Person of Shri Mataji within the formless energy of Before the havan and the puja ceremonies Shri Mataji spoke beautifully about the relation- ship between the formed and the formless as- pect of God. Forinstance, She says, a chakra is both formed and formless. Its formed dimension ciousness. "See Page. 13, 14 Nirmala Yoga 25

 vibrations I will pine and feel separated from will come, by the grace of sakshat Kundalini Her when I am not physically with Her, I when a Sahaja Yogi will be able to perceive at won't be so aware of Her PREM (Divine Love) or above the sahasrara level, in Nirvikalpa or upon me. If I do not realise the formless beyond. Then many things change: these energy within the person of Shri Mataji will two shaktis flow into each other, all the constantly forget the true magnitude of Her deities of the sahasrara are integrated within personality, the perception of Her divinity will the formless and the attention has reached the seat of the Atma at the center of the Brahma- Her as if She were a human being. In other randra. At this highest stage the Yogi words, we could say, parhaps, that the becomes what he perceives. Instead of Uncertainty principle is one aspect ol May3, saying "TWAMEWA SAKSHAT SHRI MATA- JI" he says "AHAM SAKSHAT SHRI MATAJI". as a inherent limit of the human psyche. Can While saying "you are" the distinction between it be overcome? - In physics, no ; in Sahaja the yogi and Shri Mataji prevents him to perceive Her formed and formless aspects in one integrated act of consciousness; while escape my awareness and1 will behave with embodied as a law of nuclear physics as well Yoga, Yes. The key to this answer is to be found in the words "from the observer's stand-point" saying" I am" he has no difficulties, from the Depending upon his standpoint, the physicist inside, to experiment these two dimensions; can measure the location or the momentum of a particle but not both at the same time. It is not in his power to alter his experimental standpoint in a way which would enable him to do so. While the Sahaia Yogi, through slow but steady growth, can alter his episte- aham Bhavani". He knows fully well that he mological standpoint. How? this is probably the state of "God realisation". ONE HAS TO BECOME HIM in ORDER TO KNOW HER. The author of these lines, for instance, certainly does'nt see himself entitled to say, is not at that level. But in Sahaja Yoga even It is of course Shri Kundalini who is the the most crazy hopes are allowed. And we magical doer., We could say, may be, that the know Her generosity ! The greatness of the Sahaja Yogi, at the level of Nirvichara Samma- dhi, perceives more the localised darshan of bestow upon us challenges the sheer capacity Shri Mataji through the mana shakti of his Ida of imagination. nadi and more the vibrations through the Prana shakti of his Pingala nadi. But a day Vienna 7.7.83 blessings that The Great Goddess wants to -Gregoire Our Mother is unique and desireless. Her advent is fulfulment of the desire of all seekers; and Sahaja Yogis are specially being looked after by HER overflowing love and Compassion, every moment. Let us all pray collectively every day after Arti, three times: "Shri Mataji, we the Sahaja Yogis of the World desire your good health". 26 Nirmala Yoga

 Installation of Shri Ganesh The establishment of Shri Ganesh marks the Shri Shiva to protect His mother's protocol. advent of sahaja. Shri Ganesh is the son of Why should the children disobey when Adi Shakti Shri Mataji. She bestows upon they know that whatever Shri Mataji says is for Him great powers when She sits him on the their benefit ? Often Sahaja Yogis say, "but earth as its guardian. Mother why don't we do it the other way:" Are we to teach the Adi Shakti, who has crea- Shri Ganesh symbolizes the love of His ted the universe? But She is Maha Maya so MOTHER hence Sahaja Yoga is to be spread Sheplays with one's ego and consents to one's through love. wishes and suggestions. Organisers of As the guardian of the earth Shri Ganesh Sahaja Centres have to be very careful about has the special power of gravity which main- giving suggestions to Shri Mataji or interpret- tains our balance. In our body His chakra is ing Her instructions because they are too close placed outside the spine where the body is sewn together and this forms our foundation. Any disturbance in the foundation reflects in the chakra. It is therefore important that the foundation should be strong and well groun- ded. With the spreading of Sahaja Yoga, point, whereas one's intellect is limited to many Sahaja countries will spring all over the world. However their efficiency depends on the strength of this foundation which is Shri remains connected to the mains and the vibra- Ganesh. If the foundation is weak, the neg- ative forces can easily attack, and render us inelfective, the instruments of Shri Matail's Without vibrations there cannot be Sahaja love. If Shri Ganesh is strongly entrenched Yogi thus Shri Ganesh gets upset with the then no-one dare attack. Thus the inner organisers, thus the growth of Sahaja Yoga weakness attracts the outside negativity. Shri suffers a set back. Hence it is sometimes Ganesh is the protector of the Devi's protocol, better to be a nobody, than a big busy body. If we seek His protection then we have to be very careful of the protocol of Shri Mataji. When we are not careful there, He is angry to Maha Maya and can easily fall into it. The importance attached to the work often throws the viel of Maya. We forget that She is Maha Saraswati; the source of all arts and planning. Her instructions are from the supreme view 3-dimenstional and hence cannot realise its total implications. In one's obedience one tions keep flowing. In disobedience or cen- sorship the work snaps, the vibrations cease. A dispute among the organizers reflects a decline in their vibrations. The organizers should then withdraw for a while and ask the collective body of Sahaja Yogis to decide the and if He witdraws then we become vulner- able to the attack of the negative forces. The issue through vibrations, then it comes under most important aspect of the protocol is absolute obedience and surrender to Shri When the decision is based on conditioning Mataji. Shri Ganesh does not know any other authority except His Mother. He is so devoted to Her that He does not even know should not trespass it with Mundane Matters, His father-There is a story about how even like personal finances or family problems. Shri Shiva Himself could not enter Parvati's Though She may graciously listen to everyone abode because Shri Ganesh guarded the door- for a while, yet She has already taught us the way. He destroyed the the attention of Shri Mataji. She works it out. She does not work it out. Shri Mataji does talk about Her time yet we entire army of method of dealing with them ourselves. If Nirmala Yoga 27

 anyone tries to dominate Her attention or divert it into Mundane matters, the deity gets all foily committed in innocence. annoyed with these people. If a deity is upset, then He plays games with our ego. We should always be mindful of Her time and Shri Mataji bestows wisdom on Shri Ganesha. that Her attention is not brought down from the collective level. When inter-personal pro- blems arise among Sahaja Yogis it causes great pain to Shri Mataji to have to witness Her children quarrelling. The senior Sahaja Yogis dence regarding protocol, wisdom guides us, should resolve the issue among themselves as far as possible. Sometimes we go on com- aneously. plaining to Shri Mataji but we forget that She is all knowing and in complaining too much a long way. Shri Ganesh is being established we only reveal our own weaknesses. conduct talks to cover some folly. She forgives To maintain the balance of the universe Wisdom is not intellect. Wisdom is born when our intelligence is connected with the Spirit. Through wisdom our discretionary power develops. In the absence of any prece- infact we must observe the protocol spont- With the grace of Shri Mataji we have come all around the world. By being always mindful of the protocol the dieties are pleased and we can aiso save ourselve the excercise of The purest quality is innocence. This is the purity of our vibrations. Shri Mataji is falling in and out of Maha Maya constantly. pleased with this innocence., hence always be truthful to Her. Never use devious means or Yogi Mahajan, 'Mother's Love' You make me forget all the pangs and sufferings. Ol my beloved Mother! When I go out for work, I get heat of the world. 10 There is no better place than your Lotus Feet, Where I find my sole refuge When I come back home, Your Love cools me down. I pray not only for me, but for the whole world. Your love dissolves all that I gather, To extend your soothing Love to all To fill the whole Universe with your your love refreshes me. When I get injury outside, infinite joy, that you are. When I come to you. That who is infinite joy, Love, peace and get healing touch of your love. The world though full of miseries, beauty is going to make the whole creation manifested with His real nature, the eternal your love makes it peaceful. There is no place in the world to hide, happiness. Aum Amen when I come to you, you conceal me in JAI MATAJI your depth, Nirmala Yoga 28

 Advice Given to Sahaja Mothers by Shri Mataji "To be a mother-it's a most responsible vibrations of the parents-therefore it is impor- tant that the parents cleanse themselves as much as possible-from our practical experi- ence, almost all vibrational problems that the babies and children have is that of the position, that of a mother, it is even more responsible than that of a king-to be a mother" -Shri Mataji. parents- Becoming the mother of a reajised soul presented most of us with practical questions which before Sahaja Yoga would probably not have occurred to us. Here in London, Sahaja Yoginis were specially blessed to have of books about mother and childcare in order our Holy Mother to advise us. Knowing how to educate ourselves in the absence of sen- thirsty we were for these tips and guidelines, sible parental advice, which in a society such we have collected together all the points Sri as India would be available-the Grandmother Mataji has told to individuals; as far as we playing an important role. are aware, all the information given below was meant as general advice and does not relate specifically to individual cases-we hope it may prove useful to you. "It is a very special responsibility, that of having children." Shri Mataji has also advised the reading Another point which Shri Mataji has men- tioned on several occasions is the way in India that the whole society trains the attention of the child-by continually pointing the atten- During conversations with Sahaja Yogini tion, to the correct things. mothers, Shri Mataji has told us that in the Western society, the children are born with our ego and superego-this is the reason they are often born with little or no hair-in India, Shri Mataji tells us, the babies are always born with hair. Once the child has all its 'needs seen to, i.e., changed nappy, feed, he shouldn't full of positivity. be picked up all the time as this encourages ego to develop. THE PRACTICAL ADVICE During Pregnancy It is very important that the mother's mental and spiritual health is kept clean and "Whatever's going on in the mind will affect the child-the mind has to be happy- Shri Mataji has strongly advised us to feed you cannot be with artificiality or fantasy. on a regular basis from the beginning and to establish a flexible routine for the children-it has been stressed that to a reasonable degree On the physical side, if the mother is fit and healthy and the pregnancy is normal, Shri they should adapt to our life-style and should Mataji has advised a daily walk in the park or country throughout the entire pregnancy, This, Shri Matají explains, will help towards Shri Mataji has also explained that God an easier labour. (This advice would indicate can protect the children from most harmful that if the Swadisthana Chakra is in good not begin to rule us! vibrations, but cannot protect them from the condition, this will also help). Nirmala Yoga 29

 Mother's Diet After the birth The mother and baby should stay inside for forty days. Contact with non-Sahaja your own diet is very important while breast- Yogis should be minimal during this period, If your baby suffers from wind problems, feeding, to help reduce ths build-up of gases: (a) no rice should be taken3B (b) root vegetables and all things growing below the ground should not be Sugar and boiled water can be given to the baby from birth onwards. Treatment for colic: It seems that many of our babies have experienced problems with wind and colic. Shri Mataji gave us much advice on how to treat and prevent this: eaten; (c) no white flour or any produce made from white flour: (d) milk should be taken with something like cereal, never on its own; (a) ajwain treatment: foment ajwain by (i) chewing it yourself; or (ii) warming it in a dry pan. Place this on baby's navel with a warmed nappy over the top, hoiding it in place. (s) avoid cold drinks; (f) also omit all generally well-known wind-producing food, e.g., beans, spices, (b) the mother should also chew ajwain -quite a good handful several times a day. Another good way of taking almonds (sugared or plain), an Indian sweet aiwain is in a drink that Shri Matajicalled Rasqullah (sweet, white balls in sugar has shown us how to prepare: Good foods to eat are; semolina t syrup). Use 7 fennel ais seeds and 2 ajwain seeds with cracked block gugar (sugar candy)-make sure it is quite sweet (ordinary sugar can be used). Use them warm. If the weather is cold, they this as baby's drinking water, and the should not be bathed so often, Shri Mataji mother may also take it, (in severe cases, Sahaja Yogis have found that increasing the amount of ajwain seeds can help). Bathing When bathing the baby, we should keep says it is not so necessary-but daily oil massage is. Baby should be oil massaged every day as it is very good for the chakras. Use an oil (d) when the baby is older, i.e., approxi- such as olive, almond, mustard-not the pro- mately one to two monthe, grips water pietory baby oils, as they do not contain can be given--say, twice a day-but vitamins. Do not use olive oil on the hair, as this turns white. Massage with the oil towards tha Sahasrara on the head, as if to "fill' the Sahasrara with oil. it must be boiled first. (e) other preventative measures: (i) the baby should be properly win- ded, even if he falls asleep. Do not pick baby up under the arms as this can damage his shoulders and be very painful for him. (ii) when taking the wind out of the baby the hands should be moved in a downward direction from the neck to the base of the spine. Brushing the hair should be done even if their isn't very much, Brush it from the front Nirmala Yoga 30

 to the back on top of the head and upwards of natural fibres such as wood. Plastic toys towards the Sahasrara at the back and sides. do not have good vibrations and should be This is to open the Sahasrara and encourage avoided. growth of the hair, Shri Mataji has commented that it is better for the children to have fewer toys of better quality than lots of inferior ones, Clothing Shri Mataji has strongly impressed upon us the importance of the children wearing Weaning 100% natural fibres, and that only pure cotton should be worn next to their skin. Woollen cloth should be over this in the colder clima- tes or part of the year. Most important is should be natural, no packaged or artificial that the small indentation in the collar bone is ones to be given, Shri Matajl advises that the covered up-this helps to prevent them catch- ing colds. C putting over cotton ones. Babies to be weaned at six months-fully weaned approximately ten months. All foods first weaning foods should be rice mashed up Cherub' wool vests are good for With sugar and milk. Do not start babies off on curd (yoghurt), Feeding bottles should preferably be made Silk is not a good fabric for babies. Reg- arding nappies, use 100% cotton only as they of glass. are much better for vibrations, However, in situations like seminars where washing facili- ties are very poor, we may use the disposable Vaccinations Shri Mataji has advised us to get the children vaccinated against the childhood diseases, as this helps strengthen them against the negativity, ones as a temporary measure. To allow a good flow of vibrations, two- piece outfits are preferable to one-piece ones, and garments should end at the ankle. In Meditation cold weather, make sure the nabhi chakra is well covered, and keep head and feet covered. Girls should be dressed like girls, in dresses should meditate with us in the early morning or punjabi suits, and boys should be dressed like boys. Shri Mataji has recommended that children from being young babies. "One has to remember that motherhood is very importanf-it is the mother who created this universe, the father was just a witness," Toys Regarding toys, these should be also made Shri Mataji,. Note : Most quotes taken from andiotape no. 164 "The Mother" Shri Mataji also talks on children in no. 255 "Marriage and Collecticity" and the Derby tape. 31 Nirmala Yoga

 Sahaja Yoga and Nursery Rhymes Now that Shri Mataji has blessed so many city of London, which is nowadays the finan- of us with beautiful children, we are starting cial capital of the world and has, among other to sing the age old nursery rhymes once things, quite a nabhi catch. again, remenmbering the songs of our own childhoods. "Oranges and lemons, say the bells of St. Clement's, I owe you five farthings. say the bells of St. Martin's. When will you pay me ? Say the bells of Old Bailey. Our beloved Mother Our once explained how one or tvwo refer to Her or certain aspects of Sahaja Yoga, and the writer has taken the liberty of looking at some more from the angle of Sahaja Yoga. Hope- fully the ideas will be enjoyable to all mums and dads and other interested parties. When I grow rich, say the bells of Shora- ditch. When will that be ? Say the bells of Stepney. I do not know, says the great bell of Bow." Firstly here are three that Shri Mataji Herself talked about : The New Jerusalem starts from London, England, which is the heart of the universe The third rhyme that Mother commented on and at present the home of Shri Mataji. But is also something of a warning, but has a when Shri Mataji came to London to call Her Children, many were damaged to the point of "falling down" and She has had to use every conceivable method to build us up again. Someone made a song about this long ago and the children still sing it: sweetness about it too. It goes like this: "Ladybird, ladybird, fly away home. Your house is on fire, your children are göne. Mother told us that She is the ladybird in "London Bridge is falling down, falling the song. A ladybird is a little red beetle with down, falling down, London Bridge is falling down, my fair common in many countries including England lady. Help to build it up again, up again, up aphids which ruin rose bushes and is the again, Help to build it up again my fair lady. Build it up with sticks and stones, sticks Sahaja Yogis who have seen the dreadful and stones sticks and stones, Build it up with sticks and stones, my even make them run away. Her house is fair lady. seven black spots on its back. (It is very and the Himalayas. It likes to eat damaging gardener's best friend.) The second line of the rhyme is self explanatory to Western attacks on Shri Mataji's children which can perhaps the Sahasrara of the seekers, which is often burning instead of cool to begin with, when they first come for realisation. Shri Mataji is the fair lady. There is another very apt nursery rhyme about London, and this one is about lemons (chillies being unknown in England until in English and here are a few more which recently) and bells, which have long been used to frighten off negative forces. The song happens to refer to bells of churches in the much: There are a large number of nursery rhymes would appear to be about Sahaja Yoga. Firstly, in case the ego should come up too Nirmala Yoga 32

 "Humpty Dumpty sat on the wall, Humpty not decide whether he wants to dwell in the Dumpty had a big fall, All the king's horses and all the king's consequences are revealed in the last two men couldn't put Humpty together again." lines! Sahasrara (lady's chamber) or not. The To finish, here are two rhymes which Humpty Dumpty was an ego. glorify Shri Mataji in two of Her many aspects, Firstly, as Shri Adi Kundalini : Anather very well known one is Baa Baa Black Sheep: 4 had a little nut tree and nothing would it bear, But a silver nutmeg and a golden pear. The King of Spain's daughter came to visit me All for the sake of my little nut tree." "Baa Baa black sheep, have you any wool? Yes sir, yes sir, three bags full. One for the master and one for the dame, And one for the little boy who lives down the lane." The nut tree would be the Kundalini while the silver nutmeg is présumably the moon, which glorifies the left side. (Nutmegs are used as a sleéping draught, sleep being to do with the left side). The golden pear would be the In olden A black sheep is an expression used to des- cribe the odd one out, the eccentric, the one who does not fit in with the accepted norm. Only too often the Western seeker are "black sheep". Perhaps the rhyme explains why. stun whose place is the right side. The woo! may be the rubbish of conditioning days Spain was supposed to be a source of and the unnecessary ideas with which we clutter up our egos and super-egos. The one great wealth and splendour so the King of Spain's daughter would be someone very other to the dame, the left. Surely the litle special. Could it be that the princess is the Grace of Shri Mataji, which comes to visit boy down the lane is the Shri Ganesha. the seeker because of the Kundalini, and to Children manage to sing quite gruesome give moksha or realisation ? songs with great gusto and detachment. and this one is an example: We have all looked into the sky just after dusk and seen Venus shining so gloriously for "Goosey Goosey Gander, whither shallI it is the brightest star in the sky. The planet Venus is one of the seats of Shri Mataji in Upstairs and downstairs and in my lady's the solar system. Everyone knows this one: wander? chamber. Twinkle twinkle little star, how I wonder what you are. Up above the world so high, like a diamond in the sky," There I met an old man who wouldn't say his prayers. So I took him by the left leg and threw him down the stairs!" How many of us cannot help wondering The ward "hamsa" is the hamsa chakra, the at Our Divine Mother, our guiding star who is place of discrimination, means goose or so beautiful, so simple and yet so enigmatic? swan. Perhaps the second line refers to someone who is wandering around and can- Om Shri Mataji Nirmala Ma. -Linda Pierce Nirmala Yoga 33

 A Letter from Italy Aum Twameva Sakshat Shri Maha Buddha Sakshat Shri Adi Shakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Namo Namah Dear Sahaja brothers and sisters, By the grace and with the blessings of Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, a new Sahaja venture is under way in Italy, Near to Tivoli, famous for the fountains, there in the mountains to the east of Rome, by the river Aniene a tributary of Sri Tibur. The venture is a hotel/pizzeria. So the work is directed towards Nabhi Chakra, Liver and Void. The business was launched by Guido (of Italy) and Isabelle (France) on their return earlier this year from India, where they were wedded in the presence of Shri Mataji. The staff at time of writing consists of Guido and Isabelle, Billy (Irish) and Rosemary (Australian) and baby Sukanya (born in London), Akbar Amir (Iranian) and Pin (Sicily), not forgetting Gabriel from Rome. Giovanni in Sicily is working very hard to build another similar concern there. He has been given some land with a dilapidated building and is gradually preparing it for occupation. Please remember us in your prayers. especially void and ego are the obstacles up to now. We feel Shri Mataji's attention very much with us, particularly in the evening as customers begin to arrive in the Pizzeria. Also the Elements are very much with us and keep us clean. May Shri Hanumana take this message with our love to all Sahaja Yogis throughout the world in the name of our mother Shri Nirmala Devi. Amen. Jai Mataji. SAHAJA Y OGA ARCHIVES Let it be reminded here that we have started a Sahaja Yoga archives project. All the material used in spreading Sahaja Yoga is being collected in all the languages: pamphlets, posters, letters, newsletters, songs, mantras etc etc. The file is building up and we have already collected some very interesting-and perhaps one day historical-material. So we would be grateful if all the Sahaja Yoga centers throughout the world could keep aside for us one copy of the material they are producing. Once or twice a year they could send it at the following address: Sahaja Archive Care A. de Kalbermatten Chemin du Joran 1295 TANNAY-VD- Switzerland We are very grateful for your cooperation in this matter. JAI MATAJI Sahaja Yoga Switzerland. Nirmala Yoga 34

 99 Names of Allah LA ILLAHA ILLA HAH MUHAMAD RASULLAH JAI MATAJI 1. Ar-Rahman The Beneficent 29. Al-Adl The Just The Merciful 30. Al-Lațif 2. Ar-Rahim The Subtle One The Sovereign Lord 31. Al-Khabir 3. Al-Malik The Aware The Holy 32. Al-Halim 4. Al-Quddus The Forbearing One 33. Al-Azim The Source of peace 5. As-Salam The Great One 34. Al-Ghafür 6. Al-Mumin The Guardian of Faith The All-Forgiving 35. Ash-Shakür 7. Al-Muhaymin The Protector The Appreciative The Mighty 36. Al-All 8. Al-Aziz The Most High The Compeller 37. Al-Kabir 38. Al-Hafiz 9. Al-Jabbar The Most Great The Majestic 10. Al-Mutakabbir The Preserver 39. Al-Muqit H. Al-Khaliq The Creator The Maintainer The Evolver 40. Al-Hasib 12 Al-Bari The Reckoner The Fashioner 41. Al-Jalil 42. Al-Karim The Sublime One 13. Al-Muşawwir The Generous One The Forgiver 14. Al-Ghaffär 43. Ar-Raqoib The Watchful The Subduer 15. Al-Qahhar 44. Al-Mujlb The Responsive The Bestower 16. Al-Wahhãb 45. Al-Wai The All-Embracing The Provider 17. Ar-Razzāq The Opener 46. Al-Hakim The Wise 18. Al-Fattah The All-Knowing 47. Al-Wadūd 48. Al-Majld The Loving 19. Al-Alim The Most Glorious One The Constrictor 20. Al-Qabid 49. Al-Baith The Resurrector The Expander 21. Al-Băsit 50. Ash-Shahid The Witness 22. Al-Khafid The Abaser The Truth The Exalter 51. Al-Haqq 23. Ar-Rafi 24. Al-Mu Izz The Trustee The Honourer 52. Al-Wakil The Most Strong The Dishonourer 53. Al-Qawi 25. Al-Muzill 26. As-Sami The Firm One The All-Hearing 54. Al-Matin The Protecting Friend 27. Al-Başir The All-Seeing 55. Al-Wali The Praiseworthy 28. Al-Hakam The Judge 56. Al-Hamid Nirmala Yoga 35

 The Finder The Reckoner 78. Al-Wajid ee 57. Al-Mubsi The Noble The Originator 79. Al-Mājid 58. Al-Mubdi The Unique The Restorer 80. Al-Wähid 59. Al-Mu'id The One Si. Al-Ahad The Giver of Life 60. Al-Muhyi The Eternal The First 82. Aş-Şamad 61. Al-Awwal The Able The Last 83. Al-Qādir 62. Al-Ākhir The Manifest 84. Al-Muqtadir The Powerful 63. Az-Z.ahir The Hidden 85. Al-Muqaddim The Governor 86. Al-Mu akhkhir The Expediter 64. Al-Bațin The Delayer 65. Al-Wali The Most Exalted 87. Al-Jāme 66. Al-Muta ali The Gatherer The Source of All Goodness The Self-Sufficient 88. Al-Ghani 67. Al-Barr 68. Al-Tawwäb The Acceptor of Repentance 89. Al-Mughni The Enricher The Avenger 90. Al-Mani 69. Al-Muntaqim The Preventer The Pardoner 91. Ad-Darr 70. Al-Afuw The Distresser The Compassionate 92. An-Näfi 71. Ar-Ra'üf The Propitious The Eternal Owner 93. An-Nür The Light 72. Mälik-Ul-Mulk The Lord of Majesty 73. Dhül-Jalal-Wal- The Guide 94. Al-Hādi The Incomparable and Bounty 95. Al-Badi Ikrām The Equitable 96. Al-Bagi The Everlasting 74. Al-Muqsit The Supreme Inheritor Creator of Death 97. Al-Wärith 75. Al-Mumit The Guide to the right path The Alive 98. Ar-Rashid 76. Al-Hayy The Patient The Self-Subsisting 99. As-Sabūr 77. Al-Qayyйm Nirmala Yoga 36

 OM SHRI NIRMALA MA NAMOH NAMAH THE JOY OF SAHAJA WORLD So much joy, love, sweetness is flowing, overflowing, flooding everything and every one: Is it possible that we receive such Blessing ! Is it possible we would deserve such heavenly treatment ! Is it possible to be such a close collectivity- all over the world ! Is it possible to feel, to be in such overwhelming unity, all together, in One Body, One Ocean, One Breath, the Holy Breath !! Sometimes I feel I am dreaming. Everything is so perfect, beautiful, well set, even with its crisis, attacks of negativity and all this stuff in fact so useful and necessary for our growth ! Gods' plans and the way He works them out are too fabulous! Let our eyes be always more open, to see, let our ears be always more open, to hear let our hearts be always more open, to be drenched in our Mother's love, let our mouths be always more open to sing the Lord's Praise, to sing The Adi Shakti's Praises, to sing The Highest Mother's, The Highest Being's Praises. -RUTH (ROME) JAI TO HER LOTUS FEET How lucky and fortunate we all are to be under the care and protection of Her Love. Without Sahaja Yoga how could we all feel this closeness even thousands of miles apart, we are all one together in reality. We realise how much we have to change inside, learn humility become more pure and subtle inside, With Mother's Grace it will all happen. Right now we try more to become deeper in Sahaja Yoga-treasure of Love !! Annick (Paris) It is amazing how many people are taking to the path of seeking, despite the highly negative society and life style. It is really a very strong desire for realization that ultimately wins through. It is really tremendous to see the new Sahaja Yogis giving up their old life- styles and taking to the path of Sushumna and what, what a fantastic change there is in their complete nature, character and even appearance !! Karan, (San Diego) March 83 We are sure every Sahaja Yogi in the world today is offering support through their attention and desire, that this year in America will bring many seekers forth to our Mother's Holy feet to receive their realisation. It is only

 Registwed with the Reaistrar of Newspapers ander Repd. No. 3699931 through the desires of Her Children that Shri Mataji can, raise America to be the voice of spiritual wisdom on Earth and bring the collective consciousness to great reality with us all. JAI MATAJI, We hope you are all enjoying your Selves, and not letting small things stop you from being near to Mother. Sometimes we have to fight hard, but Our vibrations should be alright, the attention should be at the Sahasrara. The fight against the negativity is not fighting it, but keeping our Vibrations well, while facing it. Sometimes when one is not strong enough, ane could get away, physically removed, from it. But our vibrations, our attention is the first priority. Other things are mere excuses, not from the Spirit, but from somewhere else, to keep us away from Mother, If we do what the Spirit says, our vibrations are good and Mother takes care of everything. Even if we do not have anything we are happy and enjoy. That happens. Not a make-believe state. It lasts. everything. So when ve face ourselves we are at peace with ourselves and t is God. JAI MATAJI Ashram is really a nice place to be in. You are really enjoying with everybody all the time: Your attention remains more on the Spirit, you see clearly lots of things about yourself which tend to take you way from it, from Mother. It is not just a person alone, but the whale lot of people who grow and enjoy together !! Surabhi (Sydney) Coming of Spring It is Spring and Mother has filled it with beautiful flowers and green grass. It is a splendid day and all the west Australian wild flowers are out. All the colours of the flowers glistening in the early morning rays, the birds singing their tunes of joy, and 'the Silence-that Joy of thoughtlessness-just looking. smelling and enjoying our Mother's wonderful oreation-the Earth, the living sphere supporting our Mother Kundalini !! Glenda. (Perth) Sept. 83 Next Spring we hope to do programnes in Munich. Germany and in Budapest, the Capital city of Hungary. Perhaps you all could give bandhans. It all sounds very exciting-but then life in Sahaja Yoga always is. it seems ! Eutopean Sahaja, (Vienna) Sept. 83 Edited & Published by Sh. S.C. Rai 43, Bunglow Road, Dethi-110007 8 Printed at The Central Electric Press, 80 0. Kamla Nagat, Delhi-110007. One issuo Rs 6.00, Annual SutsGription Rs30 00 Foreign (by Airmail É 5$10) lESS10)



----------------------

1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Nirmala Yoga
Bi-Monthly
Vol. 3 No. 16
July-August 1983
5F
5F
"Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns all the religions and
seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga THE UNION"
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-1.txt 
 NIRM ALA YOGA
43, Bungalow Road, Delhi-110007, (India)
Founder: Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Editorial Board : Dr. S.K. Mathur, Sri A.S. Mishra, Sri R.D. Kulkarni
Representatives
: CHERYL HYNES-1267, Burke Road, KEW 3101, VICTORIA.
:ZORANA BEDKE Gartnergasse 17/10, 1030 VIENNA.
:LORI TODRICK-4518 Woodgreen Drive, West Vancouver, BC. V7S2V1.
: MARIE ROUGER-175, Av. Ledru Rollin PARIS-750001.
:RUTH LEDERBERGER : via Mercalli-46, 00197 ROME.
: M.B. Ratnannwar-13, Merwan Mansion, Genjewala Lane, Borivali (W)..
Australia
Austria
Canada
France
Italy
India
BOMBAY-400092.
RAJARAM SHANKAR RAJWADE-840, Sadashiva Peth, PUNE-411030.
: DANIEL & ROXANA DEVINE-Angel Luis De Herran, 38, 6, 4,
MADRID-33.
Spain
:CHARLES & MRS. MAGDA MATHYS 5, Chemin Des Mouldins,
1256. Troinex (Canton de Geneva).
* GAVIN BROWN-Brown's Geological Information Service Ltd., 160 North
Gower St., London NW 1. 2ND.
M.J. MURDOCH, 14A Bourne Ave, S. RUISLIP, MIDDLESEX, HAH 6TZ,
ENGLAND.
Switzerland
U. K.
:CHRISTINE PETRUNIA-225 Adams St., 1/E BROOKLYN, NY-11201.
U.S.A.
C ONT ENTS
Page
1. Editorial
2 Mahalakshmi
3. Anupama's Poem
4. Spirit
5. Ekadasha Rudra
6. Importance of Havan & Puja
7. God's Work & Negativity
8. Shri Mataji's Advice
9. Leaders in Sahaja Yoga
10. Sahaja Yoga & Physical Cure-lil
11. The Sahaja of Physics (Part I)
12. Installation of Shri Ganesh
9.
10
12
13
15
19
21
22.
24
27
13. Mother's Love (Poem)
14. Advice to Sahaja Mothers
15. Sahaja Yoga & Nursery Rhymes
16. A letter from Italy
17. Sahaja Yoga Archives
18. 99 Names of Allah
19. The Joy of Sahaja World
28
29
32
34
34
35
3rd Cover 4th Cover
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Editorial
केवलं ज्ञानमूर्त्तिम्
ब्रह्मानन्दं परम सुखदं ।
द्वंद्वातीतं गगन सदशं तत्वमस्यादि लक्ष्यम् ।।
एक नित्यं विमल मचलं सर्वथी साक्षिभूतम् ।
भवातीतं त्रिगुणरहितं सद्गुरुं तं नमामि ।।
Brahmä-nandam Parama-sukhadam Kevalam Jnäna Moortim
Dwandwa-teetam gagana sadrusham tatwa-masyadi lakshyam
nityam vimala-machalam sarvadhee sākshibhootam
sadgurum
Ekam
namāmi.
Bhäväteetam
triguna-rahitam
tam
TRANSLATION
I bow before Shri Sadguru who is verily the bliss of Brahma, knowledge personified, giver of
supreme happiness (who is) like sky, beyond all dualities (who is) the first manifestation of
tatwa, (principle) (who) alone is eternal, Pure and undisturbed, witness to everything, (who
is) beyond all emotions and without the three gunas.
Shri Namdeva was a great saint of India, at the time when galaxy of saints like Shri Kabira, Shri
Nanaka, Shri Jnaneshwar and others, decorated the holy land of India. He lived at Pandhar-
pur in Maharashtra, where age-old temple of Shri Vitthal and Rukmini (Shri Krishna as the king
of Dwarka is known as Shri Vitthal, and Rukmini his wife) is situated. Shri Namdeva's
devotion to Shri Vitthal. from his very childhood was of such a high order that Shri Vitthal talked
to him, played with him and even took food from his hands. As he grew-up, his devotion
became lop-sided and he developed ego that Shri Vitthal was the only God and he was the
only devotee.
Shri Vitthal then directed him to meet Shri Jnaneshwar, but seeing the latter's young age, Shri
Namdeva did not believe him. It was therefore suggested that Shri Namdeva would meet
another saint Visoba Khechar an octogenerian devotee of Shiva who lived in a Shiva-temple,
engrossed in meditation. Shri Namdeva found him sleeping with his feet resting on Shiva-
linga and rebuked him for doing so. Visoba requested Namdeva to put his feet at some other
place provided there was no God at that place, since he himself was very old and unable to lift
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-3.txt 
 his feet. Shri Namdeva moved Visoba's feet from place to place and found to his great amaze-
ment, that Shiva-linga was under his feet at every place. This completely deflated Shri
Namdeva's ego and he was convinced that God was present every where and he himself was
not the only devotee of God. Instantly he accepted Visoba as his Guru and surrendered to
him. Later, Shri Namdeva, got the true knowledge and attained complete God realization.
In ancient days, many great saints, and sincere seekers, had to make tremendous efforts to
meet their sadguru, and they gladiy passed through all the difficulties, They were aware that
howsoever evolved a person was by birth, without the correcting force of sad-guru, real
spiritual growth and Ultimate unison with the Supreme was not possible. Shri Ramdas says
"Can anybody explain in words how that indescribable Parabrahma is ? But even 'that' is
known just from the casual talk of sadguru. By the grace of sadguru we get the realization
which we could never imagine will happen and from that we enjoy innaccesible nector-like
supreme bliss". Having this experience, is the fulfilment of the desire for many lives, of the
Spirit, to unite with Paramatma, the Supreme Spirit. It is accomplishing the happiness, par
excellence.
Sadguru however would not accept them easily as his disciples. He would test their dedi-
cation and earnestness of seeking in very difficult ways. Only those were entitled to receive
his blessings and guidance, who could satisfy him. But the desciples did not hesitate to even
stake their lives, in order to please him, because they recognised his ability, powers and
greatness.
It is in response to our desires of past many lives that Sakshat Adishakti, Sakshat Parabrahma
has given us the shelter at Her lotus feet. It is for Her limitless compassion that She is not
giving to us severe tests, and accepting us seeing the desire of our Spirits. But She is watch-
ing and correcting us through Her all pervading powers. Being our mother, She is pleased
to see us happy, prosperOus and progressing to accomplish the desires of our Spirits. Let us
therefore surrender our 'tan (physical being) 'man' (mind) and 'dhan' (wealth) at Her lotus
feet. "Tan" (physical being) cannot be parted with, She does not need our 'dhan' (wealth)
as entire creation is Hers. All that we can really surrender to Her, is our 'chitta'. When that
is given, completely, once surrender is total, we can establish yoga with Her, the Paramatma.
She has complete command over the entire creation and would move the universe with just a
thought But it is for our own inner evolution that we should work for Sahaja Yoga and
request Her with all humility to accept what ever services we can render.
May we be in everlasting yoga with You.
May everything we have be utilized in the service of Sahaja Yoga.
Mother. kindly keep your this form, which is quenching the thirsts of our Spirits, in good
health for years and years,
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-4.txt 
 KOLHAPUR
1st Jan. 83
Shri Mahalakshmi
नमस्ते गरूडाखूदे कोलासुर भयंकरि। सर्वपापहरे देवि महालक्षमि नमोऽस्तुते ||
Namasté garudārūré kolāsur-bhayankari, sarvapāp-haré Dévi Maha
Lakshmi namostu te
-Padma Purāna
(Salutations to thee, who is mounted on the Garuda bird and is terror to
Rakshsa Kolhasura. Who is the remover of all sins, O Devi Mahalakshmi,
obeisance to thee.)
Today again is a new year's day. Every Mother Earth, in this particular place. That
new year comes, because we have to take to means this place has got a capacity to give
somethfng that is new. It has been so
arranged that the sun has to move for 365 force or an intensive feeling of evolution. If
days and again a new year has come. Actual-
ly the whole solar-system is moving in a
spiral way. So, there is definitely a higher, not so sensitive you are still so conditioned
higher state of this solar system. Every year and still outside, that may not work out. I
you a force. You can say, an additional
you are sensitive enough you can see that,
you can feel it and you can do it. If you are
So it is not
mean all kinds of things can be done, but if
only that-it is because 365 days have passed somebody wants to remain a stone you can-
because it has moved a step forward
higher than what it was.
that in awareness, human beings have defini-
tely risen much higher than what they were, out in this place Kolhapur. Normally, this
say, about 2000 years back. But, the first place should be very very warm because of
system that started the whole universe was its position. But even in summer this place
the first model, you can say was created. keeps very cool because of the vibrations, from
And that model has to be perfect. And that the temple that is emitted. The people in this
was a perfect model which then started per- place may not be so aware either. We can-
fecting the rest of it. So that is the perfect not say if they are aware. Because as neg-
model which is in the principle of this ascent. ativity has to come forward, there are lots of
And that is working out this ascent. Now, sugar factories and lots of alcoholism going on
the perfection of the rest of the universe takes here. But we have to take the hest advantane
-t--- i disnntione Pu tnduan
not do anything about it.
Now, we can see
So this Mahalakshmi principle is working
TEtntalitou
Theotinite foct
vOU lihow
e
ihatis and is surrodded litCo
ow
dcusin ier
lay to seupo
Now the tede
S
wilf br
Mananhaim
E mavhob
theshD n st
oonedlcen i
Nwal.Vou
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-5.txt 
 see that, it is in another person this exists.
lakshmi tattwa cannot be established. Maha-
lakshmi tattwa is strengthened through Guru Whatever I may try to say they always see in
principle. Now we are lucky today because
there was the birthday of Dutta, the Duttatreya negative person amongst us. You need not
just the other day when we had the Pooja, be compassionate to that person. On the
and
other person. Now supposing there is a
Mahalakshmi puja. contrary better be away. Get rid of that
today is this
So two things together we have got together. person, as far as possible don't have anything
First was the Dutt puja and today is this to do is a definite sign of great compassion
puja of Mahalakshmi. So, to have the
Guru principle all right, we must make anything to do with the person who is nega-
our Dharmas correct. Now these Dharmas,
as I have told you many times, are ten,
and we should look after these ten Dharmas away from a person who is not positive. It
in a very careful manner. These are expressed
outside, but whatever is inside comes out.
Now I find when you people talk, and you conditioning is such that still though you have
say things, I know that this person is negative, become a Guru tattwa, you don't understand
that person is definitely positive. There are
so many ways of expression of positivity. there is no brother, sister or any other relation-
But how I know that, I cannot tell you,
because I just don't know how to tell you There is no other relationship. One of these
that. But I just know that such a person is principles are to be understood. Very impor-
definitely positive and such a person is nega-
tive. The positivity lies in understanding why ship is only to Mother end to Sahaja Yogis
are we here? First of all, why are we on this
earth? Why are we human beings? In
understanding what are we doing about it? whether through anything else". Now this I
Why are we Sahaja Yogis?
Yogi has to do? What is his responsibility as
a Sahaja Yogi? Then he moves forward to
understand, why Mother is so kind to me?
Why have I got vibrations? Why am I among
very few who have got this special blessing,
the special knowledge of vibratory awareness.
And then to ask yourself. what am I doing supposing you have collected lots of wheat
about it? Am I still very much embedded in
my cheapishness or in my childishness, in all lost. It will be spread out like this; this
my stupidity, in my harshness, in my aggres- side, that side, it will be all lost. But if you
siveness. We always see these things in
other people, not in ourseives. So we are
not Sahaja Yogis. We should understand at
that point, when we start seeing these things way this principle of Mahalakshmi can spread
in other people, then we are not Sahaja Yogis. just across like that and can just destroy all
We should see in ourselves and emit pure that Mother has given us and all that we have
compassion to others. But always people had all these years, only by spreading it out.
IS
to yourself, if not to others. Better not have
tive, if you have to come up. He may be
your brother, sister, anyone. But try to be
causes lots of problems. I have been telling
you this and I have been requesting you, but
that you have to be detached. For a Guru
ship except for the relationship of the NMother.
"That our relation-
tart I feel is for all of you.
and not to any relationship which has come
to us. Whether through Sahaja Yoga or
What a Sahaja have been explaining because our Maha-
lakshmi Tattwa is not all right. That is why
we get sort of fritter away, lost into these
things.
And the Mahalakshmi tattwa has to be like
an ascending force, all put together. Like
my father used to give an example. That
it will be
and you spread it on the ground,
put it in a bag, it wil rise In height, naturally.
It will have
and it will go higher and higher. In the same
those maryadas; #afer it will rise
Nirmala Yoga
4.
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Now to collect it inside, s to pay atten- is. How your behaviour is. You should be
tion to yourself. First of all, try to clarify your human. But sometimes, even with me, 1
ideas and your understanding 'in brain, is find people talk in a very funny manner,
important. Because Mahalakshmi tattwa ulti- just don't understand, how it is that always
mately works in the brain. Is the enlighten- they say the wrong thing. I mean, even if
ment of the brain, is done by Mahalakshmi they have to say one sentence, they will say
tattwa, It gives you the Sat, (aa) the Truth,
you see. So in the brain you must clarify. It is also Vishuddhi, which is also Nabhi.
Reach logically; Logically we must reach the Comes from Nabhi, because you must know
conclusion I don't have to do these things. I that Vishuddhi Chakra is the ascent of the
have to do these things. I have to ascend. Nabhi Chakra. So what happens, that a
This is why I am here? What am I supposed to
do? Now logically you convince your brain, his language, through his behaviour, through
first of all. It is very important now after his face, through his nose, his eyes, every-
realisation. Because if logically your brain thing, through the Vishuddhi Chakra. So the
does not understand, it will always be chea-
pish, childish, indignified or could be harsh, threugh the Vishuddhi Chakra. Now whatever
horribly oppressive. It could be one of these.
a wrong thing, It is absolutely with them.
person whatever he is, is expressed through
ascent of the Nabhi is expressed, shown,
you have in the Nabhi, is shown here. Suppos-
ing, now a person who has the Mahalakshmi tat-
So, in Guru tattwa, there are ten elements. twa properly developed, such a person will have
Five of them deal with the weight. "Weight". a way of dealing with another person where
Guru is the weight. Weight of a person. he will have the weight, as well as the under-
How much weight you have got? The gravity, standing, how far to go with the person.
as we call it, Person has a gravity. When How far to carry on with that person. How
he talks how much balance he has got. See far to talk to a person.
in Indian Music, we call it Ta (Vazan) means about it. How much importance to be given.
the weight. The weight of the person, means That is one point, is very important.
when he is dealing with himself or with others,
how much weight he carried. In English also
they use this-weight. How much weight he magnetism you have? So you reverse back to
carries with others? Means, how much he can yourself. The magnetism is a magic, is a
really impress others? If you impress too, all magic of a person. A person is magnetic
right, then the person will say, 'Ohl it is too because he has certain magic. Now this
much.' That is a very big quality with western magic comes from your own personality. From
people, is, "Ohl that is too much!" They have your own personality. So the basis of magne-
an idea, you see this is all ego oriented, That is tism on the left hand side starts and that is
too much. If you tell them too much, 'Ohl that basis is Shri Ganesha. Shri Ganesha is the basis
is too much'. She is too much. I move
slowly, slowly. It is too much for me'. It is
very common. It is very common reaction,
So how much weight you have. And the It is not a material stuff. But it is something
second one is the quality of magnetism. Two abstract, comes from your quality of Ganesha,
things weight & magnetism. First is the Shri Ganesha. Such a person is magnetic.
quality of weight that's how much dignified Magnetic means such a person attracts other
you are. How you talk. How your language person because of the weight of the person,
How far to think
And the another point is how much
of that magnetism. So your innocence; inno-
cence is the best way to have that magnetism,
Magnetism you cannot explain in material way.
Nirmala Yoga
5.
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-7.txt 
 because of the quality ot the person. Such a and much weightier, you cannot be destroyed
person attracts, but does not attract for lust, by a thing that, whom you ate attracting.
greed and non-sensical things. But attracts Always the greater magnet attracts the small-
another person because of the fragrance of
love in the subjects. Now it is always con-
fused, confused because it is such an abstract charismatic temperament of a person, comes
thing. So one must understand it in a very by, first of all, the Ganesh tattwa, innocence.
subtle way. What is this magnetism?-that And secondly by complete dedication and
one should understand. You see, there some devotion. Those who are 'completely dedic-
gestures people use artificially which normally ated and devoted to Mother. Not to 'anything"
they have been using just to attract other else. Ganesh tattwa again. Not to your wife,
people, the way they walk, the way they dress,
the way they live. All these things are of no your country, not to anyone but to Mother.
use. It is something so inner, that fragrance is "Complete dedication' gives you that charisma,
so inner which must be developed. But in
Sahaja Yoga l have seen. people just do not person becomes really attractive and such a
bother about it, just do not bother. They person has it.
think the way they have been living, the way
they have been doing this-say if they are
English, they are English, if they are French very passive person and if anybody says any-
they are French, if they are Indians they are
Indians, if they are from Kolhapur they will he person you are charismatic. It is not. People
from Kolhapur. These ideas first muust be
curbed off. Because the fragrance spreads They like you because they can dominate you.
everywhere whether you are English or any-
er magnet. And that is what one should
understand. This magie and this charisma,
not to your husband, not to your sister, not to
or that attraction. In Sahaja Yoga such a
Now some people think that if you are a
thing to you and you don't mind,' sort of a
like you because they can dominate you.
Now if you think that by your aggressiveness
one. So the fragrance of a person develops and by vour shouting and by your screaming
through first of all the Ganesha princinle at these people, you will achieve that charis-
within. Ganesha principle is to be first of all
seen to. Now a Ganesha person is not a
person who is absolutely a remorse type or a
person who is such a gone case that even if
you beat him up and make him into a com- is by not thinking about it. Like you see some
plete minsed thing, he will bear it. It's not body asked me, 'How do you manage your
like that, it's not that.
quality of magnetism is such that it attracts all'. Then they ask me, 'How do you solve
you, to a point where 'you' are not disturbed.
Now this is a very important point we should all of mine. They said, "What about your
know. You see, if you have other loves, love
like carnal love and all other love you have, own. "Nihi, Nihi." Everything Nihi for me.
then that love you may attract the person, Then how do you sir solve your this problem.
then that person can destroy you and it des- By not having it, just have no, not have it,
troys you, always. But this attraction does Don't take up headaches upon yourself. See
not destroy, does not destroy. The attraction when you take up headaches upon yourself,
is upto that point that you are not destroyed, then only the innocence is reduced. That
because you being much higher much deeper headaches like this, that this is my shawl, this
matic temperament, you cannat. You cannot
achieve that height. So how do you achieve
it? By becoming more innocent.
Now how innocence develops in a person
On the contrary the
Income Tax?'I said, 'By having no income at
your car problem?'
By not having any car at
house problem?" By having no house of my
6.
Nirm ala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-8.txt 
 is my sari, this is my thing, this is this, this
is this, this is this. But only one thing is that argumentation. There is no theology about
"this is my Mother and I have to proclaim Her', it. It is very simple. It is the simplest thing
that is all. if that is the way it is, then inno-
cence starts risıng like Shri Ganesha, and by lost, why? Because our attention is in
laving no other headache.
This is 'mine', that is mine, This 'mine We are looking at other things. It is so simple,
business causes the problem, I think. Personally you know. Today I was thinking I have to
I think this must be the reason. That this 'mine'
business. This is mine.' Because whatever is as it is, because there were three ladies who
mine, somebody told me.-this is very good wear nine yard saris and I had to give them
argument she gave,"Whatever is mine is not three nine yard saris. That is all. I just thought
1, means thatis not Sahaja. My body my head, of it. All right. I came here, I saw very nice
my everything-'my'. But 17"-she gave me
this idea-1'. What is 'l'? Then 'I' is separated, do you get these?" She said "You get it here'. L
Whatever is not mine is 'I. So what remains said 'All right'. So you go and buy these three
is your Spirit", Somebody gave me this argu-
ment. I said this is good argument to work it just came into my mind that I have to buy
out. Then whatever remains is the I' and that three saris. Finished. The answer is here. So
I is the one we have to see to. So you go on
reducing all these mines, 'mines", 'mines. So situation is so innocent that the solution is
the pure spirit of innocence will rise. So the presented by innocence to innocent. Inno-
idea about Spirit also, people think that if you
become spiritual-I mean, I don't know what because every body has little bit of innocence
people think about spiritual people. But the in every one, isn't it? So you can,-it is like a
idea about spiritual people is that you have to
be something terrific like a bull or l don't fifth column within you. So if any porson is
know. You have to be sharp like a fox or innocent, you see he will work on your fifth
you have to be intellectual like Freud or
something. All sorts of ideas people have! you give bandhan () to others, what hap-
No, it is not! Spiritual person is just innocent,
just innocent. There is no intelligence, and the poor fellow does not know. He has
nothing. Just innocence. The whole thing is his innocence within him, you capture that
innocence. So whatever he talks or says innocence, that is all you have done, that's
comes through innocence. It does not have how you manage.
intellect as such, which here people have it out things. Only principle, the tattwa, the whole
through reading and through understanding thing rests on what 'tattwa-is nothing but
and by analysing. Nothing of the kind. It innocence.
just has 'pure' and 'simple' innnocence and it
all works out very well, It is so clean. It afa afa (Neti, Neti)-saying not this, not this.
just says what it knows and what it knows is
the highest.
then you also-it becomes sort of a theological
is to be innocent. But the innocence is
different way, we are attentive to other things.
buy three nine yard saris.A simple question
saris being put here. So I asked her, Where
saris. No analysis. nothing of the kind. It
even the atmosphere is so innocent, the whole
cence works out in everything, you see
fifth column, you see. The innocenca is a
column and will make you all right. When
pens, you actually bind him by your innocence
It is very simple to work
So try to develop this by all these things
it
Not this, not this 'to all your faults. "Not this
not this, not this, not this,-you reach there.
So this deconditioning has to be brought "Not mine, not mine not mine, not mine-you
But you should not discuss it reach there. And that is how it is, and you
see the whole material world is not attacking
within us.
us.
among yourself also. Once you start discussing
71
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-9.txt 
 the innocence, because they are frightened.
You cannot attack. Innocence cannot be inside, inside is, we can say, there are three
destroyed. It cannot be destroyed. Innoce-
nce is something: is all prevading and it can-
not be destroyed. So whatever. people may right. But inside is the creation, that is all
try, it cannot be destroyed. But it can be the elements being created and all that. But
covered, it can recede, but it cannot be inside that is the desire and inside the desire
destroyed. It will act, it's own way. So try is the half-one, you can say, is Ganesha.
to develop that innocence which is the basis So this Ganesh tattwa ultimately overpo-
of Mahalakshmi Tattwa, we should say, 'or wers
that is essence of Mahalakshmi tatva'. So the everything. And this is, I would say, that
outward things, the weightage, the weight, don't think about it. Just allow your inno-
the dignity, the behaviour everything. It is
outward thing and the inside thing. The tattwa, dignity. That is very important to have your
the pinciple, on which itis based is innocence. dignity. Like some people think if they wear
So outwardly it is Mahalakshmi tattwa, but
cores. The first core is Mahalakshmi tattwa,
outside to look at. you see the growth all
everything and
permeates through
cence to grow, Simple innocence and your
Now if it is this, if we understand Mahala- tall clothes and walk about on the street, and
kshmi tattwa within us, how it has to work out. all they are big sanyasis. It is wrong. Why?
You are not being dignified and God has
that, I don't want you to project your intellect given you so much why should you try to
into it. and to find out. But just remain where show that you have not got anything? Just
you are and you will find the answers; just to show off that you have not got anything.
coming to you. Automatically. Just don't God has given. This is just a sort of thanks-
project your minds into it. Just you will get giving to God you have given me so much.
You have to wear the best. Like in Puja if
you see the ladies here wear all their noserings
and all their ornaments and everything, in
the temple, everything they wear, And in the
same way, men also wear their very clean
dresses, very ciean things, whatever they have,
they wear simple clean dresses, whatever
they have. But no austentation; it is just
a thing by which you express. The God has
It is not intellectual. Again I would say
answers to every question just like that. Beca-
use innocence in eveyone is the simple ans-
wer wheie all the complications drop out in-
посеntly.
And that is what is the love of God, is the
love of God. So don't confuse this with love,
with all your non-sensical love, ideas you have
about people and identification, misidentifica-
tion. This is pure love within us, the purity, given you this. 'O God! I. thank you.
the innocence is love and which is life itself,
we should say, is a part of that, the prized.
But pranashakti is not Mahalakshmi, So year, on the new year day to be here on
Mahalakshmi is the 'essence' and'essence' of Mahalakshmi's place of Kolhapur. And this
everything. Because if creation has to take is also called Kolhapur because Kolhasura
place, also, if desire of God is there, and if
there is no Mahalakshmi tattwa, then what is like a fox and he was born again. Now he
the use of having desire,-is finished. Supposing is again dead. Thank God! He was here and
even if you have creation and you don't have now he is dead. Kolahasura died. You don't
Mahalashmi tattwa, how will you work it out? think about, it, again your mind goes out.
You cannot work it out, You have to have Don't think about it, I will tell you about it.
Mahalakshmi tattwa. Because they don't have I have deliberately avoided the name. He
any meaning,
It is such a great day today to be the new
was killed here. Kolhasura was horrible fellow
was born again and was pitched out. So
Nirmla Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-10.txt 
 this is the place where Kolhasura was killed, they tried to establish themselves. And gradu-
where this was established. So Mahalakshmi ally they are being neutralised and cleaned out.
incarnation came in and that is how this These tantrikas have gone into every temple
place has a spacial value, that we have come of all the Goddesses, And they will be gra-
here for a pilgrimage and let us be in a humble dually all out, straight out, So this is the
way think about it. Actually these things attack that came through and that how these
could not take place in the West. Because brahmins came down and settled in these
even if they had come out of the Mother Earth places'so called' brahmins-and tried to
who would have recognised them? Who preach about all tantrik method and things here
would have known about them? Who would
have respected them? Who would have wor-
shipped them? That is why it did not happen
in the West too much. But it is there, little people to develop concentration of mind so
bit is there, no doubt. But here now we have that you rise above all other misidentifications
these all these temples and the attack on the and get identified with the 'pure Spirit' tihrough
innocence has come from the tantrikas. And your Mahalakshmi principle.
so the tantrikas rented out this temple and
in the temple and they'ieally' spoilt the atmos
phere here.
So may God bless you all. I want you
May God bless you.
ANUPAMA'S POEM
Shri Mataji has three very beautiful grand daughters who, to the sahaja
yogis, are little goddesses. (Perhaps, after all, the sahaja yogis have just there
the right insight.) The youngest one, Anupama, has written the following
poem :
"I am a little cabbage
Divided into two
I give my leaves to others
And my heart to you."
London, July 83
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-11.txt 
 SPIRIT
Spirit is the most precious thing that we
have within ourselves. The preciousness of
your Spirit is immeasurable and that is why it It is'Attention'. When it is excited (in sanskrit
is called the thing of eternal value. Because
it is infinite, we cannot measure.
witness fike a light.
But His another quality is the 'Chit', (frq)
there is a very good word for excited, it is
i. e. the pulsation) or when it is pulsated
His attention or when it pulsates, then through
Now, God the Almighty we say is 'Sat-
Chit-Anand'. Sat () means the Truth', The
truth, we understand, in human terminology
His attention He starts creating.
And He has third quality which we call
is relative. But the Truth' I am telling you is 'Anand', (a). Anand is the feeling of 'Joy'
the absolute, from where all the relations that He gets by His perception, by His
start. Example, I will tell you, how to under- creation, the joy that He gets. All these
stand. This Earth has got oceans and rivers
and all kinds of waters you can say. But the
earth is enveloping all of them.
three things Sat Chit Anand' when they are
at a zero point where they meet, then they
If the mother become principte of Brahma. When these
Earth was not there, there could not have three things are one, where there is complete
been any of these existing. So we can say,
silence nothing is created and nothing is
that the mother Earth is the support, of all the manifested but the "Joy' is ane with the
things that exist on earth. She is enveloping Attention' because the 'Attention' has'reached
us, In the atoms, she exists, in the big
mountains, she exists, because the elements
to merge into 'Joy' and Joy has become
one with the 'Truth'. This combination of
are part of that Earth. In the same way is three qualities separate and create three
God Almighty. The "Sat' part of Him, the types of phenomena. 'Anand' the joy inwards
Truth' is the support of all the things that are
merged with His creation and with the Truth
created or not created. Another example; When "Joy starts moving with the creation,
you try to understand. How, the 'Sat is the the creation starts, moving down from first,
"Purush' (To), is the God who does not take the 'Sat' or Truth' stage to Asat' i.e. 'untruth
actual part in the creation itself, but is a
catalyst. The example can be like this, That,
I am doing all the work I am creating every
to 'Maya' i.e. "Illusion. And that time, the
creation starts. on working out and when it
starts working out, the 'Joy which is on the left
thing, but I have a light in my hand. With hand side the emotional side of God also starts
out the light, I cannot do anything. Light is becoming grosser and grosser, till they reach
the support of my work. But the light does a stage where there is, we can say, a complete
not in anyway do anything about what I do. darkness of Tamoguna, the complete ceasation
In the same way, God Almighty is just the of the creativity and the complete, sleeping
10
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-12.txt 
 be human being. Because at this stage, you
have to jump only a little bit that side, while
wati. That is why Christ said, 'I am the light. you start jumping this side and that side.
Because this jumping is not possible unless
and until the awareness reaches that stage,
absolutely gross, dormant or dead, then it where you become independent and in that
reaches the second stage of creation. All independence, you find your own course.
these things go deeper and deeper and become This is the position. Because your 'Self can-
not be yaurs until and unless you are
independent. As long as you are slave or
under bondage or something that is gross,
how can you enjoy that eternal joy that is
within you? So it is for you to expose your-
self more to that joy by opening out your
"Self more and more and getting subtler and
of the joy. Is it clearer? You will understand
now Mahalakshmi, Mahakali and Mahasaras-
Because He represents the 'Sat the light of
God. And when the light of God becomes
grosser. That is one part of the paraboli.
Now the another part of the paraboli starts
when you are
Almighty. That process now gradually starts
becoming higher and higher, subtler and
subtler and finer and finer. In that refinement
ultimately the light works for the evlutionary
process. Gradually the grosser parts start
becoming enlightened. You find the lower
animal is not much enlightened as the higher ting self realisation, unless and until these
animal. Gradually even the 'Joy' starts becom-
ing subtler and subtler. We can call it not feel that you have established yourself.
beautiful. Human joys are much more beauti-
ful than that of animals. So the 'Joy' also start
changing their manifestation. In the sense,
you start more and more and wider range of
"Joy' comes into your hands. For example, how will you see me ? If you are not aware
to a dog beauty has no meaning: decency to hear me how will you understand me ? And
has no meaning. So at a stage when you
reach, when you are a human being, to that
extent you develop your 'Sat' which is aware-
ness; to that extent you also develop your
Joy and to that extent you also develop you felt, you said "what a beautiful thing it
creative action.
"creativity' of God passes into the hands of the joy of creation at this stage and Man is
Man, when he turns out; how the 'Joy' of God
passes into the hands of Man and how His part is such a little thing. Very little it is.
'Light' comes into the heart of Man as 'Spirit.
back to God
attaining
cleaner; so that you feel that 'Divine.
Once you know this point that, after get-
three things start merging together, you can-
The Joy within you, must be felt through
your awareness, otherwise you cannot see it.
Suppose you have no eyes, then how can
you see ?
If you were not aware to see me,
once that awareness comes to you, then only
the 'Joy' awakens within you. Because only
through these subtle teeling of the awareness,
you are going to absorb the Joy. Just now
Now you see how the is!" You felt very happy.
You are feeling
the summit of creation. But only the 'crown'
Very little distance it crosses in no time, but
It is beautiful. I have just touched, when only thing is that, three things have to be
you have become a human being, people say
human beings have a soul, not that others do you get Self realisation, you do not feel the
not have, but light starts burning in a human silence. Because you have not become the
being only.
combined. And that is why you find even if
"Light'. You do not feel the 'Joy' because you
have not become the Anand'. That is the
Because of that 'light' we talk of religion, left side of you. In everything, there is 'Joy'
we talk of God and we talk of eternal things. as a human being, you start seeing Joy' in
But it is really a precarious stage, that is, to patterns.
You see a key box, you open it
Nirmala Yoga
11
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-13.txt 
 You see the patterns. You call it the in your family people, in your relations,
veneer. You call the roughness and things, the your friends, the first thing and the finest and
greatest thing you can do is to give them Self-
realisation which means the Joy of your
out.
smoothness and the harmony of it.
You start feeling the matter, the Joy of His
creation. But after realisation, you start feeling Spirit. Expose them to the joy of their Spirit,
the 'Joy' of creation. The summit of creation is
the human being and that is why for a Sahaja
Yogi he must realise, if he tries to be friendly
or interested or involved in a person who is at
a lower level, he can never get the Joy' from
that person. Only thing what he can do is,
to raise that person higher to his own level there and I want you all to come into it and
and make him also feel the same 'Joy' as you enjoy. It is all foryou. Whole thing was created
are getting. Supposing a man who is an
artist marries a blind girl. What is the use? subtler and subtler. You are wasting lot of
She cannot enjoy the Arts created by this time here on very gross things, you have
man. In the same way, if you are interested noticed.
which is the most precious thing. And this
is the reason, why people flicker and they
fiddle and they feel uneasy and they lose
their joy very easily at small things that has
parts of it and finished.
It is like the ocean before you, where
I am
for your enjoyment. You have to become
EKADASHA RUDRA
Some notes from Mother's advice on how to correct problems with the
Ekadasha Rudra (given in Delhi-1981)
1) Establish your innocence. Put your eyes to mother earth.
2) Cleanse your void. If you went to a false Guru beat him with shoes.
3) Put your attention more to Nature than to other people.
4) Be careful when organizing; stop organizing if you are catching on this
centre, and don't speak in public.
5) Obstinacy catches here.
6) A half-hearted commitment to Sahaja Yoga can cause a problem with
the Ekadasha Rudra.
7) The Ekadasha Rudra collects from the left and the right sympathetics.
Therefore the combination of a left catch with a right catch will
particularly affect it.
-David Spiro
12
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Talk given by Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Paris
June 18, 1983
Importance
of
Puja and Havana
I am so happy and joyous to be here with
so many Sahaja yogis and so many of them
So now the new situation arises : that you
do not have a blind faith, but you have a faith
that has come out of an experience. So your
intellect should not fight it. It should not try
to challenge it. If it start challenging it and if
you hear to your intellect, you will again go
down. Even if you get the glimpses of a star
in the sky, then the scientist believe that there
We can compare the Spirit with the sun: is a star. So in the same manner, even if you
the sun can be covered with the clouds. get the glimpses of your realisation, you have
There can be superimposition on the sun, but to at least believe that you are also the Spirit.
sun remains as it is at this point. You cannot You go on sticking to that experience and
enlighten the sun. It is illumined by itself. keeping your attention on the fact that you are
Now, when the clouds are removed, the the Spirit. Tell your intellect not to cheat you
superimposition are removed, the sun shines anymore. You can turn the face of your
are very new, not very new to me, perhaps I
have known all of you thousand of years
back. In Sahaja Yoga, you have all to under-
stand one simple thing, that you are the Spirit.
and whatever is not the Spirit is not yourself.
through the atnosphere. So our Spirit is also
superimposed by ignorance. As long as there
is superimposition, you cannot see the Spirit.
intellect by this.
Now your intellect will start working for
And even when few clouds disappear, the the pursuit of the Spirit. This is what faith
means. Faith gives rise to pure intelligence.
clear sky to see the light of the Spirit shining Now once you have seen clouds removed,
still there are clouds. So you have to use the
wind to remove the clouds, wind of the Holy
Ghost. And-that you know-there are many
ways of taking advantage of the wind. So
ption, the faith, that we are the Spirit and that the wind comes from some other source.
the rest is superimposition. You have to That is the source of the Holy Ghost, your
assume that within yourself. After realisation, own Kundalini. And also you have in person
superimposition exists. One has to have
through. There are many ways by which we
can try to remove the clouds.
The first and foremost thing is the assum-
it should become very easy. That you are
the Primordial Kundalini before you. Compared
to many other seekers who came before you,
you are very fortunate.
something much more, something very differ-
ent from what you have known so far.
Nirmala Yoga
13
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-15.txt 
 Because worshipping any vigraha, any
statue of self-created vibrations of the Mother just concentrate on the puja, and how the
Earth people had big problems. They had to
first of all do a meditation which was called
as Sarvikalpa Samadhi. That means in that work is-your only method is- just to con-
state you had to concentrate on such a statue, centrate on tha puja and witness. You are a
vigraha. Vigraha means the one which is a
vibrating statue, And then go on looking at
that statue, and try to raise your Kundatini.
And Kundalini used to come up to Agnya, but sees only, just sees and he is only knowledge,
the jumping beyond the Sahasrara was an
impossible task because one has to go from any reaction, just sees and absorbs automatic-
form to formless. And it was so difficult to ally, spontaneosly, he is the seer. For me
get out of form to formless, and even to sometimes it is burden-some because there
concentrate on abstract or formless was
another impossible task. As the Muslims did deities, some balance must be there.
or many others tried to do. Under these
circumstances it was necessary that the form-
less had to take a form so that there were no
more complications. As soon as you concent-
rated on the form you became formless. Like
if you have ice before you, as soon as you
start touching the ice, it melts away and you
start feeling the cool.
For that, you must fully
age on your chakras.
wind is blowing. And the wind will see to it
that it drives out all the clouds. So your only
seer,
Seer has double meaning. The one vwho
he is a seer. Without any thought, without
should be some parity between you and the
Here you are saying all the mantras and
the deities are awakened and there you are
who do not want to receive any thing within
Your heart. So I am the One who has to
stock up all the extra energy that is produced
in my Body. So it would be better if you all
keep your hearts opened and watch the puja
without thinking about it. Today we will
So the problem is very easily solved now. reverse the method of the Puja. First we will
do the Havana and then the Puja, it will be
excite the forms into formless. Now your better. Because by that we will evoke the
centers are the centers of energies, but they fire element which burns away all the evils.
too have a guiding deity sitting on all these When you wash my Feet you do the same
chakras, They are also the formless made thing and even when you evoke the fire you
Puja is one of the things by which you can
into forms. And when you do the puja, the do the same thing.
forms melt into formless energies. And these
formless energies start flowing, and then
Today first we will have the havana and
blows the wind. And that is how these then the puja, both are just the same. You
misidentifications, these superimpositions on can worship Me with water or with fire.
The essence of fire is the glow, all that is
wrong, all that is evil is burnt off and then the
the Spirit are removed.
Now you cannot think about the puja giow shows on the faces and on the bodies of
These are things which happen into a realm
which is beyond thinking. So you have to
understand that you cannot rationalise the
Puja, You should have the maximum advant- May God bless you.
the seekers. And also the atmosphere is
charged with the beautiful vibrations when
you have the havana.
Nirmala Yoga
14
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Shri Mataji's advice
31 st. March 1983.
Hampstead town Hall,
ENGLAND
God's Work and Negativity
I realise that when something is very
important from God's point of view all the so-called, our concern
negative forces work out their plans on how
to delay, how to put obstructions how to
deviate or how to bring hinderances. It is
very surprising. Today, it would be best if I tell
you about God's will and how, we the human
beings, try to go against it all the time.
But as we start growing in our awareness
for the
is not for
Spirit. I would say that we are like a tree
down into the
earth so as to stand and grow: so also the
Toots we have are in our brain. And then we
start growing upwards and upwards till the
leaves emerge, flowers bloom and fruits are
created. But on the contrary before reaching
the fruit stage what happens to us is that we
start creating artificial leaves and enjoying
them. We take to artificiality. Once this
identification with artificiality starts, we begin
to move away from reality to negative thoughts
or to over-positive thoughts which are actually
anti-God because it is with them that we
which pushes its roots
God's will is extremely simple. His is
divine love: He is compassion and He is the
ocean of mnercy. He created this world and
then created human beings just to give them
the highest thing in life-joy. Joy which is a
simple thing, does not have duality like borro-
wed happiness. But how are we anti-God and
anti-joy, and why does it happen ?
make atom bombs and all that.
Our awareness, as you know, grows
through our brain downwards. And what
starts growing downwards takes us away from
God. Ultimately we have to achieve God.
But first we go a little away from that They destory themselves, trouble themselves
awareness of being one with God ; just to
understand that freedom has to be used
So, there are really two branches into
which we branch off. Some people like to go
towards the left side or the negative attitude.
and do all kinds of things by which they can
die and in the most miserable manner. They
get all kinds of diseases upon themselves.
They torture their body; they torture every-
e ob BM 1y
properly. Without that training, without that
education it is no use giving freedom
human beings. You have seen the free thing that they have. Then the other side is
is the right hand side in which they move
to torture others, to destory others, to over-
power others. Both the ways are away from
God, His mercy and His grace. The concern
throughout should be towards the Spirit.
In their freedom what have they
achieved, atom bombs to kill ourselves ! It is
stupidity. It is foolish. It is absurd. But
we have done it. We are proud of it and are
still busy on how to make it worse and worse
for ourselves. This is how we move.
The Only thên is the movement in the right direc-
tion. But this concern breaks up very easily
in human beings because they have the
freedom to do it. In their ego they break it up
so much that when you develop the artificial
awareness that was our own, human awa-
reness, was given to us for our freedom to be
tested, to be experimented and to be seen. And
finally, to have ultimate freedom by which you
become the Spirit.
way of easy-going life, then even the con-
sciousness of God is lost, that He exists, that
You have to become the Spirit ultimately. He is the one wha is running the show. We
15
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Compassion; He is Mercy: He is everything.
But in His mercy only, He is going to destroy
become so conscious of ourselves that we
think there is nothing wrong. We do this, we
do that and plunge into all kinds of problems. this world. He won't allow more sins to be
What we are doing is really against ourselves,
and ourselves means God because God has destroys. What is cancer ? What are all these
created us and He loves us. We don't love diseases that are coming up in our body?
ourselves. if we had loved ourselves, we They are nothing but our own destructive
would not have abused our body and our own forces that we have built within ourselves.
systems and everything that we have by There is no fear from outside ourselves or any
saying "What is wrong ? Why not do it ?" You star or any extra-terrestrial attack. No, there
must love this body of yours, this mind of is none. It is within us that the attack is
yours and this society. You must love every- built, of which we should be aware. In the
thing you have, because God has created you name of freedom we have gathered within
in His love. But love itself has become a ourselves all the germs of destruction. It is
a much perverted word. Now what is wrong such a built-in process that we are not even
in promiscuousness ? Is it love ? If I tell you
that it is not because it is against nature and are there. We are quite satisfied with our
it gives you trouble, you will be in a mess. selves, our artificial life, etiquettes and super-
But people may think that this lady is matronly ficial mannerisms.
she is old-fashioned and Victorian. Listen.
It is a fact. Why do we do things which will
destroy. You can't create yourselves. You
can't even create a rose for yourself, leave
alone the whole body. Then why should we
be anti-ourselves ? Why should we be
anti-society which we have created ? Or against left in the dictionary today! Respect yourself.
committed against Him. Even otherwise He
aware that these attacks are coming, that they
Innately, within us, resides the Spirit which
wants to enlighten you, to give the peace, the
bliss and the joy of our being. This beautiful
lamp of yours has been created with a
purpose, It has to be enlightened. Respect
yourself. There is no word called 'respect',
the whole nation or nations that we have
created ? What are they doing-all these
politicians-today ? Fighting. For what ? Just light of the Spirit and it should be enlightened.
look at them. I can't understand what the
the fighting is for-to create more destructive has created for us but we in our ignorance,
forces, more horrible things to destroy inno-
cent human beings? Those who are innocent
are simply warned. They don't know what to
do. They don't understand why they are to
be dead tommorrow because some people going-just towards hell directly. For a mother
have gone off their heads! And those who it is a thing of great concern. How to stop
have gone off their heads are sitting at the this fall ? How to get them out of it ? How to
helm of our affairs. That is how the negati-
vity grows within us. We become negative.
Both are negative attitudes because they for granted. It is a very precious life which
We have to respect this lamp which has the
And let us be that lamp which shows the
glory too. It is such a beautiful world God
in our so-called freedom, have ruined so many
things.
It is shocking to see where people are
make them understand what is their worth,
their value. You should not take human life
was created out of many processes. It was
created with great difficulty. Don't forget that
you have to become the Spirit without which
your life is a waste. Nay, the whole creation
negate God.
Negation of God is the first crime we have
committed. We are not afraid of God. He is
16
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-18.txt 
 is just a waste because you are the highest in discussing things here and there.. But his
attention is always focussed on the kite. Then,
he says, a lady is carrying her little boy and
doing her work in the house-giving water to
her husband, sitting down with the kid,
cooking and then rising up to do washing.
creation. You are the epitome of that crea-
tion.
And what are you upto ? We have to form
nucleuses that will talk openly about God.
I was amazed to see that in this country The child is on her waist, resting. But her
people do not like to talk about God. You
cannot talk about God. Can you imagine such
a state of affairs where you cannot talk about
your creator or that religion means nothing ?
Either you form some sort of a secret organisa-
attention all the time is on the child. There is
a woman holding a pitcher of water on her
head delicately balanced. She is walking with
other women. As they are walking together
laughing, smiling, and talking to each other their
attention is always on the pitcher of water, in
now we belong to a certain cult. How the sense that the attention is on the Spirit
can God have cults ? Just think of it. How
can He have separate churches, separate
temples and separate mosques ? How can we
become fanatical in the name of God I Can have our attention on our Spirit which is the
you imagine, this is what we have done to
God ! We have become fanatics. There is a
stone which when He touches it becomes people think that it is a lot of trash which
gold. When he touches anything it becomes should not be listened to. They want to hear
gold. But there must be a stone : when He the same mundane things again and again. If
touches human beings, they become like it is a broadcast, say, the Conservative party or
prisoners. That is why there is so much the Labour, they will listen to it for hours-such
fanaticism. It is a problem how to give this mundane stuff. Every year you hear that. But
news and this message that you are the if someone says "No, this is all artificial you
Spirit and you have to become the Spirit.
In the same way, though we have to
lead a life here, it is absurd that we do not
giver of the ultimate in life. But as soon as
you begin to talk about something spiritual,
have something more worthwhile within you
and hearken to it" they think they have not
come to hear all these things. "What is it that
My mother-tongue is Marathi,-and thank
God, I
Because it is a country of saints. Thousands of
saints live in that country. It is the tradition; understand what these people have done so
it is so spiritual. Spirituality is the tradition of far and we have accepted it What we have
the place where I
great and 'rashtra' means nation. The tradition the horizon. A star is shining within us and
there is of spirituality and not of alcoholism, that is our Spirit.
drugism or any other' isms'. Spirituality is the
tradition of that country where a very simple
poet called Namdev was born. He was a
tailor, just an ordinary tailor. But he has
written many sweet poems. I will explain tying up their thighs and polishing their own
what he says, "A little boy isflying a kite in the flesh. Just imagine ! In the name of God
sky. He is looking at the sky; he is talking to doing such horrible stuff. The explanation is
his friends; he is moving up and down and that 'you must undergo mortification'. Why
have been born in Maharashtra.
this mother is telling us ?" But now awaken
On a different level we have to
and arise.
was born. "Maha means
taken for granted for all these years is beyond
People talked about it, talked about God,
made another cult which said they were doing
God's work. In "God's work' the ladies are
Nirmala Yoga
17
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-19.txt 
 should you mortify yourself ? 'Because Christ bothered about it. I have no doubt one should
feel desperate. Even the Sahaja yogis some-
whatever Christ did was a waste so a little bit times get very upset and become extremely
of yours was needed to add to it ! Whatever desperate saying "Give up, Mother. We have
has been done has been more than sufficient finished with it and no more". But I do not
because Christ was the Prince. And if a prince know how to remove my attention from the
has to undergo mortification what is so great Spirit. If you can try, try your level best to
did it'. Are you Christ ? And that means
about it ? He has already done it and He has
remove it. You cannot. for you are there. So,
worked for us. He is to be enlightened within whatever it is, you will fight to save as many
as possible. So, all these Sahaja yogis who
get frustrated at certain intervals, I have to
say, you should not be frustrated. You have to
keep your courage and understanding if you
have feelings for others and if you show con-
cern for them, they will understand you and
you will be able to get more and mare people
saved, emancipated and they will enter the
Kingdom of God. As you are enjoying, they
us and that is how we have to get our realisa-
tion.
The easiest thing to do is to sit down and ask
questions, but it is best to get your realisation.
That is the most important thing today. Of
course, under the circumstances, as human
beings are, it is not going to work very fast.
I am very sure of it I have tried my level best.
Like mountains you have to raise the Kundalini.
It is really like raising mountains. You feel so
tired and wom out. But then they don't want
to appreciate it.
do not get hurt about it.
will also enjoy.
The only snag is that you will feel so many
are still lost. It does not matter. You have to
work hard. We have to understand that there
are negative forces which are pulling them
down. They are ignorant and they do not
So do not feel disappointed3;
Slowly and steadily I am sure, in your own
eyes, people will see how your life is transfor-
med into joy and bliss and understanding. know there is a life beyond this mundane
They will see how loving and delighted you
have become and then they are going to gradually, I am sure, it will work out. Especi-
believe that there is a better life for you. Some ally, for this meeting. They have lots of ups
people are in such a bad state that they see
a black picture of everything. They are so
disappointed that they have given up. They
have just given up. They say "Now we have
just finished with it. We have done everything
and now we do not want to do anything will perform vour desired duties. The time is
more". I have seen in France. They are
discussing about the collapse and the immi- running out and that is why there is
nent destruction of the world. They are
discussing that "Let us be finished now. We
have had enough of it. Let us have the
ultimate destruction whether it is an atom
strife. The eternal life of beauty and glory. But
and downs and the whole thing was dis-
couraged.
But one must still understand that God's
work is blessed by God. He will bestow all
His blessings and help on you so that you
passing; very little time is left now. It is
increasing desperation. The desperation itself
has brought forth the advent of Sahaja Yoga
on this earth. And you should feel more
bomb or anything else. Let us be finished" strong to fight these obstructions that, you
It is so desperate! I can understand the feel, are around and work out the Ultimate
desperation of those who are thinking about,
of those who are concerned about it. I am
Goal of this Creation.
May God bless you.
18
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-20.txt 
 Her Holiness
Shri Mataji's Advice"
You should be like a king sitting on his become old still you won't get anything. That's
throne. Instead, you are sitting on the throne why, if you have not got anything, it shows
and weeping and begging! What should be that you are lacking in something. The moment
done to such foolish people? You are king you are separate from yoursell, your faults will
and you should order your five organs that you
have been tolerating them and now they seen, you will feel as if you are a king on throne.
should behave. When you command your- If you find your subjects are creating distur-
self like this, bring yourself under control like bances, order them "Be quiet, you will not
this, then only you have become a good Sahaja do it" and not just in a persuading way
Yogi. Otherwise, your mind goes somewhere "don't do it." Only that person is powerful,
and you say "Mother what to do, I control who is keeping himself in full command.
my mind so much but still it goes there".
Then, what is mind? It is a living force, it will talk. When they talk, even to me, they forget
go. It will go only at that place where it whom they are talking to. What they say is
should go. Our organs will be awakened really surprising. They do not at all under-
and we will never like to wander here and stand what should be said and what should
there, and we will give up many things.
be immediately seen to you and as they are
Let us take an example of how people
We must control even our tongue.
It becomes possible, only after you become
separate from yourself and watch. You have
to be careful of what you say and see that it
whose hearts are clean have very few is all right, Slowly you will form new habits,
not be.
Among all the things we must remember
only one: keep our hearts clean. Those peopie
problems. That does not mean that you are
thinking of bad things. Clean heart means and then you will be able to order yourself,
dedi cation. You cannot grow in Sahaja Yoga, always in 3rd person. A realised person
if you lack in dedication or if you think that
you are some special kind of a person.
There is no need for someone special or
new ways, you will make new judgements
never talks in first person. He tells himself.
"Please go there, please sit down", etc.
Generally children speak in 3rd person, they
say "Nirmala will not go now.
here itself", Sahaja yogis should also speak
in this fashion. Slowly, you should become
separate from yourself. Leaving aside your
desires, your materialistic ideas, or some other
ideas, say, your ideas regarding power etc,
you should think as to what you are doing for
You say,
being some learned
"Mother I have not felt anything, I have
no experience". It is due to your fault
and riot that of Sahaja Yoga. Sometimes,
people talk as if I have taken a contract or
they have paid money to me, "Mother we are
coming to you for very long time." However
long you may come, you may come till you Sahaja Yoga and what you should do.
person.
She will stay
"Translation of Shri Mataji's advice given in Hindi at New Delhi on 11.3.81. Alko see NIRMALA YOGA
Vol. 3 (May June 81).
Nirmala Yoga
19
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-21.txt 
 This dedication is very less in India, even
now: It is much more in the West. They
never come and request me to cure their
relations. They never tell me their material
difficulties and problems. You get the reali-
zation very quickly and those people, poor
things, they take long time because of their
mistakes.
which you can remain ever-blissful. You can
never get joy from anything else. Whatever,
may be the thing, He is the enjoyer.
So. the point is, today you get something
you want, but you are not happy. Tomorrow.
you would like something else and even
though that is given to you and you will not
be happy. Thus, you will never become
You get realization very fast but you don't happy from worldly things.
value it much. They are realized late, but
they have great value for it. They know its
worth. Just see in their eyes, their concen-
tration. They listen to me attentively, even
though I am speaking in Hindi. Though they enjoy? We should enjoy His bliss. What is
don't understand the language, their attention
is fully on how the vibrations are coming made; how many things He has given to us;
with it, how they are felt on the palms,
and what is happening, etc. Now, they given this shakti in us; now we can know
have dedicated their lives to Sahaja Yoga.
They never think that they will do this as well
Paramatma is the enjoyer, and therefore
all should desire Him. We should enjoy the
God, who is the enjoyer of every thing. If we
start enjoying Him, what else do we need to
God's creation; what a beautiful world He has
now we have become Sahaja yogis, God has
our Atma, and can recognise the Spirit in
others, how much unending grace God is
Only then you will go deep. You showering on us: with these thoughts you
must understand that you will grow only by should grow in inner happiness. If you start
dedicating your life in Sahaja Yoga. You don't enjoying the God like this, then you will find
lose anything by doing that, on the other that your heart is growing and still more
as that.
hand, all well being comes in you.
growing and you feel as if it is encompassing
entire creation.
You should devote the whole life to Sahaja
Yoga. You should give every moment to
Sahaja Yoga. That means living spontaneously.
Where will the spontaneity come from? It enjoy God, have that joy everywhere, of what
comes from the living force. It comes from God has given to you, what are the things He
that living force which is ever present within
you. You should not think of anything else.
Today, my message to you is: start enjoing
the Paramatma, leaving aside all other things
has given to you, be joyous about them.
Then you will find that your attention has
Even otherwise, you cannot enjoy. Only stabilized. In this way you will progress in
God is the enjoyer. You are under wrong
impression that you are Enjoying. God is the
enjoyer and He alone is the Creator. You are
just in between. You are just like pipes. If at blessings etc." Otherwise your complaints
all you enjoy something, it is God who has will never end and your aggression will also
unending love for you. This is the truth, with not stop.
Sahaja yoga.
Every minute you should appreciate, "I have
received this. I have recived such and such
Nirmala Yoga
20
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Leaders in Sahaja Yoga
"O Devi yoư are modesty in the heart of the high born"
Devi Mahatmyam
Let us do something which is not very when the latter is not really understood. Of
sahaja, that is, cast a glance at the future. course the mischief maker is-guess what-
Sahaja Yoga is now taking momentum and capital E capital G capital O. We find in the
we can easily foresee the need of the coming Gospels this lively story of the apostles quar-
years. The new Sahaja Yogis of today will relling about who was the greatest among
have to be the leaders of tomorrow. As the themselves and Christ took a child and said:
collective organism is growing, more and "If you are not like a child..." It was nice of
more cells are required to perform key funct- them to play this rehearsal because Christ
ions. There will be a need for Sahaja Yogis could thus warn the leaders in Sahaja Yoga
to run ashrams and schools, to talk to the not to again spoil the show.
public and to the media people, in a position, them to remember the story; a child is simple,
above all, to deal with newcomers while spontaneous, he likes to play...he also plays
displaying the required mixture of love and the role of the leader, but it's a play !
firmness. The blending of these two qualities
is important: love attracts and consolidates
positivity. Firmness keeps negativity at bay. leadership functions, I could propose the
As already mentionned in this magazine, following description of the good leader: he
inside (meditation) and outside (action)
growths of the Yogi will complement each
other.
It is good for
Looking at my brothers and sisters who
are in Sahaja Yoga since years and assume
the
does whatever the Unconscious expects him
to do, without false pride and without false
humility: he does'nt do but he is: he does'nt
Yet Shri Mataji has warned that leaders in perform but he vibrates; he does'nt appear
Sahaja Yoga are particularly exposed and
should thus move about in the various fields of his Mother's qualities). Thank God, he
of life with full awareness. For a Sahaja Yogi, has a sense of humour: He becomes a bit
full awarness ultimately implies Atma-consci-
ousness, that is, receiving, giving, perceiving
through the Spirit, realising thus the higher suspicious when he forgets to praise Her:
synthesis of the Vishnu-Shiva tattwa within
himself. Then the fruit of spiritual maturity. thoughts: of leadership come into his mind.
i.e. detachment, will free him once and for all
from the various bondages which can ensnare sometimes, the wind swells his sail; he does
him, such as materialism, possessiveness in
family life, job's worries, sex in the attention
but he shines (with, of course, the reflections
suspicious when his Mother starts praising
him (although he just loves it) and extremely
when he cares about his "position", when
He does not push himself forwards but,
not climb the mountain but, sometimes, he
finds himself sitting on the top: someone has
done it for him. He smiles: his Mother did it
again: What a wonderful sightseing: His
But besides these classical traps a leader programme is to enjoy and he does'nt even
has to watch very carefully difficulties which feel sorry about it. He is neither guilty nor
could stem from the very status of leadership responsible. He is most responsible. His
etc, etc...
*"Balancing the Internal & External Growth' NIRMALA YOGA, vol, 13. (Jan-Feb. 83).
Nirmala Yoga
21
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-23.txt 
 compassion is not his. He does'nt help Mahadeva, offering Him thousand lotuses.
anybody: everybody is helped. He carries
with great pride two diadems, two bandans of the higher worlds. As the last lotus was
sparkling snow and gold: the gratification of missing, he who is pushpalochana i.e. lotus
his Mother and the love of his brothers and eyed, plucked out one of his eyes and offered
sisters. These are the magic of his strength it to complete his worship. Shiva was enam-
and the secret of his confidence. Anyone oured and gave to Vishnu the absolute
who is adorned by the contentment of the weapon, the Sudarshana chakra. Shiva is
Goddess and shielded by the love of the s
Sahaja Yogis will become immortal.
His beautiful and melodious voice enchanted
said to be Naranarayana priya i.e. fond of
Nara and Narayana. We shall all go into our
A last word. Shri Vishnu is the Leader of depths and experience the relationship bet-
Evolution, the Master of the Quest. It is
written in the Puranas how Shri Vishnu pro-
pitiated Shri Shiva in the Himalayas. He
undertook to chant the thousand names of
ween the two Lords. When the leadership of
consciousness surrenders itself to the Atma
all temptations of the ego are finished.
A discipte
Sahaja Yoga of Physical Cure-II
and tove and adoration of a simple innocent
Let us consider diseases. Diseases can
effect us either through the ida or the Pingala sort-spontaneous and without forethought,
Nadis, since both are affected by hordes of afterthought or ritualism.
dead beings. Especially the Ida
The being, whose attention is fixed so
closely and focally on the Mother, automati-
For a disease to enter the body, its vibratory cally develops other qualities such as pure
defences must be weak. The strong points wisdom, knowledge, chastity, obedience and
that protect the body are the Mooladhara and
Agnya Chakras and the Left Heart. These
three Chakras have, above all, deities that
stand for Spirit. Purity and Truth and transc-
endence over matter. Of these three, the
most basic is the Mooladhara Chakra.
love and above all, purity. This is because
the Mother is the only source of these quali-
ties in the entire cosmos and what does not
emanate from Her is not true.
As beings created by the Goddess, we
worship Her, but as Her children we have
The Lord or the Swami of the Mooladhara direct access to Her, to place at Her Feet, our
Chakra is Shri Genesha. His outstanding perplexities and our confusion, our weaknes-
quality is respect for the Adi Shakti in the
form of the Mother. This is the aspect of the
Goddess which is paramount. With it go
ses and our strength so that She, carefully, as
Mother, may nurture and integrate them and
educate and re-evolve us. To have such a
qualities such as absolute faith and trust in direct relationship to the supreme evolutionary
the Mother whose instinct is to sacrifice for power of the universe is a very great thing
the sake of Her child.. An innocent child and in some sense condenses and summarises
knows this and puts his faith and trust, his all that there is in our existence. In reson-
whole heart at Her Feet; with it goes devotion
ance to this, Christ was born to Shri Maha-
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-24.txt 
 laxmi to stand at the ultimate gate of reality gross impurity. But if, impure, then any state
of gross purity is only transitional and cannot
last. There are only two things worthy of
The Goddess is the Creator and Preserver contemplation in this universe- Paramatma
and Destroyer or Liberater and Evolver of and its surrounding Shaktis, both of which
and ultimate truth.
this Universe, and a wise child knows this,
and nothing else, and knows that She stands torm of our Holy Mother Mataji Shri Nirmala
at every door and turning point of human Devi.
existence, placed by Herself there, in various
forms and different in powers and attributes,
There is nothing else in the Universe-Only
the Paramatma-And any one who puts indeed to know the absolute in human form
thoughts and attention on wordly matters and to have been given the chance to re-
eventually weakens both the Agnya and cognise HER-as SHE is. This is opportunity
Mooladhara. Be it on well-meaning things and privilege so great that words cannot
such as Science or Literature or Politics, or
anything. Anything that doesn't reflect the our attention and feeling on it. Initially 1
Spirit and its great Shakti, has no meaning thought to describe the various illnesses se-
in terms of development and eventually shifts parately but that would distract our attention
one off balance.
are really one and have incarnated in the
Let us consider our position, it is very
great indeed for we have been privileged
express or encompass it and we must place
from the essential to the non-essential, so I
will not speak of it.
Any shift off balance as one knowS can
lead to collapse. It is only the constant flow
The attention is seated in the stomach
of our Mother's Kundalini and It's powerful through the Nabhi and when centred rise
effortlessly through the smeothness of the
balances itself, that mantains, furthers and Sushumna to touch the Feet of Shri Sadashiva
Himself at the Sahasrara and then to continue
its ascent to the highest levels that man can
aspire to. So do not waste the attention.
Keep it pure-and no disease can assail you
-and no power in darkness can hinder your
force constantly rebalancing that which un-
pushes forward Sahaja Yoga.
The essence of human beings is their
awareness or attention, that decides what one
is or what one becomes. Shri Mataji said
that where one's awareness goes "that" one
becomes. The seats of power in a human
being are not material or gross, but subtle
and immaterial, bound together by the subtle
filaments of the awareness. If the attention
is pure, then, the being is not affected by
rise to the Absolute.
JAI SHRI MATAJI SHRI NIRMALA
MATREYA NAMOH NAMAH.
-Dr. Rustom
23
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-25.txt 
 The Sahaja of Physics-(Part I)
mathematical, immutable laws, It was all.
INTRODUCTION
Seen as a yoga of knowledge (jnana very satisfying for the intellect: matter was
yoga), Sahaja Yoga is known to us as the matter, God its creator was something else,
knowledge of integration. It should thus be
possible to integrate through its scope the science's confident observations
various fields of the human knowledge, to man's enquiry, That is why the French
grasp these fields in their essential principles physicist and mathematician Laplace could
or tattwas, to understand how these princi- tell Napoleon that he did not need God as
ples relate to each other and to God. This
synthesis with the higher spiritual plane is
concievable because Sahaja Yoga is above have shattered these beautiful certainties of
all "Nirmala vidya", that is the science of the 18th and 19th centuries and, with Albert
the living, the science of the immaculate Einstein, have laid the foundations of a sahaja
working of the Adi Shakti. The time is ripe physics, that is a physics which embraces
for the integration of all previous knowledge the Universe as a vibrating, organic Unity.
in a higher synthesis : many people who are where, so to say, the shape of God can be
not yogis have already started working on guessed. How ?-Modern physics shows at
it. For instance, in his book The Tao of work in the matter patterns of phenomena
Physics the Austrian
Capra, attempted to show that the Eastern in the more subtle, higher spiritual plane.
mystical tradition and the Western new
physics were describing the world in stri-
kingly similar patterns. It is quite reason-
able to expect that Sahaja yogis who are
scientists will be able to go quite far in this in the eye of the scientist, an hypothetical
direction of enquiry once that they have primordial cause. His ways, His play (leela)
grasped the principles of Sahaja Yoga. Even unfolds itself even in the very laws of matter.
a layman like myself can play a bit further It is, this time all very satisfying for the
with Dr. Capra'a correct intuition because intellect,.. and for the heart.
the knowledge granted to us by Shri Mataji cists and, therefore, with due apologies for
has opened fascinating horizons!
somewhere else, removed from the field of
and from
an hypothesis to explain the Universe.
Relativity theory and Quantum theory
physicist,
that can be found again through Sahaja Yoga
Fritjof
These patterns within the physical world are,
so to say, projections which reveal something
about the archetypical patterns of the causal,
spiritual reality. And thus God is no longer
As non physi-
superficiality, let us pursue in this article some
such analogies between the science-revealed
Classical physics had found its most
elaborate expression in Newton's mechanical physical Universe and the sahaja-revealed
model of the Universe. In this deterministic spiritual reality.
model, matter was made of solid stuff or
substance evolving within the three dimen-
sional space of Eucledian geometry. Masses
and motions, material particles and the forces underworld of the infinitely small to find out
between them were governed by clear, what is the nature of the subatomic units of
THE PARABLE OF THE SUBATOMIC
MATTER
Let us make a quick plunge in the strange
1. Fritjaf Capra Tao of Physics' Fontana Collins (Suffolk, 1975).
Nirmala Yoga
24
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-26.txt 
 matter, or, in other words, to find out what is the diety presiding over the chakra; its
formless dimension the energy it emits.
Hence both are one and the same thing. Like
the subatomic particle the chakra is at the
stuff is matter made of?
And here is the first surprise ! Matter is
full of tricks: these units are very abstract
enitities and have nothing to do with the same time formed and formless, position and
solid objects of classical physics or with
our every day perception of matter, Depen-
ding on how
subatomic units appear as particles, that
is, as entities confined to
small volume, or as waves, stretched out
through larger portions of space. This dual
picture provides us with an unexpected
concept of the reality of matter.
components identified by atomic physics are,
so to say, "identity" as particles and "eneray" Advaita Vedantism, forms of Islam) but his
as waves.
wave, identity and energy. Furthermore, in
spiritual life also the The Uncertainty principle
seems to apply and the the devotee is caught
in its limitations. Indeed he either usually
focuses on the identity of a personal God
(Jesus, Vishnu, Shiva) and his consciousness
loses tracks of the all pervading cosmic
manifestation of Divinity outside of this very
we look at them, these
an extremely
IS,
form; or he focuses on the abstract undifferen-
ciated aspect of the Divine (Buddhism, Taoism,
Its smallest
heart cannot find the bliss at the Lotus Feet
of the identified, recognized Beloved one.
The perception of the formed Identity drives
But according to Heisenberg's
famous "Uncertainty principle" these two
aspects can never be perceived simultane-
ously. Either the observer focus on the away the perception of the formless Energy,
location of the particle and he loses sights can't get at the same time location and
And vice versa. As the physicists say, we
of its wave like momentum;
or he meaSures
momentum,
the momentum but loses the particle's
position. That is, from the experimenter's
standpoint, the subatomic unit is identity or
energy. The particle perception and the to the Formed when he has the darshan
wave perception, as Niels Bohr saw it, are
complementary. Both are needed and both the working of the Formless when he feels
provide only a partial description of the same
atomic reality. Quantum theory reveals a in awareness. Yet the full identity of these
basic elusiveness in the very substratum of
the Universe.
For a Sahaja yogi the question becomes
a very practical one. He feels the relationship
(physical presence) of Shri Mataji. He feels
the vibrations and the consequent mutations
two aspects, although perhaps understood by
the mind, is not fully realised. Indeed it is
one thing to rationally grasp this truth that
Without going any further in our expio- the two aspects are one
Fation let us make an attempt at reading, in refer in passing to Hegel's central paradigm in
this finding, the parable of one very important The phenomenology of Spirit : IDENTITY
aspect of spiritual reality which was the (Brahman, Ultimate Reality) IS The IDENTITY
subject of Shri Mataji's enlightening speech, (one-ness) BETWEEN THE IDENTITY (the
on the 18th June 1983 in Paris.
Formed) AND THE NON INDENTITY (the
Formless),-But it is another thing to experi-
ence this truth as a state of one's own cons-
The dilemma is not without
importance: If I do not realise the Person of
Shri Mataji within the formless energy of
Before the havan and the puja ceremonies
Shri Mataji spoke beautifully about the relation-
ship between the formed and the formless as-
pect of God. Forinstance, She says, a chakra is
both formed and formless. Its formed dimension
ciousness.
"See Page. 13, 14
Nirmala Yoga
25
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-27.txt 
 vibrations I will pine and feel separated from will come, by the grace of sakshat Kundalini
Her when I am not physically with Her, I when a Sahaja Yogi will be able to perceive at
won't be so aware of Her PREM (Divine Love) or above the sahasrara level, in Nirvikalpa or
upon me. If I do not realise the formless beyond. Then many things change: these
energy within the person of Shri Mataji will two shaktis flow into each other, all the
constantly forget the true magnitude of Her deities of the sahasrara are integrated within
personality, the perception of Her divinity will the formless and the attention has reached the
seat of the Atma at the center of the Brahma-
Her as if She were a human being. In other randra. At this highest stage the Yogi
words, we could say, parhaps, that the becomes what he perceives. Instead of
Uncertainty principle is one aspect ol May3, saying "TWAMEWA SAKSHAT SHRI MATA-
JI" he says "AHAM SAKSHAT SHRI MATAJI".
as a inherent limit of the human psyche. Can While saying "you are" the distinction between
it be overcome? - In physics, no ; in Sahaja the yogi and Shri Mataji prevents him to
perceive Her formed and formless aspects in
one integrated act of consciousness; while
escape my awareness and1 will behave with
embodied as a law of nuclear physics as well
Yoga, Yes.
The key to this answer is to be found in
the words "from the observer's stand-point" saying" I am" he has no difficulties, from the
Depending upon his standpoint, the physicist inside, to experiment these two dimensions;
can measure the location or the momentum
of a particle but not both at the same time.
It is not in his power to alter his experimental
standpoint in a way which would enable him
to do so. While the Sahaia Yogi, through
slow but steady growth, can alter his episte- aham Bhavani". He knows fully well that he
mological standpoint. How?
this is probably the state of "God realisation".
ONE HAS TO BECOME HIM in ORDER TO
KNOW HER.
The author of these lines, for instance,
certainly does'nt see himself entitled to say,
is not at that level. But in Sahaja Yoga even
It is of course Shri Kundalini who is the the most crazy hopes are allowed. And we
magical doer., We could say, may be, that the know Her generosity ! The greatness of the
Sahaja Yogi, at the level of Nirvichara Samma-
dhi, perceives more the localised darshan of bestow upon us challenges the sheer capacity
Shri Mataji through the mana shakti of his Ida of imagination.
nadi and more the vibrations through the
Prana shakti of his Pingala nadi. But a day Vienna 7.7.83
blessings that The Great Goddess wants to
-Gregoire
Our Mother is unique and desireless. Her advent is fulfulment of the
desire of all seekers; and Sahaja Yogis are specially being looked after by
HER overflowing love and Compassion, every moment. Let us all pray
collectively every day after Arti, three times:
"Shri Mataji, we the Sahaja Yogis of the World desire your good
health".
26
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-28.txt 
 Installation of Shri Ganesh
The establishment of Shri Ganesh marks the Shri Shiva to protect His mother's protocol.
advent of sahaja. Shri Ganesh is the son of Why should the children disobey when
Adi Shakti Shri Mataji. She bestows upon they know that whatever Shri Mataji says is for
Him great powers when She sits him on the their benefit ? Often Sahaja Yogis say, "but
earth as its guardian.
Mother why don't we do it the other way:"
Are we to teach the Adi Shakti, who has crea-
Shri Ganesh symbolizes the love of His ted the universe? But She is Maha Maya so
MOTHER hence Sahaja Yoga is to be spread Sheplays with one's ego and consents to one's
through love.
wishes and suggestions. Organisers of
As the guardian of the earth Shri Ganesh Sahaja Centres have to be very careful about
has the special power of gravity which main- giving suggestions to Shri Mataji or interpret-
tains our balance. In our body His chakra is ing Her instructions because they are too close
placed outside the spine where the body is
sewn together and this forms our foundation.
Any disturbance in the foundation reflects in
the chakra. It is therefore important that the
foundation should be strong and well groun-
ded. With the spreading of Sahaja Yoga, point, whereas one's intellect is limited to
many Sahaja countries will spring all over the
world. However their efficiency depends on
the strength of this foundation which is Shri remains connected to the mains and the vibra-
Ganesh. If the foundation is weak, the neg-
ative forces can easily attack, and render us
inelfective, the instruments of Shri Matail's Without vibrations there cannot be Sahaja
love. If Shri Ganesh is strongly entrenched Yogi thus Shri Ganesh gets upset with the
then no-one dare attack. Thus the inner organisers, thus the growth of Sahaja Yoga
weakness attracts the outside negativity. Shri suffers a set back. Hence it is sometimes
Ganesh is the protector of the Devi's protocol, better to be a nobody, than a big busy body.
If we seek His protection then we have to be
very careful of the protocol of Shri Mataji.
When we are not careful there, He is angry
to Maha Maya and can easily fall into it. The
importance attached to the work often throws
the viel of Maya. We forget that She is Maha
Saraswati; the source of all arts and planning.
Her instructions are from the supreme view
3-dimenstional and hence cannot realise its
total implications. In one's obedience one
tions keep flowing. In disobedience or cen-
sorship the work snaps, the vibrations cease.
A dispute among the organizers reflects a
decline in their vibrations. The organizers
should then withdraw for a while and ask the
collective body of Sahaja Yogis to decide the
and if He witdraws then we become vulner-
able to the attack of the negative forces. The issue through vibrations, then it comes under
most important aspect of the protocol is
absolute obedience and surrender to Shri When the decision is based on conditioning
Mataji. Shri Ganesh does not know any
other authority except His Mother. He is so
devoted to Her that He does not even know should not trespass it with Mundane Matters,
His father-There is a story about how even like personal finances or family problems.
Shri Shiva Himself could not enter Parvati's Though She may graciously listen to everyone
abode because Shri Ganesh guarded the door- for a while, yet She has already taught us the
way. He destroyed the
the attention of Shri Mataji. She works it out.
She does not work it out.
Shri Mataji does talk about Her time yet we
entire army of method of dealing with them ourselves. If
Nirmala Yoga
27
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-29.txt 
 anyone tries to dominate Her attention or
divert it into Mundane matters, the deity gets all foily committed in innocence.
annoyed with these people. If a deity is
upset, then He plays games with our ego. We
should always be mindful of Her time and Shri Mataji bestows wisdom on Shri Ganesha.
that Her attention is not brought down from
the collective level. When inter-personal pro-
blems arise among Sahaja Yogis it causes
great pain to Shri Mataji to have to witness Her
children quarrelling. The senior Sahaja Yogis dence regarding protocol, wisdom guides us,
should resolve the issue among themselves as
far as possible. Sometimes we go on com- aneously.
plaining to Shri Mataji but we forget that She
is all knowing and in complaining too much a long way. Shri Ganesh is being established
we only reveal our own weaknesses.
conduct talks to cover some folly. She forgives
To maintain the balance of the universe
Wisdom is not intellect. Wisdom is born
when our intelligence is connected with the
Spirit. Through wisdom our discretionary
power develops. In the absence of any prece-
infact we must observe the protocol spont-
With the grace of Shri Mataji we have come
all around the world. By being always mindful
of the protocol the dieties are pleased and
we can aiso save ourselve the excercise of
The purest quality is innocence. This is
the purity of our vibrations. Shri Mataji is falling in and out of Maha Maya constantly.
pleased with this innocence., hence always be
truthful to Her. Never use devious means or
Yogi Mahajan,
'Mother's Love'
You make me forget all the pangs and
sufferings.
Ol my beloved Mother!
When I go out for work,
I get heat of the world.
10
There is no better place than your Lotus Feet,
Where I find my sole refuge
When I come back home,
Your Love cools me down.
I pray not only for me,
but for the whole world.
Your love dissolves all that I gather,
To extend your soothing Love to all
To fill the whole Universe with your
your love refreshes me.
When I get injury outside,
infinite joy, that you are.
When I come to you.
That who is infinite joy, Love, peace and
get healing touch of your love.
The world though full of miseries,
beauty is going to make the whole creation
manifested with His real nature, the eternal
your love makes it peaceful.
There is no place in the world to hide,
happiness.
Aum Amen
when I come to you, you conceal me in
JAI MATAJI
your depth,
Nirmala Yoga
28
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-30.txt 
 Advice Given to Sahaja Mothers by
Shri Mataji
"To be a mother-it's a most responsible vibrations of the parents-therefore it is impor-
tant that the parents cleanse themselves as
much as possible-from our practical experi-
ence, almost all vibrational problems that the
babies and children have is that of the
position, that of a mother, it is even more
responsible than that of a king-to be a
mother"
-Shri Mataji.
parents-
Becoming the mother of a reajised soul
presented most of us with practical questions
which before Sahaja Yoga would probably
not have occurred to us. Here in London,
Sahaja Yoginis were specially blessed to have of books about mother and childcare in order
our Holy Mother to advise us. Knowing how to educate ourselves in the absence of sen-
thirsty we were for these tips and guidelines, sible parental advice, which in a society such
we have collected together all the points Sri as India would be available-the Grandmother
Mataji has told to individuals; as far as we playing an important role.
are aware, all the information given below
was meant as general advice and does not
relate specifically to individual cases-we
hope it may prove useful to you.
"It is a very special responsibility, that of
having children."
Shri Mataji has also advised the reading
Another point which Shri Mataji has men-
tioned on several occasions is the way in India
that the whole society trains the attention of
the child-by continually pointing the atten-
During conversations with Sahaja Yogini tion, to the correct things.
mothers, Shri Mataji has told us that in the
Western society, the children are born with
our ego and superego-this is the reason they
are often born with little or no hair-in India,
Shri Mataji tells us, the babies are always born
with hair. Once the child has all its 'needs
seen to, i.e., changed nappy, feed, he shouldn't full of positivity.
be picked up all the time as this encourages
ego to develop.
THE PRACTICAL ADVICE
During Pregnancy
It is very important that the mother's
mental and spiritual health is kept clean and
"Whatever's going on in the mind will
affect the child-the mind has to be happy-
Shri Mataji has strongly advised us to feed you cannot be with artificiality or fantasy.
on a regular basis from the beginning and to
establish a flexible routine for the children-it
has been stressed that to a reasonable degree
On the physical side, if the mother is fit
and healthy and the pregnancy is normal, Shri
they should adapt to our life-style and should Mataji has advised a daily walk in the park
or country throughout the entire pregnancy,
This, Shri Matají explains, will help towards
Shri Mataji has also explained that God an easier labour. (This advice would indicate
can protect the children from most harmful that if the Swadisthana Chakra is in good
not begin to rule us!
vibrations, but cannot protect them from the
condition, this will also help).
Nirmala Yoga
29
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-31.txt 
 Mother's Diet
After the birth
The mother and baby should stay inside
for forty days. Contact with non-Sahaja your own diet is very important while breast-
Yogis should be minimal during this period,
If your baby suffers from wind problems,
feeding, to help reduce ths build-up of gases:
(a) no rice should be taken3B
(b) root vegetables and all things growing
below the ground should not be
Sugar and boiled water can be given to
the baby from birth onwards.
Treatment for colic: It seems that many
of our babies have experienced problems with
wind and colic. Shri Mataji gave us much
advice on how to treat and prevent this:
eaten;
(c) no white flour or any produce made
from white flour:
(d) milk should be taken with something
like cereal, never on its own;
(a) ajwain treatment: foment ajwain by
(i) chewing it yourself; or (ii) warming
it in a dry pan. Place this on baby's
navel with a warmed nappy over the
top, hoiding it in place.
(s) avoid cold drinks;
(f) also omit all generally well-known
wind-producing food, e.g., beans,
spices,
(b) the mother should also chew ajwain
-quite a good handful several times
a day. Another good way of taking almonds (sugared or plain), an Indian sweet
aiwain is in a drink that Shri Matajicalled Rasqullah (sweet, white balls in sugar
has shown us how to prepare:
Good foods to eat are; semolina t
syrup).
Use 7 fennel ais seeds and 2 ajwain
seeds with cracked block gugar (sugar
candy)-make sure it is quite sweet
(ordinary sugar can be used). Use them warm. If the weather is cold, they
this as baby's drinking water, and the should not be bathed so often, Shri Mataji
mother may also take it, (in severe
cases, Sahaja Yogis have found that
increasing the amount of ajwain seeds
can help).
Bathing
When bathing the baby, we should keep
says it is not so necessary-but daily oil
massage is.
Baby should be oil massaged every day as
it is very good for the chakras. Use an oil
(d) when the baby is older, i.e., approxi- such as olive, almond, mustard-not the pro-
mately one to two monthe, grips water pietory baby oils, as they do not contain
can be given--say, twice a day-but vitamins. Do not use olive oil on the hair,
as this turns white. Massage with the oil
towards tha Sahasrara on the head, as if to
"fill' the Sahasrara with oil.
it must be boiled first.
(e) other preventative measures:
(i) the baby should be properly win-
ded, even if he falls asleep.
Do not pick baby up under the arms as
this can damage his shoulders and be very
painful for him.
(ii) when taking the wind out of the
baby the hands should be moved in a
downward direction from the neck
to the base of the spine.
Brushing the hair should be done even if
their isn't very much, Brush it from the front
Nirmala Yoga
30
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-32.txt 
 to the back on top of the head and upwards of natural fibres such as wood. Plastic toys
towards the Sahasrara at the back and sides. do not have good vibrations and should be
This is to open the Sahasrara and encourage avoided.
growth of the hair,
Shri Mataji has commented that it is better
for the children to have fewer toys of better
quality than lots of inferior ones,
Clothing
Shri Mataji has strongly impressed upon
us the importance of the children wearing Weaning
100% natural fibres, and that only pure cotton
should be worn next to their skin. Woollen
cloth should be over this in the colder clima-
tes or part of the year. Most important is should be natural, no packaged or artificial
that the small indentation in the collar bone is ones to be given, Shri Matajl advises that the
covered up-this helps to prevent them catch-
ing colds. C
putting over cotton ones.
Babies to be weaned at six months-fully
weaned approximately ten months. All foods
first weaning foods should be rice mashed up
Cherub' wool vests are good for With sugar and milk. Do not start babies off
on curd (yoghurt),
Feeding bottles should preferably be made
Silk is not a good fabric for babies. Reg-
arding nappies, use 100% cotton only as they of glass.
are much better for vibrations, However, in
situations like seminars where washing facili-
ties are very poor, we may use the disposable
Vaccinations
Shri Mataji has advised us to get the
children vaccinated against the childhood
diseases, as this helps strengthen them against
the negativity,
ones as a temporary measure.
To allow a good flow of vibrations, two-
piece outfits are preferable to one-piece ones,
and garments should end at the ankle. In Meditation
cold weather, make sure the nabhi chakra is
well covered, and keep head and feet covered.
Girls should be dressed like girls, in dresses should meditate with us in the early morning
or punjabi suits, and boys should be dressed
like boys.
Shri Mataji has recommended that children
from being young babies.
"One has to remember that motherhood
is very importanf-it is the mother who created
this universe, the father was just a witness,"
Toys
Regarding toys, these should be also made Shri Mataji,.
Note : Most quotes taken from andiotape no. 164 "The Mother" Shri Mataji also talks on children in no. 255
"Marriage and Collecticity" and the Derby tape.
31
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-33.txt 
 Sahaja Yoga and Nursery Rhymes
Now that Shri Mataji has blessed so many city of London, which is nowadays the finan-
of us with beautiful children, we are starting cial capital of the world and has, among other
to sing the age old nursery rhymes once things, quite a nabhi catch.
again, remenmbering the songs of our own
childhoods.
"Oranges and lemons, say the bells of
St. Clement's, I owe you five farthings.
say the bells of St. Martin's.
When will you pay me ? Say the bells of
Old Bailey.
Our beloved Mother
Our
once
explained how one or tvwo refer to Her or
certain aspects of Sahaja Yoga, and the
writer has taken the liberty of looking at some
more from the angle of Sahaja Yoga. Hope-
fully the ideas will be enjoyable to all mums
and dads and other interested parties.
When I grow rich, say the bells of Shora-
ditch.
When will that be ? Say the bells of
Stepney.
I do not know, says the great bell of
Bow."
Firstly here are three that Shri Mataji
Herself talked about :
The New Jerusalem starts from London,
England, which is the heart of the universe The third rhyme that Mother commented on
and at present the home of Shri Mataji. But is also something of a warning, but has a
when Shri Mataji came to London to call Her
Children, many were damaged to the point
of "falling down" and She has had to use
every conceivable method to build us up
again. Someone made a song about this
long ago and the children still sing it:
sweetness about it too. It goes like this:
"Ladybird, ladybird, fly away home.
Your house is on fire, your children are
göne.
Mother told us that She is the ladybird in
"London Bridge is falling down, falling the song. A ladybird is a little red beetle with
down, falling down,
London Bridge is falling down, my fair common in many countries including England
lady.
Help to build it up again, up again, up aphids which ruin rose bushes and is the
again,
Help to build it up again my fair lady.
Build it up with sticks and stones, sticks Sahaja Yogis who have seen the dreadful
and stones sticks and stones,
Build it up with sticks and stones, my even make them run away. Her house is
fair lady.
seven black spots on its back. (It is very
and the Himalayas. It likes to eat damaging
gardener's best friend.) The second line of
the rhyme is self explanatory to Western
attacks on Shri Mataji's children which can
perhaps the Sahasrara of the seekers, which
is often burning instead of cool to begin with,
when they first come for realisation.
Shri Mataji is the fair lady.
There is another very apt nursery rhyme
about London, and this one is about lemons
(chillies being unknown in England until in English and here are a few more which
recently) and bells, which have long been
used to frighten off negative forces. The song
happens to refer to bells of churches in the much:
There are a large number of nursery rhymes
would appear to be about Sahaja Yoga.
Firstly, in case the ego should come up too
Nirmala Yoga
32
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-34.txt 
 "Humpty Dumpty sat on the wall, Humpty not decide whether he wants to dwell in the
Dumpty had a big fall,
All the king's horses and all the king's consequences are revealed in the last two
men couldn't put Humpty together again." lines!
Sahasrara (lady's chamber) or not. The
To finish, here are two rhymes which
Humpty Dumpty was an ego.
glorify Shri Mataji in two of Her many
aspects, Firstly, as Shri Adi Kundalini :
Anather very well known one is Baa Baa
Black Sheep:
4 had a little nut tree and nothing would
it bear,
But a silver nutmeg and a golden pear.
The King of Spain's daughter came to
visit me
All for the sake of my little nut tree."
"Baa Baa black sheep, have you any
wool?
Yes sir, yes sir, three bags full.
One for the master and one for the dame,
And one for the little boy who lives down
the lane."
The nut tree would be the Kundalini while the
silver nutmeg is présumably the moon, which
glorifies the left side. (Nutmegs are used as
a sleéping draught, sleep being to do with
the left side). The golden pear would be the
In olden
A black sheep is an expression used to des-
cribe the odd one out, the eccentric, the one
who does not fit in with the accepted norm.
Only too often the Western seeker are "black
sheep". Perhaps the rhyme explains why. stun whose place is the right side.
The woo! may be the rubbish of conditioning days Spain was supposed to be a source of
and the unnecessary ideas with which we
clutter up our egos and super-egos. The one
great wealth and splendour so the King of
Spain's daughter would be someone very
other to the dame, the left. Surely the litle special. Could it be that the princess is the
Grace of Shri Mataji, which comes to visit
boy down the lane is the Shri Ganesha.
the seeker because of the Kundalini, and to
Children manage to sing quite gruesome give moksha or realisation ?
songs with great gusto and detachment.
and this one is an example:
We have all looked into the sky just after
dusk and seen Venus shining so gloriously for
"Goosey Goosey Gander, whither shallI it is the brightest star in the sky. The planet
Venus is one of the seats of Shri Mataji in
Upstairs and downstairs and in my lady's the solar system. Everyone knows this one:
wander?
chamber.
Twinkle twinkle little star, how I wonder
what you are.
Up above the world so high, like a
diamond in the sky,"
There I met an old man who wouldn't
say his prayers.
So I took him by the left leg and threw
him down the stairs!"
How many of us cannot help wondering
The ward "hamsa" is the hamsa chakra, the at Our Divine Mother, our guiding star who is
place of discrimination, means goose or so beautiful, so simple and yet so enigmatic?
swan. Perhaps the second line refers to
someone who is wandering around and can-
Om Shri Mataji Nirmala Ma.
-Linda Pierce
Nirmala Yoga
33
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-35.txt 
 A Letter from Italy
Aum Twameva Sakshat Shri Maha Buddha Sakshat Shri Adi Shakti
Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Namo Namah
Dear Sahaja brothers and sisters,
By the grace and with the blessings of Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, a new Sahaja
venture is under way in Italy, Near to Tivoli, famous for the fountains, there in the mountains
to the east of Rome, by the river Aniene a tributary of Sri Tibur.
The venture is a hotel/pizzeria. So the work is directed towards Nabhi Chakra, Liver and
Void. The business was launched by Guido (of Italy) and Isabelle (France) on their return
earlier this year from India, where they were wedded in the presence of Shri Mataji.
The staff at time of writing consists of Guido and Isabelle, Billy (Irish) and Rosemary
(Australian) and baby Sukanya (born in London), Akbar Amir (Iranian) and Pin (Sicily), not
forgetting Gabriel from Rome.
Giovanni in Sicily is working very hard to build another similar concern there. He has
been given some land with a dilapidated building and is gradually preparing it for occupation.
Please remember us in your prayers. especially void and ego are the obstacles up to now.
We feel Shri Mataji's attention very much with us, particularly in the evening as customers
begin to arrive in the Pizzeria. Also the Elements are very much with us and keep us clean.
May Shri Hanumana take this message with our love to all Sahaja Yogis throughout the
world in the name of our mother Shri Nirmala Devi. Amen.
Jai Mataji.
SAHAJA Y OGA ARCHIVES
Let it be reminded here that we have started a Sahaja Yoga archives project. All the
material used in spreading Sahaja Yoga is being collected in all the languages: pamphlets,
posters, letters, newsletters, songs, mantras etc etc. The file is building up and we have
already collected some very interesting-and perhaps one day historical-material. So we
would be grateful if all the Sahaja Yoga centers throughout the world could keep aside for
us one copy of the material they are producing. Once or twice a year they could send it at
the following address:
Sahaja Archive
Care A. de Kalbermatten
Chemin du Joran
1295 TANNAY-VD-
Switzerland
We are very grateful for your cooperation in this matter.
JAI MATAJI
Sahaja Yoga Switzerland.
Nirmala Yoga
34
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-36.txt 
 99 Names of Allah
LA ILLAHA ILLA HAH
MUHAMAD RASULLAH
JAI MATAJI
1. Ar-Rahman
The Beneficent 29. Al-Adl
The Just
The Merciful 30. Al-Lațif
2. Ar-Rahim
The Subtle One
The Sovereign Lord 31. Al-Khabir
3. Al-Malik
The Aware
The Holy 32. Al-Halim
4. Al-Quddus
The Forbearing One
33. Al-Azim
The Source of peace
5. As-Salam
The Great One
34. Al-Ghafür
6. Al-Mumin
The Guardian of Faith
The All-Forgiving
35. Ash-Shakür
7. Al-Muhaymin
The Protector
The Appreciative
The Mighty 36. Al-All
8. Al-Aziz
The Most High
The Compeller 37. Al-Kabir
38. Al-Hafiz
9. Al-Jabbar
The Most Great
The Majestic
10. Al-Mutakabbir
The Preserver
39. Al-Muqit
H. Al-Khaliq
The Creator
The Maintainer
The Evolver 40. Al-Hasib
12 Al-Bari
The Reckoner
The Fashioner 41. Al-Jalil
42. Al-Karim
The Sublime One
13. Al-Muşawwir
The Generous One
The Forgiver
14. Al-Ghaffär
43. Ar-Raqoib
The Watchful
The Subduer
15. Al-Qahhar
44. Al-Mujlb
The Responsive
The Bestower
16. Al-Wahhãb
45. Al-Wai
The All-Embracing
The Provider
17. Ar-Razzāq
The Opener 46. Al-Hakim
The Wise
18. Al-Fattah
The All-Knowing 47. Al-Wadūd
48. Al-Majld
The Loving
19. Al-Alim
The Most Glorious One
The Constrictor
20. Al-Qabid
49. Al-Baith
The Resurrector
The Expander
21. Al-Băsit
50. Ash-Shahid
The Witness
22. Al-Khafid
The Abaser
The Truth
The Exalter 51. Al-Haqq
23. Ar-Rafi
24. Al-Mu Izz
The Trustee
The Honourer 52. Al-Wakil
The Most Strong
The Dishonourer 53. Al-Qawi
25. Al-Muzill
26. As-Sami
The Firm One
The All-Hearing 54. Al-Matin
The Protecting Friend
27. Al-Başir
The All-Seeing 55. Al-Wali
The Praiseworthy
28. Al-Hakam
The Judge 56. Al-Hamid
Nirmala Yoga
35
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-37.txt 
 The Finder
The Reckoner 78. Al-Wajid
ee
57. Al-Mubsi
The Noble
The Originator 79. Al-Mājid
58. Al-Mubdi
The Unique
The Restorer 80. Al-Wähid
59. Al-Mu'id
The One
Si. Al-Ahad
The Giver of Life
60. Al-Muhyi
The Eternal
The First 82. Aş-Şamad
61. Al-Awwal
The Able
The Last 83. Al-Qādir
62. Al-Ākhir
The Manifest 84. Al-Muqtadir
The Powerful
63. Az-Z.ahir
The Hidden 85. Al-Muqaddim
The Governor 86. Al-Mu akhkhir
The Expediter
64. Al-Bațin
The Delayer
65. Al-Wali
The Most Exalted 87. Al-Jāme
66. Al-Muta ali
The Gatherer
The Source of All Goodness
The Self-Sufficient
88. Al-Ghani
67. Al-Barr
68. Al-Tawwäb The Acceptor of Repentance 89. Al-Mughni
The Enricher
The Avenger 90. Al-Mani
69. Al-Muntaqim
The Preventer
The Pardoner 91. Ad-Darr
70. Al-Afuw
The Distresser
The Compassionate 92. An-Näfi
71. Ar-Ra'üf
The Propitious
The Eternal Owner 93. An-Nür
The Light
72. Mälik-Ul-Mulk
The Lord of Majesty
73. Dhül-Jalal-Wal-
The Guide
94. Al-Hādi
The Incomparable
and Bounty 95. Al-Badi
Ikrām
The Equitable 96. Al-Bagi
The Everlasting
74. Al-Muqsit
The Supreme Inheritor
Creator of Death 97. Al-Wärith
75. Al-Mumit
The Guide to the right path
The Alive 98. Ar-Rashid
76. Al-Hayy
The Patient
The Self-Subsisting 99. As-Sabūr
77. Al-Qayyйm
Nirmala Yoga
36
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-38.txt 
 OM SHRI NIRMALA MA NAMOH NAMAH
THE JOY OF SAHAJA WORLD
So much joy, love, sweetness is flowing, overflowing, flooding everything
and every one:
Is it possible that we receive such Blessing ! Is it possible we would
deserve such heavenly treatment ! Is it possible to be such a close collectivity-
all over the world ! Is it possible to feel, to be in such overwhelming unity, all
together, in One Body, One Ocean, One Breath, the Holy Breath !!
Sometimes I feel I am dreaming. Everything is so perfect, beautiful, well
set, even with its crisis, attacks of negativity and all this stuff in fact so useful
and necessary for our growth !
Gods' plans and the way He works them out are too fabulous!
Let our eyes be always more open, to see, let our ears be always more
open, to hear let our hearts be always more open, to be drenched in our
Mother's love, let our mouths be always more open to sing the Lord's Praise,
to sing The Adi Shakti's Praises, to sing The Highest Mother's, The Highest
Being's Praises.
-RUTH (ROME)
JAI TO HER LOTUS FEET
How lucky and fortunate we all are to be under the care and protection of
Her Love.
Without Sahaja Yoga how could we all feel this closeness even thousands
of miles apart, we are all one together in reality.
We realise how much we have to change inside, learn humility become
more pure and subtle inside, With Mother's Grace it will all happen. Right
now we try more to become deeper in Sahaja Yoga-treasure of Love !!
Annick (Paris)
It is amazing how many people are taking to the path of seeking, despite
the highly negative society and life style. It is really a very strong desire for
realization that ultimately wins through.
It is really tremendous to see the new Sahaja Yogis giving up their old life-
styles and taking to the path of Sushumna and what, what a fantastic change
there is in their complete nature, character and even appearance !!
Karan, (San Diego) March 83
We are sure every Sahaja Yogi in the world today is offering support
through their attention and desire, that this year in America will bring many
seekers forth to our Mother's Holy feet to receive their realisation. It is only
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-39.txt 
 Registwed with the Reaistrar of Newspapers ander Repd. No. 3699931
through the desires of Her Children that Shri Mataji can, raise America to be
the voice of spiritual wisdom on Earth and bring the collective consciousness
to great reality with us all. JAI MATAJI,
We hope you are all enjoying your Selves, and not letting small things stop
you from being near to Mother. Sometimes we have to fight hard, but Our
vibrations should be alright, the attention should be at the Sahasrara. The
fight against the negativity is not fighting it, but keeping our Vibrations well,
while facing it. Sometimes when one is not strong enough, ane could get
away, physically removed, from it.
But our vibrations, our attention is the first priority. Other things are
mere excuses, not from the Spirit, but from somewhere else, to keep us away
from Mother, If we do what the Spirit says, our vibrations are good and
Mother takes care of everything. Even if we do not have anything we are
happy and enjoy. That happens. Not a make-believe state. It lasts.
everything. So when ve face ourselves we are at peace with ourselves and
t is
God. JAI MATAJI
Ashram is really a nice place to be in. You are really enjoying with
everybody all the time: Your attention remains more on the Spirit, you see clearly
lots of things about yourself which tend to take you way from it, from Mother.
It is not just a person alone, but the whale lot of people who grow and enjoy
together !!
Surabhi (Sydney)
Coming of Spring
It is Spring and Mother has filled it with beautiful flowers and green grass.
It is a splendid day and all the west Australian wild flowers are out. All the
colours of the flowers glistening in the early morning rays, the birds singing
their tunes of joy, and 'the Silence-that Joy of thoughtlessness-just looking.
smelling and enjoying our Mother's wonderful oreation-the Earth, the living
sphere supporting our Mother Kundalini !!
Glenda. (Perth) Sept. 83
Next Spring we hope to do programnes in Munich. Germany and in
Budapest, the Capital city of Hungary. Perhaps you all could give bandhans.
It all sounds very exciting-but then life in Sahaja Yoga always is. it seems !
Eutopean Sahaja, (Vienna) Sept. 83
Edited & Published by Sh. S.C. Rai 43, Bunglow Road, Dethi-110007 8 Printed at The Central Electric
Press, 80 0. Kamla Nagat, Delhi-110007. One issuo Rs 6.00, Annual SutsGription Rs30 00
Foreign (by Airmail É 5$10)
lESS10)
