Nirmala Yoga Vol. 3 No. 15 Bi-Monthly May-June 1983 5F 5F "Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns all the religions and seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga-THE UNION"

 YOG A NIRM ALA 43, Bungalow Road, Delhi-110007, (India) Founder : Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Editorial Board : Dr. S.K. Mathur, Sri A.S. Mishra, Sri R.D. Kulkarni Representatives : CHERYL HYNES-1267, Burke Road, KEW 3101, VICTORIA. ZORANA BEDKE Gartnergasse 17/10, 1030 VIENNA. LORI TODRICK 4518 Woodgreen Drive, West Vancouver, BC. V7S2V1. :MARIE ROUGER 175, Av. Ledru Rollin PARIS-750001. :RUTH LEDERBERGER : via Mercalli-46, 00197 ROME. : M.B. Ratnannwar-13, Merwan Mansion, Genjewala Lane, Borivali (W)., Australia Austria Canada France Italy India BOMBAY-400092. RAJARAM SHANKAR RAJWADE-840, Sadashiva Peth, PUNE-411030. : DANIEL & ROXANA DEVINE-Angel Luis De Herran, 38, 6°, 4, MADRID-33. Spain Switzerland : CHARLES & MRS. MAGDA MATHYS- 5, Chemin Des Mouldins, 1256. Troinex (Canton de Geneva). : GAVIN BROWN Brown's Geological Information Service Ltd., 160 North Gower St., London NW 1. 2ND. M.J. MURDOCH, 14A Bourne Ave. S. RUISLIP, MIDDLESEX, HAH 6TZ, ENGLAND. U. K. * CHRISTINE PETRUNIA-225 Adams St.. 1/E BROOKLYN, NY-11201. U.S.A. 00NT ENTS Page 1. Editorial 1 2. Sahasrara Chakra-4th February. 1983 3. Translation of old Marathi letter from Her Holiness Shri Mataji 12 4. Her Holiness Shri Mataji's advice 14 5. Maha Sahasrara Day 5th May 1983 16 6. Christ in Kashmir 18 7 Letter from English Sahaja Yogi 19 8. ParisIt's done 9. Place of money in Sahaja Yoga 21 10. Beginnings' 22 11. Mother, Dear Mother 25 12. An Experience 27 13. 108 Names of Shri Vishnu 29

 Editorial 5th May 1983 was the 14th anniversary of Sahasrara day. Sahaja Yogis of Bombay had arranged a puja to celebrate the occasion, at a place quite befitting to the siginificance of the day. It was a very beautifut spot, on Sea shore, blessed by nature-God, and not very far from, yet unaffected by, the hustle and bustle, of the metropolis. Sahaja Yogis who attended | the function were all in praise for their brothers and profusely thanked them, for sparing no efforts, in making the excellent arrangements. Those days, Bombay was the holiest of all holy places as Shri Mataji was present in person. Besides, It was the most auspicious day of opening the Sahasrara. Orthodox Indians go to the places of pilgrimage to have holy dips in the rivers, and the sea, of that place, on certain auspicious days. Sahaja-Yogi-pil grims, from the North and other Mid-land places, made the best of this opportunity to have holy dips in the Arabian Sea, that sucked all their bad vibrations and cleansed their physical and inner beings. As if, the spirit had washed the clothes of five sheaths and was, ready to worship the Supreme Goddess. Shri Mataji's biessings for the day had already reached to Sahaja Yogis all over the world, in the early hours. Those who meditated enjoyed them very much. By the time all got ready, Sahaja Yoga-Swamini, Shri Mataji arrived. She spoke in Hindi, (English translation to be published in due course). She first explained the importance of number 14, being the fourteenth anniversary. There are fourteen lokas, viz. Bhu, Bhuva, Swah. Mah, Janah, Tapah, Satyam and other seven down-wards, as also fourteen Chakras, besides seven already known, others are Hamsa, Shri, Lalita, Ardha-bindu, Bindu, Valaya and Pradakshina. At that place, Coconut trees have grown very tail and are quite inclined towards the sea, in spite of wind from the opposite direction. Shri Mataji explained. Coconut is a completely developed fruit and as it represents auspiciousness it is called, Shreephala' and our Sahasrara is like' Shreephala" having outer hard shell and hair for protection and brain inside. She advised that we should protect our Sahasrara, as a Coconut tree, firmly holds its fruits at such height. She pointed to the inclined trees and said that Coconut trees always grow along the sea Nirmala Yoga 1

 coast and those trees were becoming humble to their creator. The sca represents 'Dharma and they were bowing befare Dharma. Pleasant westerly winds, instantly carried the fragrance of Shri Mataji's presenca and message of the Puja to Sahaja Yogis all over the world. Prompt as the elements are to please the Empress of the Universe ! Shri Mataji received the Puja and blessed everybody. Sahaja Yogis absorbed the vibrations. All the environments were flooded with the vibrations. It was now getting dark. Shri Mataji walked to the sea that had considerably receded. In the sand She prepared with Her own hands an image of Shri Ganesha and vibrated it. She worshipped Shri Ganesha. The star which follows Her everywhere was twinkling alone on the pinkish looking horizon, just above Her. As She was looking towards the sea, it started rising again. Waves were seen rising far away. Slowly they advanced and came neater. They receded for a while and again came and again receded, like a child playing with its mother; trotting, towards her and going away. Mother appreciatively walked further tew- steps towards the sea, and lo! Waves came one after another; they were rushing, but came closer gently and washed Her feet. Then further advanced and touched the image of Shri Ganesha but not beyond; lest the picture be defaced. Jaganmata Shri Nirmala Devi Ki Jai' resounded the shore. Then they stayed on till Shri Mataji was there. It was a memorable day. Weather was unusually pleasant and so it remained during the days Shri Mataji was in Bombay. Wind was pleasant throughout the day. The Sun was shining but it was not hot even in the afternoon. It shows how the elements are devoted and loving before the Mother. This gives rise to one question; should we not follow their example ? She is their mother too, but how modest, humble, and loving they are, never complaining but always pleasing. Should we not emulate the attitude, of those Coconut trees; of going back to the source and protecting and developing Sahasrara? Shri Mataji, we all the Sahaja yogis of the world desire Your good health. Shri Mataji, we all the Sahaja Yogis of the world pray that Your forthcoming tour to U.S.A., Canada and other countries be a Grand Success. BOLO SHRI BHAGWATI MATAJI SHRI NIRMALA DEVI KI JAI Nirmala Yoga

 Sahasrara Chakra Hanuman Road, New Delhi 4th Feb. 1983 Today, I will be telling you about the last So our brain is doing right side activity and centre of Sahasrara. So this last centre, the that's why our brain is like 'Shreephal'. Sahasrara, is contained in the limbic area of the brain. Our head is like a coconut. The coconut has the hair, and then a hard nut and the six Chakras and is a hollow space, on the then a black covering and inside is white shell sides of which there are one thousand Nadis of coconut and inside is the space, the water. In the same way, our brain is made. That's into the limbic area, then the enlightenment why coconut is called as "Shreephal"". It is of these Nadis takes place and you can see the fruit of the power. that is, Shree. Shree power is the right side power and the left side and these flames have all the seven colours power is the Lalita power. So, we have two that you see in the VIBGYOR. But the last Chakras-left side, here, is the Lalita and the one, ultimately becomes again integrated and right-side, here, is the Shree Chakra. These two Chakras are working out the right side lights ultimately become crystal clear. Mahasaraswati's power and left side Maha- kali's power. Now, the central power is the Kundalini that has to rise and penetrate through different Chakras, enter into the limbic area and enlighten the seven Pithas-seats of these seven Chakras. So, it penetrates through six Chakras, enters into the iimbic area, enligh- tens all the seven Pithas in the brain, which are placed along the mid-line of the limbic many nerves in every bundle of nerves. So. area. So, we start from the back, is placed here, at the back, is the Mooladhar Chakra, around it is the Swadishthan, then is the Nabhi, then the Heart, then the Vishuddhi and enlightenment of the Kundalini takes place in then the Agya. So, all these six centres are the brain, then the truth is perceived through combining to make the seventh centre. This your brain. That's why it is called as 'Satya- is very important point which we should know khand', means you start seeing the truth Now, the Shree Chakra is right side working perceived by your brain because so far what & Lalita Chakra is left side working. So, when the Kundalini does not rise then we do with truth. What you see, is just the outer side, our right side our physical and mental activities say, you can see the colours. You can see Sahasrara is actually is the assemblage of (NERVES). And when the light penetrates them as flames, very gentle flames burning it is a crystal clear flame. All these seven So, you have Sahasrara with one thousand petals, as they call it, but if you cut the brain in a transverse section or horizontal section, you will be able to see that all these nerves are bullt like this along the limbic area, all of them are like the petals, and if you cut it like this, (vertically) you will find that there are when it is enlightened, you can see Sahasrara as a burning bundle of flames. It is a very deep subject. So, when the ever you see through your brain, is not the Nirmala Yoga

 the different aesthetics of the colours. You Also, surprising, my name is Neera-also, in can see the quality of the thing. But you cannot say whether this carpet has been used also means Mary, Marium. Because it means by some saint. You cannot say whether this is made by a devil or a divine person. You in Sanskrit language. It's called 'Niranand' cannot say that this gentleman, is he a good in the brain. person or he is an evil person. You cannot say if this Deity has come out of the mother Earth or not. Also, you cannot say about any person, who is your relation, whether he is a good relation or a bad relation or what sort of from, that you see on your fingers. First you a person he is, whether he goes to wrong people or to the right people, whether he has know what Chakras, what fingers are catching connections with wrong side or with good with your attention, Then with your brain you side, Here, go you do not know anything about divinity with your mind. Nothing-it is impossible for you to judge a person about his divinity unless and until the Kundalini reaches at least this my family I am called as Neera. And 'Neera marine. Neera is water. "Neer" means water And, this stage ultimately unfolds. First what you know is the Satya, is the Truth- what is this another gentleman is suffering see your fingers. With your attention, you can depict what centres it is catching. Because, if you say this finger, that does not mean it is Vishuddhi Chakra. But your brain can say that it is Vishuddhi. And that depicts it that this fellow is suffering from the troubles of the Vishuddhi Chakra. But still it is rational. od means Divine. So actually part, which is the limbic area. You cannot make out whether a person is real or not, Because, you see what finger it catches and whether a Guru is real or not. Because then you say. divinity cannot be perceived through your the Sahasrara unfolds itself mare, you don't brain, unless & until this light of your Spirit have to think about it, you just say it. Then shines into it. But when the Satyakhand or there is no difference between your Chitta (ATTENTION) and your Sat (TRUTH). The Now, the Spirit is expressed in the heart, enlightened Chitta (ATTENTION) and the is reflected in the heart. The centre of the enlightened brain become one. There is no Spirit, we can say, is in the heart. But problem at all for such person. There is no actually, the seats of Spirit is above here above the head and that is the Spirit of what anything on the fingers and then depict it we call of the God Almighty, say whom you call Parvardigar, you call him Sadashiva or you can call Him the Rahim and you can call Him by many names which are said about the Lord who is God Almighty Niranjan, they call Him it is there. Nirankar, every sorts of words which start with 'Nir', "Nihi'. Now, at every centre in the body you receive a different type of joy. with, as I said, Chitta (Attention). Then when, Every centre has a different type of joy. And, it gets absolutely integrated with the Spirit, there are names for every type of joy you receive at every centre when the Kundalini say, it is so. That is how, this brain unfolds rises: But when the Kundalini comes into the Sahasrara, then the joy you receive is called truth through logical conclusions. Because, as 'Niranand. Niranand! The 'Ni means- nothing else but Anand (Joy). Niranand ! need to see, on the fingers, no need to say through the brain which you have learnt in Sahaja Yoga, that if you find something wrong here, it means Agya-that is not necessary ! You just say, Agya. And you just say it and Then, it unfolds more. First it is integrated then whatever you say, is the truth. You just into 3 new dimensions. First, it depicts the I have told you that if this finger is catching then it is Vishuddhi. And then, you ask the Nirmala Yoga 4.

 person "Have you got the problem, here ?". books. And though people have told thal He says, "Yes", Then, you believe in Me and first see the vibrations and then read the then you believe, that this is the Vishuddhi books, still we say, 'O what's wrong, we Chakra, which is showing, is true. This is the should read other books' You go down on logical conclusion, in a way, that you have snake and ladder as I've said. That is one of experimented, you are seeing and still doubt- the snakes. We think that what's the need ing whether Mother says is true or not. And then, you are sure, "Yes, it is so, we have thing, that thjng' You do not progress. seen that this is Vishuddhi Chakra". So, the truth becomes logically acceptable to this brain. But still, there is the brain working out there are some very gross people in Sahaja on its gross level. to do meditation, I have no time, I have this The other point which is very gross. Also, Yoga who enter into it. Doesn't matter. But first thing you must know 'you have to be In the second stage, as I told you. where honest, 'very honest in Sahaja Yoga'. The you believe, you know for definite that this means Vishuddhi Chakra,, no doubt about it. Then we say that 'Nirvikalpa" has started, just crawl into it without having any self- when there is no doubt about Me or Sahaja respect, without having any understanding as Yoga. But then, the newunfolding starts within you. For that, one has to do medita- They will bring all their family, come down tion. In humility, one has to do meditation. And then also, for this new dimension, when paving money which should be paid, for your Chitta (ATTENTION) itself becomes merged into your brain or into the enlightened brain, for that, one has to, very honestly and humbly surrender to Sahaja Yoga. honesty is like-I have seen people. If we have a dinner, say for a marriage-party, they will to, who is going to pay for all these things ? and sit down. There are people who avoid Sahaja yoga. Supposing, they are eating food or they are travelling or they are coming from abroad, they have to pay money for their travelling, for their food And, sometimes, you know I have to pay lot of money. Doesn't matter, I don't mind. But it's not good for you. The main thing is that it's not good for you. So, how you behave towards Sahaja yoga as far as money is concerned, is also very impor- tant, though it looks gross. But it can give a Now, what do we do when we get our vibrations. We have different-different reac- tions. Some people do not even understand the value of vibrations. Some people try to learn what it means. And some people, sud- denly think, "O, now they are realised souls, they can, go on giving realisations, this, that'. big trouble in the unfoldment because of the They go on a ride of a ego-trip. When they go on a ride of a ego-trip, they find that they have failed and they have then to come back, from the very beginning they start. It is like the game of of Snake & Ladder. So, treaction to vibrations should be very humble, receptive reaction. Nabhi catching-and, as you know, if the Nabhi catches it can spread upto the whole of void; and if the void is catching, Ekadasha rudra, which is placed here, the destructive forces, built-in. So, before coming to Sahaja Yoga, it was alright, you were doing all kinds of things and you would have smoothly gone to hell without any difficulty. It is very easy to go to hell the Father in it. So, if we commit any sins You can take two running jumps and go to hell. The rest of it you should see. But going to hell is the easiest thing. For that. you Now, on the gross level, because as I have told you that the brain is the one which holds against the Father, then this unfoldment in the brain takes some time. So, we start reading Nirmala Yoga

 don't have to work hard or do anything about what about you doing something that helps it. But, when you are ascending, when you are rising, then it is little difficult. You have to be the Sahasrara is very important: careful that you should not falter, you should not fall and that you are ascending. So, you have to be alert about yourself that you are not falling into the same habits which you level where there is, I mean, at the point, had. you to open your Sahasrara. So, opening of Now, surprisingly, it is so placed that Sahasrara has got the Brahmarandhra at the where there is the Heart-OChakra. So, we must know that Brahmarandhra is directly connected to your heart If it is not done from the heart, superficially done Sahaja Yoga, you can not Some people have a habit of saving money at the cost of Sahaja Yoga. Some have a habit of making money at the cost of Sahaja go very high. You have to put the full heart Yoga, Some people have the habit of not giving the due amount-and like that. It's something like cheating. They all go out of the Sahaja Yoga in no time. They may be looking like great leaders in the beginning but people also, are, what Christ calls as, 'murmur- they go out just like that and many a times ing souls'. He said that, be careful about these people tell me 'why don't you keep a proper murmuring souls-those who go on murmuring account and all that. But in Sahaja Yoga, behind and taking advantage as if they are I'm not supposed to keep any accounts or anything. Because, my accountants are Sahaja yogis. If you try to play tricks with Sahaja Yoga, immediately you are pushed out; in your dangerous when you enter into the kingdom awareness, in your Nabhi Chakra you never had-you may make thousands of rupeeshere, but you will lose thousands of rupees, You kingdom, you are punished. But in the God's might get into troubles. You will have any Kingdom, it's so blissful, absolutely blissful, kind of a problem that I cannot tell and then complete blessings are poured on, absolutely. you will say how did I get this problem. So with everything-health, wealth, mental, emo- Nabhi Chakra if you are not honest in your seeking. Honesty of seeking not only means I want to seek". It also means what your much blessed, you are also forgiven and behaviour is, towards yourself and towards forgiven, and forgiven, and there's a long rope others. You have to be honest to yourself, that you sit down for meditation, try to improve your Antar-Yoga try to make your Thoughtless Awareness, this feeling of thought- lessness, wider and wider. Try to achieve that dishonest with Sahaja, Yoga have to be very state where you really feel thoughtless. So the careful; please don't do it. If you don't like to be honesty pays and you rise higher and higher. in Sahaja Yoga, you better go away, it is better; deeper and deeper into your own being. First from your point of view and from our point of you depend upon Me that, "after all, Mother view also, Because, in case you are dishonest, is going to do everything. When I went to you are trying to play tricks and games, and Mother, my Sahasrara opened out. This thing you suffer and you look funny and strange; happened, then this thing happened". But then people will say, that what's wrong with that is the main thing. Like, people they come to Sahaja Yoga and they are murmuring behind, "This could have been like that, that could have been like that", all those things. All such trying to save others. All such people also, can suffer a lot. Because, they are doing a double game. And such a double game, is very of God. Any kingdom you are member of. any kingdom, if you are treacherous to that tional-all kinds of prosperity you can get in Sahaja Yoga, no doubt. But when you are so given to you to hang yourself. But you really hang fully. It's not half way. So, those people, who think, they can be Nirmala Yoga 6.

 Sahaja yoga ? So we will unnecessarily suffer, within us, built by two types of sins we Because, we cannot show you in the mirror, commit. If wwe bow our heads to wrong type that this man has been very very disloyal. We of gurus and submit ourselves to their viscious cannot show that! So, it will bring a bad name to us-first of all. And secondly, you will be harmed, by this kind of a thing. If you If you have bowed because I've never are harmed, then also we will have a bad name that how could it happen. But if you are honest about Sahaja yoga and about your God, then the problem comes on this side seeking. you don't know how much God of the thing, on the right side. If you have, looks after you. An body who tries to do any harm to you will be very badly harmed 1 am my own guru, who can teach me, and removed from your path. God protects don't want to listen to anybody and t don't you out and out and he looks ater you with "complete' attention and care And He is for God, All such feelings, if you have, then, so loving that description of his compassion your right side doesn't catch, but the left side can not be given in words but can be orily catches. Because right-side moves this side felt and understood. then we develop rudra-problems on the right hand side-these five go out. ways, bowed to anybody wrong, to someone who is a wrong tYpe of person and who is anti- the sense that 1 can look after myself. believe in God, who is God, I just don't care and the left-side this-side. So these ten things and one is Virata Vishnu, because also Now, the problem is, people who are dis- in the stomach we have got 10 Guru Sthanas honest are because of their background, some- (PLACES) and one that of Vishnu. So, the times, because of their education, because of seeking is also wrong, as well as these 10 their upbringing or may be because they are Gurus are out. Then you develop this Ekadash- cowards, But there is also, another thing that rudra. When this thing is set-in within you, can make you dishonest-is your 'Poorva-jan- as l've said, one on this side and one on that mas' (PREVIOUS LIVES) and that's how you side. So, those people who have bowed to take your birth and your Kundalini is made wrong type of people develop a temperament like that. or a kind of a personality which is very vulner- able for incurable diseases like cancer and all But after realisation, those people who are that. You may develop cancer or any such of a great valour and great strength ascend so thing-those who have bowed to the wrong fast that all the problems of the stars, all the types of people. problems of your STARS) and all that, Constellations every- thing disappears and you become a Sahajayogi anybody else. I don't care for God, I don't means a newly born-absolutely a different want God, I have nothing to do"-all such personality; it has nothing to do from where people develop a left-side Ekadasha. And, you have come. Like an egg becoming a beautiful bird. Nakashatras (BIRTH- Now, those who think, "I'm better than left side Ekadasha is extremely dangerous too. Because, such people develop the problems of the right-side-heart-attacks, physically I am So, this Kundalini, when it arrives here, the saying, and all other problems of the right-side. first hurdle the Kundalini has, to enter into Sahasrara, is 'Ekadasha rudra'. These are 11 entering shaktis, 11 destroying shaktis placed here. Five on this side, five on the other side and one in the centre. These are obstructions And that is how it can not enter into the So, one of the greatest hurdles of Kundalini into Sahasrara is this Ekadasha rudra, which comes from Void. And which covers the 'Medha (is the plate of the brain). 7. Nirmale Yoga

 donot recognise it, your Sahasrara can not be wrong gurus, if they have reached the right opened because, this is the time when the conclusion and surrender themselves to Sahaja Sahasrara was opened and you have to have Yoga, accepting their mistakes and saying that your realisation. It is very important thing that that you 'have' to recognise Sahaja Yoga. There are many people who say that 'Mother, above all, I don't believe in God. who is God, why to believe in Sahaja Yoga this way, we can just call you just 'Mother' you could be anything against God or prophets is the same my Mother', Alright, doesn't matter. But you -anti God personality who talks like that can't get your realisation. And, even if you develops the problems, gets alright if he get it, you cannot retain it. You have to recognise; RECOGNITION is the 'enly' wor- Yoga as the only way of entering into the ship of Sahaja Yoga Recognition is the only worship when you want to know God in Sahaja Yoga. All the other Ganas, Devatas, Deities, Shaktis, are one in unison in Sahaja Yoga. And, anyone who does not recognise Sahaja Yoga, they just are not bothered about you, what sort of a person you are. For example, a man who worships Shiva, he comes to me, and, I find his heart is catching-Sur- prising ! He says. "Mother, I worship Shiva, how is it, my heart is catching 7". I said, "you have to recognise Sahaja Yoga. Just ask and this star is the one which has brought Shiva". And when he asked the questions to cancer-disease because, Pluto is the one, that Shiva, then only the vibrations started flowing. So, Sahasrara takes charge that it makes you recognise and also, it convinces you, it proves limbic area. Even those who have been to "I'm my own Guru', they can be cured. And those, who have been speaking that 1 am I don't believe in any prophets or anything- humbles down himself and accepts Sahaja superconsciousness'. I have seen people who have been Tantrikas, are being saved. I've seen people who have done all kinds of wrong things have been saved. Those people, who were members of very funny, strange organisations have been saved. But it is very difficult to convince anyona that whatever they are doing has been wrong and they should come to right path. So, a star came to play its part with Pluto, cures cancer, or all such diseases which are incurable. So, those people who just go head-long into wrong path, suffer from funny to you. And by this proving. even if you are type of heart troubles, palpitations, insomnia, vommiting, giddiness, all sorts of, we can say irrelevant talking. It is a very serious thing to go to a wrong guru and bow to him. Sahasrara partly-they take liberties, they behave in a becomes a closed area for such a person. funny manner-without understanding that The persons who are against Sahaja Yoga, Who is this 'Person' who is here ? I've seen have a very strong Sahasrara, like a nut, in the sense that it is such a strong shell that putting their hand up, raising Kundalini; they you can not just break it-the strong shell, like a thick nut Even if you want to use a hammer, Because, if you have recognised, then you not recognising. then you cannot get your realisation. But those who recognise also, recognise many a times, I'm talking, people are just are just talking, chit chatting-I'm surprised. you cannot break it. should know whom you are facing. Because, It is not for My good; I'm not going to lose u anything. But only you, in your ascent have not recognised. That shows that you have not yet recognised. Today, the time has conme, that you have to recognise Sahaja Yoga; you have to. You did not recognise any saint any prophets, any- one, any incarnation. But today, the condi- tion is that, you have to recognise one. If you And the way some people monopolise Me Nirmala Yoga 8.

 also, is absolutely wrong, There's no need to Me. It has to be comoletely integrated. Your monopolise Me; 'nobody' can monopolise Me. There are some people who say that "Mother anything wrong and then say, "I'm Sahaja must have misunderstood". I never misunder- Yogi". YOU CAN NOT. stand; there is no question. Or, some people try to tell me, "Do this, do that"-that also is not necessary. Try to onen yourself to this within. Your Spirit strengthens you. You must prototocol which is very important in Sahaja just put in your will power, that "Yes, Let my Yoga, which I have told for this first time- Spirit act". And then, you start acting accord- today, that you must TRY TO RECOGNISE IN ing to the Spirit. Once you start acting A FULL WAY. And, if you do not recognise. according to the Spirit, you find you have no I'm sorry, I cannot give you the realisation slavery of anything. You become 'Samartha", which will sustain.-and, it may start but it means equal to your meaning : Sam + Artha; may not sustain. Dharma should be correcred. You can not do But for this, the strength comes from also, "Samartha' means powerful personality So, you develop that powerful personality So, this is the simplest way of achieving which has no temptations, which has 'no your higher thing is by recognising gradually wrong ideas, which has 'no' catches, 'no' and recognising gradually. It is very difficult problems. to tell anybody if something is wrong with that person-impossible. After Sahaja Yoga, I can tell you, this Chakra is catching, that tricks are really harming themselves, not Chakra is catching. But also because you Sahaja Yoga. Sahaja Yoga is going to be know what does that Chakra means, you can "Swarthi' (SELFISH) people trying to play established. Even if there are ten people in come back on me. "No, no, Mother, see, it's the boat, God is not bothered. It is only not so. I'm not. That's not so." Why should "My' botheration as a Mother. As a Mother, I tell you are catching ? You have to cleanse yourself with full honesty But first thing is to 'recognise' with full humility and under- nest things. standing. Once you have recognised, gradually you will do everything that has to be done- you 'know', what is to be done. I want many people to come up in the boat. But don't try to jump back by doing all disho- So, this is what it is-simple, that you are integrated. By integration, you get the powwer to do what you understand, and you have power to feel happy with what you understand. So, you come to a stage where you develop this 'Niranand'. And, this 'Niranand' you Now the essence of Sahasrara is integra- tion. so all the Deities get integrated. And, you can feel their integration. That means, when develop when you are absolutely the Spirit. you get your Kundalini in Sahasrara, your mental, emotional, and your spiritual-every- Adwaita, (WITHOUT DUALITY), is one per- thing 'being' becomes one. Your physical sonality. That is, you are completely integrated being also merges with it. Then you have no problems, as to. "Yes, I love Mother But l'm complete. It hasn't got a happiness and a sorry, I have to steal this money." "Yes, I know, I recognise Mother, Yes, I know She is great that you laugh loud, the Joy is not that you but I can't help I have to tell Her lies" or "I have to do this wrong thing, because after all, quietitude within your Self, the peace, of your I cannot help it". There is no compromise with being, of your Spirit, that asserts itself into In Sahasrara all the Chakras are there, In Niranand' state there's no duality left-is and the joy is not anymore dented-It's sorrow aspect, but is just Joy. The Joy is not are always smiling. No. Is the stillness, the 6. Nirmala Yoga

 should not sit in the sun all the time as some vibrations which you feel. that when you feel that peace, you feel like light of the sun, the of the Westerners do. Then, your brain melts and you become a crazy person--is a sign that a person is going out for madness-is But first of all we are cowed down by our something which I have told you many a times own personal, selfish, stupid ideas. THROW that do not take too much heat on your head. whole rays of that beauty spreading. THEM AWAY. We have them, because, we were insecure, because we have wrong ideas, throw them away. Just stand along one with God. And, you will find all these fears were Even if you are sitting in the sun, keep your head covered. Covering of the head is very important. But the covering of the head should be done occasionally, not all the time because useless. Our cleansing is very important, and if you just put a very heavy band around your that cleansing comes only when you really head, then the circulation becomes poor and practise the cleansing as told in Sahaja Yoga. you may have trouble with bad circulation. So, it is an occasional opening of the head to the sun and to the moon, occasionally. Other- wise, you will sit in the moon and land up in the lunatic asylum. Anything I tell you, you must know that in Sahaja Yoge, we have not to go to anything 'Ati (EXTREME). Even sitting in the water, some people will sit for 3 hours. I've never said so. Only for ten minutes you have to sit, but that with full heart. If I tell them anything, they will go on doing it for religions they are following not the real religion 4 hours: there is no need. Do it forten minutes. The Sahasrara is the blessing of the heavens, I should say. It has worked out so well. It is very diffcult to break the Sahasrara And when I really broke it, I did not know that it would be that successful, First, 1 thought it is still premature because there are many Rakshasas (DEMONS) still on the street, selling their goods; and there are many fanatics who are calling themselves by the so-called of the Atma. But gradually it has taken its roots. Now, let this truth take its roots within yoursel through your Sahasrara this truth becomes absolutely the light that guides you. the light that nourishes you, the light that enlightens you and gives you a personality that has the light, then only you Give your body different-different types of treatment not all the time the same thing. The body gets bored or gets absolutely overburde- ned. Now if you tell somebody, this is your mantra; alright; it is to be used till you get rid of your Chakra, finished. Suppose, some screw is to be put here; alright; vwhat you do you put should know that your Sahasrara is completely the screw to get fixity, you do not go on enlightened by your Spirit. Your face should screvwing even when it is fixed. Are you going And once, be such that people should know that there's to screw it more and more so that the whole 'a perscnality standing before you who is ? It is better, that you use thing gets spoiled Light'. This is how the Sahasrara is to be wisdom, And for this wisdom, we must know that Shri Ganesha or Jesus Christ looked after. For looking after Sahasrara it is important who are-placed on both the sides. Here that you should try to cover your head during winter time. It is better to cover your head during winter time so that there's no freezing your vision, understanding and give you in the brain because the brain is also made of wisdom. So, the wisdom lies not in sticking "Medha', means fat, so it should not be frozen. on to something. Moreover, you should not take too much heat stuck-up people. If they are stuck up, they on your brain. To keep your brain alright, you is Mahaganesha; (back) here is Jesus. (front) Both of them help you to correct are not progressing. You are not to get Nirmala Yoga 10

 stuck up with ideas and stuck up with people. You have to be the 'Atma' (SPIRIT) and once You have to be all the time moving and in you become the 'Atma", you become into movement, it does not mean that you should fall somewhere and people think that 'O', we are (learning) such a lot, because we are falling down". You have to ascend, not fall. Akarm (BEYOND DEEDS), where you don't know that you are doing, it just works out. you don't tel, you GOOD AND BAD are not aware. Iwish, after all these lectures, most of So, when you are achieving something in Sahaja Yoga, first of all you should see that your Chakras must have been opened, But your health should be alright. Your mind should this is all My work. You have also to do some be normal. You should be a normal person. If you are still barking at people, then know there is somthing wrong with you. Or if you in the mirror and see for yourself. How far sink, sulking and still tantrumish and if you are still in a bad mood, then think you are not yet been, How much friendly you are in collecti- a Sahaja Yogi. You can judge yourself, If you are free like a bird then it's alright. But that Yoga. If you are not collective, if you are doesn't mean that on the road you start sing- funny, if you are strange, if you cannot com- ing like a bird and jumping on a tree. You municate with others, there's something wrong. see, any analogy I give to a stupid man, he And then you should face yourself as you are can behave in a very stupid way. But to a and try to correct you Because, you separate wise man, he discreetly uses it for a proper you from yourself like I separate my Sari from purpose. So, one has to understand, Sahaja myself and try to clean it. In the same way, Yoga is known by the discretion-discreet- homework. And, you have also to work and see for yourself. Be alert. Try to face yourself honest you have been, How far clean you have vity which is a very important point in Sahaja you separate you from yourself and try to clean it. This is the way how Sahaja Yogis are going to ascend. When the Sahaja Yogis persons. Now, what happens actually that you get will ascend, the rest of the thing alsu will stuck with one thing. that is your Atma (SPIRIT) and the whole your being floats like a 'Patang' (KITE) does, or a kite that floats, goes all over the places, everything but you are stuck to only one thing, that is your Spirit. And, if you could really do it, genuinely, and honestly not worry too much about your money, and your family and other mundane who think that others are higher than them are things: just don't worry about it, you don't have to worry; just give it a bandhan. If it does not work out, doesn't work out, finished. What's that wrong ? If works out, well. low Let somebody think, what does it matter, and good. Not that your desire is important, but Thy will be dane'. First you say, 'Thy will be done-it is so suprising that your otherwise, very easy in this Kritayuga to wills change your desires change and what- ever you say, is done. But when this also comes up. people develop an ego so be care- ful. It's all done by the Shakti and not by you, by your Atma' (SPIRIT) and not by you. ascend. Many Sahaja Yogis of this kind will impress so many people that they will also ascend. So, the whole thing can ascend very fast. But you pe ple who are rising higher should try to rise higher without being aware of it-that's very important, Those also sadly mistaken, because that's not so. Because, it is the whole that is rising. Nobody should feel in that way inferior or in anyway low or feel insulted that somebody thinks him Divine does not think so. So, all these little- little things, you should be careful about, and achieve the ultimate goal of Atma sakshatkar (SELF REALISATION). Ithink today I have told you quite a lot about Sahasrara. Nirmala Yoga 11

 Translation of Old Marathi Letter from Her Holiness Shri Mataji Man wants peace, wealth, power etc. but world." Let love flow from your hearts. God is the origin of all these. Then why Love is unlimited. Your attention is on should not there be the desire for God? Why material things and you are talking about should there be no aspiration and ambition eternity ! Your attention should merge in to meet the God ? We should pray to the eternity so that you will have eternal life. God for peace, and keep the desire to meet the God who is peace itself. This should be the difference in satisfaction of a common man and that of a Sahaja Yogi. One should be ready to surrender the very desire to meet GOD at the GOD's holy feet. All attention must be on Him. For that, one must have dedication determination and con- You are officials of God's kingdom then why are you sulking ? All deities are your elder brothers in this kingdom, They are present in many forms along the path of Kundalini. You should recognise them and Kundalini is your Mother. Be attain them. Learn to always remain under Her care. Her child and She will take you to the ultimate Once you accomplish that from where everything is born you will have the rest very centration (tapasvita) and in that all material attachments should be destroyed. What is there in this world to cling to ? You must realise the glory of those feet in which all fades and becomes peaceful. Only then you will have your glory. easily. But you are not consistent in the practice of meditation, love and peaceful life. You are talking casually even to me. But how eager you are in worldy matters I How you become adamant on having what you want I Why are you not casual in that respect ? Do not run away from the reality because I am Mahamaya. Attain me, I am yours. I am for you. I have given you that which has been beyond the reach of very great sages and saints. How will you make use of it ? You have been given a big asset. Thonsands of stars and planets were created with its just Why should one brag of one's achieve- ments ? You must understand that whatever is being done by you, is all God's power i.e. working of Adi-Shakti and you are only the witnesses to see these miracles. For achieving that stage you should pray "May our I consciousness' fade away, may the truth that all of us are small parts of your being, be assimilated within us, so that your Divine Bliss would resonate every particle of our bodies and this life would be filled with beautiful melodies enchanting the whole man- kind and would show light to the rest of the one wave. There is great significance to your rebirth. Nirmala Yoga 12

 But you yourselves have to achieve that: find Sahaja Yogis are dear people, you have been the meaning of 'SWA' (Self). Sahaja yogis selected as officials, If you ignore it, on one can do it. It is a big contrivance. I have told hand you will be deprived of great source of you the secret but what have you achieved ? joy and on the other, you will loose your Nobody sulks having been benefited. You authority due to incomplete knowledge of are unhappy means you have not been bene- Sahaja Yoga. Hence be wise and stand firm. fited. If you achieve the trick, you will open Every movement has thousands of directions. the gate of joy and forget yourself while enjoying that bliss. Let your rays spread in different directions. You will do the welfare, to the whole world. Get over your inaction to act. You are to be Nobody becomes happy from wordly captains. Let God's melodies be sounded matters. I have given you the key to the treasure, which others haven't got. But you must work to open the door. You have taken everything casually. You want Mataji to feed you, to wake you up in the morning and make you sit in the meditation, to clear you of your anger, hatred etc. from your flutes. Transcend in your feelings above those who have not been realised and blessed and God's kingdom will be yours. May you get that auspiciousness. All my efforts are for that. You have been made like temples. Keep Today is the day of Guru Puja. What it clean. "Guru Dakshina' (Gift to the Guru) have you given me ? Understand, that your money is not worth the dust on the feet of your Mother- of bliss. My blessings are that all of you Guru, You should give your hearts; only should be happy. Your worldly tife and satis- clean and holy hearts. You must clean your physical beings. Do not be lazy in that. Make Yogi's satisfaction and the circumstances he a vow. You must get up early in the morning is in, are balanced. Our both legs grow to- and spend at least one hour on meditation gether. If one leg is shorter than the other, and worshiping, Perform 'Arti" and meditation You will become lame. in the evening. Some of you are enjoying in the ocean faction should be of the same level. Sahaja I do not want to tell you to lower the level of your circumstances if contentment is less. But Sahaja Yogi's Satan's desciples work hard at a funeral satisfaction does not depend on the circums- place. I cannot understand why you are taking everything so casually. Stop all gossip- that are prevailing. If he is not, then his ing. Leave all jealousies and quarrels. Time satisfaction is superficial and not from within. never waits for anyone. Do you want to go empty-handed despite having the key to the feet. tances. He is happy in the circumstances May God grant you eterneral place at His treasure ? If you do not accept God's kingdom, satan's kingdom will come and you will have your- self to blame for it. Remember, because you Yours Mother, NIRMALA 13 Nirmala Yoga

 Her Holiness Shri Mataji's Advice 1. Being a living force we should try to find out "Are we going to be the living force under the control only of Shri Ganesha or the dead one." Now, when we live in the because Shri Ganesha is the beginnig of life world, we start thinking about our comforts; and also the link between the life and the where we have to live, what, we have to do. death. So, Shri Ganesh is one who gives the When we think of all these, you see, we are balance, the 'Vivek' the understanding to you thinking of the dead But when we think of having a place or a house or an ashram. from things. But this left sided thing can also the angle that you will be doing some living come from own desire for wrong things, we work, then you are giving life to that place. might be desiring something very wrong, That atmosphere should be created from all some dead thing (a dead is that which cannot that is dead to create the living force. within us, Now, left Swadhisthan is actually by which you know how far to go with move by itself so, the 'self part does not Now, this is a very subtle thing, which remain in it), very few people understand; for example, somebody brings me a photograph of Shri not to go too far with them. If you have, Ganesha and says. Should I worship this Shri well and good. It you do not have well and Ganesha's photograph or not ?' First of all we good. You can live with minimum of mini- should see if vibrations are coming from it or not. Supposing you take a house. You must see that the house is giving good vibrations. dead possessions, it is very much bad. Then We see the comfort, we see other things. We might even see if it is good for other people to come in or not but we do not see the collective sub-conscious. house from vibrations point of view. For any- thing that we do, we have, now, to think in terms of vibratory awareness which means awareness that is working upon living things. Once you are realised, you have got that with living thing. living force within you. This is the living force you feel. So, you have to know how to use this living force to keep your body, mind, ego, super ego, and everything in the enlightened after your Spirit from which, you know, that state, by understanding the planning of the you get yourr vibrations. If your Spirit is living force. 2. On the left side the problem starts from you do not get vibrations. left Swadhishthan, because that is the first chakra that starts emitting the negativity putting their attention away from the dead The best way to look at all dead things is mum or you can live with maximum of maxi- mum, But when we start expanding our our attention goes into the dead. That is how we move into our sub-conscious, then over to Then it moves higher to the left Nabhi and at left Nabhi we start becoming crazy about these dead things. Time is a dead thing. It is not a living thing. It has nothing to do 3. By seeing to the needs of the Spirit you can overcome the left side. You start looking happy, you get your vibrations if it is unhappy People should overcome their left side by 14 Nirmala Yoga

 So one must understand that, in Sahaja things. You should watch from the centre when you are on the left side. You do not see Yoga, you are developing that sharp edge, what you want to see. that central point from which you do not 4. In Sahaja Yoga some things are prohi- deviate to the right or the left and to balance bited that nobody should touch any body's it you have to watch yourselves carefully. If feet and no Sahaja Yogi should allow anyone going to the right, come to the left, if going to touch his or her feet.This is one of the to the left come to right, Now come to the centre you juIst separate yourself you detach great bandhans for all Sahaja Yogis. No one should touch other's feet and no body should yourself all the time. Use this point just to see and guide yourself. Guidance is very different from getting lost. Living force knows how to guide itself. In the same way you will learn to guide youself. If you have learnt ask other to touch his or her feet whatever may be your quality. Those who will touch will loose vibrations and those who will get salutation will also catch on the Heart. if, you have mastered Sahaja yoga. We all are growing together. We are part and parcel of one personality Nobody is higher or lower. One who thinks even the slightest, Iike this will go down faster. This is the left side conditioning where people falter very much. So you must have very wide desires in Sahaja Yoga, that all of us must help get progress ? realization say as many as possible. We should try to save as many people as possible. We is what sahaja Yoga should make out of you. should try to improve ourselves as far as we can improve and have so many blessings. 7. If the Heart is catching, such peopie can never progress. The Heart is the source of light, it is the source of Brahma Shakti Heart is the seat of Atma. If in the Heart there is no living force, then how can you 8. You must know what to choose. This You should grow mature to that point where you know what to choose. This is growth. 5. Thoughts can come to you from the Then you donot ask Mother. You do not ask left side also, like if you have some bhoots in your head they can give you the thoughts "Oh you are useless and good for nothing, That what I do, I should know what I am Now raise your right side and put down the doing. I should know what is correct. I should left. Now why do we do this ? Because know how to correct it. I should know I' here. from your right side you get the grace and put down the left side. Such people who suffer from th left side should try this one more thing is that when these ideas come to you, that you are good for nothing etc. It is enjoy. You can enjoy God and it is the better to beat youself (yourname) with shoes. greatest enjoyment to feel what God has Go and sing the praise of the lord and say I am so happy I have got everything around me. In the right side, mostly you catch on "Swadhishtan'. This is because you think. This is another kind of thinking that gives you you to this level. What He has given you, you catch at right swadhishtan. Thinking whether can give to others and make others happy. If it comes from right or left will first give you think like that immediately both of your problem to your liver. The worst comes when sides will be settled and you yourself will be both the sides are involved. any one. This development should come to you. is the Spirit and not the ego. No more ego exists or super ego exists. It is the Spirit which guides you. 9. The God is the enjoyer. You cannot created for you. What a beautiful life he has given you in human awareness, by which you can know how much He has loved you, how much He has worked for you. He has brought filled with Divine Vibrations. 15 Nirmala Yoga

 Maha Sahasrara Day The jetty was soon reached and eager Gorai Creek In the presence of Our Divine Mother, Shri Sahaja Yogis crowded into the small weather- Mahalaxahmi, Sahaja Yogis from Bombay, beaten ferry which was to carry us over to the island. The coast and landward side of the Pune, Ruhari, Dhulia and Delhi, together with representatives from the Mooladhara and the island were fringed by thick mangroves and swamps past which the boat safely sailed. So, too, must the pilgrim, the seeker, when in sight of his goal avoid the bogs and tangled roots of his conditioning and intellectualising Heart of the Universe, gathered together on 5th May to celebrate Maha Sahasrara Day. It was on 5th May 1970, at Bordi, Maha- rashtra-the Kundalini of the universe-that that grow to the left and right. the Adi Shakti, Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, opened the Sahasrara of the Virata and offered to humankind the gift of spontaneous self realisation. And, with this blessing of our. Holy Mother to all true seekers, the blossom time of human awareness had arrived when An excited and happy group of Shri Mother's family alighted on the island, and to their delight found they were to catch "tongas" colourful horse-drawn carriages-to the Puja site. A long, straight road led across grassy undulating land to the seaward side of we could all become fruits on the tree of life children in the Kingdom of God. the island, where the fishing settlement was situated. it may seem amazing but even the lightheartedness of this ride, the straightness and smoothness of the road, seemed an earthly parallel to that crossing of the Ocean of llusion, the Bhava Sagara, by Mother Kunda- lini, a crossing which has brought us to the realm of renewed hope, peace and joy. This year the Sahasrara Day Puja was performed at Gorai Creek, a fishing hamlet on an island located 30 km or so north west of Bombay, The journey to the Puja site seemed a sort of pilgrim's progress-the physical journey reflecting the journeys of the seeker from his struggles through the Maya until that precious moment A short, pleasant walk led through the when he attained his Kundalini Awakening and felt the Joy of the village-a Christain settlement pervaded by Spirit. the briny odour of drying fish-down to the sea. On the beach, a stream of Sahaja Yogis- true "fishers of men"-moved towards the We left central Bombay by train early in the morning and experienced-some for the coconut grove and cottage where Shri Mataji's first time-the rush hour of a crowded Indian Puja was to be held. metropolis. This seemed to epitomise in many ways the franticness and confusion of Kali Yuga. Having arrived at Borivali station, we disembarked and boarded a local bus for the ferry wharf. This was a more relaxed and settled section of the journey-and indicative, perhaps, of that level of human life where one has settled into a comfortable and complacent expectant children from the heat of Lord existence and is content with the status quo- that "comfort of the body" with which affluent Westerners are so familiar. What a beautiful spot Mother Earth had given us for this special festival of Sahasrara Day. The coconut trees, laden with many fruit, all leaned towards the ocean and toward the prevailing winds. Their fronds almost touched overhead shielding Shri Mother's Surya. And it was like children, that many Sahaja Yogis greeted Grandfather Ocean-the Nirmala Yoga 16

 representative of Dharma-as they enjoyed Shri Mother appeared, dressed in a simple His warm waters washing over them. white cotton sari with red designs. She walked sedately and solemnly towards the sea. Following Her were Sahaja Yogis carry- Our Divine Mother arrived towards midday and Her eager disciples welcomed Her. She ing garlands and coconuts from the Puja seated Herself under the silk-fringed umbrella which they gave to Grandfather Ocean. and accepted a coconut full of refreshing milk. The Bombay Sahaja Yogis presented Her with a pair of silver chappals embossed with auspi- the retreating tide. She bent down and cious signs in gold-a Sahasrara Lotus, the began to Create a Ganesh in the sand and Shesha, sun, moon, swastika, cross, bandhan then ornamented it with flowers and kumkum. and lotuses representing the chakras. Shri Mother graciously wore these chappals and, after some moments of deep silence, She commenced Her wonderful Sahasrara Day Talk reddened horizon. Great power and majesty (translation to be printed soon) and invoked emanated from Her. To some present it felt the blessings of the Deities and God Almighty as though the Adi Shakti was ushering out upon all Sahaja Yogis. The significance of forever the dying embers of Kali Yuga and the coconut grove and the auspiciousness of invoking the ocean, Dharma, to assert itself. the coconut fruit was explained to us. (One The image of Shri Ganesh lay in the sand, a begins to realise how everywhere Mother symbol of the advent of the age of truth, Earth speaks to us the message of the Divine, innocence and wisdom. Shri Mataji called humming with various but harmonious melo- upon the sea to wash over us all. We chanted dies, the hymn of creation,) Shri Mother stopped some distance from She moved a few paces forward and then stood quite still, with an intent expression, and looked out to the sea and the sunset- the mantra to "Samudra Devata"-the God of the Ocean-asking His blessings. Several After lunch and a rest Shri Mother s Puja Sahaia Yogis saw the wave coming inward to the shore and leaving steps in the sand Then commenced. the sea came as they retreated. Shri Mahalaxshmi, dressed in a deep red sari with a blue border and embossed gold rushing up to Shri Mother, flowed past every- motifs, was seated regally under the coconut palms heavy with fruit, and from the corn- ucopia of Her Love and Generosity, She gave was seen high in the twilight sky directly beautiful opal rings to several Sahaja Yogis. opposite the Devi, Our Most Beneficent Children came forward to wash Our Holy Mother. At this auspicious moment a basket Mothers's Feet; curd, millk, butter, honey and of marigold was brought to Her. Spontane- sugar was applied and Shri Mataji's Lotus ously, many took turns to kneel in front of Feet and Hands painted with kumkum. The Shri Mother to wash and adorn Her Feet. At Queen of all the Prophets, Devas and Saints these moments yet more miracles occurred, for was crowned and adorned with necklaces. whenever a devotee touched Shri Mataji's garlands, girdle, and fragrant floral armbands. Aarti was sung and the Devi, with the most sending wavelets to wash over them. radiant and sweet smile, invited Her devotees to obtain yet more blessings at Her Lotus Feet. one present and encircled the Ganesha. The Evening Star, Venus-the Devi's own sign- Lotus Feet, Grandfather Ocean responded by The time of Our Blessed Mother's departure arrived. We, who had been so privileged and fortunate to witness this sea ceremony, wandered homewards down the lane lit only Dusk was approaching and many Sahaja Yogis had left for the journey home when 17 Nirmala Yoga

 Christ in K ashmir As reported in "the Advent", Shri Mataji mentions also, that his mother Mary is buried declared that Christ came to India and that, in Murree, north of Rawalpindi in Pakistan. after His resurrection, he lived in Kashmir. Today, there is still a narrow valley leading to As documented by a report in a Swiss news- paper, the "Tages Anzeiger", there are more and more evidences pointing out towards His presence in that part of the world, which, ho vever, did not appear in the gospels. Kashmir which is traditionally called "Yus- marg" meaning 'Jesus way'- The last bit of information we find in this article is rather interesting. The Eastern Insti- tute of Bombay University keeps the fragmen- But unofficial gospels, that is, scriptures ted remains of the manuscripts which had which are not recognized by church. such as the apocryphal gospels of Saint Thomas and of Levi have already ascertained that Christ following: went to India before His short lived manifes- tation as spiritual leader in Galilea. This assertion, according to the newspaper, seems corroborated by some ancient Tibetan texts kept in the Himis Gampa monastery in Ladakh that the Russian scholar, Niklaus Notowitsch, told the emperor that he came from a far could study. These texts speak of the "Child Isa" in whom the World Spirit had incarnated. He came to India from a foreign country, oreaching love, purity and the cleanness of studied in the temples, entered in conflict with the priests of the Brahmin class (sounds only too likely) and the caste system. He had thus to take refuge during six years in Nepal med that he reincarnated as Mr. Salve, the belonged to the earlier kings of Kashmir, In one of these texts the chronicler reports the At a date corresponding to 76AD the emperor SHALIVAHAN met in Kashmir an aged saint "with a clear complexion and white clothes" who was calling himself "Isa Massih", (Jesus the Messiah) and the son of God. Не away country where truth had no more place and where evil knew no boundaries. He was heart. Now this emperor Shalivahan, ruler from Maharastia, is the ancestor of Shri Mataji and, apparently, some Sahaja yogis got infor- before he returned to Palestine. In the same very father of Shri Mataji, If this is the case it really sounds like God's family keeps meet- ing through lives and ages. But we, the children gathered at Her Lotus Feet, didn't we know this already ? vein, a Persian author who lived long time back, Mir Khwand, collected oral tradi- tions. In his work, "Rauzat-aus Safa", he mentions that Yus Asaf (from the hebrew: Jesus the gatherer) travelled towards the East, through Mesopotamia and Afghanistan. He A swiss sahaja yogi (Contd. fram Page 17) by starlight. A car drove by and a beloved voice called out: Her children and caring for our welfare, had attended to the smallest and most mundane detail : our transportation home. "Why are you walking ? There's a truck waiting for you." Despite the fact all public transport had ceased at sunset, Our Great Mother, Maha Mata, ever nurturing BOLO SHRI MAHALAXSHMI SHRI JAGAN- MATA SHRI NIRMALA DEVI KI JAI -BEOUGHONIA Nirmala Yoga 18

 Letter from English Sahaja Yogi (3) Sangham surrender myself to collectivity, (The Virat). Sharanam Gacchami- Here are some extracts from the letter. "It is impossible to describe in short the many meetings with Ma, Her powerful speeches and Her loving kindness to us all. There were various other public meetings and the last which was again in Hampstead, First of all there were about 150 people at this time at the Town Hall, was great. The the airport some of whom were seeing Ma for the first time. Mother left Hercar waiting in couldn't quite hear what Shri Mataji was order to see us. She looked pleased and had a loving smile and a kind word for many of us. room was packed wirh new people who saying because the microphone wasn't func- tioning properly. So no one asked questions Then on Thursday there was a public and all of them held their hands up to receive meeting at the Friend's Meeting House in Hampstead (London). Mother spoke about our approach to new people. She stressed that enough is enough. After the meeting the importance of raising their even half frozen the whole of England was covered with violent kundalinis above the Sahasrara instead of thunderstorms with flashes of strong bright leaving them half way. Both the Westerners lightning every five minutes and this went on and the Indian Sahaja Yogis are at fault for right through the night. being lazy in that matter and that is the main reason why people do not come back. their realization, just like in India. Ma was very fierce in Her speech, telling the negativity About two weeks ago Ma went to Paris for a puja and a public programme. 150 people turned up for the programme and many were from previous meetings. During the Havan Mother threw some grapes into the fire saying that they will gradually lose their After Her speech Ma answered some ques- tions, in particular about Buddhism. On several other occasions also Ma was very fierce about Tibetian Lamas and so called Buddhists. Three weeks ago there was Shri ability to ferment (and become wine and Buddha's Birthday Puja which was held in brandy). A funny thing has recently happened Brighton. Mother gave a very long talk about in Scotland; the water has suddenly become Buddha's life and the message of His teaching. "Buddha means enlightened soul and I wish many people from your area could become real Buddhists. Buddha did not talk about very hard which has made all the whisky companies up there panic because it means they cannot even produce medium quality whisky, let alone 'good' stuff. (It is vital to have soft water for whisky), God from fear of self appointed men of God and increasing ritualism. Buddha spoke only Many great people have recently come to Sahaja Yoga here but Shri Mataji isn't too pleased and says that we are moving too slowly, She has pointed out once more that the Australian success is largely due to collec- tivity which we still lack. However the new ashram is a place of love and laughter and Gacchami-I music and warm welcomes. so that is good. about self-realisation. Ma asked the English Sahaja Yogis to work out the ego in England. She gave us three mantras to be repeated every day in the following order: (1) Dharmam surrender myself to my virtues. Sharanam Om twameva Sakshat, Shri Shiva-Parvati (2) Buddham surrender myself to my Enlightenment. Sharanam Gacchami-I Sakshat, Shri Adi Shakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi namoh namah. Nirmala Yoga 19

 PARIS-IT'S DONE After years of preparations, Sahaja Yoga in France is finding its cruising speed. Last Yogis felt that Shri Mataji was breaking into year we felt it was starting: this year we felt it another dimension. Wrapped in a white silk had started. From the 16 to the 19 June 1983 Shri Mataji blessed the French Sahaja hair, rivers of night, on Her shoulders. magni- Yogis and Paris with Her presence, Her ficient, She spoke with immense power; "In, masterful command over the power of love. the past, France has in many ways, given a Even the most yellowish livers of this place, bad example to the rest of the world. It is somehow, must have felt it... At the last public programme all the Sahaja saree, standing before a white wall, Her black time that the people of France take to self realisation... The last Judgement has started. Don't worry whether you are ready or not: The Sahajas of various countries were received with great joy and care by our this is for ME to decide. It is your Kundalini French brothers and sisters who had prepared who will judge you... the visit of Shri Mataji with efficiency and dedication. We could feel this dedication in Walking out of the conference hall Shri so many little details, in beautiful decorations, Mataji, with a laugh and a gesture of the in the poems they had composed in praise of hand, exclaimed: "We won Paris; it is done!" As She stepped out of the building on the food they had prepared for us; we could feel famed place Saint Germain des Pres, a huge their confidence in the way they were address- fire-works broke out. Multicolored rockets were exploding in the sky of Paris, one after the other, opening up in the night umbrellas of fire, Sahasraras of light ! We all laughed aloud, cheered, applauded in a joyous tumult. Shri Hanumana was putting a nice dot at the end of His Mother's statement. Actually, with this fire-works, the city council of Paris was celebrating some important event of the French history. Sahaja Yogis guess they'll the Goddess; we could feel their love in the ing newcomers at the programmes. It was wonderful ! Thank you, yogis of France! It is not rare that Shri Mataji starts a state- ment by saying: "you will be amazed.." In Paris we were amazed to witness, once more, how truly amazing our Mother is; how, in a leisurely way, and, so to say, jokingly, She was handling so many situations, people and universes at the same time. On Saturday, 18th June, we had a Havan in the garden of the ashram and a puja. Thereafter the weather changed completely from cold-moody-cloudy to sunny and warm. A gentle breeze started fanning the branches of the trees and, on Sunday, we enjoyed the garden of Eden, laying around, chatting, everybody floating in the oneness of friendship, vibrations and gaiety. There was so much love around to give and take : We were bathing in the aura of Her PREM, of Her Divine Love, And, surely, God enjoyed that His children were enjoying themselves so much. never quite know which one. VICTORY TO THE PURIFIER OF THE EARTH'S PAINFUL LIVER ! VICTORY TO HER WHO RESTS ON THE COSMIC SERPENT! VICTORY TO OUR EXTRAORDINARY MOTHER! VICTORY TO SHRI MATAJI ! The European sahaja yogis Nirmala Yoga 20

 Place of money in Sahaja Yoga Sri Mataji has many times said that God thing is certain, is that according to vibrations does not understand money. This means the money is a human invention, an artifice, a means of tricking reality. What are Sahaja God Almighty. Then why should we question? Yogis to do with such poisonous stuff ? Does it mean we should get rid of it as quickly as possible ? Or give it to someone else (our the one for which it was collected. For them, Guru perhaps) ? Or pretend we haven't got money was to be used in a particular any with us ? What to do, is the problem. Many people feel that the sensible thing to do with money is to live a normal life and our Mother wants the money to pay for spend only what is spare for Sahaja Yoga. something else ? What is wrong? They also feel that what is spent should be, at least partly, under their control and approval. petty about money and its use, we will remain Having parted with it, they still do not want petty-hearted people. Not only our Nabhi to let go. These basic assumptions must be chakra will remain closed but our heart also challenged. our Mother is divine, means, is the Laxshmi, the source of all wellbeing, is the Power of Still some people will have hankering, that the money should go to a similar purpose to way. It was to reach a particular audience with which they are identified, But suppose One thing we must understand. If we are will be tight like a stone. The whole creation has to glorify the Lord. Not just our little Money is incidental to life. It is not the measure of life's value, nor is it the means of puddle. Like the frog in the well who thought enhancing that value. This should be under- he had found the ocean, we croak our songs stood. By itself money cannot buy God. Love can, but money cannot. monetary value, it has no buying power., but definitely it can turn God's heart. Therefore the edge of our own prejudices. And then money should be regarded as incidental to our purposes. If God does not want to fulfil our purposes our money will not get used the way we want, but God may indicate another wicks that are trapped at the bottom. We may use. Why should we get upset ? of joy, little realizing that our voice is echoing in a deep pit which we have dug ourselves. Let us climb up and up until we can see over Love has no we may not mind so much helping the one who goes from well to well, lowering a light down on a long rope to illuminate the little even want to help in the process. Let us suppose we have given money for a big advertisement about Sri Mataji's lecture the purpose of money in Sahaja Yoga. It is tour, but the advertiser refuses to display it. to be spent in order to increase the light level. Still the tour is a success. As far as God is Whether the light is in Spain or Peru, makes concerned, we have paid and He delivers the goods. Yoga kshema vahamyaham': the to light all the wicks. Wherever the wicks are wellbeing of the saints is assured-we have readiest, is the easiest to light more. Wherever seen the proof. Then the question remains, the darkness is thickest, is the most urgent to what to do with the money that was collected light lamps which can enlighten others. Time and not spent ? Who decides ? This parable may help us to understand no difference to the ultimate purpose, which is is short. So let us not be petty about money. Wake up Albion. arise. As far as Sahaja Yogis are concerned, the one who decides is our Mother. Why ? Maybe people should decide for themselves. But one JAI MATAJI Gavin Brown 8-6-83 21 Nirmala Yaga

 BhoY BEGINNINGS" SIa got my realisation around the 15th Self-realisation, when negativity tries to settle August 1975, in Hurst Green, Sussex, in the back into the half-cleared chakras, when very house of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi. The doubts and fears rain from stormy ego cum period following this turning point in my life super-ego, it helps to consciously call to me- can be said to have been most intense, no doubts, but pretty precarious also. 1 had to the gentle way in which it led us towards its leave the shores of fair Albion to go back into boring daily lite where, somehow, negativity Shri Mataj Nirmala Devi. was waiting for me... and I did not know then, how to deal with the multiplicity of its subtle and less subtle form. If I managed to swim through these troubled waters and California, in June 1975. He spoke, although survived as a yogi, it Is, of course, thanks to carefully, about Sahaja Yoga and soon left for the ever watchful Grace of the one who had mory the heiping hand of the Unconscious, most elusive, most effective incarnated form, Here is an example from my own story. I met Rajesh Shah at Berkeley University, London while I went back with a friend and a given me my realisation. But, more precisely, trailer van for a tour of the Arizona and Utah I can hint here at two devices which proved deserts. Quite a few things happened during to be useful in enabling me to stick to Reality. this travel, many signals were sent. For One could be called : "charting back one's example, whenever I would fix my tent I would find the Venus star facing the opening. When I arrived on the Grand Canyon the sky was overcast. I sat on the ridge of the Canyon and prayed God that I should have a rainbow. Within ten minutes the sky opened, stream of path towards Self-realisation". "fixing the pole of the tent" The second: Charting the path towards Self- realisation We are all seekers. As such we are looked golden light flew in, down to the Colorado river, and set on fire the walis of the Canyon. While some green black clouds were still rolling over my head, I was given the most beautiful of all rainbows, shaped like horseshoe, stretching its colours from one side to the other of the Canyon. It was just too much. I felt the Universe was a house and I was the heir of this household. I did not feel after. The Divine-or, in more secular terms, the Unconscious-has been working on us as a magnet mass does on iron dust; our move- ment towards Self-realisation expresses the impact of its gravitational pull. The Unconsci- reach Self-realisation ous wants us to (nirvichara sammadhi). It paves our way towards it. Thus it carefully engineers moments and circumstances, it calis, it stages happen- ings and sends signals to the Atma, often long before we meet Shri Mataji. The Atma, the gratitude. Fortunately there weren't any Self which is Truth-Consciousness-Joy is all tourists around for they would have wondered what we want to be and Self-realisation is the first encounter with capital Reality, an encoun- ter which has been discretely but lovingly prepared by the Unconscious itseif. After met Shri Mataji in London and had spoken ous lonely and lost anymore and, with tears in the eyes, I was just overwhelmed with love and at the sight of a kind of drunken boy, hugging and kissing all the trees on his way. I did not know that, by then, Rajesh had To be printed in book edited by Gavin Brown & Ray Harris. Nirmala Yoga 22

 She very clearly exposed my inconsistency, how precarious my position was and what I should do to muster positivity within myself about me, that is, I did not know that I had already entered Her omnipotent, omiscient attention. I did not know either, by the way. that the shape of the horseshoe or "bandhan" instead of siding with negativity. I take here is the symbol of the Adi Shakti. But I felt :1 the liberty of quoting a few lines of this extra- heard a call, I felt a great, great, tremendous ordinary letter which saved my (spiritual) life love, Her Love upon me. for the second time: Rajesh and I met again in Berkeley. He showed me a picture of Shri Mataji. A few days later, in U.K., at the appointed time, I found myself standing in the hall of Shri Mataji's house, ready for "my first encounter of the Atma kind". "Now the time has come to tell you that Sahaja Yoga cannot work unless and until you completely surrender to "Me" without any more questioning. This "Me" means Mataji Nirmala Devi who resides on the "Sahasrara" of the VIRATA; This is the absolute truth whether you like it or not, whether your ego and super ego accept in or not. I am sorry I have to confess it." Needless to say, later on, in moments of confusion, the recollection of these signals comforted my still vacillating faith in Sahaja Yoga. Each of us who know to search his memory has a provision of such signals before his realisation, before meeting Shri Mataji or, simply, before meeting Sahaja Yogis. There public it is because of their overriding signifi- need not be rainbow everytime. But it's love cance: If I take upon myself to publish these sacred lines which were not meant for the all the time. "Gregoire ! You perhaps do not realize that all the Deities who reside in you and who are controlled in your Sahasrara are not at all interested in people who are not completely surrendered to me. I do not know how to convince them. They only look after those who take my name and accept that I am the Adi Shakti. This is the only way you can progress. What can I do ? Even the people who are cured by me have to keep the protocol otherwise the Deities sleep and they go back to their previous position. Fixing the pole of the tent When I left England I was eager to share the good news with others who I thought to be seekers. So, I briefed one of my friends who had much more experience of these things than myself as he had tried so many gurus in India and elsewhere. He was keeping the pictures of the various special maste:s he had met, stones they had given him and also a sort of mental decoding system whereby he could find out who was a genuine master and who wasn't. Despite this background however or, rather, because of it, he failed to grasp the point of Sahaja Yoga, passed on to me a few of his exotic-esoteric bhoots and got me quite confused. I then wrote a letter to Shri Mataji in which 1 expressed doubts as to how I could possibly be so deeply transformed through Sahaja Yoga and how could this yoga trans- form the world. I was drifting away. So far 1 have not said this to anyone because I thought there was no need. Those who were wise realised it and those who are foolish have lost their chance in Sahaja Yoga." I was stunned ! I somehow realised at once what these lines were meant to carry. The 25 September 1975 Shri Mataji was gracious enough to send me a letter in which Mataji's real identity was not true the whole saw clearly that if this assertion of Shri 23 Nirmala Yoga

 which my confidence in Destiny and Self tion was true the seekers of the whole world could be built up. It dawned upon me that the answer to one single question was provid- start. What was the matter with me ? Yes, I ing answers to all other questions. And this had felt the vibrations coming from Shri question was:"Who is Shri Mataji ?" The answer to it makes the difference between my Sahasrara, I had seen Kundalini pulsating, mystical sand castles and Reality: between I had registered Her movements under Shri salvation and doom for all of us. In it lies the key to the process of collective emancipa- want ? what was this nonsense in my head, tion. Since the reception of this letter my only goal has been and still is to further penetrate the mystery of Shri Mataji's incarna- tion on this earth, to bring my consciousness of Sahaja Yoga would fall apart. If this asser- could be saved, I too. The golden Age would Mataji, I had felt, inside, how She had opend Mataji's fingers... What more proofs did 1 why wouldn't I recognise Her ? The statement of Shri Mataji helped me tremendously helped me, that is, to recognize. closer to Her city. Realising its truth became the only relevant question, and all the other questions and worries in my mind instantly vanished, even those pertaining to Sahaja Yoga. The words petalled lotus floating in the limbic area of our of Shri Mataji had fixed the pole of the tent, the tent of Sahaja Yoga to protect me from Mataji had given me the password. the bad weather of Kali Yuga; the pole upon which the edifice of my yoga had to rely, on This island city, vibrating with multicolored tongues of fire, we all cary itas the thousand- brain. It's gate is narrow, no doubt, but Shri Gregoire Vienna 5-6-83 An appeal to all Sahaja Yogi brothers and sisters of the world Dear Brothers and Sisters. Some of us are fortunate enough to hear Her Holiness Shri Mataji in person whenever She talks to us in our area on the various aspects of Sahaja Yoga. It is fitting, therefore, to transcribe them from the original tapes in your possession for the benefit of all the Sahaja Yogis Many Sahaja Yogis who are already contributing them have expressed that they are immensely benefited while actually transcribing it and understand the various aspects explained by Mother in detail. Besides one gets plenty of vibrations. May we, therefore, request you to give a helping hand in this important task of spreading the Mother's Message. The transcribed copies may please be sent to : NIRMALA YOGA 43 Banglow Road Delhi-110007 (India) Nirmala Yoga 24

 Mother, dear Mother* Years back I had read a lovely story-by or not. What actually mattered was sincerity Anatole France, if I am not wrong-in which and devotion. the central figure was an unassuming juggler. in the brotherhood of a church's clergy who exhibited a consuming desire to please Mother Mary. All around him in the brotherhood were men of merit. Some were in the choir with melodious voices, singing the divine strains in praise of Mother. Some had the Midas" touch with which they used to create paintings which could please the Lord. Some step in this game of finest balance and exqui- were accomplished craftsmen who with infi- nite patience and skill would carve miniatures of Mother or tableaux of the Lord's he ticked them off in the air as if they were life. There were still others who distinguisbed bound by an invisible chain. He made infinite themselves, either by their oratorial acumen, scriptural erudition or writing ability. So he saw a ray of light. Quietly he slip- ped inside the church hall when nobody was there and began his show of juggling before the statue of Mother Mary. At last he was on his own again, completely in his elements. Reverent and immaculate as if playing in front of a royal audience, he proceeded step by site timing. He threw the balls one by one, with gay abandon, then with equal deftness out patterns in the empty space, his body twisting and turning in rhythm with the balls weaving kaleidoscopic variety, his trained hands quest- ing in the vaccum for the balls dancing in Amidst this galaxy of luminaries, this humble juggier felt awkward, embarrassed and the air, his face swathed in streaming sweat, even, in a way, guilty. Guilty, that when but illumined in an ethereal glow-the juggler others had great personal attributes to fall back on to please Mother, he had none. He was the odd-man out among a crowd of chosen people, or so he felt. was doing Arati'. But they found out one day. The whole brotherhood broke into the hall while he was thus engaged. He froze with fear and hung his head low. As one of the members began to reprimand him for his almost blasphemous behaviour in front of Mother, the statue of His anguish was great and genuine. His burning desire to please Mother ultimately led him to a very touching but unorthodox solu- tion. It was the classic case of a simple mind Mary came alive-with a benign smile She having a simple solution. He argued within himself that all prayers, all worshippings were in its essence the expression of one's heart- felt love, devotion, and gratitude for the knelt down in awe and reverence. descended from the pedastal and, then with the sleeve of Her apron began lovingly wiping the sweat from the juggler's face. The priests Mother. By the same token, a man who was sculpting a statue of Mary with a master's finesse, or writing lyrics in Her praise or piping the noblest songs for the Divine Mother, was in fact worshipping Her in his own way. To the Mother, it hardly mattered who worship- innocence whereas in my case, my upbringing ped in which way or who knew what mantras When I came into Sahaja Yoga I faced the same dilemma as the juggler. In fact my predicament was much more, The juggler was a blessed man because of his child-like and the social compulsions had taken a heavy *The above is a transcript of a letter written to Shri Mataji from Australia some years ago, and is reproduced here at Shri Mataji's instructions. Nirmala Yoga 25

 toll of this Godly attribute. All around me I It was a trick of my ego. Having seen a few saw Sahaja yogis of calibre, each one of them articles in print and a book or two, I had much advanced than I am, all of them blessed thought no end of myself. So now my ego was taking me for a ride, prompting me to take a short-cut to the Kingdom of God! (No sons of Mother. It was a mixed crowd of myriad personalities distinguished men of public life, Yogis of high attainments, scholars wonder my Agnya chakra is not clearing). of scriputures, instrumentalists of divine inspiration, singers of great distinction and organisers of exceptional abilities. Another phase of frustration, another round of gloom. Now I must go back to nature, I thought-to seek freshness from the morning dew, naturalness from the rippling river, stead- fastness from the sun-flower, piety from the rom the pelican, innocence from the children and bounty from Mother Earth. That would In the presence of this gathering, I also felt lost and awkward. Suddenly I realised that the qualities I had so assiduously cultiva- ted for success in society have come to nothing in the face of a greater reality. I have to unlearn many things, and re-learn a lot. To give me the depth of vision and insight so begin with, I have to learn again to walk straight, on a straight path, without manoeu- vring, without affectation, in a simple, normal necessary to be able to write about Her, For, write I must to prove me, to prove my worth; that would be my puja, my humble service to Mother. way. That was easier said than done. That called for innocence, devotion and total "Not required-an inner voice assured me. remembered Milton's On His Blindness. Light had gone out from his eyes much before the potentialities of the man were exhausted. Introspactive by nature, Milton had suffered for days together in the belief that he might be brought to book for having failed to utilise his talent in the service of God. Then in a moment of inspiration, Just then 1 surrender-qualities I had thrown to the winds way back in life in my teens and out of it, like the proverbial Negro who threw the pearl away which was richer than his whole tribe. Today I have to walk back in time through the mazes and dark alleys to retrieve them, if I can. They are not on sale or show. Once you lose them, you lose them, perhaps realisation had dawned on him that God does foreover. not need any man's service he has his angels for that. But they also serve Him who only So I had my share of anguish like the juggler. stand and wait. by. Then I had a flash, a brainwave, like a silver-lining in the encircling gloom-I would write about Mother. That would be my way of pleasing Her, worshipping Her, proving my Moments, agonising moments, ticked So I got the message-a message to bridle my presumption and curb my ego. Now I am at peace-with myself and the world. I do not want to write any more. I am happy to stand and wait for command, if any, from my worth. Clever, too clever ! I had been clever with life; now I wanted to be with Mother also ! Mother, dear Mother. Nirmala Yoga 26

 An Experience Almost a year ago, in May 1982, I started to anything like this before. I was nervous to notice beautiful photographs of an Indian lady all over Brighton. In passing I read: but definitely excited. In fact there was a great air of excitement in the whole room, and it kept mounting as "She unites the essence of all religions. Awakens the dormant spiritual energy gradually people arrived. an introductory talk was given and we sat waiting for Shri Mataji's arrival. The excitement built up more and more until .. suddenly everyone was hurrying to their feet, turning to the back of the hall and........ 'what presence, what joy, what within us all. THE PROMISED ENLIGHTENMENT IS NOW A FACT;" I felt it just had to be the truth. The com- bination of this ultimate claim with the picture absolute authority filled the room as Shri of Shri Mataji really spoke to my heart. Mataji stepped into it', Eventually one day I stopped at one poster and feeling rather embarrassed in the middle Yes.", "Of course." "Exactly.", and AT LAST of the busy street, I noted down the time and place. As She spoke everything inside me said, someone who hits the nail on the head. Who speaks the truth, nothing more nothing less. I went quite early to the programme, which was in the Royal Pavilion, a famous building that evervone but me would get their realiza- built in imitation Indian style. As I arrived I noticed quite dignified people around the entrance. The room where the meeting was to be held was incredible. There were huge windows, chandeliers and the walls were decorated with pictures of bright coloured came and worked on me standing behind me. brids and flowers. I was impressed. When it was time to meditate I was sure tion, yet, although l'd never heard of it before, I knew that it was the one thing that I really wanted. After the collective meditation people I felt very tense and a bit nervous about what they were doing behind my back. I was However I took my seat near the back, trying too hard, but then without me doing ready to escape if necessary and looked anything, I suddenly felt as if a lid was lifting around at the other people. It seemed a bit inside my stomach and the joy rushed through strange to see so many people sitting with and I burst into smiles and laughter. I realized: their hand palm upwards on their knees but "There is someone who loves us. God is they seemed somehow nice and friendly, 1 didn't realize that they were Sahaja Yogis sibility " What a weight lifted off me. It but I couldn't help feeling that I was surroun- ded by happy, healthy, clean, and cheerfully laughed, but now laughter kept on bubbling dressed people. taking care of everything. It's not our respon- seemed like such a long time since I had up inside of me. All at once I saw the joke. I stayed in the hall till the last minute watching Shri Mother and listening. I didn't want to go away. When finally did leave to go home through the Saturday night streets, I sank down in my chair. My body was aching all over and I felt scruffy and undigni- fied in my jeans and short hair. I was quite surprised to be there actually. I'd never been 27 Nirmala Yoga

 full of crowds of rowdy drunks, I clearly saw what a hell surrounds us, but I was no longer afraid. I'd never heard about it before ? Why wasn't it in all the papers ? Why wasn't it on the television news ? Even now it sometimes seems incredible. The next aternoon they had invited me to go to a Sahaj Yoginis house to see a video of Shri Mataji. Everyone was in the garden. It was a lovely sunny day and the light shone green through the tarpaulin roof covering us. There were paper streamers of all colours decorating the roof and the centre pole. By children Machinder Nath and Niranjana. I the wall, next to a flower bed was a chair upon which Shri Mataji had been sitting during Her stay and where that very morning a puja stopped asking any. It has been great to meet had been celebrated. Although at that time I knew nothing of such things, I definitely felt people who have joined Sahaja Yoga in the silence and the joy-the joy. Since then I have really been spoiled. I went to Shri Mother's programme in Vienna was offered the chance to work for Gregoire de Kalbermatten as nanny for his two beautiful have learnt so much and had so many ques- tions answered that I have at last almost the European Sahaja Yogis and the new Vienna. I really don't know how to thank Our Mother for all Her blessings. A crowd of happy smiling people. How often do we see that in the west ? In Sahaja Yoga we may start to take it for granted, but for me it was really heaven. I felt so much love flowing. Some how you could really thing about it before l'd like to say how feel at home, as if you had found all your long lost friends again. At last people who were on your wavelength. As a person who came to Sahaja Yoga from the street without ever having heard any- thankful I am to Our Mother for such great brothers and sisters who helped me with so much love over the stony path back to normalcy and beyond. After realization it becomes so easy to see the games which others play. We can so much more easily Not quite two months later I went up to London for Guru Puja. I was stunned to see the Nightingale lane Ashram, the smart way criticise and judge other Sahaja Yogis for not people were dressed, the women in their yet being what they should be. We can lose beautiful silk saris, the video, all the different the perspective and start taking the blessings nationalities represented there, and of course the most important thing, the way the people were, I was amazed. along the weary track of ego here were people who had been working on trying to improve may learn to love each other more and more themselves, not just with words but really doing it. All the Sahaj Yogis seemed so great for granted. While I'd heen plodding Therefore I pray to Shri Mataji that we to see only the best in each other and to help that to grow; that we may become truly one collective beirig enlivened by our enjoyment of ourselves and of each other and thus worthy to represent Our Holy Mother to the world, who is the embodiment of that love itself, who is sakshat Shri Jagadamba, sakashat Shri Adi Shakti Mataji. Shri Nirmal Devi, Namoh Namah. 1o me. I have no words to describe the Puja itself except to say that I felt overawed and it was a great privilege to be there. It was such a powerful experience. I found it hard to believe that all this was happening, in the heart of London. How come MARGRET 28 Nirmala Yoga

 108 Names of Shri VISHNU OM TAMEV SAKSHAT He is the source of all glory I. Shri Bhutih His glory is great His glory is supreme 2. Shri Maharddhih 3. Shri Pararddhih 4. Shri Amitavikramah His powers are immeasurable, of unlimited valour The one with a thousand heads 5. Shri Sahasramurdha 6. Shri Sahasrākshah 7. Shri Anantarupah 8. Shri Anädi-nidhanah 9. Shri Anadih 10. Shri Anantah The one with a thousand eyes The one whose form is endless He is without birth and death He is without beginning He is without end He is without equal II. Shri Atulah The ruler of all beings 12. Shri Ishänah 13. Shri Bhutamaheshvarah 14. Shri Sthavirah 15. Shri Sthãnuh The great lord of all beings Ageless The fiirm, immobile He who confers the good, or destroys sorrow and its cause 16. Shri Rudrah 17. Shri Yogih The one who is realized through Yoga on knowledge, or the one with perfect self-possession 18. Shri Kshamināmvarah The Chief among the Yogins who have patience The Great Ascetic, the great knower 19. Shri Mahãtapah 20. Shri Sadãyogi 21. Shri Durgah 22. Shri Swayyambhu 23. Shri Mahādevah 24. Shri Ugrah 25. Shri Amarah-Prabhuh Ever Manifest He who is gained with difficulty The self-born The Great God The Fearful The Lord of the Immortals 26. Shri Surānanda The delight of the Gods The preceptor of the Gods He is charming, being the Infinite Bliss Of Sweet countenance 27. Shri Devabhrd-Guru 28. Shri Manoharah 29. Shri Sumukhah His eyes are like lotuses Sweet in vedic chanting 30. Shri Aravindāksah 31. Shri Sughoshah 32. Shri Hemāngah 33. Shri Chaturbāhu Golden in form Four-armed 34. Shri Shankhabhrt He who holds the conch in one hand Nirmala Yoga 29

 35. Shri Chakri He who bears the discus in one hand, Twirls the whcel of life-cycle 36. Shri Gadādharah He who carriers the Club called Kaumodaki in one hand 37. Shri Padmi He who hold the Lotus in one hand 38. Shri Garuda Dhvajah 39. Shri Vanamali His flag bears the Garuda emblem He wears the garland named Vaijayanti which stands for the subtle elements 40. Shri Bhagavän He who has beatitude, splendour, goodness, fame, auspicious- ness, dispassion and freedom. He knows the origin of the things and their dissolution; He knows the coming of beings and their going too: He knows knowledge and nescience as well. 41. Shri Sripatih He whom SHRI chose as Her consort when She arose out of the ocean which was being churned for obtaining nectar 42. Shri Shrinivāsah 43. Shri Shrivasah 44. Shri Kämaha 45. Shri Antakah 46. Shri Krtäntakrt Abiding among prosperous Perennial abode of prosperity The destroyer of evil desire The death of all beings The destroyer of all that is made, the God of death himself Totality 47. Shri Sarvah 48. Shri Hrshikesah The Lord of the senses, or the Supreme Self in whose control the senses are 49. Shri Yamah 50. Shri Vasuh The inner controller of all beings The one who exists in all beings without distinction The one who was not, is not, and will not be shaken from His own glory 51. Shri Achyutah 52. Shri Hiranyagarbah The Golden Egg whereupon all things emanate He whose radiance pervades the firmament and transcends it. The All-pervading being, not conditioned by space, time and things. 53. Shri Vishnu 54. Shri Purushottamah The Supreme Person 55. Shri Prajäpatih The Lord of Beings, the Father of all, Protector of all born He who has the Lotus, symbolising the source of the Universe in his navel 56. Shri Padmanābhah 57. Shri Sarvavid Bhänuh The Omniscient and Effulgent Sun 58. Shri Jyotir-Adityah The effulgence of the Sun 59. Shri Suryah He who begets prosperity 60. Shri Savitah He who generates the World. Abode of all 61. Shri Vasuh Nirmala Yoga 30

 62. Shri Skandah He who flows as nectar, dries up all things as wind and dries up the demons. Also a name of Kartikaya He is all the gods, the first God, The celestial source 63. Shri Adidevah He is of 4 grouped forms; Vasudeva, Sankarsana, Pradyumna 64. Shri Chaturvyuhah and Aniruddha He dwells in and covers all beings: He sports, wishes to conquer, operates, shines, produces and moves He withdraws all souls at the time of Pralaya at aeon's end and is unswerving 65, Shri Väsudevah 66. Shri Sankarshanochyutah 67. Shri Pradyumnah He has immense wealth He is unobstructed in his manifestations by anyone 68. Shri Aniruddha 69. Shri Shringi 70. Shri Mahävarahah The horned fish which was in the waters of the deluge of acons The Great Boar 71. Shri Vishākapih He is of the nature of Dharma and the Boar 72. Shri Narasimhavapuh The one whose form is partly man, partly lion Shri Vishnu's incarnation of the Dwarf who asked for a gift of land from king Bali and checked his pride 73. Shri Vämanah 74. Shri Trivikramah He who pervades the three worlds with 3 steps Parasurama, the son of Jamadagni, the wielder of punishing axe 75. Shri Khanda-Parasuh 76. Shri Ráma The son of Dasaratha. He in whom the yogins find constant delight. The Supreme Brahman of the Nature of Eternal Bliss and Pure Consciousness in whom Yogins revel 77. Shri Dhanvi The archer 78. Shri Maheshväsah The one who carried the mighty bow 79. Shri Sumukhah The one who has a beautiful face, whose face remained calm and cheerful even when he was banished to the forests for 14 years on the eve of his coronation 80. Shri Suvratah He whose vow is auspicious, of righteous deeds. 81, Shri Shikhandih The one with a peacock feather on his head 82. Shri Yadusreshthah The chief of the Yadus 83. Shri Krishna He who has a dark blue complexion. He who is the Supreme Brahman, which is existence, consciousness, bliss 84. Shri Govindah The one who redeemed the earth, the Lord over the cows, over the Devas, over speech, the one who is known through Vedas and Vedanta 85. Shri Dāmodarah He who as a boy was tied with a cord around his waist by Sri Yashoda to two trees. Also, who can be reached by chastened mind He who punishes the wicked. He who is prayed to by men 86. Shri Janārdanah Nirmala Yoga 31

 The soul of the three worlds 87. Shri Trilokātmā The support of the earth The abode of all beings 88. Shri Bhurbhuvah 89. Shri Bhutāväsah S0. Shri Rtuh The seasons The consort of Mother Earth, the Lord of earth 91. Shri Mahibharta The Moon God, who nourishes the plants, or Shiva with Parvati 92. Shri Somah The medicine for disease 93. Shri Bheshajam The prescriber of medicine 94. Shri Bhishak He is Indra, Chief of the Gods 95. Shri Mahendrah He is time that measures all things 96. Shri Kälah He who makes the yugãs (aeons) 97. Shri Yugãdikrt 98. Shri Yugāuartah 99. Shri Lokādhyakshah He who makes the yugas turn, i.e. mover of the cyclic acons The witness of the world The delight of Devaki, mother of the luminaries of the universe, the three worlds, the protector of the worlds, the three Vedas, the three sacred fires, the five oblations, and all 100. Shri Devaki-Nandanah the Devas The Master of all knowledges 101. Shri Vaidyah Of the form of Yagna (sacrifice). He affords joy to all the Gods; He is the One who leads the sacrificers to the fruits of their sacrifices 102. Shri Yajnah Lord Vishnu is fond of the praise-chant 103. Shri Stavya Priyah The Act of Chanting is Lord Vishnu Himself 104. Shri Stutih He is auspiciousness 105. Shri Svasti He is the Plenitude of Being and Value 106. Shri Purnah He is One who grants release 10J. Shri Mukundah He is the Nature of Supreme Bliss 108. Shri Nandih Nirmala Yoga 32

 Registered with the Regintrat af Newspapara under Regn. No. 36995 at SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI PROGRAMME FOR U.S./CANADA 1983 TINTL New York September 15 16 Los Angeles 17 18 19 Houston 20 21 22 23 Los Angeles 24 25 26 San Diego 27 San Francisco 28 29 Santa Cruz (Seminar) 30 Oct. 1-2 Vancouver 3456 October 7 8 9 Toronto Boston 10 11 12 New York 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 New York (Seminar) 21 22 23 JAI SRI RADHA KRISHNA SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI Edited & Publihed by S.C. Rai 43. Bunglow Road, Delhi-110007 & Printed at The Central Electric Press. 80-D. Kamla Nagar. Delhi-110007. One issue Rs, 6,00, Annual Subscription Rs. 30,00 Foreign (by Airmail E 5 8 10)



----------------------

1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Nirmala Yoga
Vol. 3 No. 15
Bi-Monthly
May-June 1983
5F
5F
"Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns all the religions and
seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga-THE UNION"
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-1.txt 
 YOG A
NIRM ALA
43, Bungalow Road, Delhi-110007, (India)
Founder : Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Editorial Board : Dr. S.K. Mathur, Sri A.S. Mishra, Sri R.D. Kulkarni
Representatives
: CHERYL HYNES-1267, Burke Road, KEW 3101, VICTORIA.
ZORANA BEDKE Gartnergasse 17/10, 1030 VIENNA.
LORI TODRICK 4518 Woodgreen Drive, West Vancouver, BC. V7S2V1.
:MARIE ROUGER 175, Av. Ledru Rollin PARIS-750001.
:RUTH LEDERBERGER : via Mercalli-46, 00197 ROME.
: M.B. Ratnannwar-13, Merwan Mansion, Genjewala Lane, Borivali (W).,
Australia
Austria
Canada
France
Italy
India
BOMBAY-400092.
RAJARAM SHANKAR RAJWADE-840, Sadashiva Peth, PUNE-411030.
: DANIEL & ROXANA DEVINE-Angel Luis De Herran, 38, 6°, 4,
MADRID-33.
Spain
Switzerland : CHARLES & MRS. MAGDA MATHYS- 5, Chemin Des Mouldins,
1256. Troinex (Canton de Geneva).
: GAVIN BROWN Brown's Geological Information Service Ltd., 160 North
Gower St., London NW 1. 2ND.
M.J. MURDOCH, 14A Bourne Ave. S. RUISLIP, MIDDLESEX, HAH 6TZ,
ENGLAND.
U. K.
* CHRISTINE PETRUNIA-225 Adams St.. 1/E BROOKLYN, NY-11201.
U.S.A.
00NT ENTS
Page
1. Editorial
1
2. Sahasrara Chakra-4th February. 1983
3. Translation of old Marathi letter from Her Holiness Shri Mataji
12
4. Her Holiness Shri Mataji's advice
14
5. Maha Sahasrara Day 5th May 1983
16
6. Christ in Kashmir
18
7 Letter from English Sahaja Yogi
19
8. ParisIt's done
9. Place of money in Sahaja Yoga
21
10. Beginnings'
22
11. Mother, Dear Mother
25
12. An Experience
27
13. 108 Names of Shri Vishnu
29
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Editorial
5th May 1983 was the 14th anniversary of Sahasrara day. Sahaja Yogis of Bombay had
arranged a puja to celebrate the occasion, at a place quite befitting to the siginificance of
the day. It was a very beautifut spot, on Sea shore, blessed by nature-God, and not very far
from, yet unaffected by, the hustle and bustle, of the metropolis. Sahaja Yogis who attended
| the function were all in praise for their brothers and profusely thanked them, for sparing no
efforts, in making the excellent arrangements.
Those days, Bombay was the holiest of all holy places as Shri Mataji was present in person.
Besides, It was the most auspicious day of opening the Sahasrara. Orthodox Indians go to
the places of pilgrimage to have holy dips in the rivers, and the sea, of that place, on certain
auspicious days. Sahaja-Yogi-pil grims, from the North and other Mid-land places, made
the best of this opportunity to have holy dips in the Arabian Sea, that sucked all their bad
vibrations and cleansed their physical and inner beings. As if, the spirit had washed the
clothes of five sheaths and was, ready to worship the Supreme Goddess. Shri Mataji's
biessings for the day had already reached to Sahaja Yogis all over the world, in the early
hours. Those who meditated enjoyed them very much.
By the time all got ready, Sahaja Yoga-Swamini, Shri Mataji arrived. She spoke in Hindi,
(English translation to be published in due course). She first explained the importance of
number 14, being the fourteenth anniversary. There are fourteen lokas, viz. Bhu, Bhuva,
Swah. Mah, Janah, Tapah, Satyam and other seven down-wards, as also fourteen Chakras,
besides seven already known, others are Hamsa, Shri, Lalita, Ardha-bindu, Bindu, Valaya
and Pradakshina.
At that place, Coconut trees have grown very tail and are quite inclined towards the sea, in
spite of wind from the opposite direction. Shri Mataji explained. Coconut is a completely
developed fruit and as it represents auspiciousness it is called, Shreephala' and our
Sahasrara is like' Shreephala" having outer hard shell and hair for protection and brain inside.
She advised that we should protect our Sahasrara, as a Coconut tree, firmly holds its fruits
at such height.
She pointed to the inclined trees and said that Coconut trees always grow along the sea
Nirmala Yoga
1
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-3.txt 
 coast and those trees were becoming humble to their creator. The sca represents 'Dharma
and they were bowing befare Dharma.
Pleasant westerly winds, instantly carried the fragrance of Shri Mataji's presenca and
message of the Puja to Sahaja Yogis all over the world. Prompt as the elements are to
please the Empress of the Universe ! Shri Mataji received the Puja and blessed everybody.
Sahaja Yogis absorbed the vibrations. All the environments were flooded with the vibrations.
It was now getting dark. Shri Mataji walked to the sea that had considerably receded. In
the sand She prepared with Her own hands an image of Shri Ganesha and vibrated it. She
worshipped Shri Ganesha. The star which follows Her everywhere was twinkling alone on
the pinkish looking horizon, just above Her. As She was looking towards the sea, it started
rising again. Waves were seen rising far away. Slowly they advanced and came neater.
They receded for a while and again came and again receded, like a child playing with its
mother; trotting, towards her and going away. Mother appreciatively walked further tew-
steps towards the sea, and lo! Waves came one after another; they were rushing, but came
closer gently and washed Her feet. Then further advanced and touched the image of Shri
Ganesha but not beyond; lest the picture be defaced. Jaganmata Shri Nirmala Devi Ki Jai'
resounded the shore. Then they stayed on till Shri Mataji was there.
It was a memorable day. Weather was unusually pleasant and so it remained during the days
Shri Mataji was in Bombay. Wind was pleasant throughout the day. The Sun was shining
but it was not hot even in the afternoon. It shows how the elements are devoted and loving
before the Mother. This gives rise to one question; should we not follow their example ?
She is their mother too, but how modest, humble, and loving they are, never complaining
but always pleasing. Should we not emulate the attitude, of those Coconut trees; of going
back to the source and protecting and developing Sahasrara?
Shri Mataji, we all the Sahaja yogis of the world desire Your good health.
Shri Mataji, we all the Sahaja Yogis of the world pray that Your
forthcoming tour to U.S.A., Canada and other countries be a Grand Success.
BOLO SHRI BHAGWATI MATAJI SHRI NIRMALA DEVI KI JAI
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Sahasrara Chakra
Hanuman Road, New Delhi
4th Feb. 1983
Today, I will be telling you about the last So our brain is doing right side activity and
centre of Sahasrara. So this last centre, the that's why our brain is like 'Shreephal'.
Sahasrara, is contained in the limbic area of
the brain. Our head is like a coconut. The
coconut has the hair, and then a hard nut and the six Chakras and is a hollow space, on the
then a black covering and inside is white shell sides of which there are one thousand Nadis
of coconut and inside is the space, the water.
In the same way, our brain is made. That's into the limbic area, then the enlightenment
why coconut is called as "Shreephal"". It is of these Nadis takes place and you can see
the fruit of the power. that is, Shree. Shree
power is the right side power and the left side and these flames have all the seven colours
power is the Lalita power. So, we have two that you see in the VIBGYOR. But the last
Chakras-left side, here, is the Lalita and the one, ultimately becomes again integrated and
right-side, here, is the Shree Chakra. These
two Chakras are working out the right side lights ultimately become crystal clear.
Mahasaraswati's power and left side Maha-
kali's power. Now, the central power is the
Kundalini that has to rise and penetrate
through different Chakras, enter into the limbic
area and enlighten the seven Pithas-seats of
these seven Chakras. So, it penetrates through
six Chakras, enters into the iimbic area, enligh-
tens all the seven Pithas in the brain, which
are placed along the mid-line of the limbic many nerves in every bundle of nerves. So.
area. So, we start from the back, is placed
here, at the back, is the Mooladhar Chakra,
around it is the Swadishthan, then is the
Nabhi, then the Heart, then the Vishuddhi and enlightenment of the Kundalini takes place in
then the Agya. So, all these six centres are the brain, then the truth is perceived through
combining to make the seventh centre. This your brain. That's why it is called as 'Satya-
is very important point which we should know khand', means you start seeing the truth
Now, the Shree Chakra is right side working perceived by your brain because so far what
& Lalita Chakra is left side working. So, when
the Kundalini does not rise then we do with truth. What you see, is just the outer side,
our right side our physical and mental activities say, you can see the colours. You can see
Sahasrara is actually is the assemblage of
(NERVES). And when the light penetrates
them as flames, very gentle flames burning
it is a crystal clear flame. All these seven
So, you have Sahasrara with one thousand
petals, as they call it, but if you cut the brain
in a transverse section or horizontal section,
you will be able to see that all these nerves
are bullt like this along the limbic area, all of
them are like the petals, and if you cut it like
this, (vertically) you will find that there are
when it is enlightened, you can see Sahasrara
as a burning bundle of flames.
It is a very deep subject. So, when the
ever you see through your brain, is not the
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-5.txt 
 the different aesthetics of the colours. You Also, surprising, my name is Neera-also, in
can see the quality of the thing. But you
cannot say whether this carpet has been used also means Mary, Marium. Because it means
by some saint. You cannot say whether this
is made by a devil or a divine person. You in Sanskrit language. It's called 'Niranand'
cannot say that this gentleman, is he a good in the brain.
person or he is an evil person. You cannot
say if this Deity has come out of the mother
Earth or not. Also, you cannot say about any
person, who is your relation, whether he is a
good relation or a bad relation or what sort of from, that you see on your fingers. First you
a person he is, whether he goes to wrong
people or to the right people, whether he has know what Chakras, what fingers are catching
connections with wrong side or with good with your attention, Then with your brain you
side, Here, go
you do not know anything about divinity with
your mind. Nothing-it is impossible for you
to judge a person about his divinity unless
and until the Kundalini reaches at least this
my family I am called as Neera. And 'Neera
marine. Neera is water. "Neer" means water
And, this stage ultimately unfolds. First
what you know is the Satya, is the Truth-
what is this another gentleman is suffering
see your fingers. With your attention, you
can depict what centres it is catching.
Because, if you say this finger, that does not
mean it is Vishuddhi Chakra. But your brain
can say that it is Vishuddhi. And that depicts
it that this fellow is suffering from the troubles
of the Vishuddhi Chakra. But still it is rational.
od means Divine. So actually
part, which is the limbic area. You cannot
make out whether a person is real or not, Because, you see what finger it catches and
whether a Guru is real or not. Because then you say.
divinity cannot be perceived through your the Sahasrara unfolds itself mare, you don't
brain, unless & until this light of your Spirit have to think about it, you just say it. Then
shines into it.
But when the Satyakhand or
there is no difference between your Chitta
(ATTENTION) and your Sat (TRUTH). The
Now, the Spirit is expressed in the heart, enlightened Chitta (ATTENTION) and the
is reflected in the heart. The centre of the enlightened brain become one. There is no
Spirit, we can say, is in the heart. But problem at all for such person. There is no
actually, the seats of Spirit is above here
above the head and that is the Spirit of what anything on the fingers and then depict it
we call of the God Almighty, say whom you
call Parvardigar, you call him Sadashiva or you
can call Him the Rahim and you can call Him
by many names which are said about the Lord
who is God Almighty Niranjan, they call Him it is there.
Nirankar, every sorts of words which start
with 'Nir', "Nihi'. Now, at every centre in the
body you receive a different type of joy. with, as I said, Chitta (Attention). Then when,
Every centre has a different type of joy. And, it gets absolutely integrated with the Spirit,
there are names for every type of joy you
receive at every centre when the Kundalini say, it is so. That is how, this brain unfolds
rises: But when the Kundalini comes into the
Sahasrara, then the joy you receive is called truth through logical conclusions. Because,
as 'Niranand. Niranand! The 'Ni means-
nothing else but Anand (Joy). Niranand !
need to see, on the fingers, no need to say
through the brain which you have learnt in
Sahaja Yoga, that if you find something wrong
here, it means Agya-that is not necessary !
You just say, Agya. And you just say it and
Then, it unfolds more. First it is integrated
then whatever you say, is the truth. You just
into 3 new dimensions. First, it depicts the
I have told you that if this finger is catching
then it is Vishuddhi. And then, you ask the
Nirmala Yoga
4.
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-6.txt 
 person "Have you got the problem, here ?". books. And though people have told thal
He says, "Yes", Then, you believe in Me and first see the vibrations and then read the
then you believe, that this is the Vishuddhi books, still we say, 'O what's wrong, we
Chakra, which is showing, is true. This is the should read other books' You go down on
logical conclusion, in a way, that you have snake and ladder as I've said. That is one of
experimented, you are seeing and still doubt- the snakes. We think that what's the need
ing whether Mother says is true or not. And
then, you are sure, "Yes, it is so, we have thing, that thjng' You do not progress.
seen that this is Vishuddhi Chakra". So, the
truth becomes logically acceptable to this
brain. But still, there is the brain working out there are some very gross people in Sahaja
on its gross level.
to do meditation, I have no time, I have this
The other point which is very gross.
Also,
Yoga who enter into it. Doesn't matter. But
first thing you must know 'you have to be
In the second stage, as I told you. where honest, 'very honest in Sahaja Yoga'. The
you believe, you know for definite that this
means Vishuddhi Chakra,, no doubt about it.
Then we say that 'Nirvikalpa" has started, just crawl into it without having any self-
when there is no doubt about Me or Sahaja respect, without having any understanding as
Yoga. But then, the newunfolding starts
within you. For that, one has to do medita- They will bring all their family, come down
tion. In humility, one has to do meditation.
And then also, for this new dimension, when paving money which should be paid, for
your Chitta (ATTENTION) itself becomes
merged into your brain or into the enlightened
brain, for that, one has to, very honestly and
humbly surrender to Sahaja Yoga.
honesty is like-I have seen people. If we have
a dinner, say for a marriage-party, they will
to, who is going to pay for all these things ?
and sit down. There are people who avoid
Sahaja yoga. Supposing, they are eating food
or they are travelling or they are coming from
abroad, they have to pay money for their
travelling, for their food And, sometimes,
you know I have to pay lot of money. Doesn't
matter, I don't mind. But it's not good for you.
The main thing is that it's not good for you.
So, how you behave towards Sahaja yoga as
far as money is concerned, is also very impor-
tant, though it looks gross. But it can give a
Now, what do we do when we get our
vibrations. We have different-different reac-
tions. Some people do not even understand
the value of vibrations. Some people try to
learn what it means. And some people, sud-
denly think, "O, now they are realised souls,
they can, go on giving realisations, this, that'. big trouble in the unfoldment because of the
They go on a ride of a ego-trip. When they
go on a ride of a ego-trip, they find that they
have failed and they have then to come back,
from the very beginning they start. It is like
the game of of Snake & Ladder. So, treaction
to vibrations should be very humble, receptive
reaction.
Nabhi catching-and, as you know, if the
Nabhi catches it can spread upto the whole of
void; and if the void is catching, Ekadasha
rudra, which is placed here, the destructive
forces, built-in.
So, before coming to Sahaja Yoga, it was
alright, you were doing all kinds of things and
you would have smoothly gone to hell without
any difficulty. It is very easy to go to hell
the Father in it. So, if we commit any sins You can take two running jumps and go to
hell. The rest of it you should see. But going
to hell is the easiest thing. For that. you
Now, on the gross level, because as I have
told you that the brain is the one which holds
against the Father, then this unfoldment in the
brain takes some time. So, we start reading
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-7.txt 
 don't have to work hard or do anything about what about you doing something that helps
it. But, when you are ascending, when you are
rising, then it is little difficult. You have to be the Sahasrara is very important:
careful that you should not falter, you should
not fall and that you are ascending. So, you
have to be alert about yourself that you are
not falling into the same habits which you level where there is, I mean, at the point,
had.
you to open your Sahasrara. So, opening of
Now, surprisingly, it is so placed that
Sahasrara has got the Brahmarandhra at the
where there is the Heart-OChakra. So, we must
know that Brahmarandhra is directly connected
to your heart If it is not done from the heart,
superficially done Sahaja Yoga, you can not
Some people have a habit of saving money
at the cost of Sahaja Yoga. Some have a
habit of making money at the cost of Sahaja go very high. You have to put the full heart
Yoga, Some people have the habit of not
giving the due amount-and like that. It's
something like cheating. They all go out of
the Sahaja Yoga in no time. They may be
looking like great leaders in the beginning but people also, are, what Christ calls as, 'murmur-
they go out just like that and many a times ing souls'. He said that, be careful about these
people tell me 'why don't you keep a proper murmuring souls-those who go on murmuring
account and all that. But in Sahaja Yoga, behind and taking advantage as if they are
I'm not supposed to keep any accounts or
anything. Because, my accountants are Sahaja
yogis. If you try to play tricks with Sahaja
Yoga, immediately you are pushed out; in your dangerous when you enter into the kingdom
awareness, in your Nabhi Chakra you never
had-you may make thousands of rupeeshere,
but you will lose thousands of rupees, You kingdom, you are punished. But in the God's
might get into troubles. You will have any Kingdom, it's so blissful, absolutely blissful,
kind of a problem that I cannot tell and then complete blessings are poured on, absolutely.
you will say how did I get this problem. So with everything-health, wealth, mental, emo-
Nabhi Chakra if you are not honest in your
seeking. Honesty of seeking not only means
I want to seek". It also means what your much blessed, you are also forgiven and
behaviour is, towards yourself and towards forgiven, and forgiven, and there's a long rope
others. You have to be honest to yourself,
that you sit down for meditation, try to
improve your Antar-Yoga try to make your
Thoughtless Awareness, this feeling of thought-
lessness, wider and wider. Try to achieve that dishonest with Sahaja, Yoga have to be very
state where you really feel thoughtless. So the careful; please don't do it. If you don't like to be
honesty pays and you rise higher and higher. in Sahaja Yoga, you better go away, it is better;
deeper and deeper into your own being. First from your point of view and from our point of
you depend upon Me that, "after all, Mother view also, Because, in case you are dishonest,
is going to do everything. When I went to you are trying to play tricks and games, and
Mother, my Sahasrara opened out. This thing you suffer and you look funny and strange;
happened, then this thing happened". But then people will say, that what's wrong with
that is the main thing. Like, people they come
to Sahaja Yoga and they are murmuring behind,
"This could have been like that, that could
have been like that", all those things. All such
trying to save others. All such people also,
can suffer a lot. Because, they are doing a
double game. And such a double game, is very
of God. Any kingdom you are member of.
any kingdom, if you are treacherous to that
tional-all kinds of prosperity you can get in
Sahaja Yoga, no doubt. But when you are so
given to you to hang yourself. But you really
hang fully. It's not half way.
So, those people, who think, they can be
Nirmala Yoga
6.
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Sahaja yoga ? So we will unnecessarily suffer, within us, built by two types of sins we
Because, we cannot show you in the mirror, commit. If wwe bow our heads to wrong type
that this man has been very very disloyal. We of gurus and submit ourselves to their viscious
cannot show that! So, it will bring a bad
name to us-first of all. And secondly, you
will be harmed, by this kind of a thing. If you If you have bowed because I've never
are harmed, then also we will have a bad
name that how could it happen. But if you
are honest about Sahaja yoga and about your God, then the problem comes on this side
seeking. you don't know how much God of the thing, on the right side. If you have,
looks after you. An body who tries to do
any harm to you will be very badly harmed 1 am my own guru, who can teach me,
and removed from your path. God protects don't want to listen to anybody and t don't
you out and out and he looks ater you with
"complete' attention and care And He is for God, All such feelings, if you have, then,
so loving that description of his compassion your right side doesn't catch, but the left side
can not be given in words but can be orily catches. Because right-side moves this side
felt and understood.
then we develop rudra-problems
on the right hand side-these five go out.
ways,
bowed to anybody wrong, to someone who
is a wrong tYpe of person and who is anti-
the sense that 1 can look after myself.
believe in God, who is God, I just don't care
and the left-side this-side. So these ten
things and one is Virata Vishnu, because also
Now, the problem is, people who are dis- in the stomach we have got 10 Guru Sthanas
honest are because of their background, some- (PLACES) and one that of Vishnu. So, the
times, because of their education, because of seeking is also wrong, as well as these 10
their upbringing or may be because they are Gurus are out. Then you develop this Ekadash-
cowards, But there is also, another thing that rudra. When this thing is set-in within you,
can make you dishonest-is your 'Poorva-jan- as l've said, one on this side and one on that
mas' (PREVIOUS LIVES) and that's how you side. So, those people who have bowed to
take your birth and your Kundalini is made wrong type of people develop a temperament
like that.
or a kind of a personality which is very vulner-
able for incurable diseases like cancer and all
But after realisation, those people who are that. You may develop cancer or any such
of a great valour and great strength ascend so thing-those who have bowed to the wrong
fast that all the problems of the stars, all the types of people.
problems of your
STARS) and all that, Constellations every-
thing disappears and you become a Sahajayogi anybody else. I don't care for God, I don't
means a newly born-absolutely a different want God, I have nothing to do"-all such
personality; it has nothing to do from where people develop a left-side Ekadasha. And,
you have come. Like an egg becoming a
beautiful bird.
Nakashatras (BIRTH-
Now, those who think, "I'm better than
left side Ekadasha is extremely dangerous too.
Because, such people develop the problems
of the right-side-heart-attacks, physically I am
So, this Kundalini, when it arrives here, the saying, and all other problems of the right-side.
first hurdle the Kundalini has, to enter into
Sahasrara, is 'Ekadasha rudra'. These are 11 entering
shaktis, 11 destroying shaktis placed here.
Five on this side, five on the other side and
one in the centre. These are obstructions And that is how it can not enter into the
So, one of the greatest hurdles of Kundalini
into Sahasrara is this Ekadasha
rudra, which comes from Void. And which
covers the 'Medha (is the plate of the brain).
7.
Nirmale Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-9.txt 
 donot recognise it, your Sahasrara can not be
wrong gurus, if they have reached the right opened because, this is the time when the
conclusion and surrender themselves to Sahaja Sahasrara was opened and you have to have
Yoga, accepting their mistakes and saying that your realisation. It is very important thing
that that you 'have' to recognise Sahaja Yoga.
There are many people who say that 'Mother,
above all, I don't believe in God. who is God, why to believe in Sahaja Yoga this way, we
can just call you just 'Mother' you could be
anything against God or prophets is the same my Mother', Alright, doesn't matter. But you
-anti God personality who talks like that can't get your realisation. And, even if you
develops the problems, gets alright if he get it, you cannot retain it. You have to
recognise; RECOGNITION is the 'enly' wor-
Yoga as the only way of entering into the ship of Sahaja Yoga Recognition is the
only worship when you want to know God in
Sahaja Yoga. All the other Ganas, Devatas,
Deities, Shaktis, are one in unison in Sahaja
Yoga. And, anyone who does not recognise
Sahaja Yoga, they just are not bothered about
you, what sort of a person you are. For
example, a man who worships Shiva, he comes
to me, and, I find his heart is catching-Sur-
prising ! He says. "Mother, I worship Shiva,
how is it, my heart is catching 7". I said, "you
have to recognise Sahaja Yoga. Just ask
and this star is the one which has brought Shiva". And when he asked the questions to
cancer-disease because, Pluto is the one, that Shiva, then only the vibrations started flowing.
So, Sahasrara takes charge that it makes you
recognise and also, it convinces you, it proves
limbic area. Even those who have been to
"I'm my own Guru', they can be cured. And
those, who have been speaking that 1 am
I don't believe in any prophets or anything-
humbles down himself and accepts Sahaja
superconsciousness'.
I have seen people who have been Tantrikas,
are being saved. I've seen people who have
done all kinds of wrong things have been
saved. Those people, who were members of
very funny, strange organisations have been
saved. But it is very difficult to convince
anyona that whatever they are doing has been
wrong and they should come to right path.
So, a star came to play its part with Pluto,
cures cancer, or all such diseases which are
incurable. So, those people who just go
head-long into wrong path, suffer from funny to you. And by this proving. even if you are
type of heart troubles, palpitations, insomnia,
vommiting, giddiness, all sorts of, we can say
irrelevant talking. It is a very serious thing to
go to a wrong guru and bow to him. Sahasrara partly-they take liberties, they behave in a
becomes a closed area for such a person. funny manner-without understanding that
The persons who are against Sahaja Yoga, Who is this 'Person' who is here ? I've seen
have a very strong Sahasrara, like a nut, in
the sense that it is such a strong shell that putting their hand up, raising Kundalini; they
you can not just break it-the strong shell, like
a thick nut Even if you want to use a hammer, Because, if you have recognised, then you
not recognising. then you cannot get your
realisation.
But those who recognise also, recognise
many a times, I'm talking, people are just
are just talking, chit chatting-I'm surprised.
you cannot break it.
should know whom you are facing. Because,
It is not for My good; I'm not going to lose
u anything. But only you, in your ascent have
not recognised. That shows that you have not
yet recognised.
Today, the time has conme, that you have
to recognise Sahaja Yoga; you have to. You
did not recognise any saint any prophets, any-
one, any incarnation. But today, the condi-
tion is that, you have to recognise one. If you
And the way some people monopolise Me
Nirmala Yoga
8.
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-10.txt 
 also, is absolutely wrong, There's no need to Me. It has to be comoletely integrated. Your
monopolise Me; 'nobody' can monopolise Me.
There are some people who say that "Mother anything wrong and then say, "I'm Sahaja
must have misunderstood". I never misunder- Yogi". YOU CAN NOT.
stand; there is no question. Or, some people
try to tell me, "Do this, do that"-that also is
not necessary. Try to onen yourself to this within. Your Spirit strengthens you. You must
prototocol which is very important in Sahaja just put in your will power, that "Yes, Let my
Yoga, which I have told for this first time- Spirit act". And then, you start acting accord-
today, that you must TRY TO RECOGNISE IN ing to the Spirit. Once you start acting
A FULL WAY. And, if you do not recognise. according to the Spirit, you find you have no
I'm sorry, I cannot give you the realisation slavery of anything. You become 'Samartha",
which will sustain.-and, it may start but it means equal to your meaning : Sam + Artha;
may not sustain.
Dharma should be correcred. You can not do
But for this, the strength comes from
also, "Samartha' means powerful personality
So, you develop that powerful personality
So, this is the simplest way of achieving which has no temptations, which has 'no
your higher thing is by recognising gradually wrong ideas, which has 'no' catches, 'no'
and recognising gradually. It is very difficult problems.
to tell anybody if something is wrong with
that person-impossible. After Sahaja Yoga,
I can tell you, this Chakra is catching, that tricks are really harming themselves, not
Chakra is catching. But also because you Sahaja Yoga. Sahaja Yoga is going to be
know what does that Chakra means, you can
"Swarthi' (SELFISH) people trying to play
established. Even if there are ten people in
come back on me. "No, no, Mother, see, it's the boat, God is not bothered. It is only
not so. I'm not. That's not so." Why should "My' botheration as a Mother. As a Mother,
I tell you are catching ? You have to cleanse
yourself with full honesty But first thing is
to 'recognise' with full humility and under- nest things.
standing. Once you have recognised, gradually
you will do everything that has to be done-
you 'know', what is to be done.
I want many people to come up in the boat.
But don't try to jump back by doing all disho-
So, this is what it is-simple, that you are
integrated. By integration, you get the powwer
to do what you understand, and you have
power to feel happy with what you understand.
So, you come to a stage where you develop
this 'Niranand'. And, this 'Niranand' you
Now the essence of Sahasrara is integra-
tion.
so all the Deities get integrated. And, you
can feel their integration. That means, when develop when you are absolutely the Spirit.
you get your Kundalini in Sahasrara, your
mental, emotional, and your spiritual-every- Adwaita, (WITHOUT DUALITY), is one per-
thing 'being' becomes one. Your physical sonality. That is, you are completely integrated
being also merges with it. Then you have no
problems, as to. "Yes, I love Mother But l'm complete. It hasn't got a happiness and a
sorry, I have to steal this money." "Yes, I know,
I recognise Mother, Yes, I know She is great that you laugh loud, the Joy is not that you
but I can't help I have to tell Her lies" or "I
have to do this wrong thing, because after all, quietitude within your Self, the peace, of your
I cannot help it". There is no compromise with being, of your Spirit, that asserts itself into
In Sahasrara all the Chakras are there,
In Niranand' state there's no duality left-is
and the joy is not anymore dented-It's
sorrow aspect, but is just Joy. The Joy is not
are always smiling. No. Is the stillness, the
6.
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-11.txt 
 should not sit in the sun all the time as some
vibrations which you feel. that when you feel
that peace, you feel like light of the sun, the of the Westerners do. Then, your brain melts
and you become a crazy person--is a sign
that a person is going out for madness-is
But first of all we are cowed down by our something which I have told you many a times
own personal, selfish, stupid ideas. THROW that do not take too much heat on your head.
whole rays of that beauty spreading.
THEM AWAY. We have them, because, we
were insecure, because we have wrong ideas,
throw them away. Just stand along one with
God. And, you will find all these fears were
Even if you are sitting in the sun, keep your
head covered. Covering of the head is very
important. But the covering of the head should
be done occasionally, not all the time because
useless. Our cleansing is very important, and if you just put a very heavy band around your
that cleansing comes only when you really head, then the circulation becomes poor and
practise the cleansing as told in Sahaja Yoga. you may have trouble with bad circulation.
So, it is an occasional opening of the head to
the sun and to the moon, occasionally. Other-
wise, you will sit in the moon and land up in
the lunatic asylum. Anything I tell you, you
must know that in Sahaja Yoge, we have not
to go to anything 'Ati (EXTREME). Even
sitting in the water, some people will sit for 3
hours. I've never said so. Only for ten minutes
you have to sit, but that with full heart. If I
tell them anything, they will go on doing it for
religions they are following not the real religion 4 hours: there is no need. Do it forten minutes.
The Sahasrara is the blessing of the
heavens, I should say. It has worked out so
well. It is very diffcult to break the Sahasrara
And when I really broke it, I did not know
that it would be that successful, First, 1
thought it is still premature because there are
many Rakshasas (DEMONS) still on the street,
selling their goods; and there are many fanatics
who are calling themselves by the so-called
of the Atma. But gradually it has taken its
roots. Now, let this truth take its roots within
yoursel through your Sahasrara
this truth becomes absolutely the light that
guides you. the light that nourishes you, the
light that enlightens you and gives you a
personality that has the light, then only you
Give your body different-different types of
treatment not all the time the same thing. The
body gets bored or gets absolutely overburde-
ned. Now if you tell somebody, this is your
mantra; alright; it is to be used till you get rid
of your Chakra, finished. Suppose, some screw
is to be put here; alright; vwhat you do you put
should know that your Sahasrara is completely the screw to get fixity, you do not go on
enlightened by your Spirit. Your face should screvwing even when it is fixed. Are you going
And once,
be such that people should know that there's
to screw it more and more so that the whole
'a perscnality standing before you who is ? It is better, that you use
thing gets spoiled
Light'. This is how the Sahasrara is to be
wisdom, And for this wisdom, we must
know that Shri Ganesha or Jesus Christ
looked after.
For looking after Sahasrara it is important who are-placed on both the sides. Here
that you should try to cover your head during
winter time. It is better to cover your head
during winter time so that there's no freezing your vision, understanding and give you
in the brain because the brain is also made of wisdom. So, the wisdom lies not in sticking
"Medha', means fat, so it should not be frozen. on to something.
Moreover, you should not take too much heat stuck-up people. If they are stuck up, they
on your brain. To keep your brain alright, you
is Mahaganesha; (back) here is Jesus.
(front) Both of them help you to correct
are not progressing. You are not to get
Nirmala Yoga
10
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-12.txt 
 stuck up with ideas and stuck up with people. You have to be the 'Atma' (SPIRIT) and once
You have to be all the time moving and in you become the 'Atma", you become into
movement, it does not mean that you should
fall somewhere and people think that 'O', we
are (learning) such a lot, because we are
falling down". You have to ascend, not fall.
Akarm (BEYOND
DEEDS), where you don't know that you are
doing, it just works out. you don't tel, you
GOOD
AND BAD
are not aware.
Iwish, after all these lectures, most of
So, when you are achieving something in
Sahaja Yoga, first of all you should see that your Chakras must have been opened, But
your health should be alright. Your mind should this is all My work. You have also to do some
be normal. You should be a normal person.
If you are still barking at people, then know
there is somthing wrong with you. Or if you in the mirror and see for yourself. How far
sink, sulking and still tantrumish and if you are
still in a bad mood, then think you are not yet been, How much friendly you are in collecti-
a Sahaja Yogi. You can judge yourself, If you
are free like a bird then it's alright. But that Yoga. If you are not collective, if you are
doesn't mean that on the road you start sing- funny, if you are strange, if you cannot com-
ing like a bird and jumping on a tree. You municate with others, there's something wrong.
see, any analogy I give to a stupid man, he And then you should face yourself as you are
can behave in a very stupid way. But to a and try to correct you Because, you separate
wise man, he discreetly uses it for a proper you from yourself like I separate my Sari from
purpose. So, one has to understand, Sahaja myself and try to clean it. In the same way,
Yoga is known by the discretion-discreet-
homework. And, you have also to work and
see for yourself. Be alert. Try to face yourself
honest you have been, How far clean you have
vity which is a very important point in Sahaja
you separate you from yourself and try to
clean it. This is the way how Sahaja Yogis
are going to ascend. When the Sahaja Yogis
persons.
Now, what happens actually that you get will ascend, the rest of the thing alsu will
stuck with one thing. that is your Atma
(SPIRIT) and the whole your being floats like
a 'Patang' (KITE) does, or a kite that floats,
goes all over the places, everything but you
are stuck to only one thing, that is your Spirit.
And, if you could really do it, genuinely,
and honestly not worry too much about your
money, and your family and other mundane who think that others are higher than them are
things: just don't worry about it, you don't have
to worry; just give it a bandhan. If it does
not work out, doesn't work out, finished.
What's that wrong ? If works out, well. low Let somebody think, what does it matter,
and good. Not that your desire is important,
but Thy will be dane'. First you say, 'Thy
will be done-it is so suprising that your otherwise, very easy in this Kritayuga to
wills change your desires change and what-
ever you say, is done. But when this also
comes up. people develop an ego so be care-
ful. It's all done by the Shakti and not by
you, by your Atma' (SPIRIT) and not by you.
ascend. Many Sahaja Yogis of this kind will
impress so many people that they will also
ascend. So, the whole thing can ascend very
fast. But you pe ple who are rising higher
should try to rise higher without being
aware of it-that's very important, Those
also sadly mistaken, because that's not so.
Because, it is the whole that is rising. Nobody
should feel in that way inferior or in anyway
low or feel insulted that somebody thinks him
Divine does not think so. So, all these little-
little things, you should be careful about, and
achieve the ultimate goal of Atma sakshatkar
(SELF REALISATION).
Ithink today I have told you quite a lot
about Sahasrara.
Nirmala Yoga
11
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Translation of
Old Marathi Letter from
Her Holiness Shri Mataji
Man wants peace, wealth, power etc. but world." Let love flow from your hearts.
God is the origin of all these. Then why Love is unlimited. Your attention is on
should not there be the desire for God? Why material things and you are talking about
should there be no aspiration and ambition eternity ! Your attention should merge in
to meet the God ? We should pray to the eternity so that you will have eternal life.
God for peace, and keep the desire to meet
the God who is peace itself. This should be
the difference in satisfaction of a common
man and that of a Sahaja Yogi. One
should be ready to surrender the very desire
to meet GOD at the GOD's holy feet. All
attention must be on Him. For that, one
must have dedication determination and con-
You are officials of God's kingdom then
why are you sulking ? All deities are your
elder brothers in this kingdom, They are
present in many forms along the path of
Kundalini. You should recognise them and
Kundalini is your Mother.
Be
attain them.
Learn to always remain under Her care.
Her child and She will take you to the ultimate
Once you accomplish that from where
everything is born you will have the rest very
centration (tapasvita) and in that all material
attachments should be destroyed. What is
there in this world to cling to ? You must
realise the glory of those feet in which all
fades and becomes peaceful. Only then you
will have your glory.
easily.
But you are not consistent in the practice
of meditation, love and peaceful life. You are
talking casually even to me. But how eager
you are in worldy matters I How you become
adamant on having what you want I Why
are you not casual in that respect ? Do not
run away from the reality because I am
Mahamaya. Attain me, I am yours. I am for
you. I have given you that which has been
beyond the reach of very great sages and
saints. How will you make use of it ? You
have been given a big asset. Thonsands of
stars and planets were created with its just
Why should one brag of one's achieve-
ments ? You must understand that whatever
is being done by you, is all God's power i.e.
working of Adi-Shakti and you are only the
witnesses to see these miracles. For achieving
that stage you should pray "May our I
consciousness' fade away, may the truth that
all of us are small parts of your being, be
assimilated within us, so that your Divine
Bliss would resonate every particle of our
bodies and this life would be filled with
beautiful melodies enchanting the whole man-
kind and would show light to the rest of the
one wave.
There is great significance to your rebirth.
Nirmala Yoga
12
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-14.txt 
 But you yourselves have to achieve that: find Sahaja Yogis are dear people, you have been
the meaning of 'SWA' (Self). Sahaja yogis selected as officials, If you ignore it, on one
can do it. It is a big contrivance. I have told hand you will be deprived of great source of
you the secret but what have you achieved ? joy and on the other, you will loose your
Nobody sulks having been benefited. You authority due to incomplete knowledge of
are unhappy means you have not been bene- Sahaja Yoga. Hence be wise and stand firm.
fited. If you achieve the trick, you will open Every movement has thousands of directions.
the gate of joy and forget yourself while
enjoying that bliss.
Let your rays spread in different directions.
You will do the welfare, to the whole world.
Get over your inaction to act. You are to be
Nobody becomes happy from wordly captains. Let God's melodies be sounded
matters. I have given you the key to the
treasure, which others haven't got. But you
must work to open the door. You have taken
everything casually. You want Mataji to feed
you, to wake you up in the morning and
make you sit in the meditation, to clear you
of your anger, hatred etc.
from your flutes.
Transcend in your feelings above those
who have not been realised and blessed and
God's kingdom will be yours. May you get
that auspiciousness. All my efforts are for
that. You have been made like temples. Keep
Today is the day of Guru Puja. What it clean.
"Guru Dakshina' (Gift to the Guru) have you
given me ? Understand, that your money is
not worth the dust on the feet of your Mother- of bliss. My blessings are that all of you
Guru, You should give your hearts; only should be happy. Your worldly tife and satis-
clean and holy hearts. You must clean your
physical beings. Do not be lazy in that. Make Yogi's satisfaction and the circumstances he
a vow. You must get up early in the morning is in, are balanced. Our both legs grow to-
and spend at least one hour on meditation gether. If one leg is shorter than the other,
and worshiping, Perform 'Arti" and meditation You will become lame.
in the evening.
Some of you are enjoying in the ocean
faction should be of the same level. Sahaja
I do not want to tell
you to lower the level of your circumstances
if contentment is less. But Sahaja Yogi's
Satan's desciples work hard at a funeral satisfaction does not depend on the circums-
place. I cannot understand why you are
taking everything so casually. Stop all gossip- that are prevailing. If he is not, then his
ing. Leave all jealousies and quarrels. Time satisfaction is superficial and not from within.
never waits for anyone. Do you want to go
empty-handed despite having the key to the feet.
tances. He is happy in the circumstances
May God grant you eterneral place at His
treasure ?
If you do not accept God's kingdom, satan's
kingdom will come and you will have your-
self to blame for it. Remember, because you
Yours Mother,
NIRMALA
13
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-15.txt 
 Her Holiness
Shri Mataji's Advice
1. Being a living force we should try to
find out "Are we going to be the living force under the control only of Shri Ganesha
or the dead one." Now, when we live in the because Shri Ganesha is the beginnig of life
world, we start thinking about our comforts; and also the link between the life and the
where we have to live, what, we have to do. death. So, Shri Ganesh is one who gives the
When we think of all these, you see, we are balance, the 'Vivek' the understanding to you
thinking of the dead But when we think of
having a place or a house or an ashram. from things. But this left sided thing can also
the angle that you will be doing some living come from own desire for wrong things, we
work, then you are giving life to that place. might be desiring something very wrong,
That atmosphere should be created from all some dead thing (a dead is that which cannot
that is dead to create the living force.
within us, Now, left Swadhisthan is actually
by which you know how far to go with
move by itself so, the 'self part does not
Now, this is a very subtle thing, which remain in it),
very few people understand; for example,
somebody brings me a photograph of Shri not to go too far with them. If you have,
Ganesha and says. Should I worship this Shri well and good. It you do not have well and
Ganesha's photograph or not ?' First of all we good. You can live with minimum of mini-
should see if vibrations are coming from it or
not. Supposing you take a house. You must
see that the house is giving good vibrations. dead possessions, it is very much bad. Then
We see the comfort, we see other things. We
might even see if it is good for other people
to come in or not but we do not see the collective sub-conscious.
house from vibrations point of view. For any-
thing that we do, we have, now, to think in
terms of vibratory awareness which means
awareness that is working upon living things.
Once you are realised, you have got that with living thing.
living force within you. This is the living force
you feel. So, you have to know how to use
this living force to keep your body, mind, ego,
super ego, and everything in the enlightened after your Spirit from which, you know, that
state, by understanding the planning of the you get yourr vibrations. If your Spirit is
living force.
2. On the left side the problem starts from you do not get vibrations.
left Swadhishthan, because that is the first
chakra that starts emitting the negativity putting their attention away from the dead
The best way to look at all dead things is
mum or you can live with maximum of maxi-
mum, But when we start expanding our
our attention goes into the dead. That is how
we move into our sub-conscious, then over to
Then it moves higher to the left Nabhi and
at left Nabhi we start becoming crazy about
these dead things. Time is a dead thing. It
is not a living thing. It has nothing to do
3. By seeing to the needs of the Spirit you
can overcome the left side. You start looking
happy, you get your vibrations if it is unhappy
People should overcome their left side by
14
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-16.txt 
 So one must understand that, in Sahaja
things. You should watch from the centre
when you are on the left side. You do not see Yoga, you are developing that sharp edge,
what you want to see.
that central point from which you do not
4. In Sahaja Yoga some things are prohi- deviate to the right or the left and to balance
bited that nobody should touch any body's it you have to watch yourselves carefully. If
feet and no Sahaja Yogi should allow anyone going to the right, come to the left, if going
to touch his or her feet.This is one of the to the left come to right, Now come to the
centre you juIst separate yourself you detach
great bandhans for all Sahaja Yogis. No one
should touch other's feet and no body should yourself all the time. Use this point just to
see and guide yourself. Guidance is very
different from getting lost. Living force knows
how to guide itself. In the same way you
will learn to guide youself. If you have learnt
ask other to touch his or her feet whatever
may be your quality. Those who will touch
will loose vibrations and those who will get
salutation will also catch on the Heart.
if, you have mastered Sahaja yoga.
We all are growing together. We are part
and parcel of one personality Nobody is
higher or lower. One who thinks even the
slightest, Iike this will go down faster. This is
the left side conditioning where people falter
very much. So you must have very wide desires
in Sahaja Yoga, that all of us must help get progress ?
realization say as many as possible. We should
try to save as many people as possible. We is what sahaja Yoga should make out of you.
should try to improve ourselves as far as we
can improve and have so many blessings.
7. If the Heart is catching, such peopie
can never progress. The Heart is the source
of light, it is the source of Brahma Shakti
Heart is the seat of Atma. If in the Heart
there is no living force, then how can you
8. You must know what to choose. This
You should grow mature to that point where
you know what to choose. This is growth.
5. Thoughts can come to you from the Then you donot ask Mother. You do not ask
left side also, like if you have some bhoots in
your head they can give you the thoughts
"Oh you are useless and good for nothing, That what I do, I should know what I am
Now raise your right side and put down the doing. I should know what is correct. I should
left. Now why do we do this ? Because know how to correct it. I should know I' here.
from your right side you get the grace and
put down the left side. Such people who
suffer from th left side should try this one
more thing is that when these ideas come to
you, that you are good for nothing etc. It is enjoy. You can enjoy God and it is the
better to beat youself (yourname) with shoes. greatest enjoyment to feel what God has
Go and sing the praise of the lord and say I
am so happy I have got everything around me.
In the right side, mostly you catch on
"Swadhishtan'. This is because you think.
This is another kind of thinking that gives you you to this level. What He has given you, you
catch at right swadhishtan. Thinking whether can give to others and make others happy. If
it comes from right or left will first give you think like that immediately both of your
problem to your liver. The worst comes when sides will be settled and you yourself will be
both the sides are involved.
any one.
This development should come to you.
is the Spirit and not the ego. No more ego
exists or super ego exists. It is the Spirit
which guides you.
9. The God is the enjoyer. You cannot
created for you. What a beautiful life he has
given you in human awareness, by which you
can know how much He has loved you, how
much He has worked for you. He has brought
filled with Divine Vibrations.
15
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Maha Sahasrara Day
The jetty was soon reached and eager
Gorai Creek
In the presence of Our Divine Mother, Shri Sahaja Yogis crowded into the small weather-
Mahalaxahmi, Sahaja Yogis from Bombay, beaten ferry which was to carry us over to the
island. The coast and landward side of the
Pune, Ruhari, Dhulia and Delhi, together with
representatives from the Mooladhara and the island were fringed by thick mangroves and
swamps past which the boat safely sailed.
So, too, must the pilgrim, the seeker, when in
sight of his goal avoid the bogs and tangled
roots of his conditioning and intellectualising
Heart of the Universe, gathered together on
5th May to celebrate Maha Sahasrara Day.
It was on 5th May 1970, at Bordi, Maha-
rashtra-the Kundalini of the universe-that that grow to the left and right.
the Adi Shakti, Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi,
opened the Sahasrara of the Virata and offered
to humankind the gift of spontaneous self
realisation. And, with this blessing of our.
Holy Mother to all true seekers, the blossom
time of human awareness had arrived when
An excited and happy group of Shri
Mother's family alighted on the island, and to
their delight found they were to catch
"tongas" colourful horse-drawn carriages-to
the Puja site. A long, straight road led across
grassy undulating land to the seaward side of
we could all become fruits on the tree of life
children in the Kingdom of God.
the island, where the fishing settlement was
situated. it may seem amazing but even the
lightheartedness of this ride, the straightness
and smoothness of the road, seemed an earthly
parallel to that crossing of the Ocean of
llusion, the Bhava Sagara, by Mother Kunda-
lini, a crossing which has brought us to the
realm of renewed hope, peace and joy.
This year the Sahasrara Day Puja was
performed at Gorai Creek, a fishing hamlet on
an island located 30 km or so north west of
Bombay, The journey to the Puja site seemed
a sort of pilgrim's progress-the physical
journey reflecting the journeys of the seeker
from his struggles through the Maya until that
precious moment
A short, pleasant walk led through the
when he attained his
Kundalini Awakening and felt the Joy of the village-a Christain settlement pervaded by
Spirit.
the briny odour of drying fish-down to the
sea. On the beach, a stream of Sahaja Yogis-
true "fishers of men"-moved towards the
We left central Bombay by train early in
the morning and experienced-some for the coconut grove and cottage where Shri Mataji's
first time-the rush hour of a crowded Indian Puja was to be held.
metropolis. This seemed to epitomise in many
ways the franticness and confusion of Kali
Yuga. Having arrived at Borivali station, we
disembarked and boarded a local bus for the
ferry wharf. This was a more relaxed and
settled section of the journey-and indicative,
perhaps, of that level of human life where one
has settled into a comfortable and complacent expectant children from the heat of Lord
existence and is content with the status quo-
that "comfort of the body" with which
affluent Westerners are so familiar.
What a beautiful spot Mother Earth had
given us for this special festival of Sahasrara
Day. The coconut trees, laden with many
fruit, all leaned towards the ocean and toward
the prevailing winds. Their fronds almost
touched overhead shielding Shri Mother's
Surya.
And it was like children, that many
Sahaja Yogis greeted Grandfather Ocean-the
Nirmala Yoga
16
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-18.txt 
 representative of Dharma-as they enjoyed Shri Mother appeared, dressed in a simple
His warm waters washing over them.
white cotton sari with red designs. She
walked sedately and solemnly towards the
sea. Following Her were Sahaja Yogis carry-
Our Divine Mother arrived towards midday
and Her eager disciples welcomed Her. She ing garlands and coconuts from the Puja
seated Herself under the silk-fringed umbrella which they gave to Grandfather Ocean.
and accepted a coconut full of refreshing milk.
The Bombay Sahaja Yogis presented Her with
a pair of silver chappals embossed with auspi- the retreating tide. She bent down and
cious signs in gold-a Sahasrara Lotus, the began to Create a Ganesh in the sand and
Shesha, sun, moon, swastika, cross, bandhan then ornamented it with flowers and kumkum.
and lotuses representing the chakras. Shri
Mother graciously wore these chappals and,
after some moments of deep silence, She
commenced Her wonderful Sahasrara Day Talk reddened horizon. Great power and majesty
(translation to be printed soon) and invoked emanated from Her. To some present it felt
the blessings of the Deities and God Almighty as though the Adi Shakti was ushering out
upon all Sahaja Yogis. The significance of forever the dying embers of Kali Yuga and
the coconut grove and the auspiciousness of invoking the ocean, Dharma, to assert itself.
the coconut fruit was explained to us. (One The image of Shri Ganesh lay in the sand, a
begins to realise how everywhere Mother symbol of the advent of the age of truth,
Earth speaks to us the message of the Divine, innocence and wisdom. Shri Mataji called
humming with various but harmonious melo- upon the sea to wash over us all. We chanted
dies, the hymn of creation,)
Shri Mother stopped some distance from
She moved a few paces forward and then
stood quite still, with an intent expression,
and looked out to the sea and the sunset-
the mantra to "Samudra Devata"-the God
of the Ocean-asking His blessings. Several
After lunch and a rest Shri Mother s Puja Sahaia Yogis saw the wave coming inward
to the shore and leaving steps in the sand
Then
commenced.
the sea came
as they retreated.
Shri Mahalaxshmi, dressed in a deep red
sari with a blue border and embossed gold rushing up to Shri Mother, flowed past every-
motifs, was seated regally under the coconut
palms heavy with fruit, and from the corn-
ucopia of Her Love and Generosity, She gave was seen high in the twilight sky directly
beautiful opal rings to several Sahaja Yogis. opposite the Devi, Our Most Beneficent
Children came forward to wash Our Holy Mother. At this auspicious moment a basket
Mothers's Feet; curd, millk, butter, honey and of marigold was brought to Her. Spontane-
sugar was applied and Shri Mataji's Lotus ously, many took turns to kneel in front of
Feet and Hands painted with kumkum. The Shri Mother to wash and adorn Her Feet. At
Queen of all the Prophets, Devas and Saints these moments yet more miracles occurred, for
was crowned and adorned with necklaces. whenever a devotee touched Shri Mataji's
garlands, girdle, and fragrant floral armbands.
Aarti was sung and the Devi, with the most sending wavelets to wash over them.
radiant and sweet smile, invited Her devotees
to obtain yet more blessings at Her Lotus Feet.
one present and encircled the Ganesha. The
Evening Star, Venus-the Devi's own sign-
Lotus Feet, Grandfather Ocean responded by
The time of Our Blessed Mother's departure
arrived. We, who had been so privileged and
fortunate to witness this sea ceremony,
wandered homewards down the lane lit only
Dusk was approaching and many Sahaja
Yogis had left for the journey home when
17
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-19.txt 
 Christ in K ashmir
As reported in "the Advent", Shri Mataji mentions also, that his mother Mary is buried
declared that Christ came to India and that, in Murree, north of Rawalpindi in Pakistan.
after His resurrection, he lived in Kashmir. Today, there is still a narrow valley leading to
As documented by a report in a Swiss news-
paper, the "Tages Anzeiger", there are more
and more evidences pointing out towards His
presence in that part of the world, which,
ho vever, did not appear in the gospels.
Kashmir which is traditionally called "Yus-
marg" meaning 'Jesus way'-
The last bit of information we find in this
article is rather interesting. The Eastern Insti-
tute of Bombay University keeps the fragmen-
But unofficial gospels, that is, scriptures ted remains of the manuscripts which had
which are not recognized by church. such as
the apocryphal gospels of Saint Thomas and
of Levi have already ascertained that Christ following:
went to India before His short lived manifes-
tation as spiritual leader in Galilea. This
assertion, according to the newspaper, seems
corroborated by some ancient Tibetan texts
kept in the Himis Gampa monastery in Ladakh
that the Russian scholar, Niklaus Notowitsch, told the emperor that he came from a far
could study. These texts speak of the "Child
Isa" in whom the World Spirit had incarnated.
He came to India from a foreign country, oreaching love, purity and the cleanness of
studied in the temples, entered in conflict with
the priests of the Brahmin class (sounds only
too likely) and the caste system. He had
thus to take refuge during six years in Nepal med that he reincarnated as Mr. Salve, the
belonged to the earlier kings of Kashmir, In
one of these texts the chronicler reports the
At a date corresponding to 76AD the
emperor SHALIVAHAN met in Kashmir an
aged saint "with a clear complexion and white
clothes" who was calling himself "Isa Massih",
(Jesus the Messiah) and the son of God.
Не
away country where truth had no more place
and where evil knew no boundaries. He was
heart. Now this emperor Shalivahan, ruler
from Maharastia, is the ancestor of Shri Mataji
and, apparently, some Sahaja yogis got infor-
before he returned to Palestine. In the same
very father of Shri Mataji, If this is the case
it really sounds like God's family keeps meet-
ing through lives and ages. But we, the
children gathered at Her Lotus Feet, didn't we
know this already ?
vein, a Persian author who lived long time
back, Mir Khwand, collected oral tradi-
tions. In his work, "Rauzat-aus Safa", he
mentions that Yus Asaf (from the hebrew:
Jesus the gatherer) travelled towards the East,
through Mesopotamia and Afghanistan. He
A swiss sahaja yogi
(Contd. fram Page 17)
by starlight. A car drove by and a beloved
voice called out:
Her children and caring for our welfare, had
attended to the smallest and most mundane
detail : our transportation home.
"Why are you walking ? There's a truck
waiting for you." Despite the fact all
public transport had ceased at sunset, Our
Great Mother, Maha Mata, ever nurturing
BOLO SHRI MAHALAXSHMI SHRI JAGAN-
MATA SHRI NIRMALA DEVI KI JAI
-BEOUGHONIA
Nirmala Yoga
18
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-20.txt 
 Letter from English Sahaja Yogi
(3) Sangham
surrender myself to collectivity, (The
Virat).
Sharanam
Gacchami-
Here are some extracts from the letter.
"It is impossible to describe in short the
many meetings with Ma, Her powerful
speeches and Her loving kindness to us all.
There were various other public meetings
and the last which was again in Hampstead,
First of all there were about 150 people at this time at the Town Hall, was great. The
the airport some of whom were seeing Ma
for the first time. Mother left Hercar waiting in couldn't quite hear what Shri Mataji was
order to see us. She looked pleased and had a
loving smile and a kind word for many of us.
room was packed wirh new people who
saying because the microphone wasn't func-
tioning properly. So no one asked questions
Then on Thursday there was a public and all of them held their hands up to receive
meeting at the Friend's Meeting House in
Hampstead (London). Mother spoke about
our approach to new people. She stressed that enough is enough. After the meeting
the importance of raising their even half frozen the whole of England was covered with violent
kundalinis above the Sahasrara instead of thunderstorms with flashes of strong bright
leaving them half way. Both the Westerners lightning every five minutes and this went on
and the Indian Sahaja Yogis are at fault for right through the night.
being lazy in that matter and that is the main
reason why people do not come back.
their realization, just like in India. Ma was
very fierce in Her speech, telling the negativity
About two weeks ago Ma went to Paris
for a puja and a public programme. 150
people turned up for the programme and many
were from previous meetings. During the
Havan Mother threw some grapes into the
fire saying that they will gradually lose their
After Her speech Ma answered some ques-
tions, in particular about Buddhism. On
several other occasions also Ma was very
fierce about Tibetian Lamas and so called
Buddhists. Three weeks ago there was Shri ability to ferment (and become wine and
Buddha's Birthday Puja which was held in brandy). A funny thing has recently happened
Brighton. Mother gave a very long talk about in Scotland; the water has suddenly become
Buddha's life and the message of His teaching.
"Buddha means enlightened soul and I wish
many people from your area could become
real Buddhists. Buddha did not talk about
very hard which has made all the whisky
companies up there panic because it means
they cannot even produce medium quality
whisky, let alone 'good' stuff. (It is vital to
have soft water for whisky),
God from fear of self appointed men of God
and increasing ritualism. Buddha spoke only Many great people have recently come to
Sahaja Yoga here but Shri Mataji isn't too
pleased and says that we are moving too
slowly, She has pointed out once more that
the Australian success is largely due to collec-
tivity which we still lack. However the new
ashram is a place of love and laughter and
Gacchami-I music and warm welcomes. so that is good.
about self-realisation.
Ma asked the English Sahaja Yogis to
work out the ego in England. She gave us
three mantras to be repeated every day in the
following order:
(1) Dharmam
surrender myself to my virtues.
Sharanam
Om twameva Sakshat, Shri Shiva-Parvati
(2) Buddham
surrender myself to my Enlightenment.
Sharanam
Gacchami-I Sakshat, Shri Adi Shakti Mataji Shri Nirmala
Devi namoh namah.
Nirmala Yoga
19
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-21.txt 
 PARIS-IT'S DONE
After years of preparations, Sahaja Yoga in
France is finding its cruising speed. Last Yogis felt that Shri Mataji was breaking into
year we felt it was starting: this year we felt it another dimension. Wrapped in a white silk
had started. From the 16 to the 19 June
1983 Shri Mataji blessed the French Sahaja hair, rivers of night, on Her shoulders. magni-
Yogis and Paris with Her presence, Her ficient, She spoke with immense power; "In,
masterful command over the power of love. the past, France has in many ways, given a
Even the most yellowish livers of this place, bad example to the rest of the world. It is
somehow, must have felt it...
At the last public programme all the Sahaja
saree, standing before a white wall, Her black
time that the people of France take to self
realisation... The last Judgement has started.
Don't worry whether you are ready or not:
The Sahajas of various countries were
received with great joy and care by our this is for ME to decide. It is your Kundalini
French brothers and sisters who had prepared who will judge you...
the visit of Shri Mataji with efficiency and
dedication. We could feel this dedication in
Walking out of the conference hall Shri
so many little details, in beautiful decorations, Mataji, with a laugh and a gesture of the
in the poems they had composed in praise of hand, exclaimed: "We won Paris; it is done!"
As She stepped out of the building on the
food they had prepared for us; we could feel famed place Saint Germain des Pres, a huge
their confidence in the way they were address- fire-works broke out. Multicolored rockets
were exploding in the sky of Paris, one after
the other, opening up in the night umbrellas
of fire, Sahasraras of light ! We all laughed
aloud, cheered, applauded in a joyous tumult.
Shri Hanumana was putting a nice dot at the
end of His Mother's statement. Actually,
with this fire-works, the city council of Paris
was celebrating some important event of the
French history. Sahaja Yogis guess they'll
the Goddess; we could feel their love in the
ing newcomers at the programmes. It was
wonderful ! Thank you, yogis of France!
It is not rare that Shri Mataji starts a state-
ment by saying: "you will be amazed.." In
Paris we were amazed to witness, once more,
how truly amazing our Mother is; how, in a
leisurely way, and, so to say, jokingly, She
was handling so many situations, people and
universes at the same time. On Saturday,
18th June, we had a Havan in the garden of
the ashram and a puja. Thereafter the weather
changed completely from cold-moody-cloudy
to sunny and warm. A gentle breeze started
fanning the branches of the trees and, on
Sunday, we enjoyed the garden of Eden,
laying around, chatting, everybody floating in
the oneness of friendship, vibrations and
gaiety. There was so much love around to
give and take : We were bathing in the aura
of Her PREM, of Her Divine Love, And, surely,
God enjoyed that His children were enjoying
themselves so much.
never quite know which one.
VICTORY TO THE PURIFIER OF THE
EARTH'S PAINFUL LIVER !
VICTORY TO HER WHO RESTS ON THE
COSMIC SERPENT!
VICTORY TO OUR EXTRAORDINARY
MOTHER!
VICTORY TO SHRI MATAJI !
The European sahaja yogis
Nirmala Yoga
20
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Place of money in Sahaja Yoga
Sri Mataji has many times said that God thing is certain, is that according to vibrations
does not understand money. This means
the money is a human invention, an artifice, a
means of tricking reality. What are Sahaja God Almighty. Then why should we question?
Yogis to do with such poisonous stuff ? Does
it mean we should get rid of it as quickly as
possible ? Or give it to someone else (our the one for which it was collected. For them,
Guru perhaps) ? Or pretend we haven't got money was to be used in a particular
any with us ? What to do, is the problem.
Many people feel that the sensible thing to
do with money is to live a normal life and our Mother wants the money to pay for
spend only what is spare for Sahaja Yoga. something else ? What is wrong?
They also feel that what is spent should be, at
least partly, under their control and approval. petty about money and its use, we will remain
Having parted with it, they still do not want petty-hearted people. Not only our Nabhi
to let go. These basic assumptions must be chakra will remain closed but our heart also
challenged.
our Mother is divine, means, is the Laxshmi,
the source of all wellbeing, is the Power of
Still some people will have hankering, that
the money should go to a similar purpose to
way. It was to reach a particular audience
with which they are identified, But suppose
One thing we must understand. If we are
will be tight like a stone. The whole creation
has to glorify the Lord. Not just our little
Money is incidental to life. It is not the
measure of life's value, nor is it the means of puddle. Like the frog in the well who thought
enhancing that value. This should be under- he had found the ocean, we croak our songs
stood. By itself money cannot buy God.
Love can, but money cannot.
monetary value, it has no buying power., but
definitely it can turn God's heart. Therefore the edge of our own prejudices. And then
money should be regarded as incidental to
our purposes. If God does not want to fulfil
our purposes our money will not get used the
way we want, but God may indicate another wicks that are trapped at the bottom. We may
use. Why should we get upset ?
of joy, little realizing that our voice is echoing
in a deep pit which we have dug ourselves.
Let us climb up and up until we can see over
Love has no
we may not mind so much helping the one
who goes from well to well, lowering a light
down on a long rope to illuminate the little
even want to help in the process.
Let us suppose we have given money for
a big advertisement about Sri Mataji's lecture the purpose of money in Sahaja Yoga. It is
tour, but the advertiser refuses to display it. to be spent in order to increase the light level.
Still the tour is a success. As far as God is Whether the light is in Spain or Peru, makes
concerned, we have paid and He delivers the
goods. Yoga kshema vahamyaham': the to light all the wicks. Wherever the wicks are
wellbeing of the saints is assured-we have readiest, is the easiest to light more. Wherever
seen the proof. Then the question remains, the darkness is thickest, is the most urgent to
what to do with the money that was collected light lamps which can enlighten others. Time
and not spent ? Who decides ?
This parable may help us to understand
no difference to the ultimate purpose, which is
is short. So let us not be petty about money.
Wake up Albion. arise.
As far as Sahaja Yogis are concerned, the
one who decides is our Mother. Why ? Maybe
people should decide for themselves. But one
JAI MATAJI
Gavin Brown 8-6-83
21
Nirmala Yaga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-23.txt 
 BhoY BEGINNINGS" SIa
got my realisation around the 15th Self-realisation, when negativity tries to settle
August 1975, in Hurst Green, Sussex, in the back into the half-cleared chakras, when
very house of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi. The doubts and fears rain from stormy ego cum
period following this turning point in my life super-ego, it helps to consciously call to me-
can be said to have been most intense, no
doubts, but pretty precarious also. 1 had to the gentle way in which it led us towards its
leave the shores of fair Albion to go back into
boring daily lite where, somehow, negativity Shri Mataj Nirmala Devi.
was waiting for me... and I did not know
then, how to deal with the multiplicity of its
subtle and less subtle form. If I managed
to swim through these troubled waters and California, in June 1975. He spoke, although
survived as a yogi, it Is, of course, thanks to carefully, about Sahaja Yoga and soon left for
the ever watchful Grace of the one who had
mory the heiping hand of the Unconscious,
most elusive, most effective incarnated form,
Here is an example from my own story.
I met Rajesh Shah at Berkeley University,
London while I went back with a friend and a
given me my realisation. But, more precisely, trailer van for a tour of the Arizona and Utah
I can hint here at two devices which proved deserts. Quite a few things happened during
to be useful in enabling me to stick to Reality. this travel, many signals were sent. For
One could be called : "charting back one's example, whenever I would fix my tent I
would find the Venus star facing the opening.
When I arrived on the Grand Canyon the sky
was overcast. I sat on the ridge of the Canyon
and prayed God that I should have a rainbow.
Within ten minutes the sky opened, stream of
path towards Self-realisation".
"fixing the pole of the tent"
The second:
Charting the path towards Self-
realisation
We are all seekers. As such we are looked golden light flew in, down to the Colorado
river, and set on fire the walis of the Canyon.
While some green black clouds were still
rolling over my head, I was given the most
beautiful of all rainbows, shaped like
horseshoe, stretching its colours from one side
to the other of the Canyon. It was just too
much. I felt the Universe was a house and I
was the heir of this household. I did not feel
after. The Divine-or, in more secular terms,
the Unconscious-has been working on us as
a magnet mass does on iron dust; our move-
ment towards Self-realisation expresses the
impact of its gravitational pull. The Unconsci-
reach Self-realisation
ous wants us to
(nirvichara sammadhi). It paves our way
towards it. Thus it carefully engineers moments
and circumstances, it calis, it stages happen-
ings and sends signals to the Atma, often long
before we meet Shri Mataji. The Atma, the gratitude. Fortunately there weren't any
Self which is Truth-Consciousness-Joy is all tourists around for they would have wondered
what we want to be and Self-realisation is the
first encounter with capital Reality, an encoun-
ter which has been discretely but lovingly
prepared by the Unconscious itseif. After met Shri Mataji in London and had spoken
ous
lonely and lost anymore and, with tears in the
eyes, I was just overwhelmed with love and
at the sight of a kind of drunken boy, hugging
and kissing all the trees on his way.
I did not know that, by then, Rajesh had
To be printed in book edited by Gavin Brown & Ray Harris.
Nirmala Yoga
22
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-24.txt 
 She very clearly exposed my inconsistency,
how precarious my position was and what I
should do to muster positivity within myself
about me, that is, I did not know that I had
already entered Her omnipotent, omiscient
attention. I did not know either, by the way.
that the shape of the horseshoe or "bandhan" instead of siding with negativity. I take here
is the symbol of the Adi Shakti. But I felt :1 the liberty of quoting a few lines of this extra-
heard a call, I felt a great, great, tremendous ordinary letter which saved my (spiritual) life
love, Her Love upon me.
for the second time:
Rajesh and I met again in Berkeley. He
showed me a picture of Shri Mataji. A few
days later, in U.K., at the appointed time, I
found myself standing in the hall of Shri
Mataji's house, ready for "my first encounter
of the Atma kind".
"Now the time has come to tell you that
Sahaja Yoga cannot work unless and until
you completely surrender to "Me" without
any more questioning. This "Me" means
Mataji Nirmala Devi who resides on the
"Sahasrara" of the VIRATA; This is the
absolute truth whether you like it or not,
whether your ego and super ego accept in
or not. I am sorry I have to confess it."
Needless to say, later on, in moments of
confusion, the recollection of these signals
comforted my still vacillating faith in Sahaja
Yoga. Each of us who know to search his
memory has a provision of such signals before
his realisation, before meeting Shri Mataji or,
simply, before meeting Sahaja Yogis. There public it is because of their overriding signifi-
need not be rainbow everytime. But it's love cance:
If I take upon myself to publish these
sacred lines which were not meant for the
all the time.
"Gregoire ! You perhaps do not realize
that all the Deities who reside in you and
who are controlled in your Sahasrara are
not at all interested in people who are not
completely surrendered to me. I do not
know how to convince them. They only
look after those who take my name and
accept that I am the Adi Shakti. This is
the only way you can progress. What can
I do ? Even the people who are cured by
me have to keep the protocol otherwise
the Deities sleep and they go back to their
previous position.
Fixing the pole of the tent
When I left England I was eager to share
the good news with others who I thought to
be seekers. So, I briefed one of my friends who
had much more experience of these things
than myself as he had tried so many gurus in
India and elsewhere. He was keeping the
pictures of the various special maste:s he had
met, stones they had given him and also a
sort of mental decoding system whereby he
could find out who was a genuine master and
who wasn't. Despite this background however
or, rather, because of it, he failed to grasp the
point of Sahaja Yoga, passed on to me a few
of his exotic-esoteric bhoots and got me quite
confused. I then wrote a letter to Shri Mataji
in which 1 expressed doubts as to how I could
possibly be so deeply transformed through
Sahaja Yoga and how could this yoga trans-
form the world. I was drifting away.
So far 1 have not said this to anyone
because I thought there was no need.
Those who were wise realised it and those
who are foolish have lost their chance in
Sahaja Yoga."
I was stunned ! I somehow realised at
once what these lines were meant to carry.
The 25 September 1975 Shri Mataji was
gracious enough to send me a letter in which Mataji's real identity was not true the whole
saw clearly that if this assertion of Shri
23
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-25.txt 
 which my confidence in Destiny and Self
tion was true the seekers of the whole world could be built up. It dawned upon me that
the answer to one single question was provid-
start. What was the matter with me ? Yes, I ing answers to all other questions. And this
had felt the vibrations coming from Shri question was:"Who is Shri Mataji ?" The
answer to it makes the difference between
my Sahasrara, I had seen Kundalini pulsating, mystical sand castles and Reality: between
I had registered Her movements under Shri salvation and doom for all of us. In it lies
the key to the process of collective emancipa-
want ? what was this nonsense in my head, tion. Since the reception of this letter my
only goal has been and still is to further
penetrate the mystery of Shri Mataji's incarna-
tion on this earth, to bring my consciousness
of Sahaja Yoga would fall apart. If this asser-
could be saved, I too. The golden Age would
Mataji, I had felt, inside, how She had opend
Mataji's fingers... What more proofs did 1
why wouldn't I recognise Her ?
The statement of Shri Mataji helped me
tremendously helped me, that is, to recognize. closer to Her city.
Realising its truth became the only relevant
question, and all the other questions and
worries in my mind instantly vanished, even
those pertaining to Sahaja Yoga. The words petalled lotus floating in the limbic area of our
of Shri Mataji had fixed the pole of the tent,
the tent of Sahaja Yoga to protect me from Mataji had given me the password.
the bad weather of Kali Yuga; the pole upon
which the edifice of my yoga had to rely, on
This island city, vibrating with multicolored
tongues of fire, we all cary itas the thousand-
brain. It's gate is narrow, no doubt, but Shri
Gregoire
Vienna 5-6-83
An appeal to all Sahaja Yogi brothers and sisters of the world
Dear Brothers and Sisters.
Some of us are fortunate enough to hear Her Holiness Shri Mataji
in person whenever She talks to us in our area on the various aspects of
Sahaja Yoga.
It is fitting, therefore, to transcribe them from the original tapes in
your possession for the benefit of all the Sahaja Yogis Many Sahaja Yogis
who are already contributing them have expressed that they are immensely
benefited while actually transcribing it and understand the various aspects
explained by Mother in detail. Besides one gets plenty of vibrations.
May we, therefore, request you to give a helping hand in this
important task of spreading the Mother's Message.
The transcribed copies may please be sent to :
NIRMALA YOGA
43 Banglow Road
Delhi-110007 (India)
Nirmala Yoga
24
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-26.txt 
 Mother, dear Mother*
Years back I had read a lovely story-by or not. What actually mattered was sincerity
Anatole France, if I am not wrong-in which and devotion.
the central figure was an unassuming juggler.
in the brotherhood of a church's clergy who
exhibited a consuming desire to please Mother
Mary. All around him in the brotherhood
were men of merit. Some were in the choir
with melodious voices, singing the divine
strains in praise of Mother. Some had the
Midas" touch with which they used to create
paintings which could please the Lord. Some step in this game of finest balance and exqui-
were accomplished craftsmen who with infi-
nite patience and skill would carve
miniatures of Mother or tableaux of the Lord's he ticked them off in the air as if they were
life. There were still others who distinguisbed bound by an invisible chain. He made infinite
themselves, either by their oratorial acumen,
scriptural erudition or writing ability.
So he saw a ray of light. Quietly he slip-
ped inside the church hall when nobody was
there and began his show of juggling before
the statue of Mother Mary. At last he was
on his own again, completely in his elements.
Reverent and immaculate as if playing in front
of a royal audience, he proceeded step by
site timing. He threw the balls one by one,
with gay abandon, then with equal deftness
out
patterns in the empty space, his body twisting
and turning in rhythm with the balls weaving
kaleidoscopic variety, his trained hands quest-
ing in the vaccum for the balls dancing in
Amidst this galaxy of luminaries, this
humble juggier felt awkward, embarrassed and the air, his face swathed in streaming sweat,
even, in a way, guilty. Guilty, that when but illumined in an ethereal glow-the juggler
others had great personal attributes to fall
back on to please Mother, he had none. He
was the odd-man out among a crowd of
chosen people, or so he felt.
was doing Arati'.
But they found out one day. The whole
brotherhood broke into the hall while he was
thus engaged. He froze with fear and hung
his head low. As one of the members began
to reprimand him for his almost blasphemous
behaviour in front of Mother, the statue of
His anguish was great and genuine. His
burning desire to please Mother ultimately led
him to a very touching but unorthodox solu-
tion. It was the classic case of a simple mind Mary came alive-with a benign smile She
having a simple solution. He argued within
himself that all prayers, all worshippings were
in its essence the expression of one's heart-
felt love, devotion, and gratitude for the knelt down in awe and reverence.
descended from the pedastal and, then with
the sleeve of Her apron began lovingly wiping
the sweat from the juggler's face. The priests
Mother. By the same token, a man who was
sculpting a statue of Mary with a master's
finesse, or writing lyrics in Her praise or piping
the noblest songs for the Divine Mother, was
in fact worshipping Her in his own way. To
the Mother, it hardly mattered who worship- innocence whereas in my case, my upbringing
ped in which way or who knew what mantras
When I came into Sahaja Yoga I faced the
same dilemma as the juggler. In fact my
predicament was much more, The juggler
was a blessed man because of his child-like
and the social compulsions had taken a heavy
*The above is a transcript of a letter written to Shri Mataji from Australia some years ago, and is reproduced
here at Shri Mataji's instructions.
Nirmala Yoga
25
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-27.txt 
 toll of this Godly attribute. All around me I It was a trick of my ego. Having seen a few
saw Sahaja yogis of calibre, each one of them articles in print and a book or two, I had
much advanced than I am, all of them blessed
thought no end of myself. So now my ego
was taking me for a ride, prompting me to
take a short-cut to the Kingdom of God! (No
sons of Mother. It was a mixed crowd of
myriad personalities distinguished men of
public life, Yogis of high attainments, scholars wonder my Agnya chakra is not clearing).
of scriputures, instrumentalists of divine
inspiration, singers of great distinction and
organisers of exceptional abilities.
Another phase of frustration, another round
of gloom. Now I must go back to nature, I
thought-to seek freshness from the morning
dew, naturalness from the rippling river, stead-
fastness from the sun-flower, piety from the
rom the pelican, innocence from the children
and bounty from Mother Earth. That would
In the presence of this gathering, I also
felt lost and awkward. Suddenly I realised
that the qualities I had so assiduously cultiva-
ted for success in society have come to
nothing in the face of a greater reality. I have
to unlearn many things, and re-learn a lot. To give me the depth of vision and insight so
begin with, I have to learn again to walk
straight, on a straight path, without manoeu-
vring, without affectation, in a simple, normal
necessary to be able to write about Her, For,
write I must to prove me, to prove my worth;
that would be my puja, my humble service to
Mother.
way.
That was easier said than done. That
called for innocence, devotion and total
"Not required-an inner voice assured me.
remembered Milton's On His
Blindness. Light had gone out from his eyes
much before the potentialities of the man
were exhausted. Introspactive by nature,
Milton had suffered for days together in the
belief that he might be brought to book for
having failed to utilise his talent in the service
of God. Then in a moment of inspiration,
Just then 1
surrender-qualities I had thrown to the
winds way back in life in my teens and out of
it, like the proverbial Negro who threw the
pearl away which was richer than his whole
tribe. Today I have to walk back in time
through the mazes and dark alleys to retrieve
them, if I can. They are not on sale or show.
Once you lose them, you lose them, perhaps
realisation had dawned on him that God does
foreover.
not need any man's service he has his angels
for that. But they also serve Him who only
So I had my share of anguish like the
juggler. stand and wait.
by. Then I had a flash, a brainwave, like a
silver-lining in the encircling gloom-I would
write about Mother. That would be my way
of pleasing Her, worshipping Her, proving my
Moments, agonising moments, ticked
So I got the message-a message to bridle
my presumption and curb my ego. Now I am
at peace-with myself and the world. I do not
want to write any more. I am happy to stand
and wait for command, if any, from my
worth.
Clever, too clever ! I had been clever with
life; now I wanted to be with Mother also !
Mother, dear Mother.
Nirmala Yoga
26
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-28.txt 
 An Experience
Almost a year ago, in May 1982, I started to anything like this before. I was nervous
to notice beautiful photographs of an Indian
lady all over Brighton. In passing I read:
but definitely excited.
In fact there was a great air of excitement
in the whole room, and it kept mounting as
"She unites the essence of all religions.
Awakens the dormant spiritual energy gradually people arrived. an introductory talk
was given and we sat waiting for Shri Mataji's
arrival. The excitement built up more and
more until .. suddenly everyone was hurrying
to their feet, turning to the back of the hall
and........ 'what presence, what joy, what
within us all.
THE PROMISED ENLIGHTENMENT IS
NOW A FACT;"
I felt it just had to be the truth. The com-
bination of this ultimate claim with the picture absolute authority filled the room as Shri
of Shri Mataji really spoke to my heart. Mataji stepped into it',
Eventually one day I stopped at one poster
and feeling rather embarrassed in the middle Yes.", "Of course." "Exactly.", and AT LAST
of the busy street, I noted down the time and
place.
As She spoke everything inside me said,
someone who hits the nail on the head. Who
speaks the truth, nothing more nothing less.
I went quite early to the programme, which
was in the Royal Pavilion, a famous building that evervone but me would get their realiza-
built in imitation Indian style. As I arrived I
noticed quite dignified people around the
entrance. The room where the meeting was
to be held was incredible. There were huge
windows, chandeliers and the walls were
decorated with pictures of bright coloured came and worked on me standing behind me.
brids and flowers. I was impressed.
When it was time to meditate I was sure
tion, yet, although l'd never heard of it before,
I knew that it was the one thing that I really
wanted.
After the collective meditation people
I felt very tense and a bit nervous about what
they were doing behind my back. I was
However I took my seat near the back, trying too hard, but then without me doing
ready to escape if necessary and looked anything, I suddenly felt as if a lid was lifting
around at the other people. It seemed a bit inside my stomach and the joy rushed through
strange to see so many people sitting with and I burst into smiles and laughter. I realized:
their hand palm upwards on their knees but "There is someone who loves us. God is
they seemed somehow nice and friendly, 1
didn't realize that they were Sahaja Yogis sibility " What a weight lifted off me. It
but I couldn't help feeling that I was surroun-
ded by happy, healthy, clean, and cheerfully laughed, but now laughter kept on bubbling
dressed people.
taking care of everything. It's not our respon-
seemed like such a long time since I had
up inside of me. All at once I saw the joke.
I stayed in the hall till the last minute
watching Shri Mother and listening. I didn't
want to go away. When finally did leave to
go home through the Saturday night streets,
I sank down in my chair. My body was
aching all over and I felt scruffy and undigni-
fied in my jeans and short hair. I was quite
surprised to be there actually. I'd never been
27
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-29.txt 
 full of crowds of rowdy drunks, I clearly saw
what a hell surrounds us, but I was no longer
afraid.
I'd never heard about it before ? Why wasn't
it in all the papers ? Why wasn't it on the
television news ? Even now it sometimes
seems incredible.
The next aternoon they had invited me to
go to a Sahaj Yoginis house to see a video of
Shri Mataji. Everyone was in the garden. It
was a lovely sunny day and the light shone
green through the tarpaulin roof covering us.
There were paper streamers of all colours
decorating the roof and the centre pole. By children Machinder Nath and Niranjana. I
the wall, next to a flower bed was a chair
upon which Shri Mataji had been sitting during
Her stay and where that very morning a puja stopped asking any. It has been great to meet
had been celebrated. Although at that time I
knew nothing of such things, I definitely felt people who have joined Sahaja Yoga in
the silence and the joy-the joy.
Since then I have really been spoiled. I
went to Shri Mother's programme in Vienna
was offered the chance to work for Gregoire
de Kalbermatten as nanny for his two beautiful
have learnt so much and had so many ques-
tions answered that I have at last almost
the European Sahaja Yogis and the new
Vienna. I really don't know how to thank
Our Mother for all Her blessings.
A crowd of happy smiling people. How
often do we see that in the west ? In Sahaja
Yoga we may start to take it for granted, but
for me it was really heaven. I felt so much
love flowing. Some how you could really thing about it before l'd like to say how
feel at home, as if you had found all your long
lost friends again. At last people who were
on your wavelength.
As a person who came to Sahaja Yoga
from the street without ever having heard any-
thankful I am to Our Mother for such great
brothers and sisters who helped me with
so much love over the stony path back to
normalcy and beyond. After realization it
becomes so easy to see the games which
others play. We can so much more easily
Not quite two months later I went up to
London for Guru Puja. I was stunned to see
the Nightingale lane Ashram, the smart way criticise and judge other Sahaja Yogis for not
people were dressed, the women in their yet being what they should be. We can lose
beautiful silk saris, the video, all the different the perspective and start taking the blessings
nationalities represented there, and of course
the most important thing, the way the people
were, I was amazed.
along the weary track of ego here were people
who had been working on trying to improve may learn to love each other more and more
themselves, not just with words but really
doing it. All the Sahaj Yogis seemed so great
for granted.
While I'd heen plodding
Therefore I pray to Shri Mataji that we
to see only the best in each other and to help
that to grow; that we may become truly one
collective beirig enlivened by our enjoyment
of ourselves and of each other and thus worthy
to represent Our Holy Mother to the world,
who is the embodiment of that love itself, who
is sakshat Shri Jagadamba, sakashat Shri Adi
Shakti Mataji. Shri Nirmal Devi, Namoh Namah.
1o me.
I have no words to describe the Puja
itself except to say that I felt overawed and it
was a great privilege to be there. It was
such a powerful experience.
I found it hard to believe that all this was
happening, in the heart of London. How come
MARGRET
28
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-30.txt 
 108 Names of Shri VISHNU
OM TAMEV SAKSHAT
He is the source of all glory
I. Shri Bhutih
His glory is great
His glory is supreme
2. Shri Maharddhih
3. Shri Pararddhih
4. Shri Amitavikramah
His powers are immeasurable, of unlimited valour
The one with a thousand heads
5. Shri Sahasramurdha
6. Shri Sahasrākshah
7. Shri Anantarupah
8. Shri Anädi-nidhanah
9. Shri Anadih
10. Shri Anantah
The one with a thousand eyes
The one whose form is endless
He is without birth and death
He is without beginning
He is without end
He is without equal
II. Shri Atulah
The ruler of all beings
12. Shri Ishänah
13. Shri Bhutamaheshvarah
14. Shri Sthavirah
15. Shri Sthãnuh
The great lord of all beings
Ageless
The fiirm, immobile
He who confers the good, or destroys sorrow and its cause
16. Shri Rudrah
17. Shri Yogih
The one who is realized through Yoga on knowledge, or the
one with perfect self-possession
18. Shri Kshamināmvarah
The Chief among the Yogins who have patience
The Great Ascetic, the great knower
19. Shri Mahãtapah
20. Shri Sadãyogi
21. Shri Durgah
22. Shri Swayyambhu
23. Shri Mahādevah
24. Shri Ugrah
25. Shri Amarah-Prabhuh
Ever Manifest
He who is gained with difficulty
The self-born
The Great God
The Fearful
The Lord of the Immortals
26. Shri Surānanda
The delight of the Gods
The preceptor of the Gods
He is charming, being the Infinite Bliss
Of Sweet countenance
27. Shri Devabhrd-Guru
28. Shri Manoharah
29. Shri Sumukhah
His eyes are like lotuses
Sweet in vedic chanting
30. Shri Aravindāksah
31. Shri Sughoshah
32. Shri Hemāngah
33. Shri Chaturbāhu
Golden in form
Four-armed
34. Shri Shankhabhrt
He who holds the conch in one hand
Nirmala Yoga
29
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-31.txt 
 35. Shri Chakri
He who bears the discus in one hand, Twirls the whcel of
life-cycle
36. Shri Gadādharah
He who carriers the Club called Kaumodaki in one hand
37. Shri Padmi
He who hold the Lotus in one hand
38. Shri Garuda Dhvajah
39. Shri Vanamali
His flag bears the Garuda emblem
He wears the garland named Vaijayanti which stands for the
subtle elements
40. Shri Bhagavän
He who has beatitude, splendour, goodness, fame, auspicious-
ness, dispassion and freedom. He knows the origin of the
things and their dissolution; He knows the coming of beings
and their going too: He knows knowledge and nescience
as well.
41. Shri Sripatih
He whom SHRI chose as Her consort when She arose out
of the ocean which was being churned for obtaining nectar
42. Shri Shrinivāsah
43. Shri Shrivasah
44. Shri Kämaha
45. Shri Antakah
46. Shri Krtäntakrt
Abiding among prosperous
Perennial abode of prosperity
The destroyer of evil desire
The death of all beings
The destroyer of all that is made, the God of death himself
Totality
47. Shri Sarvah
48. Shri Hrshikesah
The Lord of the senses, or the Supreme Self in whose control
the senses are
49. Shri Yamah
50. Shri Vasuh
The inner controller of all beings
The one who exists in all beings without distinction
The one who was not, is not, and will not be shaken from
His own glory
51. Shri Achyutah
52. Shri Hiranyagarbah
The Golden Egg whereupon all things emanate
He whose radiance pervades the firmament and transcends it.
The All-pervading being, not conditioned by space, time and
things.
53. Shri Vishnu
54. Shri Purushottamah
The Supreme Person
55. Shri Prajäpatih
The Lord of Beings, the Father of all, Protector of all born
He who has the Lotus, symbolising the source of the Universe
in his navel
56. Shri Padmanābhah
57. Shri Sarvavid Bhänuh
The Omniscient and Effulgent Sun
58. Shri Jyotir-Adityah
The effulgence of the Sun
59. Shri Suryah
He who begets prosperity
60. Shri Savitah
He who generates the World.
Abode of all
61. Shri Vasuh
Nirmala Yoga
30
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-32.txt 
 62. Shri Skandah
He who flows as nectar, dries up all things as wind and dries
up the demons. Also a name of Kartikaya
He is all the gods, the first God, The celestial source
63. Shri Adidevah
He is of 4 grouped forms; Vasudeva, Sankarsana, Pradyumna
64. Shri Chaturvyuhah
and Aniruddha
He dwells in and covers all beings: He sports, wishes to
conquer, operates, shines, produces and moves
He withdraws all souls at the time of Pralaya at aeon's end
and is unswerving
65, Shri Väsudevah
66. Shri Sankarshanochyutah
67. Shri Pradyumnah
He has immense wealth
He is unobstructed in his manifestations by anyone
68. Shri Aniruddha
69. Shri Shringi
70. Shri Mahävarahah
The horned fish which was in the waters of the deluge of acons
The Great Boar
71. Shri Vishākapih
He is of the nature of Dharma and the Boar
72. Shri Narasimhavapuh
The one whose form is partly man, partly lion
Shri Vishnu's incarnation of the Dwarf who asked for a gift
of land from king Bali and checked his pride
73. Shri Vämanah
74. Shri Trivikramah
He who pervades the three worlds with 3 steps
Parasurama, the son of Jamadagni, the wielder of punishing axe
75. Shri Khanda-Parasuh
76. Shri Ráma
The son of Dasaratha. He in whom the yogins find constant
delight. The Supreme Brahman of the Nature of Eternal
Bliss and Pure Consciousness in whom Yogins revel
77. Shri Dhanvi
The archer
78. Shri Maheshväsah
The one who carried the mighty bow
79. Shri Sumukhah
The one who has a beautiful face, whose face remained calm
and cheerful even when he was banished to the forests for
14 years on the eve of his coronation
80. Shri Suvratah
He whose vow is auspicious, of righteous deeds.
81, Shri Shikhandih
The one with a peacock feather on his head
82. Shri Yadusreshthah
The chief of the Yadus
83. Shri Krishna
He who has a dark blue complexion. He who is the Supreme
Brahman, which is existence, consciousness, bliss
84. Shri Govindah
The one who redeemed the earth, the Lord over the cows,
over the Devas, over speech, the one who is known through
Vedas and Vedanta
85. Shri Dāmodarah
He who as a boy was tied with a cord around his waist by
Sri Yashoda to two trees. Also, who can be reached by
chastened mind
He who punishes the wicked. He who is prayed to by men
86. Shri Janārdanah
Nirmala Yoga
31
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-33.txt 
 The soul of the three worlds
87. Shri Trilokātmā
The support of the earth
The abode of all beings
88. Shri Bhurbhuvah
89. Shri Bhutāväsah
S0. Shri Rtuh
The seasons
The consort of Mother Earth, the Lord of earth
91. Shri Mahibharta
The Moon God, who nourishes the plants, or Shiva with
Parvati
92. Shri Somah
The medicine for disease
93. Shri Bheshajam
The prescriber of medicine
94. Shri Bhishak
He is Indra, Chief of the Gods
95. Shri Mahendrah
He is time that measures all things
96. Shri Kälah
He who makes the yugãs (aeons)
97. Shri Yugãdikrt
98. Shri Yugāuartah
99. Shri Lokādhyakshah
He who makes the yugas turn, i.e. mover of the cyclic acons
The witness of the world
The delight of Devaki, mother of the luminaries of the
universe, the three worlds, the protector of the worlds, the
three Vedas, the three sacred fires, the five oblations, and all
100. Shri Devaki-Nandanah
the Devas
The Master of all knowledges
101. Shri Vaidyah
Of the form of Yagna (sacrifice). He affords joy to all the
Gods; He is the One who leads the sacrificers to the fruits of
their sacrifices
102. Shri Yajnah
Lord Vishnu is fond of the praise-chant
103. Shri Stavya Priyah
The Act of Chanting is Lord Vishnu Himself
104. Shri Stutih
He is auspiciousness
105. Shri Svasti
He is the Plenitude of Being and Value
106. Shri Purnah
He is One who grants release
10J. Shri Mukundah
He is the Nature of Supreme Bliss
108. Shri Nandih
Nirmala Yoga
32
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-34.txt 
 Registered with the Regintrat af Newspapara under Regn. No. 36995 at
SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
PROGRAMME FOR U.S./CANADA 1983
TINTL
New York
September 15 16
Los Angeles
17 18 19
Houston
20 21 22 23
Los Angeles
24 25 26
San Diego
27
San Francisco
28 29
Santa Cruz (Seminar)
30 Oct. 1-2
Vancouver
3456
October
7 8 9
Toronto
Boston
10 11 12
New York
13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
New York (Seminar)
21 22 23
JAI SRI RADHA KRISHNA SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
Edited & Publihed by S.C. Rai 43. Bunglow Road, Delhi-110007 & Printed at The Central Electric
Press. 80-D. Kamla Nagar. Delhi-110007. One issue Rs, 6,00, Annual Subscription Rs. 30,00
Foreign (by Airmail E 5 8 10)
