Nirmala Yoga Vol. 13 Bi-Monthly Year 3 Jan.-Feb. '83 "Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns all the religions and seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga-THE UNION"

 Translation of Her Holiness Shri Mataji's Marathi letter 1979 My dear Sahaja Yogis, Received your loving and beautiful letters Whatever is God's work, it will be over. and messages of greetings. Here, I am busy Hence all should be alert and awake and in the work in London and could not write also awaken others. My life is dedicated to you. Every mo- Once I told you that Sahaja Yoga is beginning from Navaratri this year, That is, Satya Yuga, for which you were so far pre- gold should enlighten human history while paring, will now be seen. As a tree has to getting heated in the hell of Kali Yuga. sprout first in the earth and then its sapling peeps out, in the same way, on the fifst day led in every home, may its joy spread in the of Navaratri i.e. on 8th April the sapling of Satya Yuga will be seen. ment it is working. All I want is that pure My blessings are: may this lamp be kind- society, may the cheers of its victory re- sound all countries and may this power of It is the day of great joy. Whole Nature Brahman fill in every molecule of universe. will now have new life. You must under- stand that the importance of this day will be known only if the whole mankind is enlighte- also in other countries. You will meet each Thave to be away from you for very long time, But your brothers are living here and ned with vibrations of love. other in course of time. But I often feel that one day of such great joy of love should In this world Brahma Shakti was awake- ned from the very day of My birth. You have dawn in our life. Whatever you desire will received it to some extent, and are using it in many ways. happen. Therefore, your attention should be fully on Sahaja Yoga. I have offered my body, mind and wealth, every thing. I was telling you that light of that great power of love will spread all over the world. You have to take care of only your Chitta because only that will be enlightened. The first lamp will be lit on that day. But night of Diwali is blind. It cannot see the lamps. In this Kali-Yuga, this work will be done only if many lamps are lit. Always remembering you, Your separated Mother, Nirmala

 Editorial रुद्र क्षेत्रज्ञ वर्गः समूदयति यतो यात्रा विश्रान्तिमूच्चछेत् । यत् तत्वम् यस्य विष्वं स्फुरितमयमियद्यन्माया विश्वमेतत् ॥ स्वच्छन्धानन्द विन्दोच्छुला द् भयानुक्तर स्पन्दतरवम् । चंतन्यं शकरंतञ्जयति यरदसखिलं द्वेत भासद अद्वयात्मा । Rudra- Kshetrajna - - mruchhet! Yat-tatwam Yasya Vishwam sphurit-maya Miyad-yanmayăm vishwa-metat !! - uttar - spanda - tatwam! adwayat Vargah samudayati Yato Yärrā vishrūnti dyä-nanda Swacchan dya-nanda indo - chhalad bhayā Chaitanayam Shankaram tajja-yati Yadak hilam dwait bhasad - adwayāt mä !! Translation That consciousness of Shankara is ever victorious which in its wholeness is non dual in reality though having an appearance of duality from which emerges the class of Rudras and all living beings and in which comes to rest which is the fundamental reality from which bursts forth into view the universe whose form is the universe, from whose unimpeded free witl ever leaps forth his divine power which is a mass of bliss bringing about unsur- passed immortal vibrations (the primal.creative force). Adi-Shakti is the consciousness of Shiva, pervading in everything yet transcending above all and governing. E ' – Mother of every living being from Brahma i.e. Hiranaya- She is Abrahma-keet-Janani" garbha down to an insect. All universes have emerged from Her and She is founda- tional for everything that exists in them. Vibrations is the manifestation of Her own unimpeded free will. She is the shelter of all great souls. Her lotus feet have been worshipped and meditated upon by saints and sages since times immemorial. Nirmala Yoga

 It is sixty years since She has assumed the form of our Beloved Mother to kindle the light of Kundalini within us and enlighten the path of Sushumna for ultimate liberation and for consciously uniting with Her universal being. On the battle field of Kurukshetra Arjuna was not able to see with his mortal eyes the universal form of Shri Krishna, having the resplendence of thousand Suns. Out of great compassion on him Shri Krishna touched his eyes. Arjuna could behold that indescribable form of the Virata. However imperfect as he was, he could not bear the sight and prayed Shri Krishna to become his usual self with which Arjuna was friendly. In the battie field of life we are like Arjuna, genuine seekers, yet unprepared to meet the Supreme and unable to recognise the incarnations and are following the Instructions of ego rather than of our Spirit. Hence at the very outset, our attention is raisedabove the limitations of ego and super-ego. Vibrations, the Brahma shakti, is the partial glimpse of Her Cosmic form. Then, further revelations occur to us. She is leading us step Kundalini rises in strands depending upon the opening of Sushumna and by step. strength of Chakras. She knows the inner beings and is correcting the faults of everyone of thousands of Sahaja Yogis even without one's knowledge Every Sahaja Yogi is being looked after, as if a tender sapling, so that their inner mechanisms become strong enough to sustain final revelation ie the unity of Jeeva (the consciousness limited by ego and super-ego) and Shiva i.e. She Herself. How to express gratitude for all this to Her who is the condensed form of our Spirits ! We all Sahaja Yogis kneel down in utter humility and pray: "O Mother, your form is soothing to our inner beings, it is quenching the thirsts of our Spirits, it is fulfilling the wishes of all great sages, saints and seekers, Kindly keep this form in good health for years and years". नास्ति वारण स्वमेव अन्यथा शरण व । तस्मात् कारुण्य भावेन रक्ष रक्ष परमेश्वरी ॥ Anyatha Sharanam Nasti Sharanam Twameva Cha ! Tasmat Kārunya Bhavena Raksha Raksha Parameshwari !! Translation O Supreme Goddess, I surrender to you alone and non else. Hence have compassion on me and protect me. Nirmala Yoga

 A PRAYER O Primordial Mother, Let Your Blessings bestow upon me through Your Holy Vibrations, And let Your Holiest of all Holiest names be always in my Heart, And forgive me for offending you in thoughts, words and deeds and make me ashamed of it, And give me courage to forgive others as you have forgiven me, And let your vibrations make me understand as to where I stand so that I can plead for forgiveness to my ever loving Mother who is the Creator of this Universe, And finally let me thank you for all that You have given to me and pray that Your Blessings will bestow on this poor child infinitely. Jai Mataji -Avdhut Pai Bombay (Poem presented to Mother, at Dollis Hill, London during Easter Puja 1980). Mother, Your Name is our Truth Your Love is our Support Mother. Your Words fill us with Joy May our Joy fill every Universe Mother What May we do but Serve You ? What should we do but praise You ? What can we do without You ? Mother, Most Glorious You are And forever Mataji Nirmala Devi. -John Peirson London Nirmala Yoga

 NIRM AL A YOGA 43, Bunglow Road, Delhi-110007 (India) Founder: Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Editorlal Board : Dr. S. K. Mathur, Sri A. S. Mishra, Sri R. D. Kulkarni Representatives :CHERYL HYNES-10, Clarence Road, Burwood, N.S..W. 2134, Australia. : MR. GAVIN BROWN-Brown's Geological Information Service Ltd., 160, North Gower St., London NW1 2 ND. : MRS. CHRISTINE PETRUNIA NY 11201. : RECHARD PAYMENT - Canada V5N 1M2. Australia U. K. U. S. A. -225 Adams Street, 1/E. Brooklyn, Canada 1950, East 5th Avenue, Vancouver, B C. Switzerland : CHARLES AND MRS. MAGDA MATHYS-5, Chemin Des Mouldins, 1256, Troinex (Canton de Geneva), Switzerland. :DANIEL & ROXANA DEVINE-Angel Luis De Herran, Torre 3-8, 6, 4, Spain Madrid-33. : MARIE ROUGER-175, Av. Ledru RIlin, Paris-750001. : RUTH LEDERBERGER: Via Mercalli-46, 00197 Rome, Italy. : M.B. RATNANNAVAR-13, Merwan Mansion, Genjwala Lane, Borivali (W), Bombay-400 092. RAJARAM SHANKARRAJWADE-840, Sada Shiva Peth, Pune-411030. France Italy India CONT ENTS Page 1. Editorial 2. Prayer & Poem 3. Message of Christ and inherent dangers of sustaining the Realisation 4. Translation of Marathi letter from Her Holiness Shri Mataji 5. Confidence in our Vibrations 6. Advice of the Primordial Master 7. Seekers of Truth 8. Antar Yoga 9. Lighting the Lamps 10 Translation of H.H. Mataji's letter in Hindi 2. 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 11. H.H Shri Mataji's Advice 12 The answer, my friends, is blowing in the 13. Mithya (Translation of Shri Mataji's letter). 14. Sahaja Yoga and Physical Cure 15. Statement the Delegate of Sahajland 16. Balancing the Internal and External Growth 17. 108 Names of Lord Shiva Festivals 19 Translation of Her Holiness Shri Mataji's Marathi letter (1979) 24 26 28 31 33 35 38 18. 2nd Cover

 The Message of Christ and the Inherent Dangers of Sustaining the Realisation CAXTON HALL, LONDON 10th December 1979 This is the day for us to remember that But to such people, it does'nt matter Christ was born on this earth as a human whether you are lying in the dried grass or being. He came on this earth and the task in the stable or in the palace. Everything is that was before Him was to enlighten human just the same, for it does not touch them. awareness, with the sense of understanding They are so detached. And they are com- that we can see its actualization within the pletely in joy. They are the Masters of them- awareness of human beings that they're not selves, nothing can master them. No malter this body, but they are the spirit. message of Christ was His resurrection them. They are masters of complete com- The can master them, no comfort can master that is, you are your spirit and not your body forts within themselves, they have achieved and He showed by His resurrection how all the comforts within themselves. They He ascended Into the realm of spirit, which are satisfied people, that's why they are He was because He was 'Pranava'. He was kings They are called as kings. not these Brahma, He was Mahavishnu, as i have kings who run after things or those kings told you about His birth. And He came on who seek comforts in life. I mean if you this earth in a body like a human being. have comforts well and good. If you do not He wanted to show another thing, that spirit have well and good, makes no difference. has nothing to do with money, has nothing lo do with power. It is all powerful, all pervading. But He was born in a stable, not who seek comforts in life, I mean if you So many people in Latin America, when I went there, said, understand why Christ was born as a poor we cannot in a palace or to a king, but He was born to a very ordinary person, a carpenter. Because man'. This is again the human concept if you are the king, as we say in the Hindi about God, you see, he wants to command language Badshah', then nothing is greater God, "Be born in a king's palace". You can- Is'nt it ? It means nothing is not order him about. We have our own higher than you, neither anything can deco- concepis about God, that why should he be rate you. Whatever you're, you're at the high- a poor man ? Why should he be helpless ? est. All the worldly things are just like He never showed his helplessness. He was dry grass, Tranavat" ( ) So He was much more dynamic than ail your kings and kept in the dry grass. To many it makes all your politicians pul together. He was not them very unhappy and they feel very sorry afraid of any one. Whatever he had to say that Christ, the one who came to save us, he said it. He was not afraid of crucifixion was kept under such conditions and why or of any such so called punishment It is not God provided him with something beiter. only the human beings you see who have Nirmala Yoga 5.

 these false ideas about life and that's why and our super-ego. Ego and super ego are they want to put these ideas on to God also the two by-products of our thought process. and try to make Him also folow these con- cepts. God is not your concepts He is not and another are the thoughts of the future. a concept at all. You also say that a con- He came to make that gap, to cross that gap cept is after all a concept, not actuality. and that's how he sacrificed Himself, This 1 have found out very recently. His body. For you it is a very big thing of This is another myth people carry that remorse and repentence. concept is a concept. All right, Mataji says people it is not. If's a play that they have all right cept because concept is a thought. One are the thoughts which are of the past But for such t. So what ? But even this is con- to play a certain role. That's why I donot understand why you show Him to be so hanky panky miserable creature. He was never miserable. Such people can never be miserable as you are. This is another con- You have to rise beyond thought at a higher level into thoughtless awareness where you are not in thought, but you are in the centre of thought in the sense that one cept that He should be hanky panky-tallie, thought rises and falls and there is a place skinny, starved, bones coming out, count in between. Another thought rises and falls. them one by one, horrible I tell you. You are in the centre of these thoughts, the "Vilamba' as we call it. The time where you From His childhood till His death He was a joyous person. He was happiness, He was joy, to make you all happy, to give you the pause. Then you will understand Christ. He was here partly, of course, to save us light of happiness by enlighting your because he has many aspects. I should say not only to save human beings, He came on He came on this earth not only to save this earth because He had many more as- source of joy that is your spirit in your heart. you, to give you happiness but also to give Human beings you joy, because human beings in their pects. This is another. demanded that they must be saved. Why ? ignorance, this tomfoolery, are unnecessarily Why should they be saved all of them ? beating themselves, and destroying them- What have they done for God? How can you selves. demand from God that he should save us ? Can you ? You cannot ask for that. No body has asked you to go to pubs, to get into troubles. No body has asked you He came to create the passage bet- to go to races and become bankrupts. No ween, as you see here, the Vishuddhi and body has asked you to go to horrible Gurus the Sahasrara, is this Agnya in the Primor- and get into troubles. But you seek your dial being, the Virata. He was born there to open that door. In evolution every incar- morning flower to make you happy. First nation has come on this earth to open a to make you happy, to give you joy. You door within us and to create that opening or see any child. At least I know myself, I that enlightenment in our awareness. So donot know about the funny people here. Christ came precisely to open this small I mean to them flowers look like thorns. I little door which is constricted by our ego destruction voluntarily. He came like a I don't know how they manage. mean Nirmala Yoga

 But you see a child anywhere, any child, this ? How do you become "born again' ? such a joy giving thing it is. Not by going through the ritual of baptism. This is the child of the Divine, that Somebody coming from the theological col- came on this earth as a child, is the most lege, canno! make you a Christian. Like in joy giving thing and that's why Christmas our India, we have some paid brahmins as for all of us, for the whole universe, should you have here some paid people, you see. be a festival of great joy For he brought The whole day they will eat drink and be light for us, by which we can see that there merry and In the evening time they will come to pray and preach. You have to be a person who is authorised by God. Unless and un- til you are authorised by God, you cannot is some one called as God, there is some one who is going to remove this ignorance. s This was the first beginning. Sa for us it is That is why I have seen all these people. The so called pandits and big priests give joy. necessary to be joyous, happy and relaxed and not to take anything that seriously as we do, because Divine tife does not make re so serious bacause they are not autho- you serious, because it is all a play. It is Maya. Ihave seen in all the rituals people follow, in all the so called religious people. as if some funeral is going on. And after they are too serious to be religious. A reli- gious person is bubbling with laughter. He celebrate ? With a champagne and after a does not know how to hide his joy and he real funeral, how do they celebrate. I do not does not know how to control his laughter know why but they take champagne. when he sees people unnecessarily serious. 1 mean nobody is dead. The way the people ting Him ? He came to enlighten your aware- I rised by God. Even on a Christmas day, 1 s mean if anybody comes from village, will see the function they go home and how do you How can you celebrate Christmas by insul- say it sometimes just donot know what to do with ourselves. There is nothing in this the point at which it had reached. But you world for a person like Christ to feel sad about. If you really believe in Him, then first understand Him ? And He has promised of all please give up this silly sadness and that vou are to be baptised, you are to be sulking and sitting down and becoming horn again and now in Sahaja Yoga this ness, because He respected your awareness, are trying to put it down. Is this the way to morose, not talking to anyone, silent bores all over promise is being fulfilled. So be joyous that here at the Agnya Chakra again Christ is born within you and He is there and you how he went and talked to multitudes. How know how you can ask for His help always. he opened His heart to all the people around That the main thing that one has to under- and how He tried to give them happiness. stand is that the time has come for you to He has said that you are to be born again get all that is promised in the scriptures, not i.e. He had to do this work and that you only in the Bible but all the scriptures of the have to get It sometimes, He has promised world. The time has come today that you that you have actually to be born again. have to become a Christian, a Brahmin, a Christ is to be born within us. I do not Pir, through your Kundalini awakening only. This is not the way to look at Christ, see know what Christians understand out of There is no other way out. Nirmala Yoga

 And that your last judgement is also now. of houses you have built and what kind of Only through Kundalini awakening God is so called Nobel prizes you have won. You going to judge you. How is he going to judge you otherwise ? You think of some- philanthropic work. By that you think that body now, a person comes in now. Here is you have given so much money. If you have somebody sitting to judge you. How ? By given so much money there will be a big how many hair-dressers you have been to ? ego somewhere hanging and it will bring Or how many suits you have stitched for you down your scale. Christmas ? Or what presents you have bought or how many cards you have sent? and to how many people you have sent some ther is going to weigh more much more other things which may not be very palatable: than a ship. It's a different type of a judge- That's not the way. Or is it that what price ment of a personality. We can see how you have bought ? The things, the way we are particular, which way are we going to be judged by God ? are not also going to be judged by your This is a judgement in which a little fea- EAS Christ was judged by human beings and how he was judged by God. He came and lived in the dried straw like a feather. His Mother never felt this discomfort. In the Not superficially, people say. So what same way those who have not by their beha- depth we have got ? Let us see how far can we go in our depth. At the most we reach a point where we are a concept again. So whatever depth we have got goes only upto only rationality, upto the concept point. Be- yond that we cannot reach. So how can we be judged ? How people are judged if you doing in this lifetime, because what you no to the doetor ? He has his instruments, have accepted as reality, which is just a he works it out, puts the light in, sees for himself and says this is the position And the Absolute whatever you will be doing, how your spirituality is going to be judged ? that will be a born of ignorance. Whatever How a seed is judged ? By sprouting it. vou have done in darkness will have a parti- When you sprout the seed and when you cle of darkness In it. So without having see its germinating power you know it is a realisation if you have propagated that we good seed or a bad seed In the same way are great saints, this, that, you will have no you will be judged by Ihe way you are ger- chance. If you think you are a divine perso- viour oppressed others or taken offence are going to be judged as First class In the Kundalini awakening itself there are inherent defects Inherently, the Kun- dalini has some defects due to your pre- vious Karmas. Because what you have been concept. because when you have not known minated. The way you receive your realisa- tion, the way you retain it, respect it. That's chance. All the priests of all the religions the way you are going to be judged and not will be the last to get realisation. by the kind of dresses you are wearing. By the type of matching you do or by the hair dresser you go to. you occupy and the big politicians or big do you want to be in your next life. So he beaurucrats you become. Not by what kind told make me anything, but do not make nality and you are a realised saint no Valmiki in his Ramayana has said a very Not by the positions interesting story that a dog was asked what Nirmala Yoga

 Mathadhish' (#5TTT) a make me anything but anywhere. Just imagine a dog having that you have your problems. wisdom. But I do not say that all of them are like that. May be some who are really genuine. Some may be really realised peo- lems, Like in your countries you have certain ple may be authorised by Gad. But I am problems, the physical problems according sure they are not accepted by the multitu- to the country where you have taken birth. des. I am sure of that. Because 1 have Most of you have decided to take bitth in a seen your history and alt such people have particular country. That's why you are iden- been discarded and have been tortured. person like priest, in the same way according to the countries not a priest -'sthanvishesh' ( as they call it; dog having that you have yaur problems. Like in our country we have some prob- tified also to such an extent sometimes that Every country you think there is no defect. But now the fime has come to judge Ine has a variety according to which you suffer right and the wrong. You cannot crucify any more. You cannot. Everyone is going to be judged through Kundalini awakening. a certain amount of selback in your health. So for a Sahaja Yogi one should know that health is a very important thing. Because Now you should know there are three this body is the temple of God and you have categories of human beings. I do not know to look after your health and you know also which way to start, not to shock you. One when the Kundalini rises the first thing that is the human beings as we are. They are happens is that your health improves be- called as Nara Yonl. The second category cause of the para-sympathetic fulfilment. is Deva Yoni, those who are born seekers Because the para-sympathetic gives you en- And the third ones are lightenment which flows into the sympathetic, called as Rakshas. These are called as your health improves. I will not lell about Ganas, But we can say the species anmong it very elaborately today because time is human beings are Rakshasas, are the short but if you read any book- have not people who are evil. So we have evil peo- written much-but if you listen to my lectu- ple, excellent people and we have in-between res and some of them that are written down, or realised souls people. then you will know how Kundalini helps to cure most of the diseases except for those that are being tempered by human elements Excellent people are very few. They are born-realised. I'donot have their prOblem ike a kidney trouble. A person has been much. But one has to deal with the people who are in the centre. They are looking to- wards good but have something hanging on to them which is not so good. So for these people there are inherent defects in the Kundalini which we must understand cured by Sahaja Yoga. No doubt, we can cure kidney trouble but a person who has been on the machine you try you cannot cure. We can give him longevity but he cannot be cured. But to cure people is not your job by any chance. You must remember this. The first of them is bad health, physi- No Sahaja Yogi should take to curing peo- cal bad health. In this country specially, ple. They can use my photograph. But not people suffer too much from cold and other to take to curing because it means you are a troubles due to over calcium in the water. big philanthropic personality. I have seen Nirmala Yoga

 people who heve been curing get into such not be the end of your life. a mania of curing that they forget that they little part like cleaning the whole place and are also catching something and they are then you get out, You may ask me why do also getting some trouble and they never you clean. Like I have seen there are people cure themselves and ultimately I find they when we were in Oxted, I was surprised also get out of Sahaja Yoga. But with the everybody used to polish everything you photograph you can cure people. Do not know, lawn was done very well. Everything think it's your duty that you are a great phy- was done so very well and not even a rat sical benefactor No, you are not. a spiritual benefactor but as a by product ther I the body of the person improves because if any person getting out and they were so Christ has to be awakened, if God has to particular husband and wife. I do not know come in this body, then this body is to be why so particular for cleanliness, neatness cleansed. It is done by Kundalini. But it and everything and both of them would does not have a separate work like hospitals. never even talk to each other. I have seen That is a very You are will enter their houses For months toge- never saw any personU getting in or that. There were seven houses except for have known people who went so mad our house. They were all surprised that with the power of curing that they started visiting regularly the hospitals and they ended up in the hospital also. They wauld not even how many people are coming to our house. They asked, 'Are you an open house.' I said come to the programmes. They would not Yes, it is a open house' They could not come and see me, understand what was wrong with us. No- So this is one of the greatest hurdles of God, is the Vyadhi (eifer) body would see that polished things or any is the bodily ailments, And the bodily ail- thing and so it should be. That's how, we do ments also should not keep you down too not go to that extent so that it becomes a much. If you have some problem forget it 5ort of real Sahaja Yoga and the rest, which gradually you will improve. For some people if takes some time to get alright. But then IS important. But attention should be on the main thing is to get to your spirit. So your Spirit. It should be on your Spirit be- do not always say "Mother cure me, Cure e is the most important thing to God. Health cause it is your attention which goes into these various directions and gets stuck up. You must allow it to work out and it will work out. me, Cure me", me in the spiritual life". You will be cured automatically. It may take time with some people but you have been sick all your life. It does not matter if it takes a litile more time and also follow the methods, which we meaning a person does not want to work have told for the different diseases. Specially it out. Oof course those people who are use- in this country the liver and what you call less and do not want to get their realisation, this gout and all this troubles. We have forget about them. But even after gelting remedies for all these for which we have realisation it is an innate problem with peo- but to work it out as a duty towards your ple that they do not want to work it out. body, towards the temple. And that should They are lazy, in simple words they are lazy. But just say Mother keep The second hurdle which I feel is called as Akarmanyata ( ) as they call it Nirmala Yoga 10

 That is very much in this country surpri- eyes. Kundalini opens your eyes no doubt, singly. I mean the other day I saw a picture but again you close it down. So it is in your that how from your country people went to freedom to give up that Akarmanyata. Now Germany and blasted a complete machinery this also can he very collective. I can tell and the complete factory of that machlnery you this much, it is a very big disease. It which was selling those pilotless planes. spreads, like say husband - wife is there. And they have overdone everything so that Wife is one like that, instead the husband our children are having a nice time perhaps. raising the wife, he will succumb to wife But in Sahaja Yoga we have to be alert specially in the West. Just opposite in India. What exactly happens in Sahaja Yoga when ting a woman will succumb to her husband. people come here? They get their realisa- So what happens is that out of the two who tion. They get the cool breeze and is lost have got it, also has lost it. Instead of both again. The reason is that they do not want of them shouid be very well realised and to work it out. This is another danger could be very well there if one who is very Akramanyata. When it is lost after one year well realised could put down his will-"No, they come back, 'Mother we donot believe I will check, I have eyes to see, let me se, in it. But I have some pain in the stomach, I must give a chance to myself". if they will you cure'. Instead of you becoming so equipped with all the powers that you have, the second step. Everything cannot be just become a useless person coming here to ike a jet liner, sit down here and next take my time, These powers are all within moment you are on the moon. accept it then it works and then they go to you. This is your property. This is the pro- perty of your spirit which is caring inside, which is bound to manifest but because of start with the third danger which is the such hurdles that you accept, that it does Sanshaya (STa) which is the doubt. I do not. This is Akramanyata, we can say which not know how to describe this madness of is not working it out, not knowing about it, doubting. For example out of all of you not understanding it, whal Sahaja Yoga is, who have been here say at least how to manipulate this, what vibrations are, know how much percentage, have come out Even if you are in the moan, you may the second day with a very great statement: "Still I am doubting". how it works ot. People just say Oh, it is too much' be- cause they donot want to face reality be- cause as soon as your Kundalini comes up, you doubling ? What have you found out as soon the light comes in. Before the so far ? From where does this come ? Is eyes are ciosed, you see suddenly the light Mr. Ego about which I have given lectures comes in and you do not want to open your after lectures. It is Mr. Ego which is doubt- eyes, because it is too much, for you were ing it, because he does not want you to find sleeping. Even if you open your eyes a the Absolute. You are identified with your little bit, Oh God, you do not want to face ego and you do not want to find it because the light because you are identifled with this Mr. Ego has been guiding your life that state, you do not want to open your throughout. Now you want to doubt. Doubt Is that the sign of wisdom ? What are Nirmala Yoga 11

 what ? What are your doubting ? You feel there are certain things one has to follow. If the cool breeze. All right. Sit down then. you are going on the road, you see you are It would be something like somebody ente- used to, say, continental driving. So always ring into a college, University and sitting you turn an the wrong side, But in London. down there and the teacher says "Now this you will be arrested. In the same way you Is the diagram, I give you". Students get have been doing continental driving. Now you up and say 'We doubt". Really, what should are in London. So you better fake to the ways of Londoners and understand the roads, the maps and the regulations needed the teacher say ? But they will not say that because they and try to follow them. But you are doub- have paid the fees. They have paid it. Even ting it. That's the main point. Then you if it is a horrible drama, boring one, still we dont want to follow it. So Pramada is go through it because we have paid, you the mistakes that arise. Because Kundalni see, to go through it After all we have paid for it. What to do ?' But for Sahaja Yoga you comes here. To anyone who has been to any cannot pay. Ihave seen all kinds of tomioo- d awakening is a tree gift to anyone who sort of hell or heaven or has done very many lery people accept in so many Gurus Like common things that happen. But we blame somebody says "I am going to teach you Sahaja Yoga. We blame that spontaneous how to fly". They are absolutely ready for happening within us. We never take the that. They pay money and don't doubt, even blame upon ourselves that, no, I must have a bit, that the fellow who is propogating it, done this mistake. All right, does not matter. is he flying ? Have you seen him flying If I make mistakes I will rectify, its alright- anywhere ? Please at least ask that person to fly. They will see the Kundalini rising Mother is forgiving no doubt, but some- my forgiveness is of no use, because until and unless you realise take you would go this way Instead of that. yot bave gone that way. So the rule of the times With their eyes they will see it pulsating, rising, breaking here Still they will sit down and say, 'I am doubting'. Now who are vou? How far have you reached ? Why are you it was a mis- read is to be understood. That is the one doubting ? What are you doubting ? What have you known about yourself ? comes to us called Pramada. After that we have another inherent problem. It is called Now humble down yourself at this point. as Bhrama-darshan (g-7sa) hallucina- Humble down in your heart. "I have notknown tions. We slart seeing hallucinations, spe- myself. I have to know myself Thave not cially people who take LSD and all such known myself. I have not got the Absolute. things. They do not see me. Some times With what instrument I am doubting ?* This they just see light or any such hallucina- past. They may see me as something else. If you see me in dreams it is all right or see something in dreams it is alright. But you that's called (HT2). It is the one by which we go on fal- Bhrama Darshan. Bhrama' means illusion. developing illusions. is one of the greatest hurdles of Kundalini tion of the future or of the awakening, even after awakening, called as "Sanshaya'. OF The fourth one, we can call it Pramada seeing something start tering all the time. Foolish questions. I mean Then start you 12 Nirmala Yoga

 The worst part of it is that people start telling herent dangers in the way of sustaining our lies about it. I know about everyone. When realisation which is very Important to under- this Bharama-darshan starts it is the most stand. dangerous thing for vibrations also. Now two other big dangers which we Some people are absolutely cocksure suffer from apart from that. The people get about themselves, I see that. And they possessed and get ideas into their heads. tell all the world, they will dominate They start singing songs, this that. I am so everybody saying that vibrations of this thing embarassed. I do not know what to say. are not good, the vibrations of that thing are i see not good while they have no mastery over it. But I just do not know how to tell then 'Oh, Now I have to be very careful. I like a teacher. So I say alright, give yourself is but they will just come up and say Mother a bandhan and put your hands towards me and see for yourself and all that. a devil speaking through them, cannot talk please stop. Even praising me I know what we want to sing a song to you'. All right. | cannot say anything because they do not know from where they get this knowledge. If they by any chance know that I have it's something else doing this. Because of found out that they are lying, then they all these problems that you get possessed. are finished. I must keep their falsehood to The other day somebody came to me and me, You see I am very careful because I know said Mother, | am feeling very con- (hey are on a very stippery ground. So even fident if I mention in a way that is not so blunt And l feel like daing something very still it might happen. But one must know high handed.' And he did it. First he saw that it is for our good, that we have to stick the possession coming into him and then on to our truth. And we should not be led he did it and did it in a very bad way. Every- away by our own ideas about ourselves. about myself. Cocksure, really. body is angry with him I know. But 1 am not, because something is done in posses- Then another thing that comes is Vishaya sion: You do not know what madness people Chitta (faga-faĦ) in which the attention is may do when they get possessed. I mean attracted by objects of your previous identi- they should end up in lunatic asylum but fications where your attention has been. You because of being Sahaja Yogis they do all are, say fond of cricket. Alright you are but these things. But stil they are not station- you should not be a sick person. I mean cricket does not mean that you become a cricket bat. for anything else. For all practical purpo- This is an inherent danger in a person. ed where they should be. Then there are two more states in which And you are good for nothing a Kundalini which rises also falls down. ses you are dead. That kind of craziness for anything whatsoever gets your attention Many people have asked me, "Mother, on into a very wrong state, is also not good stav, part of it. Sometimes it is very thin for all the Sahaja Yogis. if we get realisation, does it stay ?" It does part of it, sometimes the whole thing is Today the lecture is more for the Sahaja sueked back. It is sucked back. If so, Yogis. I am pointtng out what are the in- then you will say, 'we start doubting'. Where Nirmala Yoga 13

 is it written that you will be lifted up and put into something great, whatever may be your a way that you really establish yourself as a problems ? here if I have to go to India, I have to get becomes a part and parcel of your being, innoculations and vaccinations. I have to by which you have no doubts left. From And you have still to work it out in such Is it possible ? Even from fulfledged Sahaja Yogi by which collectivity get my passport, go through an interview. thoughtless awareness When you have to enter into the Kingdom doubtless awareness. of God then you are going to be judged, not that happens to you-is not My but is a only judged but even, when supposing you state-in which only the Kundalini will rise are given a grace mark and allowed to get whenever you will raise your hands. Unless into the plane, may be they ask you to get and until you've achieved that state please down. That happens with some people that try to work it out. Do not be lazy. You have the Kundalini falls down. It is a very very te see around yourself. Meet people, talk dangerous sign It comes through problems to them. The more you talk about it the like wrong Gurus and going to wrong places, more you do it. The more you give it, the also going to spirits and doing black magic. more it will flow. The more you sit at Also bowing before people who are not in- home, 'O! I carnations, worshipping wrong type of dei- Nothing. ties and also doing mad rituals, fasting at You have to give it to others. You have to wrong times and not understanding the give it to more and more people. Thousands signs of fasting and of ritualism and chak- of them have to have it. And that's why it is ras and connections and complete synthe- sis of Sahaja Yoga. In some people you the idea that you have all the powers of the have seen that Kundalini rises and immedia- world already manifesting. Never when these tely falls down. This is a very very dange- powers really manifest you are aware of rous thing. Really it is very troublesome them. Absolutely, I mean, imagine the sun also you jump into Unless and until am doing my puja at home"- It will stagnate and stagnate. - important that you donot get bloated with saying, I am the sun'. Does he say he is the sun ? What is there Last danger which you should know is you that you start feeling that you have become If you go and ask the sun "Are you the sun ?' He will say 'Yes, by the way I am. What can I do about it ?" It's that simple. God or like an incarnation or something. This is the biggest danger. You become a very simple person. Abso- Then you start taking law into your own Jutely simple Bęcause there is no camou- hands and start ordering others or doing flage, no complication. You are that. So, all kinds of high handed business or get if anybody asks you the funny question you over self-satisfied with yourself. This is a very big danger. Humility is the only way to true. 1 mean say, 'by the way what is there to ask ? It is I am a realised soul. I am. know that there is an ocean before you. You What does it matter ?" With this understan- have got into the boat alright. But you have ding we have to go to Sahaja Yoga. I to know a lot. You have to understand a lot. must say I am surprised how itis working And you have still to attend to your attention, miraculously ! And it is working out. But it's to your Chitta, to your awareness. you who can settle it within yourself. 14 Nirmala Yoga

 So today at this juncture when we are celebrating a great event of Christ's life, let Now, among you, some are only on the peripheri. We keep them on the peripheri. That you know very well. Some of them us know Christ is born within us. And the come in the centre, And there are some, very Bethlehem is within us. You do not have few, who are in the inner circle. them are in a state where they can be there and we have to look after it It is still thrown out like a tangent goes out, you see. And then you do not understand why a have to look after it. So the light really grows Sahaja Yogi behaved like that. If you see and people know that you are realised souls. some Sahaja Yogi behaving like that, going Nobody will doubt that you are not. at a tangent, know that you might do the same. So be careful. All of to go to Bethlehem. It is within us. He is a child. You have to respect it. And you May God Bless You All. MANTR AS "Om Twamewa Sakshat, Shri (Name of Deity) Sakshat, Shri Mataji, Shri Nirmala Devi Namoh Namah" For Mooladhara Chakra, "Ganesha" Kundalini-Mata" *Jagadamba" Sira- Ram" Centre Heart, Right Heart, Left Heart, Visshudi, Agnya, Mooladhara, Nabhi, Swadisthan, "Brahmader-Saraswati" Void, "Laxshmi-Vishnu" Shiva-Parvat" Radha-Krishna" “Adi Guru Datratreya" "Jesus-Mary" For Sahasrara "Om Twamewa Sakshat. Shri Mahalaxshmi, Mahasaraswati, Mahakali, Trigunat- mika, Kundalini Sakshat, Shri Adi Shakti, Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Namoh Namah" "Om Twamewa Sakshat, Shri Kalki Sakshat, Shri Adi Shakti, Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Namoh Namah" "Om Twamewa Sakshat, Shri Kalki Sakshat, Shri Sahasrar Swamini Moksha Pradayini Mataji, Shri Nirmala Devi Namoh Namah" Shri Nirmala Devi Namo Namah Shri Nirmala Devi Namo Namah Shri Nirmala Devi Namo Namah Nirmala Yoga 15

 Translation of a Marathi letter from Her Holiness Shri Mataji My dear Sahaja Yogis Human Chitta has many illusions. When they are removed, human Chitta becomes enlightened and blissful. Many of your illusions have been removed by Kundalini awakening. 1. You have realised that Kundalini is not 7. How has this universe been made ? Why made? Is Paramatma existing ? These doubts are basic. Even Gods (Devas) have an imaginary but a living power in man. 2. This power is within every human being not understood them. But what I have and its awakening takes place spontaneously told is right or in a normal person. wrong, can be ascer- tained on vibrations. For that vibrations 3. This awakening does not take place by should be good. any act. But if a person has committed bad When you will learn with your experience deeds, awakening is not possible because that love and truth are one and when with in sleeping stale is aware of the past deeds your experiences you will realise your very of the person. Kundalini She has righteous- subtle Brahma-totwa, then your illusion, that ness and although she is mother in witness Brahma is detached, will go. Divine princi- state she knows what is good and bad for p'e i.e. Brahma will blossom from within the person. Diseased body and mind get you as lotus and its fragrance will spread. Impurities will go from physical, sublle and causal bodies. When your Chitta becomes Brahma then the iillusion due to unreal will LT. cured by the grace of Kundalini. 4 Kundalini shakti is the power of desire of Bhagwati. She is easily awakened just he destroved. by the wish (Sankalpa) of Bhagawati. A person of very high order has to put in 8. Although Brahma-tatwa (Divine element) great efforts for it But it is not his fault. is like sun, its rays reflect on unreal (water) and that disturbs your attention. It will not 5. Brahma-tatwa which is flowing within be disturbed when your Chitta becomes you in the form of vibrations cleans all your Brahma (sun) itself. This illusion will go by three sheaths viz. Body, Mind and Ego. meditation is the company of ever loving When any of these sheaths becomes im- Bhagawati. pure your vibrations give you the indications. 9. You have become collective conscious. 6. You get the bliss of the spirit, if you This power of collective consciousness become of sound body, pure mind and ego- which is awakened within you, is Brahma less. Vibrations of bliss flow from the Shakti and it is present in the universe, in different forms and even in molecules. It is spirit because its light beams unaffected. Nirmala Yoga 16

 the solidity (Jada-Shakti) in solids, in living You have understood all these, but sho uld beings it is beauty (Saundarya Shakti), in experience them. You should have steady waking state it is the power of bliss, in mind and surrendering your heart become Sahaja Yoga it is the power of conscious- free from the illusion. These are my ness bliss, in Param Yoga it is supreme blessings. bliss and within Bhagwati it is the power of being Brahma (Brahma-bhootwa shakti), Ever yours Mother Nirmala CONFIDENCE IN OUR VIBRATIONS Vibratory awareness is a precious gift we menls. Sometimes we feel that a particular receive after our Realisation. A new field situation should be handled in a particular of judgement is opened in front of us, shows way, but when the moment of action arrives, us wider horizons Our sense of discrimi- the moment of taking the final decision, we nation, symbolized by the swan who can go backwards. We are afraid. In that mo- separate the milk from the water, develops ment joy goes away from our hearts and and gives us more assurance, more confi- instead of it non-confidence settles there. dence in our decisions. Where there was The decision will not any more be the one darkness we now see light, where we would coming from the Unconseious feel incertitude we are now sure. The cor- rect way, the Right Path is shown to us through vibrations. misuse this wonderful gift and try to get an answer to our petty daily things, through birds learning how to fly, and as soon as we vibrations. This power was given to us by cannot go further we are taken in the nest. the enormous generosity of ADI SHAKTI, And again through HER GRACE we will try, best to be used in a correct way, We should til we are capable of doing it on our own. On the contrary, if we deeply believe we were given this power, we will always be confident and we will always feel the atten- tion of Shri Mataji on us. But sometimes, we We are like little, not waste it. ff not used correctly we may lose it, and then the answer we had looked for will nol be the good one. At such stage powers, shows us the way of doing things, we lose confidence-confidence in ourselves and then leaves us free to act by ourselves, and immediately in Sahaja Yoga. The same way Shri Mataji gives us always under Her Loving Care, Wise Gui- dance, Tremendous Compassion. But if each time we use it, we do it from the heart, for a worthy purpose, the sure answer will come even when not expecled face reality and to learn how to fly with all but with a sign easily recognized by a the joy in our HEARTS through the unlimi- Sahaja Yogi, as coming from the Divine. It is time for us to be strong, to grow to ted LOVE flowing from Shri Mataji. JAI MATAJI This sort of a happening should give us confidence in ourselves, in our own judge- Maria Amelia de Kalbermatten Nirmala Yoga 17

 Advice of the Primordial Master Tao is Adi Shakti. The study of Tao pursued by Shri Lao Tzu is thus unveiling some as- When I tend to work too much with the tongue: pects of our so elusive cosmic Mather but it also teaches quite a few intere sting things about ourselves. For instance, some of us, "He who knows does not speak; He who speaks does not know. He who is truthful is not showy; He who is showy is not truthful." western or westernized Sahaja Yogis, do sometimes tend to carry out the spreading of Sahaja Yoga with right side attitudes. Now the right side movement fills us with the products of our own sympathetic activity and will power such as individualistic cons- ciousness, yearning for the fruits of the actions, efforts, strivings and, perhaps, competitivity and tensions. However only when we are empty, freed from all these things, can we be filied with Tao. Shri Lao Tzu wanted the childrenof Tao to acknow- (Tao Te Ching 81) When I stick to old mental patterns in seeking achievements: He who pursues learning will increase every day He who pursues Tao will decrease everyday, He will decrease and continue to decrease, Till he comes to non-action; ledge this. Hence he kept a few wonderful lines for me: By non-action everything can be done." (Tao Te Ching 48) - For instance when I'm inclined to work - When I feel sad not to go to India, to London or wherever is Shri Mother : loo much with Mantras : *"Tao was always nameless. *Without going out of the door When for the first time applied to function, One can know the whole world; Without peeping out of the window One can see the Tao of heaven, Therefore the Sage knows every- thing without travelling; it was named. Inasmuch asS names are given, one should also know where to stop. Knowing where to stop one can become imperishable." (Tao Te Ching 32) He accomplishes everything without doing it." (To be really modern we can stop after one name : NIRMALA !) (Tao Te Ching 47) Nirmala Yoga 18

 When I forget to take my inspiration and guidance in the example set by ny SEEKERS OF TRUTH! Divine Mother: To you who seek Ne'r mind how meek Your search is not futile For they who found True yoga's shore Had searched millennium's mile. "The great Tao pervades everywhere, hoth on the left and on the righr. By it all things came into being, and it does not reject them. Merits accomplished, it does not possess Seek not for gain Seek not for fame In this truth stays concealed Seek the truth them. It loves and nourishes all things but does not dominate over them. It is ever non existent, therefore it cun be named as smalt. Inside yourself And all will be revealed All things return home to it, and it does not claim mastery over thes; therefore it can be name d as great. On Yoga's Shore By Sahaja's score The way to truth prevails And Mataji Nirmala's here To show us Truth unveiled. Because it never assiumes greatness, there- fore it can accomplish greatness." (Tao Te Ching 34) To you who seek Ne'r mind how meek Time can only allay When outstretched arms We bow to the unfathomable depth of the Adi Guru who has led us in so many ways to the Immaculate Lotus Feet of the Great Goddess. O Mother, with a tiny sparkle of His humour and of His wisdom, we, who are to be gurus in Sahaja Yoga, will convey Thy message of redemption with proper nuance, sweetness, dedication, effectiveness and style. O Devi, only Thee in the three worlds is able to enlighten in mere mortals the mani- fold qualities of true gurudom. Glory to Thee for ever and ever. It is said in the Devi Mahatmyam that those who serve Thee be- come themselves the refuge of the Universe. Of yogis who Await to show the way. And when the truth Adorns your head And you in light abound Seek not To keep it to yourself "Tis here heaven's key is found. Jai Mataji Bill Hansel -A half full yet half empty Birmingham England Child of Tao 19 Nirmala Yoga

 eee we must also correct the sins of commis- U sion, that is the failure to become, for Antar Yoga instance, sweeter and more considerate people. As we watch ourselves we will see these effects more clearly. As Christ has said, watch and pray. When the flow of vibration in our meditation is absolutely even, silent, without direction towards any BECAUSE of the enlightenment of the chakras, whatever is done externally after objec, then we have balanced our outward self realisation is reflected within. Thus mantra and yantra, prayers and gestures, have a meaning only after realisation. Even show on the part of our ego. Again, this so, gestures and words remain empty if we do not have our Mother as the residing deity of all chakras, and specially we have to place our Mother in our hearts if antar yoga behaviour and the inner yoga can work to take us deeper without outward effort or will only happen if Shri Mataji is in:our hearts as the Kshipra Prasadini -who showers blessings on Her devotees very a quickly-and as the Vanchitartha Prasadini who bestows on Her devotees the objects is to be complete. It seems so obvious, - but many Sahaja Yogis remain half hearted of worship. Thus oneself becomes one nevertheless because this has not been with the formless, all-pervading, attribute- understood. Recognition of Shri Mataji as the complete incarnation of Adi Shakti, em- known except through worship, praise, bodying every deity which is to be worship- meditation and ultimately silence. ped, is the only way to get rid of inner negativity, to feel vibrations property, and to establish oneself in the divine kingdom of all give thanks to have been born in an age joy and bliss. This has to be verified, but when it has been possible to know perso- it is a fact less Queen of the Universe who cannot be On the birthday of our Divine Mother we nally the most complete incarnation which has been known in all the history of man- Because external action and desire is kind. Again and again we pray to Her, not reflected within, the chakras become clean to lead us into the Maya of believing that or dirty according to our outward behaviour. deities are different and Mataji Shri Nirmala If the behaviour is false or artificial, even if Devi is different. To know the deities one must know Mataji, and not the other way we are doing the gestures of what we believe is Sahaja Yoga, still our left side round. Thank you Mother, for giving us this will be weak. Sins of commission are big chance. May Your children make you corrected by correct outward gesture, but proud and manifest Your glory on Earth. Nirmala Yoga 20

 Christ, the Buddha and Lord Krishna had this authority and hence the power to transform humanity. ********** ******E Lighting the Lamps A leader who practices what he preaches is like the rising sun which sheds light and shows the way. Lord Krishna states in the Sri Bhagwat Gita, "Whatsoever a great man does, the same is done by others as well. атрз Whatever standards he sets the world follows" III (21). This is not a mere scriptural quotation but a reality which was verified in recent times in the living example of Mahatma Gandhi. His personal example permeated the hearts of millions and inspired their When a child becomes more aware he be- course of action which changed the destiny YOGI MAHAJAN gins to observe his surroundings. listens intently to all sounds and watches carefully the movements of his parents, As his faculties develop he begins to imitate Не of India despite the most formidable odds. In becoming the example lies the secret the mannerism of his parents and gradually of a successful teacher. Sahaj Yogis have. learns by their example. In fact from the to become the samples of Sahaja Yoga child we can know the quality of his parents that others may learn by thier example. The for his behaviour reflects their upbringing. example we set should be so sincere that others are compelled to enquire who we are, who has adorned us like this. This will bring glory to our Mother and She will be proud of us. Then our small family will We learn by example and it continues to be the most effective method of education. In fact moral education can only be impar- ted through this method. A child is taught to speak the truth but if the teacher tells family. Therefore, we have to be careful lies then the teaching loses credibility and and should investigate and check ourselves, fails to register. Our politicians preach whether our deeds are in harmony with our honesty but if they are themselves corrupt speech. While we talk of love and forgive- cross all frontiers and become a universal then no one lends ear to their lectures and ness our actions are not a negation. While we accuse others of fanaticism we are not ourselves being carried away. For the eyes does not come from the source of truth. of the world have become very suspicious Truth has its own streng th. When one has and are always looking for an opportunity the moral standards turther deteriorate. Their message fails to inspire because it become the truth then his words have great for criticism. ( Continued on next Page ) authority and strike deep. The words of the 21 Nirmala Yoga ******* ***

 TRANSLATION OF HER HOLINESS MATAJI'S LETTER IN HINDI 21-10-1976 within you. This flame of kundalini will be kindled and one within you will become the My dear Sahaja Yogis, my dear children, Let this Diwali enlighten you with light torch. Torch is not extinguished. Then of tove, You yourself are the lamps which there will be spotless sheath of my love. It burn high and don't get pressed by the cover. will neither have any limits nor any end. I They become much more powerful than the cover. It is their own asset. When they are hit upon, they are disturbed and extin- guished. will be watching you. My love for you is showering as many many biessings. Why are our lamps disturbed ? You should think over it. Is there no transparent sheath around them ? Have you forgotten Yours always loving Mother NIRMALA your Mother's love and therefore you are so disturbed? As the glass protects the lamp, in the same way my love will protect you LIGHTING THE LAMPS ( Continued from last Page) But the glass should be kept clean. How can I explain ? Have I to say like Shri Krishna "Leave all religions and surrender tions, as loving, generous, gracious, for- to me" or as Shri Jesus "I am the way, I am giving and patient as our Mother. It is the Yes, we are to be as gentle as the vibra- the door." greatest blessing to have found the source I want to tell that I an that destination. of all great examples (Trigunatmika); now But will you people accept it ? Will this fact Tet us imbibe those qualities and mature. go to your hearts ? P. Then we shall become pure and effective channels of transmitting that great blessing. Although what I say is distorted, the The sweet fragrance and colours of a flower truth will always stand. You cannot change attract naturally. Similarly the fragrance and what It is. ill attract others backward. I am unhappy because of that Only you will remain ignorant and beauty of our qualily wi spontaneously and the message will spread, Diwali is the day of real aspirations. Invoke the whole universe. Many lamps of ray exemplifies all the goodness of the sun have to be lit, and looked after. Add the oil likewise we may exemplify Her...that of love, Kundalini is the wick and awaken Thy kingdom come Thy will be done on the kundalini of others with light of the spirit earth as it is in Heaven. Let us pray to Shri Mataji that as a beam Nirmala Yoga 22

 ple are against Sahaja Yoga and, if miserly people come, Igive them troubles. If you are miserly, you get lots of trouble. Her Holiness Shri Mataji's ADVI CE 9. Don't be too talkative also. If you be- come too talkative and troublesome, I can stop your talking. If you don't talk at all, that is also not good. That means, don't go 1. It is nothing but love which expands, to extremes. gives you vibrations, again reverts back, goes in parabolas, like that which you call a 10. Magnanimity of mind is very pleasing pradakshina (Circumabulation of Shakti ). and it attracts others. This magnanimity lies within human being and is awakened by Kundalini. But how can those people have What is Shakti ? Shakti is Paraboli. 2: I am old woman of thousands of years. this joy of spontaneity who are living in So, I know everything. artificial atmosphere ? Although Kundalini has been awakened and She has pierced 3. Many people think ego is horrid. Ego Brahmarandhra yet heart must be pierced. you must have. You have not to fight with your ego. Only thing is that your ego should But some Sahaja Yogis have hearts fike become one with that of God, that's all. It's stones, absolutely devoid of love; they use a very simple thing if you just become one with God. Everything is so simple. It is a very simple thing, but you cannot do it. So Occasions I have seen, people push others | am here. sarcastic words while talking to others and want to show that they are great. On many or shout at others even in my presence. Particularly, when you shout at the children, 4. My photograph is the photograph of I feel pain in my heart. At least Sahaja reality. Whatever I speak, because I am That, Yogis should have deep love for each other. it is Pranava fiowing. It is actually Pranava. When you know that you are the children of My every talk, everything, is mantra going the same Mother, why do you look down upon some people ? Are you perfect ? Are there no faults in you ? We only talk of universal 5. Do not have Sahaja Yogis for business love. If you have no love for each other out. partnership. amongst you, then in which mankind will it 6. Do not use Sahaja Yoga for making be seen ? All I want to tell you is to clean money. You have to be generous people, your minds of venomous thoughts that vou You have to be honest. Be satisfied in your have for other Sahaja Yogis. If a Sahaja Yogi visits your town, invite him, heart. 7. You have to lead a chaste life, See look after him, as if he is your brother. His happiness will purify your homes, I cannot chaste things. Your priorities will change, your friends will change., You will not like understand how there can be groups among the Sahaja Yogis, because every moment your condition is improving or going down. (Continued on Page No. 25) dirty jokes. You have to be decent people. 8. Don't be misers at all. All miserly peo- Nirmala Yoga 123

 THE ANSWER, MY FRIENDS, IS BLOWING IN THE WIND How can we follow up a visit of Shri very much doing all the practical work. For Mataji ? All the Sahaja Yogis have raised advertising the programmes we distributed this question. and many have felt the answer. It is amazing to witness Sahaja medium size posters and 151 large size Yoga establish itself and spread all over the posters with Shri Mataji's photograph. world! It is wonderful! over thousand leaflets, we printed 351 They were put all over Rome and the town was once again vibrated. The first pro- It was hardly one year ago, in Nov. 1981, gramme followed the usual pattern : a gene- that Shri Mataji gave Her first public pro- ral introduction, a video tape show and gramme in Rome. At this time, about 250 collective realisation. For the second eve- to 300 people got their realisation. But, as ning, just before the tape we gave a short it is Sahaja Yoga which chooses those who are entitled to carry on the Plan of God, the a technical explanation and two Sahaja Almighty, only the few who had a great Yogis spoke about their own experience. desire to become Sahaja Yogis have worked it out, it is in this spirit that we decided to commemorate Shri Mataji's most precious had said : "I am definitely coming to Rome" gift in organizing two public programmes. and She kept Her promise, not with Her We wanted to introduce Sahaja Yoga and physical presence but through the power- illustrate its concrete application to every- full flow of vibrations. day life. resume of what was said the day before, Just before leaving Vienna Shri Mother The shower of blessings from the Adi Shakti rained upon us as tremendous vibrations that gave reali- Two special days were chosen for the sation to more than fifty people. All the meetings. The 30th Nov. and the 1st Dec. Sahaja Yogis were standing at the back, in that is, respectively, Shri Ganesha's day and the day of the full moon to flow in the stream a compact row, similar to Shri Shiva's ar- rows ready to be shot, and were collectively raising the Kundalini of a public which of auspiciousness. Our collectivity directed the maximum of proved to be sensitive and attentive. All of attention and desire towards reaching as us Sahaja Yogis have the feeling that some many seekers as possible and being able to among the new realised brothers and sisters bring them to our Holy Mother's Lotus Feet. While last April, during the second coming eagerly waiting for the follow up meeting ! of Shri Mataji to Rome, our collective atten- Really, the Divine Strategist who constantly tion was concentrated an Her arrival, this has been supporting and guiding us, ever time we aimed at the seekers and enjoyed present in our minds, hearts and souls, are of a very high quality, and they were Nirmala Yoga 24

 fully enlightened us as if we were the war- the Feet of the Great Mother of the Universe, riors of Her celestial army, equipped with as stated by Shri Krishna when He told Sword and shield, love and wisdom, engag- Arjuna : "Give thy mind to me, and give me ed in the battle against the anti God forces. thy heart, and thy sacrifice and adoration. This is my Word of promise : thou shalt in To thank the Divine Molher for the atten- truth come to me, for thou art dear to me." tion She gave us we performed a puja the next Sunday. We gathered together at 8.00 p.m., got up at 2.00 a.m. and read the ped Shri Mother, and, with Her special "Devi Mahatmyam" to celebrate to Great permission, we will dedicate to Her the Goddess; again, the vibrations were so strong and cool, again the answer was blo- wing in the wind to tell us our puja was accepted. It was the best sign from the glorious spouse of Sri Sadashiva that the Spirit was pleased with Her small small children. Once again we thank our most worship- "Thanks Giving Puja". Rome, Dec. '82 -Flavia, Guido, Pedro Her Holiness Shri Mataji's A DV I CE (Continued from Page No. 23) We felt the immense, boundless, unlimi- Know that making such groups is disas- fed Divine Organisation and Power behind trous. Look at the good qualities of others us. This intimate relationship to the All and enjoy their love. Don't worry about their was, for instance, expressed in the secret bad qualities. Leave them for me. You will complicity of Shri Indra and Shri Vayu whom realise in meditation that this is the only way we invoked and prayed as rain was threate- of opening the fountains of bliss. ning the day we were to put the posters Well, they took away the blanket of clouds, 11. Sahaja Yogi parents have great res- letting through blue sky and sunshine. Shri ponsibility towards their realised children. Hanumana, as usual, took care of hundred They have to be protected, disciplined and details and encouraged us with many aus- brought up in proper atmosphere of love. picious signs. The extent of His friend- Realised children cannot tolerate nega- liness cannot be discribed here. tivity. They fight with it. In truth, we must declare that the whole 12. I do everything in collective conscious- work has been done by the only and true ness. If I cure one person, many such cases Thinker. Planner and Doer who has inspir- ed us all the time, by Shri Mataji Nirmala become alright automatically. Devi. Articles & Experiences Thus, at this particular time of our life we realise the highest privilege of being chosen by GOD Himself to accomplish His work, and the importance of doing it in a very are requested detached way leaving the fruits of action at Nirmala Yoga 25

 MITHYA* My dear Damle, of illusory ideas become a part of your mind. False thoughts like it is mine or they are mine,' identify with outside objects ! Besi- Many blessings, Received your letter It is a very good sign to feel a pull on Sahasrar, because sign to feel a pull on Sahasrar. because des, man-made bindings such as "My body only through Sahasrar endless rays are poured in man's heart and new doors of cated. Then unreal relationships like, 'he is inner being are opened. But before this my father, he is my brother, she is my grace descends in, there should be a pull in Sahasrar. We understand the pull of heart which is also silent, but lop-sided, that is emotional But pull of Sahasrar becomes allround. There, man is in integrated state, in that Dharma (righteousness) and aware- ness implore for chaitanya (Divine Cons- separation, sorrow, attachment under the ciousness) that is God's love. This hapPpens of social status. Man with great affection should be healthy and beautiful" are incul- mother', are on your head. As ego develops, foolish ideas, such as, 'l am rich, I am poor, I am helpless, or I belong to high family etc. come in your head. Many officials and and politicians become egoists (Donkeys). Then, there are anger, hatred forebearance, cover of love and temptations in the guise spontaneously. Although it is the skill of your Kundalini, your personality should keeps clinging to this unreal way of life. strengthen the Kundalini You earned that quality in previous lives and hence this life is great that gems of persons are available for my work. If you think of getting rid of all these, and make efforts, what you get is illusory know- ledge, because the attention (Chitta) moves e along Pingala Channel, and then you are involved in Siddhis (Powers) and other If you underständ physical being is here I am all over, it should Chakras is also illusory because there is no also be realised that even this body is an gain from it, on the contrary it is harmful. unreal (Mithya) appearance. It is difficult Whatever self-controls and mortifications to come to thiis stage but if gradually unreal you insist on practising effectively, all of is discerned, the truth will be eslablished them add to the limitations on your Chitta effortlessly and waves of great bliss will (attention). As such there is no way for envelop your being I am explaining, in this liberation. letter, what is unreal (Mithya). It should be read out to all and assimilated by all. that although my temptations A vision of Kundalini and But all unreal does not fall off with the Self-Realization. It can be broken off gradu- Unreal starts soon after the birth in this ally. If, with firm conviction, you deny from world. Your name, village, country, horo- your heart all that is unreal (Mithya), you scope, forecasts, many such things get will have the realization of the Self (Atman) attached to you or others attach them to you. in its pure form. Thereafter it is established Once Brahmarandhra is closed, many types within you. Albeit, the same mortal human 26 Nirmala Yoga

 that everything about it is taken care of. nature of love, truth, having no beginning There are many instances to prove it. Then, and end, verily the Shiva. Human Chitta is in whatever you do, your Chitta (attention) meant for realizing that reality. This Chitta remains in oneness with the Self. All bind- must become one with that Atman. Only Ings of sin (Pap) and merit (Punya) are that Chitta, which progresses renouncing snapped. Distinctions like worldly and non- all unreal (Mithya), breaks all known and wordly vanish, because that wicked darkness, unknown bindings and becomes verily the which has created all the discriminations, ends. Everything becomes auspicious in the light of true knowledge, whether it is the des- Atma is never disturbed or destroyed. truction done by Shri Krishna or the Cross of Chitta is drenched In that which is of the Self. Only human attention (Chitta), in pursuit of Shri Jesus. desires, leaves its inner path. This is Maya All this will not be understood by explai- (the illusion). She has been intentionally created. Without her the attention (Chitta) ning. Just showing the path will not help, would not have developed. You should not The path will be known only after walking be afraid of Maya and should recognise her on it so that She will illuminate your path. Cloud hides the sun as also makes it seen. In the same way once the Maya is identified she moves aside and the sun is seen. The sun is always there but what is the purpose of write their own experiences and progress. cloud ? Because of cloud you have an urge VWhen I come to see the sun which shines for a moment Virata's channels (Nadis) you have awaken- and again hides somewhere. It gives ed. It appears, this work will come up in the strength and courage to your sight to see case of holy land of India, and when fully the sun. Man has been created with such developed, it will spread in all countries and great efforts Only one step on his feet and directions. all is successlul. ing possible. Hence, I have come as your When I get your letters I fix the targets. After some time even that will not be necessary. But, for the present all should we will see how many of But, still it is not becom- When Sahasrar day was celebrated in London today, I.e. 5th May, I invited only about 20-25 people and decided further Mother. Write your problems to me in letters. Sit course of action. down in meditation. It is best to discuss only Sahaja Yoga even amongst each other. Attention (Chitta) should always be kept going deeper and deeper within. Forget out- side as much as possible. Have confidence Many blessings and infinite love to all. 19.7. Ever yours-Your Mother -Nirmala *Translation of Her Holiness Matajı's letter in Marathi sent on the occasion of Sahasrar day celebrations on 5.5.1975. Nirmala Yoga 27

 super-ego and ego respectively. Super-ego is sub-conscious and ego is supra-cons- cious, By accepting conditioning the super- ego gets inflated and we move towards the sub-conscious and by rejecting condition- ings ego is inflated and we move towards Yoga Sahaja and Cure Physical **** R. D. KULKARNI supra-conscious. If movement in either of As all Sahaja Yogis know, sympathetic these two directions is excessive the collec- nervous system and seven Chakras govern physical and mental health of human beings. satisfied dead-spirits reside and the result be entered. It is in these regions that un- The left sympathetic nervous system ie. Ida channel controls the emotional aspects Tantrikas enter these areas in order to cap- may be a possession. Of course some of human nature, attitude of delving in the ture dead spirits and use them for their own past, desires etc. Ida channel is the moon channel and with Pingala Nadi it maintains the balances cause many diseases. It has been balance of heat and cold in the constitution. known for some time to medical science The right sympathetic nervous system i.e. Pingala Nadi is responsible for physical side of the human being and also controls creative aspects of human nature. It keeps the balance Togy) are more likely to suffer from heart of heat and cold with Ida Nadi in the cons- purposes. On the physical level these im- that people with overactivity of the Pingala Channel (type A characters in their termino- attack. In Sahaja Yoga we know the expla- nation; over-activity of the Pingala Nadi drains the Ida Nadi especially the left heart and a heart attack is the result. Generally titution. Excessive use of one side causes imbalance in the system. Too much of sleep, thinking of the past, speaking over-activity of the Pingala Nadi lethargic nature result into over activity of causes over-activity of the organs for left side and correspondingly right side re- exampie high blood-pressure, hot liver mains unused. Over-working of physical (right Nabhi and right Swadisthan). Over- and mental faculties lead to imbalance, in activity of left sympathetic results into that right side is over active and left side is lethargic liver, lethargic heart, thus slowing less used. Right-sided people are ambi- tious and have tendency to dominate over others whereas left-sided people are sub- missive and aggressive towards themselves. pathetic in which case the heart is lethargic down their functions. It can also result into low blood-pressure. Heart-attacks can also originate from over-activity of left sym- and hence less pumping and slow blood Ida Channel begins in Mooladhar and circulation. Over-active heart leads to ex- terminates in limbic area while Pingala cess pumping of heart and fast blood circu- channel starts from right Swadisthan and lation. terminates in limbic area (Sahasrar). In originate from collective sub-conscious ie. day-to-day activities both the channels are cancer, virus infection, multiple sclerosis, constantly used and as a consequence their meningitis, Parkinson's disease, arthritis, terminal points are inflated like balloons into rheumatism, slip-disc, spondilosis, Tuber- Most of the diseases of left side Nirmala Yoga 28

 culosis, Asthama, Aneamia, Sciatica, Polio, which are to be destroyed. As Her Holiness Pryelities, Oste-myetitis, muscular dias- Mataji says, "Of what use they are? I am trophy. Paralysis. the diseases caused by left side do not suffer from fever. Similarly diseases of right side involve high fever. In these cases left side should be raised and orace ot God of particular side would lead to the diseases be added into right side. By and large patients of not here to give the realisation to chickens". Not-with-standing all that has been said. is not always necessary that over-activity related to that side alone Over-activity of right side may, as a reaction, trigger collec- Patients of left-side diseases should tive sub-consciousness and raise their right side and add grace of God diseases of left side like cancer. Hence into their left side. They should also put those who are on the extremes in this re- their left hand towards the photo ot Her gard, say excess physical and mental acti- Holiness Mataji and right hand kept away or vity, are vulnerable to the diseases of left kept raised so that back side of the palm side owing to too much of brain work; brain faces the photo.. It is disastrous to turn the gets tired and causes diseases, palm of raised hand towards the photo. Similarly those having the problems of right side should put their right hand towards the Badhas also These people should put left photo and raise left as stated eariier or keep hand towards the photo and ralse right händ cause the Left side diseases can be caused by as described above. Shoc-beating one's own name is also an effective treatment. It it away. Our diet has much to do with the balance is necessary for these people to invoke Shri of sympathetic nervous system and has to Ganesha and establish Him on their Mula- be suitably changed in order to correct the dhar by inner purification, innocence etc. Malnutrition can be cause of Devotion to Shri Mataji is of utmost impor- Hence those tance as Shri Ganesha will be pleased only imbalance. many left side ailments patients having lethergic organs should take if She is pleased, Influence of bad Gurus protein-rich food and even non-vegetarian also creates left side problems in which case food and less carbohydrates. Right sided left Swadisthan and complete left void and people (having over-active system) should left Agnya are affected. They should place avoid proteins and non vegerarian food and right hand on stomach and stretch left hand should take more carbohydrates and vegeta- towards the photo and pray "Mother, please rian food. VWhile on the subject of diet, it is make me my own Guru".. As Mother has imperative to warn the protagonists of vege- said that it is our Spirit that is our Guru and tarianism on philanthropic grounds, that hence once the Spirit is awakened one be- intellectual compassion on animals does more harm to themselves than any good to the animals. Compassion should emanate from the Spirit and only that compassion the Chakras and that ultimately leads to the (Kripa) works which comes from the heart. damages to the organs which are governed The intellectual marcy is useless. Know by the affected Chakra. Further, concerned which animals are to be preserved and deity of the Chakra recedes from it once the comes one's own Guru. Problems of left side or right side affect Nirmala Yoga 29

 Chakra is affected. Hence, the delty is in- It is however suggested that once cause of voked in the name of Her Holiness Shri the disease is attributed to a "Badha" one Mataji by saying the Mantra for that parti- should straight away recommend lime-chilli cular Chakra. For treatment, palm of oppo- treatment and the patient should also take site hand should be placed on affected to self-treatment as suggested earlier. Chakra and that hand should be stretched out towards the photo. Foot-soaking in luke- made of five Elements viz. Earth. Fire, Water, warm water with salt added in it is extremely Air, and Ether. Besides, two more elements useful and brings about quick relief. In the govern psychosomatic system which are worst cases, lime-chilli treatement becomes mind and intellect. Relation of the Chakra necessary, depending upon the judgement and Element and some of the diseases is of Sahaja Yogi, who is helping the patient. given below :- It is well known that human being is Element Deity Chakra Sh. Ganesha Earth Muladhar Chakra Sh. Gauri & Sh. Kundalini Muladhar Earth on left Sh. Brahmadeva Swadisthan Fire on right Sh. Saraswati Sh. Vishnu Water Manipur Sh. Lakshmi Sh. Shiva-Parvati Left Heart Sh. Jagadamba Centre Heart Air Right Heart Sh. Ram & Sita Ether Sh. Krishna & Radha Visshuddhi Sh. Jesus & Mary Fire Agnya HER HOLINESS MATAJI Sahasrar All 5 elements mind and Intellect Atma is on top as Sadashiva. (To be continued in next issue) Nirmala Yoga 30

 I'm sitting at a boring session of the UN Commission on social development where a communist delegate explains why everything is so beautiful in his: country. Should I take the floor and tell them about my country ? -Gregoire STATEMENT OF THE DELEGATE OF SAHAJLAND TO THE WORLD COMMISSION ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT Blablapur, the 7th Feb, 183 in Avidyaland that, all of you, distinguished and clever delegates, so aptly represent Mr. Chairman, distinguished Delegates, I have listened carefully to the declara- tions of my distinguished colleagues and I The impact of our First Economic Plan must congratulate them for their impressive on the unemployment rate has been very contribution to our debate. If our work positive. Most workers have been laid off and found time for meditation and enjo yment, will successfully going into small scale agro-industries or achieve its goal of being the greatest comic the artisanal production of natural goods, worshipping God and their own Spirit. follows this encouraging trend I am sure that our commission show in town. Businessmen do not worry about tomorrow Let me now, Mr. Chairman, expose some of the prominent features of my country in the field of social development. In Sahai- hardly any bank left to enable them to do land we have been able to dismantle in a very short time a great number of industries and services: we have practically wiped coliapse of the Insurance business. Trades- out the armament industry, the pharmaceu- men exchange goods with a generosity tical industry, the petro-chemical activities relating to the production of plastic, dras- professional category. Most administrators tically curbed down the automobile industry, and bureaucrats have been fired and I am the production of synthetic fabrics and of sure, distinguished delegates, that you will most unnecessary consumption goods. We all understand the wisdom of this move as have also abolished the noxious practice of your knowledge of this esteemed social tobacco growing. (A few plantations have class is quite deep indeed. been maintained to produce insecticides). All fermentation processes leading to the production of wines, liquors and gorgonzola society of Sahajland are most obvious in cheese are prohibited. So are most books, the so important field of education. Exis- magazines, movies and forms of the enter- ting universities and schools have been tainment business which are still popular closed down for the students (known as or about investing their money for there is so. Needless to say, this absence of wor- ries about the future has led to the welcome which did not, in the past, characterize this The changes brought about in the Nirmala Yoga 31

 Sadhakas; tune their attention inside to be reme Command is carried by the Uncons- taught by their own Spirit. The vice-chan- cious at thought's speed to the most re- cellors of the Sahaj Academy, all between mote security check-point. three and eight years old, are sometimes organizing seminars on topical issues such none other than Our Empress Herself, Her as doll rearing. Unfortunately adults are Sacred Holliness SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA not invited. The Supreme Command is headed by DEVI ! The Chief of Staff of the Supreme Almost all aspects of social life, Mr Command is Shri Vishnu while logistical ope- Chairman, have been touched by the wind rations are controlled by Shri Brahmadeva. of change which blows on my country. To They are most aptly seconded by two gene- give but one example which relates to town rals:Shri Bhairawa is incharge of our "search planning and house building, Sahaj archi- and destroy operations" and Shri Hanu- tects have abandoned the well known mana, while assuming many versatile func- practice of putting the bathroom in the tions, is the head of the best Intelligence middle of the living room. the other hand, is now closely linked to the world production of lemons. Health care, on Service in the world, I mean, in three worlds. In this short presentation of the Supreme Command I have ommitted to mention Shri Our success has been such, Mr Chair- Shiva. This is because he represents our man, that many peopte ara now applying for absolute, metanuclear deterrent who would citizenship in Sahaj land. Unfortunately, as enter into action only in case of the final holocaust, that is Tandava. I have not be at times somewhat tricky. Indeed, with- mentioned either the Commander-in-Chief out the raising of the Kundalini and the of the army. I know that, in the past, he has opening of the sahasrara, the entry visa in been identified by the spies of Avidyaland Sahajland cannot be granterd Many people which were known as the "religious esta with faked visa have been found out by blishment"-under various names such as vibratory awareness and have been expelled. Ganesha, Karttikeya or Jesus Christ. But this time He is coming under a new name you all know, the Immigration procedure can At this stage of my slatment, distingui- shed delegates, I might as well say a few things about the conditions of public secu- rity in Sahajland. Many citizens of Sahajland you to enjoy the end of this session. are enrolled at a very young age in the Sahaj Defence Force where they receive basic Commission and to your deliberations training as how to intercept intruders with Thank you Mr. Chairman. defective agnyas, antibhoots flying squads of ganas and angels are twenty four hours the Commission. I hope, dearest reader, that on operative duty on our left and right side borders to insure the integrity of our Mother- land's air space. Our Defence Forces are supported by a revolutionary telecommuni- cation system: any impulse from the Sup- that no one knows but Himself I will not elaborate much on this item as I still want I wish all success to the work of this My statment received due altention from you liked it. LOVE JAI MATAJI! SAHAJLAND INTELLIGENCE SERVICE Code name : Pink Panther Nirmala Yoga 32

 Balancing the Internal and External Growth Finally to grow means balancing oneself to feel the softness of the earth and the Every Sahaja Yogi must grow. It is his responsibility to grow, in fact his only res- ponsibility towards his brothers and sisters confidence of the tree, Growing in Sahaja and towards himself. What it means to grow Yoga gives us the power to witness our own in Sahaja Yoga and how to grow within as growth. By witnessing, we teel the pre- sence of the All Pervading Power irradia- ting the whole atmosphere, enveloping the well as without ? Growing means becoming stronger like a whole tree with the wind of love of ADI tree which grows within and without the SHAKTI, blowing on the shoots with peace Mother earth. To grow, a tree has to find and joy. Then the whole tree responds to his way to let his roats penetrate deeply the wind in a shiver of joy showing to him- in to the earth. When the roots are being self and to the nature the majesty of his nourished by the Mother earth they grow as shape and the generosity of his shadow, well as they make the whole tree grow. Hcw to grow ? Simply like a tree, with Through Self-Realisation we become aware of being the tree of life. Growth means first full spontaneity and detachment. The Kun- being aware that the Kundalini is the tree dalini is the sap of the tree. In order to of life and has to strenghen within oursel- grow the Kundalini has to circulate along The Self-Realisation gives us the the path in a tremendous flow of vitality ves. power not only to become the tree of life building Her awn strength by the irequency but to make us grow and gain vigour and of Her Raising up to our Sahasrara. The strength. Growth means feeling the beauty more She raises, the more She gets strengh of the tree of life through the light of the and the more we grow. Like the sap in a Spirit, enjoying its action and nature. tree, the Divine vibrations circulate in our being making our growth effective and Growth is triggered by our attention living. This attention will be our guide and will tell us how or whatever the roots are growing and penetrating into our Being, So growth wise how can the sap circulate ? The also means watching oneself being nouri- growth of the Self goes through the nou- shed by the divine vibrations of the Holy rishment of the Kundalini but how can the Spirit. and when we correct we grow, because we the motor of our growth because how can adjust ourselves like a root surrounding a we grow without joy ? And joy is the mani- stone and finding a new way to penetrate festation of our Spirit. How to grow? Simply more effectively in the depth of the earth. by opening our heart to feel the bliss of the Growing is then one's adaptation to all the Self and by surrendering ourselves to the asperities and obstacles of life in order to Divine Laws of God Almighty. Then we But we must be willing to grow, other- When we watch. we can correct Kundalini be nourished without joy. Joy is overcome and master them. grow because we enjoy to grow and in the Nirmala Yoga 33

 spontaneity of our growth we start feeling as far as we can see. So to let grow our love the depth ofour roots and the strength of for others, we have to grow within oursel- the shoots, we enjoy the internal as well as the external growth of the Self. This inter- through our Kundalini, by strengthening Her nal and external growth become the two and making our Chakras steady and strong. wheels of the chariot of our own emanci- ves first: We have to grow from our Spirit The inner growth makes us humble and humility establishes our connection with pation. When we are conscious of our growth Shri Mataji who is Unending Love and the and willing to grow, we start loving others, Quintescence of Divine Beauty. The inner for we feel the strengh of the roots which growth fills us with peace and Joy and ena- makes the tree defy the storms and thunder bles us to hear the voice of the Self and to as well as the beauty of the branches which feel the glory of own Spirit. The outside give shadow against the sun and protection growth makes us ask for forgiveness and against the rain. We cannot love if we do forgive by absorbing within our heart the not grow, and we cannot grow without love. Unlimited Compassion of our Beloved Love makes us grow. At first we grow in- Mother. The outside-growth creates all the wardly, because we have to love and res- bondages which tie us to our brothers pect ourselves first, Then we can grow and sisters, The inner growth makes the outwardly to give all the love we have stored external growth expressing automatically, in our heart. The love for others has to be but the external growth vanishes it it is not nourished by our heart as well as the bran looked after by the inner growth, because ches have to be nourished through the how can we love others, if we do not love roots. The roots make the shools grow the Self ? and the shoots make the roots penetrate We have to grow inwardly to show our deeper in the heart of the earth. The love for his own Spirit makes the Spirit of others love outwardly and the outward love has to sparkle within themselves and every sparkle be sustained by the Manifestation of our of theirs reflects itself with love and detach- Spirit. Then balancing internal and exter- ment in our heart. This is the balance bet- nal growth makes us feel that there is only ween internal and external growth. By one growth, one love and one collective growing inwardly we try to see as far as we joy under the light and the Eternal Glory of can the manifestation of Shri Mother's love our Beloved Mother. and Compassion. within us and by growing outwardly we try to make the others see Arneau de Kalbermatten Subscribers are requested to renew their subscription in time and also extend their co-operation in making new subscribers from Sahaja Yogis. The magazine is posted promptly, however, if the same is not received please intimate us Nirmala Yoga 34

 Amen. We the Children, we bow with utter devotion and adoration to the Sacred One Who resides in the heart of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi. From Him came the desire for our emancipation. Om Shivam shivakaram shantam abivaatmanam shivotamann shivamarga praneraram pranatosmi sadaskivam The 108 Names of Shri Shiva Om Twamewa Sakshat Shri Pure SHIVA 1. Compassionate 2. SHANKARA 3. SWAYAMBHU Born out of Himself 4. PASHUPATI Lord and protector of animals Field of forgiveness 5. KSHAMAKSHETRA 6. PRIYABHAKTA Favourite of the devotee God of love KAMADEVA 7. 8. SADHUSADHYA Achieved easily by the saintly GN Occupying the lotus of the heart HRITPUNDARIKASINA 9. 10. JAGADDHITAISIN Well wisher of the Universe 11. VYAGHRAKOMALA Tender to the tiger VATSALA Beloved 12. 13. DEVASURAGURU Preceptor of the gods and of the asuras 14. SHAMBU Bestower of blessing 15. LOKOTTARASUKHALAYA Abode of the most excellent happiness 16. SARVASAHA Bearer of everything 17. SVADHRITA Self-supported 18. EKANAYAKA Sole lord 19. SHRIVATSALA The darling of the Goddess 20. SHUBHADA Bestower of auspiciousness Nirmala Yoga 35

 21. SARVASTTVAVALABANA Supporter of all living beings 22. SHARVARIPATI Lord of the night Bestower of boons VARDA 23. 24. VAYUVAHANA Having the wind of vibrations as vehicle Holding water-pot KAMANDALUDHARA 25. Lord of the rivers NADISHVARA 26. 27. PRASADASVA Lord of the wind 28. SUKHANILA Pleasing wind NAGABHUSANA Having serpents for his ornaments 29. Residing on top of mount Kailash KAILASHASHIKHARVASIN 30. Three eyed 31. TRILOCHANA Holding the mighty bow 32. PINAKAPANI Ascetic 33. SHRAMANA Lord of the mountain 34. ACHALESHWARA 35. VYAGHRACHARMAMBARA Wearing the tiger hide 36. UNMATTAVESHA Having the guise of a mad one Going about surrounded by bhoots PRETACHARIN 37. Destroyer 38. HARA 39. RUDRA ... Fierce Of terrible exploits 40. BHIMAPARAKRAMA Lord of the dance 41. NATESHWARA 42. NATARAJA King of the dance The lord of spiritual reality ISHWARA 43. The great Shiva PARAMSHIVA 44. The soul of the Cosmos PARAMATMA 45. 46. PARAMESHWARA The supreme Lord 47. VIRESHWARA The witness of the Universe SARVESHWARA The lord of all 48. The lord of love KAMESHWARA 49. 50. VISHVASAKSHINA The witness of the universe Nirmala Yoga 36

 Ever dancing 51. NITYANRITYA Abode of alI 52. SARVAVASA Great yogi 53. MAHAYOGI Primordial, immutable yogi 54. SADYOGI God the Almighty 55. SADASHIVA The Self 56. ATMA The joy 57. ANANDA With the moon for his crest jewel CHANDRAMAULI 58. 59. MAHESHWARA The great lord Lord of nectar 60. SUDHAPATI Drinker of nectar 61. AMRUTAPA Full of nectar AMRUTAMAYA 62. Soul of the devotee 63. PRANATATMAKA Divine spiritual Being 64. PURUSHA Hidden one 65 PRACOCHANNA Very subtle 66. SUKSHMA Fond of the pericarp of the lotus 67. KARNIKARAPRIYA The poet KAVI 68. Of never failing punishment AMOGHADANDA 69. With a blue throat 70. NILAKANTHA Having matted hair 71. JATIN Having flowery eyes 72. PUSHPALOCHANA The object of meditation DHYANADHARA 73. The heart of the universe BRAHMANDAHRIT 74. Chastiser of Cupid 75. KAMASHASANA 76. JITAKAMA Conqueror of lust Conqueror of sense organs 77. JITENDRIYA 78. ATINDRIYA Beyond the scope of sense organs 79. NAKSHATRAMALIN Having a garland of stars .. Nirmala Yoga 37

 Having neither beginning nor end ANADYANTA 80. The origin of the Self ATMAYONI 81. The origin of the firmament NABHAYONI 82. Ocean of mercy KARUNA SAGARA 83. 84. SHULIN Owner of the trident Having a great bow MAHESHVASA 85. Spotless 86. NISHKALANKA Ever beautiful 87. NITYASUNDARA Whose other half is Parvati 88. ARDHANARISHWARA The Lord of the Mother UMAPATI 89. The bestower of sweetness RASADA 90. * Frightful UGRA 91. The great destroyer МАНАКАLA 92. The destroyer of death KALAKALA 93. The leader of the nature of the tiger VAIYAGHRADHURYA 94. The suppressor of enemies SHATRUPRAMATHIN 95. SARVACHARYA Preceptor of all 96. SAMA Equanimous 97. ATMAPRASANNYA Contented soul 98. Fond of Nara and Narayana NARANARAYANAPRIYA 99: (Shesha and Vishnu) The knower of the taste 100. RASAJNA Whose body is devotion 101. BHAKTIKAYA ВНАКТIКAYА The leader of the heroes of the world 102. LOKAVIRAGRANI Eternal being 103. CHIRANTANA 104. VISHVAMBARESHWARA Lord of the earth Born again soul 105. NAVATMAN Lord of the new Jerusalem 106. NAVAYERUSALEMESHWARA... The Primordial Self of Shri Mataji 107. ADINIRMALATMA 108. SAHAJAYOGIPRIYA Fond of Sahaja Yogis Nirmala Yoga 38

 FESTIVALS Festivals Date according to Indian Calendar Date according to English Calendar 21st March 1983 Her Holiness Shri Mataji's birthday 28th March 1983 Month Falgun Purnima - Full Moon Day Holi Shukla Paksha- Bright Fortnight 29th March 1983 Month Falgun- Krishna Paksha - Dark Fortnight Pratipad a-ist day (Holl can be celebrated on eitker of the two days) 3rd April 1983 Month Easter Sunday Falgun Krishna Paksha- Dark Fortnight Shashthi- 6th day 7th April 1983 Her Holiness Shri Mataji's Month Falgun Krishna Paksha- Wedding Anniversary Dark Fortnight 10th day Dashami- Month 14th April 1983 Chaitra- Navaratri Shukla Paksha- 14th April to 21st April Bright Fortnight Pratipada - 1st day to 9th day Navami Month Chaitra 21st April 1983 Shri Rama Navami Shukla Paksha- (Shri Rama's Birthday) Bright Fortnight Navami - 9th Day Chaitra Month 27th April 1983 Shri Hanumana Jayanti (Birthday of Shri Hanuman) Shukla Paksha- Bright Fortnight Purnima - Full Moon Day Nirmala Yoga 39

 Shri Adi-Shankaracharya's Vaishakh-Month 17th May 1983 Shukla Paksha- birthday Bright Fortnight Panchami – 5th Day Vaishakh a Shukla Paksha- Birthday of Shri Nrisinh (Incarnation of Shri Vish- Month 25th May 1983 Bright Fortnight 14th day demon who killed nu Hiranya Kashyapa, father of Shri Prahlad). Chaturdashi Valshakh- Month 26th May 1983 Shri Budha Purnima (Birthday of Shri Buddha) Shukla Paksha- Bright Fortnight Purnima - Full Moon Day Ashadh 24th July 1983 Guru Purnima Month (Puja of Shri Adi Guru) Shukla Paksha- Bright Fortnight Purnima - Full Moon Day Note: According to the Indian Calendar, Year comprises 12 months and a month 30 days, having two fortnights each, beginning from the first day after full moon- day and new moon day respectively. Bright Fortnight, known as Shukla Paksha, begins on the day next to new moon day and ends on full moon day. Dark fortnight i e. Krishna Paksha, begins on the day next to full moon and ends on new moon day. Each date is known as Tithi' and is given cardinal numbers from the first to fifteenth day. They are as under:- 1st Fortnight, Bright Fortnight (Shukla Paksha): 1st day First day after New Moon Day-Pratipada 2nd day Dwitiya Tritiya 3rd day 4th day Chaturthi 5th day Panchami 6th day Shashthi Saptami 7th day 8th day Ashtami 9th day Navami Nirmala Yoga 40

 10th day Dashami 11th day Ekadashi 12th day Dwadashi 13th day Trayodashi 14th day Chaturdashi 15th day Purnima (Full Moon day) Second Fortnight, Dark Fortnight (Krishna Paksha) Same as above, except the 15th day, which is New Maon day and known as Amavasya. In view of the repetition of cardinal numbers in the second fortnight beginning on the first day after full moon, while indicating a date, it is necessary to say the fort- night in which that particular day is falling, eg. 5th day of dark fortnight in the month of Chaitra is indicated, while performing the puja, as follows - Chaitra Maase, Krishna Pakshe, Panchami Tithe. Names of Twelve Months are as under:- 1st month Chaitra 2nd month Vaishakha 3rd month Jyeshtha Ashadha 4th month 5th month Shravan 6th month Bhadrapad 7th month Ashwin 8th month Kartik 9th month Marga Shirsha 10th month Paush 11th month Magh Falgun 12th month Nirmala Yoga 41

 Registered with the Registrar of Newspapers under Regn. No. 36999|81 In some states of India, new year begins on the first day of Chaitra, which falls in 1983, on 14th April Present year is 1904, after 14th April it will be 1905 known as Shalivahan Shaka, was introduced by ths kings of Shalivan Dynasty, who were ruling over India in ancient times. Our beloved Mother, Raja Rajeswari, Jaga- deshwari, Her Holiness Shri Mataji, has taken the birth in Shalivahan Dynasty. It is significant that although many such calendars were in vogue earlier and one or two were introduced subsequently, only the one originated by our Beloved Mother's ances- tors is being followed for over thousand years and has been approved by Govt. of India. This system, The Divine Mother says: After realization you all had lots of knowledge () about Kundalinl and Sahaja Yoga but without Bhakti you cannot achieve the balance. You have to get lost in Bhakti. Bhakti enriches your feelings. Try to feel the other Sahaja Yogis without criticising them. I am enjoying your beings, the beauty and glory that you are. I wish you all could do that and feel like a drop in the ocean itself. Bhakti will dissolve your angularities and impediments in the collective oneness. O my children, you are really born out of my Sahasrara. I conceived you in my hear and gave you the new birth through the Brahmarandhra. The Ganges of my love has carried you into the realm of collective consciousness. This love is too great tor my human body. It nourishes you, soothes you and gives you security. Gradually it opens your awareness to bliss and joy. But this love also corrects you and prunes you It guides you and directs you. It reveals itself in the form of true knowledge. It absorbs your shocks and settles you like a guiding leaf on the hard surface of truth. It strengthens you to fulfil your aspirations of reaching spiri- tual heights. Edited & Published by Sh. S. C. Rai, 43, Bunglow Road, Delhi-110007 and Printed at Ratnedeep Press, Darya Gani. New Delhi-110002. One Issue Rs. 6.00, Annual Subscription Rs. 30.00 Foreign [ By Airmail £ 5 5 10]



----------------------

1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Nirmala Yoga
Vol. 13
Bi-Monthly
Year 3
Jan.-Feb. '83
"Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns all the religions and
seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga-THE UNION"
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-1.txt 
 Translation of Her Holiness
Shri Mataji's Marathi letter 1979
My dear Sahaja Yogis,
Received your loving and beautiful letters
Whatever is God's work, it will be over.
and messages of greetings. Here, I am busy Hence all should be alert and awake and
in the work in London and could not write
also awaken others.
My life is dedicated to you. Every mo-
Once I told you that Sahaja Yoga is
beginning from Navaratri this year, That is,
Satya Yuga, for which you were so far pre- gold should enlighten human history while
paring, will now be seen. As a tree has to getting heated in the hell of Kali Yuga.
sprout first in the earth and then its sapling
peeps out, in the same way, on the fifst day led in every home, may its joy spread in the
of Navaratri i.e. on 8th April the sapling of
Satya Yuga will be seen.
ment it is working. All I want is that pure
My blessings are: may this lamp be kind-
society, may the cheers of its victory re-
sound all countries and may this power of
It is the day of great joy. Whole Nature Brahman fill in every molecule of universe.
will now have new life. You must under-
stand that the importance of this day will be
known only if the whole mankind is enlighte- also in other countries. You will meet each
Thave to be away from you for very long
time, But your brothers are living here and
ned with vibrations of love.
other in course of time. But I often feel
that one day of such great joy of love should
In this world Brahma Shakti was awake-
ned from the very day of My birth. You have dawn in our life. Whatever you desire will
received it to some extent, and are using it
in many ways.
happen. Therefore, your attention should
be fully on Sahaja Yoga. I have offered my
body, mind and wealth, every thing.
I was telling you that light of that great
power of love will spread all over the world.
You have to take care of only your Chitta
because only that will be enlightened.
The first lamp will be lit on that day. But
night of Diwali is blind. It cannot see the
lamps. In this Kali-Yuga, this work will be
done only if many lamps are lit.
Always remembering you,
Your separated Mother,
Nirmala
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Editorial
रुद्र क्षेत्रज्ञ वर्गः समूदयति यतो यात्रा विश्रान्तिमूच्चछेत् ।
यत् तत्वम् यस्य विष्वं स्फुरितमयमियद्यन्माया विश्वमेतत् ॥
स्वच्छन्धानन्द विन्दोच्छुला द् भयानुक्तर
स्पन्दतरवम् ।
चंतन्यं शकरंतञ्जयति यरदसखिलं द्वेत भासद अद्वयात्मा ।
Rudra- Kshetrajna - - mruchhet!
Yat-tatwam Yasya Vishwam sphurit-maya Miyad-yanmayăm vishwa-metat !!
- uttar - spanda - tatwam!
adwayat
Vargah samudayati Yato Yärrā vishrūnti
dyä-nanda
Swacchan dya-nanda indo - chhalad bhayā
Chaitanayam Shankaram tajja-yati Yadak hilam dwait bhasad - adwayāt mä !!
Translation
That consciousness of Shankara is ever victorious which in its wholeness
is non dual in reality though having an appearance of duality from which
emerges the class of Rudras and all living beings and in which comes to
rest which is the fundamental reality from which bursts forth into view the
universe whose form is the universe, from whose unimpeded free witl ever
leaps forth his divine power which is a mass of bliss bringing about unsur-
passed immortal vibrations (the primal.creative force).
Adi-Shakti is the consciousness of Shiva, pervading in everything yet transcending
above all and governing. E
' – Mother of every living being from Brahma i.e. Hiranaya-
She is Abrahma-keet-Janani"
garbha down to an insect. All universes have emerged from Her and She is founda-
tional for everything that exists in them. Vibrations is the manifestation of Her own
unimpeded free will. She is the shelter of all great souls. Her lotus feet have been
worshipped and meditated upon by saints and sages since times immemorial.
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-3.txt 
 It is sixty years since She has assumed the form of our Beloved Mother to kindle the
light of Kundalini within us and enlighten the path of Sushumna for ultimate liberation
and for consciously uniting with Her universal being. On the battle field of Kurukshetra
Arjuna was not able to see with his mortal eyes the universal form of Shri Krishna,
having the resplendence of thousand Suns. Out of great compassion on him Shri
Krishna touched his eyes. Arjuna could behold that indescribable form of the Virata.
However imperfect as he was, he could not bear the sight and prayed Shri Krishna to
become his usual self with which Arjuna was friendly.
In the battie field of life we are like Arjuna, genuine seekers, yet unprepared to meet the
Supreme and unable to recognise the incarnations and are following the Instructions of
ego rather than of our Spirit. Hence at the very outset, our attention is raisedabove the
limitations of ego and super-ego. Vibrations, the Brahma shakti, is the partial glimpse
of Her Cosmic form. Then, further revelations occur to us. She is leading us step
Kundalini rises in strands depending upon the opening of Sushumna and
by step.
strength of Chakras.
She knows the inner beings and is correcting the faults of everyone of thousands of
Sahaja Yogis even without one's knowledge Every Sahaja Yogi is being looked after,
as if a tender sapling, so that their inner mechanisms become strong enough to sustain
final revelation ie the unity of Jeeva (the consciousness limited by ego and super-ego)
and Shiva i.e. She Herself.
How to express gratitude for all this to Her who is the condensed form of our Spirits !
We all Sahaja Yogis kneel down in utter humility and pray: "O Mother, your form is
soothing to our inner beings, it is quenching the thirsts of our Spirits, it is fulfilling the
wishes of all great sages, saints and seekers, Kindly keep this form in good health for
years and years".
नास्ति वारण स्वमेव
अन्यथा शरण
व ।
तस्मात् कारुण्य भावेन रक्ष रक्ष परमेश्वरी ॥
Anyatha Sharanam Nasti Sharanam Twameva Cha !
Tasmat Kārunya Bhavena Raksha Raksha Parameshwari !!
Translation
O Supreme Goddess, I surrender to you alone and non else. Hence have
compassion on me and protect me.
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-4.txt 
 A PRAYER
O Primordial Mother,
Let Your Blessings bestow upon me through Your Holy Vibrations,
And let Your Holiest of all Holiest names be always in my Heart,
And forgive me for offending you in thoughts, words and deeds and make me
ashamed of it,
And give me courage to forgive others as you have forgiven me,
And let your vibrations make me understand as to where I stand so that I can
plead for forgiveness to my ever loving Mother who is the Creator of this
Universe,
And finally let me thank you for all that You have given to me and pray that
Your Blessings will bestow on this poor child infinitely.
Jai Mataji
-Avdhut Pai
Bombay
(Poem presented to Mother, at Dollis Hill, London
during Easter Puja 1980).
Mother,
Your Name is our Truth
Your Love is our Support
Mother.
Your Words fill us with Joy
May our Joy fill every Universe
Mother
What May we do but Serve You ?
What should we do but praise You ?
What can we do without You ?
Mother,
Most Glorious You are
And forever
Mataji Nirmala Devi.
-John Peirson
London
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-5.txt 
 NIRM AL
A YOGA
43, Bunglow Road, Delhi-110007 (India)
Founder: Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Editorlal Board : Dr. S. K. Mathur, Sri A. S. Mishra, Sri R. D. Kulkarni
Representatives
:CHERYL HYNES-10, Clarence Road, Burwood, N.S..W. 2134, Australia.
: MR. GAVIN BROWN-Brown's Geological Information Service Ltd.,
160, North Gower St., London NW1 2 ND.
: MRS. CHRISTINE PETRUNIA
NY 11201.
: RECHARD PAYMENT -
Canada V5N 1M2.
Australia
U. K.
U. S. A.
-225 Adams Street, 1/E. Brooklyn,
Canada
1950, East 5th Avenue, Vancouver, B C.
Switzerland : CHARLES AND MRS. MAGDA MATHYS-5, Chemin Des Mouldins,
1256, Troinex (Canton de Geneva), Switzerland.
:DANIEL & ROXANA DEVINE-Angel Luis De Herran, Torre 3-8, 6, 4,
Spain
Madrid-33.
: MARIE ROUGER-175, Av. Ledru RIlin, Paris-750001.
: RUTH LEDERBERGER: Via Mercalli-46, 00197 Rome, Italy.
: M.B. RATNANNAVAR-13, Merwan Mansion, Genjwala Lane, Borivali
(W), Bombay-400 092.
RAJARAM SHANKARRAJWADE-840, Sada Shiva Peth, Pune-411030.
France
Italy
India
CONT ENTS
Page
1. Editorial
2. Prayer & Poem
3. Message of Christ and inherent dangers of sustaining the Realisation
4. Translation of Marathi letter from Her Holiness Shri Mataji
5. Confidence in our Vibrations
6. Advice of the Primordial Master
7. Seekers of Truth
8. Antar Yoga
9. Lighting the Lamps
10 Translation of H.H. Mataji's letter in Hindi
2.
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
11. H.H Shri Mataji's Advice
12 The answer, my friends, is blowing in the
13. Mithya (Translation of Shri Mataji's letter).
14. Sahaja Yoga and Physical Cure
15. Statement the Delegate of Sahajland
16. Balancing the Internal and External Growth
17. 108 Names of Lord Shiva
Festivals
19 Translation of Her Holiness Shri Mataji's Marathi letter (1979)
24
26
28
31
33
35
38
18.
2nd Cover
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-6.txt 
 The Message of Christ and the Inherent Dangers
of Sustaining the Realisation
CAXTON HALL, LONDON
10th December 1979
This is the day for us to remember that But to such people, it does'nt matter
Christ was born on this earth as a human whether you are lying in the dried grass or
being. He came on this earth and the task in the stable or in the palace. Everything is
that was before Him was to enlighten human just the same, for it does not touch them.
awareness, with the sense of understanding They are so detached. And they are com-
that we can see its actualization within the pletely in joy. They are the Masters of them-
awareness of human beings that they're not selves, nothing can master them. No malter
this body, but they are the spirit.
message of Christ was His resurrection them. They are masters of complete com-
The can master them, no comfort can master
that is, you are your spirit and not your body forts within themselves, they have achieved
and He showed by His resurrection how all the comforts within themselves. They
He ascended Into the realm of spirit, which are satisfied people, that's why they are
He was because He was 'Pranava'. He was kings They are called as kings. not these
Brahma, He was Mahavishnu, as i have kings who run after things or those kings
told you about His birth. And He came on who seek comforts in life. I mean if you
this earth in a body like a human being. have comforts well and good. If you do not
He wanted to show another thing, that spirit have well and good, makes no difference.
has nothing to do with money, has nothing
lo do with power. It is all powerful, all
pervading. But He was born in a stable, not
who seek comforts in life, I mean if you
So many people in Latin America, when
I went there, said,
understand why Christ was born as a poor
we cannot
in a palace or to a king, but He was born to
a very ordinary person, a carpenter. Because man'. This is again the human concept
if you are the king, as we say in the Hindi about God, you see, he wants to command
language Badshah', then nothing is greater God, "Be born in a king's palace". You can-
Is'nt it ? It means nothing is not order him about. We have our own
higher than you, neither anything can deco- concepis about God, that why should he be
rate you. Whatever you're, you're at the high- a poor man ? Why should he be helpless ?
est. All the worldly things are just like He never showed his helplessness. He was
dry grass, Tranavat" ( ) So He was much more dynamic than ail your kings and
kept in the dry grass. To many it makes all your politicians pul together. He was not
them very unhappy and they feel very sorry afraid of any one. Whatever he had to say
that Christ, the one who came to save us, he said it. He was not afraid of crucifixion
was kept under such conditions and why or of any such so called punishment It is
not God provided him with something beiter. only the human beings you see who have
Nirmala Yoga
5.
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-7.txt 
 these false ideas about life and that's why and our super-ego. Ego and super ego are
they want to put these ideas on to God also the two by-products of our thought process.
and try to make Him also folow these con-
cepts. God is not your concepts He is not and another are the thoughts of the future.
a concept at all. You also say that a con- He came to make that gap, to cross that gap
cept is after all a concept, not actuality. and that's how he sacrificed Himself,
This 1 have found out very recently. His body. For you it is a very big thing of
This is another myth people carry that remorse and repentence.
concept is a concept. All right, Mataji says people it is not. If's a play that they have
all right
cept because concept is a thought.
One are the thoughts which are of the past
But for such
t. So what ? But even this is con- to play a certain role. That's why I donot
understand why you show Him to be so
hanky panky miserable creature. He was
never miserable. Such people can never be
miserable as you are. This is another con-
You have to rise beyond thought at a
higher level into thoughtless awareness
where you are not in thought, but you are in
the centre of thought in the sense that one cept that He should be hanky panky-tallie,
thought rises and falls and there is a place skinny, starved, bones coming out, count
in between. Another thought rises and falls. them one by one, horrible I tell you.
You are in the centre of these thoughts, the
"Vilamba' as we call it. The time where you
From His childhood till His death He was
a joyous person. He was happiness, He was
joy, to make you all happy, to give you the
pause. Then you will understand Christ.
He was here partly, of course, to save us light of happiness by enlighting your
because he has many aspects. I should say
not only to save human beings, He came on He came on this earth not only to save
this earth because He had many more as-
source of joy that is your spirit in your heart.
you, to give you happiness but also to give
Human beings you joy, because human beings in their
pects. This is another.
demanded that they must be saved. Why ? ignorance, this tomfoolery, are unnecessarily
Why should they be saved all of them ? beating themselves, and destroying them-
What have they done for God? How can you selves.
demand from God that he should save us ?
Can you ? You cannot ask for that.
No body has asked you to go to pubs, to
get into troubles. No body has asked you
He came to create the passage bet- to go to races and become bankrupts. No
ween, as you see here, the Vishuddhi and body has asked you to go to horrible Gurus
the Sahasrara, is this Agnya in the Primor- and get into troubles. But you seek your
dial being, the Virata. He was born there to
open that door. In evolution every incar- morning flower to make you happy. First
nation has come on this earth to open a to make you happy, to give you joy. You
door within us and to create that opening or see any child. At least I know myself, I
that enlightenment in our awareness. So donot know about the funny people here.
Christ came precisely to open this small I mean to them flowers look like thorns. I
little door which is constricted by our ego
destruction voluntarily. He came like a
I don't know how they manage.
mean
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-8.txt 
 But you see a child anywhere, any child, this ? How do you become "born again' ?
such a joy giving thing it is.
Not by going through the ritual of baptism.
This is the child of the Divine, that Somebody coming from the theological col-
came on this earth as a child, is the most lege, canno! make you a Christian. Like in
joy giving thing and that's why Christmas our India, we have some paid brahmins as
for all of us, for the whole universe, should you have here some paid people, you see.
be a festival of great joy For he brought The whole day they will eat drink and be
light for us, by which we can see that there merry and In the evening time they will come
to pray and preach. You have to be a person
who is authorised by God. Unless and un-
til you are authorised by God, you cannot
is some one called as God, there is some
one who is going to remove this ignorance.
s
This was the first beginning. Sa for us it is
That is why I have seen all these
people. The so called pandits and big priests
give joy.
necessary to be joyous, happy and relaxed
and not to take anything that seriously as we
do, because Divine tife does not make re so serious bacause they are not autho-
you serious, because it is all a play. It is
Maya. Ihave seen in all the rituals people
follow, in all the so called religious people. as if some funeral is going on. And after
they are too serious to be religious. A reli-
gious person is bubbling with laughter. He celebrate ? With a champagne and after a
does not know how to hide his joy and he real funeral, how do they celebrate. I do not
does not know how to control his laughter know why but they take champagne.
when he sees people unnecessarily serious.
1 mean nobody is dead. The way the people ting Him ? He came to enlighten your aware-
I
rised by God. Even on a Christmas day, 1
s
mean if anybody comes from village, will see
the function they go home and how do you
How can you celebrate Christmas by insul-
say it sometimes just donot know what to do
with ourselves. There is nothing in this the point at which it had reached. But you
world for a person like Christ to feel sad
about. If you really believe in Him, then first understand Him ? And He has promised
of all please give up this silly sadness and that vou are to be baptised, you are to be
sulking and sitting down and becoming horn again and now in Sahaja Yoga this
ness, because He respected your awareness,
are trying to put it down.
Is this the way to
morose, not talking to anyone, silent bores
all over
promise is being fulfilled. So be joyous
that here at the Agnya Chakra again Christ
is born within you and He is there and you
how he went and talked to multitudes. How know how you can ask for His help always.
he opened His heart to all the people around That the main thing that one has to under-
and how He tried to give them happiness. stand is that the time has come for you to
He has said that you are to be born again get all that is promised in the scriptures, not
i.e. He had to do this work and that you only in the Bible but all the scriptures of the
have to get It sometimes, He has promised world. The time has come today that you
that you have actually to be born again. have to become a Christian, a Brahmin, a
Christ is to be born within us. I do not Pir, through your Kundalini awakening only.
This is not the way to look at Christ, see
know what Christians understand out of There is no other way out.
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-9.txt 
 And that your last judgement is also now. of houses you have built and what kind of
Only through Kundalini awakening God is so called Nobel prizes you have won. You
going to judge you. How is he going to
judge you otherwise ? You think of some- philanthropic work. By that you think that
body now, a person comes in now. Here is you have given so much money. If you have
somebody sitting to judge you. How ? By given so much money there will be a big
how many hair-dressers you have been to ? ego somewhere hanging and it will bring
Or how many suits you have stitched for you down your scale.
Christmas ? Or what presents you have
bought or how many cards you have sent?
and to how many people you have sent some ther is going to weigh more much more
other things which may not be very palatable: than a ship. It's a different type of a judge-
That's not the way. Or is it that what price ment of a personality. We can see how
you have bought ? The things, the way we
are particular, which way are we going to be
judged by God ?
are not also going to be judged by your
This is a judgement in which a little fea-
EAS
Christ was judged by human beings and
how he was judged by God. He came and
lived in the dried straw like a feather. His
Mother never felt this discomfort. In the
Not superficially, people say. So what same way those who have not by their beha-
depth we have got ? Let us see how far can
we go in our depth. At the most we reach
a point where we are a concept again. So
whatever depth we have got goes only upto
only rationality, upto the concept point. Be-
yond that we cannot reach. So how can we
be judged ? How people are judged if you doing in this lifetime, because what you
no to the doetor ? He has his instruments, have accepted as reality, which is just a
he works it out, puts the light in, sees for
himself and says this is the position And the Absolute whatever you will be doing,
how your spirituality is going to be judged ? that will be a born of ignorance. Whatever
How a seed is judged ? By sprouting it. vou have done in darkness will have a parti-
When you sprout the seed and when you cle of darkness In it. So without having
see its germinating power you know it is a realisation if you have propagated that we
good seed or a bad seed In the same way are great saints, this, that, you will have no
you will be judged by Ihe way you are ger- chance. If you think you are a divine perso-
viour oppressed others or taken offence
are going to be judged as First class
In the Kundalini awakening itself there
are inherent defects Inherently, the Kun-
dalini has some defects due to your pre-
vious Karmas. Because what you have been
concept. because when you have not known
minated. The way you receive your realisa-
tion, the way you retain it, respect it. That's chance. All the priests of all the religions
the way you are going to be judged and not will be the last to get realisation.
by the kind of dresses you are wearing. By
the type of matching you do or by the hair
dresser you go to.
you occupy and the big politicians or big do you want to be in your next life. So he
beaurucrats you become. Not by what kind told make me anything, but do not make
nality and you are a realised saint no
Valmiki in his Ramayana has said a very
Not by the positions interesting story that a dog was asked what
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Mathadhish' (#5TTT) a
make me anything but
anywhere. Just imagine a dog having that you have your problems.
wisdom. But I do not say that all of them
are like that. May be some who are really
genuine. Some may be really realised peo- lems, Like in your countries you have certain
ple may be authorised by Gad. But I am problems, the physical problems according
sure they are not accepted by the multitu- to the country where you have taken birth.
des. I am sure of that. Because 1 have Most of you have decided to take bitth in a
seen your history and alt such people have particular country. That's why you are iden-
been discarded and have been tortured.
person like priest, in the same way according to the countries
not a priest -'sthanvishesh' ( as they call it;
dog having that you have yaur problems.
Like in our country we have some prob-
tified also to such an extent sometimes that
Every country
you think there is no defect.
But now the fime has come to judge Ine has a variety according to which you suffer
right and the wrong. You cannot crucify
any more. You cannot. Everyone is going
to be judged through Kundalini awakening.
a certain amount of selback in your health.
So for a Sahaja Yogi one should know that
health is a very important thing. Because
Now you should know there are three this body is the temple of God and you have
categories of human beings. I do not know to look after your health and you know also
which way to start, not to shock you. One when the Kundalini rises the first thing that
is the human beings as we are. They are happens is that your health improves be-
called as Nara Yonl. The second category cause of the para-sympathetic fulfilment.
is Deva Yoni, those who are born seekers Because the para-sympathetic gives you en-
And the third ones are lightenment which flows into the sympathetic,
called as Rakshas. These are called as your health improves. I will not lell about
Ganas, But we can say the species anmong it very elaborately today because time is
human beings are Rakshasas, are the short but if you read any book- have not
people who are evil. So we have evil peo- written much-but if you listen to my lectu-
ple, excellent people and we have in-between res and some of them that are written down,
or realised souls
people.
then you will know how Kundalini helps to
cure most of the diseases except for those
that are being tempered by human elements
Excellent people are very few. They are
born-realised. I'donot have their prOblem ike a kidney trouble. A person has been
much. But one has to deal with the people
who are in the centre. They are looking to-
wards good but have something hanging on
to them which is not so good. So for these
people there are inherent defects in the
Kundalini which we must understand
cured by Sahaja Yoga. No doubt, we can cure
kidney trouble but a person who has been
on the machine you try you cannot cure.
We can give him longevity but he cannot be
cured. But to cure people is not your job
by any chance. You must remember this.
The first of them is bad health, physi- No Sahaja Yogi should take to curing peo-
cal bad health. In this country specially, ple. They can use my photograph. But not
people suffer too much from cold and other to take to curing because it means you are a
troubles due to over calcium in the water. big philanthropic personality. I have seen
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-11.txt 
 people who heve been curing get into such not be the end of your life.
a mania of curing that they forget that they little part like cleaning the whole place and
are also catching something and they are then you get out, You may ask me why do
also getting some trouble and they never you clean. Like I have seen there are people
cure themselves and ultimately I find they when we were in Oxted, I was surprised
also get out of Sahaja Yoga. But with the everybody used to polish everything you
photograph you can cure people. Do not know, lawn was done very well. Everything
think it's your duty that you are a great phy- was done so very well and not even a rat
sical benefactor No, you are not.
a spiritual benefactor but as a by product ther I
the body of the person improves because if any person getting out and they were so
Christ has to be awakened, if God has to particular husband and wife. I do not know
come in this body, then this body is to be why so particular for cleanliness, neatness
cleansed. It is done by Kundalini. But it and everything and both of them would
does not have a separate work like hospitals. never even talk to each other. I have seen
That is a very
You are will enter their houses For months toge-
never saw any personU getting in or
that. There were seven houses except for
have known people who went so mad our house. They were all surprised that
with the power of curing that they started
visiting regularly the hospitals and they ended
up in the hospital also. They wauld not even
how many people are coming to our house.
They asked, 'Are you an open house.' I said
come to the programmes. They would not Yes, it is a open house' They could not
come and see me,
understand what was wrong with us. No-
So this is one of the
greatest hurdles of God, is the Vyadhi (eifer) body would see that polished things or any
is the bodily ailments, And the bodily ail- thing and so it should be. That's how, we do
ments also should not keep you down too
not go to that extent so that it becomes a
much. If you have some problem forget it 5ort of real Sahaja Yoga and the rest, which
gradually you will improve. For some people
if takes some time to get alright. But then IS important. But attention should be on
the main thing is to get to your spirit. So your Spirit. It should be on your Spirit be-
do not always say "Mother cure me, Cure
e is the most important thing to God. Health
cause it is your attention which goes into
these various directions and gets stuck up.
You must allow it to work out and it will
work out.
me, Cure me",
me in the spiritual life". You will be cured
automatically. It may take time with some
people but you have been sick all your life.
It does not matter if it takes a litile more
time and also follow the methods, which we meaning a person does not want to work
have told for the different diseases. Specially it out. Oof course those people who are use-
in this country the liver and what you call less and do not want to get their realisation,
this gout and all this troubles. We have forget about them. But even after gelting
remedies for all these for which we have realisation it is an innate problem with peo-
but to work it out as a duty towards your ple that they do not want to work it out.
body, towards the temple. And that should They are lazy, in simple words they are lazy.
But just say Mother keep
The second hurdle which I feel is called
as Akarmanyata ( ) as they call it
Nirmala Yoga
10
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-12.txt 
 That is very much in this country surpri- eyes. Kundalini opens your eyes no doubt,
singly. I mean the other day I saw a picture but again you close it down. So it is in your
that how from your country people went to freedom to give up that Akarmanyata. Now
Germany and blasted a complete machinery this also can he very collective. I can tell
and the complete factory of that machlnery you this much, it is a very big disease. It
which was selling those pilotless planes. spreads, like say husband - wife is there.
And they have overdone everything so that Wife is one like that, instead the husband
our children are having a nice time perhaps. raising the wife, he will succumb to wife
But in Sahaja Yoga we have to be alert specially in the West. Just opposite in India.
What exactly happens in Sahaja Yoga when ting a woman will succumb to her husband.
people come here? They get their realisa- So what happens is that out of the two who
tion. They get the cool breeze and is lost have got it, also has lost it. Instead of both
again. The reason is that they do not want of them shouid be very well realised and
to work it out. This is another danger could be very well there if one who is very
Akramanyata. When it is lost after one year well realised could put down his will-"No,
they come back, 'Mother we donot believe I will check, I have eyes to see, let me se,
in it. But I have some pain in the stomach, I must give a chance to myself". if they
will you cure'. Instead of you becoming so
equipped with all the powers that you have, the second step. Everything cannot be just
become a useless person coming here to ike a jet liner, sit down here and next
take my time, These powers are all within moment you are on the moon.
accept it then it works and then they go to
you. This is your property. This is the pro-
perty of your spirit which is caring inside,
which is bound to manifest but because of start with the third danger which is the
such hurdles that you accept, that it does Sanshaya (STa) which is the doubt. I do
not. This is Akramanyata, we can say which not know how to describe this madness of
is not working it out, not knowing about it, doubting. For example out of all of you
not understanding it, whal Sahaja Yoga is, who have been here say at least
how to manipulate this, what vibrations are, know how much percentage, have come out
Even if you are in the moan, you may
the second day with a very great statement:
"Still I am doubting".
how it works ot.
People just say Oh, it is too much' be-
cause they donot want to face reality be-
cause as soon as your Kundalini comes up, you doubling ? What have you found out
as soon the light comes in. Before the so far ? From where does this come ? Is
eyes are ciosed, you see suddenly the light Mr. Ego about which I have given lectures
comes in and you do not want to open your after lectures. It is Mr. Ego which is doubt-
eyes, because it is too much, for you were ing it, because he does not want you to find
sleeping. Even if you open your eyes a the Absolute. You are identified with your
little bit, Oh God, you do not want to face ego and you do not want to find it because
the light because you are identifled with this Mr. Ego has been guiding your life
that state, you do not want to open your throughout. Now you want to doubt. Doubt
Is that the sign of wisdom ? What are
Nirmala Yoga
11
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-13.txt 
 what ? What are your doubting ? You feel there are certain things one has to follow. If
the cool breeze. All right. Sit down then. you are going on the road, you see you are
It would be something like somebody ente- used to, say, continental driving. So always
ring into a college, University and sitting you turn an the wrong side, But in London.
down there and the teacher says "Now this you will be arrested. In the same way you
Is the diagram, I give you". Students get have been doing continental driving. Now you
up and say 'We doubt". Really, what should are in London. So you better fake to the
ways of Londoners and understand the
roads, the maps and the regulations needed
the teacher say ?
But they will not say that because they and try to follow them. But you are doub-
have paid the fees. They have paid it. Even
ting it. That's the main point. Then you
if it is a horrible drama, boring one, still we dont want to follow it. So Pramada is
go through it because we have paid, you the mistakes that arise. Because Kundalni
see, to go through it After all we have paid
for it. What to do ?' But for Sahaja Yoga you comes here. To anyone who has been to any
cannot pay. Ihave seen all kinds of tomioo-
d awakening is a tree gift to anyone who
sort of hell or heaven or has done very many
lery people accept in so many Gurus Like common things that happen. But we blame
somebody says "I am going to teach you Sahaja Yoga. We blame that spontaneous
how to fly". They are absolutely ready for happening within us. We never take the
that. They pay money and don't doubt, even blame upon ourselves that, no, I must have
a bit, that the fellow who is propogating it, done this mistake. All right, does not matter.
is he flying ? Have you seen him flying If I make mistakes I will rectify, its alright-
anywhere ? Please at least ask that person
to fly. They will see the Kundalini rising
Mother is forgiving no doubt, but some-
my forgiveness is of no use, because
until and unless you realise
take you would go this way Instead of that.
yot bave gone that way. So the rule of the
times
With their eyes they will see it pulsating,
rising, breaking here Still they will sit down
and say, 'I am doubting'. Now who are vou?
How far have you reached ? Why are you
it was a mis-
read is to be understood. That is the one
doubting ? What are you doubting ? What
have you known about yourself ?
comes to us called Pramada.
After that we
have another inherent problem. It is called
Now humble down yourself at this point. as Bhrama-darshan (g-7sa) hallucina-
Humble down in your heart. "I have notknown tions. We slart seeing hallucinations, spe-
myself. I have to know myself Thave not cially people who take LSD and all such
known myself. I have not got the Absolute. things. They do not see me. Some times
With what instrument I am doubting ?* This they just see light or any such hallucina-
past.
They may see me as something else. If
you see me in dreams it is all right or see
something in dreams it is alright. But you
that's called
(HT2). It is the one by which we go on fal- Bhrama Darshan. Bhrama' means illusion.
developing illusions.
is one of the greatest hurdles of Kundalini tion of the future or of the
awakening, even after awakening, called as
"Sanshaya'.
OF
The fourth one, we can call it Pramada
seeing something
start
tering all the time. Foolish questions. I mean Then
start
you
12
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-14.txt 
 The worst part of it is that people start telling herent dangers in the way of sustaining our
lies about it. I know about everyone. When realisation which is very Important to under-
this Bharama-darshan starts it is the most stand.
dangerous thing for vibrations also.
Now two other big dangers which we
Some people are absolutely cocksure suffer from apart from that. The people get
about themselves, I see that. And they possessed and get ideas into their heads.
tell all the world, they will dominate They start singing songs, this that. I am so
everybody saying that vibrations of this thing embarassed. I do not know what to say.
are not good, the vibrations of that thing are i see
not good while they have no mastery over it. But I just do not know how to tell then 'Oh,
Now I have to be very careful. I
like a teacher. So I say alright, give yourself is but they will just come up and say Mother
a bandhan and put your hands towards me
and see for yourself and all that.
a devil speaking through them,
cannot talk please stop. Even praising me I know what
we want to sing a song to you'. All right.
| cannot say anything because they do not
know from where they get this knowledge.
If they by any chance know that I have it's something else doing this. Because of
found out that they are lying, then they all these problems that you get possessed.
are finished. I must keep their falsehood to The other day somebody came to me and
me, You see I am very careful because I know said Mother, | am feeling
very con-
(hey are on a very stippery ground. So even fident
if I mention in a way that is not so blunt And l feel like daing something very
still it might happen. But one must know high handed.' And he did it. First he saw
that it is for our good, that we have to stick the possession coming into him and then
on to our truth. And we should not be led he did it and did it in a very bad way. Every-
away by our own ideas about ourselves.
about myself. Cocksure, really.
body is angry with him I know. But 1 am
not, because something is done in posses-
Then another thing that comes is Vishaya sion: You do not know what madness people
Chitta (faga-faĦ) in which the attention is may do when they get possessed. I mean
attracted by objects of your previous identi- they should end up in lunatic asylum but
fications where your attention has been. You because of being Sahaja Yogis they do all
are, say fond of cricket. Alright you are but these things. But stil they are not station-
you should not be a sick person. I mean
cricket does not mean that you become a
cricket bat.
for anything else. For all practical purpo- This is an inherent danger in a person.
ed where they should be.
Then there are two more states in which
And you are good for nothing
a Kundalini which rises also falls down.
ses you are dead. That kind of craziness
for anything whatsoever gets your attention Many people have asked me, "Mother,
on into a very wrong state, is also not good stav, part of it. Sometimes it is very thin
for all the Sahaja Yogis.
if we get realisation, does it stay ?" It does
part of it, sometimes the whole thing is
Today the lecture is more for the Sahaja sueked back. It is sucked back. If so,
Yogis. I am pointtng out what are the in- then you will say, 'we start doubting'. Where
Nirmala Yoga
13
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-15.txt 
 is it written that you will be lifted up and put
into something great, whatever may be your a way that you really establish yourself as a
problems ?
here if I have to go to India, I have to get becomes a part and parcel of your being,
innoculations and vaccinations. I have to by which you have no doubts left. From
And you have still to work it out in such
Is it possible ? Even from fulfledged Sahaja Yogi by which collectivity
get my passport, go through an interview. thoughtless awareness
When you have to enter into the Kingdom doubtless awareness.
of God then you are going to be judged, not that happens to you-is not My but is a
only judged but even, when supposing you state-in which only the Kundalini will rise
are given a grace mark and allowed to get whenever you will raise your hands. Unless
into the plane, may be they ask you to get and until you've achieved that state please
down. That happens with some people that try to work it out. Do not be lazy. You have
the Kundalini falls down. It is a very very te see around yourself. Meet people, talk
dangerous sign It comes through problems to them. The more you talk about it the
like wrong Gurus and going to wrong places, more you do it. The more you give it, the
also going to spirits and doing black magic. more it will flow. The more you sit at
Also bowing before people who are not in- home, 'O! I
carnations, worshipping wrong type of dei- Nothing.
ties and also doing mad rituals, fasting at You have to give it to others. You have to
wrong times and not understanding the give it to more and more people. Thousands
signs of fasting and of ritualism and chak- of them have to have it. And that's why it is
ras and connections and complete synthe-
sis of Sahaja Yoga. In some people you the idea that you have all the powers of the
have seen that Kundalini rises and immedia- world already manifesting. Never when these
tely falls down. This is a very very dange- powers really manifest you are aware of
rous thing. Really it is very troublesome them. Absolutely, I mean, imagine the sun
also
you jump into
Unless and until
am doing my puja at home"-
It will stagnate and stagnate.
- important that you donot get bloated with
saying, I am the sun'. Does he say he is
the sun ? What is there
Last danger which you should know is
you that you start feeling that you have
become
If you go and ask the sun "Are you the
sun ?' He will say 'Yes, by the way I am.
What can I do about it ?" It's that simple.
God or like an incarnation or
something. This is the biggest danger. You become a very simple person. Abso-
Then you start taking law into your own Jutely simple Bęcause there is no camou-
hands and start ordering others or doing flage, no complication. You are that. So,
all kinds of high handed business or get if anybody asks you the funny question you
over self-satisfied with yourself. This is a
very big danger. Humility is the only way to true. 1 mean
say, 'by the way what is there to ask ? It is
I am a realised soul. I am.
know that there is an ocean before you. You What does it matter ?" With this understan-
have got into the boat alright. But you have ding we have to go to Sahaja Yoga. I
to know a lot. You have to understand a lot. must say I am surprised how itis working
And you have still to attend to your attention, miraculously ! And it is working out. But it's
to your Chitta, to your awareness.
you who can settle it within yourself.
14
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-16.txt 
 So today at this juncture when we are
celebrating a great event of Christ's life, let
Now, among you, some are only on the
peripheri. We keep them on the peripheri.
That you know very well. Some of them us know Christ is born within us. And the
come in the centre, And there are some, very Bethlehem is within us. You do not have
few, who are in the inner circle.
them are in a state where they can be there and we have to look after it It is still
thrown out like a tangent goes out, you see.
And then you do not understand why a have to look after it. So the light really grows
Sahaja Yogi behaved like that. If you see and people know that you are realised souls.
some Sahaja Yogi behaving like that, going Nobody will doubt that you are not.
at a tangent, know that you might do the
same. So be careful.
All of to go to Bethlehem. It is within us. He is
a child. You have to respect it. And you
May God Bless You All.
MANTR AS
"Om Twamewa Sakshat, Shri (Name of Deity) Sakshat,
Shri Mataji, Shri Nirmala Devi Namoh Namah"
For Mooladhara Chakra,
"Ganesha"
Kundalini-Mata"
*Jagadamba"
Sira- Ram"
Centre Heart,
Right Heart,
Left Heart,
Visshudi,
Agnya,
Mooladhara,
Nabhi,
Swadisthan, "Brahmader-Saraswati"
Void,
"Laxshmi-Vishnu"
Shiva-Parvat"
Radha-Krishna"
“Adi Guru Datratreya"
"Jesus-Mary"
For Sahasrara
"Om Twamewa Sakshat. Shri Mahalaxshmi, Mahasaraswati, Mahakali, Trigunat-
mika, Kundalini Sakshat, Shri Adi Shakti, Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Namoh
Namah"
"Om Twamewa Sakshat, Shri Kalki Sakshat, Shri Adi Shakti, Mataji Shri
Nirmala Devi Namoh Namah"
"Om Twamewa Sakshat, Shri Kalki Sakshat, Shri Sahasrar Swamini Moksha
Pradayini Mataji, Shri Nirmala Devi Namoh Namah"
Shri Nirmala Devi Namo Namah
Shri Nirmala Devi Namo Namah
Shri Nirmala Devi Namo Namah
Nirmala Yoga
15
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Translation of a Marathi letter from
Her Holiness Shri Mataji
My dear Sahaja Yogis
Human Chitta has many illusions. When they are removed,
human Chitta becomes enlightened and blissful. Many of
your illusions have been removed by Kundalini awakening.
1. You have realised that Kundalini is not 7. How has this universe been made ?
Why made? Is Paramatma existing ? These
doubts are basic. Even Gods (Devas) have
an imaginary but a living power in man.
2. This power is within every human being not understood them. But what I have
and its awakening takes place spontaneously told is right or
in a normal person.
wrong, can be ascer-
tained on vibrations. For that vibrations
3. This awakening does not take place by should be good.
any act. But if a person has committed bad
When you will learn with your experience
deeds, awakening is not possible because that love and truth are one and when with
in sleeping stale is aware of the past deeds
your experiences you will realise your very
of the person. Kundalini She has righteous- subtle Brahma-totwa, then your illusion, that
ness and although she is mother in witness Brahma is detached, will go. Divine princi-
state she knows what is good and bad for p'e i.e. Brahma will blossom from within
the person. Diseased body and mind get you as lotus and its fragrance will spread.
Impurities will go from physical, sublle and
causal bodies. When your Chitta becomes
Brahma then the iillusion due to unreal will
LT.
cured by the grace of Kundalini.
4 Kundalini shakti is the power of desire
of Bhagwati. She is easily awakened just he destroved.
by the wish (Sankalpa) of Bhagawati. A
person of very high order has to put in 8. Although Brahma-tatwa (Divine element)
great efforts for it But it is not his fault.
is like sun, its rays reflect on unreal (water)
and that disturbs your attention. It will not
5. Brahma-tatwa which is flowing within be disturbed when your Chitta becomes
you in the form of vibrations cleans all your Brahma (sun) itself. This illusion will go by
three sheaths viz. Body, Mind and Ego. meditation is the company of ever loving
When any of these sheaths becomes im- Bhagawati.
pure your vibrations give you the indications.
9. You have become collective conscious.
6. You get the bliss of the spirit, if you This power of collective consciousness
become of sound body, pure mind and ego- which is awakened within you, is Brahma
less. Vibrations of bliss flow from the Shakti and it is present in the universe, in
different forms and even in molecules. It is
spirit because its light beams unaffected.
Nirmala Yoga
16
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-18.txt 
 the solidity (Jada-Shakti) in solids, in living You have understood all these, but sho uld
beings it is beauty (Saundarya Shakti), in experience them. You should have steady
waking state it is the power of bliss, in mind and surrendering your heart become
Sahaja Yoga it is the power of conscious- free from the illusion. These are my
ness bliss, in Param Yoga it is supreme blessings.
bliss and within Bhagwati it is the power
of being Brahma (Brahma-bhootwa shakti),
Ever yours Mother
Nirmala
CONFIDENCE IN OUR VIBRATIONS
Vibratory awareness is a precious gift we menls. Sometimes we feel that a particular
receive after our Realisation. A new field situation should be handled in a particular
of judgement is opened in front of us, shows way, but when the moment of action arrives,
us wider horizons Our sense of discrimi- the moment of taking the final decision, we
nation, symbolized by the swan who can go backwards. We are afraid. In that mo-
separate the milk from the water, develops ment joy goes away from our hearts and
and gives us more assurance, more confi- instead of it non-confidence settles there.
dence in our decisions. Where there was The decision will not any more be the one
darkness we now see light, where we would coming from the Unconseious
feel incertitude we are now sure. The cor-
rect way, the Right Path is shown to us
through vibrations.
misuse this wonderful gift and try to get an
answer to our petty daily things, through birds learning how to fly, and as soon as we
vibrations. This power was given to us by cannot go further we are taken in the nest.
the enormous generosity of ADI SHAKTI, And again through HER GRACE we will try,
best to be used in a correct way, We should til we are capable of doing it on our own.
On the contrary, if we deeply believe we
were given this power, we will always be
confident and we will always feel the atten-
tion of Shri Mataji on us.
But sometimes, we
We are like little,
not waste it. ff not used correctly we may
lose it, and then the answer we had looked
for will nol be the good one. At such stage powers, shows us the way of doing things,
we lose confidence-confidence in ourselves and then leaves us free to act by ourselves,
and immediately in Sahaja Yoga.
The same way Shri Mataji gives us
always under Her Loving Care, Wise Gui-
dance, Tremendous Compassion.
But if each time we use it, we do it from
the heart, for a worthy purpose, the sure
answer will come even when not expecled face reality and to learn how to fly with all
but with a sign easily recognized by a the joy in our HEARTS through the unlimi-
Sahaja Yogi, as coming from the Divine.
It is time for us to be strong, to grow to
ted LOVE flowing from Shri Mataji.
JAI MATAJI
This sort of a happening should give us
confidence in ourselves, in our own judge-
Maria Amelia de Kalbermatten
Nirmala Yoga
17
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-19.txt 
 Advice of the
Primordial Master
Tao is Adi Shakti. The study of Tao pursued
by Shri Lao Tzu is thus unveiling some as-
When I tend to work too much with the
tongue:
pects of our so elusive cosmic Mather but it
also teaches quite a few intere sting things
about ourselves. For instance, some of us,
"He who knows does not speak;
He who speaks does not know.
He who is truthful is not showy;
He who is showy is not truthful."
western or westernized Sahaja Yogis, do
sometimes tend to carry out the spreading
of Sahaja Yoga with right side attitudes.
Now the right side movement fills us with
the products of our own sympathetic activity
and will power such as individualistic cons-
ciousness, yearning for the fruits of the
actions, efforts, strivings and, perhaps,
competitivity and tensions. However only
when we are empty, freed from all these
things, can we be filied with Tao. Shri Lao
Tzu wanted the childrenof Tao to acknow-
(Tao Te Ching 81)
When I stick to old mental patterns in
seeking achievements:
He who pursues learning will increase every
day
He who pursues Tao will decrease everyday,
He will decrease and continue to decrease,
Till he comes to non-action;
ledge this. Hence he kept a few wonderful
lines for me:
By non-action everything can be done."
(Tao Te Ching 48)
- For instance when I'm inclined to work
- When I feel sad not to go to India, to
London or wherever is Shri Mother :
loo much with Mantras :
*"Tao was always nameless.
*Without going out of the door
When for the first time applied to function,
One can know the whole world;
Without peeping out of the window
One can see the Tao of heaven,
Therefore the Sage knows every-
thing without travelling;
it was named.
Inasmuch asS names are given, one should
also know where to stop.
Knowing where to stop one can become
imperishable."
(Tao Te Ching 32)
He accomplishes everything without
doing it."
(To be really modern we can stop after one
name : NIRMALA !)
(Tao Te Ching 47)
Nirmala Yoga
18
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-20.txt 
 When I forget to take my inspiration and
guidance in the example set by ny
SEEKERS OF TRUTH!
Divine Mother:
To you who seek
Ne'r mind how meek
Your search is not futile
For they who found
True yoga's shore
Had searched millennium's mile.
"The great Tao pervades everywhere, hoth
on the left and on the righr.
By it all things came into being, and it does
not reject them.
Merits accomplished, it does not possess
Seek not for gain
Seek not for fame
In this truth stays concealed
Seek the truth
them.
It loves and nourishes all things but does
not dominate over them.
It is ever non existent, therefore it cun be
named as smalt.
Inside yourself
And all will be revealed
All things return home to it, and it does not
claim mastery over thes; therefore it
can be name d as great.
On Yoga's Shore
By Sahaja's score
The way to truth prevails
And Mataji Nirmala's here
To show us
Truth unveiled.
Because it never assiumes greatness, there-
fore it can accomplish greatness."
(Tao Te Ching 34)
To you who seek
Ne'r mind how meek
Time can only allay
When outstretched arms
We bow to the unfathomable depth of the
Adi Guru who has led us in so many ways
to the Immaculate Lotus Feet of the Great
Goddess. O Mother, with a tiny sparkle of
His humour and of His wisdom, we, who are
to be gurus in Sahaja Yoga, will convey Thy
message of redemption with proper nuance,
sweetness, dedication, effectiveness and
style. O Devi, only Thee in the three worlds
is able to enlighten in mere mortals the mani-
fold qualities of true gurudom. Glory to Thee
for ever and ever. It is said in the Devi
Mahatmyam that those who serve Thee be-
come themselves the refuge of the Universe.
Of yogis who
Await to show the way.
And when the truth
Adorns your head
And you in light abound
Seek not
To keep it to yourself
"Tis here heaven's key is found.
Jai Mataji
Bill Hansel
-A half full yet half empty
Birmingham
England
Child of Tao
19
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-21.txt 
 eee
we must also correct the sins of commis-
U sion, that is the failure to become, for
Antar Yoga
instance, sweeter and more considerate
people. As we watch ourselves we will see
these effects more clearly. As Christ has
said, watch and pray. When the flow of
vibration in our meditation is absolutely
even, silent, without direction towards any
BECAUSE of the enlightenment of the
chakras, whatever is done externally after objec, then we have balanced our outward
self realisation is reflected within. Thus
mantra and yantra, prayers and gestures,
have a meaning only after realisation. Even show on the part of our ego. Again, this
so, gestures and words remain empty if we
do not have our Mother as the residing deity
of all chakras, and specially we have to
place our Mother in our hearts if antar yoga
behaviour and the inner yoga can work to
take us deeper without outward effort or
will only happen if Shri Mataji is in:our
hearts as the Kshipra Prasadini -who
showers blessings on Her devotees very
a quickly-and as the Vanchitartha Prasadini
who bestows on Her devotees the objects
is to be complete. It seems so obvious, -
but many Sahaja Yogis remain half hearted of worship. Thus oneself becomes one
nevertheless because this has not been with the formless, all-pervading, attribute-
understood. Recognition of Shri Mataji as
the complete incarnation of Adi Shakti, em- known except through worship, praise,
bodying every deity which is to be worship- meditation and ultimately silence.
ped, is the only way to get rid of inner
negativity, to feel vibrations property, and to
establish oneself in the divine kingdom of all give thanks to have been born in an age
joy and bliss. This has to be verified, but when it has been possible to know perso-
it is a fact
less Queen of the Universe who cannot be
On the birthday of our Divine Mother we
nally the most complete incarnation which
has been known in all the history of man-
Because external action and desire is kind. Again and again we pray to Her, not
reflected within, the chakras become clean to lead us into the Maya of believing that
or dirty according to our outward behaviour. deities are different and Mataji Shri Nirmala
If the behaviour is false or artificial, even if Devi is different. To know the deities one
must know Mataji, and not the other way
we are doing the gestures of what we
believe is Sahaja Yoga, still our left side round. Thank you Mother, for giving us this
will be weak. Sins of commission are big chance. May Your children make you
corrected by correct outward gesture, but proud and manifest Your glory on Earth.
Nirmala Yoga
20
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Christ, the Buddha and Lord Krishna had this
authority and hence the power to transform
humanity.
**********
******E
Lighting
the Lamps
A leader who practices what he preaches
is like the rising sun which sheds light and
shows the way. Lord Krishna states in the
Sri Bhagwat Gita, "Whatsoever a great man
does, the same is done by others as well.
атрз
Whatever standards he sets the world
follows" III (21).
This is not a mere scriptural quotation
but a reality which was verified in recent
times in the living example of Mahatma
Gandhi. His personal example permeated
the hearts of millions and inspired their
When a child becomes more aware he be- course of action which changed the destiny
YOGI MAHAJAN
gins to observe his surroundings.
listens intently to all sounds and watches
carefully the movements of his parents, As
his faculties develop he begins to imitate
Не
of India despite the most formidable
odds.
In becoming the example lies the secret
the mannerism of his parents and gradually of a successful teacher. Sahaj Yogis have.
learns by their example. In fact from the to become the samples of Sahaja Yoga
child we can know the quality of his parents that others may learn by thier example. The
for his behaviour reflects their upbringing.
example we set should be so sincere that
others are compelled to enquire who we
are, who has adorned us like this. This will
bring glory to our Mother and She will be
proud of us. Then our small family will
We learn by example and it continues to
be the most effective method of education.
In fact moral education can only be impar-
ted through this method. A child is taught
to speak the truth but if the teacher tells family. Therefore, we have to be careful
lies then the teaching loses credibility and and should investigate and check ourselves,
fails to register. Our politicians preach whether our deeds are in harmony with our
honesty but if they are themselves corrupt speech. While we talk of love and forgive-
cross all frontiers and become a universal
then no one lends ear to their lectures and
ness our actions are not a negation. While
we accuse others of fanaticism we are not
ourselves being carried away. For the eyes
does not come from the source of truth. of the world have become very suspicious
Truth has its own streng th. When one has and are always looking for an opportunity
the moral standards turther deteriorate.
Their message fails to inspire because it
become the truth then his words have great for criticism.
( Continued on next Page )
authority and strike deep. The words of the
21
Nirmala Yoga
*******
***
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-23.txt 
 TRANSLATION OF HER HOLINESS MATAJI'S
LETTER IN HINDI
21-10-1976
within you. This flame of kundalini will be
kindled and one within you will become the
My dear Sahaja Yogis, my dear children,
Let this Diwali enlighten you with light torch. Torch is not extinguished. Then
of tove, You yourself are the lamps which there will be spotless sheath of my love. It
burn high and don't get pressed by the cover. will neither have any limits nor any end. I
They become much more powerful than the
cover. It is their own asset. When they are
hit upon, they are disturbed and extin-
guished.
will be watching you.
My love for you is showering as many
many biessings.
Why are our lamps disturbed ? You
should think over it. Is there no transparent
sheath around them ? Have you forgotten
Yours always loving Mother
NIRMALA
your Mother's love and therefore you are so
disturbed? As the glass protects the lamp,
in the same way my love will protect you
LIGHTING THE LAMPS
( Continued from last Page)
But the glass should be kept clean. How
can I explain ? Have I to say like Shri
Krishna "Leave all religions and surrender tions, as loving, generous, gracious, for-
to me" or as Shri Jesus "I am the way, I am giving and patient as our Mother. It is the
Yes, we are to be as gentle as the vibra-
the door."
greatest blessing to have found the source
I want to tell that I an that destination. of all great examples (Trigunatmika); now
But will you people accept it ? Will this fact Tet us imbibe those qualities and mature.
go to your hearts ?
P.
Then we shall become pure and effective
channels of transmitting that great blessing.
Although what I say is distorted, the The sweet fragrance and colours of a flower
truth will always stand. You cannot change attract naturally. Similarly the fragrance and
what It is. ill attract others
backward. I am unhappy because of that
Only you will remain ignorant and beauty of our qualily wi
spontaneously and the message will spread,
Diwali is the day of real aspirations.
Invoke the whole universe. Many lamps of ray exemplifies all the goodness of the sun
have to be lit, and looked after. Add the oil likewise we may exemplify Her...that
of love, Kundalini is the wick and awaken Thy kingdom come Thy will be done on
the kundalini of others with light of the spirit earth as it is in Heaven.
Let us pray to Shri Mataji that as a beam
Nirmala Yoga
22
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-24.txt 
 ple are against Sahaja Yoga and, if miserly
people come, Igive them troubles. If you
are miserly, you get lots of trouble.
Her Holiness Shri Mataji's
ADVI CE
9. Don't be too talkative also. If you be-
come too talkative and troublesome, I can
stop your talking. If you don't talk at all,
that is also not good. That means, don't go
1. It is nothing but love which expands,
to extremes.
gives you vibrations, again reverts back,
goes in parabolas, like that which you call a 10. Magnanimity of mind is very pleasing
pradakshina (Circumabulation of Shakti ). and it attracts others. This magnanimity lies
within human being and is awakened by
Kundalini. But how can those people have
What is Shakti ? Shakti is Paraboli.
2: I am old woman of thousands of years. this joy of spontaneity who are living in
So, I know everything.
artificial atmosphere ? Although Kundalini
has been awakened and She has pierced
3. Many people think ego is horrid. Ego Brahmarandhra yet heart must be pierced.
you must have. You have not to fight with
your ego. Only thing is that your ego should But some Sahaja Yogis have hearts fike
become one with that of God, that's all. It's stones, absolutely devoid of love; they use
a very simple thing if you just become one
with God. Everything is so simple. It is
a very simple thing, but you cannot do it. So Occasions I have seen, people push others
| am here.
sarcastic words while talking to others and
want to show that they are great. On many
or shout at others even in my presence.
Particularly, when you shout at the children,
4. My photograph is the photograph of I feel pain in my heart. At least Sahaja
reality. Whatever I speak, because I am That, Yogis should have deep love for each other.
it is Pranava fiowing. It is actually Pranava. When you know that you are the children of
My every talk, everything, is mantra going the same Mother, why do you look down upon
some people ? Are you perfect ? Are there
no faults in you ? We only talk of universal
5. Do not have Sahaja Yogis for business love. If you have no love for each other
out.
partnership.
amongst you, then in which mankind will it
6. Do not use Sahaja Yoga for making be seen ? All I want to tell you is to clean
money. You have to be generous people, your minds of venomous thoughts that vou
You have to be honest. Be satisfied in your
have for other Sahaja Yogis.
If a Sahaja Yogi visits your town, invite him,
heart.
7. You have to lead a chaste life, See look after him, as if he is your brother. His
happiness will purify your homes, I cannot
chaste things. Your priorities will change,
your friends will change., You will not like understand how there can be groups among
the Sahaja Yogis, because every moment
your condition is improving or going down.
(Continued on Page No. 25)
dirty jokes. You have to be decent people.
8. Don't be misers at all. All miserly peo-
Nirmala Yoga
123
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-25.txt 
 THE ANSWER, MY FRIENDS,
IS BLOWING IN THE WIND
How can we follow up a visit of Shri very much doing all the practical work. For
Mataji ? All the Sahaja Yogis have raised advertising the programmes we distributed
this question. and many have felt the
answer. It is amazing to witness Sahaja medium size posters and 151 large size
Yoga establish itself and spread all over the posters with Shri Mataji's photograph.
world! It is wonderful!
over thousand leaflets, we printed 351
They were put all over Rome and the town
was once again vibrated. The first pro-
It was hardly one year ago, in Nov. 1981, gramme followed the usual pattern : a gene-
that Shri Mataji gave Her first public pro- ral introduction, a video tape show and
gramme in Rome. At this time, about 250 collective realisation. For the second eve-
to 300 people got their realisation. But, as ning, just before the tape we gave a short
it is Sahaja Yoga which chooses those who
are entitled to carry on the Plan of God, the a technical explanation and two Sahaja
Almighty, only the few who had a great Yogis spoke about their own experience.
desire to become Sahaja Yogis have worked
it out, it is in this spirit that we decided to
commemorate Shri Mataji's most precious had said : "I am definitely coming to Rome"
gift in organizing two public programmes. and She kept Her promise, not with Her
We wanted to introduce Sahaja Yoga and physical presence but through the power-
illustrate its concrete application to every- full flow of vibrations.
day life.
resume of what was said the day before,
Just before leaving Vienna Shri Mother
The shower of
blessings from the Adi Shakti rained upon
us as tremendous vibrations that gave reali-
Two special days were chosen for the sation to more than fifty people. All the
meetings. The 30th Nov. and the 1st Dec. Sahaja Yogis were standing at the back, in
that is, respectively, Shri Ganesha's day and
the day of the full moon to flow in the stream
a compact row, similar to Shri Shiva's ar-
rows ready to be shot, and were collectively
raising the Kundalini of a public which
of auspiciousness.
Our collectivity directed the maximum of proved to be sensitive and attentive. All of
attention and desire towards reaching as us Sahaja Yogis have the feeling that some
many seekers as possible and being able to among the new realised brothers and sisters
bring them to our Holy Mother's Lotus Feet.
While last April, during the second coming eagerly waiting for the follow up meeting !
of Shri Mataji to Rome, our collective atten- Really, the Divine Strategist who constantly
tion was concentrated an Her arrival, this has been supporting and guiding us, ever
time we aimed at the seekers and enjoyed present in our minds, hearts and souls,
are of a very high quality, and they were
Nirmala Yoga
24
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-26.txt 
 fully enlightened us as if we were the war- the Feet of the Great Mother of the Universe,
riors of Her celestial army, equipped with as stated by Shri Krishna when He told
Sword and shield, love and wisdom, engag- Arjuna : "Give thy mind to me, and give me
ed in the battle against the anti God forces. thy heart, and thy sacrifice and adoration.
This is my Word of promise : thou shalt in
To thank the Divine Molher for the atten- truth come to me, for thou art dear to me."
tion She gave us we performed a puja the
next Sunday. We gathered together at
8.00 p.m., got up at 2.00 a.m. and read the ped Shri Mother, and, with Her special
"Devi Mahatmyam" to celebrate to Great permission, we will dedicate to Her the
Goddess; again, the vibrations were so
strong and cool, again the answer was blo-
wing in the wind to tell us our puja was
accepted. It was the best sign from the
glorious spouse of Sri Sadashiva that the
Spirit was pleased with Her small small
children.
Once again we thank our most worship-
"Thanks Giving Puja".
Rome, Dec. '82
-Flavia, Guido, Pedro
Her Holiness Shri Mataji's
A DV I CE
(Continued from Page No. 23)
We felt the immense, boundless, unlimi- Know that making such groups is disas-
fed Divine Organisation and Power behind trous. Look at the good qualities of others
us. This intimate relationship to the All and enjoy their love. Don't worry about their
was, for instance, expressed in the secret bad qualities. Leave them for me. You will
complicity of Shri Indra and Shri Vayu whom realise in meditation that this is the only way
we invoked and prayed as rain was threate- of opening the fountains of bliss.
ning the day we were to put the posters
Well, they took away the blanket of clouds, 11. Sahaja Yogi parents have great res-
letting through blue sky and sunshine. Shri ponsibility towards their realised children.
Hanumana, as usual, took care of hundred They have to be protected, disciplined and
details and encouraged us with many aus- brought up in proper atmosphere of love.
picious signs. The extent of His friend- Realised children cannot tolerate nega-
liness cannot be discribed here.
tivity. They fight with it.
In truth, we must declare that the whole 12. I do everything in collective conscious-
work has been done by the only and true ness. If I cure one person, many such cases
Thinker. Planner and Doer who has inspir-
ed us all the time, by Shri Mataji Nirmala
become alright automatically.
Devi.
Articles & Experiences
Thus, at this particular time of our life we
realise the highest privilege of being chosen
by GOD Himself to accomplish His work,
and the importance of doing it in a very
are requested
detached way leaving the fruits of action at
Nirmala Yoga
25
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-27.txt 
 MITHYA*
My dear Damle,
of illusory ideas become a part of your mind.
False thoughts like it is mine or they are
mine,' identify with outside objects ! Besi-
Many blessings,
Received your letter It is a very good
sign to feel a pull on Sahasrar, because
sign to feel a pull on Sahasrar. because des, man-made bindings such as "My body
only through Sahasrar endless rays are
poured in man's heart and new doors of cated. Then unreal relationships like, 'he is
inner being are opened. But before this my father, he is my brother, she is my
grace descends in, there should be a pull in
Sahasrar. We understand the pull of heart
which is also silent, but lop-sided, that is
emotional But pull of Sahasrar becomes
allround. There, man is in integrated state,
in that Dharma (righteousness) and aware-
ness implore for chaitanya (Divine Cons- separation, sorrow, attachment under the
ciousness) that is God's love. This hapPpens of social status. Man with great affection
should be healthy and beautiful" are incul-
mother', are on your head. As ego develops,
foolish ideas, such as, 'l am rich, I am poor,
I am helpless, or I belong to high family etc.
come in your head. Many officials and
and politicians become egoists (Donkeys).
Then, there are anger, hatred forebearance,
cover of love and temptations in the guise
spontaneously. Although it is the skill of
your Kundalini, your personality should keeps clinging to this unreal way of life.
strengthen the Kundalini You earned that
quality in previous lives and hence this life
is great that gems of persons are available
for my work.
If you think of getting rid of all these, and
make efforts, what you get is illusory know-
ledge, because the attention (Chitta) moves
e
along Pingala Channel, and then you are
involved in Siddhis (Powers) and other
If you underständ
physical being is here I am all over, it should Chakras is also illusory because there is no
also be realised that even this body is an gain from it, on the contrary it is harmful.
unreal (Mithya) appearance. It is difficult Whatever self-controls and mortifications
to come to thiis stage but if gradually unreal you insist on practising effectively, all of
is discerned, the truth will be eslablished them add to the limitations on your Chitta
effortlessly and waves of great bliss will (attention). As such there is no way for
envelop your being I am explaining, in this liberation.
letter, what is unreal (Mithya). It should be
read out to all and assimilated by all.
that although my temptations A vision of Kundalini and
But all unreal does not fall off with the
Self-Realization. It can be broken off gradu-
Unreal starts soon after the birth in this ally. If, with firm conviction, you deny from
world. Your name, village, country, horo- your heart all that is unreal (Mithya), you
scope, forecasts, many such things get will have the realization of the Self (Atman)
attached to you or others attach them to you. in its pure form. Thereafter it is established
Once Brahmarandhra is closed, many types within you. Albeit, the same mortal human
26
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-28.txt 
 that everything about it is taken care of.
nature of love, truth, having no beginning There are many instances to prove it. Then,
and end, verily the Shiva. Human Chitta is in whatever you do, your Chitta (attention)
meant for realizing that reality. This Chitta remains in oneness with the Self. All bind-
must become one with that Atman. Only Ings of sin (Pap) and merit (Punya) are
that Chitta, which progresses renouncing snapped. Distinctions like worldly and non-
all unreal (Mithya), breaks all known and wordly vanish, because that wicked darkness,
unknown bindings and becomes verily the which has created all the discriminations,
ends. Everything becomes auspicious in the
light of true knowledge, whether it is the des-
Atma is never disturbed or destroyed. truction done by Shri Krishna or the Cross of
Chitta is drenched In that which is of the
Self.
Only human attention (Chitta), in pursuit of Shri Jesus.
desires, leaves its inner path. This is Maya
All this will not be understood by explai-
(the illusion). She has been intentionally
created. Without her the attention (Chitta) ning. Just showing the path will not help,
would not have developed. You should not The path will be known only after walking
be afraid of Maya and should recognise her on it
so that She will illuminate your path. Cloud
hides the sun as also makes it seen. In the
same way once the Maya is identified she
moves aside and the sun is seen. The sun
is always there but what is the purpose of write their own experiences and progress.
cloud ? Because of cloud you have an urge VWhen I come
to see the sun which shines for a moment Virata's channels (Nadis) you have awaken-
and again hides somewhere. It gives ed. It appears, this work will come up in the
strength and courage to your sight to see case of holy land of India, and when fully
the sun. Man has been created with such developed, it will spread in all countries and
great efforts Only one step on his feet and directions.
all is successlul.
ing possible. Hence, I have come as your
When I get your letters I fix the targets.
After some time even that will not be
necessary. But, for the present all should
we will see how many of
But, still it is not becom-
When Sahasrar day was celebrated in
London today, I.e. 5th May, I invited only
about 20-25 people and decided further
Mother.
Write your problems to me in letters. Sit course of action.
down in meditation. It is best to discuss
only Sahaja Yoga even amongst each other.
Attention (Chitta) should always be kept
going deeper and deeper within. Forget out-
side as much as possible. Have confidence
Many blessings and infinite love to all.
19.7.
Ever yours-Your Mother
-Nirmala
*Translation of Her Holiness Matajı's letter in Marathi sent on the occasion of Sahasrar
day celebrations on 5.5.1975.
Nirmala Yoga
27
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-29.txt 
 super-ego and ego respectively. Super-ego
is sub-conscious and ego is supra-cons-
cious, By accepting conditioning the super-
ego gets inflated and we move towards the
sub-conscious and by rejecting condition-
ings ego is inflated and we move towards
Yoga
Sahaja
and
Cure
Physical
****
R. D.
KULKARNI
supra-conscious. If movement in either of
As all Sahaja Yogis know, sympathetic these two directions is excessive the collec-
nervous system and seven Chakras govern
physical and mental health of human beings. satisfied dead-spirits reside and the result
be entered. It is in these regions that un-
The left sympathetic nervous system ie.
Ida channel controls the emotional aspects Tantrikas enter these areas in order to cap-
may be a possession. Of course some
of human nature, attitude of delving in the ture dead spirits and use them for their own
past, desires etc. Ida channel is the moon
channel and with Pingala Nadi it maintains the balances cause many diseases. It has been
balance of heat and cold in the constitution. known for some time to medical science
The right sympathetic nervous system i.e.
Pingala Nadi is responsible for physical side
of the human being and also controls creative
aspects of human nature. It keeps the balance Togy) are more likely to suffer from heart
of heat and cold with Ida Nadi in the cons-
purposes. On the physical level these im-
that people with overactivity of the Pingala
Channel (type A characters in their termino-
attack. In Sahaja Yoga we know the expla-
nation; over-activity of the Pingala Nadi
drains the Ida Nadi especially the left heart
and a heart attack is the result. Generally
titution. Excessive use of one side causes
imbalance in the system.
Too much of sleep, thinking of the past, speaking over-activity of the Pingala Nadi
lethargic nature result into over activity of causes over-activity of the organs for
left side and correspondingly right side re- exampie high blood-pressure, hot liver
mains unused. Over-working of physical (right Nabhi and right Swadisthan). Over-
and mental faculties lead to imbalance, in activity of left sympathetic results into
that right side is over active and left side is lethargic liver, lethargic heart, thus slowing
less used. Right-sided people are ambi-
tious and have tendency to dominate over
others whereas left-sided people are sub-
missive and aggressive towards themselves. pathetic in which case the heart is lethargic
down their functions. It can also result
into low blood-pressure. Heart-attacks can
also originate from over-activity of left sym-
and hence less pumping and slow blood
Ida Channel begins in Mooladhar and circulation. Over-active heart leads to ex-
terminates in limbic area while Pingala cess pumping of heart and fast blood circu-
channel starts from right Swadisthan and lation.
terminates in limbic area (Sahasrar). In originate from collective sub-conscious ie.
day-to-day activities both the channels are cancer, virus infection, multiple sclerosis,
constantly used and as a consequence their meningitis, Parkinson's disease, arthritis,
terminal points are inflated like balloons into rheumatism, slip-disc, spondilosis, Tuber-
Most of the diseases of left side
Nirmala Yoga
28
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-30.txt 
 culosis, Asthama, Aneamia, Sciatica, Polio, which are to be destroyed. As Her Holiness
Pryelities, Oste-myetitis, muscular dias- Mataji says, "Of what use they are? I am
trophy. Paralysis.
the diseases caused by left side do not
suffer from fever. Similarly diseases of
right side involve high fever. In these cases
left side should be raised and orace ot God of particular side would lead to the diseases
be added into right side.
By and large patients of not here to give the realisation to chickens".
Not-with-standing all that has been said.
is not always necessary that over-activity
related to that side alone Over-activity of
right side may, as a reaction, trigger collec-
Patients of left-side diseases should tive sub-consciousness and
raise their right side and add grace of God diseases of left side like cancer. Hence
into their left side. They should also put those who are on the extremes in this re-
their left hand towards the photo ot Her gard, say excess physical and mental acti-
Holiness Mataji and right hand kept away or vity, are vulnerable to the diseases of left
kept raised so that back side of the palm side owing to too much of brain work; brain
faces the photo.. It is disastrous to turn the gets tired and causes diseases,
palm of raised hand towards the photo.
Similarly those having the problems of right
side should put their right hand towards the Badhas also These people should put left
photo and raise left as stated eariier or keep hand towards the photo and ralse right händ
cause the
Left side diseases can be caused by
as described above.
Shoc-beating one's
own name is also an effective treatment. It
it away.
Our diet has much to do with the balance is necessary for these people to invoke Shri
of sympathetic nervous system and has to Ganesha and establish Him on their Mula-
be suitably changed in order to correct the dhar by inner purification, innocence etc.
Malnutrition can be cause of Devotion to Shri Mataji is of utmost impor-
Hence those tance as Shri Ganesha will be pleased only
imbalance.
many left side ailments
patients having lethergic organs should take if She is pleased, Influence of bad Gurus
protein-rich food and even non-vegetarian also creates left side problems in which case
food and less carbohydrates. Right sided left Swadisthan and complete left void and
people (having over-active system) should left Agnya are affected. They should place
avoid proteins and non vegerarian food and right hand on stomach and stretch left hand
should take more carbohydrates and vegeta- towards the photo and pray "Mother, please
rian food. VWhile on the subject of diet, it is make me my own Guru".. As Mother has
imperative to warn the protagonists of vege- said that it is our Spirit that is our Guru and
tarianism on philanthropic grounds, that hence once the Spirit is awakened one be-
intellectual compassion on animals does
more harm to themselves than any good to
the animals. Compassion should emanate
from the Spirit and only that compassion the Chakras and that ultimately leads to the
(Kripa) works which comes from the heart. damages to the organs which are governed
The intellectual marcy is useless. Know by the affected Chakra. Further, concerned
which animals are to be preserved and deity of the Chakra recedes from it once the
comes one's own Guru.
Problems of left side or right side affect
Nirmala Yoga
29
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-31.txt 
 Chakra is affected. Hence, the delty is in- It is however suggested that once cause of
voked in the name of Her Holiness Shri the disease is attributed to a "Badha" one
Mataji by saying the Mantra for that parti- should straight away recommend lime-chilli
cular Chakra. For treatment, palm of oppo- treatment and the patient should also take
site hand should be placed on affected to self-treatment as suggested earlier.
Chakra and that hand should be stretched
out towards the photo. Foot-soaking in luke- made of five Elements viz. Earth. Fire, Water,
warm water with salt added in it is extremely Air, and Ether. Besides, two more elements
useful and brings about quick relief. In the govern psychosomatic system which are
worst cases, lime-chilli treatement becomes mind and intellect. Relation of the Chakra
necessary, depending upon the judgement and Element and some of the diseases is
of Sahaja Yogi, who is helping the patient. given below :-
It is well known that human being is
Element
Deity
Chakra
Sh. Ganesha
Earth
Muladhar Chakra
Sh. Gauri & Sh. Kundalini
Muladhar
Earth on left
Sh. Brahmadeva
Swadisthan
Fire on right
Sh. Saraswati
Sh. Vishnu
Water
Manipur
Sh. Lakshmi
Sh. Shiva-Parvati
Left Heart
Sh. Jagadamba
Centre Heart
Air
Right Heart
Sh. Ram & Sita
Ether
Sh. Krishna & Radha
Visshuddhi
Sh. Jesus & Mary
Fire
Agnya
HER HOLINESS MATAJI
Sahasrar
All 5 elements
mind and
Intellect
Atma is on top as Sadashiva.
(To be continued in next issue)
Nirmala Yoga
30
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-32.txt 
 I'm sitting at a boring session of the UN Commission on social development where a
communist delegate explains why everything is so beautiful in his: country. Should I take
the floor and tell them about my country ?
-Gregoire
STATEMENT OF THE DELEGATE OF SAHAJLAND
TO THE WORLD COMMISSION ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT
Blablapur, the 7th Feb, 183
in Avidyaland that, all of you, distinguished
and clever delegates, so aptly represent
Mr. Chairman, distinguished Delegates,
I have listened carefully to the declara-
tions of my distinguished colleagues and I
The impact of our First Economic Plan
must congratulate them for their impressive on the unemployment rate has been very
contribution to our debate. If our work positive. Most workers have been laid off
and found time for meditation and enjo yment,
will successfully going into small scale agro-industries or
achieve its goal of being the greatest comic the artisanal production of natural goods,
worshipping God and their own Spirit.
follows this encouraging trend I am sure
that our commission
show in town.
Businessmen do not worry about tomorrow
Let me now, Mr. Chairman, expose some
of the prominent features of my country
in the field of social development. In Sahai- hardly any bank left to enable them to do
land we have been able to dismantle in a
very short time a great number of industries
and services: we have practically wiped coliapse of the Insurance business. Trades-
out the armament industry, the pharmaceu- men exchange goods with a generosity
tical industry, the petro-chemical activities
relating to the production of plastic, dras- professional category. Most administrators
tically curbed down the automobile industry, and bureaucrats have been fired and I am
the production of synthetic fabrics and of sure, distinguished delegates, that you will
most unnecessary consumption goods. We all understand the wisdom of this move as
have also abolished the noxious practice of your knowledge of this esteemed social
tobacco growing. (A few plantations have class is quite deep indeed.
been maintained to produce insecticides).
All fermentation processes leading to the
production of wines, liquors and gorgonzola society of Sahajland are most obvious in
cheese are prohibited. So are most books, the so important field of education. Exis-
magazines, movies and forms of the enter- ting universities and schools have been
tainment business which are still popular closed down for the students (known as
or about investing their money for there is
so. Needless to say, this absence of wor-
ries about the future has led to the welcome
which did not, in the past, characterize this
The changes brought about in the
Nirmala Yoga
31
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-33.txt 
 Sadhakas; tune their attention inside to be reme Command is carried by the Uncons-
taught by their own Spirit. The vice-chan- cious at thought's speed to the most re-
cellors of the Sahaj Academy, all between mote security check-point.
three and eight years old, are sometimes
organizing seminars on topical issues such none other than Our Empress Herself, Her
as doll rearing. Unfortunately adults are Sacred Holliness SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA
not invited.
The Supreme Command is headed by
DEVI ! The Chief of Staff of the Supreme
Almost all aspects of social life, Mr Command is Shri Vishnu while logistical ope-
Chairman, have been touched by the wind rations are controlled by Shri Brahmadeva.
of change which blows on my country. To They are most aptly seconded by two gene-
give but one example which relates to town rals:Shri Bhairawa is incharge of our "search
planning and house building, Sahaj archi- and destroy operations" and Shri Hanu-
tects have abandoned the well known mana, while assuming many versatile func-
practice of putting the bathroom in the tions, is the head of the best Intelligence
middle of the living room.
the other hand, is now closely linked to the
world production of lemons.
Health care, on Service in the world, I mean, in three worlds.
In this short presentation of the Supreme
Command I have ommitted to mention Shri
Our success has been such, Mr Chair- Shiva. This is because he represents our
man, that many peopte ara now applying for absolute, metanuclear deterrent who would
citizenship in Sahaj land. Unfortunately, as enter into action only in case of the final
holocaust, that is Tandava. I have not
be at times somewhat tricky. Indeed, with- mentioned either the Commander-in-Chief
out the raising of the Kundalini and the of the army. I know that, in the past, he has
opening of the sahasrara, the entry visa in been identified by the spies of Avidyaland
Sahajland cannot be granterd Many people which were known as the "religious esta
with faked visa have been found out by blishment"-under various names such as
vibratory awareness and have been expelled. Ganesha, Karttikeya or Jesus Christ. But
this time He is coming under a new name
you all know, the Immigration procedure can
At this stage of my slatment, distingui-
shed delegates, I might as well say a few
things about the conditions of public secu-
rity in Sahajland. Many citizens of Sahajland you to enjoy the end of this session.
are enrolled at a very young age in the Sahaj
Defence Force where they receive basic Commission and to your deliberations
training as how to intercept intruders with Thank you Mr. Chairman.
defective agnyas, antibhoots flying squads
of ganas and angels are twenty four hours the Commission. I hope, dearest reader, that
on operative duty on our left and right side
borders to insure the integrity of our Mother-
land's air space. Our Defence Forces are
supported by a revolutionary telecommuni-
cation system: any impulse from the Sup-
that no one knows but Himself I will not
elaborate much on this item as I still want
I wish all success to the work of this
My statment received due altention from
you liked it.
LOVE
JAI MATAJI!
SAHAJLAND INTELLIGENCE SERVICE
Code name : Pink Panther
Nirmala Yoga
32
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-34.txt 
 Balancing the Internal and External Growth
Finally to grow means balancing oneself
to feel the softness of the earth and the
Every Sahaja Yogi must grow. It is his
responsibility to grow, in fact his only res-
ponsibility towards his brothers and sisters confidence of the tree, Growing in Sahaja
and towards himself. What it means to grow Yoga gives us the power to witness our own
in Sahaja Yoga and how to grow within as growth. By witnessing, we teel the pre-
sence of the All Pervading Power irradia-
ting the whole atmosphere, enveloping the
well as without ?
Growing means becoming stronger like a whole tree with the wind of love of ADI
tree which grows within and without the SHAKTI, blowing on the shoots with peace
Mother earth. To grow, a tree has to find and joy. Then the whole tree responds to
his way to let his roats penetrate deeply the wind in a shiver of joy showing to him-
in to the earth. When the roots are being self and to the nature the majesty of his
nourished by the Mother earth they grow as shape and the generosity of his shadow,
well as they make the whole tree grow.
Hcw to grow ? Simply like a tree, with
Through Self-Realisation we become aware
of being the tree of life. Growth means first full spontaneity and detachment. The Kun-
being aware that the Kundalini is the tree dalini is the sap of the tree. In order to
of life and has to strenghen within oursel- grow the Kundalini has to circulate along
The Self-Realisation gives us the the path in a tremendous flow of vitality
ves.
power not only to become the tree of life building Her awn strength by the irequency
but to make us grow and gain vigour and of Her Raising up to our Sahasrara. The
strength. Growth means feeling the beauty more She raises, the more She gets strengh
of the tree of life through the light of the and the more we grow. Like the sap in a
Spirit, enjoying its action and nature.
tree, the Divine vibrations circulate in our
being making our growth effective and
Growth is triggered by our attention living.
This attention will be our guide and will tell
us how or whatever the roots are growing
and penetrating into our Being, So growth wise how can the sap circulate ? The
also means watching oneself being nouri- growth of the Self goes through the nou-
shed by the divine vibrations of the Holy rishment of the Kundalini but how can the
Spirit.
and when we correct we grow, because we the motor of our growth because how can
adjust ourselves like a root surrounding a we grow without joy ? And joy is the mani-
stone and finding a new way to penetrate festation of our Spirit. How to grow? Simply
more effectively in the depth of the earth. by opening our heart to feel the bliss of the
Growing is then one's adaptation to all the Self and by surrendering ourselves to the
asperities and obstacles of life in order to Divine Laws of God Almighty. Then we
But we must be willing to grow, other-
When we watch. we can correct Kundalini be nourished without joy. Joy is
overcome and master them.
grow because we enjoy to grow and in the
Nirmala Yoga
33
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-35.txt 
 spontaneity of our growth we start feeling as far as we can see. So to let grow our love
the depth ofour roots and the strength of for others, we have to grow within oursel-
the shoots, we enjoy the internal as well as
the external growth of the Self. This inter- through our Kundalini, by strengthening Her
nal and external growth become the two and making our Chakras steady and strong.
wheels of the chariot of our own emanci-
ves first: We have to grow from our Spirit
The inner growth makes us humble and
humility establishes our connection with
pation.
When we are conscious of our growth Shri Mataji who is Unending Love and the
and willing to grow, we start loving others, Quintescence of Divine Beauty. The inner
for we feel the strengh of the roots which growth fills us with peace and Joy and ena-
makes the tree defy the storms and thunder bles us to hear the voice of the Self and to
as well as the beauty of the branches which feel the glory of own Spirit. The outside
give shadow against the sun and protection growth makes us ask for forgiveness and
against the rain. We cannot love if we do forgive by absorbing within our heart the
not grow, and we cannot grow without love. Unlimited Compassion of our Beloved
Love makes us grow. At first we grow in- Mother. The outside-growth creates all the
wardly, because we have to love and res- bondages which tie us to our brothers
pect ourselves first, Then we can grow and sisters, The inner growth makes the
outwardly to give all the love we have stored external growth expressing automatically,
in our heart. The love for others has to be but the external growth vanishes it it is not
nourished by our heart as well as the bran looked after by the inner growth, because
ches have to be nourished through the how can we love others, if we do not love
roots. The roots make the shools grow the Self ?
and the shoots make the roots penetrate
We have to grow inwardly to show our
deeper in the heart of the earth. The love
for his own Spirit makes the Spirit of others love outwardly and the outward love has to
sparkle within themselves and every sparkle be sustained by the Manifestation of our
of theirs reflects itself with love and detach- Spirit. Then balancing internal and exter-
ment in our heart. This is the balance bet- nal growth makes us feel that there is only
ween internal and external growth. By one growth, one love and one collective
growing inwardly we try to see as far as we joy under the light and the Eternal Glory of
can the manifestation of Shri Mother's love our Beloved Mother.
and Compassion. within us and by growing
outwardly we try to make the others see
Arneau de Kalbermatten
Subscribers are requested to renew their subscription in time and also
extend their co-operation in making new subscribers from Sahaja Yogis.
The magazine is posted promptly, however, if the same is not received
please intimate us
Nirmala Yoga
34
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-36.txt 
 Amen. We the Children, we bow with utter devotion and adoration to
the Sacred One Who resides in the heart of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi.
From Him came the desire for our emancipation. Om
Shivam shivakaram shantam abivaatmanam shivotamann shivamarga
praneraram pranatosmi sadaskivam
The 108 Names of Shri Shiva
Om Twamewa Sakshat Shri
Pure
SHIVA
1.
Compassionate
2.
SHANKARA
3. SWAYAMBHU
Born out of Himself
4. PASHUPATI
Lord and protector of animals
Field of forgiveness
5. KSHAMAKSHETRA
6. PRIYABHAKTA
Favourite of the devotee
God of love
KAMADEVA
7.
8. SADHUSADHYA
Achieved easily by the saintly
GN Occupying the lotus of the heart
HRITPUNDARIKASINA
9.
10. JAGADDHITAISIN
Well wisher of the Universe
11. VYAGHRAKOMALA
Tender to the tiger
VATSALA
Beloved
12.
13. DEVASURAGURU
Preceptor of the gods and of the asuras
14.
SHAMBU
Bestower of blessing
15. LOKOTTARASUKHALAYA
Abode of the most excellent happiness
16. SARVASAHA
Bearer of everything
17. SVADHRITA
Self-supported
18. EKANAYAKA
Sole lord
19. SHRIVATSALA
The darling of the Goddess
20. SHUBHADA
Bestower of auspiciousness
Nirmala Yoga
35
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-37.txt 
 21. SARVASTTVAVALABANA
Supporter of all living beings
22. SHARVARIPATI
Lord of the night
Bestower of boons
VARDA
23.
24. VAYUVAHANA
Having the wind of vibrations as vehicle
Holding water-pot
KAMANDALUDHARA
25.
Lord of the rivers
NADISHVARA
26.
27. PRASADASVA
Lord of the wind
28. SUKHANILA
Pleasing wind
NAGABHUSANA
Having serpents for his ornaments
29.
Residing on top of mount Kailash
KAILASHASHIKHARVASIN
30.
Three eyed
31. TRILOCHANA
Holding the mighty bow
32. PINAKAPANI
Ascetic
33. SHRAMANA
Lord of the mountain
34. ACHALESHWARA
35. VYAGHRACHARMAMBARA
Wearing the tiger hide
36. UNMATTAVESHA
Having the guise of a mad one
Going about surrounded by bhoots
PRETACHARIN
37.
Destroyer
38. HARA
39. RUDRA
... Fierce
Of terrible exploits
40. BHIMAPARAKRAMA
Lord of the dance
41. NATESHWARA
42. NATARAJA
King of the dance
The lord of spiritual reality
ISHWARA
43.
The great Shiva
PARAMSHIVA
44.
The soul of the Cosmos
PARAMATMA
45.
46. PARAMESHWARA
The supreme Lord
47. VIRESHWARA
The witness of the Universe
SARVESHWARA
The lord of all
48.
The lord of love
KAMESHWARA
49.
50. VISHVASAKSHINA
The witness of the universe
Nirmala Yoga
36
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-38.txt 
 Ever dancing
51. NITYANRITYA
Abode of alI
52.
SARVAVASA
Great yogi
53. MAHAYOGI
Primordial, immutable yogi
54. SADYOGI
God the Almighty
55. SADASHIVA
The Self
56. ATMA
The joy
57. ANANDA
With the moon for his crest jewel
CHANDRAMAULI
58.
59. MAHESHWARA
The great lord
Lord of nectar
60. SUDHAPATI
Drinker of nectar
61.
AMRUTAPA
Full of nectar
AMRUTAMAYA
62.
Soul of the devotee
63. PRANATATMAKA
Divine spiritual Being
64. PURUSHA
Hidden one
65 PRACOCHANNA
Very subtle
66. SUKSHMA
Fond of the pericarp of the lotus
67. KARNIKARAPRIYA
The poet
KAVI
68.
Of never failing punishment
AMOGHADANDA
69.
With a blue throat
70.
NILAKANTHA
Having matted hair
71. JATIN
Having flowery eyes
72. PUSHPALOCHANA
The object of meditation
DHYANADHARA
73.
The heart of the universe
BRAHMANDAHRIT
74.
Chastiser of Cupid
75. KAMASHASANA
76. JITAKAMA
Conqueror of lust
Conqueror of sense organs
77. JITENDRIYA
78. ATINDRIYA
Beyond the scope of sense organs
79. NAKSHATRAMALIN
Having a garland of stars
..
Nirmala Yoga
37
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-39.txt 
 Having neither beginning nor end
ANADYANTA
80.
The origin of the Self
ATMAYONI
81.
The origin of the firmament
NABHAYONI
82.
Ocean of mercy
KARUNA SAGARA
83.
84. SHULIN
Owner of the trident
Having a great bow
MAHESHVASA
85.
Spotless
86. NISHKALANKA
Ever beautiful
87. NITYASUNDARA
Whose other half is Parvati
88.
ARDHANARISHWARA
The Lord of the Mother
UMAPATI
89.
The bestower of sweetness
RASADA
90.
* Frightful
UGRA
91.
The great destroyer
МАНАКАLA
92.
The destroyer of death
KALAKALA
93.
The leader of the nature of the tiger
VAIYAGHRADHURYA
94.
The suppressor of enemies
SHATRUPRAMATHIN
95.
SARVACHARYA
Preceptor of all
96.
SAMA
Equanimous
97.
ATMAPRASANNYA
Contented soul
98.
Fond of Nara and Narayana
NARANARAYANAPRIYA
99:
(Shesha and Vishnu)
The knower of the taste
100. RASAJNA
Whose body is devotion
101. BHAKTIKAYA
ВНАКТIКAYА
The leader of the heroes of the world
102. LOKAVIRAGRANI
Eternal being
103. CHIRANTANA
104. VISHVAMBARESHWARA
Lord of the earth
Born again soul
105. NAVATMAN
Lord of the new Jerusalem
106. NAVAYERUSALEMESHWARA...
The Primordial Self of Shri Mataji
107. ADINIRMALATMA
108. SAHAJAYOGIPRIYA
Fond of Sahaja Yogis
Nirmala Yoga
38
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-40.txt 
 FESTIVALS
Festivals
Date according to
Indian Calendar
Date according to
English Calendar
21st March 1983
Her Holiness Shri Mataji's birthday
28th March 1983
Month
Falgun
Purnima - Full Moon Day
Holi
Shukla Paksha-
Bright Fortnight
29th March 1983
Month
Falgun-
Krishna Paksha -
Dark Fortnight
Pratipad a-ist day
(Holl can be celebrated on eitker of the two days)
3rd April 1983
Month
Easter Sunday
Falgun
Krishna Paksha-
Dark Fortnight
Shashthi- 6th day
7th April 1983
Her Holiness Shri Mataji's
Month
Falgun
Krishna Paksha-
Wedding Anniversary
Dark Fortnight
10th day
Dashami-
Month
14th April 1983
Chaitra-
Navaratri
Shukla Paksha-
14th April to 21st April
Bright Fortnight
Pratipada - 1st day to
9th day
Navami
Month
Chaitra
21st April 1983
Shri Rama Navami
Shukla Paksha-
(Shri Rama's Birthday)
Bright Fortnight
Navami - 9th Day
Chaitra
Month
27th April 1983
Shri Hanumana Jayanti
(Birthday of Shri Hanuman)
Shukla Paksha-
Bright Fortnight
Purnima - Full Moon Day
Nirmala Yoga
39
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-41.txt 
 Shri Adi-Shankaracharya's
Vaishakh-Month
17th May 1983
Shukla Paksha-
birthday
Bright Fortnight
Panchami – 5th Day
Vaishakh a
Shukla Paksha-
Birthday of Shri Nrisinh
(Incarnation of Shri Vish-
Month
25th May 1983
Bright Fortnight
14th day
demon
who killed
nu
Hiranya Kashyapa, father
of Shri Prahlad).
Chaturdashi
Valshakh- Month
26th May 1983
Shri Budha Purnima
(Birthday of Shri Buddha)
Shukla Paksha-
Bright Fortnight
Purnima - Full Moon Day
Ashadh
24th July 1983
Guru Purnima
Month
(Puja of Shri Adi Guru)
Shukla Paksha-
Bright Fortnight
Purnima - Full Moon Day
Note: According to the Indian Calendar, Year comprises 12 months and a month 30
days, having two fortnights each, beginning from the first day after full moon-
day and new moon day respectively. Bright Fortnight, known as Shukla Paksha,
begins on the day next to new moon day and ends on full moon day. Dark
fortnight i e. Krishna Paksha, begins on the day next to full moon and ends on
new moon day. Each date is known as Tithi' and is given cardinal numbers
from the first to fifteenth day. They are as under:-
1st Fortnight, Bright Fortnight (Shukla Paksha):
1st day
First day after New Moon Day-Pratipada
2nd day
Dwitiya
Tritiya
3rd day
4th day
Chaturthi
5th day
Panchami
6th day
Shashthi
Saptami
7th day
8th day
Ashtami
9th day
Navami
Nirmala Yoga
40
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-42.txt 
 10th day
Dashami
11th day
Ekadashi
12th day
Dwadashi
13th day
Trayodashi
14th day
Chaturdashi
15th day
Purnima
(Full Moon day)
Second Fortnight, Dark Fortnight (Krishna Paksha)
Same as above, except the 15th day, which is New Maon day and known as
Amavasya.
In view of the repetition of cardinal numbers in the second fortnight beginning
on the first day after full moon, while indicating a date, it is necessary to say the fort-
night in which that particular day is falling, eg. 5th day of dark fortnight in the month
of Chaitra is indicated, while performing the puja, as follows -
Chaitra Maase, Krishna Pakshe, Panchami Tithe.
Names of Twelve Months are as under:-
1st month
Chaitra
2nd month
Vaishakha
3rd month
Jyeshtha
Ashadha
4th month
5th month
Shravan
6th month
Bhadrapad
7th month
Ashwin
8th month
Kartik
9th month
Marga Shirsha
10th month
Paush
11th month
Magh
Falgun
12th month
Nirmala Yoga
41
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-43.txt 
 Registered with the Registrar of Newspapers under Regn. No. 36999|81
In some states of India, new year begins on the first day of Chaitra, which falls in
1983, on 14th April Present year is 1904, after 14th April it will be 1905
known as Shalivahan Shaka, was introduced by ths kings of Shalivan Dynasty, who
were ruling over India in ancient times. Our beloved Mother, Raja Rajeswari, Jaga-
deshwari, Her Holiness Shri Mataji, has taken the birth in Shalivahan Dynasty. It is
significant that although many such calendars were in vogue earlier and one or two
were introduced subsequently, only the one originated by our Beloved Mother's ances-
tors is being followed for over thousand years and has been approved by Govt. of India.
This system,
The Divine Mother says:
After realization you all had lots of knowledge () about Kundalinl and Sahaja
Yoga but without Bhakti you cannot achieve the balance. You have to get lost in
Bhakti. Bhakti enriches your feelings.
Try to feel the other Sahaja Yogis without criticising them. I am enjoying your
beings, the beauty and glory that you are. I wish you all could do that and feel like a
drop in the ocean itself. Bhakti will dissolve your angularities and impediments in the
collective oneness.
O my children, you are really born out of my Sahasrara. I conceived you in my
hear and gave you the new birth through the Brahmarandhra. The Ganges of my love
has carried you into the realm of collective consciousness.
This love is too great tor my human body. It nourishes you, soothes you and
gives you security. Gradually it opens your awareness to bliss and joy. But this love
also corrects you and prunes you It guides you and directs you. It reveals itself in the
form of true knowledge. It absorbs your shocks and settles you like a guiding leaf on
the hard surface of truth. It strengthens you to fulfil your aspirations of reaching spiri-
tual heights.
Edited & Published by Sh. S. C. Rai, 43, Bunglow Road, Delhi-110007 and
Printed at Ratnedeep Press, Darya Gani. New Delhi-110002.
One Issue Rs. 6.00, Annual Subscription Rs. 30.00 Foreign [ By Airmail £ 5 5 10]
