Nirmala Yoga Vol. 3 No. 17 Bi-Monthly September-October 1983 5F t "Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns all the religions and seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga THE UNION"

 NIRM ALA YOGA 43, Bungalow Road, Delhi-110007, (India) Founder : Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Editorial Board : Dr. S.K. Mathur, Sri A.S. Mishra, Sri R.D. Kulkarni Representatives : CHERYL HYNES-1267, Burke Road, KEW 3101, VICTORIA. : ZORANA BEDKE Gartnergasse 17/10, 1030 VIENNA. : LORI TODRICK-4518 Woodgreen Drive, West Vancouver, BC. V7S2V1. :MARIE ROUGER-175, Av. Ledru Rollin PARIS-750001. :RUTH LEDERBERGER : via Mercalli-46, 00197 ROME, M.B. Ratnannwar-13, Merwan Mansion, Genjewala Lane, Borivali (W).. Australia Austria Canada France Italy India BOMBAY-400092. RAJARAM SHANKAR RAJWADE-840, Sadashiva Peth, PUNE-411030. : DANIEL & ROXANA DEVINE-Angel Luis De Herran, 38, 6, 4, Spain MADRID-33. :CHARLES & MRS. MAGDA MATHYS-5, Chemin Des Mouldins, 1256. Troinex (Canton de Geneva). : GAVIN BROWN Brown's Geological Information Service Ltd., 160 North Gower St., London NW 1. 2ND. M.J. MURDOCH, 14A Bourne Ave. S. RUISLIP, MIDDLESEX, HAH 6TZ, ENGLAND. Switzerland U. K. : CHRISTINE PETRUNIA225 Adams St., 1/E BROOKLYN, NY-11201. U.S.A. CONT ENTS Page 1. To the Divine Essence of the Prayer 2. Editorial 3. Shri Krishna Puja 4. Vishuddhi Chakra 5. Innocence is (Poem) 6. Shri Saraswati Puja 7. Maha Sahasrara Day 8. Shri Mataji's Advice 9. Innocence 10. Translation of Shri Mataji's advice given in Delhi in Hindi 11. We Sahaja Children (Poem) 12. Subconscious supraconscious & our correct foundations & ideals 13. A Letter from Canada 14. Leaders in Sahaja Yoga (Part II) 15. The Visage of Salvation 16. Shri Mataji's tour in India 1. 7. 11 14 15 20 21 22 23. 30 31 38 39 40 4th Cover

 AUM TO THE DIVINE ESSENCE OF THE PRAYER Let our ears hear that which is true; Let our eyes see that which is pure; Let our beings praise that which is divine; And let those who listen hear not my voice but the wisdom of God. Let us worship with the same song, the same strength and the same knowledge; And let our meditation enlighten and enrich. Let there be amongst us compassion and peace. Now the prayer. Salutation Shri Ganesh, sakshat Shri Jesus sakshat Shri Nirmala Devi Namoh Namah. It is you who is the beginning of all the beginnings. It is you who is the doer of all deeds which have been done, are being done, and will be done. It is you who supports all things that are supported. It is you who protects all things that are protected. It is you who is the complete, all-pervading Spirit, God's divine energy. Think clearly brain. Speak only the truth. Let your presence, awakened in us by Kundalini, speak; Let your presence, awakened in us by Kundalini, listen; Let your presence, awakened in us by Kundalini, bless%3; Let your presence, awakened in us by Kundalini, protect3; Let your presence, awakened by Kundalini, in us, your disciples, be the disciple. You are the essence of alIl the sacred literature and holy words, and you are the energy that understands the holy words; You are the divine combination of complete truth, complete happiness and complete energy; And you are beyond; You are all knowledge, and you are the use to which the knowledge is put. You exist until the end of all things, and after the end of all things, you are; 1 Nirmala Yoga

 You create the end of all things, and after the end of all things, you remain indifferent: You are the earth, you are the water, you are the fire, you are the air, and you are the space above the air. You are the gunas : and you are beyond the gunas; You are the body : and you are beyond the body: You are the essence of time: and you are beyond time; You and only you exist at the Mooladhara Chakra3; You are the Spirit: and you are beyond the Spirit; And those who would join God meditate upon you. You are Brahman, Vishnu, Rudra; You are Indra, Agni, Vayu%3; You are the sun at noon: you are the full moon3; Through all of these, and more, you are the all-pervading energy of innocence and wisdom. You are the divine servant who stoops to wash the feet of saints; You are the tiny core of all things without which the larger have no purpose; You are the key to the libraries of all the scriptures, without which the truth is hidden3; You are the full stop which completes the sentence, and without which the sentence loses its meaning; You are the crescent moon you are the stars and you are beyond the stars, All things, from tiny dot to universe, is you. You are the future and beyond the future : you are in all forms; You are where the sounds combine : you are the silence between the sounds; You are the rhythm of all music and all prayers; This is the knowledge of Nirmal Ganesh, and you, Nirmal Ganesh, are the master of that knowledge, and all knowledge. You are the God : and you are the Goddess. AUM, GVAM NIRMAL GANAPATAYE To your powers, Ganesha, let all surrender; Let the left side of memory and the right side of action surrender to you and let your enlightenment prevail. Your first tooth you have, and four hands : one holding a rope, the second a goad, the third is raised in blessing and the fourth offers sustenance. Your banner is that of a humble mouse. You have long ears and are clothed in red : red decorates you and you are worshipped with red flowers. You have compassion for those who love you, and it is for those who love you that you come to this earth. You are the force that creates, the energy that pervades and the Spirit that protects. Those who seek union with God pray through yo%B Those who seek union with God worship you. 2. Nirmala Yoga

 AUM GVAM NIRMAL JESUSYE To your powers, Aum Jesus, let all surrender; Let the left side of memory and the right side of action surrender to you and let you1 enlightenment prevail. You are the word that was the beginning: you are the word that will be the ending. You are he who was born of a virgin, and died on the cross. You are he who absorbs all sins, and who died to live again; You are God and Man, and you are worshipped with red flowers. You have compassion for those who love you, and it is for those who love you that you come to this earth. You are the force that creates, the energy that pervades and the Spirit that protects. Those who seek union with God pray through you. Those who seek union with God worship you. Shri Ganesha, salutation to you. Shri Jesus, salutation to you. He who is the beginning of all worship, salutation to you. He who destroys all the powers of evil, salutation to you. Sakshat, Son of Lord Shiva, who is unending blessings, salutation to you. Sakshat, Son of Mary Mataji, who is unending love, salutation to you. Sakshat, Mataji Nirmala Devi, who is unending joy, salutation to you. Nirmala Yoga 5F

 Editorial Prayers have a great importance in human life. What is praying? It is an expression to one's desire and requesting and soliciting its fulfilment, to a power that is far superior and that, one knows, would bestow what is desired. Praying suggests accepting one's inability to accomplish the objective only through one's own efforts. It is surrendering to the will of the power, to either grant or reject the request, although response in the positive is generally assumed. Right-sided persons are over-confident of their capabilities, and have no faith in praying whereas, left sided would only desire and pray, without making any efforts. However, right- sided people, on failing to achieve what they desire, turn to praying. As has been seen on many occasions, after doctors express helplessness people seek Sahaja cures, which involves, praying for the self-realization and recitation of mantras besides other treatment. Althaugh praying would appear to be a left-side activity, its origin would be from right side at personal level, as their orientation is to achieve limited personal ambition. In such cases, the prayers could possibly be the result of egotism and would come from ego not from heart. Even pujas are performed, by some people desiring a materialistic reward, which is again a right-side activity. Puja-mantras are the prayers invoking the deities to be present for the puja and accept offerings. However, praying would help balancing over-active right side provided the recitation of prayers is done from heart and with complete surrender. It is not just muttering of words that makes a prayer, but sincerity of heart that is associated with it. Also, it is important to dis- criminate so as to avoid reciting the prayers that have left-side bias. It is essential to recite the compositions of realized souls. It is also equally important that one should be clear on all chakras, at least on vishuddhi, so that mantras and prayers invoke good vibrations and become effective. Before beginning the recitation, one should improve vishuddhi by saying "Om Twameva Sakshat Sarva Mantra Siddhi Sakshat Shri Adi Shakti Shri Mataji Shri Nirmala Devyai Namo Namaha". Sanskrit synonym for the word prayer, is 'prärthana'. i.e. 'pra l arthana'. Arthanā is reques- ting or soliciting. Shri Mataji has advised us that words having prefix 'Pra' suggests enlighten- ment. Hence 'prärthana is an enlightened prayer, is a prayer made by a person who has got his Nirmala Yoga

 enlightenment. Enlightenment comes from the Spirit. Hence such prayers are the expressions of desires of the Spirit. They have the power to turn one's attention towards Atma, and kindle the spark of desire in every one's mind, to seek the ultimate. They inspire those, in whose hearts the spark has grown into a flame, to go deeper and closer to the Spirit, e.g. Om Brahma Medhase/Madhu Medhase/Brahmaiva madhu medhase (please give me Brähma, please give me honey i.e. sweet. Brahma alone is sweet.) Many vedic mantras are prayers to different deities requesting help for seeking the ultimate. Great sages of ancient yore have prayed even to the Sun, Moon, Wind-God (Vayu) and Varuna (rain God) and also to water to give them strength so that they could attain the realization of Atman. It is interesting to see the following prayer. MEL आपो हिण्छा मरयोभवस् ता न ऊर्जे दधातन महे रणाय चृक्षसे ।। ॐ Om äpo hishthā mayo-bhuvastāna ūrje dadhātana. Mahe-ranilya chakshase. O water as you are pleasing, give us food and protect us for attaining Self-realization which is extremely blissful. By the grace of Shri Mataji, Sahaja yogis have got their enlightenment. Hence pravers composed by them, or their recitation of the prayers composed by other great saints & prophets would be prärthana' in real sense. All the deities are awake within the Supreme Goddess and respond quickly when invoked in Her name. Our brothers would certainly allow us to seek their indulgence, and help us. Humbly approach Shri Ganesha at Mooladhar and pray for his blessings and to give us his innocence & purity so that we become loving children of our Mother keeping absolute faith in Her, and request him to join us to pray to Her to keep Her form in good health for years & years. With Shri Ganesha's permission respectfully pray to mother Kundalini to clean our subtle being and develop the flickering flame of our Spirit into a big torch, that would be one with Supreme Spirit. Then pray with her to Sakshat Shri Mahākundalini to be ever present amidst us in Her present form and give realization to all the seekers. Bow to Shri Brahmadeva, the God of creation, whose four faces are said to be four Vedas and his shakti, Shri Saraswati, Goddess of knowledge and art. Pray to him, in the name of Shri Mataji, that we enjoy the beauty of his creations rather than thinking and planning about ours. Surely, Shri Brahmadeva and Shri Saraswati would pray with us to Cosmic Mother Jagadamba, the creatrix of everything from Brahmadeva down to an insect, to protect and guide all the seekers, in Her present form, for ever and ever. Thereafter, with complete reverence approach the sustainer of creation, the protector of Dharma, and his power Shri Lakshmi. May his qualities be awakened in us, so that we work tirelessly for the divine cause of propagating Sahaja Yoga. May he allow us to pray along with them, to Adi-shakti, that all satanic & adharamic forces be destroyed. Obeisance to Primordial Master, at Bhavasagar, who came many times in the world, by the instructions of Adi-shakti, to help man-kind evolve itself. Seek his forgiveness for the ill- treatment meted out to his incarnations. Our sincere desire is to be the instruments in the Nirmala Yoga

 myriad hands of Param Parameshwari. May the qualities of Primodial Master be inculcated by us. Surrender before the Father of the Universe. Existence of all existences. Again and again pray for being pardoned as we are engrossed in the illusion, ignoring the reality. May our attention ever rest at the feet of our Cosmic Parents who are one as words and their meaning and are manifesting themselves as our Beloved Mother. May our endeavour be to always please Her. Salutations to Shri Krishna and Shri Radha who showed the divine play as a child and also showed true Virata cosmic form having myriads of hands, faces and legs, encompassing within his being every living and non living thing in the universe. He played and danced with every milk-man and milk-maid and awakened their kundalinis and at the same time transcended above them, thus proving that Supreme Spirit is all-pervading and foundational to al existence and yet uninvolved and unaffected by it. May Shri Radha &Shri Krishna, one as Sun-rays and sun-light, within our Mother. lead us to the perfect witness state, May the Mother of entire creation be amongst us in good health for years & years. Let us approach Shri Jesus and Shri Mary after repeating Lord's prayer. Remember, "forgive us of our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us". We deserve God's forgiveness only after we forgive others. May he help us grow in our awareness beyond our narrow individuality. May he confer upon us his dedication and love for our Mother. Sahasrara ! Integrated and subtle universe ! The kingdom of God placed in every human being. Our Beloved Mother is the Empress, Raja-rājeshwari of the kingdom of God, Rājya-da- yini, the conferer of the kingdom of God. She has granted liberally all boons and all that is auspicious to Her children. Let us not forget that She is Abhyäsāti-shaya-Jnäta. (aaa , known through tremendously long practice). It is only through the intense meditation that we can know Her. Let every Sahaja yogi make a vow to accept Her every spoken word and not to be casual in Her presence; to devote whole heartedly to the cause of Sahaja Yoga. May the kingdom of God be soon established in the universe, Om Twameva Sakshat Sarva Mantra Siddhi Sakshat Shri Adi-Shakti Shri Matajl Shri Nirmala Devyal Namo Namah 6. Nirmala Yoga

 GENEVA Aug. 28, 1983 Her Holiness Mataji Nirmala Devi Shri Krishna Puja Today we are celebrating here in this holy land the birthday of Shri Krishna. Shri Kri- shna is the ultimate of the fatherhood, that I He reached the optimum that one has to described you before, who came on this reach as a yogi. As if He is the ideal you Earth and illustrated the ultimate of that. have to reach. So on this Earth, the highest fatherhood is of a royal family but He lived in the jungles Shri Krishna's awareness. But in the King- in the forest, with the cows, with ordinary dom of God, we can say in Heavens, or even people. He used to sleep on the ordinary above everything else, resides Sadashiva who places like sometimes on the stones, on the does not take incarnations. He is one of grass, when He would go with His cows for the aspects, Shri Krishna is one of the aspects their feeding. He was very aware, very very of Sadashiva which is the Father. And the aware, absolutely aware of His powers, with- Adi Shakti or the Holy Ghost is the other aspect of Sadashiva which is His power. So "Samhära shakti“ by which He could destroy when Shri Krishna incarnated on this Earth, all those people who tried to harm the divine an aspect of this Adi Shakti came on this manifestation. Earth as Rädha. She is the same who came as the Mother of Christ, and She gave the name of Christ as the surname of Shri Krishna, as if it is Krishna's name, from Krishna. He's called as "Krisht" in Indian languages, Krisht. And I have told you before why he was called as Yeshu or Jesu. So today we are Yogeshwara means the Lord of the Yoga, or the Power of Yoga. He is called because Now as a yogi, He was born out any ego. He had a special power called This "Samhãra shakti" is experssed as the Chakra (Sudarshan) in His hand. And another is hand. These two the "Gada" (Mace) in His powers were within Him, and He acted according to the power of Radha, because She is the one to the two aspects of Shri who sustained the power of Shri Krishna. Krishna, which were the manifestation of His The proof of that is this that when He was in Gokul with Radha He did all His 'samhara' work. And afterwards He just became a chariot-driver for Arjuna. So for His disciple going to see divine birth. In Rama's life they showed a man; man, a Purushottama, the best of the father in wordly affairs. y Arjuna, He became even a chariot-driver. showed Him the highest fatherhood as in Yogeshwara or in divine work. So the first aspect of Shri Krishna we have to understand He knew who was a devil and who was not, is the Yogeshwara and the second aspect of who is good who is bad, who is possessed And in Shri Krishna's life they The another great quality of Yogeshwara was complete discretion power built-in. So of him as the Virata. who is not possessed, who is innocent who Nirmala Yoga

 is not. This was built-in within Him, this receded by the Agnya chakra but have to be power of coinplete discrimination. sucked into the Vishuddhi, The greatest quality of Yogeshwara is that He is not at all involved into it, detached, And He had a capacity more expressing His witnesshood, as a 'Sākshi'. He had the the capacity, I mean He was a Sakshi Himself absolutely. If He eats His food, He does not I should say this way is easier to understand. He was a Sākshi, He had the capacity of He sees, He does not see. If He hears, He does witnessing the whole world as a play. At not hear. It has no effect on Him, no retention the time of Rama, Rama was one who got involved into his problems, to show as if he is complete: sixteen petals is complete moon, is a full human being so that human beings sixteenth day of the moon is the Purnima. should not say that he was God so how could we accept God because 'he was God after all' ? Now this capacity in Him to witness confidence should not be confused with ego. has to be seen in every yogi. The element He controls is ether. We call it "Akāsha" complete dharma,lit is complete love, complete in Sanskrit. This ether now as you know, we are using for our television, for our radio, it should be. for every sort of a collective work. So we have to be in charge of the ether element as yogis. And that is the subtlest of all, what He was meaning is that all other things in the sense that you permeate everything about which you are worried "You give up with that, and is above all Like plastic also permeates into everything into matter, into everything up to the air. But it cannot enter into ether. So the negativity connot enter into ether. So when you enter into your ethereal eat it. If He speaks, He does not speak. If on Him, no action on Him. Whatever He is, He That is how one has to be, complete in one- self, complete confidence in oneself. But But confidence is complete wisdom, it's beauty, and is complete God. That's what Now when He said that "'you give up all your dharmas and surrender to Me" in Gita, and become one with me, so I look after you". Give up the responsibility to Shri Krishna, so the complete integrated Divinity will start expressing through you. Means if you say that you have to be responsible, then He says alright, go ahead, try! But if you say that thoughtless awareness. So to achieve your "You are responsible, I'm just an institution zone, you actually enter into the area which is ethereal state, you have to expand your or an instrument in Your hand", then you start thoughtless awareness. And the sustenance manifesting it well. And that is how your of that is done by Christ, by the Spirit. So you can realize now as a yogi, your state of mind should be ethereal. Vishuddhi chakra gets opened up. This is some part of the Yogeshwara I have spoken to you. But as He is the brain within us, He becomes the brain within us. We And what should be the state of your super-ego ? This is the ego part of it, that have to know all the qualities of a divine you should be in ethereal state. And as a super-ego you should see it as a play, you should see the play of the negativity. Nega- tivity will run away, but don't get involved into it, don't play into their hands. Then the negativity will separate from you. brain are within. So whatever we do with our brain like intrigue, the deception, all Nega- which are bad things by your brain as they call it, are done by Him for the divine purpose without getting any blemish upon himself. And the other side of it, so called positive, So the ego and the super-ego both rise like politics like diplomacy, or like leadership. all that is His own doing, like even the think- he from theVishuddhi chakra. They can be Nirmala Yoga

 ing of the future and all that, He does plann- if you can do that, then there is no problem as ing, thinking, all those things, administration. As a play. everything is done as a play, you are more powerful and more tricky. because He's the Master, as we call, a "sutra dhära", the one who does the prologue in a drama, the one who plays with the strings with the pantomimes. far as their effect on us is concerned, because Because the Virata Shakti has now taken that form, like the tree when it grows, it grows upward. But when it is leaden with fruit, it comes down. First it is attractive by its flowers, by its timber, by the other parts Now the other thing that we have to understand Shri Krishna at this stage of of its body. And people try to destroy it for Sahaja Yoga, that it is the Virāta Shakti that is manifesting at this time and not the Shri Krishna Shakti which was at His time. And humility, is very valuable the power that is working here is no more that of Radha or of Mary, but of Viratangana. Because you are That's why the knowledge of sahaja-yogis so valuable that those people who wanted is much wider than the knowledge of all the saints of ages. But it is not deeper than them. If you can deepen your knowledge, gain something out of these fruits. So today this wider knowledge will have proper roots within you. So the brain are the roots, here are the roots of the whole tree of life. Actually yogi with them it is so precious, Say one Kundalini comes up and waters the brain first. ordinary man gets his Realization, then he so that the whole tree of life is drenched in the Divine Bliss and Divine Knowledge. it. But when the fruit appear, they want to preserve it, and the tree bends down, with So you are the fruits. That Viratangana Shakti. you are the fruits. to ruin or to destroy the Divine power from this Earth will start thinking that they have to the Virata Shakti has given you a great value, because people see that by having one sahaja- develops his value. In that his own value he can be respected, loved, and he can be given the highest if he's a proper sahaja-yogi. So this Virata Shakti that we have to work out, gives us the sense of collective consciousness first. First we understand it through our brain power. brain power is to be guided by the Heart, is to result of that, all these different churches, be watered; but in sanskrit is a very beautiful word "sinchan", like dewdrops, spray, with the Love of God. So the integration of this they will see their benefit in it. But you have brain has to take with Heart and with your liver, Then only the Virata-Shakti takes another form. The weapons of killing be- come the weapons of forgiveness. Every sort of destructive power is used for the construc- tion. As if it is tricked. So you should understand today that Virata Shakti is "we are going to worship that Virata Shakti which has given fruits", As a But the whole fanaticism, and atheism and communism and all that-ism, all these will neutralize because to become that. That is the biggest thing one has to know is to bend down towards the Mother Earth. To be humble. Absolutely the humility inside is really going to give you the complete value of sahaja-yoga fruits. Those sahaja-yogis who boast about themselves are like the fruit which are getting ruined only on the tree. The only fruits that bend down are accepted as good and matured fruits, and not those who assert that they are the highest. But some of the negative people should not by any chance take advantage of Like now I told them a trick, how to trick these gurus. The power that they have can be tricked against them, as is said that their teeth must be put into their necks, into their throats. Instead of taking out their teeth better put them back into their throats. And Nirmala Yoga

 yourself. And leaving everything to the power of gravity of your Mother to do every work for you. And leaving all your small little worries behind, you have to rise above these distracting powers and achieve the completion of this Virata-Shakti which ulti- mately becomes a "Madhura Shakti". "Ma- dhura"; there is no word in English language, but it means a "sweet power". Like the fruit becomes sweet. That's how you all have to become very sweet. Krishna tried to make sunshine or getting to better water supply or everything very sweet in the sense it was all this and say that they are good because they are bending down. It's not the logic. Some of them pose they are humble; even a rotten fruit bends down. But the mature fruit shows its humility by its weight. That is the guru- tattwa weight. So from the Viratangana power you get the power of maturity up to the fruit and then we become blessed by guru principle. Those who are still involved in getting to better all these things, are not yet matured, because a Madhura Shakti that was acting, all His play. the fruit doesn't need anything anymore. It all His dancing, all His stories if you read, is doesn't need anything from the Mother Earth, nothing but Madhura Shakti, towards Gopas nor from the elements. But it surrenders, r and Gopis, towards other sahaja-yogis. bends, it bows to the Mother Earth. So you have to keep your Mother pleased So the sahaja-yogi who goes on asking by pleasing other Sahaja-yogis, and not other questions to Mother, bringing personal prob- people. They are not important. So today lems, stupid ideas, negativity, all those people are still not yet the fruits. we are going to shorten the Puja, and that's why it took so much time upstairs, to shorten But the matured people are those who it ! So the time lost is time gained for ever surrender, who bow to the Mother Earth. So the capacity to bow is the best judgement of and ever. May God bless you. Bolo Shri Radha Krishna sakshat Shri Virata sakahat Shri Yogeshwar sakshat Shri Adi Shakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi ki Jai Nirmala Yoga 10

 Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi TALK BEFORE PUJA Vienna, Sept. 4, 1983 Vishuddhi Chakra Before going to America, I wanted to could be absolutely stiff. Supposing you have speak more about the Vishuddhi chakra and about Shri Krishna's aspect within us. first Puja in Geneva, I spoke quite a lot about it, but there is no end to it, of course, because it is the centre of Virata. But one has to realize that the message of Shri Krishna was to surrender. Now the surrendering that we think in the gross way is like an enemy weapons, good weapons, effective good surrenders to another enemy. S a very strong weapon but you can't lift it, so what is the use of having a weapon like that? See, this Mr. Ego tries to make the weapon heavy and stiff like jammed machine-guns. Now that is what He has said that "surrender In the your ego to Me", so that when you say a mantra or utter words, they are effective as word "surrender" is spoken, we build up our barriers by thinking that we have to surrender something to the other part. But when Snri will understand how to address Me and to Krishna was talking about surrender, He was judge yourself. For example shaking your saying that "surrender your enemies to me so that I will get rid of them". Now the worst enemy that we have is our have a habit "yes" if it is said, they'll go on ego. And with ego starts all kinds of other like this for ten times. There is no need. problems, because it is the biggest barrier for Actually, you should move only once, with our growth. And the ego starts as you know humility, the head "yes Mother" is all right. from the Vishuddhi chakra, and can be sucked You must move your neck with respect and into Vishuddhi chakra. Now when we talk, let us see how I see your ego expre Issed in your talk, so that you necks too much is a sign of a Mr. Ego shaking head for nothing at all. Like many people with understanding that Shri Krishna is sitting Now let us see how is Vishuddhi chakra there. With dignity. But we forget it all the made. All the vowels that we use come from Vishudhi chakra. And like in Deva- nagri language it is a...ang-äha. So as you know you cannot compile a word without a vowel, it is so important. A consonant is weak, without any strength, without the talk to Me, like saying "no Mother". It is vowel. So the strength of a person comes very common, if I say anything, the first through the Vishuddhi chakra in his speach. reaction of people could be "no Mother". But it can be absolutely stiff also, the strength After all you see there is a course going on, time and we start using it to assert ourselves when we talk to someone. And we shake it too much or we push it in such a way that another person is sort-of dominated by it. Now there is another method when you * (a), आ (a), इ (i) ई (ee), उ (u), ऊ ( 60 ), ए (e), ऐ (ai), ओो (o), ओ (ow), अं (ang), जः (aha) 11 Nirmala Yoga

 even when I'm speaking it is a mantra, when drop has now become an ocean. And so your I'm not speaking, is a mantra flowing. And sound has got the power of the ocean. suddenly you come out with your "no Mother", you create a ripple back in the der, is the pride, or vanity. Now the vanity whole thing. can be of many types which are artificial things listen to Me what I'm saying, the saying itself absolutely. Before God, what is your property? Now the second thing you have to surren- Now at that time, if you just don't have to do What is your money? What is your position? will work it out. you anything. What is your family ? What is your education? Now another way is the style in which You see, everything has no value in the pre- you talk to Me, also I can see the right sence of God. The possessions that one value Vishuddhi acting. It is when we talk normally so much have no value. So one has to realize to each other, if we have to say "yes", we'll that if we are the possessions of God, we say "m-m". That is very common here "a-a". should be proud of one thing only. that His this style, they say "hum-um" and then on vibrations flow through us. That is: He is top of that to say "mm-mm" as if you see it proud of us. clearly. It is : you are not receiving anything in it, but you are trying to sort of put it to an Ganesha, or anything, it gets very much valued Like supposing you give Me a fruit or a equal pressure on the flow. The humility is the best way of conquering are there. Like this Ganesha now for example, this ego of Vishuddhi. And when talking to others, try to develop sweet methods, sweet is concerned, but when made into an art-piece ways unhurting other people. And you will be surprised that Vishuddhi will immediately start value increases with art, but in the realm of behaving in such a sweet manner, because the bhoots don't like sweetness, they are quarrelsome, they are harsh, they are always will be a thousand time more than what it is trying to say something to hurt. because I have touched it and the vibrations if you see the value is zero as far as the metal has some much more value. In this world, the God, or in the spiritual world or Divine world, the value of a Ganesha, the same Ganesha just now as just an art piece. So that is now So this Vishuddhi on the right hand side is what is given to you, a very high value. So to be controlled by surrendering as it is said. the pride and the vanity of artificiality, artificial Actually you surrender your ego to begin with. things, is all man-made, mythical, and should And this ego when you surrender, it has to be be surrendered because it is a myth. done from you heart, it should not be a lip- service. From your heart : "I don't want this ego any more. I want Reality." "Let the Reality be seen by me, felt by me, enjoyed by you surrender your jealousies at the Lotus me." And once you start doing it from your heart, you will be amazed that your voice will actually. The stupid jealousies that you have become sweet. Apart from that, it will have the Divine Power flowing through it. That is what we say that you have now "wak shakti", thing is that the Sahaja Yogis feel jealous of means the power of speach. Then the human mind has another capacity to be jealous, to be jealous of others. This also comes from unwise understanding. If Feet of God, I mean, you are doing all rubbish are as you know, of no value, neither in this world, nor in that world. The most surprising each other ! And I still can't understand how So when you surrender ego, what you do can it be ? If you are standing in the sunshine, actually is to say that "I'm not doing anything, then you all are jealous of your shadowsI it is You who do everything". So that a little Somebody's shadows are big, somebody's 12 Nirmala Yoga

 shadows are small, so you are jealous of each also must be surrendered. And this could be other ? Sometimes I give a present to one very dangerous in Sahaja Yoga also. This is person, can't give to others, then they get my carpet, this is my camera, this is my tape- jealous ! If I give more time to somebody, recorder. Once you start understanding what then others are jealous !only give more time sometimes to people who really are the Truth. getting lost ! is mine is not the Truth, nothing is mine, that's Also seme people I know of, they say that So one has to understand that all our ideas "my job, or my business, or my enterprise about jealousies are stupid. And I can't under- We had the other day one gentieman in stand those who are not realized, they are Geneva who was very troublesome because jealous of Sahaja Yogis, and they try to make he is so conscious of all these things. them fall 1 Instead of being jealous, So the greed. Also the lust of other women and indulging into lust too much. Giving too much importance to the agencies of lust. That creates great problems, not only for Sahaja-Yogis, but on the whole for Sahaja- they should become like Sahaja Yogis ! In Sahaja Yoga also l've seen some very funny things Like a very angry that "Mother You sport so Yoga also, It is expressed in both types of much time with a particular person, and I'm very jealous. And You said I have to be like world, as well as people who are over- the people about whom I'm jealous solwould like to know how to be like the person who was with you for such a time ?" So I said "That fellow is really a lunatic ! You want to become a lunatic ? Have you no discretion ?" A Sahaja Yogi must have discretion if his Vishuddhi is alright. You should understand that what I'm saying is to be used discreetly, that must be developed, that keeps you a very not blindly. So you can understand, without religious person, dharmic person. And the discretion, whatever I say, how funnily you innocence to know how far to go with men can use it so detrimental to your growth. happening, an incidence. me and was came to person people; those who are living in a very free suppressed. 1 know of people, those, who are supposed to be brought up in very religious so called' atmosphere, when exposed to women, suddenly get too much attracted towards them. See, it is that maturity of your innocence and women. That's the wisdom of innocence. Children, if you see, they know exactly, if there is a lady if there is a man, how to behave. So the innocence is not stupidity. It is a complete wisdom, and very maturesome in its full form. It just knows how to be with So another offshoot of ego is called as "hot temper". Of course it is said to be used against people who try to insult your Mother, you have to do that. That must be used for people who go against the Holy Ghost as Christ has said. In the same way you should people without indulging into anyone of these not tolerate any non-sense against Me from enemies. Each enemy is sufficient to finish anyone whatsoever, not even this much. But you can tolerate other Sahaja Yogis in other So best way to develop that absolute nature matters. not only one person, but billions and billions. of your Vishuddhi Chakra is to witness the whole thing with a detached mind. And to Another enemy we have is gieed. I mean material greed and also human greed, like that She cleanses all these enemies, in such possessing your wife, possessing your children, a way that when you are faced with them, possessing this, possessing Mataji also. This you are a powerful person. develop love for your Mother in your heart, so Nirmala Yoga 13

 Mentally, I think that most of the Sahaja- your mother, then what you owe to your Yogis understand that obedience to the Divi- husband, like that, you see, that relationship nity is the only way-mentally, rationally. in which you owe to them. But when He Now even if you understand something says" surrender all these dharmas", He is mentally, it's not your innate nature. So what meaning to say "you should only know I told you yesterday, when you accept some- what you owe to Me" meaning the Divinity. thing mentally and you cannot do it, you feel Now Shri Krishna is not there. it's Me who is guilty about it. Then you become your own Shri Krishna, so you must know what you guru and punish yourself, and try to make owe to Me. I only changed My language. this as your innate nature. It's a state, it He used to take out His finger and to say that clicks. Once it clicks you can see immediately. "give up everything and surrender everything I know who is surrendered. to Me". 1 don't do that way, I give a big lecture and bring you to a point. So Shri Krishna has said that: "Sarva dharmanam.". He has said that "Give up all your dharmas and surrender them to from the right goal that you have to achieve Me, surrender to my dharma only". So the by surrendering. And it is going to work out dharmas we have in our country as we say is very well with you people here, I'm sure, and a "pitra dharma", what you owe to your one day l'll find the whole Germans surrender father, "mātru dharma" what you owe to So, that should not divert your attention at the Lotus Feet of the Divine. INNOC ENCE IS The rich sweet smell of Our Mother Earth, Supporting with great strength the whole of nature's birth, The living plains of Our blessed red land, Extending a loving and guiding hand. A drop of dew, sparkling on a blade of grass, A gentle breeze that will never pass, The soft sun rays of the early morn, A little spring flower who is newly born. The joyful laughter of all the children, Dancing and playing with such glee, Creating so simply this colourful fun, With Shri Ganesha's pure innocent quality. Jai Mataji !! Australian Sahaja Nirmala Yoga 14

 DHULIA 14.1.1983 SHRI SARASWATI PUJA With love all kinds of creative action takes always to disappear in the thin air as place. You see how Raulbai has love for me and in this place you all also got ew idea of creating a beautiful thing. And as love will great love of God we talk of, we know that increase your creativity will develop. So the basis of all creativity of Saraswati is love. If there is no love there is no creativity. It is even in the deeper sense, you see; people who have created all the scientific things are also out of love to the masses, not for them- works of the world have vibrations. Only טאא Now this love of, that we talk of, the it for definite through vibrations. People do not have vibrations, but still they can feel the vibrations in a very unconscious way. All the great paintings of the world vibrations. All the great t creative selves. Nobody has produced any thing for themselves. If they make something for them- selves it has to become for universal use, otherwise it has no meaning. Even if you say atom bomb and all these things are created from science, they are also very protective. If they had not created, those people would not have taken out their minds from war. Now, nobody can think of having a big war. Of course, they are having cold that is sustaining, all that is nurturing, all that wars, but that also will gradually stop, when they will be fed up. on right hand side, of Saraswati, basically but within has to end up in love. Starts with love and ends up in love. Whichever does not end up in love, coils up and finishes off. It just love of God, otherwise it has no meaning. disappears: So you can matter which is not used for love, just finishes taken to other methods of appealing to people off. The basis has to be love. Otherwise by using cheap things and very vulgar things, all such matter that we create which has just to make people think that this is art. angularity, which is not fitting into the mass media which is not appealing to the masses; the impact of the time as I told you, it cannot. of course, it takes time, you have seen that it takes time-but it does have that tendency have to disappear and already you can see those who have vibrations have been sustained by time otherwise all other things are des- troyed. There must have been monuments and horrible statues and horrible things that have been created long time back. But they are all destroyed by Nature as they could not stand the impact of the KALA (T)-that is the destructive power of time, So, all is enobling comes from this sense of love, which is within us very much developed, others also who are not yet So all the activity realised. Ultimately the whole world has to realise that one has to go to that ultimate Now you have seen in arts people have that even see It cannot sustain But this will all disappear. Because the time will kill it. All these things 15 Nirmala Yoga

 the result, how things are changing every- through Surya is the light 'Vivek' (frà),-is where, even in the West. need to be so much disappointed with the Aanya level is occupied by lord Jesus Christ West and to say that the Western world is a waste-land. it is going to be alright and it has to be done, Specially it has done lot of Puja of Saraswati. I should say in the West. Much more than they have done in India because they have gone to learn it and they have tried to find out so many things. have all gone the against it. Those who are But only thing they forgot that it is a Goddess, God is the Giver. Everything comes from the Goddess. That is what they forgot. worshippers of the Surya, of the Saraswati And that is why all the problems have been created. If there is no Spirit in your learning if there is no source of the Goddess in your learning, then it is absolutely useless. If they had realised that there is the Spirit that is working it out, they would not have gone that far. And that is what I was warning the Indians, althrough, that you are now taking to industrial revolution in a way and to avoid all the complications of industrial revolution, you must try to know the Spirit. If you donot know the Spirit you will have the same problems as these people have. they are also human beings, you are also human beings. You will also go the same way. At random you will run and there will be problems, the same problems as the Western people have. So there is no the light within. And if Surya Chakra at the then it is even mare essential that the purity of life, what you call 'Niti" (ffa), is the morality of life. Now morality itself has become very much sort of a argument in the West. People don't have any sense of absolute morality. On vibrations of course you know. But they worshippers of Lord Jesus, those who are the have all gone against, against the powers, of Surya, just disobeying it. Because you cannot be a Surya if you don't have a proper sense of morality and holiness. The Surya itself brings light to see everything clearly. So many qualities Surya has got. It dries up everything that is wet, dirty. filthy. It dries up all those places which create par- asites. But so many parasities are created in the West. Not only parasites, but there are horrible cults and horrible things which have come into that: those countries which are supposed to be full of light, and in that darkness they exist. Darkness about the Spirit, darkness about their own knowledge and darkness about love. These three things have taken over in the places where you are supposed to love light. Light does not mean, light does not mean what you see Now Saraswati's blessings are so many with your gross eyes. Light means from Because that one cannot describe in such a short time. within-the light of love. That one should And the Surya (Sun) has given us so many understand- Light of love. And it is so powers that it is impossible to tell them soothing it is so sweet, it is so beautiful, it is so enamouring, it is so abounding that unless and until you can feel that light within go against Saraswati, while doing the you-that light which is of pure love- worship of Saraswati, it is to ba seen very of purity, pure relationship, pure understand- clearly within ourselves. For example the ing. If you can develop that kind of a light Western people are very fond of Surya within yourself, then the whole thing will because they have no Surya, But they go too be cleansed. Wash me and I shall be whiter far with it, as you know, and create comli- than snow. This is what happens to you cations within themselves of Surya. But when you are completely cleansed. The the main thing that one has to achieve purest form of Nature is within us. The even in one lecture, even in ten lectures. But how we go against Surya and how we Nirmala Yoga 16

 Our others, becomes Hitler. When it moves to Chakras are made out of that 'purest from of right side, it becomes supraconscious, It starts seeing things which are absurd, which are foolish, which are stupid. When it moves same Saraswati power. You are going against to left side them it starts, talking-I mean, Saraswati itself. Saraswati cleanses all that seeing things-yourself as a big man, as a big Christ or as a big Devi or something like Adi Gurus and '1 am a very great personality, that activity goes against pure intelligence. And is left sided. When it moves backwards, that is the dangerous one. Then people become Gurus which are ruining other psople. When Our purest form of Nature is within US. Nature. We are the only people who are spoiling it by aur mental thinking. Against the is impure in nature, while with our brain acti- vity we are spoiling all that. All our briain that is what one has to understand-that this pure intelligence, is not to be soiled by our thinking. Our thinking can make us so bump- their ego moves backwards then they become tious, so ego-oriented, so impure, that we can really eat the poison and say 'what is wrong in it? Just the opposite of Saraswati. If Saras- wati is within us, She gives us Subuddhi', wisdom. Arnd that is why. to worship Saraswati, to worship Surya, we must have that clear vision as to what we have to be. What we are doing, What filth we are living in. What our mind is getting into. After all we are here for emancipation and not for just talking about it, then it encircles, thickens the for pampering our ego and living with our filth that is with us. So this light has come within us and we should try to rise above Gurus, they themselves have lots of defects in themselves and they try to pull peaple into those horrible stuff which is described as absolute NARAKA ( T ). NARAKA is the movement of ego on all the sides. Now when people try to use their light Vishuddhi, that is, to talk about themselves, is the worst of all. Whatever type of ego you may have, if you start boasting about it and walls of ego so much, that it is impossible to penetrate into that. because such a person is completely satisfied with himself and he believes that he is so. And once he starts Apart from that. you believing into a non-sense like that, its an mental filth which is being our own created around us. have to go higher and understand that there is, within us, a thing called ego. And this ego is false, absolutely false. You do not do anything. Actually when you turn your eyes here and there, when your attention what I am, but how many times do I say 'l am is here and there it is nothing but your ego that is trying to overpower you. ego is a absolute falsehood because there is say so ? At the most if you say something, 1 only one ego and that is the God Almighty, say yes', But I don't say that. Mahata-ahankāra. There is no really any ego loudly, I don't know what may happen. The that exists, it is myth. It is a very big myth, whole thing, might be blasted So, ona has because if you start thinking you are doing to understand that Mahatahankara is the one everything-you are doing this, you are doing that acts, that works, that creates. Sometimes that-which you are not doing: then this non- sensical ego comes in and you start working run away. Just once I shout. Yesterday, it out, it can project in every direction. you saw all the bhoots that were talking, they When it projects forward, it overpowers all ran away. Yesterday this I talked to you. others, it tries to dominate others, tries to kill So you should understand that now you are a impossibility then-imposibility to penetrate. So when you boast about these things or you talk big, be careful, you see. You know that. Even if I say once, you get tremendous But actually vibrations for you. But how many times do I IF I say it I shout at you. Immediately all the bhoots Nirmala Yoga 17

 realised soul, you can aiso do the same. Use people have this.' That is the way one your right Vishuddhi to shout at yourself, "Now should do it. will you please stop boasting, will you stop power your ego, you must allow it to spread talking all this nonsense, will you stop show- into every body else, That is how, you will ing off I" Then it will stop. it. Because if you have to over make it perfectly all right. Let it spread. We all SAHAJA YOGIS WE ALL'. But that pride Now this thickening takes place by people is not there. I've seen that pride is not there. who really are active. They want to do some- thing about it, not that they are not active. They want to do. way, is to act talkative. They don't under- stand that there are inner ways by which you control it much more. Because they don't want to take to that, they take to this talking. people. He will see that person is low, that And once they take to talking and they talk about it, the whole power goes out. Still it is very individualistic. If you start thinking, "we' SAHAJA YOGIS', then what happens, that you become 'one' personality. 'one' organisation. But they know only one But the person will look down upon other person is higher, that person is there. But he But if will not think We' the Sahaj Yogis, how beautiful we are. We' the body of Sahaja Yoga, how beautiful we are. So always about your experiences, alright, but if you think in the words of WE', so your ego will become much less much less, much less. And the same ego which looks so funny and absurd will fall tommorrow to the EKADASHA they do not talk about it and keep it within themselves, it is alright. You can tell me start telling others, and talking about it too much, then the power that you have got will be all disappearing gradually. And you will just come down to absolutely lowest level. So one should not too much talk that I have this power, 1 have this power or I think this or I do this, which is a very wrong thing I warn you, DO NOT TRY TO SHOW OFF. Yes, you can talk about my powers. It is all right. But don't try to talk about your powers. When it comes, of course, you talk to some- body who is a negative person or to tell somebody, then you should say that WE, NOT 1. We' have, 'some of us' have felt this power within us. We' have seen people. It may be you only, but you need not say, T have. Today, individual ego will merge into ekādasha. But we all must remember to say 'WE' all time. This is what is today's day is great day for us to change, because the sun has changed its move, now. Sun is coming this side. So let us welcome the Sun, coming to the North now, this vway. And for Austra lians to say that though the sun has gone, let us establish the Sun, the domain of Sun, within ourselves: Because Sun never disap- pears from our inside. So that is how we have to take a mode by which we should What you've to say WE'. Then you become the think of 'one' personality, 'all of us together, all of us together.' And anybody who tries to be something separate or different, he will Mahata-ahankara. When you say 'We' here some of us' we do'. Like in Gregoire's book I made it, I saw to it that he should not have drop out. I will drop him out. Whatever it may be, it will drop out. So you judge your- "we do', 'we', means the whole collective self, anybody who tries to be singled out or being, the whole collective organism, living anything. Everybody must do whatever they like, to nurture the whole, to help the vwhole, to help the whole, to emancipate the whole. But not to, in anyway, put anyone down always. Because this is not the way the many l's but he should have We'. "We think, organism of SAHAJAYOGIS. So if you say, "yes. some of us have got', that means, you put yourself down, but put all others above you. Say Yes, some of us have, I know some Nirmala Yoga 18

 dust particle and today just wnile talking to collectivity. And the one who has developed you, remembered that I wanted to be that, this permeating spirit, is a real Sahaja Yogi. and that is what this place is. And Raulbai is like that. She is a very simple woman, very think of yourself, I have nothing to say. But simple woman and she lives like a very simple person. She has a sense of permea- tion. And now there are so many Sahaja not. Like your Mother is. Whether I meet you Yogis, yesterday who came; and I am sure that they will take up Sahaja Yoga very well. ting through all of you, by little-little things There are lots of Sahaja Yogis from Dhulia now. And I am sure there are going to be permeate into each other and see the beauty more people. I hope you have met all of them. Make friends with all of them. Try to is the biggest thing. That's the biggest thing know them who they are. They may not know English. You get somebody to trans- know makes you like a nutshell and it just late. Talk to them and be nice to them. cannot have a rapport with that beauty of friendly with them. I wanted you to meet them for permeation. You should know who are the people here, who are in Nasik. Because somehow we never meet the Sahaja Sahaja Yoga is. Sahaja Yoga only works in Who has not, is not ! Whatever you may this permeating personality which moves from places to places, whether you talk ar or not, makes no difference, but I am permea- also I am there with you. So like that, try to in you. Enjoy yourself the best because that that is to be achieved. Because this ego you Be permeation and just see how the notes move into each other. It will be a great idea today, it is great thing today that we are having puja at Dhulia, Like the Dhulia means the dust. Dust. And Yogis, you see, who are in that particular place. And when we go back we have only one or two addresses. It is not a good idea. Try to see how many people there are. Ask one day 1 had written in childhood, a poem, I remember. Very interesting poem it was-I don't know where it is now-but which questions about them. And all that. said that 1 want to be smaller like a dust This permeation is only possible when your ego starts permeating all around. And this is the way to overcome the problems of the right side and that is how to worship Saraswati. Because Saraswati has a Veena (T) in Her hand and that Veena is the primordial instru- ment which She plays like music, and music is nourishing, that is enlightening. Like that, penetrates into the heart. You don't know how it goes into you and how it works out. That is how a person who is Sahaja yogis should permeate-like music. There are so many long time back, 'that I should be a dust qualities as I told you which cannot be descri- particle. So that I will permeate into people, bed in one lecture. But one of the greatest which is a very big thing-to become a dust quality of Her's is that She ends up into particle of that kind. To just whatever you subtler things like the Mother Earth will end up touch, you see, that becomes enliving, what- into fragrance. Music will end up into melody like that whatever She creates ends up into a great thing to be like that. And that was something greater. Matter, whatever She my desire, and it will be achieved. At that produces ends up into aesthetics. If matter does not have aesthetics then it is gross, like particle which moves with the wind. It goes everywhere. Can go, sit on the head of a king, or can go and full at the feet of some- one. And it can go and sit on a little flower, and it can go and sit everywhere. But I want to be a particle of dust. That is fragrant, that I had written a very beautiful poem, I was about seven years of age, I remember-To be a dust particle,' I remember that very clearly, ever you just feel, that is fragrance. It is such young age, I had this idea of becoming a Nirmala Yoga 19

 that everything. Now you will say what is water. Water becomes the river Ganges! becomes that subtler thing. Of course, the These are the subtler things. So the matter gets into subtler thing because it has to per- meate, it has to permeate. So everything acts on matter it becomes that and that is how whatever it is. And the best of all is the air. That air becomes the vibrations! out from this matter, from these five elements, left and right side both work it out. the love has to work on this and when love Because one has to look at your own life, to make it a beautiful combination of love and matter. So you can see how whatever has come May God bless you. MAHA SAHASRARA DAY I located the place where this great event had taken place by the help of vibrations and then sat there in meditation. It is very difficult We draw your attention to the article with the above heading in NIRMALA YOGA (May-June 1983) Vol. 15, page 16. It is to be noted that on 5th, May, 1970. Shri Mataji to describe the intense peace of the Grace Nirmala Devi opened the Sahasrara of VIRATA at NARGOL and not at Bordi as mentioned in the above mentioned article. which I enjoyed in the meditation It was very deep and blissful. Thereafter, I returned back to the house in whose compound I had parked my motor- NARGOL is a small village near the sea- shore and is about 35 Km. by State highway cycle, As I was walking with my hands out- from Bordi. By railway one has to get down stretched enjoying the vibrations, people of at UMARGAON Rly. station on Central Railway and then to reach NARGOL by road. the house enquired whether I was searching something. I told them "About thirteen years visited Bordi in back our Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi had come On 25th, Sept. 1983. 1 connection with the arrangements of the there and meditated near the seashore. International Shivir for 600 Sahaja brothers wanted to find out the exact place where She and sisters who would be attending it during had meditated." They at once remembered 10th, to 15th, Feb., 1984. After finishing my work at Bordi at about IP.M, in the afternoon some other local people had attended Her I journeyed to NARGOL on a motor-cycle. programme. had taken guidance from Mr. B.G. Pradhan, SWAMINI MOKSHA PRADAYANI MATAJI who was present there on 5th, May, 1970, SHRI NIRMALA DEVI KI JAI, and is one of the lirst twelve who got their realization there. that Shri Matoji had been there and they with BOLO SHRI SAHASRARA -R.N. PEREKAR (BOMBAY) Nirmala Yoga 20

 Her Holiness Shri Mataji's Advice Be sure that you are telling the Truth and One should know that it is very important for every disciple to worship his Guru. But nothing else and that you have felt the Truth the Guru has to be real Guru, not a one who in full ways. Those who have not felt the is just exploiting the disciples and who is not authorised by God. A PUJA is arranged, They have no authority. They have to receive because you have been initiated into the vibrations. They have to fully imbibe within Statutes of the LORD. You have been told what are the DHARMAS of a human being. This is very important task Sahaja Yogis have For that actually you do not need a Guru. to do in these modern times-i.e. to teil aloud You can read a book and know what are the that they have found the Truth. Statutes of the LORD. But Guru has to see that you practice them. These Statutes are to friends, relations and everyone and tell them, be practiced, to be brought into your own life: "This is the Truth now. That you have entered which is a difficult thing and without a Guru, in the kingdom of God. That you have been a correcting force, it is very difficult to follow blessed by the Grace of God. That you are these Statutes of the Lord because there is a very big gap between human awareness and power which is prevailing everywhere, Divine awareness and that gap can only be filled by a Guru, who himself is complete. vibrations should not talk of Sahaja Yoga. them and then they can say, "Yes, we felt." You can write books, you can talk to your realized souls, that you have felt the Divine With the confidence, with that complete understanding.coming out of your heart people can make out, this is absolute truth and then all kinds of falsehood must be denounced. Doesn't matter if somebody feels bad because by telling that you are saving them and not Secondly, anybody who is a real seeker, harming them. But must be told in a correct The first is, 'you do not do harm to any- one". The first principie is that we are not to harm anyone. he may be wrong. He might have gone to way, not in frivolous way. wrong Gurus, he might have done wrong things. But have feelings for them because Tell them, "this is wrong, it is wrong, you donot know. We have done the same thing". you have been going on wrong path yourself, This is how you are going to express your sometimes. principle. of Mastery or you can say ""GURU The second Statute is that you have to TATTWA". You have to be truthful. First and stand on your own legs and know that you are foremost thing is that, you should know the here one with the Truth, the testimony of truth. That you have seen the Truth. You know should announce it. what Truth is and you cannot compromise with falsehood. truth and stand the testimony and that you Third thing for Guru a Sahaja Yogi has to do is to develop DETACHMENT. Based on Mother's Address on Guru Purnima Day 29 July 1980 (See NIRMALA YOGA Vol. 5, Sept-Oct '81) Nirmala Yoga 21

 Actually a person who is Detached is the most beautiful person, is the extremely loving The DETACHMENT is that you are your father, you are your mother. You are every thing. Only your Spirit is Everything to you, only your Spirit you have to enjoy, then the Detachment comes from them, then you really death of love is attachment. do good to them because, by detaching you see the complete vision about them and about your love, circulation of your love. what is to be done, person, is love. Attachment means Death of love, complete Detachment gives you the movement of Inno- Detachment is purity, is innocence. One has to understand that there should be cence is such a light, light that really blinds only one craze i.e. to be Settled, 'absolutely you to all that is filthy. That is what is inno- cence which one may develop only through Detachment. Detachment is of the attention. You get yourself attached to your Spirit Do not allow your attention to get involved in to something, even rituals of anything. settled in your Spirit. and detachment starts working. INNOCENCE Deep in our heart we feel the longing for a Mother we cannot thank you but with the most loving and most powerful state of being. strong wish to establish the kingdom of God Innocence is that state, it is power itself. And, at the same time, when innocence is lost, we are faced with the eruption of the worst dest- ructive forces within us. In the West, alas, inno- cence is absolutely lost. Eyes are turned here and there towards all sorts of nonsense. The attention is sucked by funny things which are spontaneity. Spontaneity is wisdom. When thrown at us by the medias, the television, this wisdom grows within us the Spirit shines the magazines etc it is as if people would now relish dirt. filth, violence and crime ! When we hear the way non Sahaja yogis sometimes talk we could really become very angry, not so much with the persons them- selves but with this special kind of negativity innocence is a beautiful and holy thing I was which is trying to destroy our race and to bring us down to a much lower level than my environment. So, one of the blessings I animals. on this earth, to bring back the lost paradise." Fighting, of course, is also a matter of being clever. As our Mother very clearly tells: "If you can fight negativity fight it: otherwise run away." Innocence gives us the finest sense of tactics and strategy. Innocence is more and more. Before I came to Sahaja Yoga I was all the time with friends who had no sense of inno- cence at all. Although 1 was feeling that unable to defend this subtle feeling against got out of Sahaja Yoga is the full understand- ing of innocence and the possibility to spread this understanding to friends and students I This anger that we, Sahaja yogis, some- times feel, is a very good thing, it is the meet everyday in the University. Therefore wrath of Shri Ganesha within us. While joy in I pray to our Holy Mother that we all should Sahaja yoga is the incentive to grow, wrath is have growing opportunities to raise Kunda- the incentive to fight, And as we are the children of the Devi we know that we will win celebrating Innocence. linis. Awakening Kundalini is awakening and every single fight; realizing this we feel tre- mendous confidence and security within our hearts. We are the children of the Devi. "O JAI SHRI NIRMALA GANESHA ! -Engelbert, Vienna Nirmala Yoga 22

 Translation of Shri Mataji's Hindi Lecture at Delhi on 18th Aug. 1979* The sudden arrival is for various reasons. away in the sky and not in water. Similarly In Sahaja Yoga sudden arrival has a special Atma is as much as It is seen, It is beyond all significance. We must have seen many inci- that and not limited by it. But, for any reflec- dents in our lives, which have suddenly tion to be clearly visible the mirror which is the cause of that reflection must be clean. If the mirror is not clean, or instead of mirror a stone is there, the sun's reflection In the same way, that man looks disturbed who has not yet become everything through reasoning. This is correct clean like mirror, so that he can see the Para- on his part because his awareness has not yet matma's reflection within himself. Although awakened, When his awareness is limited the sun is seen taking different shapes on the ripples of flowing water, he is steady at his thing through his intellect it is difficult for him place and it is only his reflection that changes its shape. Similarly, the reflection of Atma appears to be absent or it just shines for a moment and disappears, in the person who is happened. They do not mean anything to us. If we try on intellectual level, we cannot understand why a particular incident has taken place in our life. It has been the way of will not be seen in it. human being, that he wants to understand and when he is searching the proof of every- to adopt some other means which are outside the scope of reasoning. You have heard a lot about Paramatma, Atma, Adi-shakti etc. You have also read full of sin and wickedness or whose heart is about them in books. Every now and then, loaded with false ambitions and desires. It thus entails that all these-body, mind, intellect. ego etc. that we know, should be converted man talks about Atma and Paramatma. There have been many incarnations, who have told that you should first reatise your Atma because It should be transformed into into a mirror. a mirror. man cannot reach Paramatma, without know- ing his Atma. As colours without eyes in the same way, you arrangement within us. Many incarnations cannot attain Paramatma unless you meet your Atma. You cannot intellectually under- stand Paramatma. It is only through Atma present stage. When we are moving about as that you can understand Paramatma. So far, alert human beings. We are alert but not all saints have said "be alert in the observance enlightened. A blind man is very alert but of your Dharma, search your Atma, understand the Atma that is residing in you. cannot identify How will it happen ? God has made that you have worked for evolving us from ameoba to human being and have brought us into our one who has sight sees everything without being bothered about it. A blind man can What is Atma ? What work is It doing perceive small small things. He knows small details of every place. One who is having the sight looks at only those things which are worth residing within us and how is It related to Paramatma ? It is said that Atma is the reflec- tion of Paramatma in our heart. This reflection seeing and which he wants to know about. is like that of the sun in water. Although Kundalini Shakti that is residing in us has reflection of the sun is seen in water, he is been placed in us by Paramatma and has *In August 1979 Shri Mataji came to Indi a at a very short notice. Nirmala Yoga 23

 been created by His desire. Kundalini shakti yourself. You will have some pain or some Greates our mirror. develops it and cleans it. such similar feeling. Slowly She makes it capable of receiving in will understand that you have problem there; itself the reflection of Atma, In Sahaja Yoga and you will clear it. But if you are not you know that awakening of Kundalini is very sensitive and do not feel the problem, you easy and spontaneous. But Sahaja Yogis may go mad and may land in lunatic assylum must know that they have come to Sahaja without even knowing that your such and Yoga primarily to clean their mirror, to wash such Chakra was caught, and such filth their sins and past deeds, to become purified of entered inside you. Similarly you never know all the dirt that has been accumulated within even if you contact some disease, because from time immemorial. They have not come collect sins and dirt, but to become pure. you do not understand whether you are sitting In the light you you are sitting in the dark. In the darkness to Many Sahaja Yogis are aware that Kundalini on a snake or some bomb has fallen on you. is that current which passes through their When the light shines inside you, you realise Chakras and awakens their Chakras. When which calamity you are facing. So the first the light comes on your Chakras you can glimpse of knowledge is regarding yourself. know their condition even on your finger tips. You know your problems. This is the knowledge. This alone is to be known. So far the knowledge that you have had was not enlightened. There was no light Immediately thereafter man sees his own in it. Now because of the light, you can know which of your chakras have problems. ing away from Sahaja Yoga. Initially, he gets There is a way to clear the Chakras of those scared, the very moment he starts seeing his problems. How to do it, is also taught in Sahaja Yoga. In Sahaja Yoga, people get the realization. faults and as human nature is, he starts runn- own faults. He cannot believe that so many faults exist in him. He is scared and then he starts doubting. You have seen; thousands of people come and get whe realisation but they do not come again. What is the reason for it ? If hundred people are realised only 10 per cent come back. It always happens. Therefore Sahaja Yoga is developing rather slowly. That You can not see the filth so long as there is no light. It is not visible in the dark. You will see it when light illumines within you. So the first object is, to accomplish the light, to- what people call-achieving the truth or know- ing the truth. First we should know the truth and in the truth we initially come to know what our qualities are. easily accepts his faults, because he can see them in the light. Suppose there is a spot on this saree, and it is dark. If some one points it out, we won't agree and may even feel offended. But if we see it in light. we would be surprised that there is such a big spot and we have not noticed it I We won't feel bad about it, and would like to get it cleaned Sahaja Yoga and how it will be done can be somehow, immediately. does not matter. It's reason is that man is so much indentified with himself that he does not In Sahaja Yoga, man want to know his faults; and when he knows them, he statrs running away. But it is bette: to know your faults and correct them, rather than carrying their burden from life to life. People do not know what time has come. It is the last chance. You. won't get any more chance. In Bible it has been described as the "Last Judgement'. Your last judgement is in judged by yourself, When the light comes within you, you judge yourself. "See my such and such Chakra has been caught." Then Suppose if there is a catch on some Chakra, say on Agnya, you will understand it Nirmala Yoga 24

 difficulties or the other, or some bad event you say "Mother, have a catch on this Chakra". You know that I am ready to put in ocurs, that people are now convinced that all efforts for you. You can also work on that there is something wrong with me and I each other thereby you can completely clean am inauspicious, because it has happended all your faults, problems and sins etc. Why repeatedly Such people are inauspicious should you carry that burden ? Instead of throwing it off people are running away from Sahaja Yoga. This is human brain. That keeps they face tremendous difficulties, grief, sorrow. thinking and always remains worried. There is nothing to be scared of. If you become in that. If such a person visits a family some little steady, you will realise how big is this power, which not only brings into light your faults, but also removes them and removes them completely. because all darkness of sin is associated with them and it is so deep that like a blind person sickness etc. and ultimately they are finished one from them may even die. Considerations regarding good or bad omens is in vogue in our country since time immemorial. Those who are saints, although So, first of all you must know, that Kunda- they are care free, have no place of their own- lini Shakti is extremely holy and virgin. This virgin power makes us clean and pure. In Sahaja Yoga, She is very much pleased to give you the realisation. Then there can be only two possibilities. Either you recognise His biggest identity is that the biggest auspi- the self-realisation within you, and rise up to cious is in His hands. He does good to all its greatness and go deep in it; or leave it and makes all happy. Touch of His feet makes altogether. There cannot be a third alternative. everything auspicious. There are six gifts of As someone asked, "How many turns are there in London ?" Only two; left and right. happiness etc. Either you completely accept it or leave it. If you have decided to accomplish it and to completely clean yourself, then the reflection of Atma will shine in you. In this Kundalini Yoga you become aware in collective consci- ounsness, you remain aware in collective of auspiciousness and will realise the Spirit they may not be bothered about their clothes and food and may be staying in jungles-bring prosperity wherever they go This is also told about God. If you want to recognise God, God, which bring prosperity, well being, Whenever incarnations came, great and auspicious works were done. But now the time has come in which that work will be done, which is the most auspicious work ever done, thereby, you also will be the doers consciousness and you clean others also while cleaning yourself. Others sins are also washed. It is regarded as auspicious, here. residing within you. This is the ever great work of Sahaja Yoga and the incarnations. It should inspire the entire society. In this great eternal life, when shadows of Kaliyuga are enveloping the whole universe, your torches (tlame) should burn high, and in their light they enter. There will be difficulties, wherever you may attain auspiciousness, Joy and pro- they stay. One gentleman came to me. He sperity. It is necessary, for this, to keep your was a young man of 23-24 years. He said lamps clean, you should wash your sins and "How do past deeds. Your past deeds are washed you know?" I asked. He said I am very inaus- along with your ego. Karmas are done by picious. Even children are afraid of me. When your ego. You must have observed that after coming to Sahaja Yoga, you can very easily Some persons are very auspicious whereas some are quite inauspicious. Latter ones bring calamities in the house or in the country "Mother I am quite inauspicious". I go to a house the family has to face some Nirmata Yoga 25

 see your ego (Ahankar) and how it works. In burden and then they even forget that the Sahaja Yoga also, you come across many peace, serenity and cool vibrations etc. which temptations and in that when your ego domi- they had once received are no more with nates, you forget whether you have to go to Sahaja Yoga or Sahaja Yoga is to come to you. the light that these things are embodied in Many people when they surrender to their themselves, Then they get scared and become ego, turn their backs to Sahaja Yoga expecting suspicious. Sahaja Yoga to follow them. So long as your ego is enveloping, you cannot have the glimpse of your Spirit. them. They are shocked when they see in Man's intellect comes up with many doubts. The first doubt which is very common, is 'Who is Mataji ? This is the first question. But it is useless to fight with your ego. In I want to tell you that you can not understand Sahaja Yoga you do not have to fight with Me so long as the eyes of your Spirit are not your ego, but you have just to see because open, and you should not even make efforts your attention is itself awakened. Your ego to understand. First you open the eye of your cools down by just seeing, as your attention Spirit. is enlightened and in that light you witness the play of your ego and laugh at it, and laugh at the ideas given by your ego. As you start they accepted Parashuram when Shri Krishna seeing yourself, your ego starts getting defla- ted and as your ego is deflated you rise in at the time of Shri Nanaka, they accepted Shri your light. When Shri Ram came, people said that came they said, they accepted Shri Ram and Krishna when Christ was here they accepted Abrahim. All of them had taken human form. But it is all the play of Buddhi (the intellect) Sahaja Yoga is a very subtle process. Few people know that it is a very subtle process. how interesting it is! Now, I have come and Sushumna Nadi is extremely small, extremely thin, exactly at the centre of Brahma Nadi, reason is man's attachment to his karmas, That extremely subtle channel Brahma Nadi is loaded with sin and dirty things and thereby gets so much narrowed, that very thin fibre of being. So long as he was alive, he too was Kundalini could pass through it. Imagine that considered useless and tortured but when he Kundalini is like an enlightened rope made of died he was regarded as Bhagwan (God). small fibres. Its very thin fibre could pass through Brähma Nadi, This is the condition. been like this ? You have all seen that this is a very subtle, very deep process. Most of you have seen Kundalini's movements and pulsations. She tries to make, somehowa small opening at the bottom, so that it becomes possible to pass at least one strand through the extremely narrow passage of Brahma Nadi and with that very subtle strand She pierces the Brahma- randhra. Initially this happening takes place flowing at this place, why not accept it ? very easily in most of the people. But She again coils down due to the pressure of the lect. It is the most difficult job in the world! people are accepting Shri Sai Nath (of Shirdi). But when he lived here, he did not even get any thing to eat. Why was it so ? He was also a human What is the reason of this all ? Why has man You will have water of the Ganges, where She flows. If She is flowing here, will you. say We do not accept Her as the Ganges I There may be nothing at the place where She was flowing earlier, or may be, only a nullah at present. If you want to take it as the Ganges you go your way. If the Ganges is It is not easy to understand human intel- 26 Nirmala Yoga

 Even now, I see big temples. What is happen- It is easy to understand God, because He is what He is. He does not have such double ing in them ? What is going on even in those dealings. Man has a variety of qualities, not temples having 'swayambhu' idols ? (Those just double. All animals from snakes and idols which have come spontaneously out of and scorpians to elephants, horses and lions are residing in him. You will not understand They are not man-made.) at all, why his brain is working in this way. Mother earth are called Swayambhu idols. WO Ego makes donkey out of man. Even Now when the Ganges is flowing why do donkey has its respect. Donkey also may have not you take water from Her ? Imagine this plug has been connected here. Will you connect in its place a plug which is out of with his ego, then the result is a donkey. order ? It is quite pragmantic. I cannot understand what hallucination is there on human intellect, that he does not accept the truth which he is seeing but accepts something that is not seen ! Its reason was understood long back and that is Ahankar (ego). some sense of propriety but an egoist can be worse than a donkey. If a man is equated I always say, you will be surprised to see If one gets how the ego is inflated in a man. excess of money he goes astray. One out of one lakh rich people, talks sense. If they receive money, they will think in which pub they would go or to which dirty woman they would go etc. ! Never would that man think, accepted Shri Rama in his days, he would that the money he has got could be spent on have told you to get your Kundalini awakened the work, within himself and without that and get the realisation and get established in would be acceptable to God and would Sahaja Yoga. Had you recognised Shri Krishna, bring His blessing. They will make the show of ego even in that, they will make Man has t0o much of ego. If you had he would not have played Sahaja Yoga in Gokul, but would have given you the realisation a temple and inscribe on it that the and told you to practise Sahaja Yoga. If Shri temple of Shri Rama has been built by such Nanak had been accepted, there was no need and such person in the name of his father. What will you call it, if not madness! If his for him to break his head telling you to do different things. He would have simply taught father had done some work, automatically he Sahaja Yoga, but very few understood him in would have become famous. By seeing such dreams of false ego man remains away from When the truth. Even though man sees the truth face to face, the ego teaches him not to accept it because by accepting the truth he would be his days. Now, when he is not here, you have built Guru-dwaras in his name. Mohammad is not here mosques have been made, becauşe they think now Mohammad Sahib is in their hands. Now Rama is in their free from ego. hands, and they can make his temple and say This is our temple, this Rama is our property. We have authority over him and whatever you It has many remedies. Say a man receives plenty of money and becomes very powerful. Excessive power also makes One a donkey. have brought-all money and other things, Ong behaves like a joker and becomes a laugh- offer them to this idol". You say all this because you think you are the authority of Ing stock, with too much of power because that goes to one's head, If a woman becomes extremely beautiful and she takes it into her head that she is a ravishing beauty, then she goes down to a nadir. Why does man become a donkey when he has excess of something? this idol. It is sheer ego because of which man thinks, that he can keep God in his control and for that he is making all the show. Every time the same show was repeated. 27 Nirmala Yoga

 Its reason is-he cannot wield it. If he is an emperor, even milions of rupees have no to what he taught them, which mantras he told. At the cost of six thousand dollars, value for him, but let a pauper have some those poor things, got the mantra-Ainga money and he will be flabbergasted. If a real phinga thingal This mantra was passed to king comes to power, it does not matter for them sacratly in writing and they ware told that by chanting this mantra they would get is not bothered by small and petty affairs. But many siddhis. Today, those people are on the roads, their homes have been ruined, their ability to wield an excess of anything. He plight is miserable. Had they been wise and tried to understand, thy would not have extremes of his Spirit, rest everything becomes gone to such a person who was pampering their ega. Always he would tell them "you ego he loses his freedom and day and night are a great person, you are phonganand all he remains in such nasty hallucination that should come in their best etc." Those who fill like a fool he thinks that he is being praised. their coffers, keep inflating other people's Never can he think as to what he is doing and ego and all people in the world like such persons. Big news papers, will bring out their advertisement and write their praise him at all. He lives in the world like a king and an ordinary person cannot, because he has no cannot go to an extreme when he attains the valueless for him. On the contrary, due to his which is the right path for him. Now the time has come to stop and see, It is now time to rise and to know, because those persons have moncy which attracts money. Big celebrities would call on It is time for you to stop wherever you them. But inside, there is a big falsehood. have reached on the mount of your ego and Can we say man worships falsehood ? But look back. So far, you have not achieved anything, you do not know anything. Accept his ego. One who preserves such falsehood it with humility and let it be imbibed in you. and is carried away by it. invites his disaster. You have not yet understood your Spirit. With your every step, you are getting more and more involved in dead things that put you in the fetters ot dependence and enslavement of is the reason for which you do not want to your six enemies (viz Passion, anger, greed, know yourself ? Why don't you want to pride, temptation and jealousy), stop for a surrender before God ? Why are you following while and see your mirror there itself which is wrong people ? You are ready to sacrilice within you and you will find the Paramatma of your eternal Atma residing within you. destroying you, who have done all harm to Know Him and go deep. Enjoy that bliss and with that light dispel darkness of the world. This is very great work and many people ar: not sticking to this great work. That is the difficulty. Thousands will come here if I start mesmerising. man himself lives in a big falsehood, which is Why. am repeatedly asking you,-why are you inviting that disastrous end 7 What even your life for those who are robbing you, you because they have mesmerised you. Have you got no capacity of your own to under- stand what is going on ? Paramatma can be known, only in complete freedom. You are getting scared of whatever little freedom you initially experience in Sahaja Yoga and want to go back to your old state of dependence. One such fake guru reached London. He emptied the pockets of ninety thousand people, he charged $ 60 0 from each person. Sixty people from them came to me, they were suffering from epilepsy. Lasked them as Sahaja Yoga is very simple, butyou people are not. There are many complications in cities. You have to pass through considerable Nirmala Yoga 28

 pressure and strain, because of which you have to face big problems. Hence, initially, is fake. You must know your Spirit first. So you have to become simple. You know, that long as you do not know your Spirit it is my work has great impetus in villages. Ego useless to diseuss because it is a very subtle is more powerful in cities. Due to small subject and not shallow, that you could come things, people become egoists and that is and see somebody's face and say something why, they surrender to those who pamper and that's all ! Never get into such a mess their ego and run away with their money. You just keep looking at them and receive desease. You will be surprised, al those patients of deadly deseases, like cancer, etc. whom fantastic thing. It looked really very difficult have cured, all of them without any exception how would it take place in a man and then were the victims of fake gurus and tantrikas. grow further. Jesus could be considered as I have not seen any cancer patient who was not connected with a false guru. That's why we can say on Guru principle Nanak Sahib it is said that doctors cannot cure cancer. You would now understand, how wicked, inauspi- know their Spirit. He was breaking his head cious and harmful these people are ! Even environments around them are bad. Those form but still He was not recognised. means to ascertain who in genuine and who that you cannot come out of it. Sahaja Yoga is a superb feat, it is extremely great. Some times I myself am amazed at it ! It is such a the last man, to do a lot of work and after Him came. Even in his time so many could not on advising the people. He had taken human who go into their environments come to such a tremendous grief that you wlil be shocked to know. Very large number of people have am glad that there are about 10,000 persons died in Morvi, some of them were innocent, in this country who have come to Sahaja but worst kind of sin was to be committed at that place. You have heard that those people had decided to buy for a sadhu a huge land in Kucch. Man must see and think in whose for me. Even if they do not come, it's still hands he is playing and how he is inviting his alright. Remember, God will not bow before own disastrous end. I was with Him, in fact with all of them. I Yoga and attained their Spirit. This is the last judgement, let us see what happens. Whatever people come is alright you. You have to accomplish Him in your own freedom. If you have not achieved Him, I am telling you as your mother and persu- ading you not to go to such wicked people it is not His fault, nor is it of Sahaja Yoga, and invite your disaster. Do not destroy your mine, or that of Atma. Spirit by going to such people. You should understand your Spirit. There is no need You, who are having your ego, will have to spoil everything in the oscillations of yourself to blame. It is your wealth or your questions and counter questions. Get realisa- tion first. First know your Spirit. do the rest. On what basis will you ask questions before that ? Have you got any asset and it has been given to you only because you should accept it, know it, and enjoy it. May God bless you. Nirmala Yoga 29

 CHILDREN WE SAHAJA From the first wave that gave us birth, resounding through the universe, From the first sound we were born, to reverberate through the resounding world. Of father's eternal auspiciousness and Mother's joyous love and innocence, Of spontaneous play and freedom dance, of eternal longing we were born. To give meaning to sanctity, to return essence to sacredness, To give vein to joyous song and mirth, and flow in freedom throughout the earth For of our Mother's womb we were born, and once more from Her crowned head, And in both were unctuous joy and love, and immaculate glory overspread. Like a fabric She takes the cosmic sounds, rends and from the rents give forth, Eternal sounds that dance like men, and to eternal glory return again. Like bees round nectar drinking deeply, soul deep round the sacred cup, In sacred innocents cheeerful shouting, crowd thick around their Mother's lap. Like lotuses waving in the wind, each one filled with sacred strands, And bowing to each lotus head with wings outspread, filling deep their lotus hands. Lotus like born of loving softness, returning softness born of love. Each one filled joyously resounding, the softness of the eternal word. Each with sacred love cascading, each with love sacred overflowing, Each to cosmic love surrendering, Eternal lost in eternal love. Each child longs to meet its Mother, drowned in Her fulfilling love, Each one longs to peal with laughter, and pour his love into the flood. Each one pouring with reverence flowing, the glory that is of his birthright. Each in glory deep entwining drawing, the threads of eternal union tight. Each one brother to the other, sister to each others love, Proving in their close communion, the boundless limits of their Mother's love. Embraced in the all encompassing, filled with the all pervading, Swimming in the all-containing, dissolving in the all sustaining AMEN -Dr. Rustom Nirmala Yoga 30

 CHELSHAM ROAD, LONDON Shrl Mataji's advice 24th May, 1981 Subconscious, Supraconscious and our correct Foundations and Ideals QUESTION: What are the curing powers work or that work, control this or go there. coming from the supraconscious as there are And these bhoots feel very happy about it as so many people who are curing other people with supraconscious power and what is the suffering from a mental problem, for example, difference between this curing power and someone of his has died then he gets a mental curing power of the Kundalini ? they are servile. So, if there is someone push-back into the collective subconscious MOTHER : There can be two types of curing and gets possessed. Such people go to the Mantrikas and these Mantrikas tell the dead power. One could be those who get the power of the collective subconscious and spirits that you have been troubling this man for a long time and you leave this man. So those who get the power of the collective supraconscious. Both can cure depending they remove this dead spirit and put another on where the problem is. For example a dead spirit in its place and tell the first dead person with the power of the collective sub- Spirit that he can get another body to go to. These Mantrikas are the mediators or liaison officers. They catch hold of these spirits and remove them from one man and put them onto some other person. So the first person We have two types of people in India is 'cured'. For example, there was a lady whose husband used to drink quite a lot. She conscious can cure problems of the left side. And a supraconscious person can cure the physical side. known as Mantrikas and Tantrikas. The Man- trikas are those people who go to the funerals and cemeteries and they try to capture the she will cure her husband but the lady must dead spirits. These dead spirits are of the sly pay Rs 100 for that. So she put a dead spirit type. These sly spirits are the so-called 'social on this man by which the bhoot of the workers' or 'busy-bodies' trying to help others. drunkard on him was removed So this man They are in the category of Chaturvarnas or Vishudhras, the people who believe in serving Then she solved that problem by removing the others. They appear to be good people because "races' bhoot" and put another one by which they want to serve other people and help others he started going to dirty women. Now this and that is why they do not want to die and lady got frightened. Every time she would want to stay around the earth plane. One pay Rs 100 and had ended up by paying a could call this a 'servant class'. They are abso- lot of money. lutely servile. They like to be whipped, beaten- up and be ill-treated. They are another extreme. found that her husband was doing all three They enjoy a horrid type of existence-they are things together. So she went to fight with masochists. All such dead people are around that lady Mantrika, who put a bhoot on her us and they are left-sided bhoots i.e. very too. Since then, that woman is still mad and timid and clinging. These mantrikas get hold have not been able to cure her. She is a of such dead people and tell them to do this very goodlooking woman married to a very went to one of the lady Mantrikas who said gave up drinking but he started going to races. Then she complained to the lady Mantrika about it. After that she Nirmala Yoga 31

 who wrote back that on this particular day, at this particular time we will appear within you and cure you but you must lie down in your bed. On that particular day and at that parti- cular time she started shivering and one of the rich man who owns a factory and this is the life both of them are leading i.e burning the candle on both ends. This is the case of the subconscious people. The second case is of the people of supra- conscious type. For example "Dr. Lamb's 'dead doctors" entered into her and she got International Curative Centre". "International cured. For one year she was alright. But bhoots" he had ! You have to write to them that you are suffering from such and such she came to me she was in a tattered condi- disease. All the dead supraconscious people tion. Absolutely Finished. She knew that a the very ambitious type i.e. all the 'great' doctors, spirit had come in her at the time she came all the 'great' lawyers all the 'great scientists, to see me. She said and knew that there were all the 'great' engineers and architects, Hitler and all such 'great warriors gather on the right hand side. When Dr. Lamb died he met all his friends there and he could communicate Supposing there is an architect and he appro- with them because these doctors did not want to die as they had been experimenting with dead architect upon himself. Now this Jack this or that. So they started Dr. Lamb's the Ripper was possessed of the spirit of a Clinic. Now this Dr. Lamb who died lived in London and had a son. Dr. Lamb's for such things. This weakness is there spirit attacked an ordinary soldier in Vietnam within such people, that is why they are easily and told him that he was Dr. Lamb from possessed. Otherwise it does not happen. London and that he better go to his son Only if you are weak in mind and have and tell him that you want to start such a weaknesses for such things, then these clinic. He didnot attack his son as he dead spirits can catch hold of you. If then she stated feeling very dizzy. When at least ten or eleven within her and she could not bear them. So this kind of curing also can take place from the supraconscious. aches such people he can get the spirit of a dead ripper. One has to have an inclination it has something to do with your physical knew that his son would not be able to bear him as the son was not healthy. He side then the supraconscious can help you. wanted a very healthy and sturdy man whom If it has something to do with your mental he could possess. So the soldier went to his son and said that "your father is within me and he wants to open a clinic". The son would not believe it. So the soldier went into a trance and told him that I have got some ful and so pure that impurities just fall money in a secret place kept for you and he out. It is a cleansing force. It is a very different had talked in secret about it. So the son be- thing where your intention is not to cure but lieved and started the clinic for him. He gave as a by-product people get cured. Now many all that money for the clinic. And all the dynamic things are happening. In Australia 'Bhoot doctors' were helping this man to act I met an Australian couple who were journa- whenever he wanted and an intercommunica- lists and the lady was the president of the tion was established on that level i.e. the Journalist Association of Australia. She could collective supraconscious. A lady who was suffering from high blood pressure, kidney have a baby. Still they kept having tests done and uterus problems went to them. They told as the husband wanted a baby very much. her to write a letter to the Centre in London But after coming to the Sahaja Yoga she side then the subconscious people can help you. But they help you very temporarily and then come back with a big foursome. But Sahaja Yoga makes you so power- not conceive. Doctors said she can never Nirmala Yoga 32

 have been made very weak by the satanic conceived atfter about fifteen years of marriage. Now her entire idea of life has changed. First forces and they have built it since long. That she indulged in all kinds of therapies. She is why our ideas are very weak. In the west was a Catholic to begin with and then went if you observe the behaviour and life-style of to different gurus and tried different therapies. the kings and the queens, and the kind of life She overcame all that after coming to Sahaja the people lived was so debased and horrify- Yoga. Now she finds the answer physically ing. Even what the socalled "religious" people for I have made all bhoots get out of her. and the Catholic churches did was so horrid Now she said she is going to expose all such that these very foundations were shaken. people. I told her that if she could write Now you have to rebuild your foundations. what these people are doing she would be You have to lay new foundations for dharmic able to show that this is madness, And once life. You have to absolutely accept the you have talked about it then you can prepare dharmic way of life. That is the only way to a base for Sahaja Yoga and then show that make your foundation strong again. this is the reality which makes you sane, powerful and loving. Then only people are going to get convinced. Sahaja Yoga achieves miracles, on the material level, on the mental aspiring is not there. For example, an aeroplane level, on the emotional level and ultimately on fly And another aeroplane which as soon as In India the foundations are good especi- ally in Maharashtra, but the yearning and which is so perfectly built that it can never it flies goes into pieces. So one must realise that the damage to our foundation by the souls, and if you want to give realisafion you satanic forces is much deeper, much more can. For example, this lamp which is enligh- subtie than what you understand. You have such tremendous powers for you are realised tened may be unclean or may not be good to light but once it is lit it can enlighten others. Similarly your Spirit is pure. But we have to fight all these 'bhoots'. On the unlimited I am working very hard. That is how they are exposed. But on the limited you have to work such a dynamic force. Everyone of you have hard to fight. you should perpare yourself to fight these evil farces for they are the ones who ruin your own being. There will be a big depression coming on and people will just obstruct it. They will trouble you like any- thing. But you have to fightit and for that you should be evolved. to fight these very foundations. These horrible kings who kept seven wives etc. are not your ideals. Your ideals are yourself. You have to bring new ideas in the western countries then only you can change it because you are to rise up and build yourself into ideals and try to lead a life of that ideal within. For this you have to sacrifice. And the greatest sacri- fice is that of your ego which makes you so obstinate and hard-hearted. Face yourself. This ideal has to be created. One has to have It is strange that all great compassion: one has to have love and under- people, children of God, men of God, are born more in the west than in the east. have been born in countries where there is a lot of affluence and they do not have so much for we are wedded to a very great cause standing. Never talk ill of one another. Never. Try to help each other for we are very few They and we cannot afford to fight among ourselves, We poverty and troubles and these are the very people who are lost. For, the modern concept of life is to make something that can be demolished very easily. We should realise that the reason for this is that our foundations good and compatible and you must try to cannot have wrong ideas, we cannot waste our time on mundane things like marriage. If marriage has to be, then it has to be 33 Nirmala Yoga

 patch up your problems. You have to make it a beautiful institution. Do not indulge cate with God. He had no way of knowing in small and petty things, for otherwise we cannot carry out this task because we have still a very long way to go in self. For dedication you have to do nothing life. These satanic forces are very nicely but give up your ego and superego. Take built up and very united in these western countries. They did not bother about India the heart and it will work out. It is easy to because India is a poor country. The blessings kill these rakshasas but what about the lost of poverty are that it teaches you to have a souls ? Everything will work out for a year or proper foundation. The poor are just the so or even two years. After that I am going same as the rich. The very rich are not your to blast them. Before that you should be ideals nor the very poor, You are your own ready because once I blast them they will ideal and you have to create new ideals. You are the new presidents of America and such top people that you are not finished by prime ministers of England. You are the ones who are great people, so you have to stand upto it. i e. people of character, generosity, of will go to the subconscious and then they hardwork and proper understanding. Other- will attack you again. So I want them to wise you cannot do this task. It is very easy live with paralysis, with diabetes, with all to study and get degrees like MD. MA, sorts of things. And they will live, they won't PhD, but to be an ideal you have to mature. You have to constantly tell yourself that you working twenty four hours, I have no sleep have to come up and you have to do this tremendous work which is not difficult because you have the source under your com- mand. Everything is possible. Just ask for each other and the bliss of God together. All it and it will be done. But build it up. Even that I want is that we pull out so many human now if you cannot build up your personality beings in the clutches of the evil forces for and new ideals then when are you going to do which we have to dedicate ourselves so ? I is easy to justify yourself, i.e. this is wrong or that is right. Finish all this. You have to become That. So the first is that you change materialiy also. There won't be much problem. your foundation. We have great people like Shakespeare, Tennyson, Mozart, Jung and tremendous people in this country also. Taking should be loving and affectionate. Once you their name itself liberates vibrations. In those countries single-handed they created their hearted persons. "I have no interest in any- ideas and just think how in those countries thing." Then who has interest in such a stone they must have fought all these satanic forces, as you ? But who accepts these people ? Everyone of you is capable of being like them. Everyone will talk of you, not of these horrible persons. of you has to become a leader. In Poland an not a realised soul. He could not communi- the Absolute So channelize yourself properly. cleanse yourself properly and dedicate your- these loads off and create a space which is come back on you people. So you should be that. It is the easiest thing for me to blast them all, finish them off. But first they die. It is a tremendous task. And 1 am and no rest and you know that. I can see the whole vision very clearly of those beautiful days when we all will be enjoying Our am here with all the chakras intact. It attention is on too many useless things, materialistic things. There is no end to it. Be satisfied with less. You will be looked after So don't run after so many things. Just don't have interest in these. It is all trash. You start giving up the Real you become hard- You are the foundation and your children You have to be ideals of love, affection, and not of domination and all such nonsenses. ordinary factory worker did that but he was 34 Nirmala Yoga

 All of you will be the first Sahaja yogis. You each other. They are not Sahaja Yogis. Sahaja are the onas who are going to change the complete concept of life. New ideas have to sombody is not working that person will go be built up. Are you people really aware of down. I will put that person out of Sahaja your responsibilities ? Sometimes you are worried about yourselves only, "where I am catching ? so self-centred or you are worried about any case you have to sleep most of your life. others, "he should not have done this or that Why not work it out now ? In every way be He should not have sat next to Mother." Nobody should think they love me more than anybody else. Some people know more rituals, others know more protocolbut does not matter. I know the one who loves me. The one who Yogis are the ones who take it Sahaja. If Yoga. Why did you come to Sahaja Yoga You are seekers. You have been seeking for ages. Are you going to waste your life ? In What is happening to me ?" It is active. Firstly you become real and very good citizens and with moral values which are your foundation. You yourself judge. You are realised souls, I leave it to you to judge. You will lose your vibrations. You can become silent. Silence can be from other agencies. Negative forces from the left side of the Agya are giving ideas. You must have your own ideas. "I can't, I go on thinking" this nonsense goes on. Just tell yourself how dare you do all this nonsense of the left side. Those who are left sided better go for lemon treatment and shoebeating. Those who are right sided better shoe-beat 108 times. Get in the centre. You work if you do not look after that side, should really love yourself, cleanse yourself and don't care loves others loves me the most. for your protocols and rituals. It is nonsense for me. What does it matter to me ? The one who loves others is the one who really loves me. I have had all these rituals and protocols and I have no care for these things. it makes no difference whether you say good- morning to me or good evening to me. you say to your brothers and sisters is the most important thing. Sahaja Yoga will never What 1.e. how you behave towards your wife, husband, your brothers and sisters. That is the most important, thing and anybody who be in the centre. Never be proud of your ego. "O'l think this is correct". Beat yourself 108 times. You can be very high handed and then does otherwise will get out of Sahaja Yoga. vou can have no embarrassment of what you You know I have thrown out the so called important people out of Sahaja Yoga who tried to dominate others by saying "this is not good, You should not put your hand there. Don't put your feet there etc., etc." are doing. You can be absolutely sharneless. But you are a Sahaja Yogi. You should feel embarrassed about such things. There should be a little 'sankoch'. There should be reserva- tions about it. How can you say such a thing to some one? Why hurt anyone ? Agya mother. bloats more and more. So many are like that. You cannot bind me into anything. I am unli- I know where somebody tries to show off, mited. I am detached. To think that, you tries to be a Guru and tries to push down have me attracted towards you by your proto- others. "O'l know Sahaja yoga. I am a great col, which is dead, has no meaning. It has to Sahaja Yogi". Then I make their 'ego-horns come out. You can feel it jutting out of your head. Push it down. This is the sticking point. husband who wants the wife to work all the Though the balloon goes thin, it sticks on. You are all Buddhas. Buddha is the one who Who can know the protocol of the Divine You cannot bind me into protocol. be a living protocolof being kind and generous. Be beautiful. Some are lethargic. Like a time or the wife who wants the husband to work every time. Everybody finds fault with is realised, the one who is enlightened, one 35 Nirmala Yoga

 who knows. You are the enlightened ones. How can you have an ego? seekers also must realise that they cannot be happy with anything else but their Spirit. This is the test of a seeker and a non-seeker can Ego and super-ego are the greatest enemies. I have seen people who suffer from super-ego. You push it down and it goes to the ego, So in the west we have the greatest problem of the ego. Whatever appeals to the ego we run to that. That is how people are made mad by He is very nicely off. He has his ego intact, these 'gurus'. They say you can fly, so you and he is torturing you. have gone into it. Somebody says you will become very powerful, so you have gone into it Somebody says you will become a great guru and you go into it. But nobody says you with a nonseeker can be a very difficult situa- become the Spirit and become One with the tion. You carnnot make a fruit into a flower. Whole. When I say you are realised, you are great, you are saints there is more bloating of the ego-balloon. I say it to create that aware- make into a fruit. Those who are entangled ness within you. Your ideals have all been with problems like "my father, my mother, my full of ego. See Churchill standing there with brother, my son" etc. should learn not to get a stick in his hand. The complete body looks entangled with such problems. Those who like the ego. We have to form new ideals. He was right for meeting another ego called and lost. The more you try to improve them Hitler. So it was alright to break their heads together. never understand a seeker. It is very difficult to live with a man or woman who is not a see- ker because you catch all the bad points and you suffer. If the person has an ego you catch it on your Agya. Nothing happens to him. and he is torturing you. But a person who is a seeker is a better person because you can give realisation to such a person and your vibratory awareness can be shared. But to be In your case you have become the fruit. But you must have a flower around which you can are not flowers should be avoided, forgotten the more entangled you will become. They can never improve. I give you a big rope. If But now we need new ideals. The past they are not seekers then they will never be is over now. When there is flood you need boats to carry you acros. the shore you don't carry the boats with you. You leave them behind. These boats are no good for us. They have done the of them, for if they catch, you suffer. If they job. Now we have to go ahead with our own feet. So no bloating of the ego should be there. We should realise that we are in no way exceptional, for only you are blowing up your ego. You have to be ideals. You have to be in the centre. You have to be a Sahaja Yogi. That is the most important thing. Don't judge yourself by what you think of yourself mad or crazy or anything but they will realise but what Mother thinks of you. How much joy are you giving to your Mother ? If you than they do. You are much more peaceful, make Her unhappy then what is the use, so and you cannot inject seeking into them. But after reaching They may become materially well off but they can never become seekers and you forget about them. You may have to suffer because have a nabhi chakra you suffer. This kind of person is very difficult to change. Do not waste your energy. Christ has side "do not cast your pearls before swine", You cannot force anybody to become a seeker. There are millions of seekers in the world, so forget about such relationships. They may call you one thing that you lead a much better life blissful, dharmic and sane but they won't accept your life. Play around with them with the understanding that they cannot change. Even if they change mentally they cannot have You must have noticed that there are really very few true seekers in this world. And Nirmala Yoga 36

 The simple answer is that whatever you do with your mind like shouting, howling. jumping etc, can be done by the limited mind. So ane who is doing is some human agency, some human being and not the Divine, But you cannot make your Kundalini pulsate with your mind. The Divine, it it has to do something, MOTHER: They will go out of circulation. it must be extra-ordinary which human beings Sahaja Yoga rejects more than accepts. It is cannot do. To pulsate Kundalini is only possible for the Divine. It is a living force. Man makes that urge because to a seeker nothing is important except seeking. QUESTION : What about the people who are good people, not seekers, but who have got realisation but don't seem to see the signifi- cance of Sahaja yoga ? a judgement going on. Such people will go out of realisation. You can talk to them of things-dead things. Man can do dead actions. realisation, give them bandhans etc. for, they But a living force cannot be activated. What is the need to go to the gurus if they make you ted but they are lost otherwise. For example, do the limited actions of the mind. You can and jump without little butter comes out and the rest is butter them. But you cannot make the Kundalini are the people in whom you could be interes- butter is made out of curd by churning. A always shout, howl milk. To seperate it, a big lump of butter is pulsate. put in the butter-milk and when it is churned all the butter gets around that big lump and gathers into a larger lump of butter. But some butter particles are left behind. If they do not stick to the larger lump of butter they are Divine does something which you cannot You cannot make the cool breezes flow from your hand, So, if you go beyond the mind it has to be something extraordinary, thrown away with butter-milk. So, those who something different. The limited and the do not come to Sahaja Yoga and are not upto unlimited are two different dimensions. This is the secret of your Mother's Mayā, that I live on unlimited and do unlimited things. That is how I create Maya. You can know me only through knowing your vibratory awareness. If you put your hand on the head of someone nobody can make you shake. So the Divine force is something that human beings cannot The question is that the psychologists say do through their mind. I repeat, you cannot that mind is limited, i.e. whatever the mind pulsate the Kundalini. It is a living force and does is limited. Whatever action we perform human being cannot create or generate life. is done through mind only and this mind has They cannot make the pupil dilate when the Kundalini goes up. As ordinary humans and the unlimited. So something has to be which so-called gurus cannot feel the vibrations you is beyond the control of the mind, that is the cannot talk of the vibratory awareness to only spontaneous thing. Now see the confu- them but you can see with your naked eyes. They cannot make the cool breeze come out mental level. What is the basic difference bet- of your head. This is someting extraordinary, What I can do with the limited is make myself. ordinary humans of Sahaja Yoga and the I can also do unlimited. That is the side of the Divine Mother. In the same way you are limited now but you have jumped into the do. the mark, will be thrown out. It is a fact but you should have 'nirpekshita' i.e. you should have no attachment to such people. May God Bless you. Answering to another question Shri Mataji Said : limited energy and so it cannot take you to But their question can be answered on sion. ween Divine and human ? How to convince Divine ? They are doubting you as you are- doubting them. Nirmala Yoga 37

 unlimited. So you can do all these things. The gurus, so-called, can shout, howl, jump That is why you are saints. The things you and do all these things but they cannot raise can do in the unlimited you could not have the Kundalini of the people. All other things, done before realisation. You start doing some- thing that you could not have done before, you will get your cure, change your mental i.e, to raise your Kundalini and of the people. attitude and all that. we can say, are arbitrary. subjective. Then, A Letter from Canada Dear Brothers and Sisters, There was a time a few years ago when I, and many others, believed that in the light of the world's social, economic and political situation we were surely doomed. Very few advocated recovery and enlightenment for it appeared that we were in the cenre of an irreversible worldwide crisis. These were the days before I knew I was a seeker (not a quru shopper but rather a knowledge hound). Those were days of sadness, disappointment and general skepticism. I felt as though the Universal unknown entity had led me down the garden path and I didn't know where to turn. I prayed continually to the "collective" to help me and show me the way, one thought always remained in my mind. However, I knew that before this life time was out I would learn the secret to it "alI". All this occurred through the years 1971-1978. I know now that my prayers were being answered. I know, also, that these were not only my personal formative years but also the formative years of Sahaja Yoga and the beginning of the reversal of all adharmic direction. Most of us have experienced this mysterious guidance from our holy Mother and we do feel fortunate to have been blessed this way. She is so wonderful! A very beautiful thing about our Divine Mother's love is that that She has ena bled us to rise above all the nonsense of the Maya to experience the truth and reality; the love and the bliss that is heaven on earth. Although this is astounding by itself, it is also quite amazing to realize that we have only begun and that the possibilities are virtually inconceivable at this point ! We can now say with absolute joy, faith and authority that yes, there is hope, there is a great light at the end of the tunnel. Things will change and improve, we will all become one again and the absolute peace and love will once again be restored. Very soon we will be thriving within the supreme radiance of our Divine Mother's grace. The world will never look Back again ! Much love, your sister, Liallyn Musa Calgary, Alberta, Canada Nirmala Yoga 38

 LEADERS IN SAHAJA YOGA-PART I To obey God means "Thy will be done". Sahaja Yoga in its present condition could, at times, look like a big nursery and, actually, It means "O Shri Mataji, Thou are the sole this is quite a refreshing sight. The sangha of and only Doer. Let Thy immaculate mode of the sahaja Yogis is the "divine Kindergarten" action operate through me". To abey means in which, protected by the omnipotent love to be great. After all who are our models, from above, we grow into spiritual maturity. who are the true leaders of Sahaja Yoga ? When babies grow up they become children and grown up children start helping the mother in looking after the younger brothers the primordial friend of the yogi, was behead- and sisters who are still babies. As the child- ed, dafending, on his Mother's orders, the ren mature they fully realise the qualities of dccess to her inner apartments against lord childhood. They know that they are not going to recreate another boring "adult" himself be orucified. Let us face it: what is world, this world that we know only too well, the depth of our obedience to Shri Mataji ? which is serious to the point of foolishness, How many "but Shri Mataji". how many rational to ths point of insanity, a world in think, I balieve", how many explanations, which the word "adult" itself has become a justifications, argumentations or even advices stamp on sonmething dirty : aduit movies, adult have -in my abyssmal stupidity given to books.. A world in which the leaders are such sinners that entire countries are cursed Mahamaya ? Ireally feel like pulling my ears because of them. In this respect, we, the children in Sahaja Yoga are enjoying a special Shakti is cloaked into Mahamaya is it at all blessing from sakshat Shri Gopal Krishna. possible that our daily lack of obedience This is the age in which the saints have should be forgiven. Only because She is become mischievous : endorsed by the sup- reme authority of the Lord we can gently guiding us. make fun of many of those pseudoauthorities To this effect, we must remember a key word. on the earth. It is nice to have earned the right to laugh. Shri Ganesha who is Adi bandhu, that is, Shiva himselt. Christ, no less obedieni, let the one who knows everything but who is down to ground level. Only because Shri Adi Divine Patience does She go on, correcting, But we should learn. Learn fast. "ATTENTION" is the first word of Aldous Huxley's novel Island and it gives this book Yet mature children know whom to laugh its best line. Attention (chitta) is crucially important. When projected inside, it &llows us to watch how the ego plays its rebellious tricks, how the super ego isolates our cons- ciousness from God's will through a cocoon Without full attention. real obedience to Shri Mataji is not possible. And without developing such a respectful sense of obedience how could we call for at and whom to obey. It is all right to run in the courtyard during playtime but, back in the classroom, the whole class stands up at atten- tion when the master comes in. This is what our Kundalini does when Shri Mataji's pre- of conditionnings. sence is felt. And this is a fundamental characteristic of those who are to become leaders in Sahaja Yoga : they have to display absolute, uncompromising obedience to the Mahavatar Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi. In Satya before becoming gurus. Besides this obvious Yuga the right to lead men is earned through point the deities, devas and ganas are cons- understanding how to obey God. obedience in others ? We have to be disciples tantly watching how obedient we are towards 39 Nirmala Yoga

 Shri Mataji and if we don't satisfy tham on this criterium we cannot rise into higher proud too, simple yet subtle, a leader in Sahaja spiritual planes, we cannot develop the stature Yoga is, above all, obedient to his Divine of a sahaja yogi elder. Unfortunately even today old sahaja yogis aren't sometimes quick guiding him on the safest road towards Reality enough to follow the Goddess's instructions, and thus he lets Her do so. That is why he they hesitate before implementing them. As will parhaps find the answer to that most a result the whole divine project which was conceived for their benelit fizzles out and, A child but also an elder, humble but Mother. He has understood that She is clever question: "How can I best please Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi ?" sure enough, they find themselves the losers. Obedience to Shri Mataji is the establishment of our brotherhood with Shri Ganesha- Christ. -Obedience to Her is the highest punya. -Obedience to Her is the acceleration of the evolutionary process. -Obedience to Her is the actualisation of surrender. -Obedience to Her is the way to the Father. Obedience to Her is the mark of pure intelligence. -Obedience to Her, the Parameshwari, the sacred Emperess, obedience to Her again and again. JAI MATAJI A disciple The Visage of Salvation *Here is free prospect wide, Faust is the piece of the German literature which should be read by all Sahaja Yogis. The soul up-bearing. Goethe's Doctor Faust was the archetype of There women-figures glide, Heavenwards faring. With them the heavenly Queen, the modern seeker. He was so sure that nothing, short of the Absolute, could quench his thirst that he made a pact with Mephisto- pheles, the Devil, prince of the seducers. "If Majesty tender, any wordly temptation can bind me, then my soul will belong to you." In wreath of stars is seen, Clear in her splendour. Yet it is'nt an easy game the one we Pavilioned in the heaven's blue, path of Faust, strewn with lust and death, finally For the holy sight | sue, Queen on high of all the world, play with the devil and the leads to doom. At the end of the drama though, Goethe unfurls a heavenly vision: the Redeemer, of the seeker stuck in his sins, appears in great glory. No doubt, the Sahaja Feelings tender and austere, yogis will be quick to recognize who that And with glow of sacred love magnificient Divine Being is: Of the mystery unfurled. Sanction what in man may move Lifts him to thy presence near. Nirmała Yoga 40

 Goddess sends out cool moon rays, that Her darshan introduces us into the state of sa- mādhi. Indeed the Sahaja Yogis have the experience that they become absolutely thoughtless merely by watching the face of Shri Mataji. Souls unconquerable rise If, sublime, thou will it; Sinks that storm in peaceful wise If thy pity still it. Virgin, pure in heavenly sheen, Mother, throned supernal, Highest birth, our chosen Queen, Godhead's peer eternal. "O contrite hearts, seek with your eyes The visage of salvation3B Blissful in that gaze, arise, Now near her splendour Floats a light cloud, Penitents tender Through glad regeneration. Now may every pulse of good Seek to serve before thy face, Virgin, Queen of Motherhood, Keep us, Goddess, in thy grace." In gentle crowd, Tasting heaven's ether. At her feet kneeling. By praising this Holy Face of the Mother, Goethe, unconsciously, or, perhaps, consci- ously?-- brought at Her Lotus Feet the hom- mage of those many talents that She, as Saraswati, had bestowed upon him. We can very clearly see that the poet perceived the decisive role of the Cosmic Mother. Indeed For grace appealing. To thee. enthroned in holy awe, Power is not denied, That the lightly erring draw, Trusting, to thy side. Hard to save whom lust be spake, Weak, before his fire; Who in single strength can break Chains of dark desire? So the foot will swiftly slip, On the slant way gliding, Heart the fool of eye and lip, In soft words confinding." the very last words of Faust: Part two* left a powerful message to mankind. I wish that all our brothers and sisters who are still strug- gling in their quest could hear it. They would come straight to Sahaja Yoga, "All things corruptible Are but a parable; Earth's insufficiency Here finds fulfilment3; Yes, Goethe, the greatest German poet, Here the ineffable himself struggling to escape the net of the senses, extolled sakshat Shri Adi Shakti. In this Mater Gloriosa he was not portraying the Eternal Womanhood role that Shri Mahalakshmi played as Mary, Leads us above." the modest maiden of Nazareth, but the majesty of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi in Her heavenly form. It is said that the very face of the Wins life through love; JAI MATAJI -A former mini doctor Faust From Goethe, Faust : Part Two, Penguin Classics p. 284.288

 Registered with the Registrar of Newspapers under Regd. No. 36999 81 Shri Mataji's tour in Maharashtra during 1984 *Shri Mataji's programmes at Bombay First Group of 100 foreign Sahaja Yogis arrival in Bombay and will not include those who wish to go to Delhi. Programme at Vaitarna Programme at Nasik Programme at Dhule Programme at Rahuri Programme at Ahamednagar and travel to Sholapur Travel to Kolhapur 10.1.84 to 16.1.84 15.1.84 to 16.1.84 17.1.84 to 19 1.84 20.1.84 to 21.1.84 22.1.84 to 23.1.84 24.1.84 to 27. 1.84 28.1.84 1.2.84 "Programme at Kolhapur. lchalkaranji. Kazal. Sangli and Sadoli 2.2.84 to 5.2.84 Programme at Malarpeth-halt at Satara *Programme at Satara Programme at Pune "Programme at Pimpri and travel to Bombay Second group of 100 foreign Sahaja Yogis arrival in Bombay 6.2.84 7.2.84 8.2.84 to 9.2.84 10.2.84 10.2.84 to 11.2.84 International Sahaja Yoga Camp at Bordi Weddings Departure of first group to their own country Departure of 2nd group to Vaitarna *Programme at Vaitarna Programme at Nasik Programme at Dhule Programme at Rahuri Programme at Ahmednagar and travel to Sholapur Programme at Sholapur and Pandharpur Travel to Sholapur 10.2.84 to 15.2.84 15.2.84 15.2.84 16.2.84 to 18.2.84 19.2.84 to 20.2.8 21.2.84 to 22.2.84 23.2.84 to 26.2.84 27.2.84 28.2.84 to 1.3.84. 2.3.84 *Programme at Kolhapur. Ichalkaranji, Kazal, Sangli and Sadoli 3.3.84 to 6.3.84 *Programme at Malarpeth-halt at Satara Programme at Satara "Programme at Pune Departure for their own country and Delhi from Bombay. Delhi 7.3.84 8.3.84 9.3.84 to 10.3.84 11.3.84 March "84 P.S.: Foreign Sahaja Yogis those who wish to go to Delhi should join Second Group. *** JAI MATAJI** Edited & Published by Sh. S.C. Rai 43, Bunglow Road, Delhi-110007 & Printed at The Central Electric Press, 80-D, Kamla Nagar, Delhi-110007. One issue Rs. B.00, Annual Subscription Rs. 30.00 Foreign (by Airmail £5$ 10)



----------------------

1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Nirmala Yoga
Vol. 3 No. 17
Bi-Monthly
September-October 1983
5F
t
"Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns all the religions and
seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga THE UNION"
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-1.txt 
 NIRM ALA YOGA
43, Bungalow Road, Delhi-110007, (India)
Founder : Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Editorial Board : Dr. S.K. Mathur, Sri A.S. Mishra, Sri R.D. Kulkarni
Representatives
: CHERYL HYNES-1267, Burke Road, KEW 3101, VICTORIA.
: ZORANA BEDKE Gartnergasse 17/10, 1030 VIENNA.
: LORI TODRICK-4518 Woodgreen Drive, West Vancouver, BC. V7S2V1.
:MARIE ROUGER-175, Av. Ledru Rollin PARIS-750001.
:RUTH LEDERBERGER : via Mercalli-46, 00197 ROME,
M.B. Ratnannwar-13, Merwan Mansion, Genjewala Lane, Borivali (W)..
Australia
Austria
Canada
France
Italy
India
BOMBAY-400092.
RAJARAM SHANKAR RAJWADE-840, Sadashiva Peth, PUNE-411030.
: DANIEL & ROXANA DEVINE-Angel Luis De Herran, 38, 6, 4,
Spain
MADRID-33.
:CHARLES & MRS. MAGDA MATHYS-5, Chemin Des Mouldins,
1256. Troinex (Canton de Geneva).
: GAVIN BROWN Brown's Geological Information Service Ltd., 160 North
Gower St., London NW 1. 2ND.
M.J. MURDOCH, 14A Bourne Ave. S. RUISLIP, MIDDLESEX, HAH 6TZ,
ENGLAND.
Switzerland
U. K.
: CHRISTINE PETRUNIA225 Adams St., 1/E BROOKLYN, NY-11201.
U.S.A.
CONT ENTS
Page
1. To the Divine Essence of the Prayer
2. Editorial
3. Shri Krishna Puja
4. Vishuddhi Chakra
5. Innocence is (Poem)
6. Shri Saraswati Puja
7. Maha Sahasrara Day
8. Shri Mataji's Advice
9. Innocence
10. Translation of Shri Mataji's advice
given in Delhi in Hindi
11. We Sahaja Children (Poem)
12. Subconscious supraconscious & our
correct foundations & ideals
13. A Letter from Canada
14. Leaders in Sahaja Yoga (Part II)
15. The Visage of Salvation
16. Shri Mataji's tour in India
1.
7.
11
14
15
20
21
22
23.
30
31
38
39
40
4th Cover
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-2.txt 
 AUM
TO THE DIVINE ESSENCE
OF THE PRAYER
Let our ears hear that which is true;
Let our eyes see that which is pure;
Let our beings praise that which is divine;
And let those who listen hear not my voice but the wisdom of God.
Let us worship with the same song, the same strength and the same knowledge;
And let our meditation enlighten and enrich.
Let there be amongst us compassion and peace.
Now the prayer.
Salutation Shri Ganesh, sakshat Shri Jesus sakshat Shri Nirmala Devi Namoh Namah.
It is you who is the beginning of all the beginnings.
It is you who is the doer of all deeds which have been done, are being done, and will be done.
It is you who supports all things that are supported.
It is you who protects all things that are protected.
It is you who is the complete, all-pervading Spirit, God's divine energy.
Think clearly brain.
Speak only the truth.
Let your presence, awakened in us by Kundalini, speak;
Let your presence, awakened in us by Kundalini, listen;
Let your presence, awakened in us by Kundalini, bless%3;
Let your presence, awakened in us by Kundalini, protect3;
Let your presence, awakened by Kundalini, in us, your disciples, be the disciple.
You are the essence of alIl the sacred literature and holy words, and you are the energy that
understands the holy words;
You are the divine combination of complete truth, complete happiness and complete energy;
And you are beyond;
You are all knowledge, and you are the use to which the knowledge is put.
You exist until the end of all things, and after the end of all things, you are;
1
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-3.txt 
 You create the end of all things, and after the end of all things, you remain indifferent:
You are the earth, you are the water, you are the fire, you are the air, and you are the space
above the air.
You are the gunas : and you are beyond the gunas;
You are the body : and you are beyond the body:
You are the essence of time: and you are beyond time;
You and only you exist at the Mooladhara Chakra3;
You are the Spirit: and you are beyond the Spirit;
And those who would join God meditate upon you.
You are Brahman, Vishnu, Rudra;
You are Indra, Agni, Vayu%3;
You are the sun at noon: you are the full moon3;
Through all of these, and more, you are the all-pervading energy of innocence and wisdom.
You are the divine servant who stoops to wash the feet of saints;
You are the tiny core of all things without which the larger have no purpose;
You are the key to the libraries of all the scriptures, without which the truth is hidden3;
You are the full stop which completes the sentence, and without which the sentence loses
its meaning;
You are the crescent moon you are the stars and you are beyond the stars,
All things, from tiny dot to universe, is you.
You are the future and beyond the future : you are in all forms;
You are where the sounds combine : you are the silence between the sounds;
You are the rhythm of all music and all prayers;
This is the knowledge of Nirmal Ganesh, and you, Nirmal Ganesh, are the master of that
knowledge, and all knowledge.
You are the God : and you are the Goddess.
AUM, GVAM NIRMAL GANAPATAYE
To your powers, Ganesha, let all surrender;
Let the left side of memory and the right side of action surrender to you and let your
enlightenment prevail.
Your first tooth you have, and four hands : one holding a rope, the second a goad, the third
is raised in blessing and the fourth offers sustenance.
Your banner is that of a humble mouse.
You have long ears and are clothed in red : red decorates you and you are worshipped with
red flowers.
You have compassion for those who love you, and it is for those who love you that you
come to this earth.
You are the force that creates, the energy that pervades and the Spirit that protects.
Those who seek union with God pray through yo%B
Those who seek union with God worship you.
2.
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-4.txt 
 AUM GVAM NIRMAL JESUSYE
To your powers, Aum Jesus, let all surrender;
Let the left side of memory and the right side of action surrender to you and let you1
enlightenment prevail.
You are the word that was the beginning: you are the word that will be the ending.
You are he who was born of a virgin, and died on the cross.
You are he who absorbs all sins, and who died to live again;
You are God and Man, and you are worshipped with red flowers.
You have compassion for those who love you, and it is for those who love you that you come
to this earth.
You are the force that creates, the energy that pervades and the Spirit that protects.
Those who seek union with God pray through you.
Those who seek union with God worship you.
Shri Ganesha, salutation to you.
Shri Jesus, salutation to you.
He who is the beginning of all worship, salutation to you.
He who destroys all the powers of evil, salutation to you.
Sakshat, Son of Lord Shiva, who is unending blessings, salutation to you.
Sakshat, Son of Mary Mataji, who is unending love, salutation to you.
Sakshat, Mataji Nirmala Devi, who is unending joy, salutation to you.
Nirmala Yoga
5F
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Editorial
Prayers have a great importance in human life. What is praying? It is an expression to
one's desire and requesting and soliciting its fulfilment, to a power that is far superior and
that, one knows, would bestow what is desired. Praying suggests accepting one's inability to
accomplish the objective only through one's own efforts. It is surrendering to the will of the
power, to either grant or reject the request, although response in the positive is generally
assumed.
Right-sided persons are over-confident of their capabilities, and have no faith in praying
whereas, left sided would only desire and pray, without making any efforts. However, right-
sided people, on failing to achieve what they desire, turn to praying. As has been seen on
many occasions, after doctors express helplessness people seek Sahaja cures, which involves,
praying for the self-realization and recitation of mantras besides other treatment.
Althaugh praying would appear to be a left-side activity, its origin would be from right
side at personal level, as their orientation is to achieve limited personal ambition. In such
cases, the prayers could possibly be the result of egotism and would come from ego not from
heart. Even pujas are performed, by some people desiring a materialistic reward, which is
again a right-side activity. Puja-mantras are the prayers invoking the deities to be present for
the puja and accept offerings.
However, praying would help balancing over-active right side provided the recitation of
prayers is done from heart and with complete surrender. It is not just muttering of words that
makes a prayer, but sincerity of heart that is associated with it. Also, it is important to dis-
criminate so as to avoid reciting the prayers that have left-side bias. It is essential to recite
the compositions of realized souls. It is also equally important that one should be clear on all
chakras, at least on vishuddhi, so that mantras and prayers invoke good vibrations and become
effective. Before beginning the recitation, one should improve vishuddhi by saying "Om
Twameva Sakshat Sarva Mantra Siddhi Sakshat Shri Adi Shakti Shri Mataji Shri Nirmala
Devyai Namo Namaha".
Sanskrit synonym for the word prayer, is 'prärthana'. i.e. 'pra l arthana'. Arthanā is reques-
ting or soliciting. Shri Mataji has advised us that words having prefix 'Pra' suggests enlighten-
ment. Hence 'prärthana is an enlightened prayer, is a prayer made by a person who has got his
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-6.txt 
 enlightenment. Enlightenment comes from the Spirit. Hence such prayers are the expressions
of desires of the Spirit. They have the power to turn one's attention towards Atma, and kindle
the spark of desire in every one's mind, to seek the ultimate. They inspire those, in whose
hearts the spark has grown into a flame, to go deeper and closer to the Spirit, e.g. Om
Brahma Medhase/Madhu Medhase/Brahmaiva madhu medhase (please give me Brähma,
please give me honey i.e. sweet. Brahma alone is sweet.) Many vedic mantras are prayers
to different deities requesting help for seeking the ultimate. Great sages of ancient yore
have prayed even to the Sun, Moon, Wind-God (Vayu) and Varuna (rain God) and also to
water to give them strength so that they could attain the realization of Atman. It is interesting
to see the following prayer.
MEL
आपो हिण्छा मरयोभवस् ता न ऊर्जे दधातन
महे रणाय चृक्षसे ।।
ॐ
Om äpo hishthā mayo-bhuvastāna ūrje dadhātana. Mahe-ranilya chakshase.
O water as you are pleasing, give us food and protect us for attaining Self-realization
which is extremely blissful.
By the grace of Shri Mataji, Sahaja yogis have got their enlightenment. Hence pravers
composed by them, or their recitation of the prayers composed by other great saints &
prophets would be prärthana' in real sense. All the deities are awake within the Supreme
Goddess and respond quickly when invoked in Her name. Our brothers would certainly allow
us to seek their indulgence, and help us.
Humbly approach Shri Ganesha at Mooladhar and pray for his blessings and to give us
his innocence & purity so that we become loving children of our Mother keeping absolute
faith in Her, and request him to join us to pray to Her to keep Her form in good health for
years & years.
With Shri Ganesha's permission respectfully pray to mother Kundalini to clean our subtle
being and develop the flickering flame of our Spirit into a big torch, that would be one with
Supreme Spirit. Then pray with her to Sakshat Shri Mahākundalini to be ever present
amidst us in Her present form and give realization to all the seekers.
Bow to Shri Brahmadeva, the God of creation, whose four faces are said to be four Vedas
and his shakti, Shri Saraswati, Goddess of knowledge and art. Pray to him, in the name of
Shri Mataji, that we enjoy the beauty of his creations rather than thinking and planning about
ours. Surely, Shri Brahmadeva and Shri Saraswati would pray with us to Cosmic Mother
Jagadamba, the creatrix of everything from Brahmadeva down to an insect, to protect and guide
all the seekers, in Her present form, for ever and ever.
Thereafter, with complete reverence approach the sustainer of creation, the protector of
Dharma, and his power Shri Lakshmi. May his qualities be awakened in us, so that we work
tirelessly for the divine cause of propagating Sahaja Yoga. May he allow us to pray along with
them, to Adi-shakti, that all satanic & adharamic forces be destroyed.
Obeisance to Primordial Master, at Bhavasagar, who came many times in the world, by the
instructions of Adi-shakti, to help man-kind evolve itself. Seek his forgiveness for the ill-
treatment meted out to his incarnations. Our sincere desire is to be the instruments in the
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-7.txt 
 myriad hands of Param Parameshwari. May the qualities of Primodial Master be inculcated
by us.
Surrender before the Father of the Universe. Existence of all existences. Again and again
pray for being pardoned as we are engrossed in the illusion, ignoring the reality. May our
attention ever rest at the feet of our Cosmic Parents who are one as words and their
meaning and are manifesting themselves as our Beloved Mother. May our endeavour be to
always please Her.
Salutations to Shri Krishna and Shri Radha who showed the divine play as a child and also
showed true Virata cosmic form having myriads of hands, faces and legs, encompassing within
his being every living and non living thing in the universe. He played and danced with every
milk-man and milk-maid and awakened their kundalinis and at the same time transcended
above them, thus proving that Supreme Spirit is all-pervading and foundational to al
existence and yet uninvolved and unaffected by it. May Shri Radha &Shri Krishna, one as
Sun-rays and sun-light, within our Mother. lead us to the perfect witness state, May the
Mother of entire creation be amongst us in good health for years & years.
Let us approach Shri Jesus and Shri Mary after repeating Lord's prayer. Remember,
"forgive us of our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us". We deserve
God's forgiveness only after we forgive others. May he help us grow in our awareness
beyond our narrow individuality. May he confer upon us his dedication and love for our
Mother.
Sahasrara ! Integrated and subtle universe ! The kingdom of God placed in every human
being. Our Beloved Mother is the Empress, Raja-rājeshwari of the kingdom of God, Rājya-da-
yini, the conferer of the kingdom of God. She has granted liberally all boons and all
that is auspicious to Her children. Let us not forget that She is Abhyäsāti-shaya-Jnäta.
(aaa , known through tremendously long practice). It is only through the intense
meditation that we can know Her. Let every Sahaja yogi make a vow to accept Her every
spoken word and not to be casual in Her presence; to devote whole heartedly to the cause
of Sahaja Yoga. May the kingdom of God be soon established in the universe,
Om Twameva Sakshat Sarva Mantra Siddhi Sakshat Shri Adi-Shakti
Shri Matajl Shri Nirmala Devyal Namo Namah
6.
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-8.txt 
 GENEVA
Aug. 28, 1983
Her Holiness Mataji Nirmala Devi
Shri Krishna Puja
Today we are celebrating here in this holy
land the birthday of Shri Krishna. Shri Kri-
shna is the ultimate of the fatherhood, that I He reached the optimum that one has to
described you before, who came on this reach as a yogi. As if He is the ideal you
Earth and illustrated the ultimate of that. have to reach.
So on this Earth, the highest fatherhood is of a royal family but He lived in the jungles
Shri Krishna's awareness. But in the King- in the forest, with the cows, with ordinary
dom of God, we can say in Heavens, or even people. He used to sleep on the ordinary
above everything else, resides Sadashiva who places like sometimes on the stones, on the
does not take incarnations. He is one of grass, when He would go with His cows for
the aspects, Shri Krishna is one of the aspects their feeding. He was very aware, very very
of Sadashiva which is the Father. And the aware, absolutely aware of His powers, with-
Adi Shakti or the Holy Ghost is the other
aspect of Sadashiva which is His power. So "Samhära shakti“ by which He could destroy
when Shri Krishna incarnated on this Earth, all those people who tried to harm the divine
an aspect of this Adi Shakti came on this manifestation.
Earth as Rädha. She is the same who came
as the Mother of Christ, and She gave the
name of Christ as the surname of Shri Krishna,
as if it is Krishna's name, from Krishna. He's
called as "Krisht" in Indian languages, Krisht.
And I have told you before why he was
called as Yeshu or Jesu. So today we are
Yogeshwara means the Lord of the Yoga,
or the Power of Yoga. He is called because
Now as a yogi, He was born
out any ego. He had a special power called
This "Samhãra shakti" is experssed as the
Chakra (Sudarshan) in His hand. And
another is
hand. These two
the "Gada" (Mace) in His
powers were within
Him, and He acted according to the power
of Radha,
because She
is
the
one
to the two aspects of Shri who sustained the power of Shri Krishna.
Krishna, which were the manifestation of His The proof of that is this that when He was
in Gokul with Radha He did all His 'samhara'
work. And afterwards He just became a
chariot-driver for Arjuna. So for His disciple
going to see
divine birth.
In Rama's life they showed a man; man,
a Purushottama, the best of the father in
wordly affairs. y Arjuna, He became even a chariot-driver.
showed Him the highest fatherhood as in
Yogeshwara or in divine work. So the first
aspect of Shri Krishna we have to understand He knew who was a devil and who was not,
is the Yogeshwara and the second aspect of who is good who is bad, who is possessed
And in Shri Krishna's life they
The another great quality of Yogeshwara
was complete discretion power built-in. So
of him as the Virata.
who is not possessed, who is innocent who
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-9.txt 
 is not. This was built-in within Him, this receded by the Agnya chakra but have to be
power of coinplete discrimination.
sucked into the Vishuddhi,
The greatest quality of Yogeshwara is that
He is not at all involved into it, detached,
And He had a capacity more expressing
His witnesshood, as a 'Sākshi'. He had the
the capacity, I mean He was a Sakshi Himself absolutely. If He eats His food, He does not
I should say this way is easier to understand.
He was a Sākshi, He had the capacity of He sees, He does not see. If He hears, He does
witnessing the whole world as a play. At not hear. It has no effect on Him, no retention
the time of Rama, Rama was one who got
involved into his problems, to show as if he is complete: sixteen petals is complete moon,
is a full human being so that human beings sixteenth day of the moon is the Purnima.
should not say that he was God so how could
we accept God because 'he was God after
all' ? Now this capacity in Him to witness confidence should not be confused with ego.
has to be seen in every yogi. The element
He controls is ether. We call it "Akāsha" complete dharma,lit is complete love, complete
in Sanskrit. This ether now as you know,
we are using for our television, for our radio, it should be.
for every sort of a collective work. So we
have to be in charge of the ether element
as yogis. And that is the subtlest of all, what He was meaning is that all other things
in the sense that you permeate everything about which you are worried "You give up
with that, and is above all Like plastic also
permeates into everything into matter, into
everything up to the air. But it cannot enter
into ether. So the negativity connot enter into
ether. So when you enter into your ethereal
eat it. If He speaks, He does not speak. If
on Him, no action on Him. Whatever He is, He
That is how one has to be, complete in one-
self, complete confidence in oneself. But
But confidence is complete wisdom, it's
beauty, and is complete God. That's what
Now when He said that "'you give up all
your dharmas and surrender to Me" in Gita,
and become one with me, so I look after you".
Give up the responsibility to Shri Krishna, so
the complete integrated Divinity will start
expressing through you. Means if you say
that you have to be responsible, then He
says alright, go ahead, try! But if you say that
thoughtless awareness. So to achieve your "You are responsible, I'm just an institution
zone, you actually enter into the area which is
ethereal state, you have to expand your
or an instrument in Your hand", then you start
thoughtless awareness. And the sustenance manifesting it well. And that is how your
of that is done by Christ, by the Spirit. So
you can realize now as a yogi, your state of
mind should be ethereal.
Vishuddhi chakra gets opened up.
This is some part of the Yogeshwara I have
spoken to you. But as He is the brain within
us, He becomes the brain within us. We
And what should be the state of your
super-ego ? This is the ego part of it, that have to know all the qualities of a divine
you should be in ethereal state. And as a
super-ego you should see it as a play, you
should see the play of the negativity. Nega-
tivity will run away, but don't get involved
into it, don't play into their hands. Then the
negativity will separate from you.
brain are within. So whatever we do with
our brain like intrigue, the deception, all
Nega- which are bad things by your brain as they
call it, are done by Him for the divine purpose
without getting any blemish upon himself.
And the other side of it, so called positive,
So the ego and the super-ego both rise like politics like diplomacy, or like leadership.
all that is His own doing, like even the think-
he
from theVishuddhi chakra. They can be
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-10.txt 
 ing of the future and all that, He does plann- if you can do that, then there is no problem as
ing, thinking, all those things, administration.
As a play. everything is done as a play, you are more powerful and more tricky.
because He's the Master, as we call, a "sutra
dhära", the one who does the prologue in a
drama, the one who plays with the strings
with the pantomimes.
far as their effect on us is concerned, because
Because the Virata Shakti has now taken
that form, like the tree when it grows, it
grows upward. But when it is leaden with
fruit, it comes down. First it is attractive by
its flowers, by its timber, by the other parts
Now the other thing that we have to
understand Shri Krishna at this stage of of its body. And people try to destroy it for
Sahaja Yoga, that it is the Virāta Shakti that
is manifesting at this time and not the Shri
Krishna Shakti which was at His time. And humility, is very valuable
the power that is working here is no more
that of Radha or of Mary, but of Viratangana. Because you are
That's why the knowledge of sahaja-yogis so valuable that those people who wanted
is much wider than the knowledge of all the
saints of ages. But it is not deeper than
them. If you can deepen your knowledge, gain something out of these fruits. So today
this wider knowledge will have proper roots
within you. So the brain are the roots, here
are the roots of the whole tree of life. Actually yogi with them it is so precious, Say one
Kundalini comes up and waters the brain first. ordinary man gets his Realization, then he
so that the whole tree of life is drenched in
the Divine Bliss and Divine Knowledge.
it. But when the fruit appear, they want
to preserve it, and the tree bends down, with
So you are the fruits. That Viratangana
Shakti. you are the fruits.
to ruin or to destroy the Divine power from
this Earth will start thinking that they have to
the Virata Shakti has given you a great value,
because people see that by having one sahaja-
develops his value. In that his own value he
can be respected, loved, and he can be given
the highest if he's a proper sahaja-yogi.
So this Virata Shakti that we have to
work out, gives us the sense of collective
consciousness first. First we understand it
through our brain power.
brain power is to be guided by the Heart, is to result of that, all these different churches,
be watered; but in sanskrit is a very beautiful
word "sinchan", like dewdrops, spray, with
the Love of God. So the integration of this they will see their benefit in it. But you have
brain has to take with Heart and with your
liver, Then only the Virata-Shakti takes
another form. The weapons of killing be-
come the weapons of forgiveness. Every sort
of destructive power is used for the construc-
tion. As if it is tricked.
So you should understand today that
Virata Shakti is "we are going to worship that
Virata Shakti which has given fruits", As a
But the whole
fanaticism, and atheism and communism and
all that-ism, all these will neutralize because
to become that. That is the biggest thing one
has to know is to bend down towards the
Mother Earth. To be humble. Absolutely
the humility inside is really going to give you
the complete value of sahaja-yoga fruits.
Those sahaja-yogis who boast about
themselves are like the fruit which are getting
ruined only on the tree. The only fruits that
bend down are accepted as good and matured
fruits, and not those who assert that they are
the highest. But some of the negative people
should not by any chance take advantage of
Like now I told them a trick, how to trick
these gurus. The power that they have can
be tricked against them, as is said that their
teeth must be put into their necks, into their
throats. Instead of taking out their teeth
better put them back into their throats. And
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-11.txt 
 yourself. And leaving everything to the
power of gravity of your Mother to do every
work for you. And leaving all your small
little worries behind, you have to rise above
these distracting powers and achieve the
completion of this Virata-Shakti which ulti-
mately becomes a "Madhura Shakti". "Ma-
dhura"; there is no word in English language,
but it means a "sweet power". Like the
fruit becomes sweet. That's how you all have
to become very sweet. Krishna tried to make
sunshine or getting to better water supply or everything very sweet in the sense it was all
this and say that they are good because they
are bending down. It's not the logic. Some
of them pose they are humble; even a rotten
fruit bends down. But the mature fruit shows
its humility by its weight. That is the guru-
tattwa weight.
So from the Viratangana power you get
the power of maturity up to the fruit and then
we become blessed by guru principle. Those
who are still involved in getting to better
all these things, are not yet matured, because
a Madhura Shakti that was acting, all His play.
the fruit doesn't need anything anymore. It all His dancing, all His stories if you read, is
doesn't need anything from the Mother Earth, nothing but Madhura Shakti, towards Gopas
nor from the elements. But it surrenders, r
and Gopis, towards other sahaja-yogis.
bends, it bows to the Mother Earth.
So you have to keep your Mother pleased
So the sahaja-yogi who goes on asking by pleasing other Sahaja-yogis, and not other
questions to Mother, bringing personal prob- people. They are not important. So today
lems, stupid ideas, negativity, all those people
are still not yet the fruits.
we are going to shorten the Puja, and that's
why it took so much time upstairs, to shorten
But the matured people are those who it ! So the time lost is time gained for ever
surrender, who bow to the Mother Earth. So
the capacity to bow is the best judgement of
and ever.
May God bless you.
Bolo Shri Radha Krishna sakshat Shri Virata sakahat Shri Yogeshwar
sakshat Shri Adi Shakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi ki Jai
Nirmala Yoga
10
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-12.txt 
 Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
TALK BEFORE PUJA
Vienna, Sept. 4, 1983
Vishuddhi Chakra
Before going to America, I wanted to could be absolutely stiff. Supposing you have
speak more about the Vishuddhi chakra and
about Shri Krishna's aspect within us.
first Puja in Geneva, I spoke quite a lot about
it, but there is no end to it, of course, because
it is the centre of Virata. But one has to
realize that the message of Shri Krishna was
to surrender. Now the surrendering that
we think in the gross way is like an enemy weapons, good weapons, effective good
surrenders to another enemy. S
a very strong weapon but you can't lift it, so
what is the use of having a weapon like that?
See, this Mr. Ego tries to make the weapon
heavy and stiff like jammed machine-guns.
Now that is what He has said that "surrender
In the
your ego to Me", so that when you say a
mantra or utter words, they are effective as
word "surrender" is spoken, we build up our
barriers by thinking that we have to surrender
something to the other part. But when Snri will understand how to address Me and to
Krishna was talking about surrender, He was judge yourself. For example shaking your
saying that "surrender your enemies to me so
that I will get rid of them".
Now the worst enemy that we have is our have a habit "yes" if it is said, they'll go on
ego. And with ego starts all kinds of other like this for ten times. There is no need.
problems, because it is the biggest barrier for Actually, you should move only once, with
our growth. And the ego starts as you know humility, the head "yes Mother" is all right.
from the Vishuddhi chakra, and can be sucked You must move your neck with respect and
into Vishuddhi chakra.
Now when we talk, let us see how I see
your ego expre Issed in your talk, so that you
necks too much is a sign of a Mr. Ego shaking
head for nothing at all. Like many people
with understanding that Shri Krishna is sitting
Now let us see how is Vishuddhi chakra there. With dignity. But we forget it all the
made. All the vowels that we use come
from Vishudhi chakra. And like in Deva-
nagri language it is a...ang-äha. So as you
know you cannot compile a word without a
vowel, it is so important. A consonant is
weak, without any strength, without the talk to Me, like saying "no Mother". It is
vowel. So the strength of a person comes very common, if I say anything, the first
through the Vishuddhi chakra in his speach. reaction of people could be "no Mother".
But it can be absolutely stiff also, the strength After all you see there is a course going on,
time and we start using it to assert ourselves
when we talk to someone. And we shake it
too much or we push it in such a way that
another person is sort-of dominated by it.
Now there is another method when you
* (a), आ (a), इ (i) ई (ee), उ (u), ऊ ( 60 ), ए (e), ऐ (ai), ओो (o), ओ (ow), अं (ang), जः (aha)
11
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-13.txt 
 even when I'm speaking it is a mantra, when drop has now become an ocean. And so your
I'm not speaking, is a mantra flowing. And sound has got the power of the ocean.
suddenly you come out with your "no
Mother", you create a ripple back in the der, is the pride, or vanity. Now the vanity
whole thing. can be of many types which are artificial things
listen to Me what I'm saying, the saying itself absolutely. Before God, what is your property?
Now the second thing you have to surren-
Now at that time, if you just
don't have to do What is your money? What is your position?
will work it out. you
anything.
What is your family ? What is your education?
Now another way is the style in which You see, everything has no value in the pre-
you talk to Me, also I can see the right sence of God. The possessions that one value
Vishuddhi acting. It is when we talk normally so much have no value. So one has to realize
to each other, if we have to say "yes", we'll that if we are the possessions of God, we
say "m-m". That is very common here "a-a". should be proud of one thing only. that His
this style, they say "hum-um" and then on vibrations flow through us. That is: He is
top of that to say "mm-mm" as if you see it proud of us.
clearly. It is : you are not receiving anything
in it, but you are trying to sort of put it to an Ganesha, or anything, it gets very much valued
Like supposing you give Me a fruit or a
equal pressure on the flow.
The humility is the best way of conquering are there. Like this Ganesha now for example,
this ego of Vishuddhi. And when talking to
others, try to develop sweet methods, sweet is concerned, but when made into an art-piece
ways unhurting other people. And you will be
surprised that Vishuddhi will immediately start value increases with art, but in the realm of
behaving in such a sweet manner, because
the bhoots don't like sweetness, they are
quarrelsome, they are harsh, they are always will be a thousand time more than what it is
trying to say something to hurt.
because I have touched it and the vibrations
if you see the value is zero as far as the metal
has some much more value. In this world, the
God, or in the spiritual world or Divine world,
the value of a Ganesha, the same Ganesha
just now as just an art piece. So that is now
So this Vishuddhi on the right hand side is what is given to you, a very high value. So
to be controlled by surrendering as it is said. the pride and the vanity of artificiality, artificial
Actually you surrender your ego to begin with. things, is all man-made, mythical, and should
And this ego when you surrender, it has to be be surrendered because it is a myth.
done from you heart, it should not be a lip-
service. From your heart : "I don't want this
ego any more. I want Reality." "Let the
Reality be seen by me, felt by me, enjoyed by you surrender your jealousies at the Lotus
me." And once you start doing it from your
heart, you will be amazed that your voice will actually. The stupid jealousies that you have
become sweet. Apart from that, it will have
the Divine Power flowing through it. That is
what we say that you have now "wak shakti", thing is that the Sahaja Yogis feel jealous of
means the power of speach.
Then the human mind has another capacity
to be jealous, to be jealous of others. This
also comes from unwise understanding. If
Feet of God, I mean, you are doing all rubbish
are as you know, of no value, neither in this
world, nor in that world. The most surprising
each other ! And I still can't understand how
So when you surrender ego, what you do can it be ? If you are standing in the sunshine,
actually is to say that "I'm not doing anything, then you all are jealous of your shadowsI
it is You who do everything". So that a little Somebody's shadows are big, somebody's
12
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-14.txt 
 shadows are small, so you are jealous of each also must be surrendered. And this could be
other ? Sometimes I give a present to one very dangerous in Sahaja Yoga also. This is
person, can't give to others, then they get my carpet, this is my camera, this is my tape-
jealous ! If I give more time to somebody, recorder. Once you start understanding what
then others are jealous !only give more
time sometimes to people who really are the Truth.
getting lost !
is mine is not the Truth, nothing is mine, that's
Also seme people I know of, they say that
So one has to understand that all our ideas "my job, or my business, or my enterprise
about jealousies are stupid. And I can't under- We had the other day one gentieman in
stand those who are not realized, they are Geneva who was very troublesome because
jealous of Sahaja Yogis, and they try to make he is so conscious of all these things.
them fall 1 Instead of
being jealous,
So the greed. Also the lust of other
women and indulging into lust too much.
Giving too much importance to the agencies
of lust. That creates great problems, not only
for Sahaja-Yogis, but on the whole for Sahaja-
they should become like Sahaja Yogis !
In Sahaja Yoga also l've seen some very
funny things
Like a
very angry that "Mother You sport so Yoga also, It is expressed in both types of
much time with a particular person, and I'm
very jealous. And You said I have to be like world, as well as people who are over-
the people about whom I'm jealous solwould
like to know how to be like the person who
was with you for such a time ?" So I said
"That fellow is really a lunatic ! You want to
become a lunatic ? Have you no discretion ?"
A Sahaja Yogi must have discretion if his
Vishuddhi is alright. You should understand
that what I'm saying is to be used discreetly, that must be developed, that keeps you a very
not blindly. So you can understand, without religious person, dharmic person. And the
discretion, whatever I say, how funnily you innocence to know how far to go with men
can use it so detrimental to your growth.
happening,
an incidence.
me and was
came to
person
people; those who are living in a very free
suppressed. 1 know of people, those, who are
supposed to be brought up in very religious
so called' atmosphere, when exposed to
women, suddenly get too much attracted
towards them.
See, it is that maturity of your innocence
and women. That's the wisdom of innocence.
Children, if you see, they know exactly, if
there is a lady if there is a man, how to
behave. So the innocence is not stupidity.
It is a complete wisdom, and very maturesome
in its full form. It just knows how to be with
So another offshoot of ego is called as
"hot temper". Of course it is said to be used
against people who try to insult your Mother,
you have to do that. That must be used for
people who go against the Holy Ghost as
Christ has said. In the same way you should people without indulging into anyone of these
not tolerate any non-sense against Me from enemies. Each enemy is sufficient to finish
anyone whatsoever, not even this much. But
you can tolerate other Sahaja Yogis in other So best way to develop that absolute nature
matters.
not only one person, but billions and billions.
of your Vishuddhi Chakra is to witness the
whole thing with a detached mind. And to
Another enemy we have is gieed. I mean
material greed and also human greed, like that She cleanses all these enemies, in such
possessing your wife, possessing your children, a way that when you are faced with them,
possessing this, possessing Mataji also. This you are a powerful person.
develop love for your Mother in your heart, so
Nirmala Yoga
13
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-15.txt 
 Mentally, I think that most of the Sahaja- your mother, then what you owe to your
Yogis understand that obedience to the Divi- husband, like that, you see, that relationship
nity is the only way-mentally, rationally. in which you owe to them. But when He
Now even if you understand something says" surrender all these dharmas", He is
mentally, it's not your innate nature. So what meaning to say "you should only know
I told you yesterday, when you accept some- what you owe to Me" meaning the Divinity.
thing mentally and you cannot do it, you feel Now Shri Krishna is not there. it's Me who is
guilty about it. Then you become your own Shri Krishna, so you must know what you
guru and punish yourself, and try to make owe to Me. I only changed My language.
this as your innate nature. It's a state, it He used to take out His finger and to say that
clicks. Once it clicks you can see immediately. "give up everything and surrender everything
I know who is surrendered.
to Me". 1 don't do that way, I give a big
lecture and bring you to a point.
So Shri Krishna has said that: "Sarva
dharmanam.". He has said that "Give up
all your dharmas and surrender them to from the right goal that you have to achieve
Me, surrender to my dharma only". So the by surrendering. And it is going to work out
dharmas we have in our country as we say is very well with you people here, I'm sure, and
a "pitra dharma", what you owe to your one day l'll find the whole Germans surrender
father, "mātru dharma" what you owe to
So, that should not divert your attention
at the Lotus Feet of the Divine.
INNOC ENCE IS
The rich sweet smell of Our Mother Earth,
Supporting with great strength the whole of nature's birth,
The living plains of Our blessed red land,
Extending a loving and guiding hand.
A drop of dew, sparkling on a blade of grass,
A gentle breeze that will never pass,
The soft sun rays of the early morn,
A little spring flower who is newly born.
The joyful laughter of all the children,
Dancing and playing with such glee,
Creating so simply this colourful fun,
With Shri Ganesha's pure innocent quality.
Jai Mataji !!
Australian Sahaja
Nirmala Yoga
14
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-16.txt 
 DHULIA
14.1.1983
SHRI SARASWATI PUJA
With love all kinds of creative action takes always to disappear in the thin air as
place. You see how Raulbai has love for me
and in this place you all also got ew idea
of creating a beautiful thing. And as love will great love of God we talk of, we know that
increase your creativity will develop. So the
basis of all creativity of Saraswati is love.
If there is no love there is no creativity. It
is even in the deeper sense, you see; people
who have created all the scientific things are
also out of love to the masses, not for them- works of the world have vibrations. Only
טאא
Now this love of, that we talk of, the
it for definite through vibrations. People
do not have vibrations, but still they can
feel the vibrations in a very unconscious
way. All the great paintings of the world
vibrations. All the great
t creative
selves. Nobody has produced any thing for
themselves. If they make something for them-
selves it has to become for universal use,
otherwise it has no meaning. Even if you
say atom bomb and all these things are
created from science, they are also very
protective. If they had not created, those
people would not have taken out their minds
from war. Now, nobody can think of having
a big war. Of course, they are having cold that is sustaining, all that is nurturing, all that
wars, but that also will gradually stop, when
they will be fed up.
on right hand side, of Saraswati, basically but within
has to end up in love. Starts with love and
ends up in love. Whichever does not end
up in love, coils up and finishes off. It just love of God, otherwise it has no meaning.
disappears: So you can
matter which is not used for love, just finishes taken to other methods of appealing to people
off. The basis has to be love. Otherwise by using cheap things and very vulgar things,
all such matter that we create which has just to make people think that this is art.
angularity, which is not fitting into the mass
media which is not appealing to the masses; the impact of the time as I told you, it cannot.
of course, it takes time, you have seen that
it takes time-but it does have that tendency have to disappear and already you can see
those who have vibrations have been sustained
by time otherwise all other things are des-
troyed. There must have been monuments
and horrible statues and horrible things that
have been created long time back. But they
are all destroyed by Nature as they could not
stand the impact of the KALA (T)-that
is the destructive power of time, So, all
is enobling comes from this sense of love,
which is within us very much developed,
others also who are not yet
So all the activity
realised. Ultimately the whole world has to
realise that one has to go to that ultimate
Now you have seen in arts people have
that
even
see
It cannot sustain
But this will all disappear.
Because the time will kill it. All these things
15
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-17.txt 
 the result, how things are changing every- through Surya is the light 'Vivek' (frà),-is
where, even in the West.
need to be so much disappointed with the Aanya level is occupied by lord Jesus Christ
West and to say that the Western world is a
waste-land. it is going to be alright and
it has to be done, Specially it has done lot
of Puja of Saraswati. I should say in the
West. Much more than they have done in
India because they have gone to learn it and
they have tried to find out so many things. have all gone the against it. Those who are
But only thing they forgot that it is a Goddess,
God is the Giver. Everything comes from
the Goddess. That is what they forgot. worshippers of the Surya, of the Saraswati
And that is why all the problems have been
created. If there is no Spirit in your learning
if there is no source of the Goddess in your
learning, then it is absolutely useless. If
they had realised that there is the Spirit that
is working it out, they would not have gone
that far. And that is what I was warning the
Indians, althrough, that you are now taking
to industrial revolution in a way and to avoid
all the complications of industrial revolution,
you must try to know the Spirit. If you
donot know the Spirit you will have the same
problems as these people have.
they are also human beings, you are also
human beings. You will also go the same
way. At random you will run and there will
be problems, the same problems as the
Western people have.
So there is no
the light within. And if Surya Chakra at the
then it is even mare essential that the purity of
life, what you call 'Niti" (ffa), is the morality
of life. Now morality itself has become very
much sort of a argument in the West. People
don't have any sense of absolute morality.
On vibrations of course you know. But they
worshippers of Lord Jesus, those who are the
have all gone against, against the powers,
of Surya, just disobeying it. Because you
cannot be a Surya if you don't have a proper
sense of morality and holiness. The Surya
itself brings light to see everything clearly.
So many qualities Surya has got. It dries
up everything that is wet, dirty. filthy. It
dries up all those places which create par-
asites. But so many parasities are created
in the West. Not only parasites, but there
are horrible cults and horrible things which
have come into that: those countries which
are supposed to be full of light, and in that
darkness they exist. Darkness about the
Spirit, darkness about their own knowledge
and darkness about love. These three things
have taken over in the places where you are
supposed to love light. Light does not
mean, light does not mean what you see
Now Saraswati's blessings are so many with your gross eyes. Light means from
Because
that one cannot describe in such a short time.
within-the light of love. That one should
And the Surya (Sun) has given us so many understand- Light of love. And it is so
powers that it is impossible to tell them soothing it is so sweet, it is so beautiful, it is
so enamouring, it is so abounding that unless
and until you can feel that light within
go against Saraswati, while doing the you-that light which is of pure love-
worship of Saraswati, it is to ba seen very of purity, pure relationship, pure understand-
clearly within ourselves. For example the ing. If you can develop that kind of a light
Western people are very fond of Surya within yourself, then the whole thing will
because they have no Surya, But they go too be cleansed. Wash me and I shall be whiter
far with it, as you know, and create comli- than snow. This is what happens to you
cations within themselves of Surya. But when you are completely cleansed. The
the main thing that one has to achieve purest form of Nature is within us. The
even in one lecture, even in ten lectures.
But how we go against Surya and how we
Nirmala Yoga
16
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-18.txt 
 Our others, becomes Hitler. When it moves to
Chakras are made out of that 'purest from of right side, it becomes supraconscious, It
starts seeing things which are absurd, which
are foolish, which are stupid. When it moves
same Saraswati power. You are going against to left side them it starts, talking-I mean,
Saraswati itself. Saraswati cleanses all that seeing things-yourself as a big man, as a big
Christ or as a big Devi or something like Adi
Gurus and '1 am a very great personality, that
activity goes against pure intelligence. And is left sided. When it moves backwards, that
is the dangerous one. Then people become
Gurus which are ruining other psople. When
Our
purest form of Nature is within
US.
Nature. We are the only people who are
spoiling it by aur mental thinking. Against the
is impure in nature, while with our brain acti-
vity we are spoiling all that. All our briain
that is what one has to understand-that this
pure intelligence, is not to be soiled by our
thinking. Our thinking can make us so bump- their ego moves backwards then they become
tious, so ego-oriented, so impure, that we can
really eat the poison and say 'what is wrong
in it? Just the opposite of Saraswati. If Saras-
wati is within us, She gives us Subuddhi',
wisdom. Arnd that is why. to worship
Saraswati, to worship Surya, we must have
that clear vision as to what we have to be.
What we are doing, What filth we are living
in. What our mind is getting into. After all
we are here for emancipation and not for just talking about it, then it encircles, thickens the
for pampering our ego and living with our
filth that is with us. So this light has come
within us and we should try to rise above
Gurus, they themselves have lots of defects in
themselves and they try to pull peaple into
those horrible stuff which is described as
absolute NARAKA ( T ). NARAKA is the
movement of ego on all the sides.
Now when people try to use their light
Vishuddhi, that is, to talk about themselves, is
the worst of all. Whatever type of ego you
may have, if you start boasting about it and
walls of ego so much, that it is impossible to
penetrate into that. because such a person is
completely satisfied with himself and he
believes that he is so. And once he starts
Apart from that. you believing into a non-sense like that, its an
mental filth which is being
our
own
created around us.
have to go higher and understand that
there is, within us, a thing called ego.
And this ego is false, absolutely false. You
do not do anything. Actually when you turn
your eyes here and there, when your attention what I am, but how many times do I say 'l am
is here and there it is nothing but your ego
that is trying to overpower you.
ego is a absolute falsehood because there is say so ? At the most if you say something, 1
only one ego and that is the God Almighty, say yes', But I don't say that.
Mahata-ahankāra. There is no really any ego loudly, I don't know what may happen. The
that exists, it is myth. It is a very big myth, whole thing, might be blasted So, ona has
because if you start thinking you are doing to understand that Mahatahankara is the one
everything-you are doing this, you are doing that acts, that works, that creates. Sometimes
that-which you are not doing: then this non-
sensical ego comes in and you start working run away. Just once I shout. Yesterday,
it out, it can project in every direction. you saw all the bhoots that were talking, they
When it projects forward, it overpowers all ran away. Yesterday this I talked to you.
others, it tries to dominate others, tries to kill So you should understand that now you are a
impossibility then-imposibility to penetrate.
So when you boast about these things or
you talk big, be careful, you see. You know
that. Even if I say once, you get tremendous
But actually vibrations for you. But how many times do I
IF I say it
I shout at you. Immediately all the bhoots
Nirmala Yoga
17
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-19.txt 
 realised soul, you can aiso do the same. Use people have this.' That is the way one
your right Vishuddhi to shout at yourself, "Now should do it.
will you please stop boasting, will you stop power your ego, you must allow it to spread
talking all this nonsense, will you stop show- into every body else, That is how, you will
ing off I" Then it will stop.
it. Because if you have to over
make it perfectly all right. Let it spread. We
all SAHAJA YOGIS WE ALL'. But that pride
Now this thickening takes place by people is not there. I've seen that pride is not there.
who really are active. They want to do some-
thing about it, not that they are not active.
They want to do.
way, is to act talkative. They don't under-
stand that there are inner ways by which you
control it much more. Because they don't
want to take to that, they take to this talking. people. He will see that person is low, that
And once they take to talking and they talk
about it, the whole power goes out.
Still it is very individualistic. If you start
thinking, "we' SAHAJA YOGIS', then what
happens, that you become 'one' personality.
'one' organisation.
But they know only one
But the person will look down upon other
person is higher, that person is there. But he
But if will not think We' the Sahaj Yogis, how
beautiful we are. We' the body of Sahaja
Yoga, how beautiful we are. So always
about your experiences, alright, but if you think in the words of WE', so your ego will
become much less much less, much less.
And the same ego which looks so funny and
absurd will fall tommorrow to the EKADASHA
they do not talk about it and keep it within
themselves, it is alright. You can tell me
start telling others, and talking about it too
much, then the power that you have got will
be all disappearing gradually. And you will
just come down to absolutely lowest level.
So one should not too much talk that I have
this power, 1 have this power or I think this
or I do this, which is a very wrong thing I
warn you, DO NOT TRY TO SHOW OFF.
Yes, you can talk about my powers. It is all
right. But don't try to talk about your powers.
When it comes, of course, you talk to some-
body who is a negative person or to tell
somebody, then you should say that WE, NOT
1. We' have, 'some of us' have felt this power
within us. We' have seen people. It may be
you only, but you need not say, T have.
Today, individual ego will merge into
ekādasha. But we all must remember to say
'WE' all time. This is what is today's day is
great day for us to change, because the sun
has changed its move, now. Sun is coming
this side. So let us welcome the Sun, coming
to the North now, this vway. And for Austra
lians to say that though the sun has gone, let
us establish the Sun, the domain of Sun,
within ourselves: Because Sun never disap-
pears from our inside. So that is how we
have to take a mode by which we should
What you've to say WE'. Then you become the think of 'one' personality, 'all of us together,
all of us together.' And anybody who tries
to be something separate or different, he will
Mahata-ahankara. When you say 'We' here
some of us' we do'. Like in Gregoire's book I
made it, I saw to it that he should not have drop out. I will drop him out. Whatever it
may be, it will drop out. So you judge your-
"we do', 'we', means the whole collective self, anybody who tries to be singled out or
being, the whole collective organism, living anything. Everybody must do whatever they
like, to nurture the whole, to help the vwhole,
to help the whole, to emancipate the whole.
But not to, in anyway, put anyone down
always. Because this is not the way the
many l's but he should have We'. "We think,
organism of SAHAJAYOGIS. So if you say,
"yes. some of us have got', that means, you
put yourself down, but put all others above
you. Say Yes, some of us have, I know some
Nirmala Yoga
18
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-20.txt 
 dust particle and today just wnile talking to
collectivity. And the one who has developed you, remembered that I wanted to be that,
this permeating spirit, is a real Sahaja Yogi. and that is what this place is. And Raulbai is
like that. She is a very simple woman, very
think of yourself, I have nothing to say. But simple woman and she lives like a very
simple person. She has a sense of permea-
tion. And now there are so many Sahaja
not. Like your Mother is. Whether I meet you Yogis, yesterday who came; and I am sure
that they will take up Sahaja Yoga very well.
ting through all of you, by little-little things There are lots of Sahaja Yogis from Dhulia
now. And I am sure there are going to be
permeate into each other and see the beauty more people. I hope you have met all of
them. Make friends with all of them. Try to
is the biggest thing. That's the biggest thing know them who they are. They may not
know English. You get somebody to trans-
know makes you like a nutshell and it just late. Talk to them and be nice to them.
cannot have a rapport with that beauty of friendly with them. I wanted you to meet
them for permeation. You should know who
are the people here, who are in Nasik.
Because somehow we never meet the Sahaja
Sahaja Yoga is. Sahaja Yoga only works in
Who has not, is not ! Whatever you may
this permeating personality which moves
from places to places, whether you talk ar
or not, makes no difference, but I am permea-
also I am there with you.
So like that, try to
in you.
Enjoy yourself the best because that
that is to be achieved.
Because this ego you
Be
permeation and just see how the notes move
into each other.
It will be a great idea today, it is great
thing today that we are having puja at Dhulia,
Like the Dhulia means the dust. Dust. And
Yogis, you see, who are in that particular
place. And when we go back we have only
one or two addresses. It is not a good idea.
Try to see how many people there are. Ask
one day 1 had written in childhood, a poem,
I remember. Very interesting poem it was-I
don't know where it is now-but which questions about them. And all that.
said that 1 want to be smaller like a dust
This permeation is only possible when your
ego starts permeating all around. And this is
the way to overcome the problems of the right
side and that is how to worship Saraswati.
Because Saraswati has a Veena (T) in Her
hand and that Veena is the primordial instru-
ment which She plays like music, and music
is nourishing, that is enlightening. Like that, penetrates into the heart. You don't know how
it goes into you and how it works out. That
is how a person who is Sahaja yogis should
permeate-like music. There are so many
long time back, 'that I should be a dust qualities as I told you which cannot be descri-
particle. So that I will permeate into people, bed in one lecture. But one of the greatest
which is a very big thing-to become a dust quality of Her's is that She ends up into
particle of that kind. To just whatever you subtler things like the Mother Earth will end up
touch, you see, that becomes enliving, what- into fragrance. Music will end up into melody
like that whatever She creates ends up into
a great thing to be like that. And that was something greater. Matter, whatever She
my desire, and it will be achieved. At that produces ends up into aesthetics. If matter
does not have aesthetics then it is gross, like
particle which moves with the wind. It goes
everywhere. Can go, sit on the head of a
king, or can go and full at the feet of some-
one. And it can go and sit on a little flower,
and it can go and sit everywhere. But I want
to be a particle of dust. That is fragrant, that
I had written a very beautiful poem, I was
about seven years of age, I remember-To be
a dust particle,' I remember that very clearly,
ever you just feel, that is fragrance. It is such
young age, I had this idea of becoming a
Nirmala Yoga
19
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-21.txt 
 that everything. Now you will say what is
water. Water becomes the river Ganges! becomes that subtler thing. Of course, the
These are the subtler things. So the matter
gets into subtler thing because it has to per-
meate, it has to permeate. So everything acts on matter it becomes that and that is how
whatever it is. And the best of all is the air.
That air becomes the vibrations!
out from this matter, from these five elements,
left and right side both work it out.
the love has to work on this and when love
Because
one has to look at your own life, to make it a
beautiful combination of love and matter.
So you can see how whatever has come
May God bless you.
MAHA SAHASRARA DAY
I located the place where this great event
had taken place by the help of vibrations and
then sat there in meditation. It is very difficult
We draw your attention to the article with
the above heading in NIRMALA YOGA
(May-June 1983) Vol. 15, page 16. It is to be
noted that on 5th, May, 1970. Shri Mataji to describe the intense peace of the Grace
Nirmala Devi opened the Sahasrara of
VIRATA at NARGOL and not at Bordi as
mentioned in the above mentioned article.
which I enjoyed in the meditation It was
very deep and blissful.
Thereafter, I returned back to the house in
whose compound I had parked my motor-
NARGOL is a small village near the sea-
shore and is about 35 Km. by State highway cycle, As I was walking with my hands out-
from Bordi. By railway one has to get down stretched enjoying the vibrations, people of
at UMARGAON Rly. station on Central
Railway and then to reach NARGOL by road.
the house enquired whether I was searching
something. I told them "About thirteen years
visited Bordi in back our Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi had come
On 25th, Sept. 1983. 1
connection with the arrangements of the there and meditated near the seashore.
International Shivir for 600 Sahaja brothers wanted to find out the exact place where She
and sisters who would be attending it during had meditated." They at once remembered
10th, to 15th, Feb., 1984. After finishing my
work at Bordi at about IP.M, in the afternoon some other local people had attended Her
I journeyed to NARGOL on a motor-cycle. programme.
had taken guidance from Mr. B.G. Pradhan, SWAMINI MOKSHA PRADAYANI MATAJI
who was present there on 5th, May, 1970, SHRI NIRMALA DEVI KI JAI,
and is one of the lirst twelve who got their
realization there.
that Shri Matoji had been there and they with
BOLO
SHRI
SAHASRARA
-R.N. PEREKAR (BOMBAY)
Nirmala Yoga
20
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Her Holiness
Shri Mataji's Advice
Be sure that you are telling the Truth and
One should know that it is very important
for every disciple to worship his Guru. But nothing else and that you have felt the Truth
the Guru has to be real Guru, not a one who in full ways. Those who have not felt the
is just exploiting the disciples and who is not
authorised by God. A PUJA is arranged, They have no authority. They have to receive
because you have been initiated into the vibrations. They have to fully imbibe within
Statutes of the LORD. You have been told
what are the DHARMAS of a human being. This is very important task Sahaja Yogis have
For that actually you do not need a Guru. to do in these modern times-i.e. to teil aloud
You can read a book and know what are the that they have found the Truth.
Statutes of the LORD. But Guru has to see
that you practice them. These Statutes are to friends, relations and everyone and tell them,
be practiced, to be brought into your own life: "This is the Truth now. That you have entered
which is a difficult thing and without a Guru, in the kingdom of God. That you have been
a correcting force, it is very difficult to follow blessed by the Grace of God. That you are
these Statutes of the Lord because there is a
very big gap between human awareness and power which is prevailing everywhere,
Divine awareness and that gap can only be
filled by a Guru, who himself is complete.
vibrations should not talk of Sahaja Yoga.
them and then they can say, "Yes, we felt."
You can write books, you can talk to your
realized souls, that you have felt the Divine
With the confidence, with that complete
understanding.coming out of your heart people
can make out, this is absolute truth and then
all kinds of falsehood must be denounced.
Doesn't matter if somebody feels bad because
by telling that you are saving them and not
Secondly, anybody who is a real seeker, harming them. But must be told in a correct
The first is, 'you do not do harm to any-
one". The first principie is that we are not to
harm anyone.
he may be wrong. He might have gone to way, not in frivolous way.
wrong Gurus, he might have done wrong
things. But have feelings for them because
Tell them, "this is wrong, it is wrong, you
donot know. We have done the same thing".
you have been going on wrong path yourself, This is how you are going to express your
sometimes.
principle. of Mastery or you can say ""GURU
The second Statute is that you have to TATTWA". You have to be truthful. First and
stand on your own legs and know that you are foremost thing is that, you should know the
here one with the Truth, the testimony of truth.
That you have seen the Truth. You know should announce it.
what Truth is and you cannot compromise
with falsehood.
truth and stand the testimony and that you
Third thing for Guru a Sahaja Yogi has to
do is to develop DETACHMENT.
Based on Mother's Address on Guru Purnima Day 29 July 1980 (See NIRMALA YOGA Vol. 5, Sept-Oct '81)
Nirmala Yoga
21
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-23.txt 
 Actually a person who is Detached is the
most beautiful person, is the extremely loving
The DETACHMENT is that you are your
father, you are your mother. You are every
thing. Only your Spirit is Everything to you,
only your Spirit you have to enjoy, then the
Detachment comes from them, then you really death of love is attachment.
do good to them because, by detaching you
see the complete vision about them and about your love, circulation of your love.
what is to be done,
person, is love.
Attachment means Death of love, complete
Detachment gives you the movement of
Inno-
Detachment is purity, is innocence.
One has to understand that there should be cence is such a light, light that really blinds
only one craze i.e. to be Settled, 'absolutely you to all that is filthy. That is what is inno-
cence which one may develop only through
Detachment. Detachment is of the attention.
You get yourself attached to your Spirit Do not allow your attention to get involved
in to something, even rituals of anything.
settled in your Spirit.
and detachment starts working.
INNOCENCE
Deep in our heart we feel the longing for a Mother we cannot thank you but with the
most loving and most powerful state of being. strong wish to establish the kingdom of God
Innocence is that state, it is power itself. And,
at the same time, when innocence is lost, we
are faced with the eruption of the worst dest-
ructive forces within us. In the West, alas, inno-
cence is absolutely lost. Eyes are turned here
and there towards all sorts of nonsense. The
attention is sucked by funny things which are spontaneity. Spontaneity is wisdom. When
thrown at us by the medias, the television, this wisdom grows within us the Spirit shines
the magazines etc it is as if people would
now relish dirt. filth, violence and crime !
When we hear the way non Sahaja yogis
sometimes talk we could really become very
angry, not so much with the persons them-
selves but with this special kind of negativity innocence is a beautiful and holy thing I was
which is trying to destroy our race and to
bring us down to a much lower level than my environment. So, one of the blessings I
animals.
on this earth, to bring back the lost paradise."
Fighting, of course, is also a matter of
being clever. As our Mother very clearly tells:
"If you can fight negativity fight it: otherwise
run away." Innocence gives us the finest
sense of tactics and strategy. Innocence is
more and more.
Before I came to Sahaja Yoga I was all the
time with friends who had no sense of inno-
cence at all. Although 1 was feeling that
unable to defend this subtle feeling against
got out of Sahaja Yoga is the full understand-
ing of innocence and the possibility to spread
this understanding to friends and students I
This anger that we, Sahaja yogis, some-
times feel, is a very good thing, it is the meet everyday in the University. Therefore
wrath of Shri Ganesha within us. While joy in I pray to our Holy Mother that we all should
Sahaja yoga is the incentive to grow, wrath is have growing opportunities to raise Kunda-
the incentive to fight, And as we are the
children of the Devi we know that we will win celebrating Innocence.
linis. Awakening Kundalini is awakening and
every single fight; realizing this we feel tre-
mendous confidence and security within our
hearts. We are the children of the Devi. "O
JAI SHRI NIRMALA GANESHA !
-Engelbert, Vienna
Nirmala Yoga
22
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-24.txt 
 Translation of Shri Mataji's Hindi Lecture
at Delhi on 18th Aug. 1979*
The sudden arrival is for various reasons.
away in the sky and not in water. Similarly
In Sahaja Yoga sudden arrival has a special Atma is as much as It is seen, It is beyond all
significance. We must have seen many inci- that and not limited by it. But, for any reflec-
dents in our lives, which have suddenly tion to be clearly visible the mirror which
is the cause of that reflection must be
clean. If the mirror is not clean, or instead of
mirror a stone is there, the sun's reflection
In the same way, that
man looks disturbed who has not yet become
everything through reasoning. This is correct clean like mirror, so that he can see the Para-
on his part because his awareness has not yet matma's reflection within himself. Although
awakened, When his awareness is limited the sun is seen taking different shapes on the
ripples of flowing water, he is steady at his
thing through his intellect it is difficult for him place and it is only his reflection that changes
its shape. Similarly, the reflection of Atma
appears to be absent or it just shines for a
moment and disappears, in the person who is
happened. They do not mean anything to us.
If we try on intellectual level, we cannot
understand why a particular incident has taken
place in our life. It has been the way of will not be seen in it.
human being, that he wants to understand
and when he is searching the proof of every-
to adopt some other means which are outside
the scope of reasoning.
You have heard a lot about Paramatma,
Atma, Adi-shakti etc. You have also read full of sin and wickedness or whose heart is
about them in books. Every now and then,
loaded with false ambitions and desires. It
thus entails that all these-body, mind, intellect.
ego etc. that we know, should be converted
man talks about Atma and Paramatma.
There
have been many incarnations, who have told
that you should first reatise your Atma because
It should be transformed into
into a mirror.
a mirror.
man cannot reach Paramatma, without know-
ing his Atma. As
colours without eyes in the same way, you arrangement within us. Many incarnations
cannot attain Paramatma unless you meet
your Atma. You cannot intellectually under-
stand Paramatma. It is only through Atma present stage. When we are moving about as
that you can understand Paramatma. So far, alert human beings. We are alert but not
all saints have said "be alert in the observance enlightened. A blind man is very alert but
of your Dharma, search your Atma, understand
the Atma that is residing in you.
cannot identify
How will it happen ? God has made that
you
have worked for evolving us from ameoba to
human being and have brought us into our
one who has sight sees everything without
being bothered about it. A blind man can
What is Atma ? What work is It doing perceive small small things. He knows small
details of every place. One who is having the
sight looks at only those things which are worth
residing within us and how is It related to
Paramatma ? It is said that Atma is the reflec-
tion of Paramatma in our heart. This reflection seeing and which he wants to know about.
is like that of the sun in water. Although
Kundalini Shakti that is residing in us has
reflection of the sun is seen in water, he is been placed in us by Paramatma and has
*In August 1979 Shri Mataji came to Indi a at a very short notice.
Nirmala Yoga
23
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-25.txt 
 been created by His desire. Kundalini shakti yourself. You will have some pain or some
Greates our mirror. develops it and cleans it. such similar feeling.
Slowly She makes it capable of receiving in will understand that you have problem there;
itself the reflection of Atma, In Sahaja Yoga and you will clear it. But if you are not
you know that awakening of Kundalini is very sensitive and do not feel the problem, you
easy and spontaneous. But Sahaja Yogis may go mad and may land in lunatic assylum
must know that they have come to Sahaja without even knowing that your such and
Yoga primarily to clean their mirror, to wash such Chakra was caught, and such filth
their sins and past deeds, to become purified of entered inside you. Similarly you never know
all the dirt that has been accumulated within even if you contact some disease, because
from time immemorial. They have not come
collect sins and dirt, but to become pure. you do not understand whether you are sitting
In the light you
you are sitting in the dark. In the darkness
to
Many Sahaja Yogis are aware that Kundalini on a snake or some bomb has fallen on you.
is that current which passes through their When the light shines inside you, you realise
Chakras and awakens their Chakras. When which calamity you are facing. So the first
the light comes on your Chakras you can glimpse of knowledge is regarding yourself.
know their condition even on your finger tips. You know your problems.
This is the knowledge. This alone is to be
known. So far the knowledge that you have
had was not enlightened. There was no light Immediately thereafter man sees his own
in it. Now because of the light, you can
know which of your chakras have problems. ing away from Sahaja Yoga. Initially, he gets
There is a way to clear the Chakras of those scared, the very moment he starts seeing his
problems. How to do it, is also taught in
Sahaja Yoga.
In Sahaja Yoga, people get the realization.
faults and as human nature is, he starts runn-
own faults. He cannot believe that so many
faults exist in him. He is scared and then he
starts doubting. You have seen; thousands of
people come and get whe realisation but they
do not come again. What is the reason for it ?
If hundred people are realised only 10 per cent
come back. It always happens. Therefore
Sahaja Yoga is developing rather slowly. That
You can not see the filth so long as there
is no light. It is not visible in the dark. You
will see it when light illumines within you. So
the first object is, to accomplish the light, to-
what people call-achieving the truth or know-
ing the truth. First we should know the truth
and in the truth we initially come to know
what our qualities are.
easily accepts his faults, because he can see
them in the light. Suppose there is a spot on
this saree, and it is dark. If some one points
it out, we won't agree and may even feel
offended. But if we see it in light. we would
be surprised that there is such a big spot and
we have not noticed it I We won't feel bad
about it, and would like to get it cleaned Sahaja Yoga and how it will be done can be
somehow, immediately.
does not matter. It's reason is that man is so
much indentified with himself that he does not
In Sahaja Yoga, man
want to know his faults; and when he knows
them, he statrs running away. But it is bette:
to know your faults and correct them, rather
than carrying their burden from life to life.
People do not know what time has come. It
is the last chance. You. won't get any more
chance. In Bible it has been described as the
"Last Judgement'. Your last judgement is in
judged by yourself, When the light comes
within you, you judge yourself. "See my such
and such Chakra has been caught." Then
Suppose if there is a catch on some
Chakra, say on Agnya, you will understand it
Nirmala Yoga
24
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-26.txt 
 difficulties or the other, or some bad event
you say "Mother, have a catch on this
Chakra". You know that I am ready to put in ocurs, that people are now convinced that
all efforts for you. You can also work on that there is something wrong with me and I
each other thereby you can completely clean am inauspicious, because it has happended
all your faults, problems and sins etc. Why repeatedly Such people are inauspicious
should you carry that burden ? Instead of
throwing it off people are running away from
Sahaja Yoga. This is human brain. That keeps they face tremendous difficulties, grief, sorrow.
thinking and always remains worried. There
is nothing to be scared of. If you become in that. If such a person visits a family some
little steady, you will realise how big is this
power, which not only brings into light your
faults, but also removes them and removes
them completely.
because all darkness of sin is associated with
them and it is so deep that like a blind person
sickness etc. and ultimately they are finished
one from them may even die.
Considerations regarding good or bad
omens is in vogue in our country since time
immemorial. Those who are saints, although
So, first of all you must know, that Kunda- they are care free, have no place of their own-
lini Shakti is extremely holy and virgin. This
virgin power makes us clean and pure. In
Sahaja Yoga, She is very much pleased to
give you the realisation. Then there can
be only two possibilities. Either you recognise His biggest identity is that the biggest auspi-
the self-realisation within you, and rise up to cious is in His hands. He does good to all
its greatness and go deep in it; or leave it and makes all happy. Touch of His feet makes
altogether. There cannot be a third alternative. everything auspicious. There are six gifts of
As someone asked, "How many turns are
there in London ?" Only two; left and right. happiness etc.
Either you completely accept it or leave it. If
you have decided to accomplish it and to
completely clean yourself, then the reflection
of Atma will shine in you. In this Kundalini
Yoga you become aware in collective consci-
ounsness, you remain aware in collective of auspiciousness and will realise the Spirit
they may not be bothered about their clothes
and food and may be staying in jungles-bring
prosperity wherever they go This is also told
about God. If you want to recognise God,
God, which bring prosperity, well being,
Whenever incarnations came, great and
auspicious works were done. But now the
time has come in which that work will be
done, which is the most auspicious work
ever done, thereby, you also will be the doers
consciousness and you clean others also while
cleaning yourself. Others sins are also
washed. It is regarded as auspicious, here.
residing within you. This is the ever great
work of Sahaja Yoga and the incarnations. It
should inspire the entire society. In this great
eternal life, when shadows of Kaliyuga are
enveloping the whole universe, your torches
(tlame) should burn high, and in their light
they enter. There will be difficulties, wherever you may attain auspiciousness, Joy and pro-
they stay. One gentleman came to me. He sperity. It is necessary, for this, to keep your
was a young man of 23-24 years. He said lamps clean, you should wash your sins and
"How do past deeds. Your past deeds are washed
you know?" I asked. He said I am very inaus- along with your ego. Karmas are done by
picious. Even children are afraid of me. When your ego. You must have observed that after
coming to Sahaja Yoga, you can very easily
Some persons are very auspicious whereas
some are quite inauspicious. Latter ones
bring calamities in the house or in the country
"Mother I am quite inauspicious".
I go to a house the family has to face some
Nirmata Yoga
25
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-27.txt 
 see your ego (Ahankar) and how it works. In burden and then they even forget that the
Sahaja Yoga also, you come across many peace, serenity and cool vibrations etc. which
temptations and in that when your ego domi- they had once received are no more with
nates, you forget whether you have to go to
Sahaja Yoga or Sahaja Yoga is to come to you. the light that these things are embodied in
Many people when they surrender to their themselves, Then they get scared and become
ego, turn their backs to Sahaja Yoga expecting suspicious.
Sahaja Yoga to follow them. So long as your
ego is enveloping, you cannot have the
glimpse of your Spirit.
them. They are shocked when they see in
Man's intellect comes up with many
doubts. The first doubt which is very common,
is 'Who is Mataji ? This is the first question.
But it is useless to fight with your ego. In I want to tell you that you can not understand
Sahaja Yoga you do not have to fight with Me so long as the eyes of your Spirit are not
your ego, but you have just to see because open, and you should not even make efforts
your attention is itself awakened. Your ego to understand. First you open the eye of your
cools down by just seeing, as your attention Spirit.
is enlightened and in that light you witness
the play of your ego and laugh at it, and laugh
at the ideas given by your ego. As you start they accepted Parashuram when Shri Krishna
seeing yourself, your ego starts getting defla-
ted and as your ego is deflated you rise in at the time of Shri Nanaka, they accepted Shri
your light.
When Shri Ram came, people said that
came they said, they accepted Shri Ram and
Krishna when Christ was here they accepted
Abrahim. All of them had taken human form.
But it is all the play of Buddhi (the intellect)
Sahaja Yoga is a very subtle process. Few
people know that it is a very subtle process. how interesting it is! Now, I have come and
Sushumna Nadi is extremely small, extremely
thin, exactly at the centre of Brahma Nadi,
reason is man's attachment to his karmas,
That extremely subtle channel Brahma Nadi is
loaded with sin and dirty things and thereby
gets so much narrowed, that very thin fibre of being. So long as he was alive, he too was
Kundalini could pass through it. Imagine that considered useless and tortured but when he
Kundalini is like an enlightened rope made of died he was regarded as Bhagwan (God).
small fibres. Its very thin fibre could pass
through Brähma Nadi, This is the condition. been like this ?
You have all seen that this is a very subtle,
very deep process. Most of you have seen
Kundalini's movements and pulsations. She
tries to make, somehowa small opening at
the bottom, so that it becomes possible to
pass at least one strand through the extremely
narrow passage of Brahma Nadi and with that
very subtle strand She pierces the Brahma-
randhra. Initially this happening takes place flowing at this place, why not accept it ?
very easily in most of the people. But She
again coils down due to the pressure of the lect. It is the most difficult job in the world!
people are accepting Shri Sai Nath (of Shirdi).
But when he lived here, he did not even get
any thing to eat.
Why was it so ? He was also a human
What is the reason of this all ?
Why has man
You will have water of the Ganges, where
She flows. If She is flowing here, will you.
say We do not accept Her as the Ganges I
There may be nothing at the place where She
was flowing earlier, or may be, only a nullah
at present. If you want to take it as the
Ganges you go your way. If the Ganges is
It is not easy to understand human intel-
26
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-28.txt 
 Even now, I see big temples. What is happen-
It is easy to understand God, because He
is what He is. He does not have such double ing in them ? What is going on even in those
dealings. Man has a variety of qualities, not temples having 'swayambhu' idols ? (Those
just double. All animals from snakes and idols which have come spontaneously out of
and scorpians to elephants, horses and lions
are residing in him. You will not understand They are not man-made.)
at all, why his brain is working in this way.
Mother earth are called Swayambhu idols.
WO
Ego makes donkey out of man. Even
Now when the Ganges is flowing why do donkey has its respect. Donkey also may have
not you take water from Her ? Imagine this
plug has been connected here. Will you
connect in its place a plug which is out of with his ego, then the result is a donkey.
order ? It is quite pragmantic. I cannot
understand what hallucination is there on
human intellect, that he does not accept the
truth which he is seeing but accepts something
that is not seen ! Its reason was understood
long back and that is Ahankar (ego).
some sense of propriety but an egoist can be
worse than a donkey. If a man is equated
I always say, you will be surprised to see
If one gets
how the ego is inflated in a man.
excess of money he goes astray. One out of
one lakh rich people, talks sense. If they
receive money, they will think in which pub
they would go or to which dirty woman they
would go etc. ! Never would that man think,
accepted Shri Rama in his days, he would that the money he has got could be spent on
have told you to get your Kundalini awakened the work, within himself and without that
and get the realisation and get established in would be acceptable to God and would
Sahaja Yoga. Had you recognised Shri Krishna, bring His blessing. They will make the
show of ego even in that, they will make
Man has t0o much of ego. If you had
he would not have played Sahaja Yoga in
Gokul, but would have given you the realisation a temple and inscribe on it that the
and told you to practise Sahaja Yoga. If Shri temple of Shri Rama has been built by such
Nanak had been accepted, there was no need and such person in the name of his father.
What will you call it, if not madness! If his
for him to break his head telling you to do
different things. He would have simply taught father had done some work, automatically he
Sahaja Yoga, but very few understood him in would have become famous. By seeing such
dreams of false ego man remains away from
When the truth. Even though man sees the truth
face to face, the ego teaches him not to accept
it because by accepting the truth he would be
his days. Now, when he is not here, you
have built Guru-dwaras in his name.
Mohammad is not here mosques have been
made, becauşe they think now Mohammad
Sahib is in their hands. Now Rama is in their free from ego.
hands, and they can make his temple and say
This is our temple, this Rama is our property.
We have authority over him and whatever you
It has many remedies. Say a man receives
plenty of money and becomes very powerful.
Excessive power also makes One a donkey.
have brought-all money and other things, Ong behaves like a joker and becomes a laugh-
offer them to this idol". You say all this
because you think you are the authority of Ing stock, with too much of power because
that goes to one's head, If a woman becomes
extremely beautiful and she takes it into her
head that she is a ravishing beauty, then she
goes down to a nadir. Why does man become
a donkey when he has excess of something?
this idol. It is sheer ego because of which
man thinks, that he can keep God in his
control and for that he is making all the show.
Every time the same show was repeated.
27
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-29.txt 
 Its reason is-he cannot wield it. If he is an
emperor, even milions of rupees have no
to what he taught them, which mantras he
told. At the cost of six thousand dollars,
value for him, but let a pauper have some those poor things, got the mantra-Ainga
money and he will be flabbergasted. If a real phinga thingal This mantra was passed to
king comes to power, it does not matter for them sacratly in writing and they ware told
that by chanting this mantra they would get
is not bothered by small and petty affairs. But many siddhis. Today, those people are on
the roads, their homes have been ruined, their
ability to wield an excess of anything. He plight is miserable. Had they been wise and
tried to understand, thy would not have
extremes of his Spirit, rest everything becomes gone to such a person who was pampering
their ega. Always he would tell them "you
ego he loses his freedom and day and night are a great person, you are phonganand all
he remains in such nasty hallucination that should come in their best etc." Those who fill
like a fool he thinks that he is being praised. their coffers, keep inflating other people's
Never can he think as to what he is doing and ego and all people in the world like such
persons. Big news papers, will bring out
their advertisement and write their praise
him at all. He lives in the world like a king and
an ordinary person cannot, because he has no
cannot go to an extreme when he attains the
valueless for him. On the contrary, due to his
which is the right path for him.
Now the time has come to stop and see,
It is now time to rise and to know,
because those persons have moncy which
attracts money. Big celebrities would call on
It is time for you to stop wherever you them. But inside, there is a big falsehood.
have reached on the mount of your ego and Can we say man worships falsehood ? But
look back. So far, you have not achieved
anything, you do not know anything. Accept his ego. One who preserves such falsehood
it with humility and let it be imbibed in you. and is carried away by it. invites his disaster.
You have not yet understood your Spirit. With
your every step, you are getting more and
more involved in dead things that put you in
the fetters ot dependence and enslavement of is the reason for which you do not want to
your six enemies (viz Passion, anger, greed, know yourself ? Why don't you want to
pride, temptation and jealousy), stop for a surrender before God ? Why are you following
while and see your mirror there itself which is wrong people ? You are ready to sacrilice
within you and you will find the Paramatma
of your eternal Atma residing within you. destroying you, who have done all harm to
Know Him and go deep. Enjoy that bliss and
with that light dispel darkness of the world.
This is very great work and many people ar:
not sticking to this great work. That is the
difficulty. Thousands will come here if I start
mesmerising.
man himself lives in a big falsehood, which is
Why. am repeatedly asking you,-why
are you inviting that disastrous end 7 What
even your life for those who are robbing you,
you because they have mesmerised you. Have
you got no capacity of your own to under-
stand what is going on ? Paramatma can
be known, only in complete freedom. You
are getting scared of whatever little freedom
you initially experience in Sahaja Yoga and
want to go back to your old state of
dependence.
One such fake guru reached London. He
emptied the pockets of ninety thousand
people, he charged $ 60 0 from each person.
Sixty people from them came to me, they
were suffering from epilepsy. Lasked them as
Sahaja Yoga is very simple, butyou people
are not. There are many complications in
cities. You have to pass through considerable
Nirmala Yoga
28
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-30.txt 
 pressure and strain, because of which you
have to face big problems. Hence, initially, is fake. You must know your Spirit first. So
you have to become simple. You know, that long as you do not know your Spirit it is
my work has great impetus in villages. Ego useless to diseuss because it is a very subtle
is more powerful in cities. Due to small subject and not shallow, that you could come
things, people become egoists and that is and see somebody's face and say something
why, they surrender to those who pamper and that's all ! Never get into such a mess
their ego and run away with their money. You
just keep looking at them and receive desease.
You will be surprised, al those patients of
deadly deseases, like cancer, etc. whom fantastic thing. It looked really very difficult
have cured, all of them without any exception how would it take place in a man and then
were the victims of fake gurus and tantrikas. grow further. Jesus could be considered as
I have not seen any cancer patient who was
not connected with a false guru. That's why we can say on Guru principle Nanak Sahib
it is said that doctors cannot cure cancer. You
would now understand, how wicked, inauspi- know their Spirit. He was breaking his head
cious and harmful these people are ! Even
environments around them are bad. Those form but still He was not recognised.
means to ascertain who in genuine and who
that you cannot come out of it. Sahaja Yoga is
a superb feat, it is extremely great. Some
times I myself am amazed at it ! It is such a
the last man, to do a lot of work and after Him
came. Even in his time so many could not
on advising the people. He had taken human
who go into their environments come to such
a tremendous grief that you wlil be shocked
to know. Very large number of people have am glad that there are about 10,000 persons
died in Morvi, some of them were innocent, in this country who have come to Sahaja
but worst kind of sin was to be committed at
that place. You have heard that those people
had decided to buy for a sadhu a huge land in
Kucch. Man must see and think in whose for me. Even if they do not come, it's still
hands he is playing and how he is inviting his alright. Remember, God will not bow before
own disastrous end.
I was with Him, in fact with all of them. I
Yoga and attained their Spirit.
This is the last judgement, let us see what
happens. Whatever people come is alright
you. You have to accomplish Him in your
own freedom. If you have not achieved Him,
I am telling you as your mother and persu-
ading you not to go to such wicked people it is not His fault, nor is it of Sahaja Yoga,
and invite your disaster. Do not destroy your mine, or that of Atma.
Spirit by going to such people. You should
understand your Spirit. There is no need
You, who are having your ego, will have
to spoil everything in the oscillations of yourself to blame. It is your wealth or your
questions and counter questions. Get realisa-
tion first. First know your Spirit.
do the rest. On what basis will you ask
questions before that ? Have you got any
asset and it has been given to you only
because you should accept it, know it, and
enjoy it.
May God bless you.
Nirmala Yoga
29
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-31.txt 
 CHILDREN
WE SAHAJA
From the first wave that gave us birth, resounding through the universe,
From the first sound we were born, to reverberate through the resounding world.
Of father's eternal auspiciousness and Mother's joyous love and innocence,
Of spontaneous play and freedom dance, of eternal longing we were born.
To give meaning to sanctity, to return essence to sacredness,
To give vein to joyous song and mirth, and flow in freedom throughout the earth
For of our Mother's womb we were born, and once more from Her crowned head,
And in both were unctuous joy and love, and immaculate glory overspread.
Like a fabric She takes the cosmic sounds, rends and from the rents give forth,
Eternal sounds that dance like men, and to eternal glory return again.
Like bees round nectar drinking deeply, soul deep round the sacred cup,
In sacred innocents cheeerful shouting, crowd thick around their Mother's lap.
Like lotuses waving in the wind, each one filled with sacred strands,
And bowing to each lotus head with wings outspread, filling deep their lotus hands.
Lotus like born of loving softness, returning softness born of love.
Each one filled joyously resounding, the softness of the eternal word.
Each with sacred love cascading, each with love sacred overflowing,
Each to cosmic love surrendering, Eternal lost in eternal love.
Each child longs to meet its Mother, drowned in Her fulfilling love,
Each one longs to peal with laughter, and pour his love into the flood.
Each one pouring with reverence flowing, the glory that is of his birthright.
Each in glory deep entwining drawing, the threads of eternal union tight.
Each one brother to the other, sister to each others love,
Proving in their close communion, the boundless limits of their Mother's love.
Embraced in the all encompassing, filled with the all pervading,
Swimming in the all-containing, dissolving in the all sustaining
AMEN
-Dr. Rustom
Nirmala Yoga
30
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-32.txt 
 CHELSHAM ROAD, LONDON
Shrl Mataji's advice
24th May, 1981
Subconscious, Supraconscious and our
correct Foundations and Ideals
QUESTION: What are the curing powers work or that work, control this or go there.
coming from the supraconscious as there are And these bhoots feel very happy about it as
so many people who are curing other people
with supraconscious power and what is the suffering from a mental problem, for example,
difference between this curing power and someone of his has died then he gets a mental
curing power of the Kundalini ?
they are servile. So, if there is someone
push-back into the collective subconscious
MOTHER : There can be two types of curing and gets possessed. Such people go to the
Mantrikas and these Mantrikas tell the dead
power. One could be those who get the
power of the collective subconscious and spirits that you have been troubling this man
for a long time and you leave this man. So
those who get the power of the collective
supraconscious. Both can cure depending they remove this dead spirit and put another
on where the problem is. For example a dead spirit in its place and tell the first dead
person with the power of the collective sub- Spirit that he can get another body to go to.
These Mantrikas are the mediators or liaison
officers. They catch hold of these spirits and
remove them from one man and put them
onto some other person. So the first person
We have two types of people in India is 'cured'. For example, there was a lady
whose husband used to drink quite a lot. She
conscious can cure problems of the left side.
And a supraconscious person can cure the
physical side.
known as Mantrikas and Tantrikas. The Man-
trikas are those people who go to the funerals
and cemeteries and they try to capture the she will cure her husband but the lady must
dead spirits. These dead spirits are of the sly pay Rs 100 for that. So she put a dead spirit
type. These sly spirits are the so-called 'social on this man by which the bhoot of the
workers' or 'busy-bodies' trying to help others. drunkard on him was removed So this man
They are in the category of Chaturvarnas or
Vishudhras, the people who believe in serving Then she solved that problem by removing the
others. They appear to be good people because "races' bhoot" and put another one by which
they want to serve other people and help others he started going to dirty women. Now this
and that is why they do not want to die and lady got frightened. Every time she would
want to stay around the earth plane. One pay Rs 100 and had ended up by paying a
could call this a 'servant class'. They are abso- lot of money.
lutely servile. They like to be whipped, beaten-
up and be ill-treated. They are another extreme. found that her husband was doing all three
They enjoy a horrid type of existence-they are things together. So she went to fight with
masochists. All such dead people are around that lady Mantrika, who put a bhoot on her
us and they are left-sided bhoots i.e. very too. Since then, that woman is still mad and
timid and clinging. These mantrikas get hold have not been able to cure her. She is a
of such dead people and tell them to do this very goodlooking woman married to a very
went to one of the lady Mantrikas who said
gave up drinking but he started going to races.
Then she complained to
the lady Mantrika about it. After that she
Nirmala Yoga
31
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-33.txt 
 who wrote back that on this particular day, at
this particular time we will appear within you
and cure you but you must lie down in your
bed. On that particular day and at that parti-
cular time she started shivering and one of the
rich man who owns a factory and this is the
life both of them are leading i.e burning the
candle on both ends. This is the case of the
subconscious people.
The second case is of the people of supra-
conscious type. For example "Dr. Lamb's 'dead doctors" entered into her and she got
International Curative Centre". "International cured. For one year she was alright. But
bhoots" he had ! You have to write to them
that you are suffering from such and such she came to me she was in a tattered condi-
disease. All the dead supraconscious people tion. Absolutely Finished. She knew that a
the very ambitious type i.e. all the 'great' doctors, spirit had come in her at the time she came
all the 'great' lawyers all the 'great scientists, to see me. She said and knew that there were
all the 'great' engineers and architects, Hitler
and all such 'great warriors gather on the right
hand side. When Dr. Lamb died he met all
his friends there and he could communicate Supposing there is an architect and he appro-
with them because these doctors did not want
to die as they had been experimenting with dead architect upon himself. Now this Jack
this or that. So they started Dr. Lamb's the Ripper was possessed of the spirit of a
Clinic. Now this Dr. Lamb who died lived
in London and had a son. Dr. Lamb's for such things. This weakness is there
spirit attacked an ordinary soldier in Vietnam within such people, that is why they are easily
and told him that he was Dr. Lamb from possessed. Otherwise it does not happen.
London and that he better go to his son Only if you are weak in mind and have
and tell him that you want to start such a weaknesses for such things, then these
clinic. He didnot attack his son as he dead spirits can catch hold of you. If
then she stated feeling very dizzy. When
at least ten or eleven within her and she could
not bear them. So this kind of curing also
can take place from the supraconscious.
aches such people he can get the spirit of a
dead ripper. One has to have an inclination
it has something to do with your physical
knew that his son would not be able to
bear him as the son was not healthy. He side then the supraconscious can help you.
wanted a very healthy and sturdy man whom If it has something to do with your mental
he could possess. So the soldier went to
his son and said that "your father is within me
and he wants to open a clinic". The son
would not believe it. So the soldier went
into a trance and told him that I have got some ful and so pure that impurities just fall
money in a secret place kept for you and he out. It is a cleansing force. It is a very different
had talked in secret about it. So the son be- thing where your intention is not to cure but
lieved and started the clinic for him. He gave as a by-product people get cured. Now many
all that money for the clinic. And all the dynamic things are happening. In Australia
'Bhoot doctors' were helping this man to act I met an Australian couple who were journa-
whenever he wanted and an intercommunica- lists and the lady was the president of the
tion was established on that level i.e. the Journalist Association of Australia. She could
collective supraconscious. A lady who was
suffering from high blood pressure, kidney have a baby. Still they kept having tests done
and uterus problems went to them. They told as the husband wanted a baby very much.
her to write a letter to the Centre in London But after coming to the Sahaja Yoga she
side then the subconscious people can help
you. But they help you very temporarily and
then come back with a big foursome.
But Sahaja Yoga makes you so power-
not conceive. Doctors said she can never
Nirmala Yoga
32
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-34.txt 
 have been made very weak by the satanic
conceived atfter about fifteen years of marriage.
Now her entire idea of life has changed. First forces and they have built it since long. That
she indulged in all kinds of therapies. She is why our ideas are very weak. In the west
was a Catholic to begin with and then went if you observe the behaviour and life-style of
to different gurus and tried different therapies. the kings and the queens, and the kind of life
She overcame all that after coming to Sahaja the people lived was so debased and horrify-
Yoga. Now she finds the answer physically ing. Even what the socalled "religious" people
for I have made all bhoots get out of her. and the Catholic churches did was so horrid
Now she said she is going to expose all such that these very foundations were shaken.
people. I told her that if she could write Now you have to rebuild your foundations.
what these people are doing she would be You have to lay new foundations for dharmic
able to show that this is madness, And once life. You have to absolutely accept the
you have talked about it then you can prepare dharmic way of life. That is the only way to
a base for Sahaja Yoga and then show that make your foundation strong again.
this is the reality which makes you sane,
powerful and loving. Then only people are
going to get convinced. Sahaja Yoga achieves
miracles, on the material level, on the mental aspiring is not there. For example, an aeroplane
level, on the emotional level and ultimately on fly And another aeroplane which as soon as
In India the foundations are good especi-
ally in Maharashtra, but the yearning and
which is so perfectly built that it can never
it flies goes into pieces. So one must realise
that the damage to our foundation by the
souls, and if you want to give realisafion you satanic forces is much deeper, much more
can. For example, this lamp which is enligh- subtie than what you understand. You have
such tremendous powers for you are realised
tened may be unclean or may not be good to
light but once it is lit it can enlighten others.
Similarly your Spirit is pure. But we have to
fight all these 'bhoots'. On the unlimited I
am working very hard. That is how they are
exposed. But on the limited you have to work such a dynamic force. Everyone of you have
hard to fight. you should perpare yourself to
fight these evil farces for they are the ones
who ruin your own being. There will be a
big depression coming on and people will just
obstruct it. They will trouble you like any-
thing. But you have to fightit and for that you
should be evolved.
to fight these very foundations. These horrible
kings who kept seven wives etc. are not your
ideals. Your ideals are yourself. You have
to bring new ideas in the western countries
then only you can change it because you are
to rise up and build yourself into ideals and
try to lead a life of that ideal within. For this
you have to sacrifice. And the greatest sacri-
fice is that of your ego which makes you so
obstinate and hard-hearted. Face yourself.
This ideal has to be created. One has to have
It is strange that all great
compassion: one has to have love and under-
people, children of God, men of God, are
born more in the west than in the east.
have been born in countries where there is a
lot of affluence and they do not have so much for we are wedded to a very great cause
standing. Never talk ill of one another. Never.
Try to help each other for we are very few
They
and we cannot afford to fight among ourselves,
We
poverty and troubles and these are the very
people who are lost. For, the modern concept
of life is to make something that can be
demolished very easily. We should realise
that the reason for this is that our foundations good and compatible and you must try to
cannot have wrong ideas, we cannot waste
our time on mundane things like marriage.
If marriage has to be, then it has to be
33
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-35.txt 
 patch up your problems. You have to make
it a beautiful institution. Do not indulge cate with God. He had no way of knowing
in small and petty things, for otherwise
we cannot carry out this task because
we have still a very long way to go in self. For dedication you have to do nothing
life. These satanic forces are very nicely but give up your ego and superego. Take
built up and very united in these western
countries. They did not bother about India the heart and it will work out. It is easy to
because India is a poor country. The blessings kill these rakshasas but what about the lost
of poverty are that it teaches you to have a souls ? Everything will work out for a year or
proper foundation. The poor are just the so or even two years. After that I am going
same as the rich. The very rich are not your to blast them. Before that you should be
ideals nor the very poor, You are your own ready because once I blast them they will
ideal and you have to create new ideals.
You are the new presidents of America and such top people that you are not finished by
prime ministers of England. You are the ones
who are great people, so you have to stand
upto it. i e. people of character, generosity, of will go to the subconscious and then they
hardwork and proper understanding. Other- will attack you again. So I want them to
wise you cannot do this task. It is very easy live with paralysis, with diabetes, with all
to study and get degrees like MD. MA, sorts of things. And they will live, they won't
PhD, but to be an ideal you have to mature.
You have to constantly tell yourself that you working twenty four hours, I have no sleep
have to come up and you have to do this
tremendous work which is not difficult
because you have the source under your com-
mand. Everything is possible. Just ask for each other and the bliss of God together. All
it and it will be done. But build it up. Even that I want is that we pull out so many human
now if you cannot build up your personality beings in the clutches of the evil forces for
and new ideals then when are you going to do which we have to dedicate ourselves
so ? I
is easy to justify yourself, i.e. this is wrong or
that is right. Finish all this. You have to
become That. So the first is that you change materialiy also. There won't be much problem.
your foundation. We have great people like
Shakespeare, Tennyson, Mozart, Jung and
tremendous people in this country also. Taking should be loving and affectionate. Once you
their name itself liberates vibrations. In those
countries single-handed they created their hearted persons. "I have no interest in any-
ideas and just think how in those countries thing." Then who has interest in such a stone
they must have fought all these satanic forces, as you ?
But who accepts these people ? Everyone of
you is capable of being like them. Everyone will talk of you, not of these horrible persons.
of you has to become a leader. In Poland an
not a realised soul.
He could not communi-
the Absolute So channelize yourself properly.
cleanse yourself properly and dedicate your-
these loads off and create a space which is
come back on you people.
So you should be
that. It is the easiest thing for me to blast
them all, finish them off. But first they
die. It is a tremendous task. And 1 am
and no rest and you know that. I can
see the whole vision very clearly of those
beautiful days when we all will be enjoying
Our
am here with all the chakras intact. It
attention is on too many useless things,
materialistic things. There is no end to it. Be
satisfied with less. You will be looked after
So don't run after so many things. Just don't
have interest in these. It is all trash. You
start giving up the Real you become hard-
You are the foundation and your children
You have to be ideals of love, affection, and
not of domination and all such nonsenses.
ordinary factory worker did that but he was
34
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-36.txt 
 All of you will be the first Sahaja yogis. You each other. They are not Sahaja Yogis. Sahaja
are the onas who are going to change the
complete concept of life. New ideas have to sombody is not working that person will go
be built up. Are you people really aware of down. I will put that person out of Sahaja
your responsibilities ? Sometimes you are
worried about yourselves only, "where I am
catching ?
so self-centred or you are worried about any case you have to sleep most of your life.
others, "he should not have done this or that Why not work it out now ? In every way be
He should not have sat next to Mother."
Nobody should think they love me more than
anybody else. Some people know more rituals,
others know more protocolbut does not matter.
I know the one who loves me. The one who
Yogis are the ones who take it Sahaja. If
Yoga. Why did you come to Sahaja Yoga
You are seekers. You have been seeking for
ages. Are you going to waste your life ? In
What is happening to me ?" It is
active.
Firstly you become real and very good
citizens and with moral values which are your
foundation. You yourself judge. You are
realised souls, I leave it to you to judge. You
will lose your vibrations. You can become
silent. Silence can be from other agencies.
Negative forces from the left side of the Agya
are giving ideas. You must have your own
ideas. "I can't, I go on thinking" this nonsense
goes on. Just tell yourself how dare you do all
this nonsense of the left side. Those who are
left sided better go for lemon treatment and
shoebeating. Those who are right sided better
shoe-beat 108 times. Get in the centre. You
work if you do not look after that side, should really love yourself, cleanse yourself and
don't care
loves others loves me the most.
for your protocols and rituals. It is nonsense
for me. What does
it matter to me ? The
one who loves others is the one who really
loves me. I have had all these rituals and
protocols and I have no care for these things.
it makes no difference whether you say good-
morning to me or good evening to me.
you say to your brothers and sisters is the
most important thing. Sahaja Yoga will never
What
1.e. how you behave towards your wife,
husband, your brothers and sisters. That is
the most important, thing and anybody who
be in the centre. Never be proud of your ego.
"O'l think this is correct". Beat yourself 108
times. You can be very high handed and then
does otherwise will get out of Sahaja Yoga. vou can have no embarrassment of what you
You know I have thrown out the so called
important people out of Sahaja Yoga who
tried to dominate others by saying "this is not
good, You should not put your hand there.
Don't put your feet there etc., etc."
are doing. You can be absolutely sharneless.
But you are a Sahaja Yogi. You should feel
embarrassed about such things. There should
be a little 'sankoch'. There should be reserva-
tions about it. How can you say such a thing
to some one? Why hurt anyone ? Agya
mother. bloats more and more. So many are like that.
You cannot bind me into anything. I am unli- I know where somebody tries to show off,
mited. I am detached. To think that, you tries to be a Guru and tries to push down
have me attracted towards you by your proto- others. "O'l know Sahaja yoga. I am a great
col, which is dead, has no meaning. It has to Sahaja Yogi". Then I make their 'ego-horns
come out. You can feel it jutting out of your
head. Push it down. This is the sticking point.
husband who wants the wife to work all the Though the balloon goes thin, it sticks on.
You are all Buddhas. Buddha is the one who
Who can know the protocol of the Divine
You cannot bind me into protocol.
be a living protocolof being kind and generous.
Be beautiful. Some are lethargic. Like a
time or the wife who wants the husband to
work every time. Everybody finds fault with is realised, the one who is enlightened, one
35
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-37.txt 
 who knows. You are the enlightened ones.
How can you have an ego?
seekers also must realise that they cannot be
happy with anything else but their Spirit. This
is the test of a seeker and a non-seeker can
Ego and super-ego are the greatest enemies.
I have seen people who suffer from super-ego.
You push it down and it goes to the ego, So
in the west we have the greatest problem of
the ego. Whatever appeals to the ego we run
to that. That is how people are made mad by He is very nicely off. He has his ego intact,
these 'gurus'. They say you can fly, so you and he is torturing you.
have gone into it. Somebody says you will
become very powerful, so you have gone into
it Somebody says you will become a great
guru and you go into it. But nobody says you with a nonseeker can be a very difficult situa-
become the Spirit and become One with the tion. You carnnot make a fruit into a flower.
Whole. When I say you are realised, you are
great, you are saints there is more bloating of
the ego-balloon. I say it to create that aware- make into a fruit. Those who are entangled
ness within you. Your ideals have all been with problems like "my father, my mother, my
full of ego. See Churchill standing there with brother, my son" etc. should learn not to get
a stick in his hand. The complete body looks entangled with such problems. Those who
like the ego. We have to form new ideals.
He was right for meeting another ego called and lost. The more you try to improve them
Hitler. So it was alright to break their heads
together.
never understand a seeker. It is very difficult
to live with a man or woman who is not a see-
ker because you catch all the bad points and
you suffer. If the person has an ego you catch
it on your Agya. Nothing happens to him.
and he is torturing you. But a person who is
a seeker is a better person because you can
give realisation to such a person and your
vibratory awareness can be shared. But to be
In your case you have become the fruit. But
you must have a flower around which you can
are not flowers should be avoided, forgotten
the more entangled you will become. They
can never improve. I give you a big rope. If
But now we need new ideals. The past they are not seekers then they will never be
is over now. When there is flood you need
boats to carry you acros.
the shore you don't carry the boats with
you. You leave them behind. These boats
are no good for us. They have done the of them, for if they catch, you suffer. If they
job. Now we have to go ahead with our
own feet. So no bloating of the ego should
be there. We should realise that we are in no
way exceptional, for only you are blowing up
your ego. You have to be ideals. You have
to be in the centre. You have to be a Sahaja
Yogi. That is the most important thing. Don't
judge yourself by what you think of yourself mad or crazy or anything but they will realise
but what Mother thinks of you. How much
joy are you giving to your Mother ? If you than they do. You are much more peaceful,
make Her unhappy then what is the use,
so and you cannot inject seeking into them.
But after reaching They may become materially well off but they
can never become seekers and you forget
about them. You may have to suffer because
have a nabhi chakra you suffer. This kind of
person is very difficult to change. Do not
waste your energy. Christ has side "do not
cast your pearls before swine", You cannot
force anybody to become a seeker. There are
millions of seekers in the world, so forget
about such relationships. They may call you
one thing that you lead a much better life
blissful, dharmic and sane but they won't
accept your life. Play around with them with
the understanding that they cannot change.
Even if they change mentally they cannot have
You must have noticed that there are
really very few true seekers in this world. And
Nirmala Yoga
36
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-38.txt 
 The simple answer is that whatever you
do with your mind like shouting, howling.
jumping etc, can be done by the limited mind.
So ane who is doing is some human agency,
some human being and not the Divine, But
you cannot make your Kundalini pulsate with
your mind. The Divine, it it has to do something,
MOTHER: They will go out of circulation. it must be extra-ordinary which human beings
Sahaja Yoga rejects more than accepts. It is cannot do. To pulsate Kundalini is only possible
for the Divine. It is a living force. Man makes
that urge because to a seeker nothing is
important except seeking.
QUESTION : What about the people who are
good people, not seekers, but who have got
realisation but don't seem to see the signifi-
cance of Sahaja yoga ?
a judgement going on. Such people will go
out of realisation. You can talk to them of things-dead things. Man can do dead actions.
realisation, give them bandhans etc. for, they But a living force cannot be activated. What is
the need to go to the gurus if they make you
ted but they are lost otherwise. For example, do the limited actions of the mind. You can
and jump without
little butter comes out and the rest is butter them. But you cannot make the Kundalini
are the people in whom you could be interes-
butter is made out of curd by churning. A always shout, howl
milk. To seperate it, a big lump of butter is pulsate.
put in the butter-milk and when it is churned
all the butter gets around that big lump and
gathers into a larger lump of butter. But some
butter particles are left behind. If they do not
stick to the larger lump of butter they are
Divine does something which you cannot
You cannot make the cool breezes
flow from your hand, So, if you go beyond
the mind it has to be something extraordinary,
thrown away with butter-milk. So, those who something different. The limited and the
do not come to Sahaja Yoga and are not upto unlimited are two different dimensions. This
is the secret of your Mother's Mayā, that I live
on unlimited and do unlimited things. That is
how I create Maya. You can know me only
through knowing your vibratory awareness. If
you put your hand on the head of someone
nobody can make you shake. So the Divine
force is something that human beings cannot
The question is that the psychologists say do through their mind. I repeat, you cannot
that mind is limited, i.e. whatever the mind pulsate the Kundalini. It is a living force and
does is limited. Whatever action we perform human being cannot create or generate life.
is done through mind only and this mind has They cannot make the pupil dilate when the
Kundalini goes up. As ordinary humans and
the unlimited. So something has to be which so-called gurus cannot feel the vibrations you
is beyond the control of the mind, that is the cannot talk of the vibratory awareness to
only spontaneous thing. Now see the confu- them but you can see with your naked eyes.
They cannot make the cool breeze come out
mental level. What is the basic difference bet- of your head. This is someting extraordinary,
What I can do with the limited is make myself.
ordinary humans of Sahaja Yoga and the I can also do unlimited. That is the side of
the Divine Mother. In the same way you are
limited now but you have jumped into the
do.
the mark, will be thrown out. It is a fact but
you should have 'nirpekshita' i.e. you should
have no attachment to such people.
May God Bless you.
Answering to another question
Shri Mataji Said :
limited energy and so it cannot take you to
But their question can be answered on
sion.
ween Divine and human ? How to convince
Divine ? They are doubting you as you are-
doubting them.
Nirmala Yoga
37
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-39.txt 
 unlimited. So you can do all these things. The gurus, so-called, can shout, howl, jump
That is why you are saints. The things you and do all these things but they cannot raise
can do in the unlimited you could not have the Kundalini of the people. All other things,
done before realisation. You start doing some-
thing that you could not have done before, you will get your cure, change your mental
i.e, to raise your Kundalini and of the people. attitude and all that.
we can say, are arbitrary. subjective. Then,
A Letter from Canada
Dear Brothers and Sisters,
There was a time a few years ago when I, and many others, believed that in the light of
the world's social, economic and political situation we were surely doomed. Very few
advocated recovery and enlightenment for it appeared that we were in the cenre of an
irreversible worldwide crisis. These were the days before I knew I was a seeker (not a
quru shopper but rather a knowledge hound). Those were days of sadness, disappointment
and general skepticism. I felt as though the Universal unknown entity had led me down
the garden path and I didn't know where to turn. I prayed continually to the "collective" to
help me and show me the way, one thought always remained in my mind. However, I knew
that before this life time was out I would learn the secret to it "alI".
All this occurred through the years 1971-1978. I know now that my prayers were being
answered. I know, also, that these were not only my personal formative years but also the
formative years of Sahaja Yoga and the beginning of the reversal of all adharmic direction.
Most of us have experienced this mysterious guidance from our holy Mother and we do feel
fortunate to have been blessed this way. She is so wonderful!
A very beautiful thing about our Divine Mother's love is that that She has ena bled us to
rise above all the nonsense of the Maya to experience the truth and reality; the love and the
bliss that is heaven on earth. Although this is astounding by itself, it is also quite amazing to
realize that we have only begun and that the possibilities are virtually inconceivable at this
point !
We can now say with absolute joy, faith and authority that yes, there is hope, there is a
great light at the end of the tunnel. Things will change and improve, we will all become one
again and the absolute peace and love will once again be restored. Very soon we will be
thriving within the supreme radiance of our Divine Mother's grace.
The world will never look Back again !
Much love, your sister,
Liallyn Musa
Calgary, Alberta,
Canada
Nirmala Yoga
38
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-40.txt 
 LEADERS IN SAHAJA YOGA-PART I
To obey God means "Thy will be done".
Sahaja Yoga in its present condition could,
at times, look like a big nursery and, actually, It means "O Shri Mataji, Thou are the sole
this is quite a refreshing sight. The sangha of and only Doer. Let Thy immaculate mode of
the sahaja Yogis is the "divine Kindergarten" action operate through me". To abey means
in which, protected by the omnipotent love to be great. After all who are our models,
from above, we grow into spiritual maturity. who are the true leaders of Sahaja Yoga ?
When babies grow up they become children
and grown up children start helping the
mother in looking after the younger brothers the primordial friend of the yogi, was behead-
and sisters who are still babies. As the child- ed, dafending, on his Mother's orders, the
ren mature they fully realise the qualities of dccess to her inner apartments against lord
childhood. They know that they are not
going to recreate another boring "adult" himself be orucified. Let us face it: what is
world, this world that we know only too well, the depth of our obedience to Shri Mataji ?
which is serious to the point of foolishness, How many "but Shri Mataji". how many
rational to ths point of insanity, a world in think, I balieve", how many explanations,
which the word "adult" itself has become a justifications, argumentations or even advices
stamp on sonmething dirty : aduit movies, adult have -in my abyssmal stupidity given to
books.. A world in which the leaders are
such sinners that entire countries are cursed Mahamaya ? Ireally feel like pulling my ears
because of them. In this respect, we, the
children in Sahaja Yoga are enjoying a special Shakti is cloaked into Mahamaya is it at all
blessing from sakshat Shri Gopal Krishna. possible that our daily lack of obedience
This is the age in which the saints have should be forgiven. Only because She is
become mischievous : endorsed by the sup-
reme authority of the Lord we can gently guiding us.
make fun of many of those pseudoauthorities To this effect, we must remember a key word.
on the earth. It is nice to have earned the
right to laugh.
Shri Ganesha who is Adi bandhu, that is,
Shiva himselt. Christ, no less obedieni, let
the one who knows everything but who is
down to ground level. Only because Shri Adi
Divine Patience does She go on, correcting,
But we should learn. Learn fast.
"ATTENTION" is the first word of Aldous
Huxley's novel Island and it gives this book
Yet mature children know whom to laugh its best line. Attention (chitta) is crucially
important. When projected inside, it &llows
us to watch how the ego plays its rebellious
tricks, how the super ego isolates our cons-
ciousness from God's will through a cocoon
Without full attention.
real obedience to Shri Mataji is not possible.
And without developing such a respectful
sense of obedience how could we call for
at and whom to obey. It is all right to run in
the courtyard during playtime but, back in the
classroom, the whole class stands up at atten-
tion when the master comes in. This is what
our Kundalini does when Shri Mataji's pre-
of conditionnings.
sence is felt. And this is a fundamental
characteristic of those who are to become
leaders in Sahaja Yoga : they have to display
absolute, uncompromising obedience to the
Mahavatar Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi. In Satya before becoming gurus. Besides this obvious
Yuga the right to lead men is earned through point the deities, devas and ganas are cons-
understanding how to obey God.
obedience in others ? We have to be disciples
tantly watching how obedient we are towards
39
Nirmala Yoga
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-41.txt 
 Shri Mataji and if we don't satisfy tham on
this criterium we cannot rise into higher proud too, simple yet subtle, a leader in Sahaja
spiritual planes, we cannot develop the stature Yoga is, above all, obedient to his Divine
of a sahaja yogi elder. Unfortunately even
today old sahaja yogis aren't sometimes quick guiding him on the safest road towards Reality
enough to follow the Goddess's instructions, and thus he lets Her do so. That is why he
they hesitate before implementing them. As will parhaps find the answer to that most
a result the whole divine project which was
conceived for their benelit fizzles out and,
A child but also an elder, humble but
Mother. He has understood that She is
clever question: "How can I best please Shri
Mataji Nirmala Devi ?"
sure enough, they find themselves the losers.
Obedience to Shri Mataji is the establishment of our brotherhood with Shri Ganesha-
Christ.
-Obedience to Her is the highest punya.
-Obedience to Her is the acceleration of the evolutionary process.
-Obedience to Her is the actualisation of surrender.
-Obedience to Her is the way to the Father.
Obedience to Her is the mark of pure intelligence.
-Obedience to Her, the Parameshwari, the sacred Emperess, obedience to Her again
and again.
JAI MATAJI
A disciple
The Visage of Salvation
*Here is free prospect wide,
Faust is the piece of the German literature
which should be read by all Sahaja Yogis. The soul up-bearing.
Goethe's Doctor Faust was the archetype of
There women-figures glide,
Heavenwards faring.
With them the heavenly Queen,
the modern seeker.
He was so sure that
nothing, short of the Absolute, could quench
his thirst that he made a pact with Mephisto-
pheles, the Devil, prince of the seducers. "If Majesty tender,
any wordly temptation can bind me, then my
soul will belong to you."
In wreath of stars is seen,
Clear in her splendour.
Yet it is'nt an easy game the one we Pavilioned in the heaven's blue,
path of
Faust, strewn with lust and death, finally For the holy sight | sue,
Queen on high of all the world,
play with the devil and
the
leads to doom. At the end of the drama
though, Goethe unfurls a heavenly vision: the
Redeemer, of the seeker stuck in his sins,
appears in great glory. No doubt, the Sahaja Feelings tender and austere,
yogis will be quick to recognize who that And with glow of sacred love
magnificient Divine Being is:
Of the mystery unfurled.
Sanction what in man may move
Lifts him to thy presence near.
Nirmała Yoga
40
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-42.txt 
 Goddess sends out cool moon rays, that Her
darshan introduces us into the state of sa-
mādhi. Indeed the Sahaja Yogis have the
experience that they become absolutely
thoughtless merely by watching the face of
Shri Mataji.
Souls unconquerable rise
If, sublime, thou will it;
Sinks that storm in peaceful wise
If thy pity still it.
Virgin, pure in heavenly sheen,
Mother, throned supernal,
Highest birth, our chosen Queen,
Godhead's peer eternal.
"O contrite hearts, seek with your eyes
The visage of salvation3B
Blissful in that gaze, arise,
Now near her splendour
Floats a light cloud,
Penitents tender
Through glad regeneration.
Now may every pulse of good
Seek to serve before thy face,
Virgin, Queen of Motherhood,
Keep us, Goddess, in thy grace."
In gentle crowd,
Tasting heaven's ether.
At her feet kneeling.
By praising this Holy Face of the Mother,
Goethe, unconsciously, or, perhaps, consci-
ously?-- brought at Her Lotus Feet the hom-
mage of those many talents that She, as
Saraswati, had bestowed upon him. We can
very clearly see that the poet perceived the
decisive role of the Cosmic Mother. Indeed
For grace appealing.
To thee. enthroned in holy awe,
Power is not denied,
That the lightly erring draw,
Trusting, to thy side.
Hard to save whom lust be spake,
Weak, before his fire;
Who in single strength can break
Chains of dark desire?
So the foot will swiftly slip,
On the slant way gliding,
Heart the fool of eye and lip,
In soft words confinding."
the very last words of Faust: Part two* left a
powerful message to mankind. I wish that
all our brothers and sisters who are still strug-
gling in their quest could hear it. They would
come straight to Sahaja Yoga,
"All things corruptible
Are but a parable;
Earth's insufficiency
Here finds fulfilment3;
Yes, Goethe, the greatest German poet, Here the ineffable
himself struggling to escape the net of the
senses, extolled sakshat Shri Adi Shakti. In
this Mater Gloriosa he was not portraying the Eternal Womanhood
role that Shri Mahalakshmi played as Mary, Leads us above."
the modest maiden of Nazareth, but the majesty
of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi in Her heavenly
form. It is said that the very face of the
Wins life through love;
JAI MATAJI
-A former mini doctor Faust
From Goethe, Faust : Part Two, Penguin Classics p. 284.288
 1983_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-43.txt 
 Registered with the Registrar of Newspapers under Regd. No. 36999 81
Shri Mataji's tour in Maharashtra during 1984
*Shri Mataji's programmes at Bombay
First Group of 100 foreign Sahaja Yogis arrival in Bombay
and will not include those who wish to go to Delhi.
Programme at Vaitarna
Programme at Nasik
Programme at Dhule
Programme at Rahuri
Programme at Ahamednagar and travel to Sholapur
Travel to Kolhapur
10.1.84 to 16.1.84
15.1.84 to 16.1.84
17.1.84 to 19 1.84
20.1.84 to 21.1.84
22.1.84 to 23.1.84
24.1.84 to 27. 1.84
28.1.84
1.2.84
"Programme at Kolhapur. lchalkaranji. Kazal. Sangli
and Sadoli
2.2.84 to 5.2.84
Programme at Malarpeth-halt at Satara
*Programme at Satara
Programme at Pune
"Programme at Pimpri and travel to Bombay
Second group of 100 foreign Sahaja Yogis arrival in
Bombay
6.2.84
7.2.84
8.2.84 to 9.2.84
10.2.84
10.2.84 to 11.2.84
International Sahaja Yoga Camp at Bordi Weddings
Departure of first group to their own country
Departure of 2nd group to Vaitarna
*Programme at Vaitarna
Programme at Nasik
Programme at Dhule
Programme at Rahuri
Programme at Ahmednagar and travel to Sholapur
Programme at Sholapur and Pandharpur
Travel to Sholapur
10.2.84 to 15.2.84
15.2.84
15.2.84
16.2.84 to 18.2.84
19.2.84 to 20.2.8
21.2.84 to 22.2.84
23.2.84 to 26.2.84
27.2.84
28.2.84 to 1.3.84.
2.3.84
*Programme at Kolhapur. Ichalkaranji, Kazal, Sangli
and Sadoli
3.3.84 to 6.3.84
*Programme at Malarpeth-halt at Satara
Programme at Satara
"Programme at Pune
Departure for their own country and Delhi from Bombay.
Delhi
7.3.84
8.3.84
9.3.84 to 10.3.84
11.3.84
March "84
P.S.: Foreign Sahaja Yogis those who wish to go to Delhi should join Second
Group.
*** JAI MATAJI**
Edited & Published by Sh. S.C. Rai 43, Bunglow Road, Delhi-110007 & Printed at The Central Electric
Press, 80-D, Kamla Nagar, Delhi-110007. One issue Rs. B.00, Annual Subscription Rs. 30.00
Foreign (by Airmail £5$ 10)
