Nirmala Yoga Bi-Monthly Vol, 4 No. 23 Sept.Oct. 1984 EL "Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns all the religions and seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga-THE UNION"

 YOGA NIRM ALA 43, Bungalow Road, Delhi-110007 (India) Founder : Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Editorial Board: Dr. S.K. Mathur, Sri A.S. Mishra, Sri R.D. Kulkarni Representatives B CHERYL REBEIRO, 1267, Burke Road, KEW 3101, VICTORIA. INGE KELLY, Gartnergasse 17/10, 1030 VIENNA. :LORI & CARY HYNEK, 3151, Heather Street, Vancouver, B.C. V5Z 3K2. ALEXANDRE PICOVSCHI, 175, Av. Ledru Rollin PARIS-75011. ANTONIO SARACINO. PIAZZA E. MILLO 9 e/2, 00122-109, OSTIA LIDO, Australia Austria Canada France Italy ROMA. : M.B. RATNANNWAR, 13, Merwan Mansion, Genjewala Lane, Borivali (W).. India BOMBAY-4000092. : JUAN ANTONIO DELGADO, Avenida De Burgos, 30, 1, A, MADRID-28036 : CHARLES & MRS. MAGDA MATHYS, 5, Chemin Des Mouldins. 1256. Troinex (Canton de Geneva). : GAVIN BROWN, Brown's Geological Information Services Ltd., 134 Great Portland Street, London WIN 5PH. M.J. MURDOCH, 14A Bourne Ave, S. RUISLIP, MIDDLESEX, HAH 6TZ, Spain Switzerland U. K. ENGLAND. : CHRISTINE PETRUNIA, 270. Jay Street (APT. 1-C), BROOKLYN, U.S.A. NY-11201. URSULA SEHLMEYER, 191 Canal ST. #23 SAN RAFAEL, CA-94901. CONT ENTS Page 1. Editorial 2. Prayer for Sahaja Yogis 3 3. The way of our full Spiritual growth and Sahaja penance (Easter puja) 4. Sahasrāra 15 5. Shri Rama's birthday 16 6. Raksha Bandhan and Maryadas 27 7. Becoming our Ideals (Diwali Puja) 39 45 8. Open Letter

 Editorial All Sahaja Yogis have worshipped Shri Adi Shakti on a number of occasions. The Pujas are TEceived by Her in person or through Her all pervading presence. Established Puja procedure generally consists of the following stages: (1) Dhyinam-Remembering the deity, (2) Avähanam-Invocation. (3) Asanam-Offering a seat to the deity, (4) Pādyam-Offering water for washing the feet. (5) Arghyam-Offering water for washing the hands. (6) Achaman-Offering water for sipping and rinsing mouth. (7) Ābhishekam-Ablution or consecration with water while reciting hymns. (8) Upchar-Offering of vermilion, sandlewood paste, scented materials, rice grains smeared with vermillion, offering the clothes, ornaments, etc. (8) Naivedya-offering the eatables and food. (10) Singing the Arti and prayers. (11) Salutation or prostration. For a common man who is engrossed in his own affairs. and has no time to think of God God is often presumed to be away. Owing to inability of common man to comprehend all pervading presence of God or recognise His incarnations, it has become customary to worship the idols. Ignorance even led them to believe the almighty to be present only in a particular idol. It is assumed, after saying the relevant mantras, that God has condescended in the idol and further offerings are made. However. Sahaja Yogis know what response do the prayers of unrealised people, evoke. Nevertheless, God did appear in the idols, in response to the prayers of great realised souls. Namdeva, a great saint from Maharashtra, when he was a boy of 7-8 years, performed the puja of Shri Vitthala, the Virata, and insisted on the Lord to eat the food he had offered. When his repeated requests and crying did not move the Lord, he threatened to break his own head, if the Lord did not eat. Lo I The Lord of Universe melted with compassion at his devotee and ate the food and as an evidence of it, left a small quantity near the mouth of the idol. Nirmala Yoga 1

 Sahaja Yogis, have tremendous responsibility when they worship the Adi-Shakti. It is undoubtedly the experience of everyone of them, that Mother is with us when we meditate and remember Her. Hence the puja must be performed with attention completely on the lotus feet of Supreme Goddess. Distraction from the puja, although not intended, may amount to showing disrespect. Mantras are chanted in the praise of Supreme Goddess and praying for acceptance of the offerings made with devotion. Pure devotion comes from the heart ie. from the desire to please the Parameshwari whose reflection is the Spirit which is pleased when She is Prasanna'. Hence it is essential that the heart is associated with the puja. Mother has also emphasised it time and again. It evokes beautiful vibrations at every stage and Divine Bliss is enjoyed by everyone present. It is the actual experience of unison of "Jeeva' the empirical being and the Brahman. With the attention of everyone present totally on the puja of Mother's lotus feet in complete thoughtless awareness, the aggregate of consciousness of Sahaga Yogis worship the Supreme Spirit, the universal consciousness, the quintessence of totality of consciousness. It is the highest stage of oneness of the worshipper, the worshipped and the worshipping. It should be possible for everyone to sustain this state during the entire period of perfor- mance of puja and even thereafter. Purity of attention is tainted by irrelevant thoughts pertaining to one's individuality, the product of ego and super-ego, resulting into separation of that person from collectivity. It would therefore depend on one's ability to remain thoughtless even-outside the state of meditation. Pujas should become a part of the inner system. Shri Mataji has said in one of Her letters that Puja should be performed in the heart. Views of pujas should go to heart Indeed, it becomes a permanent source of joy, Let the heart be the throne of Adi-Shakti. Pray to Shrimadsinhäsaneshwari to take the throne. Then worship Her lotus feet with the attention that has become pure and holy like the Ganges water and auspicious like 'Amrit'. Adi Shankarãchūrya has described Mänas Puja (Puja through attention) and Para-Puja (Puja of very high order) which if practised, would be very conducive to the spiritual progress and would evoke the flood of blessings of Adi-Shakti. With slight modification these are, summari- sed in succeeding paras. O Mother kindly come in my heart and take this throne decorated with jewels of love and devotion. I wash your lotus feet with the waters collected from all holy rivers. Permit me to apply sandlewood paste mixed with musk and saffron to your lotus feet and offer the flowers, vilva and basil leaves. Pray, kindly accept this beautiful seree and ornaments of gold and jewel that I have brought with love and devotion. Kindly accept delicious food and fruits which I am offering in golden vessels. O Mother, this being is your temple. Five Prānās (vital Forces) and five organs are your Ganas. My enjoyment is the worship of your lotus feet, sleep is your meditation, walk is the perambulation and speech is your praise Whatever I do is dedicated to you. In Para-Puja, which is the mediatation on infinite, Adi Shankarăcharya emphasise that Chitta which is one with all pervading, Sacchidānand Nirvikalpa Paramatma, transcends Nirmala Yoga 2.

 above the duality of the worshipper and worshipped. Then who would worship whom ? Invocation is for one who is not present. When the Supreme Goddess is everpresent how can we invoke Her to come and receive the Puja. How to offer Asan, to the supporter of the Universe ? There is no need to offer Pädyam, Arghyam, Snānam, and Abhishekam, to the Immaculate, How can the clothes be offered when the Universe is within Her being ? There can be no ornaments to the formless and Naivedya (eatables) to one ever-blissful in own self. Perambulation is out of question for Anantā (unending) and salutation is not possible to the Deity of Deities who alone is present equally everywhere. How grateful we all Sahaja Yagis should be to our Mother for taking the finite form, for ordinary people, who are unable to visualise Her infinite form. मनस्त्वं व्योम त्वं मरुदसि मरुत्सारथिरसि त्वमापस्त्वं भूमिस्त्वयि परिणतायां न हि परम् । स्वात्मानं परिणमयितुं चिदानन्दाकारं शिवयुवति भावेन विभूषे विश्ववपुषा त्वमेव ।। Manastvam vyoma tvam marudasi marutsärathirasi Tvamipastvam bhoomistvayi parinatāyām na hi param i Tvameva svātmānam parinamayitum vishvavapusha Chidanandākāram shivayuvati bhavena bibhrushe u You are the Mind, you are the Ether, you are Air, you are fire and water and the Earth. You manifest yourself as the universe, there exists nothing other than you. To transform yourself, who are consciousness and bliss into the universal body, you deem yourself ihe young bride of Auspicious one. Verse 35 Saundarya Lahari PRAYER "Mother please come into my heart. Let me cleanse my heart so that you are there. Put your Feet into my heart. Let your Feet be worshipped in my heart. Let me not be in delusions. Take me away from illusions. Keep me in reality. Take away the sheen of superficiality. Let me enjoy your Feet in my heart. Let me see your Feet in my heart." Shri Mataji told the Sahaja Yogis to do this prayer in London in Oct 1984 Nirmala Yoga

 Her Holiness Shri Mataji The way of our full Spiritual Growth and Sahaja Penance Easter Puja, Temple of all faiths, London 22nd April. 84 "clear' statement of Christ, which people wanted to avoid and start their own orga- Today we are celebrating the resurrection of Christ. With it we also have to celebrate the resurrection of human beings, of Sahaja Yogis nisations, their own ideas and created a very who have been resurrected as realised souls. mythical thing in His name. And now the With that we have to understand that we enter time has come for it to be blasted. It has been into a new awareness. There was no need for going on and on now for thousands of years, Christ to enter into any new awareness, He captured so many innocent people, and people had to come down and again to show to this world that you are the eternal life, that you lead a life that is spiritual, which never perishes. are into it. But when you are resurrected, and you become realised souls, one has to under- stand that now your movement is 'inward", you are moving towards your roots and not outside. So whatever was the endeavour 'be- You have to rise into that new realm which is the realm of God Almighty, what you call the Kingdom of God. And He said it very clearly to Nicodemus that"You have to be born again," and when he asked "Am I to enter back into my mother's womb to be born again?" And He said it so clearly ! It's so clear. Those who don't want to see can remain blind, but he said it very very clearly: that "No,-that is, whatever is born of the flesh is the flesh, but whatever is born of the Spirit is the Spirit." fore realisation has to be changed; the direc- tion has to be changed. And that point mostly we miss, This is the thing today 1 am trying to explain to you : that so far to a human mind entertainment was important; entertaining-to the mind. not to the Spirit. Entertainment to the Spirit is 'absolutely opposite to the entertainment to the mind. Like somebody the other day telephoned to me and said that, "Mother, there is no excitement in Sahaja Yoga." The excitement is too much. We are going 'against' that. We are going towards peace, not towards excitement I mean nothing could be more clear than that, that it has to be born 'of the Spirit'. Of course, human beings have a special capacity to twist and this kind of electric shocks we require everything around. For them Spirit could be every time. See a drunkard is alright in the a book, could be some words, could be an morning but evening-time he goes off, he organisation, a church, or some sort of a thing needs a shock, some sort of an injection into like that which they have made, But whatever his body. 'All' human enterprises have been is man-made is not the Spirit; this is the like that, they are to 'excite your body. Be- Nirmala Yoga

 cause if it is the dead you are dealing with, (frr fiue), relaxation of the thought. then you have to excite it. But something that Naw a thought is coming into your mind3; is living, that is eternal, you have to enjoy it some thought: Today is Mother's puja let's go, we have to hurry up. You didn't juxtaposition, and that is where many sahaja get the flowers, nw you gu ta the 3rd world and get the flowers, you must get this and you must get that". Second is: "No, detach yourself. Witness. Leave it to the Spirit: watch, you will get it." Many of you have noticed this. But still this mind which is quite silly tries to and not excite it. Se the direction has to be yogis fail to understand. "How do we do it?" is the paint. "How do we make pur attention move inward instead of going outward." If you start from the time vou are born again, it is much easier, because impress upon you that you have to use the it is a new venture you go into, that is the Tmpress 'peace.' Peace of your Spirit, the joy of your Spirit, which is permanent, you don't need any excitement from it, it is permanent, it is you start using that, ego comes in, you get eternal. So the first thing that comes to our: attached to it, and what you lose is your mind is, that whatever we were doing before progress-and thus the joy is minimised. realisation we have not to do. The first and foremost thing is that realisation comes to you "effortlessly. So the effort which is built into your body all the time, the energy of effort. " it's very difficult to explain "how to detach", must do this,I must do that, I have to do this, I have to do that,"-that creates tension-that ! have told you already, So what do we do? explain to you in words, that are human We do not try to compete with others, we do words, but still, 1'll try to say now. not try to fix certain timing, dates, watches. We do not also put our attention into any do, in the beginning, just to see how it works endeavour which puts us into effort'. But we relax that attitude of effort. It's called in Sans- example, when I had to, say, attend any puja krit as 'Prayatna Shaithilya' . For a or anything, I used to ask them, 'what is the western mind it is very difficult to grasp the auspicious time ? So they would tell me, this subject; so try to understand.-That doesn't mean lethargy, doesn't mean lethargy. So you telephone to say "this is the auspicious time". should never confuse with the dead, the So I said, how can there be two auspiciOuS energy of the Living. Now we are trying to times ? It's a big problem with human beings. transform our energies towards the energy of So they said-there are 5 Panchangas in India; the Spirit. So you have to allow the Spirit to means 5 books to consult the auspicious time. take over. Your effort of your mind should be That's what human beings have done. I said, reduced and the energy of the Spirit should "Then why consult ? It's better not to have 5 work through you. old junky instrument of this mind. And it asserts, that "Better use." And when "How do you detach yourself? For a person who is absolutely detached, . isn't it ? I'll try ! 1 cannot get attached, that is the problem. And I find it difficult to Say, I tried something as human beings to experiment. For out-because I had is the auspicious time, then another would auspicious times, isn't it ?" Then the auspi- cious time has to be 'beyond' time. But it is bound in the time the way human beings have Now how do you do it? First is 'detachment. Detachment. Detach- made it. so it is bound in the time. Like in ment-start with the thought; let us see the India, it is so much, so much, so much, but thought. It is called as 'Vichāra Shaithilya' now, 'here' (in U.K.) it is different. Then you Nirmala Yoga

 calculate,-you have a watch. You see, to overcome all these hurdles human beings also Christ has done the 'greatest' work on this, but we do not understand So you consult. Now because His life was like a micro thing you what is the auspicious time here ? It's a big see, in 3 years So we have to open it out a headache. Because there are 5 books to be little bit and see what He did. He has given consulted, watch could be wrong, this could be us the greatest weapon of "forgiveness". wrong, that could be wrong, Butif you are the When you forgive a person, what do you do ? Spirit, then the Spirit works out auspiciousness. You accept the situation, to begin with. And It's the Spirit that works out auspiciousness. secondly you forgive what 'you think has And imagine when you think like that, how been done wrong to you. But because much tension goes out. First of all you have to nothing can be done wrong to your Spirit, you be a slave of your watch: another, you have just forgive, because you are the Spirit. And to be a slave of the books then, you have to when you forgive, you have found that your be a slave of the market, of the place which you tension goes away. So 'even' to your thoughts have to hire. But supposing if you allow the if you say, "Alright. Forgive this thought, Spirit to work it out, then 'everything will work forgive this thought."-because thought is not out, and you will reach at this point when it is to be punished. Forgive this thought, forgive this thought, forgive everything. Not forget, So how do you accept it?-Just by accep- -'forgive'; because then you will even forget that you are the Spirit ! But "I forgive all the I should say, the most auspicious. ting. So just now, if you give up your 'sattä thoughts that are coming to me," just go on (rar), your own domain; you get into the saying. This is a mantra. What is a mantra? domain of your Spirit. You give up 'your" -Is that power of the word, that expresses domain, that is, your ego's domain, or may be Spirit. So this is a 'very important' thing your super-ego's domain, you give up that and try to see things how it works out. Now, what is the testing point of it ? How do you test it ? It works out,-that's the point of testing it. It works out. Allow it to workout. Don't any effort for it. You don't have to pay for it, put your attention. Attention has the second it is just that you have to say "I forgive. part, the tension. And don't try to say, "Why not today, it should have happened this tension, this pressure of these modern today, we expected it to happen; why not at things will be reduced if you go on saying "I this' moment ?"-That's your ego. "Thy' will forgive", "l forgive". For example, you go be done". So the thought that starts moving and see, I mean if you happen suddenly to see in our mind all the time, which creates tensions something very filthy, according to the Spirit- is not the thought of the Spirit. So, what may be it is very exciting according to normal you should say, "Not this thought. Not human beings, but we are abnormal people this thought. (Néti", néti)*. Not this thought, and for us if we find it rather ugly then-the not this thought, not this thought".-and see how you relax -Now you are relaxing.-Not they are ignorant, they are blind, they are not this thought, not this thought..Just go on refusing accepting any thought. So you go into the source of enjoyment, at the source of peace. Nirvichāra. In that state you feel the Spirit. Christ has given us : the weapon of forgive- ness Everybody has that weapon, everyone can use that weapon. You don't have to put in You'll be amazed your nerves will soothe down, best thing to get over is "l forgive, because yet there where I am. I am the one who is at while they are not: So I forgive." And you'll पन्नेतिनेतिवचनैनिगमा अवोचस्तं 6. Nirmala Yoga

 It's a 'very thin' road on which you have be amazed that this forgiveness that Christ gives you, works out the Vichara Shaithilya, to walk. One side is the hugg big rock of Felaxation of the thought. Gibralter of your ego, and another side is the super-ego. In between is the 'small' discretion Now this opposite movement that you path going, on which you see both the sides. have to move, first of all should start at this point. today. from forgiving. Now what happens when you forgive someone ? That valley of super-ego, you should see that you means you do not react. The power to react to somebody's injuries, insults is finished. And when that power is finished, you become a powerful person; because nobody can now overpower you: because nobody can kill you, nobody can hurt you, nobody can do classical things. Alright. Then you go so anything to you. Whether you are hitting yourself with the rock of Gibrater, or you are falling into the are using your 'discretion'. So another thing one has to remember is that whatever you were doing before realization, is to go to extremes. For example now, you start some sort of a movement. Say, you say we'll have classical that it becomes mechanical, Now you say, "Give up; we'll start anticulture". So you'll go to the other side that you But it is not. again I say, shamelessness. You see people can think that it is shame- become primitive, Till you have reached the lessness. So if somebody says something harsh and something that is wrong, you do not accept it. But supposing t shout at away. You have seen that many a times, I have to shout at people, so bhoots run away- because they react, and they just run away, but the Spirit shines through. So in Sahaja Yoga one has to this movement-which we need not use this central path, is just the 'balancing" thing otherwise, till we are absolutely destroyed which is important, it's not an extreme of anything. Like when we go to say that you |forgive everyone is not going to that extreme your discretion you fall this side or that side. where you have done some wrong, and somebody says to you, you don't take that Sahaja Yogis take to discretion first: "How part of it; doesn't mean that. Again dis- cretion is the engine of your movement. So have to say because you are the Spirit. You you have to see, "if they have said it, some- yourself, you are the Spirit. First of all 'assume thing like that, is it, have I gone against the your position as the Spirit, and then you move Spirit ?." Otherwise, if I say to you something, with it, that you say discretely "how far to you will say, "Alright, forgive Mother."-You see the point ! "Forgive Her for saying so'". No. You cannot say that to me. So then, that is the point you start thinking, "Why have to become thoughtless, by becoming a Mother said so ? What have I done ?" Now forgiving person. Most of the thoughts will think on thosé lines; so you start moving drop out once you become forgiving. But you again. end of it and learnt a lesson of your life, you to you do not return. But in Sahaja Yoga, its a very slippery road on which we are walking. And there you have to see that it is not your ego and it is not your super-ego. So discretion has to be used very much, and the balance, in someone, the bhoots Tun understand that it is juUst we can go ahead with it, before realization. But in Sahaja Yoga as soon as you leave Now those people who are of high quality far to go ?". Now for that Mother doasn't go, how far not to go." Now that is one of the things, that you cannot forgive some people, like you cannot Nirmala Yoga 7.

 forgive Gad. you cannot forgive Mother. Certain things you 'cannot do, so the "Marya- of sense organs who do not react to outside das must be seen. Now, in these boundaries excitement. if you walk properly, you can go ahead. This to be excitement, how can it be ? It is just the is the thing which brings you "Vichāra opposite. So what you have to do is to see Shaithilya' or you can call the mind becomes that your sense organs-say for example your a new kind of sense organs or a new quality . Now if you want Sahaja Yoga eyes, they see something-then they react; relaxed. your ears, they hear something-they react: somebody wants to talk and see the reaction. Then you have to have "Vishaya Shaithilya' (frer fren,) means, your sense organns always There are expectations. But because Spirit react to things, because you are human be- ings, you are born like that. So whatever happens, you react. For example, you see beautiful flower, you react. Some sort of a thought rises with it Now you must practice higher. This is a thing which one has to to see something without allowing any thou- know, when now we are celebrating His ght to rise. Then you start sucking through resurrection, because it is Tapas, itis the penance your Spirit the beauty, the glory, the fra- grance of a flower: Every flower is a poetry, but when you start thinking about it then it becomes a dead thing. But you just try to enjoy. Now you are the people who are on this earth to enjoy yourself, not to worry about anything, Just enjoy. is active 'itself it acts itself, you have seen vibrations don't speak, they act. It has the power to act, you need not react. If you can reduce the power of reaction. you rise much of Christ. Christ came on this earth for penance. You know in the Gäyatri mantra there are 7 things they have said in it. and at the point of Christ it is Tapas, is the penance. So you have to have the so-called penance to achieve the joy. The panance is to pull back your sense organs inside yourself. As But if you are still used to, "I must do this thing special, I am something special Krishna has said that you have to pull back Sahaja Yogi, I am a very highly evolved all your limbs of sense organs like a tortoise Sahaja Yogi", then you are finished. Say, does. So the excitement that you require for we are all going in a boat; enjoy the boat ! your sense organs is no more needed, be- And also the waves. But somebody says "I am a very special one, I'l try to jump down," then you are back again into the same position. So one has to have an attitude of that point from where it starts. A river starts looking at things-try to develop this habit of with a looking at things without thinking about it. expands, expands, expands, expands. You go Try to develop your mind on those lines: that to the source. "absolutely" to the central you do not react. cause your sense organs now, are themselves the source of excitement. In the sense that they neutralize all the excitements. You go to very small, little drop. and then it point. There you'll find hardly even a drop fall- ing out. Now the excitement business, or all this "sensationalisation that is today's craze, Another good example would be a wheel, comes from the same-that your sense organs it has the central point. And the wheel moves because they all the time but the central point has to be While we must have our sense organs fixed, otherwise with the wheel if the central which do not react; because they must only point also moves, then the cart cannot move, So the require a kind of sensation react. react to the Spirit. So we have to develop the cart will also start rolling down. Nirmala Yoga 8.

 So you be generous. I have seen now wheel cannot move. So you go to that people have different attachments, subtler central point, and the movement is on the ones. Like attached to their own children central point, where there is no movement, in I've seen people. Once their children are born to the Sahaja Yogis then the whole world revalution, it doesn't revolve any more, becomes their children: You spoil them, you spoil yourselves. You are just their trustees. But to you it becomes a very big thing that you have produced a child. Anybody can produce a child--even a dog produces a child, what is so great?-I mean, the bitch. That's central point has to be fixed otherwise the a way, because there is only ascent, there's no there's just ascent on the central point. I hope you try to understand, that all the movements come out of ignorance.. All the outer movements come because wa are not yet on the central point. But that achieve- ment is not difficult because you have iumped a funny word to sayl So, to create a child is onto it,-but you again come out onto the not something great, but that you have a child periphery, onto the wheel. So how to keep God, You are just in charge; but to identify "there' and to ascend in 'that line. Say, for example, there are wheels-like this wheels after-wheels; but the central point is fixed. Now every time you jump out, now how do you go back to the central point?-is by detach- ment, by Tapas, by penance. Penance is "to y" It doesn't mean asceticism of outside, spoil also you very much in your ascent. in charge of you, which has to work for that this child is great, it's a very big realized soul and all that will blast your head complete- ly, because it's a subtler blasting. It's like hydrogen bomb. Ordinary bombs can destroy a part of it. but these subtler bombs are even worse. And this will spo.l the child, that will deny but asceticism of within. First of all we must learn to give. Give to others. That also sometimes people find it difficult, I have seen. Even to give one pound-they say,to Sahaja Yoga they find it difficult, I was amazed! So to give to others is going to be even worse. Try to give to others. Detach- So what you have to do is to see that if you have a child, alright you are just in charge, as you are in charge of all' the children of Sahaja Yogis not of your own. Be generous. "उदार चरितानाम् दसुध ुम्बरम". " " The person who is a generous person. for him the whole world is his family." So expand yourself. This is my family, this is my wife, how can I live So one way is to have forgiveness, then without my wife, or my husband my child: second is generosity. If you work for Sahaja my',this will not help you. This will Yoga: "I haven't done anything so far". Not tie you down 'completely. This is a very to react to it what work you have done. subtler thing you start, because now you are "Oh, it's a pleasure ! did it. It's my pleasure receding back. First you gave up your family, I did it. Just out of pleasure". Don't count gave up your children, gave up everything, ment. it: "I brought four flowers, she brought two flowers. I must be paid for one and a half back. came to this extreme; now you are going flower." For Indians they understand that they are already too much in this, so they know that to detach yourself from your children is very important because they are already in it. They are too much attached to their children. In All these calculations are on the periphery, outside, when you were not realized souls. Now you just don't count anything else, but your blessings. Udar charitänăm Vasudhaiva kutumbakam. Nirmala Yoga

 the beginning, they will always tell me, mywheels you should know. Now, it you go child is like this, my mother is like this, my further with it, with the detachment, suppos- father is like this, my brother is like this, and ing works out in you, even you become com- passionate. Even that comes. Still vwhat is the judging point ? How do you know relations on my head and I feel terrible about that you are alright ? How do you measure ? farfetched relation of a relation How do you find out that you are alright? relation they will bring in along: I mean what you call, take the bearing, as they "But you see she is my relation". So, say. How do you know ?-You must have peace. You should be a peaceful person. relation of such and such person, and you Agitation should be outside, but you should be absolutely peaceful yourself. If you are not a peaceful person then, be 'sura that what we understand, is that our relationships you are not yet there where you should have and our identifications have to be dropped been. Now you can say that Christ also got very angry, he took a whip in His hand and beat the people, so we can also do the same they will be all bhoots, one better than the other. Without any discretion, bring all those of a in India it is very important that you are a may not have anything to do with that person. But he is a relation, so he is a relation. So, completely. We are universal beings now. So your child is a source of joy 'every child should be the source of joy to you, every child should be. Bachelors that way are better or the ation, you must know, you are a realized ones who are not yet married, they can enjoy s0ul. So you don't have to take a whip in everybody's child nicely. But, when you are not a mother and a father, and you are enjoying, what is so creditable ? When you "become' the parents and then' you enjoy thought, that He was an incarnation, you see, other children as much as you enjoy your All the incarnations have killed'. Krishna chiid, then your generosity has started. thing. You are not Christ. You are not an incar- your hand and hit others. You cannot. This is the mistake what the disciples of Maham- mad Sähab have done, that they never has killed, Rama has killed, the Devi has killed. But you are not the Devi, you are not Shri Krishna. So you don't have to kill any- one. You don't have to show the temper. So if you still have a temper then know that your progress is very siow. You have to be a peaceful person. Imagine having a Jehād'. What do you say to that I Going with swords in the hand and spears in So the generosity of loving others, the generosity through Compassion'. Compas- sion doesn't mean that you should pity some- one. Compassion means the sharing of personality, sharing of love personality. And that is where we miss the point, that com- passion means that somebody has to be helped. Sahaja Yoga compassion is not that, the hand and hitting others. This point I want Sahaja Yoga Compassion is in sharing. Sahaja Yogis to make very clear, because when I am there, Now the fourth thing you have to remem- of course, I am going to tell you everyone, but ber. What I've told you : First is forgiveness, when I am not there I don't want you to take second according to me is you can call it, the in your hands the swords and things and fight. compassion; or the detachment leading to What William Blake has written is for the incar- nation, Incarnations say "Give me my..." It's as the forgiveness; detachment and thirdly not that you should say now "Give me Rama's the compassion. These are the wheels of Ayudhas"-You cannot. You are not an your chariot which moves you. These are the incarnation. Because the discretion of these are So you can call it the first one compassion. Nirmala Yoga 10

 affective, yours are 'not. So you are not "Alright. it's very simple. Alright, you give them to me." So after a month when he appeared to take the cocks, they would not react to anything, they were just standing like this-(upright and watching everything). He got a fright of his life! He said, "How are they going to fight ?" Saint, said You So he took them to the arena and put them there. And all the cocks, you see, invaded each other, fought, and these were just watching. And all the rest of them got so frightened with these two, to take 'any weapon into your hand-or even anger. Doesn't behove a Sahaja Yogi at any point,-unless and until I tell you to be angry. So this is the criteria, that you have to be peaceful person, not aggressive person. Now different people have different type just take them, you'll see." of aggressiveness. For example, men don't discuss, you see, they just slap you.-finished. They don't argue they don't like to argue, at a point they will go and they'll just hit you and finished. But women are very good at they all ran away and they won ! Very "very' aggressive. So the person who is peaceful is powerful -the one who doesn't react to anything else. is the most powerful. So, one has to under- aggressively argumentative. "So you don't argue" is the second point. If you are argu- mentative then know that you are not yet stand that peace is the criterion to know that you are absolutely at that point where you have to be. But peace by 'no' chance means cowardliness. Because, you see, I know what indiscretion is, human indiscretion. They there where you have to be. A peaceful person goes to a point and then argues it out. If you are argumentative. then your progress is not alright. So a person has to be absolutely peaceful think it's cowardliness. No. You stand like this and this peace is the 'most effective thing. (erect, upright) not We are seeking the peace of the universe. You cannot achieve it through any one of these bombs. You can only achieve it through the Spirit, which is the source of all the peace. So, I would request all of you to give up tempers, angers. Peace is the greatest power- ful thing on this earth. & stooping). The difference between a cowardly person and a peaceful person is that a cowardly person acts to the negative forces, and a peaceful person creates positive farces, constructive forces, generates it: So you are not to be cowardly, but you have to be peaceful. And a peaceful person is like a magnet, you see, so 'soothing' it is. So you can see we are moving towards the soothing There is a interesting story-a Chinese story-about it. There were two very great fighting cocks, known to be the greatest of qualities of the Spirit. You have to 'soothe all.-And they have this excitement again of the cock-fighting in China. Imean you can have everything in this world, all absurd things, like is-we call it like the 'ghee'. When your body rugby, football, this, that, I mean there's no end to it.-So these two cocks were to go in for an international sort of a fight. So they smooth. said there is one great saint living here. he personality is a lubricant. It doesn't go into makes everyone very powerful. So the owner friction, but treduces' frictions. It is a lubricant of the cocks went to him and he said, "Will temperament. So you should judge your- you make my these two cocks very powerful, self," Am I a lubricant personality ?". For so that they can fight and win ?" He said example, you see two persons are fighting, others and not to excite, but to soothe. And that soothing quality what you call, is charred and is absolutely burning, then you put some sort of a 'ghee' on it so it becomes Like lubrication-lubricant. Such a Nirmala Yoga 11

 alright ? And one goes as a peace-maker; just flows, just forgives, it is just Compassion. and one goes to excite it nmore, you see, he it's the 'most enjoyable thing. Radiant, just joins them. Now the one who is the peace- maker is the blessed one, is the one who is gave those who crucified Him ! Imagine! the one moving towards God, because he is Imagine !! the peacemaker. "Blessed are those who are the peacemakers." like the sun-shine. Like Christ who even for- Because He knew that God will not forgive. Even God would not forgive those, He tried to forgive them. But we-those who All these things if you see, that I am telling today is the same,-but in a different call themselves Christians,-those who are language, that's all-what Christ said it. To supposed to be christians are just the oppo- understand Christ you have to open him out site of Christ. Just the 'opposite: in "every more, because He said it in very simple way, if you see. Just the opposite. words, which has very deep meanings and only a Sahaja Yogi can understand it. So, you come to a point where you under- stand that you become the 'Love. And when So you have to make peace. I have seen it is pure love relationship, when there is no people been given Nobel prizes of peace, who have no peace within them at all, they are hot-tempered, horrible people and given Nobel prize for peace! Alright! sonified temper, absolutely hot-tempered; and you call it peace ! How can you have peace with a person who is so hot tempered. So this is possible. In this human endeavour my eyes they just look like mosquitoes; horri- anything is possible. Sometimes so àbsurd, nails and all that look to me like witches-so you see, like I have seen people getting a degree "doctorate of learning". who hasn't even been to a school or know how to read the books. Anything is possible. Because it is just a manoeuvering of evarything, its artificial. lust and greed, or anything but. just love and purity of it, you don't want to do it because you want to have any luSt out of that person. Just see the opposite. Here the girl is very 'attractive'. What is so attractive ? To ble-sometimes like witches you know. Their artificiat. Just like machines. sometimes. What is so attractive in these women ? Or in these men ? They look like skulls to me, sometimes. Somethings like, Frankenstein, i don't know what they look like horrible. The way they walk, the way they try to impress, Imean nothing but fear comes out of them. So the lubrication of your love. So the love that you enjoy is not what is bestowed upon you, but what you bestow upon others. So, what you emit out of your love to ather. sense of security, an 'Ocean' of security. The idea of love is also funny. It's just Everyone feels secured; security. And that the opposite of what you have seen so far. security will be felt by you. Trust. Trust They'll write "I-love-you" and the second others. You must trust. That is very impor- tant. Trust for everything. I have seen some modern fashion is like that. "I love you; I people are very serious on money, some are very serious about possessions, some are this; s -know they are sometimes weak people. Could be weak about money, could be weak And the sentence is "I want to divorce you." want to divorce you because I love you too much ! Because I very modern, very "sophisticated'. So the want to spare you."- is love that hurts others, love that tortures others about possessions, could be even insulting to the love that expects, is not love. Love that things, that should not be so. But don't lose Nirmala Yoga 12

 your temper, just have forgiveness for them, and let them feel secured. Absolutely secured. Trust. You see as you know that I never ask the trustees to give me any reports. I do not want them to give me any accounts or anything; don't understand accounts at all myself, you see. So I never see how many accounts you have got, what money you have got or, say, suppose Gavin is saying that "I am sending monIey now Mother to you, whatever Why 7-Because they are growing, they are I Actually my system as you know is that I know also the people, who have mismanag- ed money who've not been alright, I know it somehow, without knowing accounts, but I said "just forgive, forgive, forgive". 1 know everything but I just say "forgive, doesn't matter." Then, you might say with rationality.. that "Mother, such a person will go ahead with it". No, he wouldn't, you try and trust. coming to light and the more light they see, the better they become. received." It's alright-finished. know whether he is giving receipts or not- nothing. If he says so, alright; 1 leave it to him. He has to grow, whatever it is. It's his responsibility, if he's not grown up enough he will grow. So trust others, because in Sahaja Yoga you must know we are all grow- ing, we are all transforming. So we 'must grow, we "must' grow; and for your growth security is the 'most' important Again discretion has to be used, how far you thing. If there is no security for a tree, it will "never grow. So everybody should feel secured in the company of Sahaja Yogis. If there is great person and he can correct everyone, and any insecurity from someone, then it should be reported, to the collective, and should see that all such cases of insecurity-creating, trouble- creators should be a little bit taken out, for the time being. Because there should be à beco me like them; try to elevate them than to I don't This trust 'has to be' there. Trusting in God that He will give him the right path. So this understanding about your growth is "within' yourself, which you can see. And the highest of all is the collectivity, not the fraterity of bhoots, but 'Collectivity. are collective. If a person thinks he is a very he can punish everyone and he can do as he likes, than he is not collective, But some- times you have to also understand that even with bhootish people I have to stoop down to conquer them, to bring them round. Don't healthy growth. And growth 'must take place and for that you must trust. Somebody go down to their level. And if you can might make mistakes; alright, doesn't matter. Somebody may be dishonest, doesn't matter. But give them security. But what we do is to give security to bhoots, I've seen it iIS very is something definitely wrong with that common. People will have only interest in the bhootish people, they will trust a bhootish person than to someone who is a little dis- honest. See what is dishonesty 7 Supposing somebody doesn't give income tax, doesn't For this we have to be doing some penance. matter, it's this Gov't, or that Gov't what does it matter to us ? As lang as that honest to God it's sufficient. Our honesty is of people are, 1 know that: the tongue is the different level. So we become angry with worst of all. If you can control tongue then that person, we get upset with that person. There's nothing to get angry, manage that, then you have achieved what you wanted to do through your collectivity. And a person 'has' to be collective. If he is not collective then one must know that there person. Then, what you have to do for detach- ment from things-the penance' part of it. For example, you are too attached to any person is thing; say you are very fond of food. Many you have control over 50% of your sense organs. If you are attached to the tongue- Nirmala Yoga 13

 These days I am going into a big penance, am eating just boiled food without salt with- out' any thing in it, just boiled food. Going into penance. I have to, for 9 months. For first. This constable lady died; her mother me it doesn't matter. It is no penance for me because l've no tongue at all No taste be in a position to talk, you see. The father buds. I can manage. So whatever you like was sitting quiet. You can't imagine. In too much, "Ahaal i love to have..," you see. Especially here l've seen if you see good food talk, most of the English men do not talk, women talk too much. It's a fact. I've seen any interview you see, the wonen will talk In India the mother would not was talking. India supposing a child dies like that, you see, the mother would be absolutely sobbing, in a mess. She won't be talking. Here the woman was talking, we were most surprised! The women talk too much the men just don't- first it's "Mmmm.." So now what you have to do, is have a kind of self-directed discipiine. Self-directed, they arë not supposed to talk I think, they just not on others. Self-directed. "Do I meditate in the morning ?1 don't. So what's wrong with ping. I don't know what they do. me ? I'm supposed to be a " Nobody has to tell you, you "yourself should do this to yourself. You are fond of food, "Alright doesn't matter, I'll fast for two days". No fasting is allowed in Sahaja Yoga, alright; but fasting for detachment is alright. Not for how to talk. Now go and talk to the sea, go God's Sake, but for your sake you do it. "I like a particular type of cake. Alright I'll not have it. I'll not have it for one year". But no, when people have to give up, they give up something like Rubab ! So one should not be sweetly. Some people have to go through cunning about it, you should not be cunning penance for that. For them to talk sweetly is with yourself. So what you have to do is to see that where does this mind go? What is the sweetly, just can't. Sarcasm. You see in keep quiet At the most they might be slap- Sahaja Yogi. So what we have to do is to teach our- selves, that if our tongue talks too much then we'd better keep quiet. If we do not talk. we better talk. We should teach ourselves and talk to some tree, go and talk to someone like that. Or best is to talk to me, to my photograph. so a kind of control over your tongue. To talk that's how you achieve like taking rubab again. They just can't talk attraction ? that sarcasm, they have a special pleasure. Try to say something 'sweet'. You can be I mean, even now I see I find some people humorous without being sarcastic. Humour are like Romeo and Juliets, you see, still living is the best way. What is the need to in that area of Romeo-Julietness. Get out of be sarcastic? There's no need 'at all', its a it Nonsense. Get out of that kind of a thing. sign of cowardliness, That doesn't mean you become a dry person- ality. Another extreme can be become like sticks, that's not the point. But you should not "indulge' into these things. tell your tongue to behave yourself. So a These are all artificial things. So a Tapas' is to be established within yourself. Self-disci- pline. Now those who talk too much should I think, Sarcasm. It is a sign that you want to hurt others, but you are that you not being straightforward. So try to avoid sarcastic talking, If you are sarcastic, better little disciplining towards yourself, punishment what you call, or the tapas or penance has to work out. "stop' talking. Absolutely 'mauna' () is the ilaj (sa). Mauna is the treatment for such people ! Just don't talk ! Those who do not things. Some men want to see women all Now people have so many ways of seeing 14 Nirmala Yoga

 the time, some women want to see men all it work out. Today I had told Gavin that the time, or clothes, or 'anything. Now, the difference is that when you see something, it reacts. The difference between my looking wanted to talk to you at any thing is that, that reacts. VWhen I the time has come for us to go further. As a look at you, your Kundalini reacts, when I look at this, it gets vibrated. Katāksha,- you become the truth. You become" the Katāksha (Ferat-TET): Every glance; every truth. So, in every chakra if you concentrate, glance makes the thing react. And Nireek- and use the chakra to detach yourself from shana (fte) means, Iknow what it is. I know the particular quality of that chakra. Like, what it is. Just Looking at a person know now for example, the Nabhi chakra does the what it is. Looking at a thing, I know what it digestion. Now you don't worry what you is.-'Nireekshana. But the whole thing is in should eat to digest. Just 'detach' yourself the memory there. Like we were going and from there, with vibrations if you just see and they said we have only black stones. I said, eat; whatever is there, you will digest. And "No, you have red also." He said, "Where? Do then you become the truth. Truth that is you know ? So I told them tha "exact spot love, that is God where to get the stones. He said, 'How do you know, Mother ?"I said, "We passed that way about eight years back and I know there are red stones." So 'everything I see gets vibrated and also I note what is there, and is all ready as your birthday comes. there to be used at the proper time. But what increase your age, And you are proud that do I do ? What do I do? 1 do 'nothing do you are growing. In the human level you feel "nothing'. don't think, I don't plan. Every- unhappy that you are growing, here you feel thing that you do, I don't do. I won't have so much of a puja but I will talk. Because puja is alright, it talks for itself, but result of all this, all this and that what you do, May God Bless you all. In a human form you 'decrease' your age proud that you are growing. Just the oppo- site of what you are doing if you try to do, it So when you have that kind of a tempera- will be nice. I mean, that doesn't mean again, ment you will be amazed I The amount of indiscreet, you know. I'm quite worried on dynamism that will 'work it out. You don't have to create a dynamo, it is inside you. Let you should have before you. that point ! Discretion is the first thing that S.Y.: Is there a particular advice to keep the Sahasrāra open and clear ? Shri Mataji: It's very simple, as I have tald you, that the deity of the Sahasrāra is sitting before you, that the diety of Sahasrāra is the Mahamaya, that try not to understand Her through your reasoning and imagination; but by surrendering 'absolutely' to it, you keep your Sahasrāra open. In case you find it still closed, you have to ask forgiveness from the deity that "if we have by mistake made any mistakes, forgive me"-that's all. Nirmala Yoga 15

 Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Shri Rama's Birthday Ram navami Chelsham Road, London, 2nd April 1982. Today specially I'm talking about the Vedas and these havanas we do. When we do the the deities within the spinal column actually. havana it is a Yagnya. Yagnya means "by which And for these Yagnyas they used to sit down you know". Yagnya. And this is done where and do all these havanas the way we do it. you use "Sväha' as the word. That means you use the principle of fire to burn off all and try to spoil the Yagnya. Because Yagnyas that is wrong in you "Svāha'. And you awaken it by taking the different names of the cieanliness and with purity. It should not be God. It was very much invoked when Rama insulted. There is a protocol about it. While lived and they used to do Yagnyas at that they thought that if we insult the deities there time. Today is Räma's birthday. The reason was that the people had just started realizing Yagnyas will be spoiled. At the time of Räma that there is something higher and you have also there were some Räkshasas who took a to worship that higher Self, and they thought special pleasure in spoiling these Yagnyas that the best thing is to do Yagnyas. On the and Râma as a child would go and protect left side, of course, the people started the the rishis from the demons. And the demons worship of God and the dedication to God would take on some sort of a funny form and and all those things, that is Bhakti. (devotion) come like miserable creatures and put some but mainly what they did before Räma was bones of animals and things like that in the the Yagnyas, the Vedas, with which they prayed Yagnya and that would spoil the effects of the to different elements. Elements have made our Yagnya. And Rama would protect that. as chakras, and they tried to evake the deities of a child. Imagine, as a child he used to do the Elements. But actually it amounts to the that. They would be doing the Yagnya and same thing. Now these Yagnyas were created to evoke But at that time the Rakshasas would come are to be dane with a pure heart and with n then the deities will disappear and their he would be sitting outside with all his small So as a child Rama was studying with a brothers around him and they would kill the very great saint, Vishwämitra and he had an demons who would try to destroy the Yagnya. äshram where Rāma and his brothers studied This iš the early life of Rama rin which you and they used to come for holidays to their See how as a child also he showed an amount father's place. Then he had the capacity to kill a demon with only one arrow. One arrow of expertise in arrow and bow. So any, time you see a statue, how to make out if it's a of Sri Räma's was sufficient. And he was a Rama statue is to see if there's an arrow and small little child, say about seven-eight years a bow, then its a Räma's statue. of age and people were surprised how he could do it. Now his coming on this earth gave us the development of the right side and so the Nirmala Yoga 16

 Yagnyas were also on the right side. Because first of all when human beings came on this they should abide with law. It doesn't corne earth they were frightened of all the amimals who would invade them and all kinds of horrible Rakshasas and all those people, and negative forces would trouble them. In that state they needed to create a king, a ruler, who was an ideal king and who would rule accord- good, the righteousness, incarnates as Shri ing to the laws of dharma. So he was the one in charge of that: He was here in Tréta Supposing an individual starts saying that Yuga and Krishna came at the time of Dwipar "this is not good, this is not good", an indi- Yuga. Wheni came it was Kali Yuga but vidual might take a different attitude about now today the time is of Krita Yugä. The Yuga where work will be done-Krita Yuga. that goodness placed onto someone. And This is the time where work will be done. common people, of the common feeling that to you that you are a slave, or you have to be dominated, or you have to be put down, but it is only your "common will" which is good. The desire of all the people which is the Rāma and He looks after that will. Because But you must have a symbol of these things. these symbols were created to symbolise your righteousness, your sense of good. so that you can be saved yourself, So far things have moved from one to another, Now in the Tréti Yuga when Shri Rama came, the idea of kingship and rulership started, so the greatest emphasis was on the hits you. Now you can feel how bad it is to goodwill of the people The people had to have goodwill, for the people and for the king, and for the betterment of humanity. The will. ing you. But tomorrow YOu may do the That is the right side. So how to areate the goodwill ? First the leader has to sacrifice your goodwill and represent it as the kingdom and show how far he can go on sacrificing to keep the moral and the goodwill of the people. governing body represents, should represent: So the right side was created by the advent also its both ways. it's not that it always of Shri Rama because he showed a path of represents. It may not at all represent. It Supposing today somebody comes and be hit by someone or murdered by someone, so you decide there should be a law protect- same thing, but what you do, is to take out or a king or a governing body. So, the creating among people the awareness that nay not, possibly. But the government should they should be ruled, that they should not be anarchists. There should be one head who the pure will to be good, to be protected and should be able to organize, co-ordinate and work out a collective thing. represent the good in you, the purity in you, that you also should abide by it. It's a very mutual thing. But what happens as soon as you start mak- You see, when we think of a king we want to oust him because we don't like the idea of ing someone like that, or appointing someone being ruled by him, because he's not a good like that, as usual he goes into an ego trip. king perhaps, or he doesn't represent that will Simple thing like that. Absolutely a simple of the people which is a common will, which thing. Ego trip. The government gets into an creațes a king who rules for the maintenance ego trip. of that goodwill. See it as a symbolic ex- pression of your "goodwill". People get amazed how people behave. They'll elect may be a Prime Minister and So when you create a law, it is also the suddenly you find the Prime Minister behaves You can't understand. You've e expression, common expression, of all the like a brute 17 Nirmala Yoga

 But in this relativity we are improving. Definitely we are more aware, understanding the value of these people, and also the public elected somebody like a Prime Minister think- ing that he will be good to us. revolutions take place and people revolt, fight it out. Again the will of the people fights it is understanding. But then when too many and makes it alright. So we have to have such people come in who are negative they something absolute, because all these values also bring down the will, the collective will are changing every moment, isn't it ? We very low. And people start identifying them- think that this government did not do so well, selves with these aristocrats or those people for example. So, we want to demolish this who are ego orientated, who have no moral government. Then we bring another one. We find the same thing happening. See, whether we bring a communist or we bring a socialist or we bring a democrat or we have a monarch. Whatever you may have, but still what happens actually is that all these things the way the Government is behaving and is that come up and go away, all these changes putting down the people. All these things that take place go on creating a feeling in a man that he should be anarchist. Why should relative terminology. Like El Salvador. You we have any government ? Why should we don't know what to do over there now. Whom have any king? Why should we be ruled by to support ? Whether to support the Ameri- anyone ? Because you find the person who's ruling is not up to the mark and he's just trying to deceive you. At that point you have to have some absolute standards. If you Yogi can stand and say now, should we join have an absolute standard then you can And then the values, who have no fear of God, who deny religion, who deny evolution. Government starts behaving in such a manner that you are amazed that how this is the Government. Like in Chile and Argentina, And the are happening, you don't know. It's such a cans or to support the Russians and äll that. Now under these ciroumstances a Sahaja this or that ? All is a wasteful thing. It's Just a game going on. Let them break their heads. They are good for nothing, useless people. always judge that this king is deviating from the right path, is not doing whata king should do. So you cannot solve these problems A king has to be like Rama. He has to be and you are not supposed to solve them. like Rāma. Representing your will, your good- will, your sense of proper judgement, fair play the Kingdom of God. So really Rāma rules and righteousness. If the king is not right- eous then your collective goodwill will go against the king. Now I've seen say for example in France, We had one kind of a Prime Minister. He we would have Mrs. Thatcher. Good, very good. did lots of things which were not good so he She's coming up well I should say was thrown away. So you had another one. good things she is saying, like self-restrain Now he's doing another thing so he's going and all that. She's talking good things, buti to be thrown away. And we are just playing what about herself ? games you see. First of all we have Labour Government. We don't like it. So then we They must get their realisation and establish on this earth and not these horrible kings who change their morality every day, those whose will is for something materialistic. Like now in our country (U.K.) we thought Certain Shri Räma not only propounded what was Government, Conservative good but he followed that. He sacrificed for that and he established his own symbol as a pure symbol of that righteous will which is another have Government. We don't like it so throw it away. We go on playing with it all the time. Nirmala Yoga 18

 within the people, which is the collective you think like that ? Because by that there is a general good created-Because you have become integrated, your body, your mind and your soul. all of them think the same way now. They all want the same. There's no difference. Once there is integration you'll find that Sahaja Yoga is the easiest way to live. But if there is not, then it is difficult. righteous will. Now, for example, you can see ciearly how the ego oriented things work out, first of all by the misidentifications we can have. Now if you're a communist you cannot have com- promise between democratic methods and communist methods-They think, if you have to be this you have to be absolutely-this. If you have to be that you have to be absolutely are a very hot tempered person or you are a that. But in Sahaja Yoga what youfind is sort of a dual person, or you are playing tricks thit both are intégrated because you have Wvith yourself, you are playing games. Then you the complete capital and you have to distri- bute it. This is the complete integration here. All these 'isms' are experinments of the arti- Yoga. But once this situation is overcome, fiçiality of the mind. Just a projection of the then you will like it, because then you will mind. Whatever is man-made is artificial, know that whatever is good for your Spirit is If you are a lazy person, for example, or you won't like Sahaja Yoga. As long Bs these situations are in you, you will not like Sahaja for the well-being of you all, and of all the people. Once this well-being comes in, every- one feels absolutely nourished and fresh. but you know that. But what God made is all integrated, what- ever you have within yourself you must give it to others. So the governing part is enjoyable. The connection part is even mare enjoyable and Now see for administration also what that you are in the attention of your Mother happens after Sahaja Yoga. Say I am your is such a great feeling within yourself that Mother, here sitting down. You like me to guide you. You like me to govern you. You look after me." She's there to look after you. like me to correct you, you like me to scold But this integration part comes very late you and to even go on to see that your life because of Ego problems. improves. Supposing I say "Alright, I give up. I don't want to talk about it." You'll not like it. None of you will like such a situation, where I say, "Alright you are a gone case, I have nothing to do. You get out." No-one; nobody will like such a situation. You want me to govern you. You want me to look after you. You like that, automati- cally you have started liking it. There's no domination, but you want my domination. "yes nothing will go wrong with me, She'll You have built up egos because of wrong type of people administering you. From your childhood, you might have had bad parents who never talked of God, of good things of life. They themselves did not lead a life of sacrifice. Very self indulgent parents can create a problem like that. They never gave you the right type of life, a proper value system which should have been there. They riever educated how to enjoy righteousness, You want me to dominate you. You want virtues in life. Possibly, later on the country that all my desire should be dominating. in which you are born, the other people who Automatically. Why do you feel that it is surround you also might have done that. Also, alright, it is very good if Mother takes interest your government, whichever you have known must have done that. So when these things in me, corrects me, it's a privilege. Why do Nirmala Yoga 19

 I'll give you an example. Supposing I am that kind of integration within you that what- sitting here and sornebody tells me that this ever your body likes is for the good of your will burn you. This is my own maya, but the Spirit also. Like say for example, I don't body wants to burn itself. It says: no, don't like certain things myself. I don't like drinks, listen to this, just go ahead. Now, when I say this it sounds absurd, but say, the mind says you should not take to alcohol but still you'll go to the pub. Then you are disintegrated. I don't have to tell Gradually once you start listening to your body too much, your mind gives in. It just gives in. In everything that you do, if you are integrated you'll be amazed that you'll really change, when you find that you have achieved I don't like it. Nobody can tempt me. I mean no question of temptation, I just don't like it. I will hate the things which are really bad for my Spirit. Automatically. myself; it's just there. To tell lies I don't like, because it harms me there. I don't like it. Whatever is good for your Spirit will auto- matically work out as soon as this integration become dynamic. Integration is nothing but takes place, and that is the work of Sahaja your complete connection with your Spirit. Yoga today. That's why t said it is Krita Yuga, The Spirit starts flowing into you In every is to be done. And this integration must be achieved within ourselves, so sometimes you you'll become if you're integrated. Just the have to make your body come to this level. connection is to be absolutely achieved with May be you are under the influence of some bhoots. Your body doesn't help you. Little "Is it good for my Spirit ?" bit of tapas or penance is needed after Sahaja Yoga to make this possible and then once you start enjoying, then you like it. Like driving a car. In the beginning it's dificult. Or Swimming. Anything, when you try to do it, it's rather difficult in the beginning. If I say forget it now, whatever you have done in the past now forget it You have to get to the new things now. You have to do it. So you have garanoid state, who is frightened of the whole to put your mind to it with all your full zest. That "Alright. if my body's not helping me then I'll try to improve the body because I'm These absurd jdeas are to be given up by not the body. If my mind is not helping me, I must improve my mind. If my intellect is there, absolutely there between all of them, standing in the way I'Il have to put my but somehow you should be rare, a different intellect right because after all I have to be intégrated. If I am not integrated I'm not going to enjoy anything nor am I going to do anything good to myself or to others. So why am I here ? Why am I trying to destroy myself?" Yogis. They see somebody negative, they But when you are disintegrated you'll be say. "Oh no I" Now take a fight with that surprised. Your one action will destroy your second action and your second action will destroy your third action. When you are disintegrated. walk of life you'll be amazed how dynamic your Spirit. Whenever you think of something, Some people have a habit of thinking that spiritual life is such that you hang by the shoestrings somewhere in the air with no connection to the day to day life. So many people think like that. They think that such a man should be a thin, miserable tree hanging onto some or creature something, and should be absolutely in a world, who cannot talk to anyone, who is so much exclusive that he becomes a recluse. Sahaja Yogis, You have to be very much type, a uniqque personality. You are to be there with alỈ these things that are going on. Now people are frightened even of Sahaja person. Take a fight. How could you dare to do this, such a thing ? You are a Sahaja Yogi. Come up. What do you mean by this ? You have to fight it out. As long as possible Nirmala Yoga 20

 you should try to salvage a person. Talk to him in that manner. never told his mother. He nevar told anybody that He was an incarnation. Of course it was evident that he was. The other side of it is that when you talk to others, when they come to you, then there has to be a kind of a tremendous sincerity. If you are doing things with that sincerity then had other brothers also, but Bharat and people will know. When you talk to a person Lakshmana show the two sides of a human they should know that there's sincerity, that being. your heart is there. For example, you may talk to that person very sweetly but your heart may not be there and the person might misbehaving towards Rama. He couldn't think, "Oh, he was just giving me a lecture." But if you talk to someone with sincerity you to Shri Râma and he used to get so angry say, "How could you do such a thing ? Can't with all these people that he would just come you see yourself ? Can't you work it out ? That's what it is. You are here for that." His brother knew about it., Now he had two brothers. Very interesting. I mean he One was Lakshmana and he was a fiery He couldn't bear anybody type, you see. bear anybody talking in a very mundane way out like a big thunderbolt on anybody who tried to say anything about Shri Räma, even Now in saying so, your sincerity, which is Parshurāma, who was a contemporary incarna- coming from your heart is to be seen, and tion of Shri Räma Himself. He is the Shésha that's what is Shri Rama's character. That he as they call it, the serpent which sleeps on was on the right side of the heart, which the Bhavasagara, on which Shri Vishnu rests. means the heart put to activity. Do you The same Shésha had taken birth as Shri understand that, where Kabira has said, "I will Lakshmana. make the compassion of my heart (mana) steady and put it into five elements."* Now for a western mind you see, if you talk about snakes they only know the Adam See in the same way when you are in the and Eve snake that's all. They don't under- left heart then that's your 'heart-felt' thing. stand anything, and they can't understand But the heartfelt thing, what's the use, you why people worship snakes. You see, snakes see. There are many Sahaja Yogis who really like the cobra and all that are like the kings of feel that this world is horible and something the under-world, and Shésha is the one who must be done, Sahaja Yoga must be brought supports the whole universe. So this Shésha in. But how many of you are really, putting is worshipped as the cobras are worshipped that into action, absolutely into action. With- in many villages in India anywhere today. out that, your Rama's Tattva cannot be impro- Because they don't trouble anyone there. ved. Rāma's tattva principle is only improved Because they are worshipped like deities in when you put all the things into action; that india. Sometimes they do, but mostly they don't bite a good religious man. exactly Shri Rama did. There's a story of Sãi Nath where a snake charmer was given a lot of money just to kill Shri Sai Nath. Because in the night Sai Nath used to suddenly go up to his own swing he had made about twenty feet above the ground. God knows, nobody knew how he used to get So in the ascent of man, when he came up to Rāma's place, the advent of Räma was not in the centre, but on the right hand side. He moved aside. So much so that he forgot about his past. It's never mentioned that He's an incarnation. He never told His father. He "मन ममता को भिर कर जाऊंगा, पचों तरव में साऊंगा । * (Man mamtā ko thir kara Lāungā, pāncho tattva main Launga). Nirmala Yoga 21

 up there, but they would find him sleeping agitation. He didn't know what to do so he there. So the snake was taken by this snake went back to Rāma and he said, "You take charmer and he put the snake on to Sai Nath. back your kingdom. I don't want anything. And Sai Nath talked to him and He said, "Oh You are the one who should govern. Why God, you've come here to meet me after such should I have it ?" So Rāma said, "Alright, a long time. What is your job 7" Snake said, you just be there in charge of the kingdom. "This horrible snake charmer has asked me to bite you so I've come to tell you to be careful mother because I have given them a promise ?" about these people." The snake charmer was looking with amazement that he was talking to him! Sai Nath said, "Alright, you go now." These are age-old snakes you see. So the kept. This is another quality that we have snake went and bit the snake charmer. But to have, that if you have promised anything then He came down and He sucked his poison you have to keep it. If you have said, "I and threw it away. "Because, after all," He will do this.", you must do it. You should said, "the snake is angry with you because you tried such a trick." So He sucked it. absolutely anti-God activity, to avoid doing That's compassion. And He sucked his things that you have promised. Your deities venom out and the fellow was completely will never be happy. You must see that I have to obey my father, I have to obey my So another great quality of Shri Rāma was that once a promise is given, it is to be not find out excuses to avoid it. It's an *"Now I'm going to whatever you have promised you must do. announce it to all the people that these Brahmins wanted to kill Shri Sai Nath." Now when Bharata was senit back by him he said, "Alright, give me your sandals which And why ? Why were they so frightened l take there and l'll use them as a symbol of of this man ? He used to live outside the you being there. village. They were frightened of Him because they were doing all wrong things in the name of God so they were all frightened that they'd be exposed " And Bharata put those sandals on the throne and he ruled that king- dom and looked after it. Though when he was going to see Shri Rāma, Lakshmana saw him coming and said,Look at this ! He is This is what it is, that He sleeps on the coming to invade you now. He has thrown Shesha and Shesha is the one who is some- times expressed in Sahaja Yogis, I have seen as anger, when you try to be unprotocolish or when you try to be funny or you don't That the Sahaja Yogis who behave yourself. That's the Shesha in them. That is also sometimes needed. You have to you out of the kingdom and now he's coming to invade you." And also among Sahaja Yogis I've seen that this is there are like Shesha cannot see the goodness of other Sahaja Yogis who are very good people, be a Shesha sometimes, otherwise people will start misbehaving, and by that they will be extremely sacrificing, nice people but their harmed. Not that I will be harmed, but they will be harmed. So that kind of temperament is also needed. intentions are not understood, are misunder- stood, which is a very sad thing. You must see the intentions also of another type of people who may not be so hot tempered, may But the other one is very interesting, is not be so much angry but their intentions are that of Bharata. Shri Rāma bestowed the very good. They have come actually to ask kingdom on him because of his mother's for the sandals of Shri Räma. Nirmala Yoga 22

 feel. That wwhile So among these two types of people,I have sean there is always a misunderstanding giving vibrations and all that at the most you going on. So both the types of people should should ask, "Are you feeling any try to understand that we both are needed for breeze ?" Very humble. Sahaja Yoga. I cannot only do with one type of people. We have to have both tYpes of people who will look after both the styles is "Sankocha' ( ). There's no word for it in of the thing. talk That's one thing I col And this is another quality of Shri Rāma; the English language because you have for- mality, which is a very insipid word to des- no integration But when you are dealing with others, one cribe Sankocha. There is should go as one. For example, if a person between your heart and formality. But if you comes to Caxton Hall and he says something, then you should weigh it whether he's a new do you call that7 Sincerity is different. one or an old one. If he's a new one then: you must show all gentleness, kindness, all thing. How to say such a thing ? Not kinds of exterior things which will please, honesty. These are all abstract words. In The reason is that he's not a realised soul. He doesn't see your subtle thing. What he sees is what you are. are dressed. How you talk to him, How bring me a broken cup, alright, a little broken, you behave towards him. they see first of all. They don't see what you Indian is there,-l don't know about western have got inside. They can't see your heart. style,-then he'l eat and drink, he'll not say They can't feel your vibrations. So you have anything. But may be somebody might say to be very kind to them. You have to be very that it's broken. sweet to them. can think of a formality of the heart then what mean in action. Sincerity is an abstract action. For example, I am sitting. Now you may Outside. How you All these things of you go to somebody's house, so if an Or say you go to somebody's house and you don't like a colour scheme or something. So for an lndian person it would be not Ireceived a letter from someone saying that the Sahaja Yogis have been very rude to me and have been angry. Like the other day proper to immediately say something. For SOLaebody came and was sitting at the back. They are trying to salvage the people who are lost by the cults. He was sitting at the back touch the wrong side of a and I said, "Come forward." And when he didn't come, you said, shouldn't say that! Let me say that. That time you should keep quiet. No-one should say, "Get out." Because, you see, the thing Although he was not a realised soul he has is if you say,. "We don't care for people who are not humble", then they are going to be lost anyway. Let us give them a fair chance against the heads of Ravana and he had ten to come into Sahaja Yoga first by your an Indian. You see formality of the heart is not to say something in such a way that you person, is Sankocha. "Get out." You Now to such an extent Shri Rama had this that there's a good story which is described in the Rămäyana written by Tulsi Dās. brought out some points very well. He says that Shri Räma was shooting the arrows heads, and he had a boon that for every head that fell off another head would grow. He behaviour. Now, some people have a habit of talking had a boon like that. So his brother said, to them a bit too much. They should not "What are you doing ? You know that he 23 Nirmala Yoga

 cannot die by shooting the arrows at his other we have that Sankocha within us of Shri head. You have to put it in his heart other- wise he will not die." So the Sankocha comes in and He said, "See. In his heart he has got my wife bęcause he loves her and she's sitting in his heart. How can I hit him very dangerous thing in a country like England Rama. And if you do not have that Sankocha you get the right heart and that right heart is a where the climate is so bad, because it gives See the d.li- cacy of his understanding. So the brother you a horrible thing like asthma. I'm not said, "Then by hitting his head is he going to frightening you but its true. You get asthma be killed ?" He said, "You see, once his f your right heart is caught up. Not neces- attention goes towards his head his attention sarily that asthma comes from right heart will be withdrawn from his heart and once the only. It can also come from centre heart. attention is withdrawn, my wife will not be there any more. Then I'Il hit him and I'll kill him." But if you get right heart you definitely get asthma. So the attitude you see, like towards your father. I've heard people talking to their fathers also in such a funny way. You can't talk to your father like that. They talk to me also very rudely I've seen, Sahaja Yogis, shockingly even sometimes, on a very mun- dane level or you can say in a very unproto- So see, the Sankoslia, then you will under- stand that how we are rude and arrogant You see, this kind of arrogance and rudeness comes to us because we have no Sankocha. We should not say everything to everyone. We need not: Should we say everything ? Say, for example, in your puja may be you are doing colish way. You get this due to the right something which should not be done. I know its wrong. Unless and until its absolutely wrong I'll not tell. l'll sit quietly. Because otherwise you become tensed up. heart problem. So this Sankocha one has to learn, the 'maryäda' means the boundaries of your rela tionships. You see, that we love each other doesn't mean that we go on aggressing other's privacies. To what extent we love each other doesn't mean that we go on in way that we So you see, that Sankocha, that understan- ding comes if you love someone and under- stand them. Now, you have to love all the seekers of the world. They have done wrong. try to transgress all the beauties and all the They have done all kinds of ego-trips. They privacies of another person. have made all kinds of mistakes but, your Say, someone walks into the bedroom Mother loves them and you have to love directly, it's not the way a Sahaja Yogi should them. do. I need not tell you, but you must knock if you have to, and knock at a time when you need it All the time to knock or to hang onto someone all the time is not proper. If they are to be corrected I'll do that. You just don't do that way that they feel hurt. Put a Sankocha. While talking to each other educate yourself, train yourself to say things which are sweet and nice, which will So we have a cultural tradition which we make another person feel that this person is a properly brought up person in the Sahaja for his Sankocha, he knows everytime how Yaga tradition. So we have a Sahaja Yoga tradition in which when we speak to each engrained within us. The children are to be The Sankocha is a complete cultural style. He's known have to learn from Shri Rāma. to say things: We have to have this very much 24 Nirmala Yoga

 educated in that way and once they are principles or anything. In day to day educated in that way they will learn the things, like if yaur father is sitting-I mean in Sankocha. And that will give them a proper India if the father is there you won't sit down. understanding of social life. Before him you won't sit, at any cost. Till he tells you ten times you won't sit before him. Like if you see this light is here. If you It helps, you know. It reacts on the father put your finger to it, it might burn. Then you that supposing may remove your finger. But if you are with another person and if you try to take IRberties from your heart. That's only possible if you with that person then a day may come when that person may misbehave or harm you of do go". What is the need to be rude to your something to you. Still you will not realise father ? No need, at all. At any cost. What that it is because you have no Sankocha that is the need ? Or to your husband or to your it has happened. I misbehave my child will not respect. So the sense of respect also comes know that maryada from heart-"how far to wife ? Why say anything harsh to anyone ? So this Sankocha has to be worked out very What is the need ? What are you going to beautifully in every way, In thanks-giving. in gain out of it? By saying anything harsh I accepting some body's gratitude, in expressing have not seen that people have improved. Only when a guru is harsh or when a mother and father are harsh to the children it helps. Nowhere else it helps in common relationships like brothers and sisters, It does not. In higher and lower relationships the lower persons have to bear the harshness of the elders if they want to improve. There's your lave to another person in a way that is a Sankocha. Now Shri Rama is known for his bounda- ries. He doesn't cross the limit. The other day I told you about food, that you don't crss the boundaries of food, like being compas- sionate to the bugs and to the mosquitoes. nothing, after all they're not going to throttle You see in the same way in everything 'dis you. Supposing even il they say something cretion of the heart' should be there. Alright ?7 And bad to you it doesn't matter. one has to remember what Christ has said, that you have to turn the other cheek. So There's no word for discretion of the heart in the English language which is 'maryāda'. use the heart's discretion about how far to go Discretion of the heart. Is to understand, for with a person, In the effect of it you'll be a example, that if you are rude to your father very, very powerful person, in your family, in what do you gain ? You gain nothing. But Sahaja Yoga, anywhere. if you are humble you might gain, alright ? Even if he's a bad man, because what hap- pens in reaction ? Psychologically, supposing you are the son of a father who is doing something wrong and you are obedient to him, he will always have a fear that he will lose you if you follow him in your ideas. So by isten to me, who are rude to me, who do that humility you will raise him. Those people who are obedient to me are very powerful Sahaja Yogis. You know that. And those who are not, go down very fast. I try to save them by everything but I've seen that those who are disobedient, who don't not understand the protocol go down very much in Sahaja Yoga. Absolutely like that. In a second I tind they are going hundreds of feet down. It's true. Because what is lacking in you is the discretion, the maryādā, how far If you are humble, if your behaviour towards your parents is like Shri Räma's, there's noth- ing to lose. You don't compromise in your 25 Nirmala Yoga

 to go. And that's another thing where we task and sometimes you might think, "How can Mother expect us to do it ?" But I think have to educate ourselves. So the education of Shri Rama as I told that you are the people who are chosen for it you was that he could kill a demon with one arrow. You don't have to beat them a hun- So we have to train up ouselves to be first dred and eight times. One beating should be good rulers of ouselves and the rulers of sufficient. and you have to get to it and work it out. But you have to be powerful others. First we must learn to rule overselves. people and the power of a person increases You see, here in this body only you learn how by putting maryadas. Supposing you have to rule yourself. Comfort; if you get fond of wheat and just spread it. it will spread all comfort, make your body work it out that over. The birds will come and eat it up. But there's no comfort needed. If your body if you put it in a sack it will have a weight, it indulges into too much eating or anything. will have a size, it will rise in height and it is make your body learn that its not good to useful. It will have respect. But the thing indulge into it. If you speak too much, talk which is spread all over, which has no too much, if you are rude, just say that, "I'm maryada will never be respected. Nothing works out without maryadas. Even the light evening.' keeps to a maryada. You have to keep your maryadas. That is part of our training. not going to say a word from morning till So the Tapas, the penance time is now ahead of us. With that penance the greatest Say there's an aeroplane and it is not thing that is going to help is to go and talk of bound by any maryadas, it is not bound. When it goes up in the air it will be all and also talk about how the transformation, finished. A/l our ideas of freedom are to the blossom time has come be bound by maryādās. If the freedom has to do, plus you have to learn how to rule no maryada it is abandonment. It is nonsense. It is not going to help. So we have to create out of Sahaja Yogis great politicians. It has been predicted that if Sahaja Yoga does not spread then the third world war is inevitable. People will suffer a lot with a third world war. It is possible to avoid it if people take to Sahaja Yoga in big numbers. But if they do not. there will be a third world war and the What is Blake ? He was a prophet too. You effects of that will harm people so much that ultimately it is the Sahaja Yogis who will be through his Spirit, isn't it ? Pure intellegence. called for a conference and not the diplomats. Then you become Shri Räma if you can do The Sahaja Yogis will be consulted, and they will decide what is to be done for the world and they will become the rulers of tomorrow's You all could come world. So we must have a full idea of how to be rulers like Shri Râma. We have to move very far with ourselves, training ourselves, educating ourselves, getting your responsibility to be good. To be like rid of our egos and understanding that we have to grow. Its a very big task, its a great Sahaja Yoga. Give the message of my Advent This you have yourself and then how ta rule others-through your heart and not through your mind. You have to rule through your hearts by learning all the qualities of the heart which I have just told you.... I think you'd better read some of the prop- hets. You will also start talking like them. You read Kabir. Khalif Gibran, all these people. can talk like him. Why not ? He talked that. So today's a great day. I'm happy that . And it has worked out so well that I was going to come here and taik about Shri Rama, and wish you all that you follow Him up. Respect yourself and it's Work it out that way. that. May God bless you all. NADI GRANTH, (see Nirmala Yoga, vol. 9 (May-June 1982) pp. 3. Nirmala Yoga 26

 Shri Mataji Hounslow, London. 11th Aug 1984 Raksha-Bandhan and Maryadas for Sahaja Yogis Today is a very great day ot Rakshä- bandhan. So I have to tell you something successful than the marriages that were about Rakshaã-bandhan. to talk about the maryādās (boundaries of pure such a thing as to arrange your marriage with relationships) that have to be observed by a Sahaja Yogis. marriages which were done like that, ara'very Before that we have selected and were done. It's very wrong to do Sahaja Yogi by yourself. It will be dange- rous. I don't want to say anything; but it would'nt turn out to be good because it is anti-God activity Absolutely anti-God. You are supposed to develop your brahmacharya, you are supposed to develop your Moolãdhára. One of the things I discovered here, in the West, that though we have understood the importance of Moolädhära, which is a very important thing, that unless and until we estab- Instead of that if you start using a Sahaja lish our Moolādhāra fully we are not going to have speediestascent. Despite all that, there are lingering things you see around. Like, people troublesome, your Moaiādhāra is not going start choosing their life-partners in Sahaja Yoga. That is not allowed. That is not allowed. You are not to spoil your Ashrams, your centres-using them for a marriage searching society. You must respect this point, you of the conditioning you have had, you people must respect. If you have to marry, then you don't understand that it is important to main- can find your life partners 'outside" Sahaja tain the purity of the centres. And of every Yoga-to begin with. But if you want to marry place. So any such relationship in one city "in' Sahaja Yoga, then you should not go on searching people in Sahaja Yoga. It is "very To add up to the trouble, it's a habit of dangerous' thing for Sahaja Yoga itself, and people, I have heard, that they try to tease for you people. That is one thing one should "never' try to do with Sahaja Yoga. For all together". They tease' and enjoy. It's a kind practical purposes you are brothers and sisters. of a very perverted enjoyment of molādhāra, And that's why I always encouraged marriage To tease others, "You are looking very nice between people who belong to another with him, and you better marry him." Yogini or a Sahaja Yogi for the selection of your married life, it's going to be very very to settle down. I mean that's a bad stroke for your development. Because of the background and the kind is a very very wrong thing. It spoils everyone. that "you look better together", "you're nice It's a kind of a romantic non-sense. country or another centres. Of course, for all this, yogis-they have to. have a Brahmacharya. But even if you can't As we are now having a big marriage programme, I would say that most of the 27 Nirmala Yoga

 searching for boys and girls. Because il these habits are not curbed, 'before" marriage, then kind of a non-sense, when the marriage is not they go on lingering on. So, one should settled;-if marriage is settled it is alright: not try to do all these things before marriage. And this kills completely the joy of marriage, And I have seen such marriages are never- never successful so far. And even if they are, it is a sort of make-believe thing. It doesn't established. Some of them are really no . May be in orie case-may be-successful, that does not mean that you take help from such difficult if they are established, they are wrong, and things, but have 'normal" marriage which are if they are not established, they are heart- enjoyable, which have created permanent bon have brahmacharya. You must have Marya- Not to tease each other and enjoy that dās. because there is no curiosity left. And many a times I find that absurd relations are give real joy. it's a joyless pursuit good. And they will really be detrimental and some of them are never established. So dages between people. breaking. So all this kind of thing you should not Now we have to understand about tihe do. You have got experiences of people who "Maryādās about which I have told you before married outside and brought wonderful also. The relationships between men and people to Sahaja Yoga: If you can do it, you. women are pure only if a certain amount of should do it. If you have to marry Sahaja boundaries are kept. Like supposing you have Yogi, you should not marry them at the cost milk in one container and you have got some- of destroying the purity and the idealism it thing else in another container. To keep the has. For your own sake, for your 'own' purity of one container, you have to keep it in pleasures you should not spoil the name of its bounds, in the cup. If you allow them to mix up, if they fall together and mix up, then there is no purity left. It's a simple thing like that. One should understand- That we have to understand that how to keep our relation- Sahaja Yoga. That is one thing I have seen, so I would say that today, as it is the day of purity bet- ween relationships, let us know that you have to treat each other as brothers and sisters. Ships proper in respect to each other's modesty No such play should be followed. Don't allow your mind to drift into this. Because if you allow, then there's no end to it. As it is, you younger to you. You must keep al the dis know how hard it is to bring you back to normalcy. and chastity. Now, for example, there is a girl who is tance from such a person. If she is much older than you, then it's alright; you can talk, laugh, joke, she's much' older than you. But nor- When Christ had said, "Thou shalt not mally with a girl who is younger to you, even have adultrous eyes", He did not say it because it was not practical It is quite practi- And there is nothing to "much' younger, you should try to keep away, after all if she is a young girl; not with the children, but still You must learn these things: worry about marriages so much, wwhat is so important ? So many are married and what has happened to them. 'Even with the Sahaja Yoga marriage, some have failed because of Then you 'must not have any funny ideas these bad habits. So you better' get rid of about such a person-is absolutely absurd. If these bad habits before marriage. Because after marriage also they go on like this, and in perversion you do such things. See, you how to maintain a distance. Now, there is a man, who's younger to you. some gentleman is younger to you, it is only Nirmala Yoga 28

 person sit on my head. Sometimes you tele- phone to me, "Mother she would like to talk to you". Who is she? Is she alright? Should we take her to Mother? Is she capable of talking to Mother ? What is her condition ? Will she trouble Mother ?-Nobody thinks about it. should not have any funny ideas about that person. It's only done when there are emer- gencies, when there is no possibility of a marriage, when there are so many women or so many men-or under perverted conditions. Wa don't have; none of these conditions are here, so we have to bahave like normal people. And when the proper atmosphere is given to with me on proper understanding that you us, why not make use of it? Why should we should not try to trouble me !-But this is create absurd things ? Then they come out saying to me, "Mother, we have decided to marry : let us marry. I have to say, 'yes. many things i don't want to say 'yes', but I have to say "yes". That creates a very bad precedent. 'May be' that in certain cases, as an exceptional case, I might have chosen somebody to marry like that. But that does not mean 'you' should take things into your hands and just start doing things like that, so that I will have problems later. So you must first establish your relationship something not yet in my hands. cause people do not understand what they are doing. I think be- To So first try to see that you don't take advantage of me. And second thing, you don't bring people to me who do not deserve Vit. There is no need to waste my time with them. I have so much things to be done; so many ideas to be formulated. I have to work so hard. You know, I am working harder than any one of you, those who are doing Sahaja Because once you do that, everybody starts Yoga, And at this age if you try to trouble doing it. It's a kind of an aggressiveness, that me like that/ don't know that how to tell you you arrange something, come to me, say, that you do not trouble me. In the 'presence of the person you will come, you will bring the person on my head," Oh, that person has problem for me, for the rest of the people. come from Timbuktu, and I have brought her", Just you do it. It is aggressiveness only. "Mother we want to marry". Now what am I to say? "Alright, marry." But it creates a They will say, "Alright. If he has married a girl who is twenty years younger, why not I marry a girl who is thirty years younger." Please do not try to do that. This is the wrong thing to do. You must understand my problems. If you ask me something, "Mother, should I do it ?" You really force me into it; / say, "Yes", Be- first with me; that understanding that you cause I can't be very strict with you, because should not try to trouble me 'at all'. Secondly. I am your Mother. But you should be sensible you should try to please me by being good what to ask me, how far to go. This is the people. "biggest Maryādā you have to learn. Suddenly you will come, "Mother should I sit here?" egoistical. He does not even put on mny tapes, What do I say ? "Should I make this gentleman This kind of a sit here?" What should I say?-"Alright". You thing is very 'surprising'; how can people do "yourself' should not ask such a question. So the Maryādās are to be established I hear that somebody is trying to be very he just gives his own lectures. H like that? Try to bring down your egos, Because sometimes you give undue impor- tance to somebody, who is "my brother," who is "my sister,"-something. And make that You must Tearn to "please' me super-egos. S it, gE (Prasanna bhava He Devi. Prasanna bhava.) If you cannot make Nirmala Yoga 29

 the Devi Prasanna (pleased), what will be your achievement? As Rustom says. I am Maha- that. Achieve that purity. That is very mäyä. Alright. But don't you know that I am important. that ? So try to keep to it. And keep that understanding that if we have to grow, we *must have proper relationship with Mother. And we must understand what would displease trY to enter into any bedroom, where the ladies Her the 'most. "Am I pleasing Her by doing this ?" But if you force me; "If it pleases You we will do this", then what am I to say ?- "Alright, go ahead". If it pleases me I wil just spontaneously say, "Alright, it pleases me. Go ahead with it". First of all you should 'arise' and achieve Now the relationship between men and women. I have told you that you should not It's not proper. Nor the women sho uld enter into men's thing. But it is very common. Women should not behave in the way other women behave, Like I was told in a wedding in Maharashtra that the women went and took out all their clothes. I mean that is not England, they got a shock, you know. Some are. Like that so many things are there that of them lost their appetite for 3-4 days. They people just try to force on me and I say, **Yes". But I am very cunning and clever in They went and took out their clothes suddenly that, because I tell in a way that you realise that it is not joy-giving: Alright. have never seen such women in theirlife time. all of them. I mean they were shocked, so much shocked that 3-4 days they did not eat Now the second thing is that Maryadās of their food. So you had no business to shock relationships between you, is relationship of them also. Because if you go to somebody's "Pure' Love. Of Purity, Unless and until you country, you must know in what way they develop 'pure relationship, you are going to be ruined. See, this finger has to have pure like that. And 20 girls, if they suddenly relationsh p with the hand. Supposing if this become nude like that, what will happen. ? finger ha. some dirty feelings about this hand, it may dirty it. It may spoil it. live. It's never done, Nobody becomes nude So the sense of shame must be developed. Among men and women. It looks nice, it In the same way we must have 'extremely looks beautiful. It gives you an additional pure' relationship with each other. Means we charm. If you have the sense of shame, a should try to give our heart to another person little bashfulness. See your Princess of Wales without any lust or greed in it,-that, we is regarded as something beautiful. She is should try to do. Try to help each other. bashful ! Her bashfulness is so natural. That bashfulness is not there, like a-I don't know greedy way attached to others-this is not for what animal does that. but somebody who the Sahaja Yogis, but non Sahaja Yogis-they has no shame. I mean just don't know Everybody has a sense of shame-even animals. So why not we have that sense of shame; how to behave towards I find when they feel in a lusty way, or a It's a which one is that. get so much interested in that person. very 'baser' way of attachment., But in Sahaja Yoga, your attachment is with your Spirit, your Atmā, And Atma is the "purest form of our being. We have to keep it absolutely pure. And then the enjoy- to India. And she just went and put a big ment is higher than any romance, any marriage, slap on the back of Mr. Modi "HELLO" any worldly thing. Its the highest and the: Modi, how are you ?" And Modi got such a top-most. First achieve that. women, how to be dignified. I have seen one lady going from England shock ! She did not mean; she was innocent, Nirmala Yoga 30

 but that's not the way in Sahaja Yoga we are going to behave. Like some sort of a debon- air or some sort of a fantastic-what you call-a modern woman talk, how you listen to others more than you talk yourself, how you become non-aggres- sive,-is the best way to impress people and to express Sahaja Yoga, 5. One must understand one must have a sense of shame; how do you talk. Even with saying, "They are very beautiful people, you me they will talk with a hand like that "MOTHERI you see this thing is happening." they are very different type. It's something But there's no need to do all that, you see. Talk in a way that is gentle and beautiful. I tell you, as it is people have started can see they are very beautiful. You can see different. They are something great."-People have 'started' saying that. But 'still we lack The other day I met a very nice taxi fellow. in certain things, like we start going on a And I tell you, his gestures and things were so beautiful, immediately' I said he is a realised soul He would not say anything all prophets, and prophets have to behave like without putting his hand like this, and with prophets. They can not behave like cheap-type his eyes down below. He would not say people. So, in that we have to understand something tike that, nothing of the kind. So the Maryadās. sweet he was, his whole gesture. He is an Englishman I Brought up and bred here. Not should be respectful. have seen that nobody a single vulgar word he said. Like one of calls any body-even the children will call your players was so stupid. When Princess somebody, say, elderly person also-never they, Anne went to meet him he said all kinds of plane which is not suitable to our stature, to our dignity, to our position as saints. We are Now the Maryādā to your leader also; you say, call them uncle or anything like that; it's a wrong thing. You must teach your children to call elders by the name as brother or uncle or someone. Give some respect to the everything should be saintly. You are 'saints' elders. But when the leader also is not now I Do you realize ? You are all 'saints'. So respected, what is the question ot it ?I have seen little boys calling big, married people other, how you respect their dignity. how you with 3-4 children, by name. That's not our things, you see. It's kind of stupidity- don't know. a ego, or Because, how you talk, how you speak how you behave with dignity towards each live, is 'very important. style. You should never do it. I saw this-even my husband's office has this problem. Because when I came, you see,-they always called you by name.- Tom. He's such a big man, he's called as Tom and all that. So C.P. loked at it.......... And we always call them even the drivers, we call them by the name Mr- you see. So we could not understand why is it like this. You see, it being 'democratic' And that you should try to maintain in a way that looks like a 'saintly behaviour. You have to be a 'saint' ! And that is not difficult for you, to take to that, that you behave in a manner that you are saints. This is very important. It would be killing, absolutely killing Sahaja Yoga, if you do not keep your Maryādās. That is one of or something. You the 'Most essential things one has to under- become 'demonocratic stand. see that's how you We 'must' respect. We 'must" respectieach have told you again and again, how you other, must call them by higher names. dress up, how you bear yourself up, how youSpecially when in a meeting, where there are Nirmala Yoga 31

 people, you should call them-each other, even your friends-by Mr. so and so. brother. Or a lady is friendly as a sister, then she should not try to put a wedge between husband and wife. That is the 'worst thing to do, is to put a wedge between husband and wife. Anybody who tries to do that must know that he is a mean person. One * should never try to put a wedge between husband and wife. It's alright for me to call you. It would look very funny if I call Mr. Brown or Mr. Reeves; because they are my children, you see, I am their Mother. But for 'you because you are equal, at least call them Mr. And say something in a way which is beautiful. I know there are problems between hus- Like the English language has many words band and wife, I will put them right. But you as "please", "thank you"-All these must be don't try to put any wedge between them. used 'profusely. Profusely'. We are going And don't try to create a problem. If it is "back' a little bit. We are now becoming problematic, it is for 'me' to solve, you people much more modern. That, we should give up don't have to solve, And don't interfere with their married life, Let them be as they are, I will find out how they are, I will try to help them. Butit's 'very" wrong to play with their married life or with their mariage problems, and suddenly jump on somebody,-is a very wrong thing. Which is very common here. A and become less modern and more elevating, Now the whole idea of this Maryādā is such that when you have called somebody as a sister or a brother then it is not only lip- service, "You are my sister". It is something innate', and very deep. You have to develop that feeling of a sister. Because that's how your sublimity will go up, your left-vishuddhi will improve, your Vishnumäyā will be satis- fied. woman is in distress, you see, a man will come to help her. Even if she is married, he will elope with her. This is how he comes to help her in the distress.-To create another distress for her. So this is how one should If you call somebody a sister, the sisterly understand that this kind of a cheap heart- and daughterly relationships, and motherly giving business is not for Sahaja Yoga. relationships, always bring down the so-called ego, which is hiding in the left vishuddhi. So try to be kind and gentle with the person whom- you call the sister. Stand by her. Look after her. If somebody you call your brother. you In our heart resides the Spirit. We are dignified people, and in that dignity, we have to rise, and live with that dignity. Not to cheaply allow the Spirit to be insulted or daminated or subjugated to 'anyone". have to pray for his protection; then you must know that you have a right to ask him for 'his protection also. But you must also 'give something to him, and you must try to look- after him, welcome him to your house, and treat him as a part and parcel of your being, because he is 'very much near to you be- cause he is your brother, and he's very much Now the relationship with children also one should understand. I have seen some people have a habit of getting a child very much closer, and pampering them, "Oh I this child is this thing", "Oh I that child..." Let the parents handie the child, "you just don't interfere with other's children. Don't interfere much with them. If you find any child is such and such, inform me, I will cure the But such a brother should not try to domi- child. But if a child is being spoilt by you, nate the wife, this is the Maryādā, again. it's the worst thing to do to harm that child, closer to you. Like somebody is very friendly with the is to spoil. Nirmala Yoga 32

 best way, because we don't want to have gent. you must know. They are 'very good children who are spoilt. who are spoiling at manipulating. They will, because they are other children, nor we want children who are subjected to such children. So, you can souls, they are born in this country. What a have proper children, well-behaved children, combination 1 At that time you should be'very' sensible. wise children. Because they can really be a drag on you, on me, on everyone, if you do not properly bring them up. And Children here are 'very' clever and intelli- are realised extremely precocious. They careful as to their training. From the first five years all the parents should be textremely strict with children. they are our liabilities, we have to look after Extremely strict'. Don't allow them to overpower you or manipulate you. It's very' important. If you allow them to overpower you or to dominate you, they will sit on your Actually the mother should look after the child head. Tell them not to do like that. And one day you will come and say "Mother, what father should never scold the mother in the to do, these are realised souls and you see we were looking after them." They are not deities. They are not deities to be worship- scolding the mother in the presence of the ped. They are 'only realised souls. So keep child, the child will have no respect for the them at that point. And you are my trustees of these children. And if you spoil them, it is 'you' who will he held responsible. You the child will know how to respect her and have no business to spoil the lives of these children as Sahaja Yogis, and their chances of ascent. So if they are born-realised, they children to follow. One should not try to are not deities; this you must understand. dominate the husband, at least in the presence They are not 'beyond' corruption, they are not beyond all kinds of things. them. So the relationship between father and children, mother and children, is important. much more. And the child must respect;- presence of the child. That's one thing one must understand. That if the father starts mother. But the respect must be maintained, because if the wife respects the husband then the husband too. So the whole thing is built up like that. Is a kind of a pattern for the of children. That's very wrong. Because then the children learn that trịck and they start So this if you understand, this little point. dominating 'you." So it flows from you to that dealing with your children, you have to be 'really strict. They must know how to meditate, they must know how to pray, they the husband and in a way that is very obvious must know how to respect; and all the good to the child that the father is respected by things you njust teach your children-and don't allow them to sit on your head. children. So try to see, if you have to do anything then you do it yourself. And respect mother. And they are just like monkeys. The way you behave, they behave. So you allow them to behave in a particular manner, Many people have ruined the lives of their they will behave that way. But if you put a children like this: Now will you see such good pattern af behaviour, they will imbibe child is brought into proper level? If the child is trying to take liberties with you, and cheeky, and does not listen, please give that child to some other Sahaja Yogi, whom you think can look after, to look after-and see that the will never ask for it, "I want this, I want that". child is put right. "Nip in the bud" is the They never manipulate. What happens 7 What it. The other day I was thinking, how Indian children are so obedient, so sensible. They 33 Nirmala Yoga

 happens, how do they do it ? The reason is, I 'wrong of you, notto take any money from think, the good pattern in the house. Every- them." said where is the money! No question n of taking, I have to pay myself! I said it is so invaluable that how can you charge for it? body knows whom to respect, how to respect, how to behave. The relationship in Sahaja Yoga has to be They are not charged for it, it is very invalu- even more than this, much more subtler. For example, if-this I have said before also-if we are in a room try to give another person al ways-try to do 'for' them. If you have to pay, better pay yourself. Not that wait for another person. Try to do it yourself. Run "forward' to do it. You see, if someone is carrying the luggage, you' run, 'you' do it. That is the way a Sahaja Yogi should be. Mostly, children are like that; they will say, "I will get it; 1 will do it: T will receive. May be ego, you might call it, but whatever it is, but that is the sign you all have to achieve by organising a proper type of an image for the 'whole society'. That if some- body needs something, you run; You want water, alright..", "you want something. you take mine". Food also, same thing. First let other's have, not that you should first have anything. How you eat your food is very important, everything is very important for the possible for Sahaja Yoga. It is very important. children to see, and to behave like that. able. The Spirit is very invaluable, and you cannot charge for it. So he was insisting. 1 mean, he took half an hour on this subject only. He said, "This Anglo-Saxon brain would not understand unless and until you make it a little more money-oriented ar something. s something. I said, "I can not. Tell me how much is to be paid." Just to shut him down, I said, "What about Christ ? How much money did He" take ? By God's grace I am quite well off and I really do not need either, But He "needed", still He never toak any money from anyone."-Then he kept quiet. But this is, you seel That people think that you are getting it easy, cheap and that is why you want to take advantage, -which is wrong. *respect. You must respect and understand, that it is 'never" good to take any advantage of it. On the contrary. whenever possible you should try to do whatever is You must it is Try to surrender. Not that I will take any money fronm you; you know that, / do not In money matters also, l have seen that want any money or anything. But 'surrender people should be very-very should have proper Maryadüs. Now, with me, whatever Maryādās you want to keep, you must understand ! It is very embarrassing to talk about it. But so far, as you know, I had to shell-out lot of money to manage many funds, many things. And last time also we had many people who came to eat-does not Supposing there is a couple now, wants to go sensible and yourself absolutely to Sahaja Yoga That is the best way people have risen and have done so well. Now the relationship among yourselves, among different groups, among different nations. We should try to help people. to India to get married. Now if they do not have money, of courseI am there. I said, matter. At the time, now, when we are talking "Alright they need not pay any money, I will about Maryãdās, we must know that in any case Mother should not be made to pay any foot, he says, "Why not the people or the centre pay for them". But Waren has put down his Because we are so many, we should help them out, for the time being ?" You see more. try to manage, it possible. Like yesterday, because, now supposing they have helped I had a person from BBC, and he said, "It is somebody, he had no money. He went to Nirmala Yoga 34

 India, he got married and then he got lost. See, get the vibrations. Every morning, there he misbehaved, in the sense, that he does should be a discipline: You must know that not talk to anyone, he thinks no end of himself. Then he started behaving in a funny manner. So a kind of a feeling came into their mind that "Why should we do it 7 You see, you do it for somebody, he behaved like that. If you not:-only possible try to help somebody,.. is this reaction that if you try to do something for someone then people try to misbahave ?" That's not so: Must be one person has done it. that person. And tell-off that person. Or there that does not mean that every body has done are leaders who will do it. But everybody it. the system of Sahaja yoga has worked out this way, that I have given you realization just to say that "Let your light be enlightened." Now you have to see your lamp, it's clean or when the light is enlightened. See your lamp, if it is enlightened or not. See, if somebody is over-aggressive, then its alright, you make a joint attack on a natural others. You better judge must not judge That's what it is. They say there's a kind of a barrier built in a parson who is helped by yourself, cleanse yourself, look after yourself. us and his ego is challenged, and he tries to And also try to see how your lamp is. Is it behave in a manner, which was never known before, And he starts behaving in such a "funny manner that he does not talk to anyone, he keeps out and he becomes mad, will go tvery fast. And you have to. now, which is ego. So, his ego is hurt. There's perfect yourself. We have so many Sahaja nothing to feel hurt. Because if you have no money and if it is one part and one body, if point. somebody's helping you out, does not matter. You can help some body else, when you are well off. But when it comes to "you', you give it very much. Sahaja yoga should not be taken up. So it's a very absurd type of a behaviour for granted. Anybody who thinks he has of one individual or two or three or may be got realisation and now he is sitting on top of clean? Mother has given us the light to see; and why not see ? So if you work it out on these lines, you Yagis, but how many are perfect. This is the Now your relationship to Sahaja Yoga is also very important. There's a Maryāda about the world-is not so. You must work it out, to have discipline. The same five or ten. Doesn't matter. But still we must not forget that we have to 'help'. We have you have to help as many as possible. And we must gentleman-the BBC fellow-was saying that try to do, whatever is possible for us, for it was before, for years together you had to others. This is important. If we cannot do for live in celibacy and wash and sweep steps of a group, like Sahaja Yogis, whom are we going the temple and do all kinds of things, work to help ? So we have to give that help. hard, do this do that,-and then they would raise it to one chakra. / said, "Now we do it Now, in Sahaja Yoga itself, on the subtle the other way round". First build the dome, basis we should not try to judge anybody's and then the foundation. Sahaja Yoga is like vibrations. It is very common in people; "Oh, that So that, with the dome you understand you are caught-up on your Agnya". "Oh you have got this wrong, let me clear you out". people take for granted. Like : "Mother will You sit down. Morning till evening, without do it." "Leave it to Mother." No. It is not meditating, they are clearing each other's chakras and catching on yourself. It's an absolutely individually. should sit before the photograph -These hands are the Nirmala at this point! you are protected, you are looked after. But so. You are my hands. ow, supposing, my hands have to lift this, should say that "Nirmala will do it." Now which is Nirmala ? Every body, idea. wrong Nirmala Yoga 35

 So, many people drift like that, so to Sahaja to get perfection. Perfectionism. You shauld Yaga also your attitude should be of respect. You should not try to put yourself into bandhan before others, you should not try to every body should try to be: That, "your pro- do these things, but in a dignified way you blems / will solve. But you solve your ascent. should respect Sahaja Yoga. And forenmost That is very important. You 'must ascend, of all, to Sahaja Yoga your relationship should otherwise whatever problems I solve, you get be that you should know "Sahaja Yoga,- into another problem, then you get into what it is." liability on Sahaja Yoge, but a "great asset of Sahaja Yoga. That's what never be a Otherwise everytime if you have another problem. to talk about Sahaja, Gavin must come-or somabody. Why? Gavin did not know a word about Sahaja Yoga, he did not know a word about Indian mythology. he did not know anything', he didnot know what is Realization. He studied. He even studied sion. Because then I trouble you; that's the Sanskrit. Now the relationship, Say, you have a Ashram. Somebody has bought it. Now nobody should think that this is my house." Now this is the best way to get out of this idea of posses- place where Mahämäyā plays If you say, "This is my house"-then you will have it I And you Like many of you have done it. But 'all will have it for ever. Sosuch things you should of you. "one and all. should become a big pandit. But you get lost in your marriage house)." Now I have seen people going to problems. Then your children's problems. Then my mother, then my sister. I mean it house. They live there. They manipulate will take too much time for you. First of all all the money that they save and this and that, you must see, Tam a Sahaja Yogi, let me get and develop this, want to make everything to work 'never develop, the feeling that this (is my an Ashram. And then they think this is their comfortable. They never think: "This is not my Ashram, / am doing it because I am a This is the Ashram of Mother. And it creates problems for us also. Because your wile will sue you, your children Sahaja Yogi. will come round, this that. You should say "I have nothing to do; lam going to study Sahaja Yoga." thave to do it" Not at But that detachment is not there ! all a detachment. And it is something surpris- ing, that if you have to go to Himālayas and make insurance policy; then what's the use of coming to Sahaja Yoga? It is as absurd as that ! We are writing two insurance policies, that, "I have gone to Himalayas, if I die, give . If I don't die, I will come back after that"..-And nicely packing I was surprised that many people have taken "Advent" just like-as a Bible. Just as a Bible. They "never read it. I was surprised that some people do not know whatI have written in the Advent. So it's like the Jews, you see, having a Golden Bible tied up here. my property to this one They keep the "Advent" in a very good cover near the photograph, worship it,-finished. up in a nice plastic bag so that ice does not And the knowledge goas into them I" So you It's as absurd as that You spoil it! some chapters-at least of should not have anything. *must read' "Advent", if not anything else. Now some people have a habit-"Oh,I will gst a house for myself. Get my wife There are so many books you can read, 1 have told you. Try to make your own library. there, children there." Finished ..All such Try to improve on it. Every body" must try people, for a change, should leave their Nirmala Yoga 36

 houses, come to Ashram, put some other at her" Why did not you come in time, I was people in their house. Because they are get- ting attached, you see, how will you get ing to scold her, and shout at her and spoil detached? Is there any way out ? Because that all the relationship? Just see, the absurdity is very important in Sahaja Yoga : "Unless and until you are detached, you cannot ascend." Supposing you have all the tenta- cles down here on the Mother Earth, and you say "Let this plane fly-how will it move? waiting for you." Then why were you wait- of the whole thing is the attachment. You should get completely DETACHED about everything and you will enjoy, just ENJOY! But in that also, one has to judge you are really enjoying or you are just making a drama So those people who have houses of their out of it Try to be sincere. PURITY is own, or buildings of their own or anything- brought forth by SINCERITY If you are flats-should' give up their houses, not to be that comfortable: get out of it. Ask some other people to shift, and you shift to the you have to achieve in Sahaja Yoga, apart Ashram. Go on shifting, training your mind from the unity, which I have given you. But to shift, to live with everyone, to be able to if you do not use this unity for purity, no use. share and to do things. not sincere to yourself and to others, you 'can not' be pure. And purity is the 'main thing So this light should give you complete wisdom that you enjoy a 'pure' good life. You are married; alright, you have life of enjoyment that I have already described to you. And with your wife how to behave I have changed 40 houses after my marri- age. You can imagine ! And the kind of a house I have to carry on with is a very multi- with your wife purpose house. And I have changed so far forty houses, and if I change now this house, also I have described many a times. Or with it will be the forty-first. You can imagine, I have been married forty years and forty houses 1-have changed. your husband. But when it comes to others, you should have absolutely Pure relationship-of no So the relationship of purity must be exploitation. Even there are flirting exploi- understood, in everything. "Is it 'pure rela- tations-as the same as money exploitations. Here if you exploit somebody by money it's called a Thug'. But flirting is not called a house that is giving me comfort that's why anything. I think it is a much worse crime 1 am living in this house, or am I just living according to Christ. So you have to be care- here. just because it is an abode, I am here ful on this point. and understand that relation- tionship? Am I living in this Ashram in 'pure rclationship? Because this is a house that is today, and I will be there tomorrow?." ship with each other has to be pure. You will be amazed you will enjoy 'every part of life. "As soon as' you are attached, horrible wives or horrible husbands. I don't you are doomed. It's a 'headache', to be mind, they can give them up. if they are attached to some one. Then you hanker: "My absolutely impossible, if they are spoiling wife has not arrived. Oh God, what to do their purity, if they are torturing their lives, now. I must telephone to her, get her here". But if you are detached, "What's it, she'll mind. Because if they are 'so' bad that you come in time." Not only that, but you will enjoy her company; otherwise you will shout Now there are people who have, say, then the best is to get rid of them. I don't OS cannot use them-just like this body, if it is so bad, it's better to give up and die, so that 37 Nirmala Yoga

 let that relationship die out. But that death should come to you as a very forceful help, relationship of Vishnumaya is, that Vishnu- otherwise after that if you become a nervous mäya is the one who is the Sister, sister of personality, what's the use? Now. brother sister relationship-the Shri Krishna. She is the one who announced the Coming of Shri Krishna. She is the one So what you have to do after such a thing who sacrificed, her life to save Shri Krishna's has happened, is to solve all your problems solve your divorce problems, solve your court problems, then come to Sahaja Yoga. We do not want to get involved into this sort of a Durvodhana and it was Shri Krishna who came thing 'at all' that we have broken any family or anything. If you cannot carry on with your wife, Sahaja Yoga should not be any excuse. Because 'you' can not carry on with your purity, of help. A very delicate relationship wife, you should have this thing-go out of is to be maintained of a brother and a sister. Sahaja Yoga, do what you like with your wite, And that is a special relationship, Today, finish it off once for all. And you should tell those who want to tie the Räkhis to a sister her," I am no more a Sahaja Yogi." Get it should tie today before me, it will he a good out, and then' come to Sahaja Yoga. But by idea, It is a greater relationship than any coming to Sahaja Yoga you will be 'really other relationship. Because here somebody troubling me too much. life. Vishnumāyā is the one which surrounds Shri Krishna; and She was born as Draupadi who, you know, was later humiliated by and helped her. So it's a very sweet relationship of is your 'own' sister, is alright. But if she is not your own sister you should know that you So I have to make a humble request to all are born of 'One Mother. So the brother you, that if you have any such problem, do and sister relationship should be alright not allow any child who is younger than a proper age-sixteen years-to be kept in the Ashram without taking a full permission, "written' permission from the parents. Ora wife who has made problems with the husband. should 'not' be allowed to come and stav in miserable one. This is all but a the Ashram with the childern. We are not responsible for all kinds of problems. In that also one should not have preferences Because some would like to have a rich sistert Or some sort of a nonsense like that. Or somebody would like to have the most relation- ship with a person with whom you would like to be happy, you should tie the Rakhi, And if there is anybody left out, I would say that best Then people who are sick or mentally thing would be to have your lucky dips. I think deranged shouuld not be kept in the Ashram. That is also quite a 'sympathetic' attitude of so many Sahaja Yogis. Ashram is for the things. Whichever way you like you choose best people. not for the lunatics. So please do not get such people who are no good. We do not want such people to come in the happy. And then we will do this little havana Ashram who are going to ruin the reputation of the Ashram. for people, something like that could be done so that they choose their sisters and tie the it. But I have got some nice Rakhis for you; that should be done today. And I will be very for the Vishnumäyä. May God Bless you. 38 Nirmala Yoga

 SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI BECOMING THE IDEALS Diwali Puja Temple of all faiths, Hampstead London, 6-11-1983 Today's vibrations, you can see when you What are the ideals we have become or have are prepared for puja how much you get. to become. What we can achieve, this idea Today you can feel it. So the Divine is very you must have. And secondly you must have anxious to act, only thing you have to pre- the capacity to deepen your meditative power, pare yourselves, and all these preparations are gaing to help you tremendously, so that these ideals go and settle in your heart, as a part and parcel of your being. That you can't live without these ideals. You As we are now Sahaja Yogis, we have to know that we have become something diffe- rent from what we were. We are Yogis, we are higher people than others are and as such we have to understand one thing, that we one thing and did another thing and executed are not like other human beings, who say between Sahaja Yogis and Non Sahaja Yogis. can take an example, say of Christ. He and His ideals were the same. There is no diffe- rence between the two. He did not talk of the third thing. This will be the difference something and do something, who can live with hypocracy. That's why all the problems have arisen out of all the religions. A person who says he is a Christian, he is absolutely You are that. If you are gold then gold is gold Anti-Christ. He who says he is Islamic, is absolutely Anti-Mohammad, he who says he is a Hindu, is absolutely Anti-Shri Krishna. This is the main reason why all the religions have failed so far, because human beings talk big of ideals. They all say they have this ideal Yogis you become pure human beings, and that ideal, but they are not those ideals. They cannot live with those ideals. The ideals are not in their lives, they are outside, but they go about saying that these are our Ideals. They become fanatics but they are not the ideals. By Sahaja Yoga now you have the method, you have the possibility that you can become the ideals That whatever are your ideals, have to be expressed in your life every moment. because all the time. It is not gold sometimes and some times Iron and sometimes mud. It is gold all the time. Only human beings are like that. That sometimes they can be Snakes, Lions and could be Foxes also. But as Sahaja this is what we have to know. It is not diffi- cult to strive for it, it's not difficult because now you have the power to deepen your roots to your heart. So the brain must be used to understand clearly what are the ideals of a Sahaja Yogi, what are the things a Sahaja Yogi should do. How he should behave in life, what method he should follow. And then he has to bring it to his heart, Through The ideal has to first be understood through med tative through your brain, in the West specially. surrendering. processes. Nirmala Yoga 39

 How I give you second birth you know also. You have to nourish them, care for them very well, I conceive you in my heart. Otherwise I cannot do it: because my heart unrighteous things. is so pure it cleanses you. My compassion and love cleanses you, and then I can take you out of my Sahasrara, otherwise how will I do that ? And when that has happened upward. Those who are standing even on a you have become a new personality. So you are very different from al others, because a Spirit has given birth to your Spirit. You at a higher step and looking downward, will have been cleansed by the Spirit. So you cannot live like that. like all other human beings are living. All the clashes, al the problems of human beings are because they parents: are you becoming silent within are not what they talk. ldeals are out, out of yourself, are you nourishing it with your their life. That is how a Sahaja Yogi will silence, with your compassion, or you are show himself-up, compared to anybody else. supporting something which is absolutely Take an example, say of Abraham Lincoln, alright ? Abraham Lincoln believed that everyone must have freedom, and the govern- ideals itself will make you so dynamic that ment should be for the public, for the people. you don't need to consult anybody, you be- Whatever he taiked he practised he believed in he worked it out and gave his ideals itself will be enlightened. So the first life for it, that's why he is a great man. and do not compromise with wrong doings, Now, when I tell you this, it is not nece- ssary for you to feel guilty. We have to look lower staircase, if they are looking upward, they are alright, but those who are standing go down. So look forward. What we have to do in our day to day lives, in simple rela- tionships, husband-wife, children- even Anti-God. If you become the ideals, the power of it, whatever come the ideal. They are like torches. Your attitude should be, how do we deepen our- selves, that should be the first attitude. Now say, husband and wife are quarrelling, morning Think of Mahatma Gandhi, they were not like Christ, incarnations. Think of any great man, think of Shivaji Maharaj. Anyone till evening. They can not be Sahaja Yogis. of the saints, they were human beings But Absurdities. If they are quarrelling they are not once they knew this is the principle on which Sahaja Yogis, take it for granted. Now, what we have to live, they became one with the You have to do, if two persons are quarrelling, principles. They do not compromise. So what a Sahaja Yogi has to be, that we should understand. the one who is a Sahaja Yogi will leave that wife and have nothing to do with that wife, "I have nothing to do with wife, I have no wife, nothing." Keep out, detach completely A Sahaja Yogi, is a person who has got from it, just do not talk to that wife. Don't realization through the Kundalini. And Kunda- discuss, don't bother about it, just detach. If lini is the mother within you. Is the caring. the son is like that, just detach.. After a point, nourishing power. That mother will never but no quarrelling, no arguments nothing compromise with the son. If the son wants to kill somebody she will say, 'no'. I mean a developed. But in that silence, he should real mother will even shoot that son who Complete silence, a silent protest must be not be a cowardly person. So many people are cowards and that cowardliness they think if you become the mother of yourself, then is their silent process. A person who is you have to look after yourself, in the same really powerful will not deter. will not be manner you nourish yourself and all others aggressive, but will not also take aggression. tries to do wrong things: And the same way Nirmala Yoga 40

 So in your meditations, you have to sit you, whatever you are which has to grow, is down. Now what do you see in meditation. the child. Mother is the ideal. She is the Try to see all the chakras, what chakras are inspiration, she is the power and the child is catching, face it yourself. These might be the recipient. If the child is an obstinate from your past life some chakras are weak, fellow, then you can't do anything about it. try to make them alright, try to strengthen Also find out, you might be one of them. I them. Because ideals have to be worked out. know who are like that. There are many. them out in no time. Obsti- And you can find The instrument has to be alright, if the instru- ment is a crazy one how will you do ? So first nate fellows, if they live with ten people of all you must develop your instrument pro- suddenly we hear reports of their existence. perly, it should be balanced, powerful, not They are quite eloquent, even if they are not cowardly. People should feel your power, Of talking a word, people can tell you, "I had a course the power is of love, but love doesn't fight with such and such. That person said mean that you compromise with all the non- such and such a thing to me, that person was so cruel to me, that person demanded this, you know which person where. You see, as a diamond can be made out, thorns can be sensical things. There should be no com- promise at all. It's a very self certifying state. We cannot say when it is, so we just cannot say. Itself, the state, will certify that I'm made out also anytime, You go near the thorn, alright now, I have reached that state. You anyone without exception, it will bite everyone cannot say after five hours three ninutes two It is not going to spare, it is a thorn. So seconds you will become that. You just thorn has to be a thorn. But if you are a Sahaja Yogi you have to be a flower, and a strong flower, and an eternal flower that always Once you understand, that unless and grows, does not fade out. always growing never fades, such a flower you have to be, Sahaja Yogi. Everybody can call themselves then you will be surprised that you do not Sehaja Yogis: there's ro inauguration, we don't get into a trip of ego neither you go into a mature and see that maturity within you. until you become your ideals, you are not a have any sort of a inauguration of a university where people can come and get their degrees and diplamas, "Alright, you are certified twice complete collapse of super-ego. So much you know that anyone of you born." There are some who are several times can be called a scholar, I can tell you. twice born. They are twice born today, mean so many times people have asked me "Are they all scholars that you have your dis- twice born, and again twice born. Some of ciples ?" You know so much, much more than them can be 108 times twice born, in Sahaja any Saint ever knew, I can assure you. But Yoga. And even then they are not certified. you know only in the brain outside, it's all So you have to give yourself a certificate. bla, bla, bla. It comes to the brain and you use it to show off to others and finished. It doesn't even settle down there, you haven't let it go to the heart. So everybody is talking big, they can impress people. I mean if some journalists come here, they will be so impres- sed by the Sahaja Yogis, so many wise men in England sitting down here But you laugh at yourself, you have known all this because tomorrow they are not. then again they become There is no university to do that. You have to understand yourself what are your problems, why are you behaving like this. You treat yourselfas a child. When it is needed you have to rebuke yourself. When you have to glorify, you have to glorify yourself. So now you separate, You become the mother, and Nirmala Yoga 41

 I know you have eaten. have been speaking to0 much, Also the Spirit is shining. Let your Spirit shine in such I eat, how can : I can't even go out of the a way, that people know that this is a man who house, I'm sitting down here, where is the. mud ? How can Teat I" "You did eat, I know you have eaten, so better show me your " He said, "Really!" and then the mouth apens and the complete Vishwa Swa- rup, complete vision of the whole Vishwa she sees, and the mother falls at his feet. That's is completely intergrated, and this is what is Sahasrara. So if there is no integration, you have not achieved your Sahasrara. Then there mouth. will be no need to pull your ears. The day should come when you all will raise your heads with great pride and glory, what should be. This mother has to fall at because your ideals, your ideals will shine like ornaments. / want to see those days Symbolic. Thất is how you have to grow when all those who claim to be Sahaja Yogis, Into that Vishwa Swarup. Into that Collective become that. That's the most important thing Being. Into thet Virata. all other things are useless, getting an ashram getting this, doing this, doing that, forget it. good symbolic thing. Arjuna was a friend who What you have to manage is this child which has to grow. Who is still naughty some- times, tries to misbehave. But put it right. things. But still Shri Krishna could not con- Give it a name, you call yourself a Sahaja vince him of that. All these were just outside Yagi, and that child as Mr Y, Mr X-whatever your name has been, and always try to tell, talks are very entertaining you know, very "Now will you behave yourself'! Get up in humorous, nice to hear them; let's not-best the morning. have your bath, sit down for not listen to any music better to hear Mother's meditation. "I feal lazy," the child says. "1 can't." Then you accept the child. Then the listening to Mother they have become Mothe: child will become the mother and you will be already. That's what happened to Arjuna losing your powers. Excuses the child knows, very intelligent, its a very clever child, extre- mely intelligent, knows how to deceive you. ideal. But the child also knows in it whet it means. If it comes to know that the inother in you "I think l'll see your great image." Krishna has developed that personality, then it accepts said, "Alright, are you prepared," and he said, mother's personality. But if the child knows "Yes, I am prepared." And then he became that the mother herself is weak, then he starts taking advantage of the mother. So you have not to fight yourself, but to tame, and this is very easy. You're hiding behind there alright giving excuses. And the child grows big, so big that the mother sees that, and is amazed ! Like in Shri Krishna's child- like this !" Just fike Yashodā falling at the hood, the mother was Yashoda and the child feet of the little child. You have to tall at the was Shri Krishna. It's very symbolic. And he feet of the child that is within you. used to play very naughty tricks, and she said, "You vwent and ate that mud from there. remember that no argument, no explanations. the feet of the child, that has grown Very Arjuna and Shri Krishna is another very used to take liberties with Shri Krishna. Shri Krishna tried to tell him about Gita and all these bla bla blas. As Mothers talks are. Mother's talks. And then the people think if they are also, but still he found out there's something lacking in him. That he has not become the Still his attention is not there as it should have been. So he asked Shri Krishna, the Virāta, the vision of the Virāta, and when o he saw it he said, "Stop it, its too much for me." That's what should happen to your friend who is this child. That it should become that Virata where you see that, should be amazed at yourself, "Oh God, I have grown l'am sure this will happen now. So Nirmala Yoga 42

 Everybody's improving but it's rather slow, Mother is forgiving, She'll forgive you every- thing, you know that. Anything that you do l'll it can be vary fast if you mmeditate, very impor- forgive you, even if you murder me, I'll forgive tant You have to know how to make your you. But you won't be able to forgive yoursalf. chakras alright. Your mantras are to be seen. So allow that child to grow. grow fully. (Who are the children crying like this ? be mechanical, just saying something mecha- Why are they crying ? Which child is that ?- ..She has a problem. Take her out You Again, if you do not say mantras through must clear her, she has had problems for your heart, mantra is not Siddha, means you So many days. You must take her out for a while. Still screaming, have no effect. Siddha mantra is that, that Mantras are to be such that they should not nically, You should say it from your heart. clear that child, may go on saying one hundred times, it will look after better take her out. You must them and find out what's wrong with your does not work then your mantra has no children. If they're crying, I know what are meaning. So the development has to be the children still not alright: Just don't pam- within and without, and you have to certify per their ego. Work it out. clear them out, yourself. Nobody else is going to certify: it's important. Don't want to be bhootish. All their lives they'll be bhootish like this. I go ahead. If you want to cheat yourself, have seen many children who are like this, then go ahead. It's not going to help anyone. you say, that it has an effect. it works. If it If you want to give yourself a false certificate, they see me they cry, weep, shout, it's not a sign of a healthy child. would not even look at me, used to scream and shout, now look at him how nice he's become. So any are there have to be given up to enjoy that child who is like that, you don't say that, don't beauty. avoid the topic. Look after that child, put him right. You have to see that the child is alright. As you have to put your child alright. also put all. Today is a day we celebrate in India, the child which is really your son alright, and do where rélationships between brothers and not live with that kind of misunderstanding. If a child cries like that there's something wrong with the child. They're singled out.) . If you find your attention is going here or ship where the sister prays for the protection there, if you are not attentive in the pro- gramme, something wrong with you also. If sufficiency of the Kshema, well-being of the you go off to sleep, something very seriously sister. So this time you have to think of wrong with you. At that time if you are thinking of other things, then something like your brothers and sisters. You have to wrong with you. Get headaches, something think like that. Purify your hearts. It's some- wrong with you. Judge yourself, clear out. thing funny in these countries you know that, you must clear out, that's very important. If there no such relationship exists. Purify your you are still getting into tempers, irritation, mind today on that point, that evarybody anger, there's no balance that has come in you, something wrong with you. f you its alright. but look at everyone, try to look at know how to control your anger, then its everyone as a brother and a sister. Both alright. You'll find out everywhere how relationships don't exist. This is negativity works, in small things. But if you really want to have the joy and the bliss of the grace of Heavenly Father, then come out of it, many misidentifications that It's such a great day today, to meet you sisters have to be established, they're very Brothers and sisters relationships is without any lust or greed. It is pure relation- pure. of the brother, and brother prays for the self- your other Sahaja Yoginis and Yogis who are else is my brother or sister. If you are married a funny country where there is no relationship which Bhai Dooj-is celebrated on Dvitiya (the 2nd day of new moon) after Diwali, the festival of lights. Nirmala Yoga 43

 is pure. It's such a filth I tell you, if you read Women will listen to the tune, men will be that, you can't believe it, such perversion; especiajly, innocent people like children are attacked. Think of them as virgins, be care- ful, and the young girls should know that they are beautiful. Nodody is higher or lower, but are virgins. If they go about with boys and enjoy yourself as being a they are Sahaja Yogis, they are not. Sahaja yourself as being a man But man does not Yogis means have to be chaste women, powerful, chastity is their power and of men stupidly that you are higher than woman, in too. After Sahaja Yoga men should become conscious of their power too. seeing to the instruments. That's the nature, God has created you, after all somebody has to do this and somebody has to see that, both woman, enjoy mean that you agress women, thinking evalution. Or women dominating men. thinking that by dominating them they can put them right. They have never put them You see this was Nomadic times when right by that. They have gone absolutely the men used to go for hunting and women used to cook in the house. Men were sup- posed to have five women, they were Noma- They have not put them right. So both the dic people, then they became sophisticated. qualities must be nourished and developed, Then the Monogamy started which reached a certain point. Then again this kind of an abandoned life started, this is Nomadic life, fying yourself, these things will automati- Now women also have become Nomadic. cally work out, and you will respect each Men and women all Nomadic and primitive. other, actually you are all Yogis. I have to After sophistication they have become primitive, respect you, and you have to respect each this is the problem, but now you have to Other. become higher beings where there are pure pect. You are all great Saints, yes, you are. relationships. Any relationships, supposing Respect, respect each other, you are not to there was something in between me and talk harshly to anyone, to trouble anyone. Try this instrument, we cannot use it, any con- nection can be cut off, f there is something the way we have to change. in between. To have the best connection is to have pure relationshlps, and it should be discretionary. Mother is a mother, father is a culture of God, we are talking about, it's the father, sister is a sister, brother is a brother, culture of His kingdom. Where we give to cabbages, men have become cabbages, where ever women dominate, men become cabbages. and the relationships between men and women should be of pure love. Once you start puri- On the contrary I find there is no res- to do as much as possible for others, this is These are no brand of any culture, it's the types others, enjoy giving, doing for others, loving be understood. others, caring for others, without any return. different, Vvarious all these are of relationships, should Women must understand they are women If you little bit help yourself, the Divine is and men must understand they are men. Also relationship to yourself is very impor- tant, women should not try to be men, we cannot be, and men should not try to be women, it's wrong, because basically they cult even to talk, sucking, going out. just a are different people, they are born differently. little thing you did yesterday or this morning, What is the difference? Aman is more meticu- lous, he knows more about machines, details into that, you'll blossom into something. Just about it, a women will see the pattern. pay attention to yourself and first and foremost very anxious. You have seen today that the vibrations are so much that really I am finding it diffi- tremendous vibrations, and you'll be thrown Nirmala Yoga 44

 respect yourself because you are a Yogi, you fighting and pulling each others hair, then I cannot be undignified, you cannot be stupid, would say it's better not to call. Try to get you cannot be high-handed, you cannot be rid of your problems which are very simple, if dishonest, you have to be a sweet, matured personality, because you are all Yogis. I mean you should call yourself Yagi X, Y, Z, you should, you are, but calling yourself Yogi and you cannot then you'll tell me, I will tell you how to get rid of them. Face them. May God Bless You All. Shri Lakshmi Sakshat Shri Kshema Dayini Saks Shri Adi Shakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Namo Namah hat Shri Kubera Sakshat Om Tvameva Sakshat Open letter to all the Sahaja Yoga Centres on the Financing of Sahaja Yoga Activities MONEY I I.. Money makes the world go.... round and round anticlockwise. What is Money ? For too many people it is a cause of illusion and, perhaps, of doom. For the Sahaja Yogis it is, at the gross level. a neces- sary means to reach some ends, at the subtler level, a welcomed opportunity to sustain their nabhi chakra, through the shakti of genero- sity. thereby putting auspiciousness into matter. Here are a few practical suggestions as to how to do so. will itself run into problems. This is the basic principle of financing the activities ot our sangha and I hope it is clear I ! 2- The financing of Sahaja Yoga activities at the international level There are some expenditures at the inter- national level that have to be covered by all the nationa! familias of Sahaja Yoga because they are indispensable for the growth of our community world wide. They express our contributions to the greater collectivity on which each of our national collectivities depend. Here are a few examples of such expenditures. 1- The financing of Sahaja Yoga activi- ties at the national level Whatever is financed, say, by the Britishers in the UK, Australians in Australia etc. for Sahaja Yoga expenditures, is to be consi- dered as the household money of the national family. That is, at the national level, we do not "make a donation" or "contribute" to Sahaja Yoga any more than I "make a donation" to my own family when1 go shopping and buy a piece of cheese. We do it for ourselves. The hand which puts food in the mouth should not feel that it is "contributing" to the mouth's welfare. (a) Programmes of Sahaja Yoga in a new country. When a few people introduce Sahaja Yoga in a new country they should be financially supported if need be. (b) Projects in India. Various pilot pro- jects in India (on Sahaja agriculture, health, education) work as focuses of experimentation to set up new guidelines for Satya Yuga's Society. We and our children will most certainly benefit from it. Ater all, if the (c) Travels of Shri Mataji. Our Divine Mother's exhausting schedule of travels mouth does not eat anymore, the hand Nirmala Yoga 45

 Registered with the Registrar of Newspaper under Regd. No. 36999/81 Again, money has to be raised for this central fund on a regular basis. Further- more the sales proceeds from uny publica- tian or book on Sahaja Yoga has to be earmarked would certainly be too much for anyone else. It goes without saying that she should be attended to in these worldwide tours by competent organizer. It is our collective desire that Dr. War ren Reeves should do precisely this and no more at his own costs. With his very versatile background he is most suited for this important function, hence we should pay for his travels too. for international covering expenditures ance that the production costs of the publication have been covered. 4- Management practices Very sound and honest managenent prac- tices are an absolute necessity. Here a word of warning is overdiue, the mis- management of Sahaja Yoga money can have extremely negative consequences. Moreover, to consciously or unconsciously embezzle Sahaja Yoga money is to expose oneself to the anger of the deities. Punish- ment is swift and severe. (d) Celebrations and gifts. Whenever it is planned that celebrationor a gift should be sponsored worldwide the co- oidinating.center or person should. when ever possible, contact the other centers beforehand so that everybody can share and rojoice in due time 3- Raising money and payment For national expenditutes vatious davices can be used to raise monev automatically: eig. percentage on Ashram rents, charity sales, collections etc. Each country can Finally let us all note that it is for us a great challenge to turn matter against materia- iam, that is, to invest part of our earnings to support activities undertaken for the we manage its accounts according to the practice best suited to the logal condiE Deing of the Spirit. There is also a joyous trick about being a bit generous..ond this is that God is always much, much more gene- rous than we are. JAI SHRI MATAJILL tions. For International expenditures each country has to open a spěcial account whose HSsets have to be transfetred twice a year to the central account in London. Much love. Gregoire de Kalbermatten Editud & Published by Sh. S.C. Rai 43, Bunginw fload, Dalhi-110007 & Printed it The Central Elnctric Preas, 80 D. Kaimla Nogar. Delhi-110007. Onit. iNsu Rs 9.00, Annual Subseription Ra 51.00 Formign tby Aimail E 714)



----------------------

1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Nirmala Yoga
Bi-Monthly
Vol, 4 No. 23
Sept.Oct. 1984
EL
"Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns all the religions and
seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga-THE UNION"
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-1.txt 
 YOGA
NIRM ALA
43, Bungalow Road, Delhi-110007 (India)
Founder : Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Editorial Board: Dr. S.K. Mathur, Sri A.S. Mishra, Sri R.D. Kulkarni
Representatives
B CHERYL REBEIRO, 1267, Burke Road, KEW 3101, VICTORIA.
INGE KELLY, Gartnergasse 17/10, 1030 VIENNA.
:LORI & CARY HYNEK, 3151, Heather Street, Vancouver, B.C. V5Z 3K2.
ALEXANDRE PICOVSCHI, 175, Av. Ledru Rollin PARIS-75011.
ANTONIO SARACINO. PIAZZA E. MILLO 9 e/2, 00122-109, OSTIA LIDO,
Australia
Austria
Canada
France
Italy
ROMA.
: M.B. RATNANNWAR, 13, Merwan Mansion, Genjewala Lane, Borivali (W)..
India
BOMBAY-4000092.
: JUAN ANTONIO DELGADO, Avenida De Burgos, 30, 1, A, MADRID-28036
: CHARLES & MRS. MAGDA MATHYS, 5, Chemin Des Mouldins.
1256. Troinex (Canton de Geneva).
: GAVIN BROWN, Brown's Geological Information Services Ltd., 134 Great
Portland Street, London WIN 5PH.
M.J. MURDOCH, 14A Bourne Ave, S. RUISLIP, MIDDLESEX, HAH 6TZ,
Spain
Switzerland
U. K.
ENGLAND.
: CHRISTINE PETRUNIA, 270. Jay Street (APT. 1-C), BROOKLYN,
U.S.A.
NY-11201.
URSULA SEHLMEYER, 191 Canal ST. #23 SAN RAFAEL, CA-94901.
CONT ENTS
Page
1. Editorial
2. Prayer for Sahaja Yogis
3
3. The way of our full Spiritual growth and
Sahaja penance (Easter puja)
4. Sahasrāra
15
5. Shri Rama's birthday
16
6. Raksha Bandhan and Maryadas
27
7. Becoming our Ideals (Diwali Puja)
39
45
8. Open Letter
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Editorial
All Sahaja Yogis have worshipped Shri Adi Shakti on a number of occasions. The Pujas are
TEceived by Her in person or through Her all pervading presence. Established Puja procedure
generally consists of the following stages:
(1) Dhyinam-Remembering the deity,
(2) Avähanam-Invocation.
(3) Asanam-Offering a seat to the deity,
(4) Pādyam-Offering water for washing the feet.
(5) Arghyam-Offering water for washing the hands.
(6) Achaman-Offering water for sipping and rinsing mouth.
(7) Ābhishekam-Ablution or consecration with water while reciting hymns.
(8) Upchar-Offering of vermilion, sandlewood paste, scented materials, rice grains
smeared with vermillion, offering the clothes, ornaments, etc.
(8) Naivedya-offering the eatables and food.
(10) Singing the Arti and prayers.
(11) Salutation or prostration.
For a common man who is engrossed in his own affairs. and has no time to think of God
God is often presumed to be away. Owing to inability of common man to comprehend all
pervading presence of God or recognise His incarnations, it has become customary to worship
the idols. Ignorance even led them to believe the almighty to be present only in a
particular idol. It is assumed, after saying the relevant mantras, that God has condescended
in the idol and further offerings are made. However. Sahaja Yogis know what response do
the prayers of unrealised people, evoke. Nevertheless, God did appear in the idols, in response
to the prayers of great realised souls. Namdeva, a great saint from Maharashtra, when he
was a boy of 7-8 years, performed the puja of Shri Vitthala, the Virata, and insisted on the Lord
to eat the food he had offered. When his repeated requests and crying did not move the Lord,
he threatened to break his own head, if the Lord did not eat. Lo I The Lord of Universe melted
with compassion at his devotee and ate the food and as an evidence of it, left a small quantity
near the mouth of the idol.
Nirmala Yoga
1
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Sahaja Yogis, have tremendous responsibility when they worship the Adi-Shakti. It is
undoubtedly the experience of everyone of them, that Mother is with us when we meditate
and remember Her. Hence the puja must be performed with attention completely on the
lotus feet of Supreme Goddess. Distraction from the puja, although not intended, may
amount to showing disrespect. Mantras are chanted in the praise of Supreme Goddess and
praying for acceptance of the offerings made with devotion. Pure devotion comes from the
heart ie. from the desire to please the Parameshwari whose reflection is the Spirit which is
pleased when She is Prasanna'. Hence it is essential that the heart is associated with the puja.
Mother has also emphasised it time and again. It evokes beautiful vibrations at every stage
and Divine Bliss is enjoyed by everyone present.
It is the actual experience of unison of "Jeeva' the empirical being and the Brahman. With
the attention of everyone present totally on the puja of Mother's lotus feet in complete
thoughtless awareness, the aggregate of consciousness of Sahaga Yogis worship the Supreme
Spirit, the universal consciousness, the quintessence of totality of consciousness. It is the
highest stage of oneness of the worshipper, the worshipped and the worshipping.
It should be possible for everyone to sustain this state during the entire period of perfor-
mance of puja and even thereafter. Purity of attention is tainted by irrelevant thoughts pertaining
to one's individuality, the product of ego and super-ego, resulting into separation of that
person from collectivity. It would therefore depend on one's ability to remain thoughtless
even-outside the state of meditation.
Pujas should become a part of the inner system. Shri Mataji has said in one of Her
letters that Puja should be performed in the heart. Views of pujas should go to heart Indeed,
it becomes a permanent source of joy, Let the heart be the throne of Adi-Shakti. Pray to
Shrimadsinhäsaneshwari to take the throne. Then worship Her lotus feet with the attention
that has become pure and holy like the Ganges water and auspicious like 'Amrit'.
Adi Shankarãchūrya has described Mänas Puja (Puja through attention) and Para-Puja (Puja
of very high order) which if practised, would be very conducive to the spiritual progress and
would evoke the flood of blessings of Adi-Shakti. With slight modification these are, summari-
sed in succeeding paras.
O Mother kindly come in my heart and take this throne decorated with jewels of love and
devotion. I wash your lotus feet with the waters collected from all holy rivers. Permit me
to apply sandlewood paste mixed with musk and saffron to your lotus feet and offer the
flowers, vilva and basil leaves. Pray, kindly accept this beautiful seree and ornaments of gold
and jewel that I have brought with love and devotion. Kindly accept delicious food and fruits
which I am offering in golden vessels. O Mother, this being is your temple. Five Prānās
(vital Forces) and five organs are your Ganas. My enjoyment is the worship of your lotus
feet, sleep is your meditation, walk is the perambulation and speech is your praise Whatever
I do is dedicated to you.
In Para-Puja, which is the mediatation on infinite, Adi Shankarăcharya emphasise that
Chitta which is one with all pervading, Sacchidānand Nirvikalpa Paramatma, transcends
Nirmala Yoga
2.
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-4.txt 
 above the duality of the worshipper and worshipped. Then who would worship whom ?
Invocation is for one who is not present. When the Supreme Goddess is everpresent how
can we invoke Her to come and receive the Puja. How to offer Asan, to the supporter of the
Universe ? There is no need to offer Pädyam, Arghyam, Snānam, and Abhishekam, to the
Immaculate, How can the clothes be offered when the Universe is within Her being ? There
can be no ornaments to the formless and Naivedya (eatables) to one ever-blissful in own self.
Perambulation is out of question for Anantā (unending) and salutation is not possible to the
Deity of Deities who alone is present equally everywhere.
How grateful we all Sahaja Yagis should be to our Mother for taking the finite form, for
ordinary people, who are unable to visualise Her infinite form.
मनस्त्वं व्योम त्वं मरुदसि मरुत्सारथिरसि
त्वमापस्त्वं भूमिस्त्वयि परिणतायां न हि परम् ।
स्वात्मानं परिणमयितुं
चिदानन्दाकारं शिवयुवति भावेन विभूषे
विश्ववपुषा
त्वमेव
।।
Manastvam vyoma tvam marudasi marutsärathirasi
Tvamipastvam bhoomistvayi parinatāyām na hi param i
Tvameva svātmānam parinamayitum vishvavapusha
Chidanandākāram shivayuvati bhavena bibhrushe u
You are the Mind, you are the Ether, you are Air, you are fire and water and the Earth.
You manifest yourself as the universe, there exists nothing other than you. To transform
yourself, who are consciousness and bliss into the universal body, you deem yourself ihe young
bride of Auspicious one.
Verse 35 Saundarya Lahari
PRAYER
"Mother please come into my heart.
Let me cleanse my heart so that you are there.
Put your Feet into my heart.
Let your Feet be worshipped in my heart.
Let me not be in delusions.
Take me away from illusions.
Keep me in reality.
Take away the sheen of superficiality.
Let me enjoy your Feet in my heart.
Let me see your Feet in my heart."
Shri Mataji told the Sahaja Yogis to do this prayer in London in Oct 1984
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Her Holiness Shri Mataji
The way of our full Spiritual
Growth and Sahaja Penance
Easter Puja,
Temple of all faiths, London
22nd April. 84
"clear' statement of Christ, which people
wanted to avoid and start their own orga-
Today we are celebrating the resurrection
of Christ. With it we also have to celebrate the
resurrection of human beings, of Sahaja Yogis nisations, their own ideas and created a very
who have been resurrected as realised souls. mythical thing in His name. And now the
With that we have to understand that we enter time has come for it to be blasted. It has been
into a new awareness. There was no need for going on and on now for thousands of years,
Christ to enter into any new awareness, He captured so many innocent people, and people
had to come down and again to show to this
world that you are the eternal life, that you
lead a life that is spiritual, which never
perishes.
are into it. But when you are resurrected, and
you become realised souls, one has to under-
stand that now your movement is 'inward",
you are moving towards your roots and not
outside. So whatever was the endeavour 'be-
You have to rise into that new realm which
is the realm of God Almighty, what you call
the Kingdom of God. And He said it very
clearly to Nicodemus that"You have to be
born again," and when he asked "Am I to
enter back into my mother's womb to be born
again?" And He said it so clearly ! It's so
clear. Those who don't want to see can
remain blind, but he said it very very clearly:
that "No,-that is, whatever is born of the flesh
is the flesh, but whatever is born of the Spirit
is the Spirit."
fore realisation has to be changed; the direc-
tion has to be changed. And that point
mostly we miss, This is the thing today 1 am
trying to explain to you : that so far to a
human mind entertainment was important;
entertaining-to the mind. not to the Spirit.
Entertainment to the Spirit is 'absolutely
opposite to the entertainment to the mind.
Like somebody the other day telephoned
to me and said that, "Mother, there is no
excitement in Sahaja Yoga." The excitement is
too much. We are going 'against' that. We are
going towards peace, not towards excitement
I mean nothing could be more clear than that,
that it has to be born 'of the Spirit'. Of course,
human beings have a special capacity to twist and this kind of electric shocks we require
everything around. For them Spirit could be every time. See a drunkard is alright in the
a book, could be some words, could be an morning but evening-time he goes off, he
organisation, a church, or some sort of a thing needs a shock, some sort of an injection into
like that which they have made, But whatever his body. 'All' human enterprises have been
is man-made is not the Spirit; this is the like that, they are to 'excite your body. Be-
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-6.txt 
 cause if it is the dead you are dealing with, (frr fiue), relaxation of the thought.
then you have to excite it. But something that Naw a thought is coming into your mind3;
is living, that is eternal, you have to enjoy it some thought: Today is Mother's puja
let's go, we have to hurry up. You didn't
juxtaposition, and that is where many sahaja get the flowers, nw you gu ta the 3rd world
and get the flowers, you must get this and you
must get that". Second is: "No, detach yourself.
Witness. Leave it to the Spirit: watch, you
will get it." Many of you have noticed this.
But still this mind which is quite silly tries to
and not excite it. Se the direction has to be
yogis fail to understand.
"How do we do it?" is the paint. "How do
we make pur attention move inward instead
of going outward." If you start from the time
vou are born again, it is much easier, because impress upon you that you have to use the
it is a new venture you go into, that is the Tmpress
'peace.' Peace of your Spirit, the joy of your
Spirit, which is permanent, you don't need
any excitement from it, it is permanent, it is you start using that, ego comes in, you get
eternal. So the first thing that comes to our: attached to it, and what you lose is your
mind is, that whatever we were doing before progress-and thus the joy is minimised.
realisation we have not to do. The first and
foremost thing is that realisation comes to you
"effortlessly. So the effort which is built into
your body all the time, the energy of effort. " it's very difficult to explain "how to detach",
must do this,I must do that, I have to do this,
I have to do that,"-that creates tension-that !
have told you already, So what do we do? explain to you in words, that are human
We do not try to compete with others, we do words, but still, 1'll try to say now.
not try to fix certain timing, dates, watches.
We do not also put our attention into any do, in the beginning, just to see how it works
endeavour which puts us into effort'. But we
relax that attitude of effort. It's called in Sans- example, when I had to, say, attend any puja
krit as 'Prayatna Shaithilya' . For a or anything, I used to ask them, 'what is the
western mind it is very difficult to grasp the auspicious time ? So they would tell me, this
subject; so try to understand.-That doesn't
mean lethargy, doesn't mean lethargy. So you telephone to say "this is the auspicious time".
should never confuse with the dead, the So I said, how can there be two auspiciOuS
energy of the Living. Now we are trying to times ? It's a big problem with human beings.
transform our energies towards the energy of So they said-there are 5 Panchangas in India;
the Spirit. So you have to allow the Spirit to means 5 books to consult the auspicious time.
take over. Your effort of your mind should be That's what human beings have done. I said,
reduced and the energy of the Spirit should "Then why consult ? It's better not to have 5
work through you.
old junky instrument of this mind.
And it asserts, that "Better use." And when
"How do you detach yourself?
For a person who is absolutely detached,
. isn't it ? I'll try ! 1 cannot get attached, that
is the problem. And I find it difficult to
Say, I tried something as human beings
to experiment. For
out-because I had
is the auspicious time, then another would
auspicious times, isn't it ?" Then the auspi-
cious time has to be 'beyond' time. But it is
bound in the time the way human beings have
Now how do you do it?
First is 'detachment. Detachment. Detach- made it. so it is bound in the time. Like in
ment-start with the thought; let us see the India, it is so much, so much, so much, but
thought. It is called as 'Vichāra Shaithilya' now, 'here' (in U.K.) it is different. Then you
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-7.txt 
 calculate,-you have a watch. You see, to
overcome all these hurdles human beings also
Christ has done the 'greatest' work on this,
but we do not understand
So you consult. Now because His life was like a micro thing you
what is the auspicious time here ? It's a big see, in 3 years So we have to open it out a
headache. Because there are 5 books to be little bit and see what He did. He has given
consulted, watch could be wrong, this could be us the greatest weapon of "forgiveness".
wrong, that could be wrong, Butif you are the When you forgive a person, what do you do ?
Spirit, then the Spirit works out auspiciousness. You accept the situation, to begin with. And
It's the Spirit that works out auspiciousness. secondly you forgive what 'you think has
And imagine when you think like that, how been done wrong to you. But because
much tension goes out. First of all you have to nothing can be done wrong to your Spirit, you
be a slave of your watch: another, you have just forgive, because you are the Spirit. And
to be a slave of the books then, you have to when you forgive, you have found that your
be a slave of the market, of the place which you tension goes away. So 'even' to your thoughts
have to hire. But supposing if you allow the if you say, "Alright. Forgive this thought,
Spirit to work it out, then 'everything will work forgive this thought."-because thought is not
out, and you will reach at this point when it is to be punished. Forgive this thought, forgive
this thought, forgive everything. Not forget,
So how do you accept it?-Just by accep- -'forgive'; because then you will even forget
that you are the Spirit ! But "I forgive all the
I should say,
the most auspicious.
ting.
So just now, if you give up your 'sattä thoughts that are coming to me," just go on
(rar), your own domain; you get into the saying. This is a mantra. What is a mantra?
domain of your Spirit. You give up 'your" -Is that power of the word, that expresses
domain, that is, your ego's domain, or may be Spirit. So this is a 'very important' thing
your super-ego's domain, you give up that and
try to see things how it works out. Now,
what is the testing point of it ? How do you
test it ? It works out,-that's the point of testing
it. It works out. Allow it to workout. Don't any effort for it. You don't have to pay for it,
put your attention. Attention has the second it is just that you have to say "I forgive.
part, the tension. And don't try to say,
"Why not today, it should have happened this tension, this pressure of these modern
today, we expected it to happen; why not at things will be reduced if you go on saying "I
this' moment ?"-That's your ego. "Thy' will forgive", "l forgive". For example, you go
be done". So the thought that starts moving and see, I mean if you happen suddenly to see
in our mind all the time, which creates tensions something very filthy, according to the Spirit-
is not the thought of the Spirit. So, what may be it is very exciting according to normal
you should say, "Not this thought. Not human beings, but we are abnormal people
this thought. (Néti", néti)*. Not this thought, and for us if we find it rather ugly then-the
not this thought, not this thought".-and see
how you relax -Now you are relaxing.-Not they are ignorant, they are blind, they are not
this thought, not this thought..Just go on
refusing accepting any thought. So you go into the source of enjoyment, at the source of peace.
Nirvichāra. In that state you feel the Spirit.
Christ has given us : the weapon of forgive-
ness
Everybody has that weapon, everyone can
use that weapon. You don't have to put in
You'll be amazed your nerves will soothe down,
best thing to get over is "l forgive, because
yet there where I am. I am the one who is at
while they are not: So I forgive." And you'll
पन्नेतिनेतिवचनैनिगमा अवोचस्तं
6.
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-8.txt 
 It's a 'very thin' road on which you have
be amazed that this forgiveness that Christ
gives you, works out the Vichara Shaithilya, to walk. One side is the hugg big rock of
Felaxation of the thought.
Gibralter of your ego, and another side is the
super-ego. In between is the 'small' discretion
Now this opposite movement that you path going, on which you see both the sides.
have to move, first of all should start at this
point. today. from forgiving. Now what
happens when you forgive someone ? That valley of super-ego, you should see that you
means you do not react. The power to react
to somebody's injuries, insults is finished.
And when that power is finished, you become
a powerful person; because nobody can now
overpower you: because nobody can kill
you, nobody can hurt you, nobody can do classical things. Alright. Then you go so
anything to you.
Whether you are hitting yourself with the
rock of Gibrater, or you are falling into the
are using your 'discretion'. So another thing
one has to remember is that whatever you
were doing before realization, is to go to
extremes. For example now, you start some
sort of a movement. Say, you say we'll have
classical that it becomes mechanical, Now
you say, "Give up; we'll start anticulture".
So you'll go to the other side that you
But it is not. again I say, shamelessness.
You see people can think that it is shame- become primitive, Till you have reached the
lessness. So if somebody says
something harsh and something that is
wrong, you do not accept it. But supposing
t shout at
away. You have seen that many a times, I
have to shout at people, so bhoots run away-
because they react, and they just run away,
but the Spirit shines through. So in Sahaja
Yoga one has to this movement-which we need not use
this central path, is just the 'balancing" thing otherwise, till we are absolutely destroyed
which is important, it's not an extreme
of anything. Like when we go to say that you
|forgive everyone is not going to that extreme your discretion you fall this side or that side.
where you have done some wrong, and
somebody says to you, you don't take that Sahaja Yogis take to discretion first: "How
part of it; doesn't mean that. Again dis-
cretion is the engine of your movement. So have to say because you are the Spirit. You
you have to see, "if they have said it, some- yourself, you are the Spirit. First of all 'assume
thing like that, is it, have I gone against the your position as the Spirit, and then you move
Spirit ?." Otherwise, if I say to you something, with it, that you say discretely "how far to
you will say, "Alright, forgive Mother."-You
see the point ! "Forgive Her for saying so'".
No. You cannot say that to me. So then,
that is the point you start thinking, "Why have to become thoughtless, by becoming a
Mother said so ? What have I done ?" Now forgiving person. Most of the thoughts will
think on thosé lines; so you start moving drop out once you become forgiving. But you
again.
end of it and learnt a lesson of your life, you
to you
do not return.
But in Sahaja Yoga, its a very slippery
road on which we are walking. And there
you have to see that it is not your ego and it
is not your super-ego. So discretion has to
be used very much, and the balance, in
someone, the bhoots
Tun
understand that it is juUst
we can go ahead with it, before realization.
But in Sahaja Yoga as soon as you leave
Now those people who are of high quality
far to go ?". Now for that Mother doasn't
go, how far not to go."
Now that is one of the things, that you
cannot forgive some people, like you cannot
Nirmala Yoga
7.
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-9.txt 
 forgive Gad. you cannot forgive Mother.
Certain things you 'cannot do, so the "Marya- of sense organs who do not react to outside
das must be seen. Now, in these boundaries excitement.
if you walk properly, you can go ahead. This to be excitement, how can it be ? It is just the
is the thing which brings you "Vichāra opposite. So what you have to do is to see
Shaithilya' or you can call the mind becomes that your sense organs-say for example your
a new kind of sense organs or a new quality
. Now if you want Sahaja Yoga
eyes, they see something-then they react;
relaxed.
your ears, they hear something-they react:
somebody wants to talk and see the reaction.
Then you have to have "Vishaya Shaithilya'
(frer fren,) means, your sense organns always There are expectations. But because Spirit
react to things, because you are human be-
ings, you are born like that. So whatever
happens, you react. For example, you see
beautiful flower, you react. Some sort of a
thought rises with it Now you must practice higher. This is a thing which one has to
to see something without allowing any thou- know, when now we are celebrating His
ght to rise. Then you start sucking through resurrection, because it is Tapas, itis the penance
your Spirit the beauty, the glory, the fra-
grance of a flower: Every flower is a poetry,
but when you start thinking about it then it
becomes a dead thing. But you just try to
enjoy. Now you are the people who are on
this earth to enjoy yourself, not to worry
about anything, Just enjoy.
is active 'itself it acts itself, you have seen
vibrations don't speak, they act.
It has the
power to act, you need not react. If you can
reduce the power of reaction. you rise much
of Christ. Christ came on this earth for
penance. You know in the Gäyatri mantra
there are 7 things they have said in it. and at
the point of Christ it is Tapas, is the penance.
So you have to have the so-called penance
to achieve the joy. The panance is to pull
back your sense organs inside yourself. As
But if you are still used to, "I must do
this thing special, I am something special Krishna has said that you have to pull back
Sahaja Yogi, I am a very highly evolved all your limbs of sense organs like a tortoise
Sahaja Yogi", then you are finished. Say, does. So the excitement that you require for
we are all going in a boat; enjoy the boat ! your sense organs is no more needed, be-
And also the waves. But somebody says
"I am a very special one, I'l try to jump
down," then you are back again into the same
position. So one has to have an attitude of that point from where it starts. A river starts
looking at things-try to develop this habit of with a
looking at things without thinking about it. expands, expands, expands, expands. You go
Try to develop your mind on those lines: that to the source. "absolutely" to the central
you do not react.
cause your sense organs now, are themselves
the source of excitement. In the sense that
they neutralize all the excitements. You go to
very small, little drop. and then it
point. There you'll find hardly even a drop fall-
ing out.
Now the excitement business, or all this
"sensationalisation that is today's craze,
Another good example would be a wheel,
comes from the same-that your sense organs it has the central point. And the wheel moves
because they all the time but the central point has to be
While we must have our sense organs fixed, otherwise with the wheel if the central
which do not react; because they must only point also moves, then the cart cannot move,
So the
require a kind of sensation
react.
react to the Spirit. So we have to develop the cart will also start rolling down.
Nirmala Yoga
8.
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-10.txt 
 So you be generous. I have seen now
wheel cannot move. So you go to that people have different attachments, subtler
central point, and the movement is on the ones. Like attached to their own children
central point, where there is no movement, in I've seen people. Once their children are born
to the Sahaja Yogis then the whole world
revalution, it doesn't revolve any more, becomes their children: You spoil them, you
spoil yourselves. You are just their trustees.
But to you it becomes a very big thing that
you have produced a child. Anybody can
produce a child--even a dog produces a child,
what is so great?-I mean, the bitch. That's
central point has to be fixed otherwise the
a way, because there is only ascent, there's no
there's just ascent on the central point.
I hope you try to understand, that all the
movements come out of ignorance.. All the
outer movements come because wa are not
yet on the central point. But that achieve-
ment is not difficult because you have iumped a funny word to sayl So, to create a child is
onto it,-but you again come out onto the not something great, but that you have a child
periphery, onto the wheel. So how to keep God, You are just in charge; but to identify
"there' and to ascend in 'that line. Say, for
example, there are wheels-like this wheels
after-wheels; but the central point is fixed.
Now every time you jump out, now how do
you go back to the central point?-is by detach-
ment, by Tapas, by penance. Penance is "to
y" It doesn't mean asceticism of outside, spoil also you very much in your ascent.
in charge of you, which has to work for
that this child is great, it's a very big realized
soul and all that will blast your head complete-
ly, because it's a subtler blasting. It's like
hydrogen bomb. Ordinary bombs can destroy
a part of it. but these subtler bombs are even
worse. And this will spo.l the child, that will
deny
but asceticism of within. First of all we
must learn to give. Give to others. That
also sometimes people find it difficult, I have
seen. Even to give one pound-they say,to
Sahaja Yoga they find it difficult, I was
amazed! So to give to others is going to be
even worse. Try to give to others. Detach-
So what you have to do is to see that if
you have a child, alright you are just in charge,
as you are in charge of all' the children of
Sahaja Yogis not of your own. Be generous.
"उदार चरितानाम् दसुध ुम्बरम". " " The person who is
a generous person. for him the whole world is
his family." So expand yourself. This is
my family, this is my wife, how can I live
So one way is to have forgiveness, then without my wife, or my husband my child:
second is generosity. If you work for Sahaja my',this will not help you. This will
Yoga: "I haven't done anything so far". Not tie you down 'completely. This is a very
to react to it what work you have done. subtler thing you start, because now you are
"Oh, it's a pleasure ! did it. It's my pleasure receding back. First you gave up your family,
I did it. Just out of pleasure". Don't count gave up your children, gave up everything,
ment.
it: "I brought four flowers, she brought two
flowers. I must be paid for one and a half back.
came to this extreme; now you are going
flower."
For Indians they understand that they are
already too much in this, so they know that
to detach yourself from your children is very
important because they are already in it. They
are too much attached to their children. In
All these calculations are on the periphery,
outside, when you were not realized souls.
Now you just don't count anything else, but
your blessings.
Udar charitänăm Vasudhaiva kutumbakam.
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-11.txt 
 the beginning, they will always tell me, mywheels you should know. Now, it you go
child is like this, my mother is like this, my further with it, with the detachment, suppos-
father is like this, my brother is like this, and ing works out in you, even you become com-
passionate. Even that comes. Still vwhat is
the judging point ? How do you know
relations on my head and I feel terrible about that you are alright ? How do you measure ?
farfetched relation of a relation How do you find out that you are alright?
relation they will bring in along: I mean what you call, take the bearing, as they
"But you see she is my relation". So, say. How do you know ?-You must have
peace. You should be a peaceful person.
relation of such and such person, and you Agitation should be outside, but you should
be absolutely peaceful yourself. If you are
not a peaceful person then, be 'sura that
what we understand, is that our relationships you are not yet there where you should have
and our identifications have to be dropped been. Now you can say that Christ also got
very angry, he took a whip in His hand and
beat the people, so we can also do the same
they will be all bhoots, one better than the
other. Without any discretion, bring all those
of a
in India it is very important that you are a
may not have anything to do with that person.
But he is a relation, so he is a relation. So,
completely.
We are universal beings now. So your
child is a source of joy 'every child should
be the source of joy to you, every child should
be. Bachelors that way are better or the ation, you must know, you are a realized
ones who are not yet married, they can enjoy s0ul. So you don't have to take a whip in
everybody's child nicely. But, when you are
not a mother and a father, and you are
enjoying, what is so creditable ? When you
"become' the parents and then' you enjoy thought, that He was an incarnation, you see,
other children as much as you enjoy your All the incarnations have killed'. Krishna
chiid, then your generosity has started.
thing.
You are not Christ.
You are not an incar-
your hand and hit others. You cannot. This
is the mistake what the disciples of Maham-
mad Sähab have done, that they never
has killed, Rama has killed, the Devi has
killed. But you are not the Devi, you are not
Shri Krishna. So you don't have to kill any-
one. You don't have to show the temper. So
if you still have a temper then know that
your progress is very siow. You have to be a
peaceful person. Imagine
having a Jehād'. What do you say to that I
Going with swords in the hand and spears in
So the generosity of loving others, the
generosity through Compassion'. Compas-
sion doesn't mean that you should pity some-
one. Compassion means the sharing of
personality, sharing of love personality. And
that is where we miss the point, that com-
passion means that somebody has to be
helped. Sahaja Yoga compassion is not that, the hand and hitting others. This point I want
Sahaja Yoga Compassion is in sharing.
Sahaja Yogis
to make very clear, because when I am there,
Now the fourth thing you have to remem- of course, I am going to tell you everyone, but
ber. What I've told you : First is forgiveness, when I am not there I don't want you to take
second according to me is you can call it, the in your hands the swords and things and fight.
compassion; or the detachment leading to What William Blake has written is for the incar-
nation, Incarnations say "Give me my..." It's
as the forgiveness; detachment and thirdly not that you should say now "Give me Rama's
the compassion. These are the wheels of Ayudhas"-You cannot. You are not an
your chariot which moves you. These are the incarnation. Because the discretion of these are
So you can call it the first one
compassion.
Nirmala Yoga
10
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-12.txt 
 affective, yours are 'not. So you are not "Alright. it's very simple. Alright, you give
them to me." So after a month when he
appeared to take the cocks, they would not
react to anything, they were just standing like
this-(upright and watching everything). He
got a fright of his life! He said, "How
are they going to fight ?" Saint, said You
So he took them
to the arena and put them there. And all the
cocks, you see, invaded each other, fought,
and these were just watching. And all the
rest of them got so frightened with these two,
to take 'any weapon into your hand-or even
anger. Doesn't behove a Sahaja Yogi at any
point,-unless and until I tell you to be angry.
So this is the criteria, that you have to be
peaceful person, not aggressive person.
Now different people have different type just take them, you'll see."
of aggressiveness. For example, men don't
discuss, you see, they just slap you.-finished.
They don't argue they don't like to argue, at
a point they will go and they'll just hit you
and finished. But women are very good at they all ran away and they won !
Very
"very' aggressive.
So the person who is peaceful is powerful
-the one who doesn't react to anything else.
is the most powerful. So, one has to under-
aggressively argumentative. "So you don't
argue" is the second point. If you are argu-
mentative then know that you are not yet
stand that peace is the criterion to know that
you are absolutely at that point where you
have to be. But peace by 'no' chance means
cowardliness. Because, you see, I know what
indiscretion is, human indiscretion. They
there where you have to be. A peaceful
person goes to a point and then argues it out.
If you are argumentative. then your progress
is not alright.
So a person has to be absolutely peaceful think it's cowardliness. No. You stand like this
and this peace is the 'most effective thing. (erect, upright) not
We are seeking the peace of the universe. You
cannot achieve it through any one of these
bombs. You can only achieve it through the
Spirit, which is the source of all the peace.
So, I would request all of you to give up
tempers, angers. Peace is the greatest power-
ful thing on this earth.
& stooping). The difference between a
cowardly person and a peaceful person is
that a cowardly person acts to the negative
forces, and a peaceful person creates positive
farces, constructive forces, generates it: So
you are not to be cowardly, but you have to
be peaceful. And a peaceful person is like
a magnet, you see, so 'soothing' it is. So you
can see we are moving towards the soothing
There is a interesting story-a Chinese
story-about it. There were two very great
fighting cocks, known to be the greatest of qualities of the Spirit. You have to 'soothe
all.-And they have this excitement again of
the cock-fighting in China. Imean you can have
everything in this world, all absurd things, like is-we call it like the 'ghee'. When your body
rugby, football, this, that, I mean there's no
end to it.-So these two cocks were to go in
for an international sort of a fight. So they smooth.
said there is one great saint living here. he personality is a lubricant. It doesn't go into
makes everyone very powerful. So the owner friction, but treduces' frictions. It is a lubricant
of the cocks went to him and he said, "Will temperament. So you should judge your-
you make my these two cocks very powerful, self," Am I a lubricant personality ?". For
so that they can fight and win ?" He said example, you see two persons are fighting,
others and not to excite, but to soothe.
And that soothing quality what you call,
is charred and is absolutely burning, then you
put some sort of a 'ghee' on it so it becomes
Like lubrication-lubricant. Such a
Nirmala Yoga
11
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-13.txt 
 alright ? And one goes as a peace-maker; just flows, just forgives, it is just Compassion.
and one goes to excite it nmore, you see, he it's the 'most enjoyable thing. Radiant, just
joins them. Now the one who is the peace-
maker is the blessed one, is the one who is gave those who crucified Him ! Imagine!
the one moving towards God, because he is Imagine !!
the peacemaker. "Blessed are those who are
the peacemakers."
like the sun-shine. Like Christ who even for-
Because He knew that God will not
forgive. Even God would not forgive those,
He tried to forgive them. But we-those who
All these things if you see, that I am
telling today is the same,-but in a different call themselves Christians,-those who are
language, that's all-what Christ said it. To supposed to be christians are just the oppo-
understand Christ you have to open him out site of Christ. Just the 'opposite: in "every
more, because He said it in very simple way, if you see. Just the opposite.
words, which has very deep meanings and
only a Sahaja Yogi can understand it.
So, you come to a point where you under-
stand that you become the 'Love. And when
So you have to make peace. I have seen it is pure love relationship, when there is no
people been given Nobel prizes of peace, who
have no peace within them at all, they are
hot-tempered, horrible people and given
Nobel prize for peace! Alright!
sonified temper, absolutely hot-tempered; and
you call it peace ! How can you have peace
with a person who is so hot tempered. So
this is possible. In this human endeavour my eyes they just look like mosquitoes; horri-
anything is possible. Sometimes so àbsurd, nails and all that look to me like witches-so
you see, like I have seen people getting a
degree "doctorate of learning". who hasn't
even been to a school or know how to read
the books. Anything is possible. Because
it is just a manoeuvering of evarything, its
artificial.
lust and greed, or anything but. just love and
purity of it, you don't want to do it because
you want to have any luSt out of that person.
Just see the opposite. Here the girl is
very 'attractive'. What is so attractive ? To
ble-sometimes like witches you know. Their
artificiat. Just like machines. sometimes.
What is so attractive in these women ? Or in
these men ? They look like skulls to me,
sometimes. Somethings like, Frankenstein, i
don't know what they look like horrible. The
way they walk, the way they try to impress,
Imean nothing but fear comes out of them.
So the lubrication of your love. So the
love that you enjoy is not what is bestowed
upon you, but what you bestow upon others.
So, what you emit out of your love to ather.
sense of security, an 'Ocean' of security.
The idea of love is also funny. It's just Everyone feels secured; security. And that
the opposite of what you have seen so far. security will be felt by you. Trust. Trust
They'll write "I-love-you" and the second others. You must trust. That is very impor-
tant. Trust for everything. I have seen some
modern fashion is like that. "I love you; I people are very serious on money, some are
very serious about possessions, some are this;
s -know they are sometimes weak people.
Could be weak about money, could be weak
And the
sentence is "I want to divorce you."
want to divorce you because I love you too
much ! Because I
very modern, very "sophisticated'. So the
want to spare you."- is
love that hurts others, love that tortures others about possessions, could be even insulting to
the love that expects, is not love. Love that things, that should not be so. But don't lose
Nirmala Yoga
12
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-14.txt 
 your temper, just have forgiveness for them,
and let them feel secured. Absolutely secured.
Trust. You see as you know that I never ask
the trustees to give me any reports. I do
not want them to give me any accounts or
anything; don't understand accounts at all
myself, you see. So I never see how many
accounts you have got, what money you have
got or, say, suppose Gavin is saying that "I am
sending monIey now Mother to you, whatever Why 7-Because they are growing, they are
I
Actually my system as you know is that
I know also the people, who have mismanag-
ed money who've not been alright, I know it
somehow, without knowing accounts, but I
said "just forgive, forgive, forgive". 1 know
everything but I just say "forgive, doesn't
matter." Then, you might say with rationality..
that "Mother, such a person will go ahead
with it". No, he wouldn't, you try and trust.
coming to light and the more light they see,
the better they become.
received." It's alright-finished.
know whether he is giving receipts or not-
nothing. If he says so, alright; 1 leave it to
him. He has to grow, whatever it is. It's his
responsibility, if he's not grown up enough
he will grow. So trust others, because in
Sahaja Yoga you must know we are all grow-
ing, we are all transforming.
So we 'must grow, we "must' grow; and
for your growth security is the 'most' important Again discretion has to be used, how far you
thing. If there is no security for a tree, it will
"never grow. So everybody should feel secured
in the company of Sahaja Yogis. If there is great person and he can correct everyone, and
any insecurity from someone, then it should be
reported, to the collective, and should see that
all such cases of insecurity-creating, trouble-
creators should be a little bit taken out, for
the time being. Because there should be à beco me like them; try to elevate them than to
I don't
This trust 'has to be' there. Trusting in
God that He will give him the right path. So
this understanding about your growth is
"within' yourself, which you can see.
And the highest of all is the collectivity,
not the fraterity of bhoots, but 'Collectivity.
are collective. If a person thinks he is a very
he can punish everyone and he can do as he
likes, than he is not collective, But some-
times you have to also understand that even
with bhootish people I have to stoop down
to conquer them, to bring them round. Don't
healthy growth. And growth 'must take
place and for that you must trust. Somebody go down to their level. And if you can
might make mistakes; alright, doesn't matter.
Somebody may be dishonest, doesn't matter.
But give them security. But what we do is
to give security to bhoots, I've seen it iIS very is something definitely wrong with that
common. People will have only interest in
the bhootish people, they will trust a bhootish
person than to someone who is a little dis-
honest. See what is dishonesty 7 Supposing
somebody doesn't give income tax, doesn't For this we have to be doing some penance.
matter, it's this Gov't, or that Gov't what does
it matter to us ? As lang as that
honest to God it's sufficient. Our honesty is of people are, 1 know that: the tongue is the
different level. So we become angry with worst of all. If you can control tongue then
that person, we get upset with that person.
There's nothing to get angry,
manage that, then you have achieved what
you wanted to do through your collectivity.
And a person 'has' to be collective. If he is
not collective then one must know that there
person.
Then, what you have to do for detach-
ment from things-the penance' part of it.
For example, you are too attached to any
person is thing; say you are very fond of food. Many
you have control over 50% of your sense
organs. If you are attached to the tongue-
Nirmala Yoga
13
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-15.txt 
 These days I am going into a big penance,
am eating just boiled food without salt with-
out' any thing in it, just boiled food. Going
into penance. I have to, for 9 months. For first. This constable lady died; her mother
me it doesn't matter. It is no penance for
me because l've no tongue at all No taste be in a position to talk, you see. The father
buds. I can manage. So whatever you like was sitting quiet. You can't imagine. In
too much, "Ahaal i love to have..," you see.
Especially here l've seen if you see good food
talk, most of the English men do not talk,
women talk too much. It's a fact. I've seen
any interview you see, the wonen will talk
In India the mother would not
was talking.
India supposing a child dies like that, you see,
the mother would be absolutely sobbing, in a
mess. She won't be talking. Here the woman
was talking, we were most surprised! The
women talk too much the men just don't-
first it's "Mmmm.."
So now what you have to do, is have a
kind of self-directed discipiine. Self-directed, they arë not supposed to talk I think, they just
not on others. Self-directed. "Do I meditate
in the morning ?1 don't. So what's wrong with ping. I don't know what they do.
me ? I'm supposed to be a "
Nobody has to tell you, you "yourself should
do this to yourself. You are fond of food,
"Alright doesn't matter, I'll fast for two days".
No fasting is allowed in Sahaja Yoga, alright;
but fasting for detachment is alright. Not for how to talk. Now go and talk to the sea, go
God's Sake, but for your sake you do it. "I
like a particular type of cake. Alright I'll not
have it. I'll not have it for one year". But no,
when people have to give up, they give up
something like Rubab ! So one should not be sweetly. Some people have to go through
cunning about it, you should not be cunning penance for that. For them to talk sweetly is
with yourself. So what you have to do is to
see that where does this mind go? What is the sweetly, just can't. Sarcasm. You see in
keep quiet
At the most they might be slap-
Sahaja Yogi.
So what we have to do is to teach our-
selves, that if our tongue talks too much then
we'd better keep quiet. If we do not talk.
we better talk. We should teach ourselves
and talk to some tree, go and talk to someone
like that. Or best is to talk to me, to my
photograph. so
a kind of control over your tongue. To talk
that's how you achieve
like taking rubab again. They just can't talk
attraction ?
that sarcasm, they have a special pleasure.
Try to say something 'sweet'. You can be
I mean, even now I see I find some people humorous without being sarcastic. Humour
are like Romeo and Juliets, you see, still living is the best way. What is the need to
in that area of Romeo-Julietness. Get out of be sarcastic? There's no need 'at all', its a
it Nonsense. Get out of that kind of a thing. sign of cowardliness,
That doesn't mean you become a dry person-
ality. Another extreme can be
become like sticks, that's not the point. But
you should not "indulge' into these things. tell your tongue to behave yourself. So a
These are all artificial things. So a Tapas' is
to be established within yourself. Self-disci-
pline. Now those who talk too much should
I think, Sarcasm. It is a
sign that you want to hurt others, but you are
that you not being straightforward. So try to avoid
sarcastic talking, If you are sarcastic, better
little disciplining towards yourself, punishment
what you call, or the tapas or penance has to
work out.
"stop' talking. Absolutely 'mauna' () is the
ilaj (sa). Mauna is the treatment for such
people ! Just don't talk ! Those who do not things. Some men want to see women all
Now people have so many ways of seeing
14
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-16.txt 
 the time, some women want to see men all it work out. Today I had told Gavin that
the time, or clothes, or 'anything. Now, the
difference is that when you see something, it
reacts. The difference between my looking wanted to talk to you
at any thing is that, that reacts. VWhen I the time has come for us to go further. As a
look at you, your Kundalini reacts, when I
look at this, it gets vibrated. Katāksha,- you become the truth. You become" the
Katāksha (Ferat-TET): Every glance; every truth. So, in every chakra if you concentrate,
glance makes the thing react. And Nireek- and use the chakra to detach yourself from
shana (fte) means, Iknow what it is. I know the particular quality of that chakra. Like,
what it is. Just Looking at a person know now for example, the Nabhi chakra does the
what it is. Looking at a thing, I know what it digestion. Now you don't worry what you
is.-'Nireekshana. But the whole thing is in should eat to digest. Just 'detach' yourself
the memory there. Like we were going and from there, with vibrations if you just see and
they said we have only black stones. I said, eat; whatever is there, you will digest. And
"No, you have red also." He said, "Where? Do then you become the truth. Truth that is
you know ? So I told them tha "exact spot love, that is God
where to get the stones. He said, 'How do you
know, Mother ?"I said, "We passed that way
about eight years back and I know there are
red stones." So 'everything I see gets vibrated
and also I note what is there, and is all ready as your birthday comes.
there to be used at the proper time. But what increase your age, And you are proud that
do I do ? What do I do? 1 do 'nothing do you are growing. In the human level you feel
"nothing'. don't think, I don't plan. Every- unhappy that you are growing, here you feel
thing that you do, I don't do.
I won't have so much of a puja but I will talk.
Because puja is alright, it talks for itself, but
result of all this, all this and that what you do,
May God Bless you all.
In a human form you 'decrease' your age
proud that you are growing. Just the oppo-
site of what you are doing if you try to do, it
So when you have that kind of a tempera- will be nice. I mean, that doesn't mean again,
ment you will be amazed I The amount of indiscreet, you know. I'm quite worried on
dynamism that will 'work it out. You don't
have to create a dynamo, it is inside you. Let you should have before you.
that point ! Discretion is the first thing that
S.Y.: Is there a particular advice to keep the Sahasrāra open and clear ?
Shri Mataji: It's very simple, as I have tald you, that the deity of the Sahasrāra is sitting
before you, that the diety of Sahasrāra is the Mahamaya, that try not to understand Her
through your reasoning and imagination; but by surrendering 'absolutely' to it, you keep your
Sahasrāra open. In case you find it still closed, you have to ask forgiveness from the deity
that "if we have by mistake made any mistakes, forgive me"-that's all.
Nirmala Yoga
15
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Shri Rama's Birthday
Ram navami
Chelsham Road, London,
2nd April 1982.
Today specially I'm talking about the Vedas
and these havanas we do. When we do the the deities within the spinal column actually.
havana it is a Yagnya. Yagnya means "by which And for these Yagnyas they used to sit down
you know". Yagnya. And this is done where and do all these havanas the way we do it.
you use "Sväha' as the word. That means
you use the principle of fire to burn off all and try to spoil the Yagnya. Because Yagnyas
that is wrong in you "Svāha'. And you
awaken it by taking the different names of the cieanliness and with purity. It should not be
God. It was very much invoked when Rama insulted. There is a protocol about it. While
lived and they used to do Yagnyas at that they thought that if we insult the deities there
time. Today is Räma's birthday. The reason
was that the people had just started realizing Yagnyas will be spoiled. At the time of Räma
that there is something higher and you have also there were some Räkshasas who took a
to worship that higher Self, and they thought special pleasure in spoiling these Yagnyas
that the best thing is to do Yagnyas. On the and Râma as a child would go and protect
left side, of course, the people started the the rishis from the demons. And the demons
worship of God and the dedication to God would take on some sort of a funny form and
and all those things, that is Bhakti. (devotion) come like miserable creatures and put some
but mainly what they did before Räma was bones of animals and things like that in the
the Yagnyas, the Vedas, with which they prayed Yagnya and that would spoil the effects of the
to different elements. Elements have made our Yagnya. And Rama would protect that. as
chakras, and they tried to evake the deities of a child. Imagine, as a child he used to do
the Elements. But actually it amounts to the that. They would be doing the Yagnya and
same thing.
Now these Yagnyas were created to evoke
But at that time the Rakshasas would come
are to be dane with a pure heart and with
n then the deities will disappear and their
he would be sitting outside with all his small
So as a child Rama was studying with a brothers around him and they would kill the
very great saint, Vishwämitra and he had an demons who would try to destroy the Yagnya.
äshram where Rāma and his brothers studied This iš the early life of Rama rin which you
and they used to come for holidays to their See how as a child also he showed an amount
father's place. Then he had the capacity to
kill a demon with only one arrow. One arrow
of expertise in arrow and bow. So any, time
you see a statue, how to make out if it's a
of Sri Räma's was sufficient. And he was a Rama statue is to see if there's an arrow and
small little child, say about seven-eight years a bow, then its a Räma's statue.
of age and people were surprised how he
could do it.
Now his coming on this earth gave us the
development of the right side and so the
Nirmala Yoga
16
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-18.txt 
 Yagnyas were also on the right side. Because
first of all when human beings came on this they should abide with law. It doesn't corne
earth they were frightened of all the amimals
who would invade them and all kinds of
horrible Rakshasas and all those people, and
negative forces would trouble them. In that
state they needed to create a king, a ruler, who
was an ideal king and who would rule accord- good, the righteousness, incarnates as Shri
ing to the laws of dharma. So he was the
one in charge of that: He was here in Tréta Supposing an individual starts saying that
Yuga and Krishna came at the time of Dwipar "this is not good, this is not good", an indi-
Yuga. Wheni came it was Kali Yuga but vidual might take a different attitude about
now today the time is of Krita Yugä. The
Yuga where work will be done-Krita Yuga. that goodness placed onto someone. And
This is the time where work will be done.
common people, of the common feeling that
to you that you are a slave, or you have to be
dominated, or you have to be put down, but
it is only your "common will" which is good.
The desire of all the people which is the
Rāma and He looks after that will. Because
But you must have a symbol of
these things.
these symbols were created to symbolise
your righteousness, your sense of good. so
that you can be saved yourself,
So far things have moved from one to
another, Now in the Tréti Yuga when Shri
Rama came, the idea of kingship and rulership
started, so the greatest emphasis was on the hits you. Now you can feel how bad it is to
goodwill of the people The people had to
have goodwill, for the people and for the king,
and for the betterment of humanity. The will. ing you. But tomorrow YOu may do the
That is the right side. So how to areate the
goodwill ? First the leader has to sacrifice your goodwill and represent it as the kingdom
and show how far he can go on sacrificing to
keep the moral and the goodwill of the people. governing body represents, should represent:
So the right side was created by the advent also its both ways. it's not that it always
of Shri Rama because he showed a path of represents. It may not at all represent. It
Supposing today somebody comes and
be hit by someone or murdered by someone,
so you decide there should be a law protect-
same thing, but what you do, is to take out
or a king or a governing body. So, the
creating among people the awareness that nay not, possibly. But the government should
they should be ruled, that they should not be
anarchists. There should be one head who the pure will to be good, to be protected and
should be able to organize, co-ordinate and
work out a collective thing.
represent the good in you, the purity in you,
that you also should abide by it. It's a very
mutual thing.
But what happens as soon as you start mak-
You see, when we think of a king we want
to oust him because we don't like the idea of ing someone like that, or appointing someone
being ruled by him, because he's not a good like that, as usual he goes into an ego trip.
king perhaps, or he doesn't represent that will Simple thing like that. Absolutely a simple
of the people which is a common will, which thing. Ego trip. The government gets into an
creațes a king who rules for the maintenance ego trip.
of that goodwill. See it as a symbolic ex-
pression of your "goodwill".
People get amazed how people behave.
They'll elect may be a Prime Minister and
So when you create a law, it is also the suddenly you find the Prime Minister behaves
You can't understand. You've
e
expression, common expression, of all the like a brute
17
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-19.txt 
 But in this relativity we are improving.
Definitely we are more aware, understanding
the value of these people, and also the public
elected somebody like a Prime Minister think-
ing that he will be good to us.
revolutions take place and people revolt, fight
it out. Again the will of the people fights it is understanding. But then when too many
and makes it alright. So we have to have such people come in who are negative they
something absolute, because all these values also bring down the will, the collective will
are changing every moment, isn't it ? We very low. And people start identifying them-
think that this government did not do so well, selves with these aristocrats or those people
for example. So, we want to demolish this who are ego orientated, who have no moral
government. Then we bring another one.
We find the same thing happening. See,
whether we bring a communist or we bring a
socialist or we bring a democrat or we have a
monarch. Whatever you may have, but still
what happens actually is that all these things the way the Government is behaving and is
that come up and go away, all these changes putting down the people. All these things
that take place go on creating a feeling in a
man that he should be anarchist. Why should relative terminology. Like El Salvador. You
we have any government ? Why should we don't know what to do over there now. Whom
have any king? Why should we be ruled by to support ? Whether to support the Ameri-
anyone ? Because you find the person who's
ruling is not up to the mark and he's just
trying to deceive you. At that point you have
to have some absolute standards. If you Yogi can stand and say now, should we join
have an absolute standard then you can
And then the
values, who have no fear of God, who deny
religion, who deny evolution.
Government starts behaving in such a manner
that you are amazed that how this is the
Government. Like in Chile and Argentina,
And the
are happening, you don't know. It's such a
cans or to support the Russians and äll that.
Now under these ciroumstances a Sahaja
this or that ? All is a wasteful thing. It's
Just a game going on. Let them break their
heads. They are good for nothing, useless
people.
always judge that this king is deviating from
the right path, is not doing whata king should
do.
So you cannot solve these problems
A king has to be like Rama. He has to be and you are not supposed to solve them.
like Rāma. Representing your will, your good-
will, your sense of proper judgement, fair play the Kingdom of God. So really Rāma rules
and righteousness. If the king is not right-
eous then your collective goodwill will go
against the king.
Now I've seen say for example in France,
We had one kind of a Prime Minister. He we would have Mrs. Thatcher. Good, very good.
did lots of things which were not good so he She's coming up well I should say
was thrown away. So you had another one. good things she is saying, like self-restrain
Now he's doing another thing so he's going and all that. She's talking good things, buti
to be thrown away. And we are just playing what about herself ?
games you see. First of all we have Labour
Government. We don't like it. So then we
They must get their realisation and establish
on this earth and not these horrible kings who
change their morality every day, those whose
will is for something materialistic.
Like now in our country (U.K.) we thought
Certain
Shri Räma not only propounded what was
Government, Conservative good but he followed that. He sacrificed for
that and he established his own symbol as a
pure symbol of that righteous will which is
another
have
Government. We don't like it so throw it
away. We go on playing with it all the time.
Nirmala Yoga
18
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-20.txt 
 within the people, which is the collective you think like that ? Because by that there is
a general good created-Because you have
become integrated, your body, your mind
and your soul. all of them think the same
way now. They all want the same. There's
no difference. Once there is integration you'll
find that Sahaja Yoga is the easiest way to
live. But if there is not, then it is difficult.
righteous will.
Now, for example, you can see ciearly how
the ego oriented things work out, first of all
by the misidentifications we can have. Now
if you're a communist you cannot have com-
promise between democratic methods and
communist methods-They think, if you have
to be this you have to be absolutely-this. If
you have to be that you have to be absolutely are a very hot tempered person or you are a
that. But in Sahaja Yoga what youfind is sort of a dual person, or you are playing tricks
thit both are intégrated because you have Wvith yourself, you are playing games. Then you
the complete capital and you have to distri-
bute it. This is the complete integration here.
All these 'isms' are experinments of the arti- Yoga. But once this situation is overcome,
fiçiality of the mind. Just a projection of the then you will like it, because then you will
mind. Whatever is man-made is artificial, know that whatever is good for your Spirit is
If you are a lazy person, for example, or you
won't like Sahaja Yoga. As long Bs these
situations are in you, you will not like Sahaja
for the well-being of you all, and of all the
people. Once this well-being comes in, every-
one feels absolutely nourished and fresh.
but you know that.
But what God made is all integrated, what-
ever you have within yourself you must give
it to others.
So the governing part is enjoyable. The
connection part is even mare enjoyable and
Now see for administration also what that you are in the attention of your Mother
happens after Sahaja Yoga. Say I am your is such a great feeling within yourself that
Mother, here sitting down. You like me to
guide you. You like me to govern you. You look after me." She's there to look after you.
like me to correct you, you like me to scold But this integration part comes very late
you and to even go on to see that your life because of Ego problems.
improves. Supposing I say "Alright, I give
up. I don't want to talk about it." You'll
not like it. None of you will like such a
situation, where I say, "Alright you are a gone
case, I have nothing to do. You get out."
No-one; nobody will like such a situation.
You want me to govern you. You want me
to look after you. You like that, automati-
cally you have started liking it. There's no
domination, but you want my domination.
"yes nothing will go wrong with me, She'll
You have built up egos because of wrong
type of people administering you. From your
childhood, you might have had bad parents
who never talked of God, of good things of
life. They themselves did not lead a life of
sacrifice. Very self indulgent parents can
create a problem like that. They never gave
you the right type of life, a proper value
system which should have been there. They
riever educated how to enjoy righteousness,
You want me to dominate you. You want virtues in life. Possibly, later on the country
that all my desire should be dominating. in which you are born, the other people who
Automatically. Why do you feel that it is surround you also might have done that. Also,
alright, it is very good if Mother takes interest your government, whichever you have known
must have done that. So when these things
in me, corrects me, it's a privilege. Why do
Nirmala Yoga
19
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-21.txt 
 I'll give you an example. Supposing I am
that kind of integration within you that what- sitting here and sornebody tells me that this
ever your body likes is for the good of your will burn you. This is my own maya, but the
Spirit also. Like say for example, I don't body wants to burn itself. It says: no, don't
like certain things myself. I don't like drinks, listen to this, just go ahead. Now, when I say
this it sounds absurd, but say, the mind says
you should not take to alcohol but still you'll
go to the pub. Then you are disintegrated.
I don't have to tell Gradually once you start listening to your body
too much, your mind gives in. It just gives
in. In everything that you do, if you are
integrated you'll be amazed that you'll really
change, when you find that you have achieved
I don't like it. Nobody can tempt me. I mean
no question of temptation, I just don't like it.
I will hate the things which are really bad for
my Spirit. Automatically.
myself; it's just there. To tell lies I don't like,
because it harms me there. I don't like it.
Whatever is good for your Spirit will auto-
matically work out as soon as this integration become dynamic. Integration is nothing but
takes place, and that is the work of Sahaja your complete connection with your Spirit.
Yoga today. That's why t said it is Krita Yuga, The Spirit starts flowing into you In every
is to be done. And this integration must be
achieved within ourselves, so sometimes you you'll become if you're integrated. Just the
have to make your body come to this level. connection is to be absolutely achieved with
May be you are under the influence of some
bhoots. Your body doesn't help you. Little "Is it good for my Spirit ?"
bit of tapas or penance is needed after Sahaja
Yoga to make this possible and then once you
start enjoying, then you like it. Like driving a
car. In the beginning it's dificult. Or Swimming.
Anything, when you try to do it, it's rather
difficult in the beginning. If I say forget it
now, whatever you have done in the past
now forget it You have to get to the new
things now. You have to do it. So you have garanoid state, who is frightened of the whole
to put your mind to it with all your full zest.
That "Alright. if my body's not helping me
then I'll try to improve the body because I'm These absurd jdeas are to be given up by
not the body. If my mind is not helping me,
I must improve my mind. If my intellect is there, absolutely there between all of them,
standing in the way I'Il have to put my but somehow you should be rare, a different
intellect right because after all I have to be
intégrated. If I am not integrated I'm not
going to enjoy anything nor am I going to do
anything good to myself or to others. So why
am I here ? Why am I trying to destroy myself?" Yogis. They see somebody negative, they
But when you are disintegrated you'll be say. "Oh no I" Now take a fight with that
surprised. Your one action will destroy your
second action and your second action will
destroy your third action. When you are
disintegrated.
walk of life you'll be amazed how dynamic
your Spirit. Whenever you think of something,
Some people have a habit of thinking that
spiritual life is such that you hang by the
shoestrings somewhere in the air with no
connection to the day to day life. So many
people think like that. They think that
such a man should be a thin, miserable
tree
hanging
onto
some
or
creature
something, and should be absolutely in a
world, who cannot talk to anyone, who is so
much exclusive that he becomes a recluse.
Sahaja Yogis, You have to be very much
type, a uniqque personality. You are to be
there with alỈ these things that are going on.
Now people are frightened even of Sahaja
person. Take a fight. How could you dare
to do this, such a thing ? You are a Sahaja
Yogi. Come up. What do you mean by this ?
You have to fight it out. As long as possible
Nirmala Yoga
20
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-22.txt 
 you should try to salvage a person. Talk to
him in that manner.
never told his mother. He nevar told anybody
that He was an incarnation. Of course it was
evident that he was.
The other side of it is that when you talk to
others, when they come to you, then there has
to be a kind of a tremendous sincerity. If you
are doing things with that sincerity then had other brothers also, but Bharat and
people will know. When you talk to a person Lakshmana show the two sides of a human
they should know that there's sincerity, that being.
your heart is there. For example, you may
talk to that person very sweetly but your
heart may not be there and the person might misbehaving towards Rama. He couldn't
think, "Oh, he was just giving me a lecture."
But if you talk to someone with sincerity you to Shri Râma and he used to get so angry
say, "How could you do such a thing ? Can't with all these people that he would just come
you see yourself ? Can't you work it out ?
That's what it is. You are here for that."
His brother knew about it., Now he had
two brothers. Very interesting. I mean he
One was Lakshmana and he was a fiery
He couldn't bear anybody
type, you see.
bear anybody talking in a very mundane way
out like a big thunderbolt on anybody who
tried to say anything about Shri Räma, even
Now in saying so, your sincerity, which is Parshurāma, who was a contemporary incarna-
coming from your heart is to be seen, and tion of Shri Räma Himself. He is the Shésha
that's what is Shri Rama's character. That he
as they call it, the serpent which sleeps on
was on the right side of the heart, which the Bhavasagara, on which Shri Vishnu rests.
means the heart put to activity. Do you The same Shésha had taken birth as Shri
understand that, where Kabira has said, "I will Lakshmana.
make the compassion of my heart (mana)
steady and put it into five elements."*
Now for a western mind you see, if you
talk about snakes they only know the Adam
See in the same way when you are in the and Eve snake that's all. They don't under-
left heart then that's your 'heart-felt' thing. stand anything, and they can't understand
But the heartfelt thing, what's the use, you why people worship snakes. You see, snakes
see. There are many Sahaja Yogis who really like the cobra and all that are like the kings of
feel that this world is horible and something the under-world, and Shésha is the one who
must be done, Sahaja Yoga must be brought supports the whole universe. So this Shésha
in. But how many of you are really, putting is worshipped as the cobras are worshipped
that into action, absolutely into action. With- in many villages in India anywhere today.
out that, your Rama's Tattva cannot be impro- Because they don't trouble anyone there.
ved. Rāma's tattva principle is only improved Because they are worshipped like deities in
when you put all the things into action; that india. Sometimes they do, but mostly they
don't bite a good religious man.
exactly Shri Rama did.
There's a story of Sãi Nath where a snake
charmer was given a lot of money just to kill
Shri Sai Nath. Because in the night Sai Nath
used to suddenly go up to his own swing he
had made about twenty feet above the ground.
God knows, nobody knew how he used to get
So in the ascent of man, when he came
up to Rāma's place, the advent of Räma was
not in the centre, but on the right hand side.
He moved aside. So much so that he forgot
about his past. It's never mentioned that He's
an incarnation. He never told His father. He
"मन ममता को भिर कर जाऊंगा, पचों तरव में साऊंगा ।
* (Man mamtā ko thir kara Lāungā, pāncho tattva main Launga).
Nirmala Yoga
21
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-23.txt 
 up there, but they would find him sleeping agitation. He didn't know what to do so he
there. So the snake was taken by this snake went back to Rāma and he said, "You take
charmer and he put the snake on to Sai Nath. back your kingdom. I don't want anything.
And Sai Nath talked to him and He said, "Oh You are the one who should govern. Why
God, you've come here to meet me after such should I have it ?" So Rāma said, "Alright,
a long time. What is your job 7" Snake said, you just be there in charge of the kingdom.
"This horrible snake charmer has asked me to
bite you so I've come to tell you to be careful mother because I have given them a promise ?"
about these people." The snake charmer was
looking with amazement that he was talking
to him! Sai Nath said, "Alright, you go now."
These are age-old snakes you see. So the kept. This is another quality that we have
snake went and bit the snake charmer. But to have, that if you have promised anything
then He came down and He sucked his poison you have to keep it. If you have said, "I
and threw it away. "Because, after all," He will do this.", you must do it. You should
said, "the snake is angry with you because
you tried such a trick." So He sucked it. absolutely anti-God activity, to avoid doing
That's compassion. And He sucked his things that you have promised. Your deities
venom out and the fellow was completely will never be happy. You must see that
I have to obey my father,
I have to obey my
So another great quality of Shri Rāma
was that once a promise is given, it is to be
not find out excuses to avoid it. It's an
*"Now I'm going to whatever you have promised you must do.
announce it to all the people that these
Brahmins wanted to kill Shri Sai Nath."
Now when Bharata was senit back by him
he said, "Alright, give me your sandals which
And why ? Why were they so frightened l take there and l'll use them as a symbol of
of this man ? He used to live outside the you being there.
village. They were frightened of Him because
they were doing all wrong things in the name
of God so they were all frightened that
they'd be exposed
" And Bharata put those
sandals on the throne and he ruled that king-
dom and looked after it. Though when he
was going to see Shri Rāma, Lakshmana saw
him coming and said,Look at this ! He is
This is what it is, that He sleeps on the coming to invade you now. He has thrown
Shesha and Shesha is the one who is some-
times expressed in Sahaja Yogis, I have seen
as anger, when you try to be unprotocolish
or when you try to be funny or you don't That the Sahaja Yogis who
behave yourself. That's the Shesha in them.
That is also sometimes needed. You have to
you out of the kingdom and now he's coming
to invade you."
And also among Sahaja Yogis I've seen
that this is there
are like Shesha cannot see the goodness of
other Sahaja Yogis who are very good people,
be a Shesha sometimes, otherwise people will
start misbehaving, and by that they will be extremely sacrificing, nice people but their
harmed. Not that I will be harmed, but they
will be harmed. So that kind of temperament
is also needed.
intentions are not understood, are misunder-
stood, which is a very sad thing. You must
see the intentions also of another type of
people who may not be so hot tempered, may
But the other one is very interesting, is not be so much angry but their intentions are
that of Bharata. Shri Rāma bestowed the very good. They have come actually to ask
kingdom on him because of his mother's for the sandals of Shri Räma.
Nirmala Yoga
22
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-24.txt 
 feel. That wwhile
So among these two types of people,I
have sean there is always a misunderstanding giving vibrations and all that at the most you
going on. So both the types of people should should ask, "Are you feeling any
try to understand that we both are needed for breeze ?" Very humble.
Sahaja Yoga. I cannot only do with one
type of people. We have to have both tYpes
of people who will look after both the styles is "Sankocha' ( ). There's no word for it in
of the thing.
talk That's one thing I
col
And this is another quality of Shri Rāma;
the English language because you have for-
mality, which is a very insipid word to des-
no integration
But when you are dealing with others, one cribe Sankocha. There is
should go as one. For example, if a person between your heart and formality. But if you
comes to Caxton Hall and he says something,
then you should weigh it whether he's a new do you call that7 Sincerity is different.
one or an old one. If he's a new one then:
you must show all gentleness, kindness, all thing. How to say such a thing ? Not
kinds of exterior things which will please, honesty. These are all abstract words. In
The reason is that he's not a realised soul.
He doesn't see your subtle thing. What he
sees is what you are.
are dressed. How you talk to him, How bring me a broken cup, alright, a little broken,
you behave towards him.
they see first of all. They don't see what you Indian is there,-l don't know about western
have got inside. They can't see your heart. style,-then he'l eat and drink, he'll not say
They can't feel your vibrations. So you have anything. But may be somebody might say
to be very kind to them. You have to be very that it's broken.
sweet to them.
can think of a formality of the heart then what
mean in action. Sincerity is an abstract
action.
For example, I am sitting. Now you may
Outside. How you
All these things of you go to somebody's house, so if an
Or say you go to somebody's house and
you don't like a colour scheme or something.
So for an lndian person it would be not
Ireceived a letter from someone saying
that the Sahaja Yogis have been very rude to
me and have been angry. Like the other day proper to immediately say something. For
SOLaebody came and was sitting at the back.
They are trying to salvage the people who are
lost by the cults. He was sitting at the back touch the wrong side of a
and I said, "Come forward." And when he
didn't come, you said,
shouldn't say that! Let me say that. That
time you should keep quiet. No-one should
say, "Get out." Because, you see, the thing Although he was not a realised soul he has
is if you say,. "We don't care for people who
are not humble", then they are going to be
lost anyway. Let us give them a fair chance against the heads of Ravana and he had ten
to come into Sahaja Yoga first by your
an Indian. You see formality of the heart is
not to say something in such a way that you
person, is
Sankocha.
"Get out." You
Now to such an extent Shri Rama had this
that there's a good story which is described
in the Rămäyana written by Tulsi Dās.
brought out some points very well. He says
that Shri Räma was shooting the arrows
heads, and he had a boon that for every head
that fell off another head would grow. He
behaviour.
Now, some people have a habit of talking had a boon like that. So his brother said,
to them a bit too much. They should not "What are you doing ? You know that he
23
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-25.txt 
 cannot die by shooting the arrows at his other we have that Sankocha within us of Shri
head. You have to put it in his heart other-
wise he will not die." So the Sankocha
comes in and He said, "See. In his heart he
has got my wife bęcause he loves her and
she's sitting in his heart. How can I hit him very dangerous thing in a country like England
Rama.
And if you do not have that Sankocha you
get the right heart and that right heart is a
where the climate is so bad, because it gives
See the d.li-
cacy of his understanding. So the brother you a horrible thing like asthma. I'm not
said, "Then by hitting his head is he going to frightening you but its true. You get asthma
be killed ?" He said, "You see, once his f your right heart is caught up. Not neces-
attention goes towards his head his attention sarily that asthma comes from right heart
will be withdrawn from his heart and once the only. It can also come from centre heart.
attention is withdrawn, my wife will not be
there any more. Then I'Il hit him and I'll kill
him."
But if you get right heart you definitely get
asthma.
So the attitude you see, like towards your
father. I've heard people talking to their
fathers also in such a funny way. You can't
talk to your father like that. They talk to me
also very rudely I've seen, Sahaja Yogis,
shockingly even sometimes, on a very mun-
dane level or you can say in a very unproto-
So see, the Sankoslia, then you will under-
stand that how we are rude and arrogant
You see, this kind of arrogance and rudeness
comes to us because we have no Sankocha.
We should not say everything to everyone. We
need not: Should we say everything ? Say, for
example, in your puja may be you are doing colish way. You get this due to the right
something which should not be done. I know
its wrong. Unless and until its absolutely wrong
I'll not tell. l'll sit quietly. Because otherwise
you become tensed up.
heart problem.
So this Sankocha one has to learn, the
'maryäda' means the boundaries of your rela
tionships. You see, that we love each other
doesn't mean that we go on aggressing other's
privacies. To what extent we love each other
doesn't mean that we go on in way that we
So you see, that Sankocha, that understan-
ding comes if you love someone and under-
stand them. Now, you have to love all the
seekers of the world. They have done wrong.
try to transgress all the beauties and all the
They have done all kinds of ego-trips. They privacies of another person.
have made all kinds of mistakes but, your
Say, someone walks into the bedroom
Mother loves them and you have to love directly, it's not the way a Sahaja Yogi should
them.
do. I need not tell you, but you must knock if
you have to, and knock at a time when you
need it All the time to knock or to hang
onto someone all the time is not proper.
If they are to be corrected I'll do that.
You just don't do that way that they feel
hurt. Put a Sankocha. While talking to each
other educate yourself, train yourself to say
things which are sweet and nice, which will So we have a cultural tradition which we
make another person feel that this person is a
properly brought up person in the Sahaja for his Sankocha, he knows everytime how
Yaga tradition. So we have a Sahaja Yoga
tradition in which when we speak to each engrained within us. The children are to be
The Sankocha is a complete cultural style.
He's known
have to learn from Shri Rāma.
to say things: We have to have this very much
24
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-26.txt 
 educated in that way and once they are principles or anything. In day to day
educated in that way they will learn the things, like if yaur father is sitting-I mean in
Sankocha. And that will give them a proper India if the father is there you won't sit down.
understanding of social life.
Before him you won't sit, at any cost. Till he
tells you ten times you won't sit before him.
Like if you see this light is here. If you It helps, you know. It reacts on the father
put your finger to it, it might burn. Then you that supposing
may remove your finger. But if you are with
another person and if you try to take IRberties from your heart. That's only possible if you
with that person then a day may come when
that person may misbehave or harm you of do go". What is the need to be rude to your
something to you. Still you will not realise father ? No need, at all. At any cost. What
that it is because you have no Sankocha that is the need ? Or to your husband or to your
it has happened.
I misbehave my child will not
respect. So the sense of respect also comes
know that maryada from heart-"how far to
wife ? Why say anything harsh to anyone ?
So this Sankocha has to be worked out very What is the need ? What are you going to
beautifully in every way, In thanks-giving. in gain out of it? By saying anything harsh I
accepting some body's gratitude, in expressing have not seen that people have improved.
Only when a guru is harsh or when a mother
and father are harsh to the children it
helps. Nowhere else it helps in common
relationships like brothers and sisters, It does
not. In higher and lower relationships the
lower persons have to bear the harshness of
the elders if they want to improve. There's
your lave to another person in a way that is a
Sankocha.
Now Shri Rama is known for his bounda-
ries. He doesn't cross the limit. The other
day I told you about food, that you don't crss
the boundaries of food, like being compas-
sionate to the bugs and to the mosquitoes. nothing, after all they're not going to throttle
You see in the same way in everything 'dis you. Supposing even il they say something
cretion of the heart' should be there.
Alright ?7 And
bad to you it doesn't matter.
one has to remember what Christ has said,
that you have to turn the other cheek. So
There's no word for discretion of the heart
in the English language which is 'maryāda'. use the heart's discretion about how far to go
Discretion of the heart. Is to understand, for with a person, In the effect of it you'll be a
example, that if you are rude to your father very, very powerful person, in your family, in
what do you gain ? You gain nothing. But Sahaja Yoga, anywhere.
if you are humble you might gain, alright ?
Even if he's a bad man, because what hap-
pens in reaction ? Psychologically, supposing
you are the son of a father who is doing
something wrong and you are obedient to
him, he will always have a fear that he will
lose you if you follow him in your ideas. So by isten to me, who are rude to me, who do
that humility you will raise him.
Those people who are obedient to me are
very powerful Sahaja Yogis. You know that.
And those who are not, go down very fast. I
try to save them by everything but I've seen
that those who are disobedient, who don't
not understand the protocol go down very
much in Sahaja Yoga. Absolutely like that.
In a second I tind they are going hundreds of
feet down. It's true. Because what is lacking
in you is the discretion, the maryādā, how far
If you are humble, if your behaviour towards
your parents is like Shri Räma's, there's noth-
ing to lose. You don't compromise in your
25
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-27.txt 
 to go. And that's another thing where we task and sometimes you might think, "How
can Mother expect us to do it ?" But I think
have to educate ourselves.
So the education of Shri Rama as I told that you are the people who are chosen for it
you was that he could kill a demon with one
arrow. You don't have to beat them a hun- So we have to train up ouselves to be first
dred and eight times. One beating should be good rulers of ouselves and the rulers of
sufficient.
and you have to get to it and work it out.
But you have to be powerful others. First we must learn to rule overselves.
people and the power of a person increases You see, here in this body only you learn how
by putting maryadas. Supposing you have to rule yourself. Comfort; if you get fond of
wheat and just spread it. it will spread all comfort, make your body work it out that
over. The birds will come and eat it up. But there's no comfort needed. If your body
if you put it in a sack it will have a weight, it indulges into too much eating or anything.
will have a size, it will rise in height and it is make your body learn that its not good to
useful. It will have respect. But the thing indulge into it. If you speak too much, talk
which is spread all over, which has no too much, if you are rude, just say that, "I'm
maryada will never be respected. Nothing
works out without maryadas. Even the light evening.'
keeps to a maryada. You have to keep your
maryadas. That is part of our training.
not going to say a word from morning till
So the Tapas, the penance time is now
ahead of us. With that penance the greatest
Say there's an aeroplane and it is not thing that is going to help is to go and talk of
bound by any maryadas, it is not bound.
When it goes up in the air it will be all and also talk about how the transformation,
finished. A/l our ideas of freedom are to the blossom time has come
be bound by maryādās. If the freedom has to do, plus you have to learn how to rule
no maryada it is abandonment. It is nonsense.
It is not going to help. So we have to create
out of Sahaja Yogis great politicians. It has
been predicted that if Sahaja Yoga does not
spread then the third world war is inevitable.
People will suffer a lot with a third world war.
It is possible to avoid it if people take to
Sahaja Yoga in big numbers. But if they do
not. there will be a third world war and the What is Blake ? He was a prophet too. You
effects of that will harm people so much that
ultimately it is the Sahaja Yogis who will be through his Spirit, isn't it ? Pure intellegence.
called for a conference and not the diplomats. Then you become Shri Räma if you can do
The Sahaja Yogis will be consulted, and they
will decide what is to be done for the world
and they will become the rulers of tomorrow's You all could come
world. So we must have a full idea of how
to be rulers like Shri Râma.
We have to move very far with ourselves,
training ourselves, educating ourselves, getting your responsibility to be good. To be like
rid of our egos and understanding that we
have to grow. Its a very big task, its a great
Sahaja Yoga. Give the message of my Advent
This you have
yourself and then how ta rule others-through
your heart and not through your mind. You
have to rule through your hearts by learning
all the qualities of the heart which I have just
told you....
I think you'd better read some of the prop-
hets. You will also start talking like them.
You read Kabir. Khalif Gibran, all these people.
can talk like him. Why not ? He talked
that.
So today's a great day. I'm happy that
. And it has worked out
so well that I was going to come here and
taik about Shri Rama, and wish you all that
you follow Him up. Respect yourself and it's
Work it out that way.
that.
May God bless you all.
NADI GRANTH, (see Nirmala Yoga, vol. 9 (May-June 1982) pp. 3.
Nirmala Yoga
26
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-28.txt 
 Shri Mataji
Hounslow, London.
11th Aug 1984
Raksha-Bandhan and Maryadas
for Sahaja Yogis
Today is a very great day ot Rakshä-
bandhan. So I have to tell you something successful than the marriages that were
about Rakshaã-bandhan.
to talk about the maryādās (boundaries of pure such a thing as to arrange your marriage with
relationships) that have to be observed by a
Sahaja Yogis.
marriages which were done like that, ara'very
Before that we have
selected and were done. It's very wrong to do
Sahaja Yogi by yourself. It will be dange-
rous. I don't want to say anything; but it
would'nt turn out to be good because it is
anti-God activity Absolutely anti-God. You are
supposed to develop your brahmacharya,
you are supposed to develop your Moolãdhára.
One of the things I discovered here, in the
West, that though we have understood the
importance of Moolädhära, which is a very
important thing, that unless and until we estab- Instead of that if you start using a Sahaja
lish our Moolādhāra fully we are not going to
have speediestascent. Despite all that, there are
lingering things you see around. Like, people troublesome, your Moaiādhāra is not going
start choosing their life-partners in Sahaja
Yoga. That is not allowed. That is not allowed.
You are not to spoil your Ashrams, your
centres-using them for a marriage searching
society. You must respect this point, you of the conditioning you have had, you people
must respect. If you have to marry, then you don't understand that it is important to main-
can find your life partners 'outside" Sahaja tain the purity of the centres. And of every
Yoga-to begin with. But if you want to marry place. So any such relationship in one city
"in' Sahaja Yoga, then you should not go on
searching people in Sahaja Yoga. It is "very To add up to the trouble, it's a habit of
dangerous' thing for Sahaja Yoga itself, and people, I have heard, that they try to tease
for you people. That is one thing one should
"never' try to do with Sahaja Yoga. For all together". They tease' and enjoy. It's a kind
practical purposes you are brothers and sisters. of a very perverted enjoyment of molādhāra,
And that's why I always encouraged marriage To tease others, "You are looking very nice
between people who belong to another with him, and you better marry him."
Yogini or a Sahaja Yogi for the selection of
your married life, it's going to be very very
to settle down. I mean that's a bad stroke
for your development.
Because of the background and the kind
is a very very wrong thing. It spoils everyone.
that "you look better together", "you're nice
It's a
kind of a romantic non-sense.
country or another centres.
Of course, for all this, yogis-they have to.
have a Brahmacharya. But even if you can't
As we are now having a big marriage
programme, I would say that most of the
27
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-29.txt 
 searching for boys and girls. Because il these
habits are not curbed, 'before" marriage, then
kind of a non-sense, when the marriage is not they go on lingering on. So, one should
settled;-if marriage is settled it is alright: not try to do all these things before marriage.
And this kills completely the joy of marriage, And I have seen such marriages are never-
never successful so far. And even if they are,
it is a sort of make-believe thing. It doesn't
established. Some of them are really no . May be in
orie case-may be-successful, that does not
mean that you take help from such difficult
if they are established, they are wrong, and things, but have 'normal" marriage which are
if they are not established, they are heart- enjoyable, which have created permanent bon
have brahmacharya. You must have Marya-
Not to tease each other and enjoy that
dās.
because there is no curiosity left. And many
a times I find that absurd relations are
give real joy. it's a joyless pursuit
good. And they will really be detrimental
and some of them are never established. So
dages between people.
breaking.
So all this kind of thing you should not
Now we have to understand about tihe
do. You have got experiences of people who "Maryādās about which I have told you before
married outside and brought wonderful also. The relationships between men
and
people to Sahaja Yoga: If you can do it, you.
women are pure only if a certain amount of
should do it. If you have to marry Sahaja boundaries are kept. Like supposing you have
Yogi, you should not marry them at the cost milk in one container and you have got some-
of destroying the purity and the idealism it thing else in another container. To keep the
has. For your own sake, for your 'own' purity of one container, you have to keep it in
pleasures you should not spoil the name of its bounds, in the cup. If you allow them to
mix up, if they fall together and mix up, then
there is no purity left. It's a simple thing like
that. One should understand- That we have
to understand that how to keep our relation-
Sahaja Yoga.
That is one thing I have seen, so I would
say that today, as it is the day of purity bet-
ween relationships, let us know that you have
to treat each other as brothers and sisters. Ships proper in respect to each other's modesty
No such play should be followed. Don't allow
your mind to drift into this. Because if you
allow, then there's no end to it. As it is, you younger to you. You must keep al the dis
know how hard it is to bring you back to
normalcy.
and chastity.
Now, for example, there is a girl who is
tance from such a person. If she is much older
than you, then it's alright; you can talk, laugh,
joke, she's much' older than you. But nor-
When Christ had said, "Thou shalt not mally with a girl who is younger to you, even
have adultrous eyes", He did not say it
because it was not practical It is quite practi-
And there is nothing to
"much' younger, you should try to keep away,
after all if she is a young girl; not with the
children, but still You must learn these things:
worry about marriages so much, wwhat is so
important ? So many are married and what
has happened to them. 'Even with the Sahaja
Yoga marriage, some have failed because of Then you 'must not have any funny ideas
these bad habits. So you better' get rid of about such a person-is absolutely absurd. If
these bad habits before marriage. Because
after marriage also they go on like this, and in perversion you do such things. See, you
how to maintain a distance.
Now, there is a man, who's younger to you.
some gentleman is younger to you, it is only
Nirmala Yoga
28
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-30.txt 
 person sit on my head. Sometimes you tele-
phone to me, "Mother she would like to talk
to you". Who is she? Is she alright? Should we
take her to Mother? Is she capable of talking
to Mother ? What is her condition ? Will she
trouble Mother ?-Nobody thinks about it.
should not have any funny ideas about that
person. It's only done when there are emer-
gencies, when there is no possibility of a
marriage, when there are so many women or
so many men-or under perverted conditions.
Wa don't have; none of these conditions are
here, so we have to bahave like normal people.
And when the proper atmosphere is given to with me on proper understanding that you
us, why not make use of it? Why should we should not try to trouble me !-But this is
create absurd things ? Then they come out
saying to me, "Mother, we have decided to
marry : let us marry. I have to say, 'yes.
many things i don't want to say 'yes', but I
have to say "yes". That creates a very bad
precedent. 'May be' that in certain cases, as
an exceptional case, I might have chosen
somebody to marry like that. But that does
not mean 'you' should take things into your
hands and just start doing things like that, so
that I will have problems later.
So you must first establish your relationship
something not yet in my hands.
cause people do not understand what they
are doing.
I think be-
To
So first try to see that you don't take
advantage of me. And second thing, you
don't bring people to me who do not deserve
Vit. There is no need to waste my time with
them. I have so much things to be done; so
many ideas to be formulated. I have to work
so hard. You know, I am working harder than
any one of you, those who are doing Sahaja
Because once you do that, everybody starts Yoga, And at this age if you try to trouble
doing it. It's a kind of an aggressiveness, that me like that/ don't know that how to tell you
you arrange something, come to me, say, that you do not trouble me. In the 'presence
of the person you will come, you will bring
the person on my head," Oh, that person has
problem for me, for the rest of the people. come from Timbuktu, and I have brought her",
Just you do it. It is aggressiveness only.
"Mother we want to marry". Now what am
I to say? "Alright, marry." But it creates a
They will say, "Alright. If he has married a
girl who is twenty years younger, why not I
marry a girl who is thirty years younger."
Please do not try to do that. This is the
wrong thing to do.
You must understand my problems. If you
ask me something, "Mother, should I do it ?"
You really force me into it; / say, "Yes", Be- first with me; that understanding that you
cause I can't be very strict with you, because should not try to trouble me 'at all'. Secondly.
I am your Mother. But you should be sensible you should try to please me by being good
what to ask me, how far to go. This is the people.
"biggest Maryādā you have to learn. Suddenly
you will come, "Mother should I sit here?" egoistical. He does not even put on mny tapes,
What do I say ? "Should I make this gentleman This kind of a
sit here?" What should I say?-"Alright". You thing is very 'surprising'; how can people do
"yourself' should not ask such a question.
So the Maryādās are to be established
I hear that somebody is trying to be very
he just gives his own lectures.
H like that? Try to bring down your egos,
Because sometimes you give undue impor-
tance to somebody, who is "my brother," who
is "my sister,"-something. And make that
You must Tearn to "please' me
super-egos.
S it, gE (Prasanna bhava He
Devi. Prasanna bhava.) If you cannot make
Nirmala Yoga
29
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-31.txt 
 the Devi Prasanna (pleased), what will be your
achievement? As Rustom says. I am Maha- that. Achieve that purity. That is very
mäyä. Alright. But don't you know that I am important.
that ? So try to keep to it. And keep that
understanding that if we have to grow, we
*must have proper relationship with Mother.
And we must understand what would displease trY to enter into any bedroom, where the ladies
Her the 'most. "Am I pleasing Her by doing
this ?" But if you force me; "If it pleases You
we will do this", then what am I to say ?-
"Alright, go ahead". If it pleases me I wil
just spontaneously say, "Alright, it pleases me.
Go ahead with it".
First of all you should 'arise' and achieve
Now the relationship between men and
women. I have told you that you should not
It's not proper. Nor the women sho uld
enter into men's thing. But it is very common.
Women should not behave in the way other
women behave, Like I was told in a wedding
in Maharashtra that the women went and took
out all their clothes. I mean that is not
England, they got a shock, you know. Some
are.
Like that so many things are there that of them lost their appetite for 3-4 days. They
people just try to force on me and I say,
**Yes". But I am very cunning and clever in They went and took out their clothes suddenly
that, because I tell in a way that you realise
that it is not joy-giving: Alright.
have never seen such women in theirlife time.
all of them. I mean they were shocked, so
much shocked that 3-4 days they did not eat
Now the second thing is that Maryadās of their food. So you had no business to shock
relationships between you, is relationship of them also. Because if you go to somebody's
"Pure' Love. Of Purity, Unless and until you country, you must know in what way they
develop 'pure relationship, you are going to
be ruined. See, this finger has to have pure like that. And 20 girls, if they suddenly
relationsh p with the hand. Supposing if this become nude like that, what will happen. ?
finger ha. some dirty feelings about this hand,
it may dirty it. It may spoil it.
live. It's never done, Nobody becomes nude
So the sense of shame must be developed.
Among men and women. It looks nice, it
In the same way we must have 'extremely looks beautiful. It gives you an additional
pure' relationship with each other. Means we
charm. If you have the sense of shame, a
should try to give our heart to another person little bashfulness. See your Princess of Wales
without any lust or greed in it,-that, we is regarded as something beautiful. She is
should try to do. Try to help each other.
bashful ! Her bashfulness is so natural. That
bashfulness is not there, like a-I don't know
greedy way attached to others-this is not for what animal does that. but somebody who
the Sahaja Yogis, but non Sahaja Yogis-they has no shame. I mean just don't know
Everybody has a sense of
shame-even animals. So why not we have
that sense of shame; how to behave towards
I find when they feel in a lusty way, or a
It's a which one is that.
get so much interested in that person.
very 'baser' way of attachment.,
But in Sahaja Yoga, your attachment is
with your Spirit, your Atmā, And Atma is
the "purest form of our being. We have to
keep it absolutely pure. And then the enjoy- to India. And she just went and put a big
ment is higher than any romance, any marriage, slap on the back of Mr. Modi "HELLO"
any worldly thing. Its the highest and the: Modi, how are you ?" And Modi got such a
top-most. First achieve that.
women, how to be dignified.
I have seen one lady going from England
shock ! She did not mean; she was innocent,
Nirmala Yoga
30
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-32.txt 
 but that's not the way in Sahaja Yoga we are
going to behave. Like some sort of a debon-
air or some sort of a fantastic-what you
call-a modern woman
talk, how you listen to others more than you
talk yourself, how you become non-aggres-
sive,-is the best way to impress people and
to express Sahaja Yoga,
5.
One must understand one must have a
sense of shame; how do you talk. Even with saying, "They are very beautiful people, you
me they will talk with a hand like that
"MOTHERI you see this thing is happening." they are very different type. It's something
But there's no need to do all that, you see.
Talk in a way that is gentle and beautiful.
I tell you, as it is people have started
can see they are very beautiful. You can see
different. They are something great."-People
have 'started' saying that. But 'still we lack
The other day I met a very nice taxi fellow. in certain things, like we start going on a
And I tell you, his gestures and things were
so beautiful, immediately' I said he is a
realised soul He would not say anything all prophets, and prophets have to behave like
without putting his hand like this, and with prophets. They can not behave like cheap-type
his eyes down below. He would not say people. So, in that we have to understand
something tike that, nothing of the kind. So the Maryadās.
sweet he was, his whole gesture. He is an
Englishman I Brought up and bred here. Not should be respectful. have seen that nobody
a single vulgar word he said. Like one of calls any body-even the children will call
your players was so stupid. When Princess somebody, say, elderly person also-never they,
Anne went to meet him he said all kinds of
plane which is not suitable to our stature, to
our dignity, to our position as saints.
We are
Now the Maryādā to your leader also; you
say, call them uncle or anything like that; it's
a wrong thing. You must teach your children
to call elders by the name as brother or
uncle or someone. Give some respect to the
everything should be saintly. You are 'saints' elders. But when the leader also is not
now I Do you realize ? You are all 'saints'. So respected, what is the question ot it ?I have
seen little boys calling big, married people
other, how you respect their dignity. how you with 3-4 children, by name. That's not our
things, you see. It's kind of
stupidity- don't know.
a ego, or
Because, how you talk, how you speak
how you behave with dignity towards each
live, is 'very important.
style. You should never do it. I saw this-even
my husband's office has this problem. Because
when I came, you see,-they always called you
by name.- Tom. He's such a big man, he's
called as Tom and all that. So C.P. loked at
it.......... And we always call them even the
drivers, we call them by the name Mr-
you see. So we could not understand why
is it like this. You see, it being 'democratic'
And that you should try to maintain in a
way that looks like a 'saintly behaviour. You
have to be a 'saint' ! And that is not difficult
for you, to take to that, that you behave in a
manner that you are saints.
This is very important. It would be
killing, absolutely killing Sahaja Yoga, if you
do not keep your Maryādās. That is one of or something. You
the 'Most essential things one has to under- become 'demonocratic
stand.
see that's how you
We 'must' respect. We 'must" respectieach
have told you again and again, how you other, must call them by higher names.
dress up, how you bear yourself up, how youSpecially when in a meeting, where there are
Nirmala Yoga
31
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-33.txt 
 people, you should call them-each other, even
your friends-by Mr. so and so.
brother. Or a lady is friendly as a sister, then
she should not try to put a wedge between
husband and wife. That is the 'worst thing
to do, is to put a wedge between husband
and wife. Anybody who tries to do that
must know that he is a mean person. One
* should never try to put a wedge between
husband and wife.
It's alright for me to call you. It would
look very funny if I call Mr. Brown or Mr.
Reeves; because they are my children, you
see, I am their Mother. But for 'you because
you are equal, at least call them Mr. And
say something in a way which is beautiful.
I know there are problems between hus-
Like the English language has many words band and wife, I will put them right. But you
as "please", "thank you"-All these must be don't try to put any wedge between them.
used 'profusely. Profusely'. We are going And don't try to create a problem. If it is
"back' a little bit. We are now becoming problematic, it is for 'me' to solve, you people
much more modern. That, we should give up don't have to solve, And don't interfere with
their married life, Let them be as they are,
I will find out how they are, I will try to help
them. Butit's 'very" wrong to play with their
married life or with their mariage problems,
and suddenly jump on somebody,-is a very
wrong thing. Which is very common here. A
and become less modern and more elevating,
Now the whole idea of this Maryādā is
such that when you have called somebody as
a sister or a brother then it is not only lip-
service, "You are my sister". It is something
innate', and very deep. You have to develop
that feeling of a sister. Because that's how
your sublimity will go up, your left-vishuddhi
will improve, your Vishnumäyā will be satis-
fied.
woman is in distress, you see, a man will
come to help her. Even if she is married, he
will elope with her. This is how he comes to
help her in the distress.-To create another
distress for her. So this is how one should
If you call somebody a sister, the sisterly understand that this kind of a cheap heart-
and daughterly relationships, and motherly giving business is not for Sahaja Yoga.
relationships, always bring down the so-called
ego, which is hiding in the left vishuddhi. So
try to be kind and gentle with the person whom-
you call the sister. Stand by her. Look after
her. If somebody you call your brother. you
In our heart resides the Spirit. We are
dignified people, and in that dignity, we have
to rise, and live with that dignity. Not to
cheaply allow the Spirit to
be insulted or
daminated or subjugated to 'anyone".
have to pray for his protection; then you must
know that you have a right to ask him for 'his
protection also. But you must also 'give
something to him, and you must try to look-
after him, welcome him to your house, and
treat him as a part and parcel of your being,
because he is 'very much near to you be-
cause he is your brother, and he's very much
Now the relationship with children also
one should understand. I have seen some
people have a habit of getting a child very
much closer, and pampering them, "Oh I this
child is this thing", "Oh I that child..." Let the
parents handie the child, "you just don't
interfere with other's children. Don't interfere
much with them. If you find any child is
such and such, inform me, I will cure the
But such a brother should not try to domi- child. But if a child is being spoilt by you,
nate the wife, this is the Maryādā, again. it's the worst thing to do to harm that child,
closer to you.
Like somebody is very friendly with the is to spoil.
Nirmala Yoga
32
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-34.txt 
 best way, because we don't want to have
gent. you must know. They are 'very good children who are spoilt. who are spoiling
at manipulating. They will, because they are other children, nor we want children who
are subjected to such children. So, you can
souls, they are born in this country. What a have proper children, well-behaved children,
combination 1 At that time you should be'very' sensible. wise children. Because they can
really be a drag on you, on me, on everyone,
if you do not properly bring them up. And
Children here are 'very' clever and intelli-
are realised
extremely precocious. They
careful as to their training.
From the first five years all the parents
should be textremely strict with children. they are our liabilities, we have to look after
Extremely strict'. Don't allow them to
overpower you or manipulate you. It's very'
important. If you allow them to overpower
you or to dominate you, they will sit on your Actually the mother should look after the child
head. Tell them not to do like that. And
one day you will come and say "Mother, what father should never scold the mother in the
to do, these are realised souls and you see
we were looking after them." They are not
deities. They are not deities to be worship- scolding the mother in the presence of the
ped. They are 'only realised souls. So keep child, the child will have no respect for the
them at that point. And you are my trustees
of these children. And if you spoil them,
it is 'you' who will he held responsible. You the child will know how to respect her and
have no business to spoil the lives of these
children as Sahaja Yogis, and their chances
of ascent. So if they are born-realised, they children to follow. One should not try to
are not deities; this you must understand. dominate the husband, at least in the presence
They are not 'beyond' corruption, they are not
beyond all kinds of things.
them.
So the relationship between father and
children, mother and children, is important.
much more. And the child must respect;-
presence of the child. That's one thing one
must understand. That if the father starts
mother. But the respect must be maintained,
because if the wife respects the husband then
the husband too. So the whole thing is built
up like that. Is a kind of a pattern for the
of children. That's very wrong. Because then
the children learn that trịck and they start
So this if you understand, this little point. dominating 'you." So it flows from you to
that dealing with your children, you have to
be 'really strict. They must know how to
meditate, they must know how to pray, they the husband and in a way that is very obvious
must know how to respect; and all the good to the child that the father is respected by
things you njust teach your children-and
don't allow them to sit on your head.
children. So try to see, if you have to do
anything then you do it yourself. And respect
mother. And they are just like monkeys.
The way you behave, they behave. So you
allow them to behave in a particular manner,
Many people have ruined the lives of their they will behave that way. But if you put a
children like this: Now will you see such good pattern af behaviour, they will imbibe
child is brought into proper level? If the child
is trying to take liberties with you, and cheeky,
and does not listen, please give that child to
some other Sahaja Yogi, whom you think
can look after, to look after-and see that the will never ask for it, "I want this, I want that".
child is put right. "Nip in the bud" is the They never manipulate. What happens 7 What
it.
The other day I was thinking, how Indian
children are so obedient, so sensible. They
33
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-35.txt 
 happens, how do they do it ? The reason is, I 'wrong of you, notto take any money from
think, the good pattern in the house. Every- them." said where is the money! No question
n
of taking, I have to pay myself! I said it is so
invaluable that how can you charge for it?
body knows whom to respect, how to respect,
how to behave.
The relationship in Sahaja Yoga has to be They are not charged for it, it is very invalu-
even more than this, much more subtler. For
example, if-this I have said before also-if
we are in a room try to give another person
al ways-try to do 'for' them. If you have to
pay, better pay yourself. Not that wait for
another person. Try to do it yourself. Run
"forward' to do it. You see, if someone is
carrying the luggage, you' run, 'you' do it.
That is the way a Sahaja Yogi should be.
Mostly, children are like that; they will say,
"I will get it; 1 will do it: T will receive.
May be ego, you might call it, but whatever
it is, but that is the sign you all have to
achieve by organising a proper type of an
image for the 'whole society'. That if some-
body needs something, you run; You want
water, alright..", "you want something. you
take mine". Food also, same thing. First let
other's have, not that you should first have
anything. How you eat your food is very
important, everything is very important for the possible for Sahaja Yoga. It is very important.
children to see, and to behave like that.
able. The Spirit is very invaluable, and you
cannot charge for it. So he was insisting. 1
mean, he took half an hour on this subject
only. He said, "This Anglo-Saxon brain
would not understand unless and until you
make it a little more money-oriented ar
something.
s something. I said, "I can not. Tell me how
much is to be paid." Just to shut him down,
I said, "What about Christ ? How much money
did He" take ? By God's grace I am quite well
off and I really do not need either, But He
"needed", still He never toak any money from
anyone."-Then he kept quiet. But this is,
you seel That people think that you are getting
it easy, cheap and that is why you want to
take advantage, -which is wrong.
*respect. You must respect and understand,
that it is 'never" good to take any advantage
of it. On the contrary. whenever
possible you should try to do whatever is
You must
it is
Try to surrender. Not that I will take any
money fronm you; you know that, / do not
In money matters also, l have seen that want any money or anything. But 'surrender
people should be very-very
should have proper Maryadüs. Now, with me,
whatever Maryādās you want to keep, you
must understand ! It is very embarrassing to
talk about it. But so far, as you know, I had
to shell-out lot of money to manage many
funds, many things. And last time also we had
many people who came to eat-does not Supposing there is a couple now, wants to go
sensible and yourself absolutely to Sahaja Yoga That is
the best way people have risen and have done
so well.
Now the relationship among yourselves,
among different groups, among different
nations. We should try to help people.
to India to get married. Now if they do not
have money, of courseI am there. I said,
matter.
At the time, now, when we are talking "Alright they need not pay any money, I will
about Maryãdās, we must know that in any
case Mother should not be made to pay any foot, he says, "Why not the people or the centre
pay for them". But Waren has put down his
Because we are so many, we should help them out, for the time being ?" You see
more.
try to manage, it possible. Like yesterday, because, now supposing they have helped
I had a person from BBC, and he said, "It is somebody, he had no money. He went to
Nirmala Yoga
34
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-36.txt 
 India, he got married and then he got lost. See, get the vibrations. Every morning, there
he misbehaved, in the sense, that he does should be a discipline: You must know that
not talk to anyone, he thinks no end of himself.
Then he started behaving in a funny manner.
So a kind of a feeling came into their mind
that "Why should we do it 7 You see, you do
it for somebody, he behaved like that. If you not:-only possible
try to help somebody,.. is this
reaction that if you try to do something for
someone then people try to misbahave ?" That's
not so: Must be one person has done it. that person. And tell-off that person. Or there
that does not mean that every body has done are leaders who will do it. But everybody
it.
the system of Sahaja yoga has worked out
this way, that I have given you realization just
to say that "Let your light be enlightened."
Now you have to see your lamp, it's clean or
when
the light is
enlightened. See your lamp, if it is enlightened
or not. See, if somebody is over-aggressive,
then its alright, you make a joint attack on
a natural
others. You better judge
must not judge
That's what it is. They say there's a kind
of a barrier built in a parson who is helped by yourself, cleanse yourself, look after yourself.
us and his ego is challenged, and he tries to And also try to see how your lamp is. Is it
behave in a manner, which was never known
before, And he starts behaving in such a
"funny manner that he does not talk to
anyone, he keeps out and he becomes mad, will go tvery fast. And you have to. now,
which is ego. So, his ego is hurt. There's perfect yourself. We have so many Sahaja
nothing to feel hurt. Because if you have no
money and if it is one part and one body, if point.
somebody's helping you out, does not matter.
You can help some body else, when you are
well off. But when it comes to "you', you give it very much. Sahaja yoga should not be taken
up. So it's a very absurd type of a behaviour for granted. Anybody who thinks he has
of one individual or two or three or may be got realisation and now he is sitting on top of
clean? Mother has given us the light to see;
and why not see ?
So if you work it out on these lines, you
Yagis, but how many are perfect. This is the
Now your relationship to Sahaja Yoga is
also very important. There's a Maryāda about
the world-is not so. You must work it out,
to have discipline. The same
five or ten. Doesn't matter. But still we must
not forget that we have to 'help'. We have you have
to help as many as possible. And we must gentleman-the BBC fellow-was saying that
try to do, whatever is possible for us, for it was before, for years together you had to
others. This is important. If we cannot do for live in celibacy and wash and sweep steps of
a group, like Sahaja Yogis, whom are we going the temple and do all kinds of things, work
to help ? So we have to give that help.
hard, do this do that,-and then they would
raise it to one chakra. / said, "Now we do it
Now, in Sahaja Yoga itself, on the subtle the other way round". First build the dome,
basis we should not try to judge anybody's and then the foundation. Sahaja Yoga is like
vibrations. It is very common in people; "Oh, that So that, with the dome you understand
you are caught-up on your Agnya". "Oh you
have got this wrong, let me clear you out". people take for granted. Like : "Mother will
You sit down. Morning till evening, without do it." "Leave it to Mother." No. It is not
meditating, they are clearing each other's
chakras and catching on yourself. It's an
absolutely
individually. should sit before the photograph -These hands are the Nirmala at this point!
you are protected, you are looked after. But
so. You are my hands. ow, supposing, my
hands have to lift this, should say that
"Nirmala will do it." Now which is Nirmala ?
Every body,
idea.
wrong
Nirmala Yoga
35
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-37.txt 
 So, many people drift like that, so to Sahaja to get perfection. Perfectionism. You shauld
Yaga also your attitude should be of respect.
You should not try to put yourself into
bandhan before others, you should not try to every body should try to be: That, "your pro-
do these things, but in a dignified way you blems / will solve. But you solve your ascent.
should respect Sahaja Yoga. And forenmost That is very important. You 'must ascend,
of all, to Sahaja Yoga your relationship should otherwise whatever problems I solve, you get
be that you should know "Sahaja Yoga,- into another problem, then you get into
what it is."
liability on Sahaja Yoge, but a
"great asset of Sahaja Yoga. That's what
never be a
Otherwise everytime if you have another problem.
to talk about Sahaja, Gavin must come-or
somabody. Why? Gavin did not know a
word about Sahaja Yoga, he did not know a
word about Indian mythology. he did not
know anything', he didnot know what is
Realization. He studied. He even studied sion. Because then I trouble you; that's the
Sanskrit.
Now the relationship, Say, you have a
Ashram. Somebody has bought it. Now nobody
should think that this is my house." Now this is
the best way to get out of this idea of posses-
place where Mahämäyā plays If you say, "This
is my house"-then you will have it I And you
Like many of you have done it. But 'all will have it for ever. Sosuch things you should
of you. "one and all. should become a big
pandit. But you get lost in your marriage house)." Now I have seen people going to
problems. Then your children's problems.
Then my mother, then my sister. I mean it house. They live there. They manipulate
will take too much time for you. First of all all the money that they save and this and that,
you must see, Tam a Sahaja Yogi, let me get and develop this, want to make everything
to work
'never develop, the feeling that this (is my
an Ashram. And then they think this is their
comfortable. They never think: "This is not
my Ashram, / am doing it because I am a
This is the Ashram of Mother.
And it creates problems for us also.
Because your wile will sue you, your children Sahaja Yogi.
will come round, this that. You should say "I
have nothing to do; lam going to study Sahaja
Yoga."
thave to do it"
Not at
But that detachment is not there !
all a detachment. And it is something surpris-
ing, that if you have to go to Himālayas and
make insurance policy; then what's the use of
coming to Sahaja Yoga? It is as absurd as
that ! We are writing two insurance policies,
that, "I have gone to Himalayas, if I die, give
. If I don't die, I will
come back after that"..-And nicely packing
I was surprised that many people have
taken "Advent" just like-as a Bible. Just as a
Bible. They "never read it. I was surprised
that some people do not know whatI have
written in the Advent. So it's like the Jews,
you see, having a Golden Bible tied up here. my property to this one
They keep the "Advent" in a very good cover
near the photograph, worship it,-finished. up in a nice plastic bag so that ice does not
And the knowledge goas into them I"
So you
It's as absurd as that
You spoil it!
some chapters-at least of should not have anything.
*must read'
"Advent", if not anything else.
Now some people have a habit-"Oh,I
will gst a house for myself. Get my wife
There are so many books you can read, 1
have told you. Try to make your own library. there, children there." Finished ..All such
Try to improve on it. Every body" must try people, for a change, should leave their
Nirmala Yoga
36
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-38.txt 
 houses, come to Ashram, put some other at her" Why did not you come in time, I was
people in their house. Because they are get-
ting attached, you see, how will you get ing to scold her, and shout at her and spoil
detached? Is there any way out ? Because that all the relationship? Just see, the absurdity
is very important in Sahaja Yoga : "Unless
and until you are detached, you cannot
ascend." Supposing you have all the tenta-
cles down here on the Mother Earth, and you
say "Let this plane fly-how will it move?
waiting for you." Then why were you wait-
of the whole thing is the attachment. You
should get completely DETACHED about
everything and you
will enjoy, just ENJOY!
But in that also, one has to judge you are
really enjoying or you are just making a drama
So those people who have houses of their out of it Try to be sincere. PURITY is
own, or buildings of their own or anything- brought forth by SINCERITY If you are
flats-should' give up their houses, not to be
that comfortable: get out of it. Ask some
other people to shift, and you shift to the you have to achieve in Sahaja Yoga, apart
Ashram. Go on shifting, training your mind from the unity, which I have given you. But
to shift, to live with everyone, to be able to if you do not use this unity for purity, no use.
share and to do things.
not sincere to yourself and to others, you 'can
not' be pure. And purity is the 'main thing
So this light should give you complete
wisdom that you enjoy a 'pure' good life. You
are married; alright, you have life of enjoyment
that I have already described
to you. And with your wife how to behave
I have changed 40 houses after my marri-
age. You can imagine ! And the kind of a
house I have to carry on with is a very multi- with your wife
purpose house. And I have changed so far
forty houses, and if I change now this house, also I have described many a times. Or with
it will be the forty-first. You can imagine, I
have been married forty years and forty houses
1-have changed.
your husband.
But when it comes to others, you should
have absolutely Pure relationship-of no
So the relationship of purity must be exploitation. Even there are flirting exploi-
understood, in everything. "Is it 'pure rela- tations-as the same as money exploitations.
Here if you exploit somebody by money it's
called a Thug'. But flirting is not called
a house that is giving me comfort that's why anything. I think it is a much worse crime
1 am living in this house, or am I just living according to Christ. So you have to be care-
here. just because it is an abode, I am here ful on this point. and understand that relation-
tionship? Am I living in this Ashram in 'pure
rclationship? Because this is a house that is
today, and I will be there tomorrow?."
ship with each other has to be pure.
You will be amazed you will enjoy 'every
part of life. "As soon as' you are attached, horrible wives or horrible husbands. I don't
you are doomed. It's a 'headache', to be mind, they can give them up. if they are
attached to some one. Then you hanker: "My absolutely impossible, if they are spoiling
wife has not arrived. Oh God, what to do their purity, if they are torturing their lives,
now. I must telephone to her, get her here".
But if you are detached, "What's it, she'll mind. Because if they are 'so' bad that you
come in time." Not only that, but you will
enjoy her company; otherwise you will shout
Now there are people who have, say,
then the best is to get rid of them. I don't
OS
cannot use them-just like this body, if it is
so bad, it's better to give up and die, so that
37
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-39.txt 
 let that relationship die out. But that death
should come to you as a very forceful help, relationship of Vishnumaya is, that Vishnu-
otherwise after that if you become a nervous mäya is the one who is the Sister, sister of
personality, what's the use?
Now.
brother sister relationship-the
Shri Krishna. She is the one who announced
the Coming of Shri Krishna. She is the one
So what you have to do after such a thing who sacrificed, her life to save Shri Krishna's
has happened, is to solve all your problems
solve your divorce problems, solve your court
problems, then come to Sahaja Yoga. We do
not want to get involved into this sort of a Durvodhana and it was Shri Krishna who came
thing 'at all' that we have broken any family
or anything. If you cannot carry on with your
wife, Sahaja Yoga should not be any excuse.
Because 'you' can not carry on with your purity, of help. A very delicate relationship
wife, you should have this thing-go out of is to be maintained of a brother and a sister.
Sahaja Yoga, do what you like with your wite, And that is a special relationship, Today,
finish it off once for all. And you should tell those who want to tie the Räkhis to a sister
her," I am no more a Sahaja Yogi." Get it should tie today before me, it will he a good
out, and then' come to Sahaja Yoga. But by idea, It is a greater relationship than any
coming to Sahaja Yoga you will be 'really other relationship. Because here somebody
troubling me too much.
life. Vishnumāyā is the one which surrounds
Shri Krishna; and She was born as Draupadi
who, you know, was later humiliated by
and helped her.
So it's a very sweet relationship of
is your 'own' sister, is alright. But if she is
not your own sister you should know that you
So I have to make a humble request to all are born of 'One Mother. So the brother
you, that if you have any such problem, do and sister relationship should be alright
not allow any child who is younger than a
proper age-sixteen years-to be kept in the
Ashram without taking a full permission,
"written' permission from the parents. Ora wife
who has made problems with the husband.
should 'not' be allowed to come and stav in miserable one. This is all but a
the Ashram with the childern. We are not
responsible for all kinds of problems.
In that also one should not have preferences
Because some would like to have a rich sistert
Or some sort of a nonsense like that. Or
somebody would like to have the most
relation-
ship with a person with whom you would like
to be happy, you should tie the Rakhi, And if
there is anybody left out, I would say that best
Then people who are sick or mentally thing would be to have your lucky dips. I think
deranged shouuld not be kept in the Ashram.
That is also quite a 'sympathetic' attitude of
so many Sahaja Yogis. Ashram is for the things. Whichever way you like you choose
best people. not for the lunatics. So please
do not get such people who are no good.
We do not want such people to come in the happy. And then we will do this little havana
Ashram who are going to ruin the reputation
of the Ashram.
for people, something like that could be done
so that they choose their sisters and tie the
it. But I have got some nice Rakhis for you;
that should be done today. And I will be very
for the Vishnumäyä.
May God Bless you.
38
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-40.txt 
 SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
BECOMING THE IDEALS
Diwali Puja
Temple of all faiths, Hampstead
London, 6-11-1983
Today's vibrations, you can see when you What are the ideals we have become or have
are prepared for puja how much you get. to become. What we can achieve, this idea
Today you can feel it. So the Divine is very you must have. And secondly you must have
anxious to act, only thing you have to pre- the capacity to deepen your meditative power,
pare yourselves, and all these preparations are
gaing to help you tremendously,
so that these ideals go and settle in your
heart, as a part and parcel of your being.
That you can't live without these ideals. You
As we are now Sahaja Yogis, we have to
know that we have become something diffe-
rent from what we were. We are Yogis, we
are higher people than others are and as such
we have to understand one thing, that we one thing and did another thing and executed
are not like other human beings, who say between Sahaja Yogis and Non Sahaja Yogis.
can take an example, say of Christ. He and
His ideals were the same. There is no diffe-
rence between the two. He did not talk of
the third thing. This will be the difference
something and do something, who can live
with hypocracy. That's why all the problems
have arisen out of all the religions. A person
who says he is a Christian, he is absolutely You are that. If you are gold then gold is gold
Anti-Christ. He who says he is Islamic, is
absolutely Anti-Mohammad, he who says he is
a Hindu, is absolutely Anti-Shri Krishna. This
is the main reason why all the religions have
failed so far, because human beings talk big
of ideals. They all say they have this ideal Yogis you become pure human beings, and
that ideal, but they are not those ideals. They
cannot live with those ideals. The ideals
are not in their lives, they are outside, but
they go about saying that these are our Ideals.
They become fanatics but they are not the
ideals. By Sahaja Yoga now you have the
method, you have the possibility that you can
become the ideals
That whatever are your ideals, have to be
expressed in your life every moment. because
all the time. It is not gold sometimes and some
times Iron and sometimes mud. It is gold all
the time. Only human beings are like that.
That sometimes they can be Snakes, Lions
and could be Foxes also. But as Sahaja
this is what we have to know. It is not diffi-
cult to strive for it, it's not difficult because
now you have the power to deepen your
roots to your heart. So the brain must be
used to understand clearly what are the ideals
of a Sahaja Yogi, what are the things a
Sahaja Yogi should do. How he should
behave in life, what method he should follow.
And then he has to bring it to his heart,
Through
The ideal has to first be understood through med tative
through your brain, in the West specially. surrendering.
processes.
Nirmala Yoga
39
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-41.txt 
 How I give you second birth you know also. You have to nourish them, care for them
very well, I conceive you in my heart.
Otherwise I cannot do it: because my heart unrighteous things.
is so pure it cleanses you. My compassion
and love cleanses you, and then I can take
you out of my Sahasrara, otherwise how will
I do that ? And when that has happened upward. Those who are standing even on a
you have become a new personality. So you
are very different from al others, because a
Spirit has given birth to your Spirit. You at a higher step and looking downward, will
have been cleansed by the Spirit. So you
cannot live like that. like all other human
beings are living. All the clashes, al the
problems of human beings are because they parents: are you becoming silent within
are not what they talk. ldeals are out, out of yourself, are you nourishing it with your
their life. That is how a Sahaja Yogi will silence, with your compassion, or you are
show himself-up, compared to anybody else. supporting something which is absolutely
Take an example, say of Abraham Lincoln,
alright ? Abraham Lincoln believed that
everyone must have freedom, and the govern- ideals itself will make you so dynamic that
ment should be for the public, for the people. you don't need to consult anybody, you be-
Whatever he taiked he practised
he believed in he worked it out and gave his ideals itself will be enlightened. So the first
life for it, that's why he is a great man.
and do not compromise with wrong doings,
Now, when I tell you this, it is not nece-
ssary for you to feel guilty. We have to look
lower staircase, if they are looking upward,
they are alright, but those who are standing
go down. So look forward. What we have
to do in our day to day lives, in simple rela-
tionships,
husband-wife, children-
even
Anti-God.
If you become the ideals, the power of
it, whatever
come the ideal. They are like torches. Your
attitude should be, how do we deepen our-
selves, that should be the first attitude. Now
say, husband and wife are quarrelling, morning
Think of Mahatma Gandhi, they were
not like Christ, incarnations. Think of any
great man, think of Shivaji Maharaj. Anyone till evening. They can not be Sahaja Yogis.
of the saints, they were human beings But Absurdities. If they are quarrelling they are not
once they knew this is the principle on which Sahaja Yogis, take it for granted. Now, what
we have to live, they became one with the You have to do, if two persons are quarrelling,
principles. They do not compromise. So what
a Sahaja Yogi has to be, that we should
understand.
the one who is a Sahaja Yogi will leave that
wife and have nothing to do with that wife,
"I have nothing to do with wife, I have no
wife, nothing." Keep out, detach completely
A Sahaja Yogi, is a person who has got from it, just do not talk to that wife. Don't
realization through the Kundalini. And Kunda- discuss, don't bother about it, just detach. If
lini is the mother within you. Is the caring. the son is like that, just detach.. After a point,
nourishing power. That mother will never but no quarrelling, no arguments nothing
compromise with the son. If the son wants
to kill somebody she will say, 'no'. I mean a developed. But in that silence, he should
real mother will even shoot that son who
Complete silence, a silent protest must be
not be a cowardly person. So many people
are cowards and that cowardliness they think
if you become the mother of yourself, then is their silent process. A person who is
you have to look after yourself, in the same really powerful will not deter. will not be
manner you nourish yourself and all others aggressive, but will not also take aggression.
tries to do wrong things:
And the same way
Nirmala Yoga
40
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-42.txt 
 So in your meditations, you have to sit you, whatever you are which has to grow, is
down. Now what do you see in meditation. the child. Mother is the ideal. She is the
Try to see all the chakras, what chakras are inspiration, she is the power and the child is
catching, face it yourself. These might be the recipient. If the child is an obstinate
from your past life some chakras are weak, fellow, then you can't do anything about it.
try to make them alright, try to strengthen Also find out, you might be one of them. I
them. Because ideals have to be worked out. know who are like that. There are many.
them out in no time. Obsti-
And you can find
The instrument has to be alright, if the instru-
ment is a crazy one how will you do ? So first nate fellows, if they live with ten people
of all you must develop your instrument pro- suddenly we hear reports of their existence.
perly, it should be balanced, powerful, not They are quite eloquent, even if they are not
cowardly. People should feel your power, Of talking a word, people can tell you, "I had a
course the power is of love, but love doesn't fight with such and such. That person said
mean that you compromise with all the non- such and such a thing to me, that person was
so cruel to me, that person demanded this,
you know which person where. You see, as
a diamond can be made out, thorns can be
sensical things. There should be no com-
promise at all. It's a very self certifying state.
We cannot say when it is, so we just cannot
say. Itself, the state, will certify that I'm made out also anytime, You go near the thorn,
alright now, I have reached that state. You anyone without exception, it will bite everyone
cannot say after five hours three ninutes two It is not going to spare, it is a thorn. So
seconds you will become that. You just thorn has to be a thorn. But if you are a
Sahaja Yogi you have to be a flower, and a
strong flower, and an eternal flower that always
Once you understand, that unless and grows, does not fade out. always growing
never fades, such a flower you have to be,
Sahaja Yogi. Everybody can call themselves then you will be surprised that you do not
Sehaja Yogis: there's ro inauguration, we don't get into a trip of ego neither you go into a
mature and see that maturity within you.
until you become your ideals, you are not a
have any sort of a inauguration of a university
where people can come and get their degrees
and diplamas, "Alright, you are certified twice
complete collapse of super-ego.
So much you know that anyone of you
born." There are some who are several times can be called a scholar, I can tell you.
twice born. They are twice born today, mean so many times people have asked me
"Are they all scholars that you have your dis-
twice born, and again twice born. Some of ciples ?" You know so much, much more than
them can be 108 times twice born, in Sahaja any Saint ever knew, I can assure you. But
Yoga. And even then they are not certified. you know only in the brain outside, it's all
So you have to give yourself a certificate. bla, bla, bla. It comes to the brain and you
use it to show off to others and finished. It
doesn't even settle down there, you haven't
let it go to the heart. So everybody is talking
big, they can impress people. I mean if some
journalists come here, they will be so impres-
sed by the Sahaja Yogis, so many wise men
in England sitting down here But you laugh
at yourself, you have known all this because
tomorrow they are not. then again they become
There is no university to do that.
You have to understand yourself what are
your problems, why are you behaving like this.
You treat yourselfas a child. When it is needed
you have to rebuke yourself. When you have to
glorify, you have to glorify yourself. So now
you separate, You become the mother, and
Nirmala Yoga
41
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-43.txt 
 I know you have eaten.
have been speaking to0 much, Also the
Spirit is shining. Let your Spirit shine in such
I eat, how can : I can't even go out of the
a way, that people know that this is a man who house, I'm sitting down here, where is the.
mud ? How can Teat I" "You did eat, I know
you have eaten, so better show me your
" He said, "Really!" and then the
mouth apens and the complete Vishwa Swa-
rup, complete vision of the whole Vishwa she
sees, and the mother falls at his feet. That's
is completely intergrated, and this is what is
Sahasrara. So if there is no integration, you
have not achieved your Sahasrara. Then there mouth.
will be no need to pull your ears.
The day should come when you all will
raise your heads with great pride and glory, what should be. This mother has to fall at
because your ideals, your ideals will shine
like ornaments. / want to see those days Symbolic. Thất is how you have to grow
when all those who claim to be Sahaja Yogis, Into that Vishwa Swarup. Into that Collective
become that. That's the most important thing Being. Into thet Virata.
all other things are useless, getting an ashram
getting this, doing this, doing that, forget it. good symbolic thing. Arjuna was a friend who
What you have to manage is this child which
has to grow. Who is still naughty some-
times, tries to misbehave. But put it right. things. But still Shri Krishna could not con-
Give it a name, you call yourself a Sahaja vince him of that. All these were just outside
Yagi, and that child as Mr Y, Mr X-whatever
your name has been, and always try to tell, talks are very entertaining you know, very
"Now will you behave yourself'! Get up in humorous, nice to hear them; let's not-best
the morning. have your bath, sit down for not listen to any music better to hear Mother's
meditation. "I feal lazy," the child says. "1
can't." Then you accept the child. Then the listening to Mother they have become Mothe:
child will become the mother and you will be already. That's what happened to Arjuna
losing your powers. Excuses the child knows,
very intelligent, its a very clever child, extre-
mely intelligent, knows how to deceive you. ideal.
But the child also knows in it whet it means.
If it comes to know that the inother in you "I think l'll see your great image." Krishna
has developed that personality, then it accepts said, "Alright, are you prepared," and he said,
mother's personality. But if the child knows "Yes, I am prepared." And then he became
that the mother herself is weak, then he
starts taking advantage of the mother. So
you have not to fight yourself, but to tame,
and this is very easy. You're hiding behind
there alright giving excuses. And the child
grows big, so big that the mother sees that,
and is amazed ! Like in Shri Krishna's child- like this !" Just fike Yashodā falling at the
hood, the mother was Yashoda and the child feet of the little child. You have to tall at the
was Shri Krishna. It's very symbolic. And he feet of the child that is within you.
used to play very naughty tricks, and she
said, "You vwent and ate that mud from there. remember that no argument, no explanations.
the feet of the child, that has grown
Very
Arjuna and Shri Krishna is another very
used to take liberties with Shri Krishna. Shri
Krishna tried to tell him about Gita and all these
bla bla blas. As Mothers talks are. Mother's
talks. And then the people think if they are
also, but still he found out there's something
lacking in him. That he has not become the
Still his attention is not there as it
should have been. So he asked Shri Krishna,
the Virāta, the vision of the Virāta, and when
o
he saw it he said, "Stop it, its too much for
me." That's what should happen to your
friend who is this child. That it should
become that Virata where you see that, should
be amazed at yourself, "Oh God, I have grown
l'am sure this will happen now. So
Nirmala Yoga
42
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-44.txt 
 Everybody's improving but it's rather slow,
Mother is forgiving, She'll forgive you every-
thing, you know that. Anything that you do l'll it can be vary fast if you mmeditate, very impor-
forgive you, even if you murder me, I'll forgive tant You have to know how to make your
you. But you won't be able to forgive yoursalf. chakras alright. Your mantras are to be seen.
So allow that child to grow. grow fully.
(Who are the children crying like this ? be mechanical, just saying something mecha-
Why are they crying ? Which child is that ?-
..She has a problem. Take her out You Again, if you do not say mantras through
must clear her, she has had problems for your heart, mantra is not Siddha, means you
So many days. You must
take her out for a while. Still screaming, have no effect. Siddha mantra is that, that
Mantras are to be such that they should not
nically, You should say it from your heart.
clear that child, may go on saying one hundred times, it will
look after
better take her out. You must
them and find out what's wrong with your does not work then your mantra has no
children. If they're crying, I know what are meaning. So the development has to be
the children still not alright: Just don't pam- within and without, and you have to certify
per their ego. Work it out. clear them out, yourself. Nobody else is going to certify:
it's important. Don't want to be bhootish.
All their lives they'll be bhootish like this. I go ahead. If you want to cheat yourself,
have seen many children who are like this, then go ahead. It's not going to help anyone.
you say, that it has an effect. it works. If it
If you want to give yourself a false certificate,
they see me they cry, weep, shout, it's not a
sign of a healthy child. would not even
look at me, used to scream and shout, now
look at him how nice he's become. So any are there have to be given up to enjoy that
child who is like that, you don't say that, don't beauty.
avoid the topic. Look after that child, put him
right. You have to see that the child is alright.
As you have to put your child alright. also put all. Today is a day we celebrate in India,
the child which is really your son alright, and do where rélationships between brothers and
not live with that kind of misunderstanding.
If a child cries like that there's something
wrong with the child. They're singled out.)
. If you find your attention is going here or ship where the sister prays for the protection
there, if you are not attentive in the pro-
gramme, something wrong with you also. If sufficiency of the Kshema, well-being of the
you go off to sleep, something very seriously sister. So this time you have to think of
wrong with you. At that time if you are
thinking of other things, then something like your brothers and sisters. You have to
wrong with you. Get headaches, something think like that. Purify your hearts. It's some-
wrong with you. Judge yourself, clear out. thing funny in these countries you know that,
you must clear out, that's very important. If there no such relationship exists. Purify your
you are still getting into tempers, irritation, mind today on that point, that evarybody
anger, there's no balance that has come in
you, something wrong with you. f you its alright. but look at everyone, try to look at
know how to control your anger, then its everyone as a brother and a sister. Both
alright. You'll find out everywhere how relationships don't exist. This is
negativity works, in small things.
But if you really want to have the joy and the
bliss of the grace of Heavenly Father, then
come out of it, many misidentifications that
It's such a great day today, to meet you
sisters have to be established, they're very
Brothers and sisters relationships is
without any lust or greed. It is pure relation-
pure.
of the brother, and brother prays for the self-
your other Sahaja Yoginis and Yogis who are
else is my brother or sister. If you are married
a funny
country where there is no relationship which
Bhai Dooj-is celebrated on Dvitiya (the 2nd day of new moon) after Diwali, the festival of lights.
Nirmala Yoga
43
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-45.txt 
 is pure. It's such a filth I tell you, if you read Women will listen to the tune, men will be
that, you can't believe it, such perversion;
especiajly, innocent people like children are
attacked. Think of them as virgins, be care-
ful, and the young girls should know that they are beautiful. Nodody is higher or lower, but
are virgins. If they go about with boys and enjoy yourself as being a
they are Sahaja Yogis, they are not. Sahaja yourself as being a man But man does not
Yogis means have to be chaste women,
powerful, chastity is their power and of men stupidly that you are higher than woman, in
too. After Sahaja Yoga men should become
conscious of their power too.
seeing to the instruments. That's the nature,
God has created you, after all somebody has
to do this and somebody has to see that, both
woman, enjoy
mean that you agress women, thinking
evalution. Or women dominating men.
thinking that by dominating them they can
put them right. They have never put them
You see this was Nomadic times when right by that. They have gone absolutely
the men used to go for hunting and women
used to cook in the house. Men were sup-
posed to have five women, they were Noma- They have not put them right. So both the
dic people, then they became sophisticated. qualities must be nourished and developed,
Then the Monogamy started which reached
a certain point. Then again this kind of an
abandoned life started, this is Nomadic life, fying yourself, these things will automati-
Now women also have become Nomadic. cally work out, and you will respect each
Men and women all Nomadic and primitive. other, actually you are all Yogis. I have to
After sophistication they have become primitive, respect you, and you have to respect each
this is the problem, but now you have to Other.
become higher beings where there are pure pect. You are all great Saints, yes, you are.
relationships. Any relationships, supposing Respect, respect each other, you are not to
there was something in between me and talk harshly to anyone, to trouble anyone. Try
this instrument, we cannot use it, any con-
nection can be cut off, f there is something the way we have to change.
in between. To have the best connection is
to have pure relationshlps, and it should be
discretionary. Mother is a mother, father is a culture of God, we are talking about, it's the
father, sister is a sister, brother is a brother, culture of His kingdom. Where we give to
cabbages, men have become cabbages, where
ever women dominate, men become cabbages.
and the relationships between men and women
should be of pure love. Once you start puri-
On the contrary I find there is no res-
to do as much as possible for others, this is
These are no brand of any culture, it's the
types others, enjoy giving, doing for others, loving
be understood. others, caring for others, without any return.
different, Vvarious
all these
are
of relationships, should
Women must understand they are women If you little bit help yourself, the Divine is
and men must understand they are men.
Also relationship to yourself is very impor-
tant, women should not try to be men, we
cannot be, and men should not try to be
women, it's wrong, because basically they cult even to talk, sucking, going out. just a
are different people, they are born differently. little thing you did yesterday or this morning,
What is the difference? Aman is more meticu-
lous, he knows more about machines, details into that, you'll blossom into something. Just
about it, a women will see the pattern. pay attention to yourself and first and foremost
very anxious.
You have seen today that the vibrations
are so much that really I am finding it diffi-
tremendous vibrations, and you'll be thrown
Nirmala Yoga
44
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-46.txt 
 respect yourself because you are a Yogi, you fighting and pulling each others hair, then I
cannot be undignified, you cannot be stupid, would say it's better not to call. Try to get
you cannot be high-handed, you cannot be rid of your problems which are very simple, if
dishonest, you have to be a sweet, matured
personality, because you are all Yogis. I mean
you should call yourself Yagi X, Y, Z, you
should, you are, but calling yourself Yogi and
you cannot then you'll tell me, I will tell you
how to get rid of them. Face them.
May God Bless You All.
Shri Lakshmi Sakshat Shri Kshema Dayini Saks
Shri Adi Shakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Namo Namah
hat Shri Kubera Sakshat
Om Tvameva Sakshat
Open letter to all the Sahaja Yoga Centres on the Financing
of Sahaja Yoga Activities
MONEY I I.. Money makes the world go....
round and round anticlockwise. What is
Money ? For too many people it is a cause
of illusion and, perhaps, of doom. For the
Sahaja Yogis it is, at the gross level. a neces-
sary means to reach some ends, at the subtler
level, a welcomed opportunity to sustain their
nabhi chakra, through the shakti of genero-
sity. thereby putting auspiciousness into
matter. Here are a few practical suggestions
as to how to do so.
will itself run into problems. This is the
basic principle of financing the activities
ot our sangha and I hope it is clear I !
2- The financing of Sahaja Yoga activities
at the international level
There are some expenditures at the inter-
national level that have to be covered by
all the nationa! familias of Sahaja Yoga
because they are indispensable for the
growth of our community world wide.
They express our contributions to the
greater collectivity on which each of our
national collectivities depend. Here are a
few examples of such expenditures.
1- The financing of Sahaja Yoga activi-
ties at the national level
Whatever is financed, say, by the Britishers
in the UK, Australians in Australia etc. for
Sahaja Yoga expenditures, is to be consi-
dered as the household money of the
national family. That is, at the national
level, we do not "make a donation" or
"contribute" to Sahaja Yoga any more
than I "make a donation" to my own
family when1 go shopping and buy a
piece of cheese. We do it for ourselves.
The hand which puts food in the mouth
should not feel that it is "contributing" to
the mouth's welfare.
(a) Programmes of Sahaja Yoga in a new
country. When a few people introduce
Sahaja Yoga in a new country they should
be financially supported if need be.
(b) Projects in India. Various pilot pro-
jects in India (on Sahaja agriculture,
health, education) work as focuses of
experimentation to set up new guidelines
for Satya Yuga's Society. We and our
children will most certainly benefit from it.
Ater all, if the
(c) Travels of Shri Mataji. Our Divine
Mother's exhausting schedule of travels
mouth does not eat anymore, the hand
Nirmala Yoga
45
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-47.txt 
 Registered with the Registrar of Newspaper under Regd. No. 36999/81
Again, money has to be raised for this
central fund on a regular basis. Further-
more the sales proceeds from uny publica-
tian or book on Sahaja Yoga has to be
earmarked
would certainly be too much for anyone
else. It goes without saying that she
should be attended to in these worldwide
tours by competent organizer. It is our
collective desire that Dr. War ren Reeves
should do precisely this and no more at
his own costs. With his very versatile
background he is most suited for this
important function, hence we should pay
for his travels too.
for
international
covering
expenditures ance that the production
costs of the publication have been
covered.
4- Management practices
Very sound and honest managenent prac-
tices are an absolute necessity. Here a
word of warning is overdiue, the mis-
management of Sahaja Yoga money can
have extremely negative consequences.
Moreover, to consciously or unconsciously
embezzle Sahaja Yoga money is to expose
oneself to the anger of the deities. Punish-
ment is swift and severe.
(d) Celebrations and gifts. Whenever it
is planned that celebrationor a gift
should be sponsored worldwide the co-
oidinating.center or person should. when
ever possible, contact the other centers
beforehand so that everybody can share
and rojoice in due time
3- Raising money and payment
For national expenditutes vatious davices
can be used to raise monev automatically:
eig. percentage on Ashram rents, charity
sales, collections etc. Each country can
Finally let us all note that it is for us a
great challenge to turn matter against materia-
iam, that is, to invest part of our earnings to
support activities undertaken for the we
manage its accounts according to the
practice best suited to the logal condiE Deing of the Spirit. There is also a joyous
trick about being a bit generous..ond this is
that God is always much, much more gene-
rous than we are. JAI SHRI MATAJILL
tions.
For International expenditures each country
has to open a spěcial account whose
HSsets have to be transfetred twice a year
to the central account in London.
Much love.
Gregoire de Kalbermatten
Editud & Published by Sh. S.C. Rai 43, Bunginw fload, Dalhi-110007 & Printed it The Central Elnctric
Preas, 80 D. Kaimla Nogar. Delhi-110007. Onit. iNsu Rs 9.00, Annual Subseription Ra 51.00
Formign tby Aimail E 714)
