Nirmala Yoga Bi Monthly Vol. 4 No. 21 May June 1984 5F t. 5F "Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns all the religions and seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga-THE UNION"

 NIRM ALA YOGA. 43, Bungalow Road, Delhi-110007, (India) Founder : Her Holiness Mataji Shri NVirmala Devi Editorial Board : Dr. S.K. Mathur, Sri A.S. Mishra, Sri R.D. Kulkarni Representatives : CHERYL REBEIRO, 1267, Burke Road, KEW 3101, VICTORIA. : ZORANA BEDKE, Gartnergasse 17/10, 1030 VIENNA. : LORI & CARY HYNEK, 3151, Heather Street, Vancouver, B.C. V5Z 3K2. : MARIE ROUGER, 175, Av. Ledru Rollin PARIS-750001. ALESSANDRA PALLINI, via Monserrato 105-109, ROMA 00186. Australia Austria Canada France Italy M.B. RATNANNWAR, 13, Merwan Mansion, Genjewala Lane, Borivali (W)., India BOMBAY-400092. : DANIEL & ROXANA DEVINE, Angel Luis De Herran, 38, 6°, 4, Spain MADRID-33. Switzerland : CHARLES & MRS. MAGDA MATHYS, 5, Chemin Des Mouldins, 1256, Troinex (Canton de Geneva). : GAVIN BROWN, Brown's Geological Information Services Ltd., 134 Great Portland Street, London WIN 5PH. M.J. MURDOCH, 14A Bourne Ave, S. RUISLIP, MIDDLESEX, HAH 6TZ, ENGLAND. U. K. : CHRISTINE PETRUNIA, 270, Jay Street (APT. 1-C). BROOKLYN, NY-11201. URSULA SEHLMEYER, 191 Canal ST. #23 SAN RAFAEL, CA-94901. U.S.A CONT ENTS Page 1. Ganesh Atharva Sheersha 2. Editorial 3. Mahashivratri Puja 4. The Call Sahaja Yogis (Poem) 5. Assume Your Position 6. Open Your Heart 7. Ekadasha Rudra Puja 6. 12 13 24 29 8. Vishnu-Tattwa 9. The Heart Chakra and its Afflictions 10. Shri Mataji's Advice 11. Morning Prayer (Poem) 12. The Second Era 13. To Shri Mother (Poem) 14. The Shri Lalita and Shri Chakra Centres 34 36 38 39 40 41 42 3rd Cover 15. Festivals 16. Letter from Switzeriand 4th Cover

 Ganesha Atharva Sheersha Om Namaste Ganapataye Twaméva Pratyaksham Tattwam asi. Twaméva Kévalam Kartāsi. Twamèva Kévalam Dhartāsi. Twaméva Kévalam Hartāsi. Twaméva Sarvam Khalvidam Brahmäsi. Twam Sākshät Atmāsi Nityam. Ritam Vachmi. Satyam Vachmi. Ava Twam Mām. Ava Vaktäram. Ava Shrotāram. chänam. Ava Shishyam. Ava Pash chất tãt. Ava Puras tāt. Avot tarāt tāt, Ava Dakshinät tät. Ava Chor dhvät tät. Ava Dharät tät. Sarvato Măm Pāhi Pähi Saman tat. Ava Datāram. Ava Dhātāram. Avă noo Twam Väng mayas Twam Chin mayah. Twam änanda mayas Twam Brahma mayah. Twam Sat chit änanda dvitiyosi. Twam Pratyaksham Brahmäsi. Twam Gyāna mayo Vigyana mayosi, Sarvam Jagadidam Twatto Jäyaté. Sarvam Jagadidam twat tas tish thati. Sarvam Jagadidam Twayi Laya mé shyati. Sarvam Jagadidam Twayi Pratyéti. Twam Bhoomi răpo nalo nilo Nabhah. Twam Chatväri Väk Padāni. Twam Guna traya teetah. Twam Déha traya teetah. Twam Käla traya teetah. Twam Moolä dhāra sthitosi Nityam. Twam Shakti träyat makah. Twam Yogino Dhyäyanti Nityam. Twam Brahma Twam Vishnus twam Rudras Twam Indras Twam Agnis Twam Väyus Twam Sooryas Twam Chandramás Twam Brahma bhoor bhuvah Swarom. Ganādim Poorva much chărya Varnā dim Tada nan taram. Anus vārah Para tarah. Ardhéndu lasitam Tārė na Ruddham. Etat tava Manuswa roopam. Gakārah Poorva roopam. Akāro Madhyama roopam. Anuswärash chantya roopam. Bindu rut tara roopam. Nädah Sandha nam. Sanhitä Sandhih. Saishã Ganésha Vidyā. Ganaka Rishihi. Nich rid Gäyatri Chandah. Ganapatir Devată, Om Gam Ganapatayé Namah. Eka Dantäya Vidmahé. Vakra Tundaya Dheemahi. Tanno Dantih Prachodayāt. Ekadantam Chatur hastam Pāsham ankush dhārinam. Mooshak dhvajam. Raktam Lambodaram Shoorpa karnakam rakta vāsasam. Rakta gandhänu liptängam Rakta pushpaihi Supoojitam. Bhaktänu Kampinam Dévam Jagat Kāranama chyutam. Āvir bhootam Cha Srishtyadau Prakritéhé Purushât param. Evam Dhya yati Yo Nityam Sa Yogi Yoginām Varah. Namo Vrätapatayé Namo Ganapatayé Namaha Pramath Patayé Namasté Astu Lambodaräya Ekadantāya Vighna Näshiné Shiva sutāya Shree Varada moortayé Namaha. Radam Cha Varadam Hastair bi bhrānam LE Sakshat Shri Adi Shakti Bhagawati Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Namo Namah Read:- t-as in Shakti and not as in talk, das in Devi and not as in dawn; E,6-as in Devi O as in gold; u-as in Upanishad, put ; a-as in star ; a-as in among, alive Shri Mataji has advised that it is important that everybody learns to say by heart this Atharvasheersha to Shrl Ganesha. The English translation "To the Divine Essence of the Prayer" was printed in Nirmala Yoga, Vol. No. 17 (Sept. Oct. 1983) issue. Nirmala Yoga

 Editorial योगाश्चित्त वृत्ति निरोधः । तदा दष्टः स्वरूपेऽव स्थानम् । बृत्ति सार्ष्यमितरत्र । (Yogāshchitta vrtti nirodhah Tada drshtuh swarupėva sthanam Vitti sarupyamitaratra) Yoga is the control of the activities of Chitta. Then the seer rests in own form, otherwise identifies with vrtti i.e. identification with Chitta. All have experienced that the Atman or the Spirit alone is real. By the grace of Shri Mataji, we know what are mind (the manas) or super ego, ego (the ahankär) buddhi (the intellect) and Chitta. She has advised us how to stop the activities of these. She has repeatedly emphasised the need of taking care of our attention or chitta, as it is the chitta that will be enlightened. In succeeding paras efforts have been made to understand the chitta and its activities, to enable it to be watched. Attention or the chitta, is the expression of conscious- ness. Even in a child in whom ego, super-ego, and buddhi are not yet developed, attention is active in its own way. Chitta is the medium for perception, and expression, emotions, experience, thoughts, analysis etc, as it identifies itself with different faculties and activates them. Thus it manifests one's individuality and with cessation of its activities, the Spirit would shine in its own form. Activities of the Chitta originate, basically, from right side and vary in every person, depen- ding upon the extent to which his or her right side is active. Every person has his orientation as an inborn characteristic towards leit or right side, in that the person is prone ta get imbalanced towards left or right side. Imbalance may not be there, or may be there for a short time, in childhood. However a person's response to environments and atmosphere in which he or she is brought up, would strengthen his or her nature and the person would tend to be imbalanced more frequently and for long time. In a right sided person attention is very active extrovert and engaged in right sided activities. Nirmala Yoga 2.

 On the other hand a left sided person would be introvert with the chitta moving more on the left than on the right side. Sahaja Yogis must have observed that attention is difficult to control when fresh and getstired after a day's work, and becomes stable soon. A tired attention may even move towards the left invoking sub-conscious whereas it would stimulate supra- conscious when it is fresh. One's age and physical health have also their effects on activities of Chitta. Continuous indentification of the Chitta with something or with an inner faculty, can result into an inertia in which it would resist being withdrawn from, or would repeatedly reidentify with, the same thing. This tendency, unless checked, can cause over-activity of the particular side and consequent problems. Attention can work simultaneously on many faculties of inner being and while associating with one, can generate reaction from another e.g. memories of an incident of long past make one happy, sorry, or angry, The reaction may not necessarily be the same as in the past and may change according to prevailing circumstances, but it is always simultaneous. Once attention identifies itself with a sense-object, it sends an information about it, which is analysed by the Buddhi (intellect) and the reaction is produced in relation to past experience and it's stored up impressions, thus correspondingly inflating ego or super-ego. However the three actions take place unnoticed almost at the same time. According to Patanjali's aphorisms on Yoga there are five kinds of activities of Chitta: Praman (Proof) : Activities of getting knowledge through direct perception, inference and from the experience of learned people. It also suggests the nature of searching proof for everything and rejecting that which cannot be seen or does not agree with past experience. Viparyaya: (Contrariety, reverse) It is accepting a wrong thing as a right one. Vikalpa (Doubt) : Tnis activity would create doubts about tha validity or correctness of a suggestion and bring forth an alternative to it by jumping to a conclusion which in fact may be wrong. According to Patanjali, it is that idea or information which is conveyed in words but does not exist. Nidra (Sleep): All other Vrttis are in suspended state in which mind remains in subtle seed-like form having all impressions uneffected. Smrti (memories) : Perceived subjects do not slip away but remain stored up in the form of impressions in sub-conscious, and become active. If seen in the light of Sahaja Yoga knowledge, Vrttis, first three above, seem to originate from right side. Vibratory awareness enables discrimination of real from unreal and veri- fication of truth. The remaining two would arise from left side. Indeed, these would impede the progress of Sahaja Yogi, in that the attention would go to left while in meditation giving rise to sleep or memories, as we have seen earlier. What Adi Shankarächärya says, in Vivék choodāmani, which can be said to be the cream of Vedantic philospphy, is equally interesting : Nirmala Yoga

 "The inner organs (antahkaran) are manas (mind), buddhi (intellect). ahankar (ego) and chitta according to their respective functions; mind from sankalpa and vikalpa, buddhi from the nature of determining the truth, ega from the identification with the body, and chitta fram the nature of remaining attached (anusandhan) to things of interest" (verse 94). "The inner organ has its seat in the organs such as the ears, nose, tongue, the eyes and touch as well as in the body, identifying with them as 'I' but endued with reflection of Atman." 103). "It is the ego, which identifies itself with the body and becomes the doer or experien- cer. It is happy when sense objects are favourable and miserable when contrary. So, happiness and misery are the characteristics of ego and not of the Atman" (verse 105). (verse According to Patanjali's aphorisms on yoga, the Chitta can be controlled by continuous practice of restraining its activities and imbibing the 'Vairāgya' (detachment), the latter may follow without much efforts after the attention can be effectively controlled. However, owing to it's self projecting nature it is extremely difficult to restrain the movement of attention, without watching it. which is possible only after separating oneself from attention. Thereby it would also be possible to observe three stages of one's involvement in sense objects, as explained earlier, (viz, identification, & registering the impressions and reaction) and separate each from the other two. It is a general experience that when a person is engrossed in a mental activity his attention dissociates itself from the surroundings and is not easily attracted by anything else. Thus, by fixing the attention on heart or Kundalini or chakras, its vrtti would be minimised and with the Joy of the Spirit emanating, it would get progressively stablized. Attention can also be engaged in enjoying the Divine Bliss of Chaitanya Lahari, that beloved Shri Mataji constantly showers upon Sahaja Yogis. Remembering the deilty, is one more way. As all the deities are awake on their chakras, they need not look anywhere else but within themselves. Besides, the Deity of all deities, Adi Shakti, is their Guru and Mother and fixing the attention on Her Lotus Feet the heart is liberating oneself trom the bondages of ego and super ego and buddhi. Attention stablized on any of these would become one with the Spirit. However as each Sahaja Yogi still carries with him some of the habits of his past life, although all misidentifications of life are getting dropped, at a pace peculiarto each, keeping the attention fixed is also found difficult. Add to it the exposure to worldly matters during non- sahaja activities that one has to do at one's job, in markets, in meeting and tackling non-sahaja people, etc. These difficultes could be overcome by time and again reminding oneself of illusory nature of the world and the Spirit being the only reality. Sense-organs have no impulse if delinked from the attention and these are verily the door-ways for the attention to go out. Thereafter follows the fulfilment of old desires and generation of new ones. New desires cause the attention to go out to sense-object for their satisfaction, through sense-organs. Sahaja Yoga has taught us that whereas it is incorrect to starve the physical and mental beings of natural requirements, it is also equally wrong to hanker after sense-pleasures. An ideal state would be that in which desires for gross pleasures do not arise. A desire arises in the mind as thought and can be cleared off the same way as the chakras. Shri Mataji has advised that the place of mind is between Agnya and Vishuddhi. Thus by clearing those chakras temptations can be overcome. Desires Nirmala Yoga

 that repeatedly disturb the serenity of mind can be put down by raising right side. One may always tell oneself that body, mind, intellect, ego, sense-organs, and the fulfilment of desires are gross, transient and false, and the only reality is Atman, Sakshat Shri Shiva, the Truth- Consciousness-Bliss, Sakshat Shri Adi Shakti Mataji. She is 'Indriyänām Adhishthätri, foundational for the functioing of all organs. Hence all objects of pleasure can be received as offerings to Her. As Shri Mataji has advised us and as everyone has experienced, that one starts jumping from one thought to another resulting into an inertia. Hence She has further advised that thoughts must be stopped immediately by ordering the mind to be quiet. Besides, one should tell oneself whenever a thought comes, that it is all false, illusory, non-existent i.e. establishing the 'Nih' Shakti. All functions of 'antahkarana i.e. the mental faculties, including that of attention, are the product of I Consciousness. T from which it has derived a degree of pleasure--impressions which create an attachment for the object. Hence the propensity to possess. All thoughts come up only in relation to T consciousness. T'indentifies itself, along with the attention, with the object As Shri Mataji has advised, we should pray that our I consciousness should fade. Adi Shankaracharya's words in the following lines are worth imbibing : "From the enjoyment of unreal things there is neither satisfaction nor a cessation of miseries. Therefore being satisfied with the realization of the Bliss Absolute, the one without a second, live happily in a state of identity with that reality. Beholding the Self alone in all circumstances, thinking of the Self, the one without a second, and enjoying the Bliss of the Self, pass thy time, O noble soul." How eternally gratefull we all are to Shri Adi-Shakti Sakshat Shri Atmanand Pradayini Sakshat Shri Nirānand Pradāyini, Sachhidänanda Pradāyini. Salutations to Her again and again. धन्तोऽहं कृतकृत्योऽहं विमुव्तोऽ्हं भवग्रहात् । नित्यानन्द स्वरूपोऽ्हं पूर्णोऽ्हं त्वदनुग्रहात ।। Dhanyo aham Krtakrutyo aham vimukto aham bhavagrahat Nityā nanda swaroopoham poornoham twadanugrahāt (verse 488 Vivekchudamani) Blessed am I, I have attained the consummation of my life, I am liberated, I am the essence of eternal bilss. I am complete,-all through Your mercy. Nirmala Yoga

 "SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI MAHA SHIVRATRI PUJA Pandharpur 29th February 1984 In these modern times, a place which is supposed to be a holy place becomes the most thought that we could have all these arrange- unholy place, It's such a topsy-turvy condi- ments done here in such far-fetched places. tion these days. And when we are trying to But, all these miracles come from the power establish something very fundamental that's of God. So we are the creator of that wee like a little seedling that has to come out of the stones, it has to fight lots of things; miracles of God cannot be explained and so we have to keep our brains intact and be should not be explained. They are beyond sensible about every thing, and try to see what we can achieve through our patience and presence of God, God can do anything! understanding. It's very important. lous. 100 years back no one could have bit-very wee bit of that miracle. So all the our minds, and, to make people feel the He can move into all of the 3 dimensions Today I think is a very great day, for all and also in the 4th dimension and can do of us, because this place is the place of Viräta, whatever He feels like. That's what you of Shri Vitthala. It is the place where Shri have seen now in your every day-to-day life, Vitthala appeared to a devoted son and when how many miracles take place-to all of you he asked Him that. "You better stand on a and you can't understand how it works out; brick", He stood there. And they say that He even it works out on things which are not stood there, waiting, Some people say that living, and people are quite amazed at how the statue that we see came out of the Mother these things happen. So we have to believe, Earth on this sand and that's what Pundarikāksh carried saying that, "These are the ones is God ! who came to see me and my parents when I was busy with them, so they are standing on the same brick which I threw". now, after seeing all this ourselves, that He And He can do anything that He feels like, and we are nothing ! We are nothing. There should be no rationality about it-of under- Now the whole story has to be taken in a standing God's miracles. "How can it be ? very sensible way, with the common-sense in How could it be ?" You can't explain. Only it. That God Himself is capable of all kinds when you achieve that state of mind where you believe through you experiences that God are doing some things which look miraculous is all-powerful. It's very difficult. this concept. say, if you take about 100 year old situation It's very difficult; because we are limited of this world. We can say that today we are people. We have limited powers. We can- seeing many things which could be miracu- not understand how God could be all-power- of miracles. We, who are created by God Nirmala Yoga

 ful, because we haven't got the capacity. So into any number. Seven raised to power 16 this God who is our creator, who is our pre- server, the one who desired that we should seven chakra5-raised to power 16 thousand. exist-who is ourexistence itself, is all-power- ful God. All powerful. He can do whatever thousand which are the ones which watch the Now this Spirit is watching through this aura-watching, I am again saying 'watching world, he can destroy this world. tt's onty through this aura . This aura is watching the world, he can destroy this world. s only behaviour of your seven centres in your brain. if He has to 'desire". Is also watching all the nerves that are work- My idea of coming to Pandharpur for ing the brain. Watching; again. But when Shiva Puja was this-that Shiva represents you bring the Spirit into your brain. then you the Spirit. And the Spirit is residing in all of go 'two steps ahead. Because when your you in your hearts. The seat of Sadāshiva is Kundalini rises, Shetouches the Sadashiva and on top of your head; but is reflected in your Sadäshiva informs the Spirit. Informs in the heart. Now. your brain is the Vitthala. So to bring Spirit to your brein means enlightenment first state where the watching auras start of your brain. "Enlightenment of your brain" communicating to your different chakras in the means: The limited capacity of your brain has brain and integrating it. to become unlimited in it's capacity to realize God. I will not use the word 'understand."To "realize' God". How powerful He is, how brain-this is the second state-then you miraculous He is, how great He is. Another is really become Self-realised, in the full way. that the brain of man can create-of course, sense reflects, in the Spirit. So that's the But when you bring your "Spirit' to your In the full way. Because then your Self, that out of the dead-but, when the Spirit comes is the Spirit becomes your brain. Action is into brain, then you create Living things, very dynamic. It opens then, the 5th dimen- Living work of Kundalini. Even the dead start sion in the human being. behaving like living, because "you touch the Spirit in the dead'. First when your become realized, collec- tively conscious, and start raising the Kunda- lini, you cross the 4th dimension. But when your Spirit comes into your brain, then, you become the 5th dimens on-means, you 'brain' of a molecule and an atom is like the become the Doer. Our brain, now, for example says "Alright, lift this thing up". So you that controls the nucleus is the Spirit that touch it with your hand, you lift it up. You are the doer. But when the brain 'becomes the Like the nucleus inside every atom or a mo'ecule, has the Spirit of that motecule. And if you become your Spirit-we can say the nucleus; body of the nucleus. But the one resides within the nucleus. Spirit, the Spirit is the doer. Sa now you have got the attention or the body-the whole body of the atom, then the nucleus, and 'inside' the nucleus is the Spirit. And when Spirit is the doer, then you become a complete Shiva; Self-realized. In In the same way-we have this body, the that state, if you get angry, you are not attention of the body. And then we have the attached. You are not an attached person nucleus that is the brain. And the Spirit is in to 'anything" whatsoever. If you possess any- not attached. You cannot the heart. So the brain is controlled through thing-you are the Spirit. How ?-That around the heart attach, because Spirit is detachment. Com- You don't bother about plete detachment. there are seven auras which can be multiplied Nirmala Yoga

 The detachment is to be watched and seen through 'your own' attachments. any attachments whatsoever. 'Even' for a second, you are not attached. Now I would say, to understand the deta- chment of Spirit we should study ourselves yet the Spirit-it has not yet come into your very well, clearly-"How are we attached ?" brain of course, but still you are realised We are attached, firstly, by our brain. Mostly souls. by our brain. Because all our conditionings are in our brain and all of our ego is also in our brain. So emotional attachments are through your attention. You can do that. You can our brain and all our conditionings are in our brain and all of our ego is also in our brain. So emotional attachments are through our controlling' your attention, also, you can do. brain and all our egoistical attachments also Very simple. To control your attention you are through our brain. That's why it is said that after Realization one must try to practice to 'that. Try to change your priorities, all this the Shiva-Tattwa by practising detachment. Now, because you are realized souls,-not So what you can do is at least to watch watch your attention very clearly ; by seeing where your attention is going. And then, have to just remove your attention from this," has to be done 'Now'--after realization a complete detachment. Now how do you practice this detach- ment ? So the body demands comfort. Try to make body uncomfortable a little bit. Try. Because we get attached to somethingof What you think it to be comfortable, try to make course through our brain, but through our it a little uncomfortable. That's why people attention. So we try to do what we call went to Himalayas. You see, cominy to this is to control place itself has caused us lut of problems. your attention. "Where is it going ?" In the So going to Himalayas-you can inmagine. So practice of Sahaja Yoga, if you have to rise after realization they used to take their body to Himalayas: "Alright, go through all this. ment and not the instrument of others. This Let's see how you act". So what you call the penance side starts now. In a way, it's a penance which you can do very easily because now you are realized souls. With enjoyment, "Chitta Nirodh" (चित्त निरोध), higher you have to improve your "own instru- is one thing one should know for definite. Now, you just watch your attention, where is it going. Watch yourself. As soon as you start watching your Self, your attention, you little, try to make this body... For shiva, it will become identified with your Spirit. doesn't matter whether He's in a cemetery or Because if you have to watch your attention in his own Kailäsha or anywhere. you will have to be your Spirit. Otherwise how will you watch it ? Where is your attention ?-is, you see, that your human attention is hopelessly bad ! Very So now see where is your attention entangled non-sense it is. "We did this because of this"-there is an explanation-or ways, to your body. So we see Shiva doesn't others have to give an explanation. 'No ex- know attachment to His body I He sleeps planation' is needed-to be given or to be anywhere. He goes to the cemeteries and accepted, or to be asked for. No explanation. sleeps there. Because, He's not attached, He To exist without explanation is the best way. In a siniple Hindi Ianguage. जैसे रामह सैसे हो रह going ? First, the attachment is, in all gross can never be caught up by any bhoots or any- thing ; nothing of the kind. He is detached. (jaisé râkhahu taisé hi rahu): Nirmala Yaga

 "Which ever way you keep me l'll remain Many people believe that if you try to behave in that state, 'and" I will enjoy. Further in this like Shiva, you become Shiva. Many believe, poem Kabira says "If you make me go on an that way-that if you take 'ganja" you become elephant- means the royal conveyance | Shiva because Shiva used to take gänjā- go; if you make me walk, I'll walk", "Jaisé Because He was 'consuming' all that to finish rākhahu taisé hi rahu"-So 'no' reaction on that off from this world. For him what does it point-no reaction. First-"No explanation', matter whether its gänjã, what does it matter, give him any thing, He'll never get drunk. No question. He's consuming' all that. Or they Now, second is about food. That's the think, if they live like Shiva, the way He was no reaction! first seeking human beings had as animals. detached about things. He was least bothered about His No attention on food ! Whether you have salt or not, whether you have this or that, 'no Shiva needs is, that whatever He appears attention on food. Actually you should not as his beauty. He does'nt need any thing to be remember what you ate this morning. But we done. think as to that we are going to eat tomorrow. We consume food not for running this body but for a sort of a more satisfaction to tonque Ugliness, Is nonsense. But you can dress pleasures. Once you start understanding that up whatever way you like. Or, even if you pleasure is a sign of gross attention; 'any' kind of pleasure is a 'very gross sensationali- zation; sensation. "Very gross' it is. appearance. What appearance So attachment to 'anything' is ugliness. is are in the most ordinary dress, you look the most magnificent person. But it's not that if you say that, "Alright, so in these circumstances let us go about on a one sheet wrapped But when I say "No pleasures," it doesn't mean that you should become serious people and people of sort of-as if somebody is dead in your family! But you should be like Shiva. through Spirit, gives you that power that you So detached. around." The beauty that has "evolved" within you can wear whatever you feel like; makes no difference to your beauty, your beauty is there He came on a bull, which was running very fast. to get married. He was sitting on a bull with his two feet like this, you see. And the bull is running fast and He is holding that state only you achieve when your Spirit the bull; the feet like this-And He's going enters into your brain. With ego-oriented for his wedding ! And with Him are coming peaple it is more difficult. And that is why they people with one eye, without noses, all kinds of funny people coming with Him; and His they topple down. wife feeling quite embarrassed at the non- sensical things people are talking about Shiva. all the time'. But have you achieved that state ? And cannot enjoy things. At the slightest pretext And Spirit, which is the source of joy. just doesn't come, doesn't show. The joy is beauty. He's not bothered what his reputation The joy itself is beauty. But, that is a state would be, this thing... But that doesn't one has to 'achieve'. mean that you become hippies. Attachments come by various methods. You go a little ahead with it, then you have you start thinking like that, you become hippies. attachments of your family. What will happen You see this is the problem is, that once Nirmala Yoga 9.

 to my child? What will happen to my husband? What will happen to my mother, to my wife, this, that nonsense. When you show your temper, when you show your affection, when you show your compas- sion, or anything.-it is the Spirit that is expre- Who is your father and who is your mother? ssing. Because brain has lost it's identity. The Who is your husband and who is your wife ? For Shiva-He doesn't know all these things. To Him-He and His Power are 'inseparable* things. So He stands as singular personality. to give an analogy to a thing like that. But There is no 'duality'. When there is duality what we can do is to understand it : That il then only you say-'my wife. You go on a colour is dropped on the ocean, the ocean saying 'my'nose, 'my' ears, 'my' hands, my, my, becomes colourful-is not possible. But try my, my, my,- go deep down. so-called "limited" brain-it has become the unlimited Spirit. I do not know, I treally" do not know how to understand; if a little colour, limited colour, is dropped into the ocean, the colour loses its Till you say 'my. there is some duality. identity completely. Think of the other way But when I say "I, the nose"-then theré is no round. If the ocean is coloured, and is pour- duality. Shiva the Shakti. Shakti the Shiva. There is no duality. But we live throughout little wee bit. or onto any spot, onto any ed into atmosphere or onto any part any on our duality and because of that there is an attachment. If there is no duality what is the attachment ? If you are the light and you are the lamp, then where is the daulity ? If you are the moon and you are the moonlight then into the little cup of your brain, the cup lases where is the duality ? If you are the sun and its identity and everything becomes Spiritual I you are the sunlight, you are the word and you are the meaning : duality ? atom or anything, it all becomes colourful, So the Spirit is like the ocean which has the light in it. And when this ocean pours Everything ! you can make everything Spiri- then where is the tual. Everything. You touch anything -it is Spiritual ! The sand becomes Spiritual, the land becomes Spiritual, atmosphere becomes Spiritual, celestial bodies becomes Spiritual. Everything becomes Spiritual But when there is this separation, there is duality. And because of this separation, you feel attached. Because if you are that, how will you be attached ? Do you see that point ? Because there is a difference and a distance between you and your's that's why you get attached to it. But it's 'me'-who is the other? So it is the ocean that is the Spirit, while your brain is limited. So the detachment from your limited brain This whole unverse is me. Who is the other ? has to be brought in. All limitations of brain should be broken" so that when this ocean fills that brain; it should break that little cup It is not that it's a brain wave or a ego and 'every bit of that cup should become colourful. The whole atmosphere, everything, whatever you look at. should be colourful. Colour of the Spirit is the light of the Spirit Everything is me, who is the other ? brain wave. So who is the other ?-Nobody ! That's only possible when your Spirit comes and this light of the Spirit acts, works, thinks, into your brain and you become part and co-ordinates, does everything. parcel of Virãta itself. Virāta is the brain, as I told you. Then 'everything that you do: Shiva-Tattwa to the Brain. This is the reason today I decided to bring 10 Nirmala Yoga

 The first procedure is to take your brain control your speech: Whether you express towards the Shiva Tattwa by telling it "See temper in your speech or you express where are you going Mr. Brain ? You are putting attention to this. You are putting compassionate. attention to that-getting involved ! Now datach, become the brain yourself. Only the Brain. Detach, Detach." your compassion; or you are artificially Try to control. I know, some of you may not do much. It's alright. I'll try to tell you-many a times: I'll try to help you- but, 'most' of you can And then, take this 'deteched' brain, 'com- pletely filled with the colour of the Spirit. do it. And you should try that. It will automatically happen. As long as you'll have these limitations to your atten- tion, it will not happen. So one has to 'really our Sahaja Yoga, where some of you may deliberately" do this tapasya. Every individual. So on a deeper level, from today we start not attain. But most of you should try to go deeper. 'Everyone'. For that you don't need I'm with you ; so you don't need any puja persons who are very well educated or well- -that way. But that state has to be achieved, placed. No. Not at all. and for achieving that state, you need the puja. I hope so many of you will become the Shiva-tattwas in my lifetime, But don't deeper, because they are like the first roots think I'm asking you to suffer. There is no suffering in this kind of an ascent. If you under- stand that this is the complete joyous state. That is the time when you become Nirãänand. That's the joy named in the Sahasrara, the my feet or anything much on it but is a saying name of the joy is Niranand, and you know of Atharvasheersha, and you can put . your Mother's name is Nira. So you become Nirānand. But people who meditate, dedicate, go which have to reach, for others, much deeper, so that others can follow. Now for today's Puja we'll have a very short Ganesh-Atharvasheersha. Not to wash Shiva is all the time clean, pure, imma- culate. So, what are you going to wash the So today's worship of Shiva has a special immaculate ? meaning. I hope whatever we do in the outward way, in a gross way, happens also in the subtler way. I am trying to push your Spirits into your brains, but 1 find it rather sometimes, difficult because your attention is still involved. One may say that "Mother when we wash Your Feet, we get your vibrations in the water". "...But its so detached that there is no need to wash; at a state where you get completely washed, completely cleaned out. Try to detach yourself. Then we'll have a Devi Pujan because Gauri who is Virgin, is to be worshipped so we'll say the 108 names ol the Virgin. Temper, lust, greed. 'everything': Try to reduce. Like in food : today, I told Warren, Then "Ask them to eat less, not like gluttonous we'll do a Shiva puja. people". You see, once in a while, on a day of a big banquet you eat more, but you can- not eat everytime like that. It's not a sign of a Sahaja Yogi. Try to control. Try to Realization. Detachment. What is surren- I'm sorry I cannot tell you everything in one short speech all about this. But detach- ment 'muststart expressing itself in your Nirmala Yoga 11

 dering ?-is nothing. Because when you are detached, you are surrendered, autonmati- Absolutely. cally. When you are holding on to other things you are not surrendered, that's all. the 'pure joy form of the Shiva-tattwa. I hope l've been able to explain to you why I am here today and why today is a very big day. You all who are here are specially very lucky people, who should think that God has What is there surrender to me ?. 1 am such a detached person I don't understand all that. What am I to get out of you ?-I am so detached.-Nothing. been kind to you, that He has chosen you today to be here, to listen to this. And then, once you get detached, you'll start feeling responsible- So today I hope we all pray that "O Lord, Abhiyukta: Responsible. Responsiblity, not give us strength and that source of attraction giving ego but responsibility which is execu- by which we give up 'all' other attractions of ting by itself. Which is expressing by itself- "all the pleasures, of joy of ego, of every manifesting by itself. thing that we think of. but we should fall into May God Bless you. THE CALL SAHAJA YOGIS The call Sahaja Yogis, wherever you Is now its time for us all, to work collectively, The Yoga that our Mother brings, spreadss pontaneously, Still many seekers lost there are, who seek our Mataji. may be, They're lost on many pathways, yet they so want to grow, Some are caught up in the past, or their emotions slow, thought, and They haven't found the here and now, Sahaja they do not know. others are futuring, are lost in Stll so, We know Shri Kalki on His steed, is riding soon this way, And whilst for us this news is good, some others fear the day, But still they're pitched in battle, they lead seekers astray, Yet they must pay their karmic debt, for He will come what may. Meanwhile, the time is pressing, let's all join in the fight, The Deviis now with us, so, let's all push back the night, Of Kali Yuga, the false gurus, and everything not right, Let's spread Sahaja Yoga and enlighten with Her light. JAI MATAJI Nirmala Yoga 12

 MATAJI SHRI NIRMALA DEVI ASSUME YOUR POSITION LODGE HILL SEMINAR 23-7-83 theme of the song is like this: "The one who has got God, or the one who has owned the God, why should he have any fear ? The one who moves about, or the one who goes about- don't know what is the English word for extensive travelling-the one who moves about extensively, for the sake of God and for doing good to others, but he does not belong to this world-such a person has no fear. He stands above.. the language, Marāthi language, you see, is a very intense language, I should say, and it touches many corners when you say a word to it. (First, Sahaja Yogis sung the following song to Shri Mother): Bhaiyakäyataya prabhu jächari (4) Sarva bhi saraghi prabhu mayexari (2) Purna jaya ji vachari (2) Bhaiyakayataya prabhu jachari (2) Jagat vichere upakāra sauv (2) Parina jaju jag kāchāri (2) Bhaiyakayataya prabhu jachari (4) Ithi nirdhana paratra jacha (2) Sarva dhanāchi sâchari (2) Bhaiyakāyataya prabhu jāchāri (2) Adhi vyädhi varana varati (2) It's like this one is : Ādhi Vyädhi Varana Varati Päya Asha Purusha Chări. It means : a person of this calibre is standing 'above'. His footis above the sickness, the mental problems, and the death itself. But when you say that such a person has the foot on top of this, means also, you see, it's meaning is, that with the effect of his foot, it can get over it. It's a double language you see. Like such a per- son has his foot on top of all these three things;-is, the sickness, the mental problems, and the death. The foot is on top of that. It means that such a person is above this. Thus, if you have somebody of this calibre and the foot touches the sick, or the mentally distur- bed people, or the dead, such a person can raise them higher, can take them out of it. has a double meaning Pāya ashā purushā chāri (2) Bhaiyakayatayā prabhu jachari (4) Shri Mataji : The song is written by a relation of ours, He was a but a realized soul, and he could never convert to Christianity, cope with the system of conversion and also the way Hindus were treated among them- selves, with the caste system, and all that. And he has written very good, some of them very good-hymns, I should say. This is one of the hymns. It The song is something 1 really always used to sing in my childhood very much. And the 13 Nirmala Yoga

 So the whole thing works out this way: protected, guided, and properly taken to the that the person who 'belongs to God, who place of heavenly bliss. Through material owns' the God, should not have fear, should manifestation, through mental manifestation, nat get frustrated. manifestation, through through financial relationship manifestation; through many things, and also the natural mani- so I needed it very much today! Because one side of course, is the joy of seeing so festation by which you see the sun, the many Sahaja Yogis, real Sahaja Yogis, not artificial disciples or dramatists, but real Sahaja Yogis of very high calibre,-and some of the people who stand on the periphery, have been on periphery for such a long time. sometimes is dangerous for me to see they will be destroyed. maon, the stars, the heavens, and all the five elements help you. This state, all of you must achieve. "All of you'. Again the word is 'all' of you should achieva. And then only the higher ascent works out. Now, "how to 'achieve this state," is a common question. Now, the first thing as I told you today that you are 'extremely for- tunate people, compared to all the seekers of At this time. you need a song like this: and in childhood whenever I felt really des- perate, Tused to sing this song. It's a very touching song. Alright ? But word by word the world, who have been, who will be, and (translation) proper mood I think, So it's touched me very were used by seekers to overcome, you don't much. This is Ritumbharā Pragnya. I wanted it very much today. who are. Bacause so many things are, which could not, l'm not in sort of a have to overcome. For example they used to meditate, say, on some name of God, and the attention would go on, say-repeating the name of, praying to that God, or thinking about that God and all that-but the whole So this morning I was telling you about this new awareness-Pragnya, 'gnya' means the knowledge and "Pra" means the awakened thing would be mechanical, and always they knowledge, which comes out of meditation, would jump into some sort of a low type of sustainance of meditation; and then the Samādhi-is the effect of that. It's a kind of Those people who start taking the name, say, a fruit ripering. When this ripens, then you of Rama, you have seen so many of them, get the taste, the sweetness of character. they start jumping, and they start behaving And then you start seeing around, how the in a funny manner. Nature, the Divine, is sweetly playing with you. This state must be achieved, For every Sahaja Yogi, it is 'important that they must ing concentrated, would become extremely achieve this state. Because unless and until disturbed, very disturbed, and a funny atten- you have minimum achieveod this stage, you'll tion, wobbly-type. And when they become ba still in a dangerous zone, which, as I told wobbly, and a kind of a left-sidedness came you, upsets me very much. a siddhi, so-called; means they get possessed. So the attention instead of being-becom- into them, they would go on enjoying it, just So, everybody must decide to reach a state like a drunkard enjoys. Then such people where you everyday see the blessings of God would weep, cry, enjoy their crying, trouble manifesting. That means you have entered others by their crying, and they would not into the kingdom of God. This is the king- have power to overcome that, so much they dom of God, in which you are looked after, would be possessed. *Rita mbhara Pragnya. Nirmala Yoga Vol. 19, Page 40 Nirmala Yoga 14

 Then another kind, who were say, ambi- learn to keep in the centre. But how to keep tious people ; like we have many scientists, the attention in the centre is the problem for and these kind of people, ambitious peaple, they would get auto-hypnotised. Thinking selves. no end of themselves, behaving in the most stupid manner and also they would get pos- sessed. And you can see people like Hitler, in a sustained way. First of all sustain it. and all sorts. So many of these people today, Then you find that you are getting into the who are ruling the world, supposed to be in state of Samādhi, means at a state where you democracy or, say, communism, or anyway: start feeling the joy and the bliss of God's most of them are actually the despots. And blessings: And then you start saying "O that's why the chaos today. And they think God, what a blessing, what a blessing, and like nationalistic-spirit or something like that what a blessing". Once you have reached they would develop, and try to take the ad- that state, then you have to realize : "Who am vantage of people's right-sidedness and 1" Who are you ? What are you involve them into wars, and all sorts of des- the Spirit. After establishing your sustained tructive things. many people who are still not above them- Now when you meditate, try to meditate ? You are attention on the Spirit you'll develop a state where you'll be in a complete state of witnes- This kind of attention is possible for sing, with joy. people who think they are vary great, say. Hindus, Christians, mostly they are warring people; Muslims... Nowadays the musilims are all warring; imagine ! Among themselves. tried to have the best rooms, they must have That's the best part of it. And the Christians are all warring among themselves. And the have done, this, that, to get a good room. Hindus are all warring among themselves; Those who want to have the best food, or the tike there are only two nations where there is best time, tried to have a position, in the Hindu majority, so called. Is one is Nepal, and mind. The best privacy for themselves. Face one is India. And all the time they are quar- yourself. Honestly. Sahaja Yoga is an honest relling. There is not one day passes with- endeavour. out hearing some news of some sort of a quarrel, because Hindus won't use the swords, but a very cold-blooded quarrel is husband wife, they want the privacy to them- Now those, say, who are here, can judge themselvas very simpiy in a way. Those, who booked ten days ahead of time, then must You all should face yourselves. Then the selves. This is not the time for husband wife on. So this is the situation. In the name of to be gathered ; or for you to talk loudly and move about, and have fun. No, this is medi- tative time you have come. Is very short time, according to me; because people spend goes left or right, and they develop those thousands and thousands of days to establish God -again I say. Because they started on a very different level, and their attention siddhis. their meditative mood. But in this speedy So what have we to do ? First of all, by life, you have to have intensity, to establish. So get into meditative mood. Some people God's grace, as I told you, you all are realized people, so your ascent is made in the centre, feel that they have come for a proper holiday- which is a 'very, very, difficult' thing. Abso- making, and there's no sea here, so, how will lutely difficult, no doubt. But you should they have a swim,-sort of temperament. 15 Nirmala Yoga

 Those who are not so badly off, would be gain something out of me, So try to settle asking for more comfort: "I couldn't get food, I should have this, the best to be given to my child, or to my husband, or to my wife. My." It doesn't matter for one day on night-you sleep, boys together and ladies together, If to see what's the problem is. there are children, alright. But there's no need, for husband wife to sleep together in this time subler and subtler and deeper. And some of when you are meditating all in one room, at all. You have come for a very special pur- pose here. You have paid for it ! So be medi- tative. What I find? Everybody was talking loudly. I didn't find them in that meditative mood. Everybody enjoying, here, very much nice, good, you see. All these ideas are old ideas. your attention with that. I've seen people who stay with me some- times. Sometimes I deliberately called them Some of them who stay with me, I find, become subtler and them start taking advantage, taking liberties, then taking a kind of a course of life which is so mundane, and so stupid, that 1 can't understand. So this awareness should be within your heart: that the time is very important'. You have come here at a 'very, very' important time. And that when you are with me, is the 'most important time, of that important time. 'Histori- was thinking they are The Silence must be established within cally' this is the mnost important time. And and without. I must say, for this,-of course, Indians are, they know all that ; so I would not say Indian qualities,-but Australia. Aus- tralia, I stayed there in all these Ashrams, and Sydney we had fifty to sixty people living Alright, you can take it. Some people think there everyday. I 'never heard a voice or even the movement of the foot till 1 was there when I was there. And I was not there for a day or so, I was there for about ten fifteen days. Not even the movement and the children Crying,-nothing, I never heard a take full advantage in the real sense of the word. Some people think if they can get some money out of me then it's a big advantage. if they can take some of my time, they are at a very great advantage. Alright you can have it. Or some people think if they can take advantage of me, sort of teeling ego- pampered or something-"I'm a great lord" and some sort of a thing, you know ; alright! But those who are wise take the best advantage. And the best advantage is the growth within. sound. This was one of the ways you can control your attention, that in my presence, what do you speak ; what do you say. know the protocol part of it. Whom are are such lucky people that before you stands you talking to ? You can't make fun. You can't joke. I can joke with you. So the first awareness has to be : that you You must someone, who has the control over all the centres, over all the powers, or say, who is smile, alright. or all-powerful. How much advantage you You can laugh sometimes, 'but' it has to be done with have taken of that, is the important thing. a weight. Whom are you talking to ? The reason is, I'm talking to you all this, because can say, in England, and in India, mostly. it's only all this rapport, all this behaviour is And the contrast I feel, English and Indian going to help you. I'm not going to be helped. thing is, in India the more I've stayed, they I'm not going to be saved, l'm not going become more protocolish because they have to get my realization. It is 'you' who have to I stay-there are two places you Now where But in England I old traditional training. Nirmala Yoga 16

 find, people start taking advantage, making develop that, in an ego-oriented society, and moreover if you are sort of possessed by fun, joking. "You cannot. You see, it is different to please, but it is different to be cunning bhoots, then God save you, and save others. Like the cunning attention would be that, anything you see, you start frivolous and shallow, with somebody so intense, For example if there's a tin-board, and you take it under the Niagara fall, what thinking what advantage I can take out of this. How much money I can save-you see, will happen to the tin-board ? It won't be able to bear even the slightest shower of it's very very quick. It would be cheaper this way. IfI go by this way I'll save some time. You see, save pounds, save time, shave everything, and shave your own Self. that. IMER So, despite the Ritambhară Pragnya, like the sun today, you must have been upset yesterday, thinking that now we have come here, we have to live in the tents, and the atterfion bacomes cunning when you try to water is raining,-1 know many of you must have been. But the one who has achieved your own calculations, But if you try to save that state, would not be : "What is there ? If your money spontaneously : actually there is I've to live doesn't matter, I'm here for a special purpose. As long as l achieve that purpose nothing matters to me; what discom- time to be smart, about things; it argues, it fort, what all these things happen to me, I gives explanations, Is it better .?" have to achieve that purpose." Some of you people cannot see me so closely. Some of cheap, cheap, cheap thing that you go mad you are still not capable. Doesn't matter. What is most important is "/ should achieve that state, Ive come here for that. Not for fun, not for food, not for comfort. Not for "anything'. but for achieving a special state where I become the Guru. What is my prepa- ration for that ?" So just to save, you are going on. The save money. Save hare, save there, with nothing to be tried, just it happens that you save. But the cunning attention tries all the These days it's such a cheap, cheap, really. Like I had a ticket to go to America. I said, 'Don't give me an expensive ticket, first r class, or....I'll go by a cheap ticket. "So they gave me a ticket, of such a kind that, 1 would never have come back to London, at least for a year, and I would have lost in that American English, 1 tell you, somewhere. So it's so much; had worked out, into this, into that, We have to be extremely careful. Because into that, That kind of a 'horrible attention, the attention of the Divine is not raising you is useless, 'Leave' it. "Forget it. With that You are 'all the saving also I 've not seen anybody becoming directly. It is a balance. Remember that. And you rich. time in a balance. have to be 'extremely" careful how far you go with that balance. So now, how do you develop? .(lt's alright, don't worry, about the sun, I like it; I only called him this morning.)... Like you want- want to go and buy some paint. So we buy some paint; then they think, "Alright, if you bring it back, then how can we return it, what should we do, this, that" nonsense. All the time the mind Now let us see what are the states of is on that level. I'll give you an example : attentions are. Either your attention would be the other day, we got some paint to paint the glass see the subtle part of it, you see, in the gross there is a subtler indication-and the So how do you manage this attention. a cunning attention. Anything you see, you see from a cunning angle; many people 17 Nirmala Yoga

 paint was brought. And then, it was worth nothing, eighty "p" or mean I can afford it. So that's why I bought. are very generous, they always have money, If you can't afford don't buy. So they said, for Sahaja Yoga. I have had "Now we should return". I said, but why ? problem of money Now it's come out, now go and return, you Because they are not so calculating. To them, spend so much petrol going there, if you want to calculate, also its 'stupid,' and the time others. To spend for others. If they have you will be wasted ! "No but Mother, you to come to your house : "Alright, open your see, ultimately we save two "p"." I said, heart, now this is the time to spend !" Not alright, now I'l save a lot of money, and I'll for drinking and self-indulgence, but for the show you how. I took that paint and painted indulgence of doing for others; that's their many things which looked like glass, or which was stone-like, and the whole thing have to take to that tradition :" Oh they have looked 'so beautiful." Indians, who But the people like They something, alright, I are not calculating, äre not so rich. never with them. Never. to do for others, not for yourself, but for practice and tradition. So in this respect, you come! Let's spend now what can we do," This is the main thing one should understand, those who "extremely' miserly people. So the mind that is destructive is only calculating. If you have such a mind, know yourself that you have to get rid of that kind of a calculation. Cheap, cheap, cheap, cheap cheap, things you should just worse attention, because you see, cunning- give up. Kep in the centre. You should not be, of course, over-indulgent. But you you, and you think: Oh I've been smart should not be also going for, all the time, enough, you see, I ve saved two "p". But for this kind of a calculation. 'Because you you have lost your soul. You are no more are wasting your attention, which very few people have in this world. Must know that you are realized souls, you are not ordinary mundane type of body. that keep the van down there, go by people. You are special people and you are train, this van seems to be an horrible van. not to waste your attention in useless calculat- And there was a lot of a, you see, are mostly self-indulgent are So the attention which is cunning, is the ness also cheats yourself, it is cunning with important awakened a Sahaja Yogi I'l give you an exampleII told some- and that. explanation, with both fingers "p", and this the ing-money, "Let's go ahead, what happens, let's see." I never calculate you kow that, but I live so fed up with the bomb shells coming very cheaply. And you can also do that. going on like this to me, you see. And I got on me, that I said, "Go ahead". And the thing fell. And the thing got spoilt or what- This attention, cunning attention, is also ever it is-It is out of order now, so they had very 'fussy' attention. Here it starts saving money, and then, there it is in the evening, it must drink. So all the saving of "p" "p" "p" "p" goes into the gutters of drinking. Just see ! The sum total of such a perso- nality is what ? So, this mentality has to be 'material" things and 'wardly things and all controlled, specially for ego-oriented people that. 'But attention "itself must be saved. Ask are extremely calculating, most surprising it is. to do what I was telling them. Without the bomb shell, if they had listened to me it would have been alright with it. So your attention should not be on saving a question, "Where is my attention" ? 1 ve seen in the programmes some people are Nirmala Yoga 18

 a very 'negative' attitude. The first are the people cannot. Some are concentrated for positive, so called, positive, who are saving a short while, and some get disinterested money, saving everything, that is useless. Some are looking there, Now the second type are the archbishops of some are looking there, So how much all that is disaster, misery, mishaps-this type If you read newspaper every Forget about others, morning you will have an attention like that. All the newspaper people have that kind of Forget about others wha are not seeking, an attention : to find where is the disaster. I mean, in a sinister way, they feel happy there's a disaster. I've seen people : "Oh Mother, Icame to the seminar but the concentratedly listening to me, but some after some time. attention you have saved is the 'only concern of an attention. of a Sahaja Yogi. they are all garbage cleaners, you see. who are not of your quality. but you are a quality. Now what do you have to save ? For Mother, I came to the seminar but the example somebody is a king. He doesn't problem is, you see, there was no water." The bother of two "p" being saved don't attention is in finding disasters within and know baba, these days.i can't say defi- nitely ! They must be also doing that kind of a thing, you know-But what is he bothered to save his Grace, to dignity. For without : What happened ? "There's a disas- ter " What happened ? "I lost a pin". 'Absurd," to have such stupid ideas. They will cry and weep and make everyone But for a Sahaja Yogi the most important miserable, "Oooh I I'm so miserable." What ? thing is : "you must save your attention "My husband doesn't talk to me, or my child Is called as Chitta Nirodha. is not with me", Such people are 'extremely Nirodha : saving, self-indulgent as far as their relationships of your attention. "Where is it going, It's such a precious thing for me. Were is it running are concerned. They make 'everyone like that : "Oh the person didn't talk to me nicely and he was this way and that way", They Then how do you save your attention? Is through concentration. Concentrate Try feel hurt at the slightest touch. And by that. to concentrate. Don't allow your attention they think they are saving their emotions, if to wobble. Gradually you will develop concentration. You can watch my photo- graph, that's the best. Concentrate, bring it in your heart. let it be integrated in your heart. not the material things. Such people are very frightened people to talk to anyone, and anybody says nice things also, they get a fright, like this-they'll frown. The reason is they do not know what they have to save-is not their emotions 'at all'. You are lucky people. You don't have to build up a photograph, and then give it up because it is just a "avalambana", means it's here's no need to save your emotions, you are protected. What does it matter if some- body says anything to you ? You are 'above them, nobody can 'touch' you ! You are wast- ing your attention all the time by trying to save your emotions. There's nothing to be frightened of anyone, because somebody is going to say something, harsh word, that's why you don't want to do something-such Then the another type of an attention, what compromising people, so called, have not we call, are the people who are sort of-take understood Sahaja Yoga. There is 'no' com- just a dependence, and then you remove it. It's a 'complate' dependence for you. And a load for me-of a 'complete joy. So when concentrating in Sahaja Yoga, you are 'absolutely fully' in Sahaja Yoga, then you are controlling, saving, your attention one. This is one type of people. Nirmala Yoga 19

 promise in Sahaja Yoga at all, 'It is just like diamond' diamond, whatever you do. it's for ever and ever. It's like that. So the reflection should be of me, of something that is ideal before you ; the one that gives you energylike this song,-and not the reflection of a miserable person. Christ Diamond will remain a So one has to understand that the atten- standing before you, as in the Sistine Chapel: tion should not be allowed to drift into this and not some miserable skeleton, which is kind of an indulgence which is of a drunkard. That they are the most miserable people the images of your Mother which you should see drunkards are, worse than you. So create those even just imagine, They'll be in your emotions, and rise', This is the always crying, weeping, and people would second type of attention you have to control. think they are very misorable. So what you have to save at that time is your attention. The idiotic one comes from the second type, from such indulgences into 'useless expre- ssion of your fear about your emotions. See now, today they sang the song. The of the third comes from the first type, which song did fill me ; completely brought out some of the expressions which would not spontaneously come out at this time, But Indian language there's only one word, spec- the greatest thing it has done is to remind me ially in Marāthiis 'mūrkha', for them both "that You are God. You are not to get frus- categories are the same, as if the circle meets trated, You have to look after all of them, and at the same point. I mean English language You are powerful when You talk". The third one is a very horrid' idiotic one. where the person is emotionally indulgent. That is the "A" of the third. And the "B" is stupid. So we have two types of people; one idiotic and another are stupid. But in in some ways is good at least it differentiates between the mūrkhas. like they can be So such people should always keep a mirror and feel elevated. "You are a Sahaja stupid or they can be idiotic, you see. Yogi'. And the mirror, in the reflection, you should see me and not yourself. Some- times I mean are schizophrenic, some are idiots, some are Sahaja Yogis, very much. Then I just stand stupid, some are donkeys. before the mirror and l say: “Now, come along. You are the one who has all the powers, who has all the chakras awakened. None of the Advents had this. You are the Because of psyche being so confused here, that psychologists have brought out : some get really' frustrated with So, this, the third type is the "worst, is 'most' frustrating for me. They'll stick onto me like leeches, they'll be saying stupid things all the time, Just can't bear an idiot, isn't it ? They can bore a person. I mean all sorts of one who has created this world, and You are the one who has to save it. So now, get up. this put together is called as mūrkha. So Not to lose courage. Not to worry. Only in the emotional things I sometimes feel that now I'll have to give up some of them, "completely'. They are my children, as a I don't want to analyse it, it's a bit too much. So that kind of an attention you have, then you better keep quiet. Don't talk. Just Mother, not as a Guru. For a Guru they listen to others what they talk, what they say. There are some people who will just go on comes in, within myself that. "No, even if I talking, talking, talking, irrelevently, use- have to give up, doesn't matter, I have to lessly, wasting their energy. And such raise, absolutely". And with that power it people are always friends of the cunning. The cunning and such people go hand in don't have problem. And then the stirring up works. 20 Nirmala Yoga

 hand, because the cunning wants to befool joy life. There's no mobility. They cannot someone, and the fool wants to be befooled. Like a king will have a jester. It's like that far as their style is concerned, but not the you see, these combinations work out. So creative of the 'joy". for such people the best thing is-to keep quiet, preserve all their attention, all their energies just for cleansing. All this idiocity will pass away very soon if you try to preserve yourself. Don't talk. Don't say things which mely. That's how all these religions have are stupid. Which are idiotic Just keep spread, like Christianity, Islam, Hinduism quiet, and watch others. Sometimes such and all that, because they had a concen- people can become very great vehicle of trated effort of fanaticism. "Concentrated' God's power, but if they do not take to stupi- affort. If you read the letters of Paul in the dity and idiocity. be 'creative'. They can be creative only as So that kind of concentration is there. "Concentrated' effort people put in. Like there are people who are fanatics. They are very concentrated in their effort. Extre- Bible, you will see the concentration of it: You go there and you go there and establish a church and do this and what you have done -very organized, very systematic, absolutely who lead a life of concentration. I mean a moving like a belt on a machine. And they person who is working very hard-say, in the all the time have that after-effects of that This is the type of people, three types I would say; but the fourth type are the people office-is a very remarkably successful person, Charlie Chaplin has shown in and this and that, and that, and that, and that. his picture "Modern Times"-I used to enjoy Somebody who that very much,-that he used to tie up a movement. is also very concentrated. works very well. anywhere, with a concen- belt, standing you see, for about an hour, and trated mind, is concentrated. A housewife then after some time when he was released who looks after her husband and children is of the job, he used to go on like that. very concentrated, and a husband who looks after his family and his things in a very con- centrated way; they know how to Daint trated, means 'stuck' onto something. It's not well, they know how to do things, and their that, it's not 'penetrating'. Because if your hands are deft, and they know evervthing attention doesn't become by concentration But such people can have a very immobile subtler, and subtler, then it is not that, but it attention, very immobile, like plastic, or you can call it, like rubber. At the most. to im- prove on it, we can say, like some of the things do not know, will never be saved perhaps. So T have seen which you use for damp-proofing, That kind of an attention, that is concen- is getting 'stuck'. And the stuck attention is of no use for Sahaja Yoga. Such people, I called successful ! They'll go with all their you see. You just apply it, after sometime badges, everything, and God will say, "Go it's just parched, into it. They just can't get out of it. They just can't. They can't enjoy any- thing. Unless and until you show them a file organization, which works much faster, much you cannot talk to them. You see,if you have to talk to such a person, better take a thing. So these people will be just stuck file before you. And before starting, you put people. the file before you. If it is on the file only, they will see. But if you talk, they say, "Make a file". Very parched. And they cannot en- They penetrate; because they are living minds, back gentleman, you are not yet been passed through the customs." There is another smarter way, and a 'very specially' 'efficient Now there are fourth type of people which are concentrated. They are "intense', 'deep Nirmala Yoga 21

 really get those experiences, otherwise youll be just a mundane type of person all the time. And you may live with me, but you will not have those experiences, you'll not have that blissful feeling, nothing, that joy... they are not dead, parched minds, they have living mind ; they penetrate. I watch some- tirmes, I ask some people what do you think of a particular person? Immediatly I know, what they talk. If they just talk in a mundane way he is a fine person, he is a bad person, this thing, that thing, then l know what it is very superficial, shallow. So this penetration starts by your medita- tion and sustainance of the meditation, and the Samādhi. Seed sprouting, manifesting the new But a person who sees the possibilities and dimension within. This sort of an attention. one has to develop, by watching the attention problems a person is facing; then I know that -Chitta Nirodha. As you watch your money. as you watch your road when you drive, as you watch your child when it is growing, as the potentialities of it's awakening, and the he is the one who has that concentration into the subject. And the subject of Sahaja Yoga requires you watch the beauty of your wite, or the the 'maximum'. 'maximum, penetration Be- cause Sahaja Yoga, if you have understood- / don't know if you have understood or you going7 Where is it lagging behind? What is are aware of it or not- happening to my attention ? experience, and through 'nothing' else. care of your husband All put together, you watch yourself, your attention. "Where is it but is learnt through Such people have no problems. You'll be You have to experience and then believe surprised, that such people when they want into it. It is not that what told you is a conditioning on your mind, nothing: you ex- perience it yourself and learn. But those And if there is a problem, which you are who have that penetrating intelligence, who facing all the time, and you then know, there have that penetrating love, emotions, and is something wrong with you. Something is those who have that penetrating movement of Wrong with the instrument. If you don't have their understanding-they are the one who experience, learn, experience, learn, ex- perience, learn. to do something, it becomes 'dynamic'. They can work it out. Nobody has any problem. a tin cutter and as you start using a knife to cut a tin, doesn't work out, then you'll say the tin-is something wrong with the tin ! Or some- thing wrong with you ? No. It's wrong with They do not allow their mind to play on the instrument and that instrument has to be them : "No. No. No. This mind of mine has corrected. got experiences of the past, and is based on that. No, I have to take everyday a new experience. And that experience must be with all the powers you have, with all the 'silenced" within me. Must be 'sustained blessings you have, 'and' the source of power within me. Must be 'conditioned' within me. When the instrument is alright, after all. behind it, everything should work out. It should work out. You have had experiences of Sahaja Yoga experiences are the good things working out. You have had experiences conditionings: "How can it be ? I've seen it, of many of miracles happening before your I've faced it, I've had it. How.can it be. But for that, also to have the best experiences, first condition is of Ritambhara Pragnya eyes, but still the attention has not settled down with those experiences. Still gatänubhavas', the old experiences-continue, means where you should be of that level that you old identifications continue. You still con Nirmala Yoga 22

 should gain something out of'me. That you should prosper out of me. Like the Mother Earth feels so elated to see Her manifesta- Changa everything Become a fresh new tion into these beautiful green trees. It's like person. You are blooming out as a flower, that. She is nothing. We stand on Her. We and then as a tree and assume your position. walk on Her. Where do we see Her ? But tinue with that, and the filth of that is still on your being Assume your position, as the Sahaja yogi So She sees Her, in those. It's a same sort this attention must be brought round. You of a situation. She is the one who changes judge yourself where is your attention ? And Ritambhara means the one, what is the point of understanding ? What is the attention, which changes the seasons. all the seasons. the measure of understanding? Ritu means the seasons. So all the seasons are created by Her, just to please us. But It's very simple. 1 , what do we do, to please Her ? We exhaust because I am the attention: It I'm pleased Her torture Her, take out everything from Her, then you have done the job. But I can not be pleased by mundane things, by any argu- ments with that, but only by your ascent. So you judge yourself on that. have to be pleased, pollute it, do all kinds of nonsensical things. - And then She gets angry. The same thing that She is Love, in the Whether you give me a flower, or anything same love, She becomes angry. And then l'm only pleased when the esserice of that you have volcanoes and you have earthquakes, doing, has that height, has that special mant- and all kinds of things happening to you. festation. You say "I love you very much, Mother". Alright, you say. But I must see, that love that you are saying, or doing, has that essence that gives me joy. It's such a mutual thing between us, you can't imagine. 1 can't live without you and you can't live and others will be ' So without me. Its 'so' mutual. But. from one side it is 'absolutely hundred per cent bene- volent. Whether I get angry with you, whether I scold you, whether I pamper you, fifteenth day. And the fourteenth day, one has whether I say "Don't do that." if I tell you to become a killer. Killer of all that is igno- "Don't come very close to me, keep away"- rance; of all that is stupid. idiotic ; all that is "anything that I do like that, is benevolent to cunning and all that is emotional. Kill that "you. But of course your Mother takes time to get angry. Takes time. That doesn't mean 'you' take time. Look after yourselves. is very important. Suddenly' you will find elevated. Some people will 'just' elevate themselves completely cut out. be careful. I'm warning you. So today is the day, previous day to this part. Become a Sahaja Yogi, tomorrow, to receive the blessings. And to me the benevolence is only one, that you should be emancipated. That you WERHE May God Bless you. 23 Nirmala Yoga

 Her Holiness Mataji Nirmala Devi Dorset, England 2.8.1981 "OPEN YOUR HEART" What a beautiful place we are all in. Its See how She has worked very hard. She has a real blessing of Sahaja Yoga for all of you to relax. Relax well, because in relaxation created only you realise that we are now realised souls, that we have entered into the kingdom beautiful nature. of Heaven, that we can see the beauty that God has Created created all this beautiful universe, She has you also, She has created the Kundalini within you, She represents the In Her company, in Her bounties when you are drenched and you all meet each other, you see for yourself how She blesses all of you all around us, that we have become sensitive to His grace and to His kindness and to His love." It's a seminar that you have arranged and Just the same There is no difference between I am very happy. I always wanted you to arrange seminars and that you all should meet together and live together and understand each other. you and any other person for Her, But those who are sensitive, are subtler people, enjoy Her much more than you people do. Now the problem that exists in every The seminars, on the gross level they work country has its own style I have seen, and in out many things no doubt, but on subtler this country we have a style of problems levels seminars of the Sahaja Yogis mean a lot. It means that strong nuclei are being consolidated in various places in a country which comes, gradually it is changing it's form. In the beginning I found that people were over-aggressive, sceptical and also and these strongholds, or the strong muclei, could be rude sometimes. It's alright. It Now, gredually, makes no difference to me. which are created like this can form a mecha- nism by which beams of strong vibrations can they've started changing over. Now they're flow or can be thrown all over the place. It becoming aware of what they've got, what is a very great task to build up these divine role they are playing, how important it is to be an Englishman (when I say Englishman I mean all the English people, not Wales or anything different) and how they have to be- come part and parcel of the Heart of the Uni- I wonder how many of you really has created living deities to show that God realise how important it is to be an English- exists, that you can now test their vibrations and man. That everything that happens in this mechanisms in different parts of your coun- try. For example Mother Earth has done Her job. Where ever it was possible for Her, She verse. Nirmala Yoga 24

 the vocabulary of Sahaja Yogis. What is there to be afraid of ? Some people say that this is said because we do not want to hurt other For example, if this wed- country circulates. ding had taken place in any other royal family it would not have circulated so much. Everything circulates from this country. May people. There are so many other ways of saying be you may not think much of yourself. You things without hurting others. may think that what is so great after all, England is like any other country! But why do people accept so many things from you ? Now what is there to be afraid of ? A man who is weak cannot love. Only a strong person can love. If you talk of love, first of all see whether you are strong enough to love Like even a monarchy. I mean, most of or not. Loving is not an easy thing, even carnal love, even loving your beloved in the rchies and in this country it exists and it has a ordinary sense is not an easy thing. You have to have a very strong moral concept. Other- monarchy is still lingering here in a very proud wise every third minute people start changing way. Then the marriage itself. The marriages their loves. That kind of a love has no of royal families are already tested. protested meaning. You have to have very firm ideas. And Not only ideas in your brain but built within that such an auspicious thing should take place you. Very few people can have a lové as Romeo had, I can tell you this. It's easy to many countries should watch it and appreciate think that you are a Romeo. It's different. it and ENJOY it of all the things, is something You can think you are the King of England, surprising. It transcends all rationality, all it's alright, but you don't become that way. understanding of even logic. We can say, So to be Romeo itself you have to have a tremendous the countries have thrown away their mona- respectable position and the symbol of a and detested and nobody is interested. here, and that everybody should see it, so "What is the logic behind it ?", but if you are a tremendous character, enjoying you just want to enjoy, you don't sense of sacrifice and love and under standing of what you want. You want to love thats all, nothing beyond or before. I mean a man, when he falls in love, he falls want to think about why you are enjoying. So one has to understand that you are part and parcel of the heart of the universe. One in love for ever and ever and ever. If he falls thing is essential that you have to be very flexi- ble people. You have to have the flexibility of that experience also is a saort of a forbidden the heart cells. Now heart has to pump. It fruit for most of you. has to be strong. and surprisingly the lion is your emblem, so you have to have a lion's heart. And lion's heart means he's not in love many times it can not be love. So So to love God is even more difficult with- out seeing Him, without knowing Him, with- out knowing His bounties. Without getting afraid. He's the king and he lives like a king. realisation it is very difficult. But today that like a lion. And Leo as in astrology is a man who is extremely generous. Lion-hearted. Not afraid of anyone. There should be no fear. But English language if you read any- yourself. If you have made mistakes you one or if you listen to anyone, every third have to say, "Yes, I have made mistakes. So sentence he'lIl come out with the words, "I'm what." afraid.." "I'm afraid to say..." "I'm afraid this is so". These words must be dropped out from yourself also. Trusting is not the case. But still you have to have no fear in your mind. Trust. You trust your- self and trust others. First of all try to trust Trust yourself that you correct can doesn't mean "The wedding of the Prince of Wales with Lady Diana, who is a realised soul. Nirmala Yoga 25

 blind ego-trip. It does not mean that. It people feel bad, or some of them accept it. means that. "Yes, I can correct myself. 1 can If you are seekers and if you are ascending improve. I can do better." Some people think you are definitely unique, you are specially that if you trust yourself then you should blessed and you have to pay special atten- never confess anything that you have done tion to yourself. You can't afford to play wrong. That you should never say that it was with yourself. So you have to discriminate wrong and l can correct it. ideas. You have to trust yourself, saying"Yes, I have made mistakes. I have been doing wrong. I've been faltering, but l can correct. I have that throwing you in the air and again you come strength within me. Ican rise above all these back with a bump and break one of your legs things. I can use to my advantage." These are wrong between ego-or ego-trips as they call it- and ascent. Ego-trips bring you back with the worst hurting. It would be something like have that thing within me that I or something like that. That's what an ego- trip is. But ascent is wher you really rise above Not only that you rise, but, with you, Trust yourself. Trust that you are realised vou make others rise. In your ascent you souls. Trust that God loves you. develop tremendous powers. The higher you chosen you to be His instrument. Love your- ascend the better it is. But it's not by think- self. You are unique. No doubt. As it is, ing that you are perfect, that you can ascend. human beings, every individual is a unique personality. But after realisation you are defi- nitely unique. One has to use discretion The teacher was very kind to his student and about understanding. It never means ego trip. If you cannot correct yourself, you are not master of yourself. Yes, you are not per- fect. You are unique, but you are not per- fect. You have to perfect yourself. He has There's a story of a teacher and his student. he would come and show him his creations. He was very kind to him. And every time he would say that, 1 have done this well, and this is the thing that I have not been able to do, so will you please tell me how to correct it." And the teacher would say, "Yes. Good. These words can be very confusing. When You'd better correct this part. Then do this." I say you are unique, immediately you think And one day the student came and said, you are perfect. These are two words. Uni- que and perfect. Somebody can be unique, "You are no more a student now. but he can have imperfections. So you have to perfect yourself and trust in yourself that "Now this is perfect.". and the teacher said, No more. There You are not to come to me anymore. was another student who was coming every- day and corecting himself and he told his perfect yourself through your can you Kundalini awakening, clearing your chakras, teacher, "Today I think I can teach others but by understanding yourself you can perfect yourself. You have to perfect not yet perfect." and he said, "Alright, you go and teach." Tne third one was a student who came and he was always trying to see I have so many ways, I tell you directly, what was the mistake and how he had to sometimes indirectly, through friends, some- how I point out that this is the problem with assiduously and he came to his teacher one you. I'm that part within you which is discretion. any more now." He said, "True. Now you take When you do not understand your own dis- cretion I try to give you the direction by this way or that way. But people feel hurt, correct it and he worked very hard, very You should think that I'm within you. day and he said, "Sir, I will not trouble you my seat." So this is what one has to understand. If you ascend, you will become humbler. It is Nirmala Yoga 26

 just the other way round that people under- own heart, first of all. Of your own heart; stand. When they ascend they think they without insincerity, cunningness. As l'm have achieved some special powers. I don't saying this you will realize that all Englishmen know, suddenly self-certification starts, you believe in the contrary. Nowadays, not olden see, "I'm very good in spirituality. I'm very times but nowadays. high up", and all that. This self-certificate starts and then it can reach such a polnt Trust others, Talk to everyone with an open Clean heart, Transparent. Open heart. where suddenly you find that you are on the This kind of thing is not the way earth again. heart. Trust others. Why do you doubt ? If it works out. Actually there are certain you do not doubt yourself you will not doubt others. What are they going to take away from you ? What have you got? Nobody can take away your nose, eyes, nothing. It's all quite intact. It's all nicely glued down so nothing is going to disappear. How are they going to hurt a person who is a realised soul ? If your heart is clean you can see the other The second quality is that how much you person clearly through and through. Inno- qualities that show on people who ascend. The first thing is their collectivity. How collective you are. How many people you can get along with. At how many things you can laugh. That is one of the biggest qualities. accept another's domination who cuts down cence is such a powerful thing. Such a your collectivity. You must have your per- powerful thing that even a glance is sufficient sonality allow others to cut your personality; say for example there's a boss and you are an emp- separate from everyone. If you to kill a satan. Purity of heart. Actually, when the heart becomes impure loyee and both are realized souls and one of the impurity fiows down to other places. It themi is ascending then he becomes humbler, is not the other way round. It is from the he becomes better. They have a congenial heart. Many people believe it's the body that becomes impure. 1 think it is the heart which becomes impure and then it starts trickling down and then it is residual there. relationship. But to a point. He will never compromise with his boss when it comes to his ascent, to his collectivity. to his giving, to his doing things for others. On that point he'll never have any domination. it settles down there. So have a clean open heart like a child's How much you feel responsible about heart. Open heart. What is there to be afraid of anyone ? What is there not to trust What is there to be angry with anyone ? Talk to everyone, shake hands Every cell in the heart has to be extremely with everyone, be nice to everyone. On the sensitive, and extremely obedient to the Self, way you find somebody with difficulty. Give him a hand. If someone cannot sit properly or has a problem you try to remove the pro- blem. if someone cannot stand, give the place. Try to give from your clean heart. If your heart is not clean it can never give. yourself is the second point. How much you are responsible to be there, to be a cell in the anyone? heart. Any cell that fails, fails the heart. to the Spirit. It has to activate, work harder when there is need or emergency, and it enjoys the most. And no impurity should be allowed. The third point now. As 1 told you, first collectivity, secondly yourresponsibility and third point is purity, Purity of your subject. There's no broom available for that Now, how do you clean the heart is the Nirmala Yoga 27

 in the super-market ! There are no Fairy times you might feel I am publicly saying Liquids or anything to wash it down ! But things for you. Maybe your images are being there is a way. ruined by that, or whatever you may think. That's not the way. It's for your "hita" (Iga), Allow your heart to be drenched in your it's for the well-being of your Spirit and that Mother's love. Just allow. See how much She loves you. I trust you. People laugh at me sometimes. Some of these saints who are supposed to be very great people. They yourself, trust others, other Sahaja Yogis. can't understand how I trust you. They say "Love thy neighbour as thyself." Who is thy that, "Oh, these are all lost races. These are horrible people. How do you trust them ? They are not sanyasis, they are not sadhus, they are nothing. They are ordinary people." you, you have to trust me and it will work For them your value is nothing. If you go to them they will make you stand on your head should not worry whether it would be abso- for three mnonths. For three years they may hang you in a well. I don't know what they knows. Whatever your heart will do in it's will do to test you. is the most difficult job. With all this trust in your heart, first trust neighbour? It's a Sahaja Yogi. Stand by him. And trust Your Mother. As I have trusted out. Open your heart to this trust You lutely respectable or not, because heart genuine form will be respectable because there resides your Spirit which manifests. But I trusted you the day I saw you: The That will look after it. By outward forms day you came to me l trusted you, and I worked on you from the vary first day, know- It is that trust in your loving heart that is go- ing what you are, but I frusted your Spirit, ing to do it. that it would shine. In the same way, trust whatever you try it's not going to work ot. It doesn't matter. You see brought some flowers. There were foday she We laugh at others. I have seen Sahaja Yogis laugh at others, make fun of them when they come to me. Trust them. When supposed to be weeds according to her. She you trust them you will respect them also. some went to the station and there she was taking some flowers out and the station master and his wife were very sweet. They said, "Go ahead, So you have to believe in yourself and enjoy the way gently you ate sweeping into They are only weeds. You can have them." the current of your Mothers love. Just enjoy And they are so fragrant! One of the most t. Like a flower that falls into the current that and flows and enjoys all the beauties of that just weeds. They do not conform to any current. In the same way you should enjoy. formal flowers or anything but just a few When that enjoyment comes into you, you will start trusting. And trust your Mother. fragrant flowers I have ever seen. They are flowers attached to other flowers were most fragrant. I try many things to correct you: but trust in one thing, that whatever I try for you or do anything, anything Imay do for you it is just to cleanse you. That's my job. Maybe some- Love gives all the sophistication and the fragrance and the breeding which is required. Not talking of love, but really loving is the way. Iits most enjoyable. 28 Nirmala Yoga

 Her Holiness Shri Mataji Ekādasha Rudra Puja 17th September 1983, New York City to by which he kills people. So before killing according a day, So today is the Indian calender, called as Parivartini them and finishing them off, in the compas- Ekadashi. Now, today is the 11th day of the sion of your Mother, we have to first try to moon. 11th day is Ekadasha. Also, in Sahaja Yoga you know about Ekadasha Rudra, which is here, (forehead), which will ultimately over. So these 11 very great destructive destroy all those things which are not required powers willI be used by the Kalki, the One who anymore. That is Ekadasha here, that is the is going to manifest on a white horse. Before 11th. But today is a special day. Where we that, today is a very great day that these powers are going to use the power of Ekadasha to do we are going to use for transformation, the transformation. It is not for destruotion but for transformation. Is such a day to be here in New York where we use the destruc- tive powers for the transformation of the uni- know that there are destructive powers mani- verse. So it's a very great day today that we are going to transform people by the mani- That we'll be destroyed so we must take to festation of the Ekadasha's powers. And they God. That's one of the ways. Secondly, if a are 11 placed over your forehead here, and you know how they work out. So that these 10 come out of the destructive powers of the method. And there is no method available Void. Void has cot 10 destructive powers transform them. If they cannot be transfor- med then its alright. then let Ekadasha take Now how can destructive powers be used for transformation ? First of all, when people festing, they start fearing. They get afraid. person comes to know about any destructive disease like cancer, he wants to find out a on a human level. So then he thinks of God Out of those 10 the destructive part and wants to come nearer to God, The fear brings him closer to God. He depends on also. settles down here. So when a person is on his destruction, say for example a cancer has God more than on his rationality, than on his set in, then you might feel a throb, here at the ego, or superego. And he wants to depend apex of your Void, the throb. And it doesn't on God's powers to cure him or to save him logically mean that if there's a throb there's a from this destruction. Because he is now on cancer, but if there's a cancer there'll be a throb in here going on. That means the force of life is trying to push it. But the obstruc- has to be destroyed. So, this is another way tion there starts accumulation on both sides people take to transformation, change their and in the centre is the centre of Vishuddhi, attitudes, change their value systemi. of the Virāta. Shri Krishna has become the Viräta, the Great Primordial Being. So this is the 11th power of destruction. He has the power called "Samhāra Shakti" the brink of destruction, as soon as cancer is setin he knows that there's no end to it and he I've known of many husbands and wives , who got cancer and their counterparts be- came very mild. gentle, kindly, romantic. Read Ekadasha as Ekadasha Nirmala Yoga 29

 There's a They tried to give all the love, all the protec- becomes too big, thick, jutting out. tion, all the good things to a person who is character l've seen like that, I think it is Fran- going to die now of Ekadasha. So a kind of kenstein or someone. Is it ? Frankenstein; a transforming temperament starts coming in a man that he sees that a person with whom Frankenstein character. Is all this is swollen he has lived all his life is now going to be no more. So a kind of beautiful feeling towards really the one that happens to human beings, the person, of giving whatever you have beautiful within you, starts. And that's how people develop a new kind of personality which was never apparent before. So all harshness drops out. starts pouring in. So the compassion in a man is awakened by which he gets transfor- med. Many people who lost their relations. kith and kin, become much more gentle, kin- day they don't eat anything at all. But you der, because Ekadasha has expressed its awe. And also another kind of a fear comes into the Mother, because. I'm the Ekadasha Myself! mind of the people, that tomorrow this can happen to me also ! about it." So at this time Sahaja Yoga helps them a lot. They come to Sahaja Yoga be- cause such an emergency is created within themselves and thus they are thrust for their transformation to Sahaja Yoga. yes, that has come from the Unconscious; up, jutting out, and this place like that. That's when he becomes a devil himself. So this is how the Ekadasha works within us, to destroy our negativity within us. In India, so many people fast on this day, for atonement, on 11th day is very common: "You must do Ekadashi". All the Hindus and all these people do Ekadashi. And all the sweetness That is, the 11th shouldn't do it after the Advent of your So why should you do it now when I've come ? It was done when I was not here, just to call me, so now I'm back here, you need not do this anymore, the penance of Eka- desha. But you have to be careful. SoI must do something Now Ekadasha comes, as I told you, from the Void. So firstly, it comes when you But there's another subtler way that this accept someone as your guru, say, who are destructive force helps : by destroying all that false, who are anti-God, anti-Christ. So you is negative within us. Because unless and develop a kind of a thickness on right side, it is the person who you are worshipping as a cannot become people who can enter into the guru, respecting as a guru, who is a guru to kingdom of God. We have our ego, we have you who is not really a guru, so you develop a superego which shows on this (right) side, here. When you have your ego very much this part. Now the other side of it shows when a person says "I'm my own guru, I'm practis- coming out on left side, a very big one, here. ing my own meditation, I've nothing to do Or if you have a super-ego you can see another with anybody's guidance, I'm quite alright as big thing jutting out on the brain on the right am". Such a person develops the left half. So you have (left) half developed be- cause of that, and this half developed because of the superego that you get from these false also you might get a blob here. So you and fake gurus. Now what happens some- times that when you get involved into this kind of superego behaviour, at that time, it so happens that you might take over from there and start using it for your ego. untif that negative is destroyed within us, we our super ego and both can be represented great ego, then you'll find a big blob-like ego side. So on both the sides you might get both the things if both the sympathetic are over- active. If you are not a very collective person might get all the thing filled up with your ego, superego and this Virāta centre again blown up in a way that a person develops a face like a monster sometimes ! This portion Nitmala Yoga 30

 That's the worst time for it. At that time going to this guru, still my vibrations are there, what you do is to act like the devils yourself. I'm having the same type of licentious life, And once you start doing that, your Ekadasha still my vibrations are there." Now it goes a is completely finished. And then I think it's easy to get rid of it. It's very diffi- cult. Like if it is one-sided it's much easier. don't very long way. the vibrations are still there. But suddenly they stop, and you find you're out of the bounds. You're thrown OUT, com- pletely. But you do not feel how you're thrown out. Gradually you find, like a tan- gent you go out. And so ane has to be care- ful about it. So within us lies a force which is centrifugal and a force that is centripetal. So So today is the day which is called as the Ekadashi which is going to bring the trans- formation. When you are transformed, so many things are automatically destroyed with- in you. As you can see very clearly that all your misidentifications drop out. The mis- identification that "I'm an American, I'm a Christian or I'm a Jew. I'm this, I'm that"-all these false misidentifications drop out and you become a naked human being: first of all you are a Human Being. And then a super human being, without the ego, WITHOUT the ego. what vou want. That's the trouble with So your ego is destroyed, your superego is Sahaja Yoga is and this is the loophole of the destroyed, your conditionings are destroyed Sahaja Yoga whichI have to tell you as a and all your false ideas about knowledge are Morher that it's very anxious to throw you destroyed. So what remains and emerges out is the reality. Now see when a flower becomes the fruit. Everything practically drops out of the flower, we can say. Like the calyx is dropped out, then the petals are dropped out and then the epicalyx is there, marriage, then there should be no marriage. that is also dropped out. But what remains is the seed, actually if you see. Around the seed all these things developed and the fruit remains, the rest of it drops out. In some fruits some part is used, in some fruits nothing hody a present, you hide it, you see; keep it to is used, a very little growth comes out as fruit and becomes a fruit while the flowers are there. So in us also whatever becomes Spirit, remains, The rest drops out. And that is what it is when we call it the Ekadasha which brings forth the transformation. And one has to understand we have to drop out many things. Ekadasha's force is cenrtifugal, by which you are thrown out. Sahaja Yoga doesn't fall onto anybody's feet. Doesn't anyone. anyone, doesn't flatter request If you want to be there you have to be POSITIVELY there and if you don't want to be there it throws you much faster than out. I'll tell you when Christine-just now she told me-got engaged to Micheal, half of them were thrown out. Because they had a conception that you must have a romance before marriage. Without a ronmance, if you have a I don't know on what conception it is based. But if you have the romance before the marriage, what's the fun of having the marri- age?I mean it's like-if you have to give some- that date, and give the surprise to the children! In the same way if you have the romance al- ready done, what's the marriage ? What's the celebration for ? It's absolutely illogical, There is no romance in such cases. Actually you have seen that after the romance, the marriage and then the divorce. It's always like that. Because you become stale, and you find Some people l've seen they say, "What's that the romance you had before marriage was something, a fantastic fantasy that has drop- there". Some say, "What's wrong ? I'm ped out, and now after marriage there is nothing drinking, still my vibrations are there. I'm left to enjoy so you are fed up and next month wrong ? I'm smoking, still my vibrations are 31 Nirmala Yoga

 body has place in the society. But in England But the you are now in the divorce court. marriages that skip this without the romance when we went first we were shocked ! They kept all reserve for a particular day. Just for had no shame about this, they said," I'm al- that day when you are going to have the real ready divorced thrice and this is the fourth romance, and real feeling of oneness, every- thing. In India it's a very big thing, you see, Oh God ! To us a divorce means worse than the first night of the married people. And that's leprosy ! "Why are you divorcad ? What's the why your marriages-lost. would say I'm an old woman of 60 years my husband is 63 years and you can see how romantic he is still. You see the romance never finishes. Because it starts on the auspi- than you people as marriage because we can cious day with the sanction of the collectivity produce much more children than you. And everybody taking interest in that romance. It children only want to be born in India not is such a big thing to be married, all the anywhere else. You'd be suprised. That's people enjoying the marriage, and enjoying. woman I'm living with." So shocking for us, Such problem ? How can you be divorced ? - an auspicious thing is the mnarriage ! How can you do it. is such a big fall I" And that's how it works out. And in no way we are less marriages-lost. You know the problem we are facing, Our population problem comes from the point that the So now this kind of thing when happens marriages are so successful, the people are so to the people who are western people think peaceful that children hate to be born in romance is very important. But I don't think one can learm anything from the marriage because you don't know where will be the system of the western people. Because all their marriage systems absolutely dwindle down. There is nothing to be learned from them but what to do 7 Children don't listen, they as far as that is concerned. We can learn don't want to go to all such places where many other things, for example we can learn how to operate a camera. marriage is better you learn from Indians. high quality, they do ;I mean, they have to be They have a very solid system of marriage. like devils to get into this thing so they may First of all the way they are trained from child- try. Or maybe real devils-to take advantage hood how to make a such a lot of importance is given. Then with- out the horoscope we'll not marry, without the of their parents, want to be born in India. auspicious day they won't marry. Everything And that's why recently we find that India is they work out in such details so that the marriage cannot fizzle out. Moreover it is worked in such a collective way. For example, supposing my husband wants to trouble me. Say for example. So the sister of my husband shocked them because they couldn't under- will take him to task. Everybody can inter- stand, there has to be a romance, and this fere if they try to do anything against the and that. marriage. Everyone in the family will be after the person who tries to break the marri- age. And so everyone knows that I'll be left that should be there that we should not allow high and dry, you see, if I have a divorce. No NIGHTMARES of NEW YORK. Naturally, mother tomorrow, where will be the father. Now we are blamed for a high rate of fertility, there's no stability for them to exist. Especi- ally the realised children, if they are of a very But to operate a marriage successful. of it. But normally, people who want peace in life, who want joy in life, and want the love growing so fast in population that we don't know what to do. So this marriage system came in which Now the more understanding of Ekadasha it to be built within us in any way, because Nirmala Yoga 32

 these are self destroying things. It starts with permissiveness should be allowed, and all doubting. When you start doubting Sahaja these things should be allowed. And now Yoga, the build-up starts. And, the doubting you have A.I.D.S. You have AIDS now here already operating. Now the AIDS has given the fear of the Ekadasha. Now have it! What's wro- ng! What about that? So this awe and this fear is very important. Is an extremely important wood means this wood. Touch wood means thing that you must have the awe and the fear that God is Almighty, and we are nothing before him. Here we have to remember that starts building up throughout the "medha" -is the plate here, you see. And it can become a big plate here. Like today I saw that lady saying touch wood, you see touch there should be no wood in here any more, you see. Or you can say touch stone. If you say something like a bragging you can say no, no, touch wood. I am not meaning that. People are quite conscious, unsconciously they ness that He is the Whole and we have be- say, but they are quite conscious not to say something that would sort of give an idea of are going to overcome our Ekadasha. So postpone nature, or something bragging, or today / bless you all with the power of Eka- something big so that it may go wrong. When dasha which is going to transform. they say touch wood, this is the wood. You say touch, there. we are part and parcel of that God, and that we have to awaken ourselves to the conscious- come one with the WVhole. That's how we May God bless you all, in your wark which So we are quite conscious of this force you are trying to do for the good of Americans. building within us. And now we have to be conscious that this force is going to transform You know it is the Vishuddhi chakra and all the universe. So today we are going to pray that this force has to transform America through its capacity to frighten people so that this transformation is to take place. Unless they come to Sahaja Yoga. Because when things have reached this stage of ego, then will see it will not work out. You cannot talk when people way "What's wrong?"- Like in England when I started talking first, they said this is Victorian woman, out of date, absolute- ly useless. I said alright, I don't say anything. gallop, and must go on spreading like wildfire. But you'll have such diseases that you'll have This should be your prayer today. to come back. That wa5 the time they pass- the law that homosexuality should be allowed, It is a responsibility to save America. the responsibility of Sahaja Yoga rests on Vishuddhi chakra. So how important it is that and until the transformation comes in, you to people, you cannot communicate with them. So you must pray that transformation process must start, must trigger, and must May God bless you. MORNING PRAYER May I this day, be what you'd have me be: May I this day, say what you'd have me say: May I this day, be 'part and parcel of the whole; And may my thoughts be of a realized soul: May I this day, have love for all mankind: Shri Mother, be in my heart and in my mind. Nirmala Yoga 33

 VISHNU-TATTWA They say that the 1000 heads of Lord of the Paramātmā Shri Shiva Sadāshiva Shesha hissing above Lord Vishnu represents the constant mental activity, a brain cons- tantly trying to sustain and balance the world. and detached balance from both left and Lord Vishnu is Vishwapäla and the Lord of right that we are sustained. Hence to deve- the Sushumna Nādi, He is the essence of lop the Vishnu-tattwa in one, one needs to be neither one. or the other, connecting them both. It is thanks to His sense of responsibility the nervouS system controlling all the both responsible and balanced. different angas ar limbs of the Viräta as the nerves penetrate every last, minute portion of the body, so he permeates every last portion Yogi, I am not interested in material things' of the Virata and, like the nerves, receives, and it is true that one should remain detached. transmits, and integrates information. All the But yet Lord Vishnu is a far greater Yogi than great chakras, and nerve plexuses are placed ultimately in the Sushumna and it is He who. body of the Virita his energy flows to every in various forms, and using various powers, controls them, In the Nabhi, the Void and ing. enlightening, and making all auspicious. Swädishthana, in the Anahata, the Vishuddhi So, while detached, one should pay attention and eventually as Maha Vishnu, the Agnya to one's sustenance, for, as realised souls, we and the two cerebral hemispheres. He is the Sokshma Sükshnottama, that penetrates the deepest levels of the Sushumna-the Brahma Nadi and it is through His Grace, by the ascent in the Brahma Nadi that we get and give realization. It is very easy for a Yogi to say, "I am a most of us and yet through the nerves in the minutest aspect of material nature-transform- are like the nerves in the body of the Virāta and that enlightened energy that flows into matter through our attention can enlighten it, So we act as instruments of the Lord. This is a very subtle point and one should not underestimate it, for the key words are Hence He is the co-ordinator and there is detachment and responsibility ; and there are no detail too small to escape His attention-by many dangers for those not absolutely in the Him the beggar is fed and sustained, the centre. If one is not detached there is no family and planetary horoscope of every birth point pretending one is, for in the end one's is approved and arranged, marriages take suppressed attachment and greed will rise up and hit one on the head when one least place etc. In a sense He is the great bureau- crat organising every aspect of the universe. expects it. Rather one should acknowledge what one is and witness it. We cannot think what the consequences would be : He fight ourselves, we can only leave it to the is the one who, in constant 'leelä and 'Māvā Kundalini and the Atma to work things out for maintains the creation and writes the drama. us. by the constant practise of Sahaja Yoga foot-soaking, Dhyana etc. be no creation and no drama, only Atma, It and since it all happens automatically, there is He who stands in the middle between the should be no room for ego intervention or If we were idle or inattentive for one moment, For without "leelä" and 'Mäya' there would shoe-beating. Mäyă of the Adi Shakti and the pure witness mental activity. *This article comes out of a conversation Dr. Rustom had with Shri Mataji, in London, in which She wondered why Sahaja Yogis are not more blessed by Shri Lakshmi, 34 Nitmala Yoga

 Lord Vishnu is the one who oversees the existence in this world gained through the four Ashramas or stages of life-and one of grace and auspices of Lord Vishnu supported by Lord Ganesha. If we do not accept our man who is Atmasākshātkāri and a realised responsibility to maintain our Lakshmi, it will - be hard for Sahaja Yoga to penetrate the material universe, for who will build the Ashrams and hold the programmes ? Often in basis of the creation, is harmad. This drama Sahaja Yoga one is asked to pay for this and that and people grumble. But they see only that is opposed. In the West, one has the gross drama-not the deep subtle meaning: an idea that "Grihastha' and marriage are that one is being asked to pay attention to the Lakshmi Vishnu tattwa so that the Virăta that this is the outer manifestation-but can be enlightened by the enlightened Atmas there is a deeper hidden meaning that, by we all possess by Shri Mataji's grace. It is it we fulfil our duty to our God who has a very small thing we are being asked for, manifested as the Virāta-so that inspite of to help enlighten our Mother's universe. The being one with the Atmã, we accept the attacks of left and right that endanger this are familiar to all-and I will not elaborate. But we should know that the Lakshmi of them, is 'Grihastha" or house-holder. For a soulsuch a thing can be a great Tapasyā but without the collective cannot survive and it's evolution and the drama, which is the. is born of Divine Will and Desire, and therefore given to us to enjoy-and it is true burden and responsibility of matter, to be one with Him and prove our Love and Bhakti for Him. There is a very subtle and twisting Sahaja Yoga is our responsibility. not our Mother's. We should shoulder the burden, not gains it, but with it also matter-as tapasyā this our Mother-and we should find ways to work it out somehow or the other. As I said, Lakshmi is a tapasyā and we should not play here, for, the sadhaka seeking the Atma time and not indulgence. If one accepts one's material respon- expect to earn money easily or effortlessly- sibilities, then one has to go down into the except by our Mother's grace. world of filth and commonness-and our For the enlightenment to have meaning, we should enlighten the universe and enter vibrations get spoilt. However, we have been given the capacity to cleanse ourselves and by Gross matter regardless of the consequences doing so, we cleanse also that, from which for we are pure Atmā. We should not forget We caught-and by doing so. we clear our Mother's creation and. in some small part. that our Mother, who is the Purest of the Pure, took birth in the darkest night of Kaliyuga to help us, and we should now stand by Her side and fight it out. Let us repay to Her the enormous debt we owe Her. If we are not prepared to face the world we go against the Vishnu tattwa, and His shakti Shri Lakshmi forsakes us. Further, we deny the fact of our birth and material hope we can all work it out, Jai Shri Mataji 35 Nirmala Yoga

 The Heart Chakra and its afflictions The heart is the centre point of the crea- slightest puff of wind will flurry the surface tion-and hence all chakras are subservient of an absolutely still, clear and smooth pond. to it. It is the power-house of the body and from it energy flows to all other points. It is pure existence-smooth, clear and unruffled the seat of the Spirit, the ultimate source of beyond any of the other spheres of existence, all power, manifested as Shri Shiva Shakti beyond even the subtle and causal bodies Vähi (The power holder or carrier). A block and therefore beyond catches and blocks in in any chakra or nādi in the body will put the system. They are a result of one's present some pressure on the heart. The centre of situation and previous existencethey are the hea.t, the "bindu' is on the left. It is the ephemereal and constantly changing : they source of all things and is the point at which have no meaning in the meaning of the the desire of the divine to manifest and begin the creation manifests to begin the creation sounds that accompany the divine Drama initially. At the dawn of creation, the Adi of existence. Shakti, manifesting in the bindu or loop of the we should be the witnesses comfortably heart, makes 3 coils around it-and descen- seated ding from the top, bisects them to create everything-Bidshah's or Emperors, in energy foci of the 7 chakras, before settling words of Shri Mataji : we may act but we are in the first- the mooladhāra-to begin the not the drama. actual substance of the creation-its strides and storms, so to speak. Reflected through the heart is the quality of divine--except as the flashing lights and As realised Sahaja Yogis to witness the drama- masters of the It is when this fact is forgotten that the problems begin, for then the awareness is sucked through all the twisted spirals and loops 1 of the damaged instrument, is caught and The reason there are 3! coils is that '3 represents the nature of Shri Adi Shakti as Kundalini and represents both Her manifest gets stuck-then cries out in pain and loses nature in the 3 gunas of existence-and Her IEs awareness of it's divine nature. It is only unmanifest nature as the Ardha-mãtrā or ! syllable. A syllable cannot be pronounced, yet it exists-it is the point of junction between unmanifest and manifest. Thus, in the Devi Mahātmyam : "You are placed in the Ardha deeply rooted in the heart, and in the cons- mātrā" and you cannot be specifically spoken becomes smooth and protected and or pronounced". The meaning of 3 as the number of Shri Gaurishwari Nityakanya Adimätā can be understood only by Sahaja Yogis, for it is very subtle. the deft fingers of Shri Mataji like a master weaver's, that can unpick and untangle these knots and get the machine moving again. If, however, one's attention is dearly and ciousness of being the Atman then it can enter any tangled skein to unentangle it- without itself being caught. The heart is the seat of one's security. The ultimate security is to know "I am that". So the whole divine Tantra or instrument Or in the words of Shri Shankarācharya: of the cosmos, of which we are all a part, is "Brahmädvityamevāham" (the undivided manifest as an expression of divine desire Brahma alone am 1). At a more material level this manifests as the protecting power irregularity in the flow of power in the system of the Spirit, manifest as the Goddess Shri- will put pressure on the heart. just as the Durgă-fierce in Her protection of Her universe through it's power. The slightest block or 36 Nirmala Yoga

 When we come to Sahaja Yoga, the tantra is damaged and impure and the heart explains the relation between Shri catches. There is nothing to be upset in and Her children and associated in the body with blood and the thymus centre heart. This Pärvati and Shri Durga-for in Her quiet form that. One should settle down silently and the Shakti remains as the companion and work to undo consort of the Atma. At the gross level this slowly. The whole library of divine know- protection of the Spirit is expressed in the ledge is at one's hand, and if the heart's fact of Motherhood. The Mother is the first desire to evolve the being and achieve the relationship one knows, in this life-and it is absolute is pure, the solution to every a Mother's instinct to protect Her child-at problem will occur automaticaly, effortlessly- any cost. The experience of this existence is and spontaneously "Sahaja". There is no need built up in us at the gross level through to involve the ego with too much effort-for countless lives beginning at even the animal effort only builds up the consciousness of stage. This is to give us an inner sense of "I do" of the ego. security, so that when we see the ultimate protecting power of the Atma as Jaganmātā, with the Atma" is an attitude that develops we can recognize it immediately and jump into with the growth of the Vishuddihi and involves it. It is important to recognise that the first, detachment from the fruit and results of one's and also the highest manifestation of God actions. Almighty is as Mother-for it leads one to recognise the protecting capacity of one's own Spirit through its Shakti. This union of Atma and Shakti as the protector of one's existence is important to understand : as the against both-and took a powerful "avatăra Shri Shiva Tattwa also expresses the quality accompanied by the three great shaktis (of or tattwa of pure existence-in complete security. the catches gradually and "I do not do. I act only, in accordance The ultimate act against the Spirit is to wor- ship that, which has no Spirit-gross maiter or Räkshasas. Shri Mohammad inveighed Shri Mahakali, Shri Mahasaraswati and Shri Mahalakshmi)-Shri Brahmadeva and Hassan and Hussein to block this artery of negativity into the Virāta through the left At a practical level, what this means is that swädishthäna, nábhi and void. Much of the if one goes against the Spirit, identifying with Kurān is an expression ef Nirmala Vidyā anything apart from it, the heart catches. On the one hand we have the ego, "lam this" or "I have done this" rather than "this has been done (by the Spirit)". "Aham" means "T" and unreality "kara"- "the doer" or Ahamkāra "I, the doer. Atma and its expression is the sole reality At another point :"This has been done to me, therefore I suffer", is the left, super-ego stand point. Both are illusory. One cannot do. it is the Shakti alone that acts as the vehicle of the Divine desire. One should identify primordial desire in the heart, having caused with that collective, great, divine being and its desire; and watch the play of its manifes- filled, ascends eventuallay to sit and dance on tation rather than concentrate on "1 do" Similarly it is above all things, and nothing can effect it or make it suffer. compassionate, clear and uncompromising, which is the support of the Atma tattwa in this material universe. There is either reality or - there is no half reality. The in the universe-identification with anything e Ise causes the heart to catch. The Shiva tattwa or power of initial and all things to be and be complete and ful- the Sahasrära or apex of the creation-as Shri Sadūshiva tattwa. There it is the purely (Contd. on page 39) 37 Nirmala Yoga

 Shri Mataji's Advice Sanskrit is really Deva-vani (language of 'Sat point. Your attention is only charmed Gods). When the Kundalini moves, she makes by the Spirit. Only the attention part as 1 vibrations. She makes special sounds, which told you is like a flicker of light in a gas lamp are Devnagri sounds, on different chakras. and Kundalini is like a gas which touches the Spirit and the light of the Spirit spreads in central nervous system. Chit part, the outer Even when you recite mantras through the Sanskrit language or Devnägri pronunciations cover, the chitta becomes the attention part. only, you can excite them better. At that stage the Kundalini opens the Brahma- randhra when you feel the vibrations Sat-Chit-Anand is the super-conscious- from your hand and you can feel other per- ness, A thought rises and falls. You can see rising of the thought but not falling. In conscious, collectively conscious again out between these thoughts there is a space of Sat-Chit-Anand, that you just touch 'chit called vilamba'. If yoOu can stop for a while, you get the conscious mind and your chit becoming the "chitta' of collective there exists Sat-Chit-Anand. You can say consciousness, means that you drop into the Sat-Chit-Anand is the condition of mind, where there is no thought, but you are awareNirvichar'. This is the first stage where you jump into the super-conscious. Your first stage is 'Nirvichar (throughtless), you become thoughtlessly aware. That hap- pens when the Kundalini rises above the the 'chitta' stage. You touch the 'sat' means Agnya chakra; meaning enters into the lymbic start seeing the reality, is one thing you feel, area when your attention just touches, 'Sat point. The reality separates from Mithya' still there, but your attention has come up (illusion). At that stage you start separating like putting lime in the milk when it starts separating into curd and water. sons also, because you become collectively part. Thus, you, start feeling the 'chitta' of ocean of 'Sat-Chit-Anand in which you only feel consciousness. That the collective means you can feel another person's Kund- alini'. Thus at the first stage when you come, is is flowing. The ejo and the super-ego are and you feel the 'chitta'. There is also a part of little enjoyment. and, the Joy or Anand, that is the joy of en- You can cure people and curatives can be joying another human being starts. These done with your Kundalini in lymbic area. I are the feelings; this is how you enjoy Nirvi- am very anxious always that it should come chār samādhi. Samādhi does not mean going out of 'Brahmarandhra'. At that stage you into unconscious, but the unconscious be- start getting the vibrations, but, at this stage comes the conscious. The universal uncons- cious becomes the conscious. you are just 'Chit' only and you just touch the Nirmala Yoga 38

 In the second stage you become Nirvikalpa the Dharma itself. At this stage the subtle where there is no 'vikaipa" (doubt). At this style of things starts. Your Mooladhara' be- stage the coilective cansciousness becomes comes the chastity itself. subtler and subtler. You can understand very deep significance of things, when the reality starts becoming clearer. You need not put your hand towards the person. tanya all around us which thinks. which sitting down you know where it is, what is happening where he is catching, what is the problem, what is the collective problem. You have no doubts about Sahaj a Yoga, nor about Kundalini not about anything else. At that time you start experimenting about it and you When you get into the Nirvikalpa stage *the Anand starts settling in you, Your cons- ciousness becomes 'Anand". There is chai- By understands, organises, and loves us. All this you come to know-the knowledge part of it. Then the Anand, which is the Hridaya (Heart), starts emitting it; later on what you get is 'vilaya' (dissolved) into Anand. At that stage complete Self-realisation takes place. you can control the Sun, you Mastery of Kundalini starts- At that stage ne vou can control every can control the Moon, you can control every At that stage The "chitta", the consciousness becomes subtle. Such Sahaja yogis are care free and element. Beyond that, there is God's reali- live in a big way. They are not touchy. They have no time for outside gross matters, so their attention is always deep into the subtle sation. Sometimes when we are shallow, we part. They are the satisfied souls. But such don't act from the heart. Sometimes when you say a mantra, you are just saying it outwardly, somebody misbehaving with me and cannot you are clearing out outwardly, you are meditating outwardly. But when you say that, you are just using your right side or your left After "Nirvikalpa' the Ganesha becoms really side, but not your heart. So, what you have to do is to balance it. When you say some- a man gets into a terrible temper if he sees bear it. "Jägrut (awakened). Such a person is not tempted by any woman. another woman will exist, except for his own No temptation for thing, say it with devotion. with dedication, with understanding and try to put it in your wife where he goes on living like a celebrated heart that whatever I am saying is a mantra husband, because husband and wife are united given to me by Adi Shakti Herself, and is a mantra, very powerful. We must establish in a bond of matrimony. Otherwise he is a satisfied house-holder. The stomach becomes our 'Ishwara Pranidhan' (tuT afirata). ॐ 30 (Contd. from page 37) balanced witness composed of all three gunans and witness of all. This, in the NIRMALA DEVI JAI SHRI SHIV SHRI individual, approximates to the stage where MAHASHIV all desires completed, one may identify with SADASHIV PARAMATMANE NAMAH the collective absolute and in fulfilled joy witness the effects, elforts and completed- MATAJI SHRI NIRMALA DEVI ness of one's desire ; pure witness beyond all things and activity. JAI SHRI ADI SHAKTI MATAJI SHRI SHRI PARAMASHIV SHRI SAKSHAT SHRI ADI SHAKTI BHAGWATI NAMO NAMAH. -Dr. Rustom Nirmala Yoga 39

 THE SECOND ERA The first flower is given by Shri Ganesha At the Sahasrara Day 1984, Shri Mataji has opened the second era of our evolution. if we know how to awaken within us the Whereas the first internal growth was vertical, constructive qualities of the deity residing in through the spinal movement of the Kunda- lini, the second is horizontal and its guiding ment of innocence. But innocence is not force is the Compassion. What does this only the reflection of the purity of the child in word Compassion hide ? our Moolådhära chakra. He is the embodi- US, the wisdom which guides and the discrimi- nation which selects, but also the ability to feel Only the attention directed towards the the intensity of the present. The present is the heart allows us to approach with humility and central path leading us to the surrender, to devotion, this quality of Compassion. The devotion. This present unites innocence with Compassion is Shri Mataji and Shri Mataji is wisdom, for innocence is the force which takes the quintessence of Compassion. So the us to the Sushumna Nadi. Only in the pre- Compassion is the integrating force of all the other qualities, the colour dissolving in the infinite purity of the white all the colours, the scious. The work of our Kundalini opens the gathering of all the deities for the coronation gate to adoration and Shri Ganesha becomes of our Mother in the Sahasrara. It is the seven- the undisputed king of his Kingdom. colour rainbow, drawing its bandhan of love and protection in the heart of the children of dens the narrow road which takes us to the Adi Shakti. It weaves in the universe the Self. The enlightened attention becomes the golden threads of the Holy Ghost, letting sparkle everywhere in a cosmic glance the Divine language of God Almighty. sent can the Kundalini man"est and open itself to the unlimited field of the collective Uncon- Adoration magnifies attention and broa- eyes looking at the Creation and its Creator. The sight of the greatness of his immeasurable work incites us to sing the glory and the majesty of the Lord, to discover through "Bhakti" the Divine universe, the incomparable choreographer of the play of the planets and the varieties of the seasons. (This is the second flower). Is it possible to penetrate in the absolute Realm of the Divine Compassion ? Can we have access, with humility and devotion, to the power of Compassion ? Are we ready to shift from the mere concept to the state itself, where we become fully Compassion ? Organisor of the This discovery and the amazement at His Divine Manifestation awakens the desire to In order to enter into the state of Compas- come closer to God by respecting His Laws sion, we Sahaja Yogis, have to pray humbly and choosing the sinuous road of Dharma. our Beloved Mother to awaken within us all (This is the third flower). the constituent qualities of the Compassion. The respect of the family-laws, the control Which flowers shall we pick, how to select over oneself, the training to the discipline with skill and love the colours so that the of the body and the heart leads us to the bunch of flowers decorate with dignity and Atmā, the Self, the shining diamond, hidden behind the veils of our illusions. The Spirit light the sacred Feet of Adi Shakti ? Nirmala Yoga 40

 in our heart opens the door of the realm of through the dynamism of the acting Spirit, the Self to Shri Shiva. He immerses our desintegrate under the power of forgiveness. heart in the untouched lake of joy and beauti- Forgiveness opens the door conducting us to tude, reflecting at the surface the immensity the Realm of God. (This is the sixth flower). of the Creation. The eternal glory of the Creator fills our heart with confidence in the handling of the cosmic play. (This is the let us combine its periumes and its colours fourth flower). Let us take, with devotion and attention, care and softness, each one of these flowers, to the shape of its petals, let us tide up each The joy and the fullness of the discovery stem in a beautiful tree of life and we have of the Self gain the sanctuary of the heart, the bunch of flowers of Compassion. irradiating our Spirit with the permanent flame of the primordial Atma. We become become Compassion. As we become the the witness of the play of love, the circula- fragrance of the flowers, the light of its petals tion of peace, and we become aware of and the beauty of its corolla, in the same way enchanting music performed in the melodious rythm of the flute of God, inviting us all to become, in full detachment, the breath spread- stituent qualities of the Compassion. These ing in the flute and the everiasting notes of qualities act for themselves. without any his songs. He takes us in the collective bondages or limitations whatsoever, lost in dance of the celestial Union with spontaneity the bliss of God's Compassion. and fun. (This is the fifth flower). We become such a bunch of flowers, we we become Compassionate, without the awareness of integrating within us the con- At last, we become one with this Compas- Then the children of Adi Shakti discover sion, dissolving ourselves in the Sahasrara of the power of forgiveness. Forgiveness is the expression of detachment. Let us feave the shapes melt and from them emerges, in a fruit of our deeds at the Feet of the Lord and horizon of twikling lights and glimpses, a sea of let us strengthen our detachment, this love Lotus-petals whose extremities, crowned with which does not let the impurities and the gold and brilliants, raise towards the sky to aggressions of the outside world filter into adorn the Divine Feet of Sakshat Adi Shakti. us. These impurities dissolve themselves our Divine Mother, The colours and the -Arneau To Shri Mother I am a humble little flower blooming in your Garden of Divinity Your Holy grace and unending Love makes me grow stronger and stronger, Until I have become a great honourable tree. who manages to reach with my powerful branches, at last..Eternity 1 -Belgian Sahaja Nathalie Nirmala Yoga 41

 The Shri Lalita and Shri Chakra Centres Recently people interest in the Shri Lalita and Shri Chakra centres that reside above the Left and Right Sahasrāra. Heart respectively. have expressed an state. This itself gives the witness power which helps the attention to remain firmly in The catches of this point can be caused by a Shri Laliti is the moon and contains the false guru, notably Narakāsura. When one feels power of the Left Side, Mahākāli power. The Shri Chakra contains the power of the right side, the Mahäsaraswati Power. These points can be thought of as starting motors for our own use and experience of the left Also deep left Vishuddhi and lack of joy of and right sides. that one can intellectually know and possess God, then one can do what one likes without "fear of God. The joy goes and one feels alone and remote, and can become very gaunt. Self, is a constant cause of catch. As the centre releases in accompaniment with left Heart one can often feal a shiver and then Shri Lalita is the point where sacred union the joy is really ignited. of Shiva and Shakti, and their joy, becomes expressed within us on our level of earthly existence. In themselves they-Shiva and Shakti-are totally beyond, but they have to make themselves felt as joy in Human beings. lack of fear of God or inauspicious behaviour It is best that this is in our left side so that we before God, which causes lack of joy is going can experience the joy spontaneously and to offend Shri Lalita. Once the starter or desire to seek it. Shri Lalită is placed at just transformer is caught then the power of this level where She can divide the second desire is severely limited. Not because the and third states of awareness. Those descri- left side is not functioning, but because it is bed by Adi Shankarüchārya-Taijasa or only because of the joy of the Spirit that We emotional dreaming level and Pragnya or deep desire the Spirit, so when it goes then we for- sleep mental level. Inother words one learns to get to desire the Spirit and surrender emotional attachment to the Mäyā, As attached to sensual and material pleasures. a result we are emotionally attached solely to This is characteristic of the whole complex the attainment of joy, to God Almighty. Since which exists at the boundary between Taijasa this point is between Heart and Vishuddhi it and Pragnya states or the level of the Vishnu can work out our guilt feelings and deep inse- curity by establishing that link to Almighty God which gives security and self-respect. The spiritual goals is lacking and lathargy sets in. joy that comes, gives such a feeling that one is just not bothered about listening to any self- doubt or temptation to be pulled down. In a sense it is like a transformer which steps that divine joy, that is beyond the level of human experience, down to our level, Divine joy can only come with the full recognition of side is the Shri Chakra. Here we really are Adi Shakti and settling into a doubtless the instrument of the Divine. This provides Here we are reminded of Kärtikéya and His Rudra Power, and that he only knows awe and love for His Father Lord Shiva. Any become Granthi. When one does not want to or even dares not desire, the energy to achieve Good mantras to use would be Shri Shiva Shakti Putra Kartikeya ie. Kartikeya the son of Shiva and Shakti, (to be said II times) and the mantra of Shri Lalitā. On the equivalent position on the Right Nirmala Yoga 42

 the source of the Kriya Shakti, the power of existerice is a blessing. It is interesting to action. This is the Holy Ghost, and it is watch just to what extent we are showing here that we see the creative power of the signs of this (without feeling guilty) and how we need to be aware of ourselves and others all the time (without thinking about it). This is the way in which the Nirmala Vidyā gets expressed in actions and day to day life. pure Holy Spirit come to physical realisation. In doing Puja to our Holy Mother we paint the cross on Her Right Hand. This represents power over matter and the Ego. In order to attain this power we must become detached and also be an instrument for the power of the Holy Ghost which is trying to work through us all the time. The Holy Ghost knows everything and knows how to achieve This abuses the Guru and Father qualities, everything. Our egos know very little and will soon forget things. The total power of the Holy Ghost fully evolved is represented thing. So we lose respect for God and the by the Shri Chaka. This can be visualised by Divinity in others. Hence we cannot enjoy imagining looking down on a person sitting others and nor can they enjoy us. How can in lotus position The Moolidhära forms we be instruments for the Almighty Father the outer square and provides the person's whose every play is just for our joy, and physical and spiritual support. All the Cha- whose love and fultilment sustains us. As kras are represented as being concentrically the Shri Chakra contains the power of arranged within this square with each of their Mahasaraswati, so we enjoy our creativity. petals giving its own quality or blessing as We now become the tool of pure grace, ir opans out nourished by the Parabrahman diginity and artistic expression for everybody energy. The brahmarandhra or centre of the to enjoy. Sahasrara is represented by a point or Bindu as it is known. (A good representation of this is presented in the Theosophical Society's the Sahasrara as they pertain to our physical edition of Saundarya Lahari or Bharatiya Vidya expression of spirituality in the world. They Bhavan's Shri Lalita Sahasranama-) Causes of catches on this centre are related to Right Heart Le, feeling of tremendous perso- nal responsibility and duty to sustain others. which leads to ego and catches on Ekadasha Rudras as we think that we are doing every- Finally these points are not represented in are the Sun and the Moon so just as these two lights give their character to us as Day and Night-they don't give the quality of Day and Night to themselves. So in the same way these points within us take our inner state and give light to our physical being and joy to our Spiritual existence. When all the Chakras are fully opened and the Kundalini fully awakened, we become the perfect instrument-the hollow personality. This is a very alive and blissful state of awareness where one acts spontaneity and fearlessness, with total where our our actions are completely pure and our very JAI MATAJI Nirmala Yoga 43

 Registered with the Regiatrarof Newapaper tndes Fegd. Na. 36999 BT Letter From Switzerland We, the SY. of Switzerland would fike through this letter addressed to all our brothers shining Spint Wecould find our way to our And sisters of Indiato express our gratitude heart by exchanging with you the wods of the and deep love for the way you welcomed us in your holy land as well as in your hearts. This trip allowed us to strengthen the ties and bondages of brother-sisterhood relationship power of the inside world, the realm of our and to go in the field of the Self Here in the West, the whole society looks outside, lives for the outside world and is only interested in the superficiality of the blessed by the presence ol many incarnations matter which is a dead, outside oreation at the is from the inside and its reflection is vour Self and Teel the flow of your joy touch the deepest side of our beinas. We could feet, through you, as instruments of God, the Lord where all the deities are drowned in their own glory and eternal majesty To clase the CHrote, your country has been dead, outside creation of the who kept you away from madness and ex tremes Your cultural and eligious back- human mankind Therefore the so weak, shado wad by the clouds of monay. cround allowed you to find out the pati ol greed and lust. We, the S.Y. of the West rightaousness and dharma with less hesitation have to find our way among the tharns of and doubts than we did. You could share this hurt attention and remove the clouds with us this confidence of your way and the covering our Spirit Only the attention of our beloved Mother Spirit within You. and the Power af Her unlimited compassion makes it possible to take to the Spirit and en- joy the bliss of the Self. She builds with where only the lotuses grow and where only care and Divine skili the piotection around us their smells permato the whole atmosphere. so that we can feel Her Reaim of Peace and love residing within us. She has created this Island for us to enjoy and glorify Her, even it level of the expression of the Self darkness and contusion is at our doorstup Then comes India and our brathers and manifest devotion and adoration, praising in sisters of India. Your country projects us to full attention and joy tha glory of the Mother. the reality of a new perception of life. We discover together the priority of the inside world. While the matter overpowers the Spirit and the human beings in the west still attention is faith in the now manifestation of the Holy But above all, you were anxious to take us by the hand leading us in the tield of bliss You WEre #ager to make us discover the hectar of the "ATMA" and to bring us to the You showed us, in your own modesty how to We thank you for all these qualities of yours, for this readiness and generosity and for your concern of transforming our trip into He prevalls in India, giving an intense poten- a real dream of love. You allowed this dream tial of harmony. Even the streets, in tha jam to biecome reality and it is difficult to express of the big cities, we taund no aggression. THO harshness, but a peaceful stream of civilized people: Then how much is profitable the Mother shower upo ourselves and enlighten through words our gratitude May however the blessing of out beloved our hearts so that you wil feel His purity and with our brothers and sisters, meeting bound together by the love of ADI SHAKTI. His thankfulness in your hearts, May the atten- We discovered your sweetness, escaping the ticon of God allow us to be united with you in abrupt tongue of the western peoplo, we got the realm of the inside world where all- to know your discretion, forgetting the pom- together we can sing in one song, one prayer, pous pride of the West, we learnt how to with one smile, one heart the Majestic Divine enjoy your modesty and how to feel within us the expression of your heart Your language Name of ADI SHAKTI. JAI SHRI MATAJI Edited & Publshed by Sh. S.C. Rai 43, Bunglow Roud, Delhi-110007 E Printed at The Central ElectriE Presa, 80-D. Kamls Nagui Delhi-110007. One Foreign (by Airtmail E74 14) sun As. 9:00, Annual Subscription Rs 51.00



----------------------

1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Nirmala Yoga
Bi Monthly
Vol. 4 No. 21
May June 1984
5F
t.
5F
"Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns all the religions and
seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga-THE UNION"
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-1.txt 
 NIRM ALA YOGA.
43, Bungalow Road, Delhi-110007, (India)
Founder : Her Holiness Mataji Shri NVirmala Devi
Editorial Board : Dr. S.K. Mathur, Sri A.S. Mishra, Sri R.D. Kulkarni
Representatives
: CHERYL REBEIRO, 1267, Burke Road, KEW 3101, VICTORIA.
: ZORANA BEDKE, Gartnergasse 17/10, 1030 VIENNA.
: LORI & CARY HYNEK, 3151, Heather Street, Vancouver, B.C. V5Z 3K2.
: MARIE ROUGER, 175, Av. Ledru Rollin PARIS-750001.
ALESSANDRA PALLINI, via Monserrato 105-109, ROMA 00186.
Australia
Austria
Canada
France
Italy
M.B. RATNANNWAR, 13, Merwan Mansion, Genjewala Lane, Borivali (W).,
India
BOMBAY-400092.
: DANIEL & ROXANA DEVINE, Angel Luis De Herran, 38, 6°, 4,
Spain
MADRID-33.
Switzerland : CHARLES & MRS. MAGDA MATHYS, 5, Chemin Des Mouldins,
1256, Troinex (Canton de Geneva).
: GAVIN BROWN, Brown's Geological Information Services Ltd., 134 Great
Portland Street, London WIN 5PH.
M.J. MURDOCH, 14A Bourne Ave, S. RUISLIP, MIDDLESEX, HAH 6TZ,
ENGLAND.
U. K.
: CHRISTINE PETRUNIA, 270, Jay Street (APT. 1-C). BROOKLYN,
NY-11201.
URSULA SEHLMEYER, 191 Canal ST. #23 SAN RAFAEL, CA-94901.
U.S.A
CONT ENTS
Page
1. Ganesh Atharva Sheersha
2. Editorial
3. Mahashivratri Puja
4. The Call Sahaja Yogis (Poem)
5. Assume Your Position
6. Open Your Heart
7. Ekadasha Rudra Puja
6.
12
13
24
29
8. Vishnu-Tattwa
9. The Heart Chakra and its Afflictions
10. Shri Mataji's Advice
11. Morning Prayer (Poem)
12. The Second Era
13. To Shri Mother (Poem)
14. The Shri Lalita and Shri Chakra Centres
34
36
38
39
40
41
42
3rd Cover
15. Festivals
16. Letter from Switzeriand
4th Cover
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Ganesha Atharva Sheersha
Om Namaste Ganapataye Twaméva Pratyaksham Tattwam asi. Twaméva Kévalam Kartāsi.
Twamèva Kévalam Dhartāsi. Twaméva Kévalam Hartāsi. Twaméva Sarvam Khalvidam Brahmäsi.
Twam Sākshät Atmāsi Nityam.
Ritam Vachmi. Satyam Vachmi.
Ava Twam Mām. Ava Vaktäram. Ava Shrotāram.
chänam. Ava Shishyam. Ava Pash chất tãt. Ava Puras tāt. Avot tarāt tāt, Ava Dakshinät tät.
Ava Chor dhvät tät. Ava Dharät tät. Sarvato Măm Pāhi Pähi Saman tat.
Ava Datāram. Ava Dhātāram. Avă noo
Twam Väng mayas Twam Chin mayah. Twam änanda mayas Twam Brahma mayah.
Twam Sat chit änanda dvitiyosi. Twam Pratyaksham Brahmäsi. Twam Gyāna mayo
Vigyana mayosi, Sarvam Jagadidam Twatto Jäyaté. Sarvam Jagadidam twat tas tish thati.
Sarvam Jagadidam Twayi Laya mé shyati. Sarvam Jagadidam Twayi Pratyéti. Twam
Bhoomi răpo nalo nilo Nabhah. Twam Chatväri Väk Padāni.
Twam Guna traya teetah. Twam Déha traya teetah. Twam Käla traya teetah. Twam
Moolä dhāra sthitosi Nityam. Twam Shakti träyat makah. Twam Yogino Dhyäyanti Nityam.
Twam Brahma Twam Vishnus twam Rudras Twam Indras Twam Agnis Twam Väyus Twam
Sooryas Twam Chandramás Twam Brahma bhoor bhuvah Swarom.
Ganādim Poorva much chărya Varnā dim Tada nan taram. Anus vārah Para tarah.
Ardhéndu lasitam Tārė na Ruddham. Etat tava Manuswa roopam. Gakārah Poorva roopam.
Akāro Madhyama roopam. Anuswärash chantya roopam. Bindu rut tara roopam. Nädah
Sandha nam. Sanhitä Sandhih. Saishã Ganésha Vidyā. Ganaka Rishihi. Nich rid Gäyatri
Chandah. Ganapatir Devată, Om Gam Ganapatayé Namah.
Eka Dantäya Vidmahé. Vakra Tundaya Dheemahi. Tanno Dantih Prachodayāt. Ekadantam
Chatur hastam Pāsham ankush dhārinam.
Mooshak dhvajam. Raktam Lambodaram Shoorpa karnakam rakta vāsasam. Rakta
gandhänu liptängam Rakta pushpaihi Supoojitam. Bhaktänu Kampinam Dévam Jagat
Kāranama chyutam. Āvir bhootam Cha Srishtyadau Prakritéhé Purushât param. Evam Dhya
yati Yo Nityam Sa Yogi Yoginām Varah.
Namo Vrätapatayé Namo Ganapatayé Namaha Pramath Patayé Namasté Astu Lambodaräya
Ekadantāya Vighna Näshiné Shiva sutāya Shree Varada moortayé Namaha.
Radam Cha Varadam Hastair bi bhrānam
LE Sakshat Shri Adi Shakti Bhagawati Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Namo Namah
Read:-
t-as in Shakti and not as in talk, das in Devi and not as in dawn; E,6-as in Devi
O as in gold; u-as in Upanishad, put ; a-as in star ; a-as in among, alive
Shri Mataji has advised that it is important that everybody learns to say by heart this Atharvasheersha to Shrl
Ganesha. The English translation "To the Divine Essence of the Prayer" was printed in Nirmala Yoga, Vol.
No. 17 (Sept. Oct. 1983) issue.
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Editorial
योगाश्चित्त वृत्ति निरोधः ।
तदा दष्टः स्वरूपेऽव स्थानम् ।
बृत्ति सार्ष्यमितरत्र ।
(Yogāshchitta vrtti nirodhah
Tada drshtuh swarupėva sthanam
Vitti sarupyamitaratra)
Yoga is the control of the activities of Chitta. Then the seer rests in own form, otherwise
identifies with vrtti i.e. identification with Chitta.
All have experienced that the Atman or the Spirit alone is real. By the grace of Shri
Mataji, we know what are mind (the manas) or super ego, ego (the ahankär) buddhi (the
intellect) and Chitta. She has advised us how to stop the activities of these. She has repeatedly
emphasised the need of taking care of our attention or chitta, as it is the chitta that will be
enlightened. In succeeding paras efforts have been made to understand the chitta and its
activities, to enable it to be watched. Attention or the chitta, is the expression of conscious-
ness. Even in a child in whom ego, super-ego, and buddhi are not yet developed, attention
is active in its own way. Chitta is the medium for perception, and expression, emotions,
experience, thoughts, analysis etc, as it identifies itself with different faculties and activates
them. Thus it manifests one's individuality and with cessation of its activities, the Spirit would
shine in its own form.
Activities of the Chitta originate, basically, from right side and vary in every person, depen-
ding upon the extent to which his or her right side is active. Every person has his orientation
as an inborn characteristic towards leit or right side, in that the person is prone ta get
imbalanced towards left or right side. Imbalance may not be there, or may be there for a short
time, in childhood. However a person's response to environments and atmosphere in which
he or she is brought up, would strengthen his or her nature and the person would tend to be
imbalanced more frequently and for long time. In a right sided person attention is very active
extrovert and engaged in right sided activities.
Nirmala Yoga
2.
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-4.txt 
 On the other hand a left sided person would be introvert with the chitta moving more on
the left than on the right side. Sahaja Yogis must have observed that attention is difficult to
control when fresh and getstired after a day's work, and becomes stable soon. A tired attention
may even move towards the left invoking sub-conscious whereas it would stimulate supra-
conscious when it is fresh. One's age and physical health have also their effects on activities
of Chitta.
Continuous indentification of the Chitta with something or with an inner faculty, can
result into an inertia in which it would resist being withdrawn from, or would repeatedly
reidentify with, the same thing. This tendency, unless checked, can cause over-activity of
the particular side and consequent problems.
Attention can work simultaneously on many faculties of inner being and while associating
with one, can generate reaction from another e.g. memories of an incident of long past make
one happy, sorry, or angry, The reaction may not necessarily be the same as in the past and
may change according to prevailing circumstances, but it is always simultaneous. Once
attention identifies itself with a sense-object, it sends an information about it, which is
analysed by the Buddhi (intellect) and the reaction is produced in relation to past experience
and it's stored up impressions, thus correspondingly inflating ego or super-ego. However the
three actions take place unnoticed almost at the same time.
According to Patanjali's aphorisms on Yoga there are five kinds of activities of Chitta:
Praman (Proof) : Activities of getting knowledge through direct perception, inference and
from the experience of learned people. It also suggests the nature of searching proof for
everything and rejecting that which cannot be seen or does not agree with past experience.
Viparyaya: (Contrariety, reverse) It is accepting a wrong thing as a right one.
Vikalpa (Doubt) : Tnis activity would create doubts about tha validity or correctness of a
suggestion and bring forth an alternative to it by jumping to a conclusion which in fact may
be wrong. According to Patanjali, it is that idea or information which is conveyed in words
but does not exist.
Nidra (Sleep): All other Vrttis are in suspended state in which mind remains in subtle
seed-like form having all impressions uneffected.
Smrti (memories) : Perceived subjects do not slip away but remain stored up in the
form of impressions in sub-conscious, and become active.
If seen in the light of Sahaja Yoga knowledge, Vrttis, first three above, seem to originate
from right side. Vibratory awareness enables discrimination of real from unreal and veri-
fication of truth. The remaining two would arise from left side. Indeed, these would impede
the progress of Sahaja Yogi, in that the attention would go to left while in meditation giving
rise to sleep or memories, as we have seen earlier.
What Adi Shankarächärya says, in Vivék choodāmani, which can be said to be the cream of
Vedantic philospphy, is equally interesting :
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-5.txt 
 "The inner organs (antahkaran) are manas (mind), buddhi (intellect). ahankar (ego) and
chitta according to their respective functions; mind from sankalpa and vikalpa, buddhi from
the nature of determining the truth, ega from the identification with the body, and chitta fram
the nature of remaining attached (anusandhan) to things of interest" (verse 94). "The
inner organ has its seat in the organs such as the ears, nose, tongue, the eyes and touch as
well as in the body, identifying with them as 'I' but endued with reflection of Atman."
103). "It is the ego, which identifies itself with the body and becomes the doer or experien-
cer. It is happy when sense objects are favourable and miserable when contrary. So,
happiness and misery are the characteristics of ego and not of the Atman" (verse 105).
(verse
According to Patanjali's aphorisms on yoga, the Chitta can be controlled by continuous
practice of restraining its activities and imbibing the 'Vairāgya' (detachment), the latter may
follow without much efforts after the attention can be effectively controlled. However, owing
to it's self projecting nature it is extremely difficult to restrain the movement of attention,
without watching it. which is possible only after separating oneself from attention. Thereby
it would also be possible to observe three stages of one's involvement in sense objects, as
explained earlier, (viz, identification, & registering the impressions and reaction) and separate
each from the other two.
It is a general experience that when a person is engrossed in a mental activity his attention
dissociates itself from the surroundings and is not easily attracted by anything else. Thus, by
fixing the attention on heart or Kundalini or chakras, its vrtti would be minimised and with the
Joy of the Spirit emanating, it would get progressively stablized. Attention can also be
engaged in enjoying the Divine Bliss of Chaitanya Lahari, that beloved Shri Mataji constantly
showers upon Sahaja Yogis. Remembering the deilty, is one more way. As all the deities
are awake on their chakras, they need not look anywhere else but within themselves. Besides,
the Deity of all deities, Adi Shakti, is their Guru and Mother and fixing the attention on Her
Lotus Feet the heart is liberating oneself trom the bondages of ego and super ego and buddhi.
Attention stablized on any of these would become one with the Spirit.
However as each Sahaja Yogi still carries with him some of the habits of his past life,
although all misidentifications of life are getting dropped, at a pace peculiarto each, keeping the
attention fixed is also found difficult. Add to it the exposure to worldly matters during non-
sahaja activities that one has to do at one's job, in markets, in meeting and tackling non-sahaja
people, etc. These difficultes could be overcome by time and again reminding oneself of
illusory nature of the world and the Spirit being the only reality.
Sense-organs have no impulse if delinked from the attention and these are verily the
door-ways for the attention to go out. Thereafter follows the fulfilment of old desires and
generation of new ones. New desires cause the attention to go out to sense-object for their
satisfaction, through sense-organs. Sahaja Yoga has taught us that whereas it is incorrect
to starve the physical and mental beings of natural requirements, it is also equally wrong to
hanker after sense-pleasures. An ideal state would be that in which desires for gross
pleasures do not arise. A desire arises in the mind as thought and can be cleared off
the same way as the chakras. Shri Mataji has advised that the place of mind is between
Agnya and Vishuddhi. Thus by clearing those chakras temptations can be overcome. Desires
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-6.txt 
 that repeatedly disturb the serenity of mind can be put down by raising right side. One may
always tell oneself that body, mind, intellect, ego, sense-organs, and the fulfilment of desires
are gross, transient and false, and the only reality is Atman, Sakshat Shri Shiva, the Truth-
Consciousness-Bliss, Sakshat Shri Adi Shakti Mataji. She is 'Indriyänām Adhishthätri,
foundational for the functioing of all organs. Hence all objects of pleasure can be received
as offerings to Her.
As Shri Mataji has advised us and as everyone has experienced, that one starts jumping
from one thought to another resulting into an inertia. Hence She has further advised that
thoughts must be stopped immediately by ordering the mind to be quiet. Besides, one should
tell oneself whenever a thought comes, that it is all false, illusory, non-existent i.e. establishing
the 'Nih' Shakti.
All functions of 'antahkarana i.e. the mental faculties, including that of attention, are the
product of I Consciousness. T
from which it has derived a degree of pleasure--impressions which create an attachment for
the object. Hence the propensity to possess. All thoughts come up only in relation to
T consciousness.
T'indentifies itself, along with the attention, with the object
As Shri Mataji has advised, we should pray that our I consciousness should fade. Adi
Shankaracharya's words in the following lines are worth imbibing :
"From the enjoyment of unreal things there is neither satisfaction nor a cessation of miseries.
Therefore being satisfied with the realization of the Bliss Absolute, the one without a
second, live happily in a state of identity with that reality.
Beholding the Self alone in all circumstances, thinking of the Self, the one without a
second, and enjoying the Bliss of the Self, pass thy time, O noble soul."
How eternally gratefull we all are to Shri Adi-Shakti Sakshat Shri Atmanand Pradayini
Sakshat Shri Nirānand Pradāyini, Sachhidänanda Pradāyini. Salutations to Her again and
again.
धन्तोऽहं कृतकृत्योऽहं विमुव्तोऽ्हं भवग्रहात्
। नित्यानन्द स्वरूपोऽ्हं
पूर्णोऽ्हं त्वदनुग्रहात ।।
Dhanyo aham Krtakrutyo aham vimukto aham bhavagrahat
Nityā nanda swaroopoham poornoham twadanugrahāt (verse 488 Vivekchudamani)
Blessed am I, I have attained the consummation of my life, I am liberated, I am the
essence of eternal bilss. I am complete,-all through Your mercy.
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-7.txt 
 "SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
MAHA SHIVRATRI PUJA
Pandharpur
29th February 1984
In these modern times, a place which is
supposed to be a holy place becomes the most thought that we could have all these arrange-
unholy place, It's such a topsy-turvy condi- ments done here in such far-fetched places.
tion these days. And when we are trying to But, all these miracles come from the power
establish something very fundamental that's of God. So we are the creator of that wee
like a little seedling that has to come
out of the stones, it has to fight lots of things; miracles of God cannot be explained and
so we have to keep our brains intact and be should not be explained. They are beyond
sensible about every thing, and try to see
what we can achieve through our patience and presence of God, God can do anything!
understanding. It's very important.
lous. 100 years back no one could have
bit-very wee bit of that miracle. So all the
our minds, and, to make people feel the
He can move into all of the 3 dimensions
Today I think is a very great day, for all and also in the 4th dimension and can do
of us, because this place is the place of Viräta, whatever He feels like. That's what you
of Shri Vitthala. It is the place where Shri have seen now in your every day-to-day life,
Vitthala appeared to a devoted son and when how many miracles take place-to all of you
he asked Him that. "You better stand on a and you can't understand how it works out;
brick", He stood there. And they say that He even it works out on things which are not
stood there, waiting, Some people say that living, and people are quite amazed at how
the statue that we see came out of the Mother these things happen. So we have to believe,
Earth on this sand and that's what Pundarikāksh
carried saying that, "These are the ones is God !
who came to see me and my parents when I
was busy with them, so they are standing on
the same brick which I threw".
now, after seeing all this ourselves, that He
And He can do anything that He feels like,
and we are nothing ! We are nothing. There
should be no rationality about it-of under-
Now the whole story has to be taken in a standing God's miracles. "How can it be ?
very sensible way, with the common-sense in How could it be ?" You can't explain. Only
it. That God Himself is capable of all kinds when you achieve that state of mind where
you believe through you experiences that God
are doing some things which look miraculous is all-powerful. It's very difficult. this concept.
say, if you take about 100 year old situation It's very difficult; because we are limited
of this world. We can say that today we are people. We have limited powers. We can-
seeing many things which could be miracu- not understand how God could be all-power-
of miracles. We, who are created by God
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-8.txt 
 ful, because we haven't got the capacity. So into any number. Seven raised to power 16
this God who is our creator, who is our pre-
server, the one who desired that we should seven chakra5-raised to power 16 thousand.
exist-who is ourexistence itself, is all-power-
ful God. All powerful. He can do whatever
thousand which are the ones which watch the
Now this Spirit is watching through this
aura-watching, I am again saying 'watching
world, he can destroy this world. tt's onty through this aura . This aura is watching the
world, he can destroy this world. s only behaviour of your seven centres in your brain.
if He has to 'desire".
Is also watching all the nerves that are work-
My idea of coming to Pandharpur for ing the brain. Watching; again. But when
Shiva Puja was this-that Shiva represents you bring the Spirit into your brain. then you
the Spirit. And the Spirit is residing in all of go 'two steps ahead. Because when your
you in your hearts. The seat of Sadāshiva is Kundalini rises, Shetouches the Sadashiva and
on top of your head; but is reflected in your Sadäshiva informs the Spirit. Informs in the
heart. Now. your brain is the Vitthala. So to
bring Spirit to your brein means enlightenment first state where the watching auras start
of your brain. "Enlightenment of your brain" communicating to your different chakras in the
means: The limited capacity of your brain has brain and integrating it.
to become unlimited in it's capacity to realize
God. I will not use the word 'understand."To
"realize' God". How powerful He is, how brain-this is the second state-then you
miraculous He is, how great He is. Another is really become Self-realised, in the full way.
that the brain of man can create-of course,
sense reflects, in the Spirit. So that's the
But when you bring your "Spirit' to your
In the full way.
Because then your Self, that
out of the dead-but, when the Spirit comes is the Spirit becomes your brain. Action is
into brain, then you create Living things, very dynamic. It opens then, the 5th dimen-
Living work of Kundalini. Even the dead start sion in the human being.
behaving like living, because "you touch the
Spirit in the dead'.
First when your become realized, collec-
tively conscious, and start raising the Kunda-
lini, you cross the 4th dimension. But when
your Spirit comes into your brain, then, you
become the 5th dimens on-means, you
'brain' of a molecule and an atom is like the become the Doer. Our brain, now, for example
says "Alright, lift this thing up". So you
that controls the nucleus is the Spirit that touch it with your hand, you lift it up. You are
the doer. But when the brain 'becomes the
Like the nucleus inside every atom or a
mo'ecule, has the Spirit of that motecule. And
if you become your Spirit-we can say the
nucleus; body of the nucleus. But the one
resides within the nucleus.
Spirit, the Spirit is the doer.
Sa now you have got the attention or the
body-the whole body of the atom, then the
nucleus, and 'inside' the nucleus is the Spirit.
And when Spirit is the doer, then you
become a complete Shiva; Self-realized. In
In the same way-we have this body, the that state, if you get angry, you are not
attention of the body. And then we have the attached. You are not an attached person
nucleus that is the brain. And the Spirit is in to 'anything" whatsoever. If you possess any-
not attached. You cannot
the heart. So the brain is controlled through thing-you are
the Spirit. How ?-That around the heart attach, because Spirit is detachment. Com-
You don't bother about
plete detachment.
there are seven auras which can be multiplied
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-9.txt 
 The detachment is to be watched and seen
through 'your own' attachments.
any attachments whatsoever. 'Even' for a
second, you are not attached.
Now I would say, to understand the deta-
chment of Spirit we should study ourselves yet the Spirit-it has not yet come into your
very well, clearly-"How are we attached ?" brain of course, but still you are realised
We are attached, firstly, by our brain. Mostly souls.
by our brain. Because all our conditionings are
in our brain and all of our ego is also in our
brain. So emotional attachments are through your attention. You can do that. You can
our brain and all our conditionings are in our
brain and all of our ego is also in our brain.
So emotional attachments are through our controlling' your attention, also, you can do.
brain and all our egoistical attachments also Very simple. To control your attention you
are through our brain. That's why it is said
that after Realization one must try to practice to 'that. Try to change your priorities, all this
the Shiva-Tattwa by practising detachment.
Now, because you are realized souls,-not
So what you can do is at least to watch
watch your attention very clearly ; by seeing
where your attention is going. And then,
have to just remove your attention from this,"
has to be done 'Now'--after realization a
complete detachment.
Now how do you practice this detach-
ment ?
So the body demands comfort. Try to
make body uncomfortable a little bit. Try.
Because we get attached to somethingof What you think it to be comfortable, try to make
course through our brain, but through our it a little uncomfortable. That's why people
attention. So we try to do what we call went to Himalayas. You see, cominy to this
is to control place itself has caused us lut of problems.
your attention. "Where is it going ?" In the So going to Himalayas-you can inmagine. So
practice of Sahaja Yoga, if you have to rise after realization they used to take their body
to Himalayas: "Alright, go through all this.
ment and not the instrument of others. This Let's see how you act". So what you call the
penance side starts now. In a way, it's a
penance which you can do very easily because
now you are realized souls. With enjoyment,
"Chitta Nirodh" (चित्त निरोध),
higher you have to improve your "own instru-
is one thing one should know for definite.
Now, you just watch your attention, where
is it going. Watch yourself. As soon as you
start watching your Self, your attention, you little, try to make this body... For shiva, it
will become identified with your Spirit. doesn't matter whether He's in a cemetery or
Because if you have to watch your attention in his own Kailäsha or anywhere.
you will have to be your Spirit. Otherwise
how will you watch it ?
Where is your attention ?-is, you see, that
your human attention is hopelessly bad ! Very
So now see where is your attention entangled non-sense it is. "We did this
because of this"-there is an explanation-or
ways, to your body. So we see Shiva doesn't others have to give an explanation. 'No ex-
know attachment to His body I He sleeps planation' is needed-to be given or to be
anywhere. He goes to the cemeteries and accepted, or to be asked for. No explanation.
sleeps there. Because, He's not attached, He To exist without explanation is the best way.
In a siniple Hindi Ianguage. जैसे रामह सैसे हो रह
going ? First, the attachment is, in all gross
can never be caught up by any bhoots or any-
thing ; nothing of the kind. He is detached.
(jaisé râkhahu taisé hi rahu):
Nirmala Yaga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-10.txt 
 "Which ever way you keep me l'll remain Many people believe that if you try to behave
in that state, 'and" I will enjoy. Further in this like Shiva, you become Shiva. Many believe,
poem Kabira says "If you make me go on an that way-that if you take 'ganja" you become
elephant- means the royal conveyance | Shiva because Shiva used to take gänjā-
go; if you make me walk, I'll walk", "Jaisé Because He was 'consuming' all that to finish
rākhahu taisé hi rahu"-So 'no' reaction on that off from this world. For him what does it
point-no reaction. First-"No explanation', matter whether its gänjã, what does it matter,
give him any thing, He'll never get drunk. No
question. He's consuming' all that. Or they
Now, second is about food. That's the think, if they live like Shiva, the way He was
no reaction!
first seeking human beings had as animals.
detached about things. He was least bothered
about His
No attention on food ! Whether you have
salt or not, whether you have this or that, 'no Shiva needs is, that whatever He appears
attention on food. Actually you should not as his beauty. He does'nt need any thing to be
remember what you ate this morning. But we done.
think as to that we are going to eat tomorrow.
We consume food not for running this body
but for a sort of a more satisfaction to tonque Ugliness, Is nonsense. But you can dress
pleasures. Once you start understanding that up whatever way you like. Or, even if you
pleasure is a sign of gross attention; 'any'
kind of pleasure is a 'very gross sensationali-
zation; sensation. "Very gross' it is.
appearance. What appearance
So attachment to 'anything' is ugliness. is
are in the most ordinary dress, you look the
most magnificent person. But it's not that if you
say that, "Alright, so in these circumstances
let us go about on a one sheet wrapped
But when I say "No pleasures," it doesn't
mean that you should become serious people
and people of sort of-as if somebody is dead
in your family! But you should be like Shiva. through Spirit, gives you that power that you
So detached.
around."
The beauty that has "evolved" within you
can wear whatever you feel like; makes no
difference to your beauty, your beauty is there
He came on a bull, which was running
very fast. to get married. He was sitting on
a bull with his two feet like this, you see.
And the bull is running fast and He is holding that state only you achieve when your Spirit
the bull; the feet like this-And He's going enters into your brain. With ego-oriented
for his wedding ! And with Him are coming peaple it is more difficult. And that is why they
people with one eye, without noses, all kinds
of funny people coming with Him; and His they topple down.
wife feeling quite embarrassed at the non-
sensical things people are talking about
Shiva.
all the time'.
But have you achieved that state ? And
cannot enjoy things. At the slightest pretext
And Spirit, which is the source of joy. just
doesn't come, doesn't show. The joy is beauty.
He's not bothered what his reputation The joy itself is beauty. But, that is a state
would be, this thing... But that doesn't one has to 'achieve'.
mean that you become hippies.
Attachments come by various methods.
You go a little ahead with it, then you have
you start thinking like that, you become hippies. attachments of your family. What will happen
You see this is the problem is, that once
Nirmala Yoga
9.
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-11.txt 
 to my child? What will happen to my husband?
What will happen to my mother, to my wife,
this, that nonsense.
When you show your temper, when you show
your affection, when you show your compas-
sion, or anything.-it is the Spirit that is expre-
Who is your father and who is your mother? ssing. Because brain has lost it's identity. The
Who is your husband and who is your wife ?
For Shiva-He doesn't know all these things.
To Him-He and His Power are 'inseparable*
things. So He stands as singular personality. to give an analogy to a thing like that. But
There is no 'duality'. When there is duality what we can do is to understand it : That il
then only you say-'my wife. You go on a colour is dropped on the ocean, the ocean
saying 'my'nose, 'my' ears, 'my' hands, my, my, becomes colourful-is not possible. But try
my, my, my,- go deep down.
so-called "limited" brain-it has become the
unlimited Spirit.
I do not know, I
treally" do not know how
to understand; if a little colour, limited colour,
is dropped into the ocean, the colour loses its
Till you say 'my. there is some duality. identity completely. Think of the other way
But when I say "I, the nose"-then theré is no round. If the ocean is coloured, and is pour-
duality. Shiva the Shakti. Shakti the Shiva.
There is no duality. But we live throughout little wee bit. or onto any spot, onto any
ed into atmosphere or onto any part any
on our duality and because of that there is an
attachment. If there is no duality what is the
attachment ? If you are the light and you are
the lamp, then where is the daulity ? If you are
the moon and you are the moonlight then into the little cup of your brain, the cup lases
where is the duality ? If you are the sun and its identity and everything becomes Spiritual I
you are the sunlight, you are the word and
you are the meaning :
duality ?
atom or anything, it all becomes colourful,
So the Spirit is like the ocean which has
the light in it. And when this ocean pours
Everything ! you can make everything Spiri-
then where is the tual. Everything. You touch anything -it is
Spiritual ! The sand becomes Spiritual, the
land becomes Spiritual, atmosphere becomes
Spiritual, celestial bodies becomes Spiritual.
Everything becomes Spiritual
But when there is this separation, there is
duality. And because of this separation, you
feel attached. Because if you are that, how
will you be attached ? Do you see that point ?
Because there is a difference and a distance
between you and your's that's why you get
attached to it. But it's 'me'-who is the other?
So it is the ocean that is the Spirit, while
your brain is limited.
So the detachment from your limited brain
This whole unverse is me. Who is the other ? has to be brought in. All limitations of brain
should be broken" so that when this ocean
fills that brain; it should break that little cup
It is not that it's a brain wave or a ego and 'every bit of that cup should become
colourful. The whole atmosphere, everything,
whatever you look at. should be colourful.
Colour of the Spirit is the light of the Spirit
Everything is me, who is the other ?
brain wave.
So who is the other ?-Nobody !
That's only possible when your Spirit comes and this light of the Spirit acts, works, thinks,
into your brain and you become part and co-ordinates, does everything.
parcel of Virãta itself. Virāta is the brain, as
I told you. Then 'everything that you do: Shiva-Tattwa to the Brain.
This is the reason today I decided to bring
10
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-12.txt 
 The first procedure is to take your brain control your speech: Whether you express
towards the Shiva Tattwa by telling it "See temper in your speech or you express
where are you going Mr. Brain ? You are
putting attention to this. You are putting compassionate.
attention to that-getting involved ! Now
datach, become the brain yourself. Only the
Brain. Detach, Detach."
your compassion; or you are artificially
Try to control.
I know, some of you may not do much.
It's alright. I'll try to tell you-many a times:
I'll try to help you- but, 'most' of you can
And then, take this 'deteched' brain, 'com-
pletely filled with the colour of the Spirit. do it. And you should try that.
It will automatically happen. As long as
you'll have these limitations to your atten-
tion, it will not happen. So one has to 'really our Sahaja Yoga, where some of you may
deliberately" do this tapasya. Every individual.
So on a deeper level, from today we start
not attain. But most of you should try to go
deeper. 'Everyone'. For that you don't need
I'm with you ; so you don't need any puja persons who are very well educated or well-
-that way. But that state has to be achieved, placed. No. Not at all.
and for achieving that state, you need the
puja. I hope so many of you will become
the Shiva-tattwas in my lifetime, But don't deeper, because they are like the first roots
think I'm asking you to suffer. There is no
suffering in this kind of an ascent. If you under-
stand that this is the complete joyous state.
That is the time when you become Nirãänand.
That's the joy named in the Sahasrara, the my feet or anything much on it but is a saying
name of the joy is Niranand, and you know of Atharvasheersha, and you can put .
your Mother's name is Nira. So you become
Nirānand.
But people who meditate, dedicate, go
which have to reach, for others, much deeper,
so that others can follow.
Now for today's Puja we'll have a very
short Ganesh-Atharvasheersha. Not to wash
Shiva is all the time clean, pure, imma-
culate. So, what are you going to wash the
So today's worship of Shiva has a special immaculate ?
meaning. I hope whatever we do in the
outward way, in a gross way, happens also
in the subtler way. I am trying to push your
Spirits into your brains, but 1 find it rather
sometimes, difficult because your attention
is still involved.
One may say that "Mother when we wash
Your Feet, we get your vibrations in the
water". "...But its so detached that there is
no need to wash; at a state where you get
completely
washed, completely cleaned
out.
Try to detach yourself.
Then we'll have a Devi Pujan because
Gauri who is Virgin, is to be worshipped so
we'll say the 108 names ol the Virgin.
Temper, lust, greed. 'everything': Try to
reduce. Like in food : today, I told Warren, Then
"Ask them to eat less, not like gluttonous we'll do a Shiva puja.
people". You see, once in a while, on a day
of a big banquet you eat more, but you can-
not eat everytime like that. It's not a sign
of a Sahaja Yogi. Try to control. Try to Realization. Detachment. What is surren-
I'm sorry I cannot tell you everything in
one short speech all about this. But detach-
ment 'muststart expressing itself in your
Nirmala Yoga
11
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-13.txt 
 dering ?-is nothing. Because when you
are detached, you are surrendered, autonmati- Absolutely.
cally. When you are holding on to other
things you are not surrendered, that's all.
the 'pure joy form of the Shiva-tattwa.
I hope l've been able to explain to you
why I am here today and why today is a very
big day. You all who are here are specially very
lucky people, who should think that God has
What is there surrender to me ?. 1 am
such a detached person I don't understand all
that. What am I to get out of you ?-I am so
detached.-Nothing.
been kind to you, that He has chosen you today
to be here, to listen to this. And then, once you
get detached, you'll start feeling responsible-
So today I hope we all pray that "O Lord, Abhiyukta: Responsible. Responsiblity, not
give us strength and that source of attraction giving ego but responsibility which is execu-
by which we give up 'all' other attractions of ting by itself. Which is expressing by itself-
"all the pleasures, of joy of ego, of every manifesting by itself.
thing that we think of. but we should fall into
May God Bless you.
THE CALL SAHAJA YOGIS
The call Sahaja Yogis, wherever you
Is now its time for us all, to work collectively,
The Yoga that our Mother brings, spreadss pontaneously,
Still many seekers lost there are, who seek our Mataji.
may be,
They're lost on many pathways, yet they so want to grow,
Some are caught up in the past, or their emotions slow,
thought, and
They haven't found the here and now, Sahaja they do not know.
others are futuring, are lost in
Stll
so,
We know Shri Kalki on His steed, is riding soon this way,
And whilst for us this news is good, some others fear the day,
But still they're pitched in battle, they lead seekers astray,
Yet they must pay their karmic debt, for He will come what may.
Meanwhile, the time is pressing, let's all join in the fight,
The Deviis now with us, so, let's all push back the night,
Of Kali Yuga, the false gurus, and everything not right,
Let's spread Sahaja Yoga and enlighten with Her light.
JAI MATAJI
Nirmala Yoga
12
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-14.txt 
 MATAJI SHRI NIRMALA DEVI
ASSUME YOUR POSITION
LODGE HILL SEMINAR 23-7-83
theme of the song is like this: "The one who
has got God, or the one who has owned the
God, why should he have any fear ? The one
who moves about, or the one who goes
about- don't know what is the English
word for extensive travelling-the one who
moves about extensively, for the sake of God
and for doing good to others, but he does
not belong to this world-such a person has
no fear. He stands above.. the language,
Marāthi language, you see, is a very intense
language, I should say, and it touches many
corners when you say a word to it.
(First, Sahaja Yogis sung the following song
to Shri Mother):
Bhaiyakäyataya prabhu jächari (4)
Sarva bhi saraghi prabhu mayexari (2)
Purna jaya ji vachari (2)
Bhaiyakayataya prabhu jachari (2)
Jagat vichere upakāra sauv (2)
Parina jaju jag kāchāri (2)
Bhaiyakayataya prabhu jachari (4)
Ithi nirdhana paratra jacha (2)
Sarva dhanāchi sâchari (2)
Bhaiyakāyataya prabhu jāchāri (2)
Adhi vyädhi varana varati (2)
It's like this one is : Ādhi Vyädhi Varana
Varati Päya Asha Purusha Chări. It means : a
person of this calibre is standing 'above'. His
footis above the sickness, the mental problems,
and the death itself. But when you say that
such a person has the foot on top of this,
means also, you see, it's meaning is, that with
the effect of his foot, it can get over it. It's
a double language you see. Like such a per-
son has his foot on top of all these three
things;-is, the sickness, the mental problems,
and the death. The foot is on top of that. It
means that such a person is above this. Thus,
if you have somebody of this calibre and the
foot touches the sick, or the mentally distur-
bed people, or the dead, such a person can
raise them higher, can take them out of it.
has a double meaning
Pāya ashā purushā chāri (2)
Bhaiyakayatayā prabhu jachari (4)
Shri Mataji :
The song is written by a relation of
ours, He was a
but a realized soul, and he could never
convert to Christianity,
cope with the system of conversion and also
the way Hindus were treated among them-
selves, with the caste system, and all that.
And he has written very good, some of them
very good-hymns, I should say. This is one
of the hymns.
It
The song is something 1 really always used
to sing in my childhood very much. And the
13
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-15.txt 
 So the whole thing works out this way: protected, guided, and properly taken to the
that the person who 'belongs to God, who place of heavenly bliss. Through material
owns' the God, should not have fear, should manifestation, through mental manifestation,
nat get frustrated.
manifestation, through
through financial
relationship manifestation; through
many things, and also the natural mani-
so
I needed it very much today! Because
one side of course, is the joy of seeing so festation by which you see the sun, the
many Sahaja Yogis, real Sahaja Yogis, not
artificial disciples or dramatists, but real
Sahaja Yogis of very high calibre,-and some
of the people who stand on the periphery,
have been on periphery for such a long time.
sometimes is dangerous for me to see they
will be destroyed.
maon, the stars, the heavens, and all the five
elements help you. This state, all of you
must achieve. "All of you'. Again the word
is 'all' of you should achieva. And then only
the higher ascent works out.
Now, "how to 'achieve this state," is a
common question. Now, the first thing as
I told you today that you are 'extremely for-
tunate people, compared to all the seekers of
At this time. you need a song like this:
and in childhood whenever I felt really des-
perate, Tused to sing this song. It's a very
touching song. Alright ? But word by word the world, who have been, who will be, and
(translation)
proper mood I think, So it's touched me very were used by seekers to overcome, you don't
much. This is Ritumbharā Pragnya. I wanted
it very much today.
who are. Bacause so many things are, which
could not, l'm not in sort of a
have to overcome. For example they used
to meditate, say, on some name of God, and
the attention would go on, say-repeating the
name of, praying to that God, or thinking
about that God and all that-but the whole
So this morning I was telling you about
this new awareness-Pragnya, 'gnya' means
the knowledge and "Pra" means the awakened thing would be mechanical, and always they
knowledge, which comes out of meditation, would jump into some sort of a low type of
sustainance of meditation; and then the
Samādhi-is the effect of that. It's a kind of Those people who start taking the name, say,
a fruit ripering. When this ripens, then you of Rama, you have seen so many of them,
get the taste, the sweetness of character. they start jumping, and they start behaving
And then you start seeing around, how the in a funny manner.
Nature, the Divine, is sweetly playing with
you. This state must be achieved, For every
Sahaja Yogi, it is 'important that they must ing concentrated, would become extremely
achieve this state. Because unless and until disturbed, very disturbed, and a funny atten-
you have minimum achieveod this stage, you'll tion, wobbly-type. And when they become
ba still in a dangerous zone, which, as I told wobbly, and a kind of a left-sidedness came
you, upsets me very much.
a siddhi, so-called; means they get possessed.
So the attention instead of being-becom-
into them, they would go on enjoying it, just
So, everybody must decide to reach a state like a drunkard enjoys. Then such people
where you everyday see the blessings of God would weep, cry, enjoy their crying, trouble
manifesting. That means you have entered others by their crying, and they would not
into the kingdom of God. This is the king- have power to overcome that, so much they
dom of God, in which you are looked after, would be possessed.
*Rita mbhara Pragnya. Nirmala Yoga Vol. 19, Page 40
Nirmala Yoga
14
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Then another kind, who were say, ambi- learn to keep in the centre. But how to keep
tious people ; like we have many scientists, the attention in the centre is the problem for
and these kind of people, ambitious peaple,
they would get auto-hypnotised. Thinking selves.
no end of themselves, behaving in the most
stupid manner and also they would get pos-
sessed. And you can see people like Hitler, in a sustained way. First of all sustain it.
and all sorts. So many of these people today, Then you find that you are getting into the
who are ruling the world, supposed to be in state of Samādhi, means at a state where you
democracy or, say, communism, or anyway: start feeling the joy and the bliss of God's
most of them are actually the despots. And blessings: And then you start saying "O
that's why the chaos today. And they think God, what a blessing, what a blessing, and
like nationalistic-spirit or something like that what a blessing". Once you have reached
they would develop, and try to take the ad- that state, then you have to realize : "Who am
vantage of people's right-sidedness and 1" Who are you ? What are you
involve them into wars, and all sorts of des- the Spirit. After establishing your sustained
tructive things.
many people who are still not above them-
Now when you meditate, try to meditate
? You are
attention on the Spirit you'll develop a state
where you'll be in a complete state of witnes-
This kind of attention is possible for sing, with joy.
people who think they are vary great, say.
Hindus, Christians, mostly they are warring
people; Muslims... Nowadays the musilims are
all warring; imagine ! Among themselves. tried to have the best rooms, they must have
That's the best part of it. And the Christians
are all warring among themselves. And the have done, this, that, to get a good room.
Hindus are all warring among themselves; Those who want to have the best food, or the
tike there are only two nations where there is best time, tried to have a position, in the
Hindu majority, so called. Is one is Nepal, and mind. The best privacy for themselves. Face
one is India. And all the time they are quar- yourself. Honestly. Sahaja Yoga is an honest
relling. There is not one day passes with- endeavour.
out hearing some news of some sort of a
quarrel, because Hindus won't use the
swords, but a very cold-blooded quarrel is husband wife, they want the privacy to them-
Now those, say, who are here, can judge
themselvas very simpiy in a way. Those, who
booked ten days ahead of time, then must
You all should face yourselves. Then the
selves. This is not the time for husband wife
on.
So this is the situation. In the name of to be gathered ; or for you to talk loudly and
move about, and have fun. No, this is medi-
tative time you have come. Is very short
time, according to me; because people spend
goes left or right, and they develop those thousands and thousands of days to establish
God -again I say. Because they started on
a very different level, and their attention
siddhis.
their meditative mood. But in this speedy
So what have we to do ? First of all, by life, you have to have intensity, to establish.
So get into meditative mood. Some people
God's grace, as I told you, you all are realized
people, so your ascent is made in the centre, feel that they have come for a proper holiday-
which is a 'very, very, difficult' thing. Abso- making, and there's no sea here, so, how will
lutely difficult, no doubt. But you should they have a swim,-sort of temperament.
15
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Those who are not so badly off, would be gain something out of me, So try to settle
asking for more comfort: "I couldn't get food,
I should have this, the best to be given to my
child, or to my husband, or to my wife. My."
It doesn't matter for one day on night-you
sleep, boys together and ladies together, If to see what's the problem is.
there are children, alright. But there's no need,
for husband wife to sleep together in this time subler and subtler and deeper. And some of
when you are meditating all in one room, at
all. You have come for a very special pur-
pose here. You have paid for it ! So be medi-
tative. What I find? Everybody was talking
loudly. I didn't find them in that meditative
mood. Everybody
enjoying, here, very much nice, good, you see.
All these ideas are old ideas.
your attention with that.
I've seen people who stay with me some-
times. Sometimes I deliberately called them
Some of them
who stay with me, I find, become subtler and
them start taking advantage, taking liberties,
then taking a kind of a course of life which
is so mundane, and so stupid, that 1 can't
understand.
So this awareness should be within your
heart: that the time is very important'. You
have come here at a 'very, very' important time.
And that when you are with me, is the 'most
important time, of that important time. 'Histori-
was thinking they are
The Silence must be established within cally' this is the mnost important time. And
and without. I must say, for this,-of course,
Indians are, they know all that ; so I would
not say Indian qualities,-but Australia. Aus-
tralia, I stayed there in all these Ashrams, and
Sydney we had fifty to sixty people living Alright, you can take it. Some people think
there everyday. I 'never heard a voice or
even the movement of the foot till 1 was
there when I was there. And I was not there
for a day or so, I was there for about ten
fifteen days. Not even the movement and the
children Crying,-nothing, I never heard a
take full advantage in the real sense of the
word.
Some people think if they can get some
money out of me then it's a big advantage.
if they can take some of my time, they are at
a very great advantage. Alright you can
have it. Or some people think if they can
take advantage of me, sort of teeling ego-
pampered or something-"I'm a great lord" and
some sort of a thing, you know ; alright! But
those who are wise take the best advantage.
And the best advantage is the growth
within.
sound.
This was one of the ways you can control
your attention, that in my presence, what do
you speak ; what do you say.
know the protocol part of it. Whom are are such lucky people that before you stands
you talking to ? You can't make fun.
You can't joke. I can joke with you.
So the first awareness has to be : that you
You must
someone, who has the control over all the
centres, over all the powers, or say, who is
smile, alright. or all-powerful. How much advantage you
You
can
laugh sometimes, 'but' it has to be done with have taken of that, is the important thing.
a weight. Whom are you talking to ? The
reason is, I'm talking to you all this, because can say, in England, and in India, mostly.
it's only all this rapport, all this behaviour is And the contrast I feel, English and Indian
going to help you. I'm not going to be helped. thing is, in India the more I've stayed, they
I'm not going to be saved, l'm not going become more protocolish because they have
to get my realization. It is 'you' who have to
I stay-there are two places you
Now where
But in England I
old traditional training.
Nirmala Yoga
16
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-18.txt 
 find, people start taking advantage, making develop that, in an ego-oriented society, and
moreover if you are sort of possessed by
fun, joking. "You cannot. You see, it is
different to please, but it is different to be cunning bhoots, then God save you, and
save others. Like the cunning attention
would be that, anything you see, you start
frivolous and shallow, with somebody so
intense, For example if there's a tin-board,
and you take it under the Niagara fall, what thinking what advantage I can take out of
this. How much money I can save-you see,
will happen to the tin-board ? It won't be
able to bear even the slightest shower of it's very very quick. It would be cheaper
this way. IfI go by this way I'll save
some time. You see, save pounds, save time,
shave everything, and shave your own Self.
that.
IMER
So, despite the Ritambhară Pragnya, like
the sun today, you must have been upset
yesterday, thinking that now we have come
here, we have to live in the tents, and the atterfion bacomes cunning when you try to
water is raining,-1 know many of you must
have been. But the one who has achieved your own calculations, But if you try to save
that state, would not be : "What is there ? If your money spontaneously : actually there is
I've to live doesn't matter, I'm here for a
special purpose. As long as l achieve that
purpose nothing matters to me; what discom- time to be smart, about things; it argues, it
fort, what all these things happen to me, I gives explanations, Is it better .?"
have to achieve that purpose." Some of you
people cannot see me so closely. Some of cheap, cheap, cheap thing that you go mad
you are still not capable. Doesn't matter.
What is most important is "/ should achieve
that state, Ive come here for that. Not for
fun, not for food, not for comfort. Not for
"anything'. but for achieving a special state
where I become the Guru. What is my prepa-
ration for that ?"
So just to save, you are going on. The
save money. Save hare, save there, with
nothing to be tried, just it happens that you
save. But the cunning attention tries all the
These days it's such a cheap, cheap,
really. Like I had a ticket to go to America.
I said, 'Don't give me an expensive ticket, first
r class, or....I'll go by a cheap ticket. "So they
gave me a ticket, of such a kind that, 1 would
never have come back to London, at least for
a year, and I would have lost in that American
English, 1 tell you, somewhere. So it's so
much; had worked out, into this, into that,
We have to be extremely careful. Because into that, That kind of a 'horrible attention,
the attention of the Divine is not raising you is useless, 'Leave' it. "Forget it. With that
You are 'all the saving also I 've not seen anybody becoming
directly. It is a balance.
Remember that. And you rich.
time in a balance.
have to be 'extremely" careful how far you go
with that balance. So now, how do you
develop? .(lt's alright, don't worry, about the
sun, I like it; I only called him this morning.)...
Like you want- want to go and buy
some paint. So we buy some paint; then
they think, "Alright, if you bring it back, then
how can we return it, what should we do,
this, that" nonsense. All the time the mind
Now let us see what are the states of is on that level. I'll give you an example :
attentions are. Either your attention would be the other day, we got some paint to paint the
glass see the subtle part of it, you see, in the
gross there is a subtler indication-and the
So how do you manage this attention.
a cunning attention. Anything you see, you
see from a cunning angle; many people
17
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-19.txt 
 paint was brought. And then, it was worth
nothing, eighty "p" or
mean I can afford it. So that's why I bought. are very generous, they always have money,
If you can't afford don't buy. So they said, for Sahaja Yoga. I have had
"Now we should return". I said, but why ? problem of money
Now it's come out, now go and return, you Because they are not so calculating. To them,
spend so much petrol going there, if you
want to calculate, also its 'stupid,' and the time others. To spend for others. If they have
you will be wasted ! "No but Mother, you to come to your house : "Alright, open your
see, ultimately we save two "p"." I said, heart, now this is the time to spend !" Not
alright, now I'l save a lot of money, and I'll for drinking and self-indulgence, but for the
show you how. I took that paint and painted indulgence of doing for others; that's their
many things which looked like glass, or
which was stone-like, and the whole thing have to take to that tradition :" Oh they have
looked 'so beautiful."
Indians, who
But the people like
They
something, alright, I are not calculating, äre not so rich.
never
with them.
Never.
to do for others, not for yourself, but for
practice and tradition. So in this respect, you
come! Let's spend now what can we do," This
is the main thing one should understand,
those who
"extremely' miserly people.
So the mind that is destructive is only
calculating. If you have such a mind, know
yourself that you have to get rid of that kind
of a calculation. Cheap, cheap,
cheap, cheap cheap, things you should just worse attention, because you see, cunning-
give up. Kep in the centre. You should
not be, of course, over-indulgent. But you you, and you think: Oh I've been smart
should not be also going for, all the time, enough, you see, I ve saved two "p". But
for this kind of a calculation. 'Because you you have lost your soul. You are no more
are wasting your
attention, which very few people have in this
world. Must know that you are realized
souls, you are not ordinary mundane type of body. that keep the van down there, go by
people. You are special people and you are train, this van seems to be an horrible van.
not to waste your attention in useless calculat- And there was a lot of a, you see,
are mostly self-indulgent are
So the attention which is cunning, is the
ness also cheats yourself, it is cunning with
important awakened
a Sahaja Yogi
I'l give you an exampleII told some-
and that. explanation,
with
both
fingers
"p", and this
the
ing-money,
"Let's go ahead, what happens, let's see."
I never calculate you kow that, but I live so fed up with the bomb shells coming
very cheaply. And you can also do that.
going on like this to me, you see. And I got
on me, that I said, "Go ahead". And the
thing fell. And the thing got spoilt or what-
This attention, cunning attention, is also ever it is-It is out of order now, so they had
very 'fussy' attention. Here it starts saving
money, and then, there it is in the evening, it
must drink. So all the saving of "p" "p"
"p" "p" goes into the gutters of drinking.
Just see ! The sum total of such a perso-
nality is what ? So, this mentality has to be 'material" things and 'wardly things and all
controlled, specially for ego-oriented people that. 'But attention "itself must be saved. Ask
are extremely calculating, most surprising it
is.
to do what I was telling them. Without the
bomb shell, if they had listened to me it
would have been alright with it.
So your attention should not be on saving
a question, "Where is my attention" ? 1 ve
seen in the programmes some people are
Nirmala Yoga
18
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-20.txt 
 a very 'negative' attitude. The first are the
people cannot. Some are concentrated for positive, so called, positive, who are saving
a short while, and some get disinterested money, saving everything, that is useless.
Some are looking there, Now the second type are the archbishops of
some are looking there, So how much all that is disaster, misery, mishaps-this type
If you read newspaper every
Forget about others, morning you will have an attention like that.
All the newspaper people have that kind of
Forget about others wha are not seeking, an attention : to find where is the disaster.
I mean, in a sinister way, they feel happy
there's a disaster. I've seen people : "Oh
Mother, Icame to the seminar but the
concentratedly listening to me, but some
after some time.
attention you have saved is the 'only concern of an attention.
of a Sahaja Yogi.
they
are all garbage cleaners, you see.
who are not of your quality. but you are a
quality.
Now what do you have to save ? For Mother, I came to the seminar but the
example somebody is a king. He doesn't problem is, you see, there was no water." The
bother of two "p" being saved don't attention is in finding disasters within and
know baba, these days.i can't say defi-
nitely ! They must be also doing that kind
of a thing, you know-But what is he
bothered to save his Grace, to dignity.
For
without : What happened ? "There's a disas-
ter " What happened ? "I lost a pin".
'Absurd," to have such stupid ideas.
They will cry and weep and make everyone
But for a Sahaja Yogi the most important miserable, "Oooh I I'm so miserable." What ?
thing is : "you must save your attention "My husband doesn't talk to me, or my child
Is called as Chitta Nirodha.
is not with me",
Such people are 'extremely
Nirodha : saving,
self-indulgent as far as their relationships
of your attention. "Where is it going, It's such
a precious thing for me. Were is it running
are concerned. They make 'everyone like
that : "Oh the person didn't talk to me nicely
and he was this way and that way", They
Then how do you save your attention?
Is through concentration. Concentrate Try feel hurt at the slightest touch. And by that.
to concentrate. Don't allow your attention they think they are saving their emotions, if
to wobble. Gradually you will develop
concentration. You can watch my photo-
graph, that's the best. Concentrate, bring it
in your heart. let it be integrated in your heart.
not the material things.
Such people are very frightened people to
talk to anyone, and anybody says nice things
also, they get a fright, like this-they'll frown.
The reason is they do not know what they
have to save-is not their emotions 'at all'.
You are lucky people. You don't have to
build up a photograph, and then give it up
because it is just a "avalambana", means it's here's no need to save your emotions, you
are protected. What does it matter if some-
body says anything to you ? You are 'above
them, nobody can 'touch' you ! You are wast-
ing your attention all the time by trying to
save your emotions. There's nothing to be
frightened of anyone, because somebody is
going to say something, harsh word, that's
why you don't want to do something-such
Then the another type of an attention, what compromising people, so called, have not
we call, are the people who are sort of-take understood Sahaja Yoga. There is 'no' com-
just a dependence, and then you remove it.
It's a 'complate' dependence for you. And
a load for me-of a 'complete joy. So when
concentrating in Sahaja Yoga,
you
are
'absolutely fully' in Sahaja Yoga, then you
are controlling, saving, your attention one.
This is one type of people.
Nirmala Yoga
19
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-21.txt 
 promise in Sahaja Yoga at all, 'It is just like
diamond'
diamond, whatever you do. it's for ever and
ever. It's like that.
So the reflection should be of me, of
something that is ideal before you ; the one
that gives you energylike this song,-and
not the reflection of a miserable person. Christ
Diamond
will
remain a
So one has to understand that the atten- standing before you, as in the Sistine Chapel:
tion should not be allowed to drift into this and not some miserable skeleton, which is
kind of an indulgence which is of a drunkard.
That they are the most miserable people the images of your Mother which you should see
drunkards are,
worse than you. So create those
even
just imagine, They'll be in your emotions, and rise', This is the
always crying, weeping, and people would second type of attention you have to control.
think they are very misorable. So what you
have to save at that time is your attention. The idiotic one comes from the second type,
from such indulgences into 'useless expre-
ssion of your fear about your emotions.
See now, today they sang the song. The of the third comes from the first type, which
song did fill me ; completely brought out
some of the expressions which would not
spontaneously come out at this time, But Indian language there's only one word, spec-
the greatest thing it has done is to remind me ially in Marāthiis 'mūrkha', for them both
"that You are God. You are not to get frus- categories are the same, as if the circle meets
trated, You have to look after all of them, and at the same point. I mean English language
You are powerful when You talk".
The third one is a very horrid' idiotic one.
where the person is emotionally indulgent.
That is the "A" of the third.
And the "B"
is stupid. So we have two types of people;
one idiotic and another are stupid. But in
in some ways is good at least it differentiates
between the mūrkhas. like they can be
So such people should always keep a
mirror and feel elevated. "You are a Sahaja stupid or they can be idiotic, you see.
Yogi'. And the mirror, in the reflection,
you should see me and not yourself. Some-
times I mean are schizophrenic, some are idiots, some are
Sahaja Yogis, very much. Then I just stand stupid, some are donkeys.
before the mirror and l say: “Now, come
along. You are the one who has all the
powers, who has all the chakras awakened.
None of the Advents had this. You are the
Because of psyche being so confused here,
that psychologists have brought out : some
get really' frustrated with
So, this, the third type is the "worst, is
'most' frustrating for me. They'll stick onto me
like leeches, they'll be saying stupid things
all the time, Just can't bear an idiot, isn't it ?
They can bore a person. I mean all sorts of
one who has created this world, and You are
the one who has to save it. So now, get up. this put together is called as mūrkha.
So
Not to lose courage. Not to worry. Only in
the emotional things I sometimes feel that
now I'll have to give up some of them,
"completely'. They are my children, as a
I don't want to analyse it, it's a bit too much.
So that kind of an attention you have,
then you better keep quiet. Don't talk. Just
Mother, not as a Guru. For a Guru they listen to others what they talk, what they say.
There are some people who will just go on
comes in, within myself that. "No, even if I talking, talking, talking, irrelevently, use-
have to give up, doesn't matter, I have to lessly, wasting their energy. And such
raise, absolutely". And with that power it people are always friends of the cunning.
The cunning and such people go hand in
don't have problem. And then the stirring up
works.
20
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-22.txt 
 hand, because the cunning wants to befool joy life. There's no mobility. They cannot
someone, and the fool wants to be befooled.
Like a king will have a jester. It's like that far as their style is concerned, but not the
you see, these combinations work out. So creative of the 'joy".
for such people the best thing is-to keep
quiet, preserve all their attention, all their
energies just for cleansing. All this idiocity
will pass away very soon if you try to preserve
yourself. Don't talk. Don't say things which mely. That's how all these religions have
are stupid. Which are idiotic Just keep spread, like Christianity, Islam, Hinduism
quiet, and watch others. Sometimes such and all that, because they had a concen-
people can become very great vehicle of trated effort of fanaticism. "Concentrated'
God's power, but if they do not take to stupi- affort. If you read the letters of Paul in the
dity and idiocity.
be 'creative'. They can be creative only as
So that kind of concentration is there.
"Concentrated' effort people put in. Like
there are people who are fanatics. They
are very concentrated in their effort. Extre-
Bible, you will see the concentration of it:
You go there and you go there and establish
a church and do this and what you have done
-very organized, very systematic, absolutely
who lead a life of concentration. I mean a moving like a belt on a machine. And they
person who is working very hard-say, in the all the time have that after-effects of that
This is the type of people, three types I
would say; but the fourth type are the people
office-is a very remarkably successful person,
Charlie Chaplin has shown in
and this and that, and that, and that, and that. his picture "Modern Times"-I used to enjoy
Somebody who that very much,-that he used to tie up a
movement.
is also very concentrated.
works very well. anywhere, with a concen-
belt, standing you see, for about an hour, and
trated mind, is concentrated. A housewife then after some time when he was released
who looks after her husband and children is of the job, he used to go on like that.
very concentrated, and a husband who looks
after his family and his things in a very con-
centrated way; they know how to Daint trated, means 'stuck' onto something. It's not
well, they know how to do things, and their that, it's not 'penetrating'. Because if your
hands are deft, and they know evervthing attention doesn't become by concentration
But such people can have a very immobile subtler, and subtler, then it is not that, but it
attention, very immobile, like plastic, or you
can call it, like rubber. At the most. to im-
prove on it, we can say, like some of the things do not know, will never be saved perhaps. So
T have seen which you use for damp-proofing,
That kind of an attention, that is concen-
is getting 'stuck'. And the stuck attention is
of no use for Sahaja Yoga. Such people, I
called successful ! They'll go with all their
you see. You just apply it, after sometime badges, everything, and God will say, "Go
it's just parched, into it. They just can't get out
of it. They just can't. They can't enjoy any-
thing. Unless and until you show them a file organization, which works much faster, much
you cannot talk to them. You see,if you
have to talk to such a person, better take a thing. So these people will be just stuck
file before you. And before starting, you put people.
the file before you. If it is on the file only,
they will see. But if you talk, they say, "Make
a file". Very parched. And they cannot en- They penetrate; because they are living minds,
back gentleman, you are not yet been passed
through the customs." There is another
smarter way, and a 'very specially' 'efficient
Now there are fourth type of people which
are concentrated. They are "intense', 'deep
Nirmala Yoga
21
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-23.txt 
 really get those experiences, otherwise youll
be just a mundane type of person all the time.
And you may live with me, but you will not
have those experiences, you'll not have that
blissful feeling, nothing, that joy...
they are not dead, parched minds, they have
living mind ; they penetrate. I watch some-
tirmes, I ask some people what do you think
of a particular person? Immediatly I know,
what they talk. If they just talk in a mundane
way he is a fine person, he is a bad person,
this thing, that thing, then l know what it is
very superficial, shallow.
So this penetration starts by your medita-
tion and sustainance of the meditation, and the
Samādhi. Seed sprouting, manifesting the new
But a person who sees the possibilities and dimension within. This sort of an attention.
one has to develop, by watching the attention
problems a person is facing; then I know that -Chitta Nirodha. As you watch your money.
as you watch your road when you drive, as
you watch your child when it is growing, as
the potentialities of it's awakening, and the
he is the one who has that concentration into
the subject.
And the subject of Sahaja Yoga requires you watch the beauty of your wite, or the
the 'maximum'. 'maximum, penetration Be-
cause Sahaja Yoga, if you have understood-
/ don't know if you have understood or you going7 Where is it lagging behind? What is
are aware of it or not- happening to my attention ?
experience, and through 'nothing' else.
care of your husband All put together, you
watch yourself, your attention. "Where is it
but is learnt through
Such people have no problems. You'll be
You have to experience and then believe surprised, that such people when they want
into it. It is not that what told you is a
conditioning on your mind, nothing: you ex-
perience it yourself and learn. But those And if there is a problem, which you are
who have that penetrating intelligence, who facing all the time, and you then know, there
have that penetrating love, emotions, and is something wrong with you. Something is
those who have that penetrating movement of Wrong with the instrument. If you don't have
their understanding-they are the one who
experience, learn, experience, learn, ex-
perience, learn.
to do something, it becomes 'dynamic'. They
can work it out. Nobody has any problem.
a tin cutter and as you start using a knife to
cut a tin, doesn't work out, then you'll say the
tin-is something wrong with the tin ! Or some-
thing wrong with you ? No. It's wrong with
They do not allow their mind to play on the instrument and that instrument has to be
them : "No. No. No. This mind of mine has corrected.
got experiences of the past, and is based on
that. No, I have to take everyday a new
experience. And that experience must be with all the powers you have, with all the
'silenced" within me. Must be 'sustained blessings you have, 'and' the source of power
within me. Must be 'conditioned' within me.
When the instrument is alright, after all.
behind it, everything should work out. It
should work out. You have had experiences of
Sahaja Yoga experiences are the good things working out. You have had experiences
conditionings: "How can it be ? I've seen it, of many of miracles happening before your
I've faced it, I've had it. How.can it be. But
for that, also to have the best experiences,
first condition is of Ritambhara Pragnya
eyes, but still the attention has not settled down
with those experiences. Still gatänubhavas',
the old experiences-continue,
means
where you should be of that level that you old identifications continue. You still con
Nirmala Yoga
22
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-24.txt 
 should gain something out of'me. That you
should prosper out of me. Like the Mother
Earth feels so elated to see Her manifesta-
Changa everything Become a fresh new tion into these beautiful green trees. It's like
person. You are blooming out as a flower, that. She is nothing. We stand on Her. We
and then as a tree and assume your position. walk on Her. Where do we see Her ? But
tinue with that, and the filth of that is still on
your being
Assume your position, as the Sahaja yogi So
She sees Her, in those. It's a same sort
this attention must be brought round. You of a situation. She is the one who changes
judge yourself where is your attention ? And
Ritambhara means the one,
what is the point of understanding ? What is the attention, which changes the seasons.
all the seasons.
the measure of understanding?
Ritu means the seasons. So all the seasons
are created by Her, just to please us. But
It's very simple. 1 , what do we do, to please Her ? We exhaust
because I am the attention: It I'm pleased Her torture Her, take out everything from Her,
then you have done the job. But I can not
be pleased by mundane things, by any argu-
ments with that, but only by your ascent. So
you judge yourself on that.
have to be pleased,
pollute it, do all kinds of nonsensical things.
-
And then She gets angry.
The same thing that She is Love, in the
Whether you give me a flower, or anything same love, She becomes angry. And then
l'm only pleased when the esserice of that you have volcanoes and you have earthquakes,
doing, has that height, has that special mant- and all kinds of things happening to you.
festation. You say "I love you very much,
Mother". Alright, you say. But I must see,
that love that you are saying, or doing, has
that essence that gives me joy. It's such a
mutual thing between us, you can't imagine.
1 can't live without you and you can't live and others will be ' So
without me. Its 'so' mutual. But. from one
side it is 'absolutely hundred per cent bene-
volent. Whether I get angry with you,
whether I scold you, whether I pamper you, fifteenth day. And the fourteenth day, one has
whether I say "Don't do that." if I tell you to become a killer. Killer of all that is igno-
"Don't come very close to me, keep away"- rance; of all that is stupid. idiotic ; all that is
"anything that I do like that, is benevolent to cunning and all that is emotional. Kill that
"you.
But of course your Mother takes time to get
angry. Takes time. That doesn't mean 'you'
take time. Look after yourselves. is very
important. Suddenly' you will find elevated.
Some people will 'just' elevate themselves
completely cut out.
be careful. I'm warning you.
So today is the day, previous day to this
part. Become a Sahaja Yogi, tomorrow, to
receive the blessings.
And to me the benevolence is only one,
that you should be emancipated. That you
WERHE
May God Bless you.
23
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-25.txt 
 Her Holiness Mataji Nirmala Devi
Dorset, England 2.8.1981
"OPEN YOUR HEART"
What a beautiful place we are all in. Its See how She has worked very hard. She has
a real blessing of Sahaja Yoga for all of you
to relax. Relax well, because in relaxation created
only you realise that we are now realised
souls, that we have entered into the kingdom beautiful nature.
of Heaven, that we can see the beauty
that God has Created
created all this beautiful universe, She has
you also, She has created the
Kundalini within you, She represents the
In Her company, in Her bounties when you
are drenched and you all meet each other, you
see for yourself how She blesses all of you
all around us, that
we have become sensitive to His grace and to
His kindness and to His love."
It's a seminar that you have arranged and Just the same There is no difference between
I am very happy. I always wanted you to
arrange seminars and that you all should
meet together and live together and understand
each other.
you and any other person for Her, But those
who are sensitive, are subtler people, enjoy
Her much more than you people do.
Now the problem that exists in every
The seminars, on the gross level they work country has its own style I have seen, and in
out many things no doubt, but on subtler this country we have a style of problems
levels seminars of the Sahaja Yogis mean a
lot. It means that strong nuclei are being
consolidated in various places in a country
which comes, gradually it is changing it's
form. In the beginning I found that people
were over-aggressive, sceptical and also
and these strongholds, or the strong muclei, could be rude sometimes. It's alright. It
Now, gredually,
makes no difference to me.
which are created like this can form a mecha-
nism by which beams of strong vibrations can
they've started changing over. Now they're
flow or can be thrown all over the place. It becoming aware of what they've got, what
is a very great task to build up these divine role they are playing, how important it is to
be an Englishman (when I say Englishman
I mean all the English people, not Wales or
anything different) and how they have to be-
come part and parcel of the Heart of the Uni-
I wonder how many of you really
has created living deities to show that God realise how important it is to be an English-
exists, that you can now test their vibrations and man. That everything that happens in this
mechanisms in different parts of your coun-
try.
For example Mother Earth has done Her
job. Where ever it was possible for Her, She
verse.
Nirmala Yoga
24
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-26.txt 
 the vocabulary of Sahaja Yogis. What is there
to be afraid of ? Some people say that this
is said because we do not want to hurt other
For example, if this wed-
country circulates.
ding had taken place in any other royal
family it would not have circulated so much.
Everything circulates from this country. May people. There are so many other ways of saying
be you may not think much of yourself. You things without hurting others.
may think that what is so great after all,
England is like any other country! But why do
people accept so many things from you ?
Now what is there to be afraid of ? A
man who is weak cannot love. Only a strong
person can love. If you talk of love, first of
all see whether you are strong enough to love
Like even a monarchy. I mean, most of or not. Loving is not an easy thing, even
carnal love, even loving your beloved in the
rchies and in this country it exists and it has a ordinary sense is not an easy thing. You have
to have a very strong moral concept. Other-
monarchy is still lingering here in a very proud wise every third minute people start changing
way. Then the marriage itself. The marriages their loves. That kind of a love has no
of royal families are already tested. protested meaning. You have to have very firm ideas.
And Not only ideas in your brain but built within
that such an auspicious thing should take place you. Very few people can have a lové as
Romeo had, I can tell you this. It's easy to
many countries should watch it and appreciate think that you are a Romeo. It's different.
it and ENJOY it of all the things, is something You can think you are the King of England,
surprising. It transcends all rationality, all it's alright, but you don't become that way.
understanding of even logic. We can say, So to be Romeo itself you have to have
a tremendous
the countries have thrown away their mona-
respectable position and the symbol of a
and detested and nobody is interested.
here, and that everybody should see it, so
"What is the logic behind it ?", but if you are
a tremendous character,
enjoying you just want to enjoy, you don't sense of sacrifice and love and under
standing of what you want. You want
to love thats all, nothing beyond or before. I
mean a man, when he falls in love, he falls
want to think about why you are enjoying.
So one has to understand that you are part
and parcel of the heart of the universe. One in love for ever and ever and ever. If he falls
thing is essential that you have to be very flexi-
ble people. You have to have the flexibility of that experience also is a saort of a forbidden
the heart cells. Now heart has to pump. It fruit for most of you.
has to be strong. and surprisingly the lion is
your emblem, so you have to have a lion's
heart. And lion's heart means he's not
in love many times it can not be love. So
So to love God is even more difficult with-
out seeing Him, without knowing Him, with-
out knowing His bounties. Without getting
afraid. He's the king and he lives like a king. realisation it is very difficult. But today that
like a lion. And Leo as in astrology is a man
who is extremely generous. Lion-hearted.
Not afraid of anyone. There should be no
fear. But English language if you read any- yourself. If you have made mistakes you
one or if you listen to anyone, every third have to say, "Yes, I have made mistakes. So
sentence he'lIl come out with the words, "I'm what."
afraid.." "I'm afraid to say..." "I'm afraid this
is so". These words must be dropped out from yourself also. Trusting
is not the case. But still you have to have
no fear in your mind. Trust. You trust your-
self and trust others. First of all try to trust
Trust yourself that you
correct
can
doesn't mean
"The wedding of the Prince of Wales with Lady Diana, who is a realised soul.
Nirmala Yoga
25
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-27.txt 
 blind ego-trip. It does not mean that. It people feel bad, or some of them accept it.
means that. "Yes, I can correct myself. 1 can If you are seekers and if you are ascending
improve. I can do better." Some people think you are definitely unique, you are specially
that if you trust yourself then you should blessed and you have to pay special atten-
never confess anything that you have done tion to yourself. You can't afford to play
wrong. That you should never say that it was with yourself. So you have to discriminate
wrong and l can correct it.
ideas. You have to trust yourself, saying"Yes, I
have made mistakes. I have been doing wrong.
I've been faltering, but l can correct. I have that throwing you in the air and again you come
strength within me. Ican rise above all these back with a bump and break one of your legs
things. I
can use to my advantage."
These are wrong between ego-or ego-trips as they call it-
and ascent. Ego-trips bring you back with the
worst hurting. It would be something like
have that thing within me that I or something like that. That's what an ego-
trip is. But ascent is wher you really rise
above Not only that you rise, but, with you,
Trust yourself. Trust that you are realised vou make others rise. In your ascent you
souls. Trust that God loves you. develop tremendous powers. The higher you
chosen you to be His instrument. Love your- ascend the better it is. But it's not by think-
self. You are unique. No doubt. As it is, ing that you are perfect, that you can ascend.
human beings, every individual is a unique
personality. But after realisation you are defi-
nitely unique. One has to use discretion The teacher was very kind to his student and
about understanding. It never means ego
trip. If you cannot correct yourself, you are
not master of yourself. Yes, you are not per-
fect. You are unique, but you are not per-
fect. You have to perfect yourself.
He has
There's a story of a teacher and his student.
he would come and show him his creations.
He was very kind to him. And every time he
would say that, 1 have done this well, and
this is the thing that I have not been able to
do, so will you please tell me how to correct
it." And the teacher would say, "Yes. Good.
These words can be very confusing. When You'd better correct this part. Then do this."
I say you are unique, immediately you think And one day the student came and said,
you are perfect. These are two words. Uni-
que and perfect. Somebody can be unique, "You are no more a student now.
but he can have imperfections. So you have
to perfect yourself and trust in yourself that
"Now this is perfect.". and the teacher said,
No more.
There
You are not to come to me anymore.
was another student who was coming every-
day and corecting himself and he told his
perfect yourself through your
can
you
Kundalini awakening, clearing your chakras, teacher, "Today I think I can teach others but
by understanding yourself you can perfect
yourself. You have to perfect
not yet perfect." and he said, "Alright, you
go and teach." Tne third one was a student
who came and he was always trying to see
I have so many ways, I tell you directly, what was the mistake and how he had to
sometimes indirectly, through friends, some-
how I point out that this is the problem with assiduously and he came to his teacher one
you.
I'm that part within you which is discretion. any more now." He said, "True. Now you take
When you do not understand your own dis-
cretion I try to give you the direction by this
way or that way. But people feel hurt,
correct it and he worked very hard, very
You should think that I'm within you. day and he said, "Sir, I will not trouble you
my seat."
So this is what one has to understand. If
you ascend, you will become humbler. It is
Nirmala Yoga
26
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-28.txt 
 just the other way round that people under- own heart, first of all. Of your own heart;
stand. When they ascend they think they without insincerity, cunningness. As l'm
have achieved some special powers. I don't saying this you will realize that all Englishmen
know, suddenly self-certification starts, you believe in the contrary. Nowadays, not olden
see, "I'm very good in spirituality. I'm very times but nowadays.
high up", and all that. This self-certificate
starts and then it can reach such a polnt Trust others, Talk to everyone with an open
Clean heart, Transparent. Open heart.
where suddenly you find that you are on the
This kind of thing is not the way
earth again. heart. Trust others. Why do you doubt ? If
it works out. Actually there are certain you do not doubt yourself you will not doubt
others. What are they going to take away
from you ? What have you got? Nobody
can take away your nose, eyes, nothing. It's
all quite intact. It's all nicely glued down so
nothing is going to disappear. How are they
going to hurt a person who is a realised soul ?
If your heart is clean you can see the other
The second quality is that how much you person clearly through and through. Inno-
qualities that show on people who ascend.
The first thing is their collectivity. How
collective you are. How many people you can
get along with. At how many things you can
laugh. That is one of the biggest qualities.
accept another's domination who cuts down
cence is such a powerful thing. Such a
your collectivity. You must have your per- powerful thing that even a glance is sufficient
sonality
allow others to cut your personality; say for
example there's a boss and you are an emp-
separate from everyone. If you
to kill a satan. Purity of heart.
Actually, when the heart becomes impure
loyee and both are realized souls and one of the impurity fiows down to other places. It
themi is ascending then he becomes humbler, is not the other way round. It is from the
he becomes better. They have a congenial heart. Many people believe it's the body
that becomes impure. 1 think it is the heart
which becomes impure and then it starts
trickling down and then it is residual there.
relationship. But to a point. He will never
compromise with his boss when it comes to
his ascent, to his collectivity. to his giving, to
his doing things for others. On that point he'll
never have any domination.
it settles down there.
So have a clean open heart like a child's
How much you feel responsible about heart. Open heart. What is there to be
afraid of anyone ? What is there not to trust
What is there to be angry with
anyone ? Talk to everyone, shake hands
Every cell in the heart has to be extremely with everyone, be nice to everyone. On the
sensitive, and extremely obedient to the Self, way you find somebody with difficulty. Give
him a hand. If someone cannot sit properly
or has a problem you try to remove the pro-
blem. if someone cannot stand, give the
place. Try to give from your clean heart. If
your heart is not clean it can never give.
yourself is the second point. How much you
are responsible to be there, to be a cell in the anyone?
heart. Any cell that fails, fails the heart.
to the Spirit. It has to activate, work harder
when there is need or emergency, and it
enjoys the most.
And no impurity should be allowed. The
third point now. As 1 told you, first
collectivity, secondly yourresponsibility
and third point is purity, Purity of your subject. There's no broom available for that
Now, how do you clean the heart is the
Nirmala Yoga
27
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-29.txt 
 in the super-market ! There are no Fairy times you might feel I am publicly saying
Liquids or anything to wash it down ! But things for you. Maybe your images are being
there is a way.
ruined by that, or whatever you may think.
That's not the way. It's for your "hita" (Iga),
Allow your heart to be drenched in your it's for the well-being of your Spirit and that
Mother's love. Just allow. See how much
She loves you. I trust you. People laugh at
me sometimes. Some of these saints who
are supposed to be very great people. They yourself, trust others, other Sahaja Yogis.
can't understand how I trust you. They say "Love thy neighbour as thyself." Who is thy
that, "Oh, these are all lost races. These are
horrible people. How do you trust them ?
They are not sanyasis, they are not sadhus,
they are nothing. They are ordinary people." you, you have to trust me and it will work
For them your value is nothing. If you go to
them they will make you stand on your head should not worry whether it would be abso-
for three mnonths. For three years they may
hang you in a well. I don't know what they knows. Whatever your heart will do in it's
will do to test you.
is the most difficult job.
With all this trust in your heart, first trust
neighbour? It's a Sahaja Yogi. Stand by him.
And trust Your Mother. As I have trusted
out. Open your heart to this trust You
lutely respectable or not, because heart
genuine form will be respectable because
there resides your Spirit which manifests.
But I trusted you the day I saw you: The That will look after it. By outward forms
day you came to me l trusted you, and I
worked on you from the vary first day, know- It is that trust in your loving heart that is go-
ing what you are, but I frusted your Spirit, ing to do it.
that it would shine. In the same way, trust
whatever you try it's not going to work ot.
It doesn't matter. You see
brought some flowers. There were
foday she
We laugh at others. I have seen Sahaja
Yogis laugh at others, make fun of them
when they come to me. Trust them. When supposed to be weeds according to her. She
you trust them you will respect them also.
some
went to the station and there she was taking
some flowers out and the station master and his
wife were very sweet. They said, "Go ahead,
So you have to believe in yourself and
enjoy the way gently you ate sweeping into They are only weeds. You can have them."
the current of your Mothers love. Just enjoy And they are so fragrant! One of the most
t. Like a flower that falls into the current
that
and flows and enjoys all the beauties of that just weeds. They do not conform to any
current. In the same way you should enjoy. formal flowers or anything but just a few
When that enjoyment comes into you, you
will start trusting. And trust your Mother.
fragrant flowers I have ever seen. They are
flowers attached to other flowers were most
fragrant.
I try many things to correct you: but trust
in one thing, that whatever I try for you or do
anything, anything Imay do for you it is just to
cleanse you. That's my job. Maybe some-
Love gives all the sophistication and the
fragrance and the breeding which is required.
Not talking of love, but really loving is the
way. Iits most enjoyable.
28
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-30.txt 
 Her Holiness Shri Mataji
Ekādasha Rudra Puja
17th September 1983, New York City
to by which he kills people. So before killing
according
a day,
So today is
the Indian calender, called as Parivartini them and finishing them off, in the compas-
Ekadashi. Now, today is the 11th day of the sion of your Mother, we have to first try to
moon. 11th day is Ekadasha. Also, in
Sahaja Yoga you know about Ekadasha Rudra,
which is here, (forehead), which will ultimately over. So these 11 very great destructive
destroy all those things which are not required powers willI be used by the Kalki, the One who
anymore. That is Ekadasha here, that is the is going to manifest on a white horse. Before
11th. But today is a special day. Where we that, today is a very great day that these powers
are going to use the power of Ekadasha to do we are going to use for transformation,
the transformation. It is not for destruotion
but for transformation. Is such a day to be
here in New York where we use the destruc-
tive powers for the transformation of the uni- know that there are destructive powers mani-
verse. So it's a very great day today that we
are going to transform people by the mani- That we'll be destroyed so we must take to
festation of the Ekadasha's powers. And they God. That's one of the ways. Secondly, if a
are 11 placed over your forehead here, and
you know how they work out. So that these
10 come out of the destructive powers of the method. And there is no method available
Void. Void has cot 10 destructive powers
transform them. If they cannot be transfor-
med then its alright. then let Ekadasha take
Now how can destructive powers be used
for transformation ? First of all, when people
festing, they start fearing. They get afraid.
person comes to know about any destructive
disease like cancer, he wants to find out a
on a human level. So then he thinks of God
Out of those 10 the destructive part
and wants to come nearer to God, The fear
brings him closer to God. He depends on
also.
settles down here. So when a person is on
his destruction, say for example a cancer has God more than on his rationality, than on his
set in, then you might feel a throb, here at the ego, or superego. And he wants to depend
apex of your Void, the throb. And it doesn't on God's powers to cure him or to save him
logically mean that if there's a throb there's a from this destruction. Because he is now on
cancer, but if there's a cancer there'll be a
throb in here going on. That means the force
of life is trying to push it. But the obstruc- has to be destroyed. So, this is another way
tion there starts accumulation on both sides people take to transformation, change their
and in the centre is the centre of Vishuddhi, attitudes, change their value systemi.
of the Virāta. Shri Krishna has become the
Viräta, the Great Primordial Being.
So this is the 11th power of destruction.
He has the power called "Samhāra Shakti"
the brink of destruction, as soon as cancer is
setin he knows that there's no end to it and he
I've known of many husbands and wives
, who got cancer and their counterparts be-
came very mild. gentle, kindly, romantic.
Read Ekadasha as Ekadasha
Nirmala Yoga
29
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-31.txt 
 There's a
They tried to give all the love, all the protec- becomes too big, thick, jutting out.
tion, all the good things to a person who is character l've seen like that, I think it is Fran-
going to die now of Ekadasha. So a kind of kenstein or someone. Is it ? Frankenstein;
a transforming temperament starts coming in a
man that he sees that a person with whom Frankenstein character. Is all this is swollen
he has lived all his life is now going to be no
more. So a kind of beautiful feeling towards really the one that happens to human beings,
the person, of giving whatever you have
beautiful within you, starts. And that's how
people develop a new kind of personality
which was never apparent before. So all
harshness drops out.
starts pouring in. So the compassion in a
man is awakened by which he gets transfor-
med. Many people who lost their relations.
kith and kin, become much more gentle, kin- day they don't eat anything at all. But you
der, because Ekadasha has expressed its awe.
And also another kind of a fear comes into the Mother, because. I'm the Ekadasha Myself!
mind of the people, that tomorrow this can
happen to me also !
about it." So at this time Sahaja Yoga helps
them a lot. They come to Sahaja Yoga be-
cause such an emergency is created within
themselves and thus they are thrust for their
transformation to Sahaja Yoga.
yes, that has come from the Unconscious;
up, jutting out, and this place like that. That's
when he becomes a devil himself.
So this is how the Ekadasha works within
us, to destroy our negativity within us. In
India, so many people fast on this day, for
atonement, on 11th day is very common: "You
must do Ekadashi". All the Hindus and all
these people do Ekadashi.
And all the sweetness
That is, the 11th
shouldn't do it after the Advent of your
So why should you do it now when I've
come ? It was done when I was not here, just
to call me, so now I'm back here, you need
not do this anymore, the penance of Eka-
desha. But you have to be careful.
SoI must do something
Now Ekadasha comes, as I told you, from
the Void. So firstly, it comes when you
But there's another subtler way that this accept someone as your guru, say, who are
destructive force helps : by destroying all that false, who are anti-God, anti-Christ. So you
is negative within us. Because unless and develop a kind of a thickness on right side, it
is the person who you are worshipping as a
cannot become people who can enter into the guru, respecting as a guru, who is a guru to
kingdom of God. We have our ego, we have you who is not really a guru, so you develop
a superego which shows on this (right) side,
here. When you have your ego very much this part. Now the other side of it shows when
a person says "I'm my own guru, I'm practis-
coming out on left side, a very big one, here. ing my own meditation, I've nothing to do
Or if you have a super-ego you can see another with anybody's guidance, I'm quite alright as
big thing jutting out on the brain on the right am". Such a person develops the left
half. So you have (left) half developed be-
cause of that, and this half developed because
of the superego that you get from these false
also you might get a blob here. So you and fake gurus. Now what happens some-
times that when you get involved into this
kind of superego behaviour, at that time,
it so happens that you might take over
from there and start using it for your ego.
untif that negative is destroyed within us, we
our super ego and both can be represented
great ego, then you'll find a big blob-like ego
side. So on both the sides you might get both
the things if both the sympathetic are over-
active. If you are not a very collective person
might get all the thing filled up with your
ego, superego and this Virāta centre again
blown up in a way that a person develops a
face like a monster sometimes ! This portion
Nitmala Yoga
30
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-32.txt 
 That's the worst time for it. At that time going to this guru, still my vibrations are there,
what you do is to act like the devils yourself. I'm having the same type of licentious life,
And once you start doing that, your Ekadasha still my vibrations are there." Now it goes a
is completely finished. And then I
think it's easy to get rid of it. It's very diffi-
cult. Like if it is one-sided it's much easier.
don't very long way. the vibrations are still there.
But suddenly they stop, and you find you're
out of the bounds. You're thrown OUT, com-
pletely. But you do not feel how you're
thrown out. Gradually you find, like a tan-
gent you go out. And so ane has to be care-
ful about it. So within us lies a force which
is centrifugal and a force that is centripetal.
So
So today is the day which is called as the
Ekadashi which is going to bring the trans-
formation. When you are transformed, so
many things are automatically destroyed with-
in you. As you can see very clearly that all
your misidentifications drop out. The mis-
identification that "I'm an American, I'm a
Christian or I'm a Jew. I'm this, I'm that"-all
these false misidentifications drop out and you
become a naked human being: first of all you
are a Human Being. And then a super human
being, without the ego, WITHOUT the ego. what vou want. That's the trouble with
So your ego is destroyed, your superego is Sahaja Yoga is and this is the loophole of the
destroyed, your conditionings are destroyed Sahaja Yoga whichI have to tell you as a
and all your false ideas about knowledge are Morher that it's very anxious to throw you
destroyed. So what remains and emerges
out is the reality. Now see when a flower
becomes the fruit. Everything practically
drops out of the flower, we can say. Like
the calyx is dropped out, then the petals are
dropped out and then the epicalyx is there, marriage, then there should be no marriage.
that is also dropped out. But what remains
is the seed, actually if you see. Around the
seed all these things developed and the fruit
remains, the rest of it drops out. In some
fruits some part is used, in some fruits nothing hody a present, you hide it, you see; keep it to
is used, a very little growth comes out as fruit
and becomes a fruit while the flowers are
there. So in us also whatever becomes
Spirit, remains, The rest drops out. And that
is what it is when we call it the Ekadasha
which brings forth the transformation. And
one has to understand we have to drop out
many things.
Ekadasha's force is cenrtifugal, by
which you are thrown out. Sahaja Yoga
doesn't fall onto anybody's feet. Doesn't
anyone.
anyone, doesn't flatter
request
If you want to be there you have to be
POSITIVELY there and if you don't want
to be there it throws you much faster than
out. I'll tell you when Christine-just now
she told me-got engaged to Micheal, half of
them were thrown out.
Because they had a
conception that you must have a romance before
marriage. Without a ronmance, if you have a
I don't know on what conception it is based.
But if you have the romance before the
marriage, what's the fun of having the marri-
age?I mean it's like-if you have to give some-
that date, and give the surprise to the children!
In the same way if you have the romance al-
ready done, what's the marriage ? What's the
celebration for ? It's absolutely illogical,
There is no romance in such cases. Actually
you have seen that after the romance, the
marriage and then the divorce. It's always like
that. Because you become stale, and you find
Some people l've seen they say, "What's that the romance you had before marriage was
something, a fantastic fantasy that has drop-
there". Some say, "What's wrong ? I'm ped out, and now after marriage there is nothing
drinking, still my vibrations are there. I'm left to enjoy so you are fed up and next month
wrong ? I'm smoking, still my vibrations are
31
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-33.txt 
 body has place in the society. But in England
But the
you are now in the divorce court.
marriages that skip this without the romance when we went first we were shocked ! They
kept all reserve for a particular day. Just for had no shame about this, they said," I'm al-
that day when you are going to have the real ready divorced thrice and this is the fourth
romance, and real feeling of oneness, every-
thing. In India it's a very big thing, you see, Oh God ! To us a divorce means worse than
the first night of the married people. And that's leprosy ! "Why are you divorcad ? What's the
why your marriages-lost.
would say I'm an old woman of 60 years my
husband is 63 years and you can see how
romantic he is still. You see the romance
never finishes. Because it starts on the auspi- than you people as marriage because we can
cious day with the sanction of the collectivity produce much more children than you. And
everybody taking interest in that romance. It children only want to be born in India not
is such a big thing to be married, all the anywhere else. You'd be suprised. That's
people enjoying the marriage, and enjoying.
woman I'm living with." So shocking for us,
Such
problem ? How can you be divorced ?
-
an auspicious thing is the mnarriage ! How can
you do it. is such a big fall I" And that's
how it works out. And in no way we are less
marriages-lost. You know
the problem we are facing, Our population
problem comes from the point that the
So now this kind of thing when happens marriages are so successful, the people are so
to the people who are western people think peaceful that children hate to be born in
romance is very important. But I don't think
one can learm anything from the marriage because you don't know where will be the
system of the western people. Because all
their marriage systems absolutely dwindle
down. There is nothing to be learned from them but what to do 7 Children don't listen, they
as far as that is concerned. We can learn don't want to go to all such places where
many other things, for example we can learn
how to operate a camera.
marriage is better you learn from Indians. high quality, they do ;I mean, they have to be
They have a very solid system of marriage. like devils to get into this thing so they may
First of all the way they are trained from child- try. Or maybe real devils-to take advantage
hood how to make a
such a lot of importance is given. Then with-
out the horoscope we'll not marry, without the of their parents, want to be born in India.
auspicious day they won't marry. Everything And that's why recently we find that India is
they work out in such details so that the
marriage cannot fizzle out. Moreover it is
worked in such a collective way. For example,
supposing my husband wants to trouble me.
Say for example. So the sister of my husband shocked them because they couldn't under-
will take him to task. Everybody can inter- stand, there has to be a romance, and this
fere if they try to do anything against the and that.
marriage. Everyone in the family will be
after the person who tries to break the marri-
age. And so everyone knows that I'll be left that should be there that we should not allow
high and dry, you see, if I have a divorce. No
NIGHTMARES of NEW YORK. Naturally,
mother tomorrow, where will be the father.
Now we are blamed for a high rate of fertility,
there's no stability for them to exist. Especi-
ally the realised children, if they are of a very
But to operate a
marriage successful.
of it. But normally, people who want peace
in life, who want joy in life, and want the love
growing so fast in population that we don't
know what to do.
So this marriage system came in which
Now the more understanding of Ekadasha
it to be built within us in any way, because
Nirmala Yoga
32
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-34.txt 
 these are self destroying things. It starts with
permissiveness should be allowed, and all
doubting. When you start doubting Sahaja these things should be allowed. And now
Yoga, the build-up starts. And, the doubting you have A.I.D.S. You have AIDS now here
already operating. Now the AIDS has given the
fear of the Ekadasha. Now have it! What's wro-
ng! What about that? So this awe and this fear
is very important. Is an extremely important
wood means this wood. Touch wood means thing that you must have the awe and the
fear that God is Almighty, and we are nothing
before him. Here we have to remember that
starts building up throughout the "medha"
-is the plate here, you see. And it can
become a big plate here. Like today I saw
that lady saying touch wood, you see touch
there should be no wood in here any more,
you see. Or you can say touch stone. If you
say something like a bragging you can say no,
no, touch wood. I am not meaning that.
People are quite conscious, unsconciously they ness that He is the Whole and we have be-
say, but they are quite conscious not to say
something that would sort of give an idea of are going to overcome our Ekadasha. So
postpone nature, or something bragging, or today / bless you all with the power of Eka-
something big so that it may go wrong. When dasha which is going to transform.
they say touch wood, this is the wood. You
say touch, there.
we are part and parcel of that God, and that
we have to awaken ourselves to the conscious-
come one with the WVhole. That's how we
May God bless you all, in your wark which
So we are quite conscious of this force you are trying to do for the good of Americans.
building within us. And now we have to be
conscious that this force is going to transform You know it is the Vishuddhi chakra and all
the universe. So today we are going to pray
that this force has to transform America
through its capacity to frighten people so that this transformation is to take place. Unless
they come to Sahaja Yoga. Because when
things have reached this stage of ego, then will see it will not work out. You cannot talk
when people way "What's wrong?"- Like in
England when I started talking first, they said
this is Victorian woman, out of date, absolute-
ly useless. I said alright, I don't say anything. gallop, and must go on spreading like wildfire.
But you'll have such diseases that you'll have This should be your prayer today.
to come back. That wa5 the time they pass-
the law that homosexuality should be allowed,
It is a responsibility to
save America.
the responsibility of Sahaja Yoga rests on
Vishuddhi chakra. So how important it is that
and until the transformation comes in, you
to people, you cannot communicate with
them. So you must pray that transformation
process must start, must trigger, and must
May God bless you.
MORNING PRAYER
May I this day, be what you'd have me be:
May I this day, say what you'd have me say:
May I this day, be 'part and parcel of the whole;
And may my thoughts be of a realized soul:
May I this day, have love for all mankind:
Shri Mother, be in my heart and in my mind.
Nirmala Yoga
33
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-35.txt 
 VISHNU-TATTWA
They say that the 1000 heads of Lord of the Paramātmā Shri Shiva Sadāshiva
Shesha hissing above Lord Vishnu represents
the constant mental activity, a brain cons-
tantly trying to sustain and balance the world. and detached balance from both left and
Lord Vishnu is Vishwapäla and the Lord of right that we are sustained. Hence to deve-
the Sushumna Nādi, He is the essence of lop the Vishnu-tattwa in one, one needs to be
neither one. or the other, connecting them
both. It is thanks to His sense of responsibility
the nervouS
system controlling all the both responsible and balanced.
different angas ar limbs of the Viräta as the
nerves penetrate every last, minute portion of
the body, so he permeates every last portion Yogi, I am not interested in material things'
of the Virata and, like the nerves, receives, and it is true that one should remain detached.
transmits, and integrates information. All the But yet Lord Vishnu is a far greater Yogi than
great chakras, and nerve plexuses are placed
ultimately in the Sushumna and it is He who. body of the Virita his energy flows to every
in various forms, and using various powers,
controls them, In the Nabhi, the Void and ing. enlightening, and making all auspicious.
Swädishthana, in the Anahata, the Vishuddhi So, while detached, one should pay attention
and eventually as Maha Vishnu, the Agnya to one's sustenance, for, as realised souls, we
and the two cerebral hemispheres. He is the
Sokshma Sükshnottama, that penetrates the
deepest levels of the Sushumna-the Brahma
Nadi and it is through His Grace, by the
ascent in the Brahma Nadi that we get and
give realization.
It is very easy for a Yogi to say, "I am a
most of us and yet through the nerves in the
minutest aspect of material nature-transform-
are like the nerves in the body of the Virāta
and that enlightened energy that flows into
matter through our attention can enlighten it,
So we act as instruments of the Lord.
This is a very subtle point and one should
not underestimate it, for the key words are
Hence He is the co-ordinator and there is detachment and responsibility ; and there are
no detail too small to escape His attention-by many dangers for those not absolutely in the
Him the beggar is fed and sustained, the centre. If one is not detached there is no
family and planetary horoscope of every birth point pretending one is, for in the end one's
is approved and arranged, marriages take suppressed attachment and greed will rise up
and hit one on the head when one least
place etc.
In a sense He is the great bureau-
crat organising every aspect of the universe. expects it. Rather one should acknowledge
what one is and witness it. We cannot
think what the consequences would be : He fight ourselves, we can only leave it to the
is the one who, in constant 'leelä and 'Māvā Kundalini and the Atma to work things out for
maintains the creation and writes the drama. us. by the constant practise of Sahaja Yoga
foot-soaking, Dhyana etc.
be no creation and no drama, only Atma, It and since it all happens automatically, there
is He who stands in the middle between the should be no room for ego intervention or
If we were idle or inattentive for one moment,
For without "leelä" and 'Mäya' there would shoe-beating.
Mäyă of the Adi Shakti and the pure witness
mental activity.
*This article comes out of a conversation Dr. Rustom had with Shri Mataji, in London, in which She
wondered why Sahaja Yogis are not more blessed by Shri Lakshmi,
34
Nitmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-36.txt 
 Lord Vishnu is the one who oversees the existence in this world gained through the
four Ashramas or stages of life-and one of grace and auspices of Lord Vishnu supported
by Lord Ganesha. If we do not accept our
man who is Atmasākshātkāri and a realised responsibility to maintain our Lakshmi, it will
- be hard for Sahaja Yoga to penetrate the
material universe, for who will build the
Ashrams and hold the programmes ? Often in
basis of the creation, is harmad. This drama Sahaja Yoga one is asked to pay for this and
that and people grumble. But they see only
that is opposed. In the West, one has the gross drama-not the deep subtle meaning:
an idea that "Grihastha' and marriage are that one is being asked to pay attention to
the Lakshmi Vishnu tattwa so that the Virăta
that this is the outer manifestation-but can be enlightened by the enlightened Atmas
there is a deeper hidden meaning that, by we all possess by Shri Mataji's grace. It is
it we fulfil our duty to our God who has a very small thing we are being asked for,
manifested as the Virāta-so that inspite of to help enlighten our Mother's universe. The
being one with the Atmã, we accept the attacks of left and right that endanger this
are familiar to all-and I will not elaborate.
But we should know that the Lakshmi of
them, is 'Grihastha" or house-holder. For a
soulsuch a thing can be a great Tapasyā
but without the collective cannot survive and
it's evolution and the drama, which is the.
is born of Divine Will and Desire, and therefore
given to us to enjoy-and it is
true
burden and responsibility of matter, to be one
with Him and prove our Love and Bhakti for
Him. There is a very subtle and twisting Sahaja Yoga is our responsibility. not our
Mother's. We should shoulder the burden, not
gains it, but with it also matter-as tapasyā this our Mother-and we should find ways to work
it out somehow or the other. As I said,
Lakshmi is a tapasyā and we should not
play here, for, the sadhaka seeking the Atma
time and not indulgence.
If one accepts one's material respon- expect to earn money easily or effortlessly-
sibilities, then one has to go down into the except by our Mother's grace.
world of filth and commonness-and our
For the enlightenment to have meaning,
we should enlighten the universe and enter
vibrations get spoilt. However, we have been
given the capacity to cleanse ourselves and by Gross matter regardless of the consequences
doing so, we cleanse also that, from which for we are pure Atmā. We should not forget
We caught-and by doing so. we clear our
Mother's creation and. in some small part.
that our Mother, who is the Purest of the
Pure, took birth in the darkest night of
Kaliyuga to help us, and we should now
stand by Her side and fight it out. Let us
repay to Her the enormous debt we owe
Her. If we are not prepared to face the
world we go against the Vishnu tattwa, and
His shakti Shri Lakshmi forsakes us. Further,
we deny the fact of our birth and material
hope we can all work it out,
Jai Shri Mataji
35
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-37.txt 
 The Heart Chakra and its afflictions
The heart is the centre point of the crea- slightest puff of wind will flurry the surface
tion-and hence all chakras are subservient of an absolutely still, clear and smooth pond.
to it. It is the power-house of the body and
from it energy flows to all other points. It is pure existence-smooth, clear and unruffled
the seat of the Spirit, the ultimate source of beyond any of the other spheres of existence,
all power, manifested as Shri Shiva Shakti beyond even the subtle and causal bodies
Vähi (The power holder or carrier). A block and therefore beyond catches and blocks in
in any chakra or nādi in the body will put the system. They are a result of one's present
some pressure on the heart. The centre of situation and previous existencethey are
the hea.t, the "bindu' is on the left. It is the ephemereal and constantly changing : they
source of all things and is the point at which have no meaning in the meaning of the
the desire of the divine to manifest and begin
the creation manifests to begin the creation sounds that accompany the divine Drama
initially. At the dawn of creation, the Adi of existence.
Shakti, manifesting in the bindu or loop of the we should be the witnesses comfortably
heart, makes 3 coils around it-and descen- seated
ding from the top, bisects them to create everything-Bidshah's or Emperors, in
energy foci of the 7 chakras, before settling words of Shri Mataji : we may act but we are
in the first- the mooladhāra-to begin the not the drama.
actual substance of the creation-its strides
and storms, so to speak.
Reflected through the heart is the quality of
divine--except as the flashing lights and
As realised Sahaja Yogis
to witness the drama- masters of
the
It is when this fact is forgotten that the
problems begin, for then the awareness is
sucked through all the twisted spirals and loops
1
of the damaged instrument, is caught and
The reason there are 3! coils is that '3
represents the nature of Shri Adi Shakti as
Kundalini and represents both Her manifest gets stuck-then cries out in pain and loses
nature in the 3 gunas of existence-and Her IEs awareness of it's divine nature. It is only
unmanifest nature as the Ardha-mãtrā or !
syllable. A syllable cannot be pronounced,
yet it exists-it is the point of junction between
unmanifest and manifest. Thus, in the Devi
Mahātmyam : "You are placed in the Ardha deeply rooted in the heart, and in the cons-
mātrā" and you cannot be specifically spoken becomes smooth and protected and
or pronounced". The meaning of 3 as the
number of Shri Gaurishwari Nityakanya
Adimätā can be understood only by Sahaja
Yogis, for it is very subtle.
the deft fingers of Shri Mataji like a master
weaver's, that can unpick and untangle these
knots and get the machine moving again.
If, however, one's attention is dearly and
ciousness of being the Atman then it
can
enter any tangled skein to unentangle it-
without itself being caught.
The heart is the seat of one's security.
The ultimate security is to know "I am that".
So the whole divine Tantra or instrument Or in the words of Shri Shankarācharya:
of the cosmos, of which we are all a part, is
"Brahmädvityamevāham"
(the
undivided
manifest as an expression of divine desire Brahma alone am 1). At a more material
level this manifests as the protecting power
irregularity in the flow of power in the system of the Spirit, manifest as the Goddess Shri-
will put pressure on the heart. just as the Durgă-fierce in Her protection of Her universe
through it's power. The slightest block or
36
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-38.txt 
 When we come to Sahaja Yoga, the
tantra is damaged and impure and the heart
explains the relation between Shri catches. There is nothing to be upset in
and Her children and associated in the body
with blood and the thymus centre heart.
This
Pärvati and Shri Durga-for in Her quiet form that. One should settle down silently and
the Shakti remains as the companion and work to undo
consort of the Atma. At the gross level this slowly. The whole library of divine know-
protection of the Spirit is expressed in the ledge is at one's hand, and if the heart's
fact of Motherhood. The Mother is the first desire to evolve the being and achieve the
relationship one knows, in this life-and it is absolute is pure, the solution to every
a Mother's instinct to protect Her child-at problem will occur automaticaly, effortlessly-
any cost. The experience of this existence is and spontaneously "Sahaja". There is no need
built up in us at the gross level through to involve the ego with too much effort-for
countless lives beginning at even the animal effort only builds up the consciousness of
stage. This is to give us an inner sense of "I do" of the ego.
security, so that when we see the ultimate
protecting power of the Atma as Jaganmātā, with the Atma" is an attitude that develops
we can recognize it immediately and jump into with the growth of the Vishuddihi and involves
it. It is important to recognise that the first, detachment from the fruit and results of one's
and also the highest manifestation of God actions.
Almighty is as Mother-for it leads one to
recognise the protecting capacity of one's
own Spirit through its Shakti. This union
of Atma and Shakti as the protector of one's
existence is important to understand : as the against both-and took a powerful "avatăra
Shri Shiva Tattwa also expresses the quality accompanied by the three great shaktis (of
or tattwa of pure existence-in complete
security.
the catches gradually and
"I do not do. I act only, in accordance
The ultimate act against the Spirit is to wor-
ship that, which has no Spirit-gross maiter
or Räkshasas. Shri Mohammad inveighed
Shri Mahakali, Shri Mahasaraswati and
Shri Mahalakshmi)-Shri Brahmadeva and
Hassan and Hussein to block this artery
of negativity into the Virāta through the left
At a practical level, what this means is that swädishthäna, nábhi and void. Much of the
if one goes against the Spirit, identifying with Kurān is an expression ef Nirmala Vidyā
anything apart from it, the heart catches. On
the one hand we have the ego, "lam this" or "I
have done this" rather than "this has been
done (by the Spirit)". "Aham" means "T" and unreality
"kara"- "the doer" or Ahamkāra "I, the doer. Atma and its expression is the sole reality
At another point :"This has been done to me,
therefore I suffer", is the left, super-ego stand
point. Both are illusory. One cannot do.
it is the Shakti alone that acts as the vehicle
of the Divine desire. One should identify primordial desire in the heart, having caused
with that collective, great, divine being and
its desire; and watch the play of its manifes- filled, ascends eventuallay to sit and dance on
tation rather than concentrate on "1 do"
Similarly it is above all things, and nothing
can effect it or make it suffer.
compassionate, clear and uncompromising,
which is the support of the Atma tattwa in this
material universe. There is either reality or
- there is no half reality. The
in the universe-identification with anything
e Ise causes the heart to catch.
The Shiva tattwa or power of initial and
all things to be and be complete and ful-
the Sahasrära or apex of the creation-as Shri
Sadūshiva tattwa. There it is the purely
(Contd. on page 39)
37
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-39.txt 
 Shri Mataji's Advice
Sanskrit is really Deva-vani (language of 'Sat point. Your attention is only charmed
Gods). When the Kundalini moves, she makes by the Spirit. Only the attention part as 1
vibrations. She makes special sounds, which told you is like a flicker of light in a gas lamp
are Devnagri sounds, on different chakras.
and Kundalini is like a gas which touches the
Spirit and the light of the Spirit spreads in
central nervous system. Chit part, the outer
Even when you recite mantras through the
Sanskrit language or Devnägri pronunciations cover, the chitta becomes the attention part.
only, you can excite them better.
At that stage the Kundalini opens the Brahma-
randhra when you feel
the vibrations
Sat-Chit-Anand is the super-conscious- from your hand and you can feel other per-
ness, A thought rises and falls. You can
see rising of the thought but not falling. In conscious, collectively conscious again out
between these thoughts there is a space of Sat-Chit-Anand, that you just touch 'chit
called vilamba'. If yoOu can stop for a
while, you get the conscious mind and your chit becoming the "chitta' of collective
there exists Sat-Chit-Anand. You can say consciousness, means that you drop into the
Sat-Chit-Anand is the condition of mind,
where there is no thought, but you are
awareNirvichar'. This is the first stage
where you jump into the super-conscious.
Your first stage is 'Nirvichar (throughtless),
you become thoughtlessly aware. That hap-
pens when the Kundalini rises above the the 'chitta' stage. You touch the 'sat' means
Agnya chakra; meaning enters into the lymbic start seeing the reality, is one thing you feel,
area when your attention just touches, 'Sat
point. The reality separates from Mithya' still there, but your attention has come up
(illusion). At that stage you start separating
like putting lime in the milk when it starts
separating into curd and water.
sons also, because you become collectively
part. Thus, you, start feeling the 'chitta' of
ocean of 'Sat-Chit-Anand in which you only
feel
consciousness. That
the collective
means you can feel another person's Kund-
alini'.
Thus at the first stage when you come, is
is flowing. The ejo and the super-ego are
and you feel the 'chitta'.
There is also a part of little enjoyment.
and, the Joy or Anand, that is the joy of en-
You can cure people and curatives can be joying another human being starts. These
done with your Kundalini in lymbic area. I are the feelings; this is how you enjoy Nirvi-
am very anxious always that it should come chār samādhi. Samādhi does not mean going
out of 'Brahmarandhra'. At that stage you into unconscious, but the unconscious be-
start getting the vibrations, but, at this stage comes the conscious. The universal uncons-
cious becomes the conscious.
you are just 'Chit' only and you just touch the
Nirmala Yoga
38
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-40.txt 
 In the second stage you become Nirvikalpa the Dharma itself. At this stage the subtle
where there is no 'vikaipa" (doubt). At this style of things starts. Your Mooladhara' be-
stage the coilective cansciousness becomes comes the chastity itself.
subtler and subtler. You can understand
very deep significance of things, when the
reality starts becoming clearer. You need not
put your hand towards the person. tanya all around us which thinks. which
sitting down you know where it is, what is
happening where he is catching, what is the
problem, what is the collective problem. You
have no doubts about Sahaj a Yoga, nor about
Kundalini not about anything else. At that
time you start experimenting about it and you
When you get into the Nirvikalpa stage
*the Anand starts settling in you, Your cons-
ciousness becomes 'Anand". There is chai-
By
understands, organises, and loves us. All
this you come to know-the knowledge part
of it. Then the Anand, which is the Hridaya
(Heart), starts emitting it; later on what you
get is 'vilaya' (dissolved) into Anand. At that
stage complete Self-realisation takes place.
you can control the Sun, you
Mastery of Kundalini starts- At that stage ne vou can control every
can control the Moon, you can control every
At that stage
The
"chitta", the consciousness becomes
subtle. Such Sahaja yogis are care free and element. Beyond that, there is God's reali-
live in a big way. They are not touchy. They
have no time for outside gross matters, so
their attention is always deep into the subtle
sation.
Sometimes when we are shallow, we
part. They are the satisfied souls. But such don't act from the heart. Sometimes when you
say a mantra, you are just saying it outwardly,
somebody misbehaving with me and cannot you are clearing out outwardly, you are
meditating outwardly. But when you say that,
you are just using your right side or your left
After "Nirvikalpa' the Ganesha becoms really side, but not your heart. So, what you have
to do is to balance it. When you say some-
a man gets into a terrible temper if he sees
bear it.
"Jägrut (awakened). Such a person is not
tempted by any woman.
another woman will exist, except for his own
No temptation for thing, say it with devotion. with dedication,
with understanding and try to put it in your
wife where he goes on living like a celebrated heart that whatever I am saying is a mantra
husband, because husband and wife are united given to me by Adi Shakti Herself, and is
a mantra, very powerful. We must establish
in a bond of matrimony. Otherwise he is a
satisfied house-holder. The stomach becomes
our 'Ishwara Pranidhan' (tuT afirata).
ॐ
30
(Contd. from page 37)
balanced witness composed of all three
gunans and witness of all. This, in the NIRMALA DEVI JAI SHRI SHIV SHRI
individual, approximates to the stage where MAHASHIV
all desires completed, one may identify with SADASHIV PARAMATMANE NAMAH
the collective absolute and in fulfilled joy
witness the effects, elforts and completed- MATAJI SHRI NIRMALA DEVI
ness of one's desire ; pure witness beyond
all things and activity.
JAI SHRI ADI SHAKTI MATAJI SHRI
SHRI PARAMASHIV SHRI
SAKSHAT SHRI ADI SHAKTI BHAGWATI
NAMO
NAMAH.
-Dr. Rustom
Nirmala Yoga
39
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-41.txt 
 THE SECOND ERA
The first flower is given by Shri Ganesha
At the Sahasrara Day 1984, Shri Mataji
has opened the second era of our evolution. if we know how to awaken within us the
Whereas the first internal growth was vertical, constructive qualities of the deity residing in
through the spinal movement of the Kunda-
lini, the second is horizontal and its guiding ment of innocence. But innocence is not
force is the Compassion. What does this only the reflection of the purity of the child in
word Compassion hide ?
our Moolådhära chakra. He is the embodi-
US, the wisdom which guides and the discrimi-
nation which selects, but also the ability to feel
Only the attention directed towards the the intensity of the present. The present is the
heart allows us to approach with humility and central path leading us to the surrender, to
devotion, this quality of Compassion. The devotion. This present unites innocence with
Compassion is Shri Mataji and Shri Mataji is wisdom, for innocence is the force which takes
the quintessence of Compassion. So the us to the Sushumna Nadi. Only in the pre-
Compassion is the integrating force of all the
other qualities, the colour dissolving in the
infinite purity of the white all the colours, the scious. The work of our Kundalini opens the
gathering of all the deities for the coronation gate to adoration and Shri Ganesha becomes
of our Mother in the Sahasrara. It is the seven- the undisputed king of his Kingdom.
colour rainbow, drawing its bandhan of love
and protection in the heart of the children of dens the narrow road which takes us to the
Adi Shakti. It weaves in the universe the Self. The enlightened attention becomes the
golden threads of the Holy Ghost, letting
sparkle everywhere in a cosmic glance the
Divine language of God Almighty.
sent can the Kundalini man"est and open itself
to the unlimited field of the collective Uncon-
Adoration magnifies attention and broa-
eyes looking at the Creation and its Creator.
The sight of the greatness of his immeasurable
work incites us to sing the glory and the
majesty of the Lord, to discover through
"Bhakti" the Divine
universe, the incomparable choreographer of
the play of the planets and the varieties of the
seasons. (This is the second flower).
Is it possible to penetrate in the absolute
Realm of the Divine Compassion ? Can we
have access, with humility and devotion, to
the power of Compassion ? Are we ready to
shift from the mere concept to the state itself,
where we become fully Compassion ?
Organisor of the
This discovery and the amazement at His
Divine Manifestation awakens the desire to
In order to enter into the state of Compas- come closer to God by respecting His Laws
sion, we Sahaja Yogis, have to pray humbly and choosing the sinuous road of Dharma.
our Beloved Mother to awaken within us all (This is the third flower).
the constituent qualities of the Compassion.
The respect of the family-laws, the control
Which flowers shall we pick, how to select over oneself, the training to the discipline
with skill and love the colours so that the of the body and the heart leads us to the
bunch of flowers decorate with dignity and Atmā, the Self, the shining diamond, hidden
behind the veils of our illusions. The Spirit
light the sacred Feet of Adi Shakti ?
Nirmala Yoga
40
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-42.txt 
 in our heart opens the door of the realm of through the dynamism of the acting Spirit,
the Self to Shri Shiva. He immerses our desintegrate under the power of forgiveness.
heart in the untouched lake of joy and beauti- Forgiveness opens the door conducting us to
tude, reflecting at the surface the immensity the Realm of God. (This is the sixth flower).
of the Creation. The eternal glory of the
Creator fills our heart with confidence in the
handling of the cosmic play. (This is the let us combine its periumes and its colours
fourth flower).
Let us take, with devotion and attention,
care and softness, each one of these flowers,
to the shape of its petals, let us tide up each
The joy and the fullness of the discovery stem in a beautiful tree of life and we have
of the Self gain the sanctuary of the heart, the bunch of flowers of Compassion.
irradiating our Spirit with the permanent
flame of the primordial Atma. We become become Compassion. As we become the
the witness of the play of love, the circula- fragrance of the flowers, the light of its petals
tion of peace, and we become aware of and the beauty of its corolla, in the same way
enchanting music performed in the melodious
rythm of the flute of God, inviting us all to
become, in full detachment, the breath spread- stituent qualities of the Compassion. These
ing in the flute and the everiasting notes of qualities act for themselves. without any
his songs. He takes us in the collective bondages or limitations whatsoever, lost in
dance of the celestial Union with spontaneity the bliss of God's Compassion.
and fun. (This is the fifth flower).
We become such a bunch of flowers, we
we become Compassionate, without the
awareness of integrating within us the con-
At last, we become one with this Compas-
Then the children of Adi Shakti discover sion, dissolving ourselves in the Sahasrara of
the power of forgiveness. Forgiveness is the
expression of detachment. Let us feave the shapes melt and from them emerges, in a
fruit of our deeds at the Feet of the Lord and horizon of twikling lights and glimpses, a sea of
let us strengthen our detachment, this love Lotus-petals whose extremities, crowned with
which does not let the impurities and the gold and brilliants, raise towards the sky to
aggressions of the outside world filter into adorn the Divine Feet of Sakshat Adi Shakti.
us. These impurities dissolve themselves
our Divine Mother, The colours and the
-Arneau
To Shri Mother
I am a humble little flower
blooming in your Garden of Divinity
Your Holy grace and unending Love
makes me grow stronger and stronger,
Until I have become a great honourable tree.
who manages to reach with my
powerful branches, at last..Eternity 1
-Belgian Sahaja Nathalie
Nirmala Yoga
41
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-43.txt 
 The Shri Lalita and Shri Chakra Centres
Recently people
interest in the Shri Lalita and Shri Chakra
centres that reside above the Left and Right Sahasrāra.
Heart respectively.
have expressed an
state. This itself gives the witness power
which helps the attention to remain firmly in
The catches of this point can be caused by a
Shri Laliti is the moon and contains the false guru, notably Narakāsura. When one feels
power of the Left Side, Mahākāli power.
The Shri Chakra contains the power of the
right side, the Mahäsaraswati Power. These
points can be thought of as starting motors
for our own use and experience of the left Also deep left Vishuddhi and lack of joy of
and right sides.
that one can intellectually know and possess
God, then one can do what one likes without
"fear of God. The joy goes and one feels alone
and remote, and can become very gaunt.
Self, is a constant cause of catch. As the
centre releases in accompaniment with left
Heart one can often feal a shiver and then
Shri Lalita is the point where sacred union the joy is really ignited.
of Shiva and Shakti, and their joy, becomes
expressed within us on our level of earthly
existence. In themselves they-Shiva and
Shakti-are totally beyond, but they have to
make themselves felt as joy in Human beings. lack of fear of God or inauspicious behaviour
It is best that this is in our left side so that we before God, which causes lack of joy is going
can experience the joy spontaneously and to offend Shri Lalita. Once the starter or
desire to seek it. Shri Lalită is placed at just transformer is caught then the power of
this level where She can divide the second desire is severely limited. Not because the
and third states of awareness. Those descri- left side is not functioning, but because it is
bed by Adi Shankarüchārya-Taijasa or only because of the joy of the Spirit that We
emotional dreaming level and Pragnya or deep desire the Spirit, so when it goes then we for-
sleep mental level. Inother words one learns to get to desire the Spirit and
surrender emotional attachment to the Mäyā, As attached to sensual and material pleasures.
a result we are emotionally attached solely to This is characteristic of the whole complex
the attainment of joy, to God Almighty. Since which exists at the boundary between Taijasa
this point is between Heart and Vishuddhi it and Pragnya states or the level of the Vishnu
can work out our guilt feelings and deep inse-
curity by establishing that link to Almighty God
which gives security and self-respect. The spiritual goals is lacking and lathargy sets in.
joy that comes, gives such a feeling that one is
just not bothered about listening to any self-
doubt or temptation to be pulled down. In
a sense it is like a transformer which steps
that divine joy, that is beyond the level of
human experience, down to our level, Divine
joy can only come with the full recognition of side is the Shri Chakra. Here we really are
Adi Shakti and settling into a doubtless the instrument of the Divine. This provides
Here we are reminded of Kärtikéya and
His Rudra Power, and that he only knows
awe and love for His Father Lord Shiva. Any
become
Granthi. When one does not want to or even
dares not desire, the energy to achieve
Good mantras to use would be Shri Shiva
Shakti Putra Kartikeya ie. Kartikeya the son
of Shiva and Shakti, (to be said II times) and
the mantra of Shri Lalitā.
On the equivalent position on the Right
Nirmala Yoga
42
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-44.txt 
 the source of the Kriya Shakti, the power of existerice is a blessing. It is interesting to
action. This is the Holy Ghost, and it is watch just to what extent we are showing
here that we see the creative power of the signs of this (without feeling guilty) and how
we need to be aware of ourselves and others
all the time (without thinking about it). This is
the way in which the Nirmala Vidyā gets
expressed in actions and day to day life.
pure Holy Spirit come to physical realisation.
In doing Puja to our Holy Mother we paint
the cross on Her Right Hand. This represents
power over matter and the Ego. In order to
attain this power we must become detached
and also be an instrument for the power of
the Holy Ghost which is trying to work
through us all the time. The Holy Ghost
knows everything and knows how to achieve This abuses the Guru and Father qualities,
everything. Our egos know very little and
will soon forget things. The total power of
the Holy Ghost fully evolved is represented thing. So we lose respect for God and the
by the Shri Chaka. This can be visualised by Divinity in others. Hence we cannot enjoy
imagining looking down on a person sitting others and nor can they enjoy us. How can
in lotus position The Moolidhära forms we be instruments for the Almighty Father
the outer square and provides the person's whose every play is just for our joy, and
physical and spiritual support. All the Cha- whose love and fultilment sustains us. As
kras are represented as being concentrically the Shri Chakra contains the power of
arranged within this square with each of their Mahasaraswati, so we enjoy our creativity.
petals giving its own quality or blessing as We now become the tool of pure grace,
ir opans out nourished by the Parabrahman diginity and artistic expression for everybody
energy. The brahmarandhra or centre of the to enjoy.
Sahasrara is represented by a point or Bindu
as it is known. (A good representation of
this is presented in the Theosophical Society's the Sahasrara as they pertain to our physical
edition of Saundarya Lahari or Bharatiya Vidya expression of spirituality in the world. They
Bhavan's Shri Lalita Sahasranama-)
Causes of catches on this centre are related
to Right Heart Le, feeling of tremendous perso-
nal responsibility and duty to sustain others.
which leads to ego and catches on Ekadasha
Rudras as we think that we are doing every-
Finally these points are not represented in
are the Sun and the Moon so just as these
two lights give their character to us as Day
and Night-they don't give the quality of Day
and Night to themselves. So in the same
way these points within us take our inner
state and give light to our physical being and
joy to our Spiritual existence.
When all the Chakras are fully opened and
the Kundalini fully awakened, we become the
perfect instrument-the hollow personality.
This is a very alive and blissful state of
awareness where one acts
spontaneity and fearlessness,
with
total
where our
our
actions are completely pure and our very
JAI MATAJI
Nirmala Yoga
43
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-45.txt 
 Registered with the Regiatrarof Newapaper tndes Fegd. Na. 36999 BT
Letter From Switzerland
We, the SY. of Switzerland would fike
through this letter addressed to all our brothers shining Spint Wecould find our way to our
And sisters of Indiato express our gratitude heart by exchanging with you the wods of the
and deep love for the way you welcomed us in
your holy land as well as in your hearts. This
trip allowed us to strengthen the ties and
bondages of brother-sisterhood relationship power of the inside world, the realm of our
and to go in the field of the Self
Here in the West, the whole society looks
outside, lives for the outside world and is
only interested in the superficiality of the blessed by the presence ol many incarnations
matter which is a dead, outside oreation at the
is from the inside and its reflection is vour
Self and Teel the flow of your joy touch the
deepest side of our beinas. We could feet,
through you, as instruments of God, the
Lord where all the deities are drowned in their
own glory and eternal majesty
To clase the CHrote, your country has been
dead, outside creation of the who kept you away from madness and ex
tremes Your cultural and eligious back-
human mankind Therefore the
so weak, shado wad by the clouds of monay. cround allowed you to find out the pati ol
greed and lust. We, the S.Y. of the West rightaousness and dharma with less hesitation
have to find our way among the tharns of and doubts than we did. You could share
this hurt attention and remove the clouds with us this confidence of your way and the
covering our Spirit
Only the attention of our beloved Mother Spirit within You.
and the Power af Her unlimited compassion
makes it possible to take to the Spirit and en-
joy the bliss of the Self. She builds with where only the lotuses grow and where only
care and Divine skili the piotection around us their smells permato the whole atmosphere.
so that we can feel Her Reaim of Peace and
love residing within us. She has created this
Island for us to enjoy and glorify Her, even it level of the expression of the Self
darkness and contusion is at our doorstup
Then comes India and our brathers and manifest devotion and adoration, praising in
sisters of India. Your country projects us to full attention and joy tha glory of the Mother.
the reality of a new perception of life. We
discover together the priority of the inside
world. While the matter overpowers the
Spirit and the human beings in the west still
attention is
faith in the now manifestation of the Holy
But above all, you were anxious to take
us by the hand leading us in the tield of bliss
You WEre #ager to make us discover the
hectar of the "ATMA" and to bring us to the
You
showed us, in your own modesty how to
We thank you for all these qualities of
yours, for this readiness and generosity and
for your concern of transforming our trip into
He prevalls in India, giving an intense poten- a real dream of love. You allowed this dream
tial of harmony. Even the streets, in tha jam to biecome reality and it is difficult to express
of the big cities, we taund no aggression. THO
harshness, but a peaceful stream of civilized
people: Then how much is profitable the Mother shower upo ourselves and enlighten
through words our gratitude
May however the blessing of out beloved
our hearts so that you wil feel His purity and
with our brothers and sisters,
meeting
bound together by the love of ADI SHAKTI. His thankfulness in your hearts, May the atten-
We discovered your sweetness, escaping the ticon of God allow us to be united with you in
abrupt tongue of the western peoplo, we got the realm of the inside world where all-
to know your discretion, forgetting the pom- together we can sing in one song, one prayer,
pous pride of the West, we learnt how to with one smile, one heart the Majestic Divine
enjoy your modesty and how to feel within us
the expression of your heart Your language
Name of ADI SHAKTI.
JAI SHRI MATAJI
Edited & Publshed by Sh. S.C. Rai 43, Bunglow Roud, Delhi-110007 E Printed at The Central ElectriE
Presa, 80-D. Kamls Nagui Delhi-110007. One
Foreign (by Airtmail E74 14)
sun As. 9:00, Annual Subscription Rs 51.00
