Talk to Sahaja Yogis Date 25th February 1984 : Place Rahuri Seminar & Meeting Type Speech Language English & Marathi CONTENTS | Transcript | 02 - 03 English Marathi Hindi || Translation English Hindi 04 - 05 Marathi

 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT ENGLISH TALK I hope your journey has been comfortable so far and will be comfortable later on and the source of comfort is your Spirit. And the more you see to the comfort of your Spirit, the problems of outside comforts drop out. You are not bothered as to where you live, where you sleep, what you eat, what you do. So to allow these gross sensitivities to drop down, so that the inner subtler sensitivities grow, that's why you are here. To get over your time, conditionings, I mean, it's a rat race and the rat race has to be somehow or other stopped, once [and] for all, within and without. So, here we can do it without and once you start meditating, the within can be also achieved and you can achieve that peace which we all human beings should have, if you have to save this world from complete destruction. And you must have realised that, now the Sahaja Yoga is growing much faster, and it's taking a good speed, and we all have to keep ourselves equipped to be able to be part and parcel of this great evolutionary and revolutionary process which is going to stir up the whole world. For that it is important also to see that we take ourselves to task and don't get into mediocre living and mediocre thinking. We are people of very great potential. Not only that but we are blessed by God's Divine power. Try to use that power within yourself and try to be one with it. Little bit you to see that you beat-up you body, beat-up your mind, beat-up your ego and chisel it out so that it is beautifully made in such a way that you grow into that image for which you are made. have Regarding our things like My tours in your countries: I think the greatest good is done to you when you come to this country. As if you belong to this country and you were uprooted in some other country. And when you come here you prosper so well, and in that country I try so hard and work so hard, do all kinds of things. All the time I spend with you, I do everything, day and night, all the time. I find it's impossible to achieve much that I see happening to you here, as if here you take absolutely with great ease, the divinity of this place, and I think this uprootedness has to be given up, I think. As if you have emigrated into those countries and now you are back in your own. You were not found out by immigration laws I think. Now under these circumstances we should change our tactics and try to establish our ashrams here and our own projects here so that you people should come down here and achieve more. You can earn a living there but you should come here and spend some time for 2 months, 3 months, continuously and establish yourself and grow because I don't think it can be achieved there that good, because we tried everything. So this is the ultimate outcome of our trips all over. Despite all kinds of hazardous roads and hazardous life here, we are doing very well I must say. And when I see you I find you are very good and you are all very much better and it's all improved. Like watches, you see when you have to make them immune, you put them under absurd conditions and they get alright. Like that, now you are immune. They are put into, I have seen, into troughs, which are shaken very heavily, as you were shaken yesterday in the buses and then they are made to pass through water which is running very fast on them. And all this we are trying here and I think your immunity is growing very fast, to outward things and we are becoming really solid, eternal timepieces; the way you are created here. And I'm so very happy to see the development. That's the main point which we have achieved here. So the attention should be out, away, from money first of all. That's one of the biggest problems. Actually nobody can believe that affluent countries are much more money minded than Indians are. Though they are so developed. You see the developed countries are much more money minded than the Indians are, it's very surprising. When you see the way they count their pennies it's impossible to

 Original Transcript : English believe that these are really developed people. They are worse than beggars sometimes. So that is what you should get out of it, the money part. Money is horrible stuff, that people count and I mean it's better to count the names of God than to count the money, horrible coins! Then, we have other things like gross attachments to comfort. But I don't think it's a very comfortable life there, because here you can move in the night any time, and you won't meet anybody who will snatch your purse or snatch your bangles. You can move about the way you like and nobody's going to bother you. You won't meet 2, 3 drunkards beating each other, nothing of the kind. So it's a very pure life here. That's a very big achievement. And the comforts that you want you can create later on if you want to have them. At least, I personally think, that too much modernisation won't suit this place, so you should not give them these useless ideas which makes you body slave to your own comforts and ideas of enslavement. In any case, cleanliness, personal cleanliness, is very good here, but the general cleanliness has to be taught to these people. All this giving and taking process will work out very well I am sure, and the way things are moving within yourself, I have great hopes that you will really grow much faster if you come to this country and stay here for some time, in a subtle way, and then go back to your countries. That would be much better than to have a visit to your countries which I feel sometimes is just bombarded by negativity. The another point which I wanted to tell you is that, you must learn to understand that you have come here to gain something. Nobody is going to gain anything out of you. So you have to gain something here, you are students and so you have to learn something and try to develop a sense of discipline like a disciple who receives all that is around: "What's that? What's this? How is it? This is the house, that's nice." You see like that. But if you go on seeing the things which are of no importance and loose talking, about things that do not matter with you. All this has to be given up because you waste so much time there that people sit down and jabber, talk, loose talks, ugly talks, useless talks. That's not needed at all. On the contrary, it's better to be quiet and assimilate more within yourself. Because here the people don't have time, so they can't talk, they have to work. But while you have time there, also here, so we start like that, and that's a very wrong thing. 99 Another talking is done with yourself also, quite a lot. Like you start analysing, criticizing and finding faults and all the time thinking, "Oh, this could have been better. I am harmed very much here," or "That has happened," all those things come into your heads. So this kind of a inner talk also should be stopped. You see they are called as murmuring souls by Christ, who said "Beware of murmuring souls." But these murmuring souls exist within us, so beware of them, and don't listen to all nonsensical talks and try to keep a good eye on that and be alert, so it will help you. I must say this trip and the last trip I am overjoyed and I am very happy that it has brought forth so many possibilities before Me and more potential. I am very happy about it that somehow in this year we have achieved a new type of atmosphere among all of you, which is humble, which is quiet, which is peaceful, which is absorbing the Divine. Which is a very great joyous thing for Me so I thank you very much for all that. I hope you keep up your progress this way. 99 99 3

 MARATHI TRANSLATION (English Talk) Scanned from Marathi Chaitanya Lahari आणि तिकडे देशात मी एवढे प्रयत्न करते, खूप कष्ट स्वस्थतेचे उगमस्थान आपला आत्मा आहे. घेते सर्वकाही तुमच्याबरोबर राहून करते तरी फारसे आपले चिते जेव्हा आपल्या आत्मसुखाकडे राहते तेव्हा बाह्यातील सुखोपभोग गळून पडतात. आपण कोठे यश येत नाही. पण येथे ते सहज प्राप्त करता. आपले राहतो, कोंठे झोपतो, काय खातो, कारय करतो याची चिता करत नाही. अशा बाह्य गोष्टीवरील लक्ष दूर आणि आता परत येथेच आलात असे वाटते, स्थलांतर करण्याचा प्रयत्न करा व आतील जाणीवा वरील लक्ष कायद्यामुळे या स्थितीत मला वाटतें तुम्ही इथेच तुमचे वाढवा. आपले घडाळ्याबरोबर धावण्याची आपली सवये (conditioning घालवण्यासाठीच तुम्ही येथे आलात. ही जीवघेणी धावपळ एकदाची थांबली पाहिजे, ती आपोआप थाबेल, जेव्हा ध्यानातून आपले चित्त तुम्ही स्वतःला घडवा. तिथे अनेक प्रयत्न करून फारसे आत येईल तेव्हा आतून शांतता मिळवाल, जी प्रत्येक मानवाला आवश्यक आहे, ज्यामुळे आपण सर्व जगाला विनाशापासून वाचवू. उध्वस्त जीवन विसरा, मला तुम्ही येथूनच तिकडे गेला आश्रम स्थापा, तुमच्या योजना इथेच राबवा. त्यामुळे तुमच्या येथे सतत येण्याने तुम्ही उन्नत व्हाल, येथे सतत ३/४ महिने राहून थोडी मिळकत जमवून येथे काही प्राप्त झाले नाही. आपल्या या सर्व दौर्यातून शेवटी हेच सिद्ध होते. इथले जीवन खडतर, रस्ते खडबडीत असले तरी आपण सर्वजण मजा घेत आहात. मी जेव्हा तुमच्या लक्षात आलेच असेल की सहजयोग वेगाने वाढत आहे. त्याने गती घेतली आहे. सर्व जगाला तुम्हाला पहाते, तुमचे सर्व काही व्यवस्थित आहे अधिक उत्तम व सर्व काही सुस्थितीत जमले आहे जसे घड्याळाची गुणवत्ता ठरविण्यासाठी त्यांना वाहत्या पाण्यात सोडले जाते नंतर तबकात टाकून जोरात हालविले जाते. या परीक्षेतूनही नंतर जे व्यवस्थित चालतात ते कुठल्याही परिस्थितीत कार्यक्षम राहतात मथून टाकणाच्या या महान क्रांतीकारक चळवळीचे आपण एक पायिक म्हणून आपण आता सर्व तयारीनिशी सिद्ध असले पाहिजे. आपल्या उथळ विचारांना व उथळ वागणुकीला टाकून आपण या कार्यात पूर्णपणे उतरणे हे महत्त्वाचे आहे. आपण सर्व प्रबळ आहोत. याशिवाय तुम्ही ईश्वरी शक्तीने तेच ठीक समजले जातात. त्याचप्रमाणे तुम्हाला या सर्व आशिर्वादित आहात. या शक्तीचा स्वतःकरता पूर्ण खडतर प्रक्रीयेतून तुम्ही बाहेर पडता व आतून पक्के उपयोग करा. तिच्याशी एकाकार व्हा. त्याकरिता होता. हे सर्व घडताना पाहून मला आनंद वाटतो आणि आपल्या शरीराला टाकीसारखे छिना शरीराला मनाला अहंकाराला रोका आणि त्या पैलूतून तुमची सुंदर प्रतिमा साकारू द्या ज्याकरिताः तुम्ही निवडले आहात. हीच गोष्ट आपण प्राप्त केली आहे. नंतर आपले लक्ष पैशापासून दूर असले पाहिजे. ही एक मोठी समस्या आहे. अगदी श्रीमंत राष्ट्रेही दुसरी गोष्ट म्हणजे माझे तुमच्या देशातील सतत पैशाच्या मागे असतात. भारतापेक्षा जास्तच, पाहूच आश्चर्य वाटते. प्रत्येक पै न् पै मोजून घेणारे हे आणि जेव्हा तुम्ही माझ्या या देशात येता तेव्हा तुम्ही देश खरंच प्रगत आहे का यावर विश्वास बसत नाही. भिकाऱ्यापेक्षाही कठीण परिस्थिति पैशाची ही चटक फारच विलक्षण आहे. तरी तुम्ही त्यापासून लांब रहा, इकडे तुम्ही येता आणि खर्या अर्थाने संपन्न होता पैशांची ही नाणी मोजत रहाण्यापेक्षा देवांची नावे घ्या. हे दौन्यामुळे तुम्हाला अनेक चांगल्या गोष्टी प्राप्त झाल्या इथलेच आहात असे तुम्हाला वाटते आणि तिकडच्या देशात तुमचे जीवन उध्वस्त असल्यासारखे वाटते. 4

 Marathi Translation (English Talk) यानंतर सुखसोयींची लागलेली चटक, तिकडचे जीवन इतके सुखावह आहे असे मला वाटत नाही. इकडे रात्रीही तुम्ही फिरु शकता. येथे कोणीही तुमचे पाकीट पळविणार नाही, बांगड्या हिसकावणार नाही. निर्धास्तपणे फिरु शकता. दारु पिऊन विचार करत बसणे 'हे असे करणे' अधिक चांगले झाले असते असे झाले तसे झाले हे सर्व काही चालूच असते. असे हे आतून चालू रहाते ते बंद करा. अशा लोकांना (पुटपुटणारे) ते खिस्ताने Murmuring suals तुम्ही एकमेकांशी धक्काबुक्की करणारे दिसणार नाही. सर्व काही सुरळीत आहे. ही एक मोठी प्राप्ती आहे. म्हणतात, त्यांच्यापासून सावध रहा. पण तुमच्या आतच अस्तित्वात असतात. अशा मूर्खपणाच्या बाबींकडे दुर्लक्ष करा. त्यावर बारीक नज़र ठेवा ज्याची तुम्हाला मदतच होईल. एकंदरीत मागील दौरा व यावर्षीच्या दौर्यामुळे तुमचे सामर्थ्यात अनेक शक्यता माझ्यासमोर आल्या ज्यामुळे मी खूप आनंदीत झाले. मीखरोखरच समाधानी आहे की यावर्षी तुम्ही जे मिळविले, येथील नवीन वातावरणात तुम्ही बनला सर्वकाही नम्र अगदी शांतपूर्ण आणि आत ओढून घेणारे चैतन्य सर्व काही महान, आनंददायक असे मला आहे. येथे तुम्हाला जरुर असणाच्या सुखसोयींचा नंतर विचार करा. या सर्व आधुनिक सुखसोयी इथे तितक्या आवश्यक नाही. इथल्या परिस्थितीशी जुळत्या नाहीत. असल्या अनावश्यक कल्पना येथे उत्तरवण्याची जरुर नाही. एकंदरीत येथे वैयक्तिक स्वच्छता उत्तम होते, तरीही येथील लोकांना सर्वसामान्य स्वच्छता करण्याची शिकवण तुम्ही त्यांना दाखवा. अशो तन्हेची तुमच्यातील देवाण घेवाणेची क्रिया फलदायी आहे, हे मात्र निश्चित. आणि तुमच्या अंतरात जे काहीघडते त्यामुळे तुम्ही वेगाने उन्नत व्हाल. येथे तुम्ही येऊन काही काळ राहून काही मिळवा व मग तुमच्या देशात परत जा. मग तेथील निगेटीव्हीटीची तुम्हाला पूर्ण जाणीव होईल. याबद्दल मी तुमची सर्वाची आभारी आहे आणि मला आशा आहे की अशारीतीने तुमची अधिक प्रगति होत जाईल. तुम्हाला अनंत आशीर्वाद. ০০ नंतरचा मुद्दा म्हणजे तुम्ही येथे काही तरी साध्य करण्यासाठी आला आहात याची जाणीव ठेवली पाहिजे. तुमच्याकडून घेण्यासारखे तर काही नाही. तुम्हीच काही मिळवा. तुम्ही विद्यार्थ्यासारखे आहात, काहीतरी चांगले शिकून घ्या, शिस्त निर्माण करा, एखाद्या शिष्यासारखे शंका विचारा, हे काय आहे ? कसे आहे? हे घर आहे, छान आहे. अवास्तव गोष्टींना थारा नानक "जानवे (यज्ञोपवीत) करुणेच्या कापासातून सूत काढले पाहिजे. त्याला सत्याचा पीळ देऊन संयमाची गाठ मारली पाहिजे. असले यज्ञोपवीत आत्म्याला पाहिजे ते तुटणार नाही, किंवा खराब होणार नाही, हरवणार किंवा जळणार नाही." देऊ नका, वायफळ गप्पाना दूर ठेवा. ज्याचा काही संबंध नाही त्या सर्वांचा त्याग करा. त्यापेक्षा शांत रहा "न कोई हिन्दू है। न कोई मुसलमान।" "काहे, रे, बन खोडान जाई? सर्व निवासी आलेपा, तोही संग समाई। पर व आतून ती बाढवण्याचा प्रयत्न करा. येथील लोकांना वेळ नसतो. त्यामुळे ते बडबडत नाही, ते आपल्या कामात गुंतलेले असतात. तुम्हाला तिकडेही भरपूर वेळ असतो, येथेही असतो म्हणून तसे वागू नका. हे करणे "अरे, देव जगलात का बसलाय? तो तर सर्वत्र चूक आहे. आहे." काही वेळेला आतूनच तुम्ही स्वतःच्या मनाशी बोलत राहता. सतत जसे काही गोष्टींचे पृथःकरण करत बसता किंवा टीका करणे, दोष काढणे आणि फुलात सुगंध, आरशात प्रतिबिंध तसा ईश्वर अंतःकरणांत सदैव रहात असतों." 5



----------------------

19840225_Talk To Sahaja Yogis_Rahuri.pdf-page0.txt 
 Talk to Sahaja Yogis
Date
25th February 1984
:
Place
Rahuri
Seminar & Meeting
Type
Speech
Language
English & Marathi
CONTENTS
| Transcript
|
02 - 03
English
Marathi
Hindi
|| Translation
English
Hindi
04 - 05
Marathi
 19840225_Talk To Sahaja Yogis_Rahuri.pdf-page1.txt 
 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT
ENGLISH TALK
I hope your journey has been comfortable so far and will be comfortable later on and the source of
comfort is your Spirit. And the more you see to the comfort of your Spirit, the problems of outside
comforts drop out. You are not bothered as to where you live, where you sleep, what you eat, what you
do. So to allow these gross sensitivities to drop down, so that the inner subtler sensitivities grow, that's
why you are here. To get over your time, conditionings, I mean, it's a rat race and the rat race has to be
somehow or other stopped, once [and] for all, within and without.
So, here we can do it without and once you start meditating, the within can be also achieved and
you can achieve that peace which we all human beings should have, if you have to save this world
from complete destruction. And you must have realised that, now the Sahaja Yoga is growing much
faster, and it's taking a good speed, and we all have to keep ourselves equipped to be able to be part and
parcel of this great evolutionary and revolutionary process which is going to stir up the whole world.
For that it is important also to see that we take ourselves to task and don't get into mediocre living
and mediocre thinking. We are people of very great potential. Not only that but we are blessed by
God's Divine power. Try to use that power within yourself and try to be one with it. Little bit you
to see that you beat-up you body, beat-up your mind, beat-up your ego and chisel it out so that it is
beautifully made in such a way that you grow into that image for which you are made.
have
Regarding our things like My tours in your countries: I think the greatest good is done to you
when you come to this country. As if you belong to this country and you were uprooted in some other
country. And when you come here you prosper so well, and in that country I try so hard and work so
hard, do all kinds of things. All the time I spend with you, I do everything, day and night, all the time. I
find it's impossible to achieve much that I see happening to you here, as if here you take absolutely
with great ease, the divinity of this place, and I think this uprootedness has to be given up, I think. As if
you have emigrated into those countries and now you are back in your own. You were not found out by
immigration laws I think.
Now under these circumstances we should change our tactics and try to establish our ashrams
here and our own projects here so that you people should come down here and achieve more. You can
earn a living there but you should come here and spend some time for 2 months, 3 months,
continuously and establish yourself and grow because I don't think it can be achieved there that good,
because we tried everything.
So this is the ultimate outcome of our trips all over. Despite all kinds of hazardous roads and
hazardous life here, we are doing very well I must say. And when I see you I find you are very good and
you are all very much better and it's all improved. Like watches, you see when you have to make them
immune, you put them under absurd conditions and they get alright. Like that, now you are immune.
They are put into, I have seen, into troughs, which are shaken very heavily, as you were shaken
yesterday in the buses and then they are made to pass through water which is running very fast on
them. And all this we are trying here and I think your immunity is growing very fast, to outward things
and we are becoming really solid, eternal timepieces; the way you are created here. And I'm so very
happy to see the development. That's the main point which we have achieved here.
So the attention should be out, away, from money first of all. That's one of the biggest problems.
Actually nobody can believe that affluent countries are much more money minded than Indians are.
Though they are so developed. You see the developed countries are much more money minded than
the Indians are, it's very surprising. When you see the way they count their pennies it's impossible to
 19840225_Talk To Sahaja Yogis_Rahuri.pdf-page2.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
believe that these are really developed people. They are worse than beggars sometimes. So that is
what you should get out of it, the money part. Money is horrible stuff, that people count and I mean it's
better to count the names of God than to count the money, horrible coins!
Then, we have other things like gross attachments to comfort. But I don't think it's a very
comfortable life there, because here you can move in the night any time, and you won't meet anybody
who will snatch your purse or snatch your bangles. You can move about the way you like and nobody's
going to bother you. You won't meet 2, 3 drunkards beating each other, nothing of the kind. So it's a
very pure life here. That's a very big achievement. And the comforts that you want you can create later
on if you want to have them. At least, I personally think, that too much modernisation won't suit this
place, so you should not give them these useless ideas which makes you body slave to your own
comforts and ideas of enslavement. In any case, cleanliness, personal cleanliness, is very good here,
but the general cleanliness has to be taught to these people.
All this giving and taking process will work out very well I am sure, and the way things are
moving within yourself, I have great hopes that you will really grow much faster if you come to this
country and stay here for some time, in a subtle way, and then go back to your countries. That would be
much better than to have a visit to your countries which I feel sometimes is just bombarded by
negativity.
The another point which I wanted to tell you is that, you must learn to understand that you have
come here to gain something. Nobody is going to gain anything out of you. So you have to gain
something here, you are students and so you have to learn something and try to develop a sense of
discipline like a disciple who receives all that is around: "What's that? What's this? How is it? This is
the house, that's nice." You see like that. But if you go on seeing the things which are of no importance
and loose talking, about things that do not matter with you. All this has to be given up because you
waste so much time there that people sit down and jabber, talk, loose talks, ugly talks, useless talks.
That's not needed at all. On the contrary, it's better to be quiet and assimilate more within yourself.
Because here the people don't have time, so they can't talk, they have to work. But while you have time
there, also here, so we start like that, and that's a very wrong thing.
99
Another talking is done with yourself also, quite a lot. Like you start analysing, criticizing and
finding faults and all the time thinking, "Oh, this could have been better. I am harmed very much
here," or "That has happened," all those things come into your heads. So this kind of a inner talk also
should be stopped. You see they are called as murmuring souls by Christ, who said "Beware of
murmuring souls." But these murmuring souls exist within us, so beware of them, and don't listen to
all nonsensical talks and try to keep a good eye on that and be alert, so it will help you.
I must say this trip and the last trip I am overjoyed and I am very happy that it has brought forth so
many possibilities before Me and more potential. I am very happy about it that somehow in this year
we have achieved a new type of atmosphere among all of you, which is humble, which is quiet, which
is peaceful, which is absorbing the Divine. Which is a very great joyous thing for Me so I thank you
very much for all that. I hope you keep up your progress this way.
99
99
3
 19840225_Talk To Sahaja Yogis_Rahuri.pdf-page3.txt 
 MARATHI TRANSLATION
(English Talk)
Scanned from Marathi Chaitanya Lahari
आणि तिकडे देशात मी एवढे प्रयत्न करते, खूप कष्ट
स्वस्थतेचे उगमस्थान आपला आत्मा आहे.
घेते सर्वकाही तुमच्याबरोबर राहून करते तरी फारसे
आपले चिते जेव्हा आपल्या आत्मसुखाकडे राहते तेव्हा
बाह्यातील सुखोपभोग गळून पडतात. आपण कोठे यश येत नाही. पण येथे ते सहज प्राप्त करता. आपले
राहतो, कोंठे झोपतो, काय खातो, कारय करतो याची
चिता करत नाही. अशा बाह्य गोष्टीवरील लक्ष दूर आणि आता परत येथेच आलात असे वाटते, स्थलांतर
करण्याचा प्रयत्न करा व आतील जाणीवा वरील लक्ष कायद्यामुळे या स्थितीत मला वाटतें तुम्ही इथेच तुमचे
वाढवा. आपले घडाळ्याबरोबर धावण्याची आपली
सवये (conditioning घालवण्यासाठीच तुम्ही येथे
आलात. ही जीवघेणी धावपळ एकदाची थांबली पाहिजे,
ती आपोआप थाबेल, जेव्हा ध्यानातून आपले चित्त तुम्ही स्वतःला घडवा. तिथे अनेक प्रयत्न करून फारसे
आत येईल तेव्हा आतून शांतता मिळवाल, जी प्रत्येक
मानवाला आवश्यक आहे, ज्यामुळे आपण सर्व जगाला
विनाशापासून वाचवू.
उध्वस्त जीवन विसरा, मला तुम्ही येथूनच तिकडे गेला
आश्रम स्थापा, तुमच्या योजना इथेच राबवा. त्यामुळे
तुमच्या येथे सतत येण्याने तुम्ही उन्नत व्हाल, येथे
सतत ३/४ महिने राहून थोडी मिळकत जमवून येथे
काही प्राप्त झाले नाही. आपल्या या सर्व दौर्यातून
शेवटी हेच सिद्ध होते.
इथले जीवन खडतर, रस्ते खडबडीत असले
तरी आपण सर्वजण मजा घेत आहात. मी जेव्हा
तुमच्या लक्षात आलेच असेल की सहजयोग
वेगाने वाढत आहे. त्याने गती घेतली आहे. सर्व जगाला
तुम्हाला पहाते, तुमचे सर्व काही व्यवस्थित आहे
अधिक उत्तम व सर्व काही सुस्थितीत जमले आहे जसे
घड्याळाची गुणवत्ता ठरविण्यासाठी त्यांना वाहत्या
पाण्यात सोडले जाते नंतर तबकात टाकून जोरात
हालविले जाते. या परीक्षेतूनही नंतर जे व्यवस्थित
चालतात ते कुठल्याही परिस्थितीत कार्यक्षम राहतात
मथून टाकणाच्या या महान क्रांतीकारक चळवळीचे
आपण एक पायिक म्हणून आपण आता सर्व
तयारीनिशी सिद्ध असले पाहिजे. आपल्या उथळ
विचारांना व उथळ वागणुकीला टाकून आपण या
कार्यात पूर्णपणे उतरणे हे महत्त्वाचे आहे. आपण सर्व
प्रबळ आहोत. याशिवाय तुम्ही ईश्वरी शक्तीने तेच ठीक समजले जातात. त्याचप्रमाणे तुम्हाला या सर्व
आशिर्वादित आहात. या शक्तीचा स्वतःकरता पूर्ण खडतर प्रक्रीयेतून तुम्ही बाहेर पडता व आतून पक्के
उपयोग करा. तिच्याशी एकाकार व्हा. त्याकरिता होता. हे सर्व घडताना पाहून मला आनंद वाटतो आणि
आपल्या शरीराला टाकीसारखे छिना शरीराला मनाला
अहंकाराला रोका आणि त्या पैलूतून तुमची सुंदर
प्रतिमा साकारू द्या ज्याकरिताः तुम्ही निवडले आहात.
हीच गोष्ट आपण प्राप्त केली आहे.
नंतर आपले लक्ष पैशापासून दूर असले पाहिजे.
ही एक मोठी समस्या आहे. अगदी श्रीमंत राष्ट्रेही
दुसरी गोष्ट म्हणजे माझे तुमच्या देशातील सतत पैशाच्या मागे असतात. भारतापेक्षा जास्तच,
पाहूच आश्चर्य वाटते. प्रत्येक पै न् पै मोजून घेणारे हे
आणि जेव्हा तुम्ही माझ्या या देशात येता तेव्हा तुम्ही देश खरंच प्रगत आहे का यावर विश्वास बसत नाही.
भिकाऱ्यापेक्षाही कठीण परिस्थिति पैशाची ही चटक
फारच विलक्षण आहे. तरी तुम्ही त्यापासून लांब रहा,
इकडे तुम्ही येता आणि खर्या अर्थाने संपन्न होता पैशांची ही नाणी मोजत रहाण्यापेक्षा देवांची नावे घ्या.
हे
दौन्यामुळे तुम्हाला अनेक चांगल्या गोष्टी प्राप्त झाल्या
इथलेच आहात असे तुम्हाला वाटते आणि तिकडच्या
देशात तुमचे जीवन उध्वस्त असल्यासारखे वाटते.
4
 19840225_Talk To Sahaja Yogis_Rahuri.pdf-page4.txt 
 Marathi Translation (English Talk)
यानंतर सुखसोयींची लागलेली चटक, तिकडचे
जीवन इतके सुखावह आहे असे मला वाटत नाही.
इकडे रात्रीही तुम्ही फिरु शकता. येथे कोणीही तुमचे
पाकीट पळविणार नाही, बांगड्या हिसकावणार नाही.
निर्धास्तपणे फिरु शकता. दारु पिऊन
विचार करत बसणे 'हे असे करणे' अधिक चांगले झाले
असते असे झाले तसे झाले हे सर्व काही चालूच असते.
असे हे आतून चालू रहाते ते बंद करा. अशा लोकांना
(पुटपुटणारे)
ते
खिस्ताने
Murmuring
suals
तुम्ही
एकमेकांशी धक्काबुक्की करणारे दिसणार नाही. सर्व
काही सुरळीत आहे. ही एक मोठी प्राप्ती आहे.
म्हणतात, त्यांच्यापासून सावध रहा. पण तुमच्या
आतच अस्तित्वात असतात. अशा मूर्खपणाच्या
बाबींकडे दुर्लक्ष करा. त्यावर बारीक नज़र ठेवा ज्याची
तुम्हाला मदतच होईल. एकंदरीत मागील दौरा व
यावर्षीच्या दौर्यामुळे तुमचे सामर्थ्यात अनेक शक्यता
माझ्यासमोर आल्या ज्यामुळे मी खूप आनंदीत झाले.
मीखरोखरच समाधानी आहे की यावर्षी तुम्ही जे
मिळविले, येथील नवीन वातावरणात तुम्ही बनला
सर्वकाही नम्र अगदी शांतपूर्ण आणि आत ओढून घेणारे
चैतन्य सर्व काही महान, आनंददायक असे मला आहे.
येथे
तुम्हाला जरुर असणाच्या सुखसोयींचा नंतर
विचार करा. या सर्व आधुनिक सुखसोयी इथे तितक्या
आवश्यक नाही. इथल्या परिस्थितीशी जुळत्या नाहीत.
असल्या अनावश्यक कल्पना येथे उत्तरवण्याची जरुर
नाही. एकंदरीत येथे वैयक्तिक स्वच्छता उत्तम होते,
तरीही येथील लोकांना सर्वसामान्य स्वच्छता
करण्याची शिकवण तुम्ही त्यांना दाखवा. अशो तन्हेची
तुमच्यातील देवाण घेवाणेची क्रिया फलदायी आहे, हे
मात्र निश्चित. आणि तुमच्या अंतरात जे काहीघडते
त्यामुळे तुम्ही वेगाने उन्नत व्हाल. येथे तुम्ही येऊन
काही काळ राहून काही मिळवा व मग तुमच्या देशात
परत जा. मग तेथील निगेटीव्हीटीची तुम्हाला पूर्ण
जाणीव होईल.
याबद्दल मी तुमची सर्वाची आभारी आहे आणि
मला आशा आहे की अशारीतीने तुमची अधिक प्रगति
होत जाईल.
तुम्हाला अनंत आशीर्वाद.
০০
नंतरचा मुद्दा म्हणजे तुम्ही येथे काही तरी साध्य
करण्यासाठी आला आहात याची जाणीव ठेवली
पाहिजे. तुमच्याकडून घेण्यासारखे तर काही नाही.
तुम्हीच काही मिळवा. तुम्ही विद्यार्थ्यासारखे आहात,
काहीतरी चांगले शिकून घ्या, शिस्त निर्माण करा,
एखाद्या शिष्यासारखे शंका विचारा, हे काय आहे ? कसे
आहे? हे घर आहे, छान आहे. अवास्तव गोष्टींना थारा
नानक
"जानवे (यज्ञोपवीत)
करुणेच्या कापासातून सूत काढले पाहिजे. त्याला
सत्याचा पीळ देऊन संयमाची गाठ मारली पाहिजे.
असले यज्ञोपवीत आत्म्याला पाहिजे ते तुटणार नाही,
किंवा खराब होणार नाही, हरवणार किंवा जळणार
नाही."
देऊ नका, वायफळ गप्पाना दूर ठेवा. ज्याचा काही
संबंध नाही त्या सर्वांचा त्याग करा. त्यापेक्षा शांत रहा
"न कोई हिन्दू है। न कोई मुसलमान।"
"काहे, रे, बन खोडान जाई?
सर्व निवासी आलेपा, तोही संग समाई।
पर
व आतून ती बाढवण्याचा प्रयत्न करा. येथील लोकांना
वेळ नसतो. त्यामुळे ते बडबडत नाही, ते आपल्या
कामात गुंतलेले असतात. तुम्हाला तिकडेही भरपूर वेळ
असतो, येथेही असतो म्हणून तसे वागू नका. हे करणे
"अरे, देव जगलात का बसलाय? तो तर सर्वत्र
चूक आहे.
आहे."
काही वेळेला आतूनच तुम्ही स्वतःच्या मनाशी
बोलत राहता. सतत जसे काही गोष्टींचे पृथःकरण
करत बसता किंवा टीका करणे, दोष काढणे आणि
फुलात सुगंध, आरशात प्रतिबिंध तसा ईश्वर
अंतःकरणांत सदैव रहात असतों."
5
