Nirmala Yoga Vol, 4 No. 24 Bi-Monthly Vol. Nov.-Dec. 1984 + "Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns all the religions and seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga THE UNION"

 NIRM ALA YOGA 43, Bungalow Road, Delhi-110007 (India) Founder : Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Editorial Board : Dr. S.K. Mathur, Sri A.S. Mishra, Sri R.D. Kulkarni Representatives : CHERYL REBEIRO, 1267, Burke Road, KEW 3101, VICTORIA. : INGE KELLY, Gartnergasse 17/10, 1030 VIENNA. : LORI & CARY HYNEK, 3151, Heather Street, Vancouver, B.C. V5Z 3K2. ALEXANDRE PICOVSCHI, 175, Av. Ledru Rollin PARIS-75011. : ANTONIO SARACINO, PIAZZA E, MILLO 9 e/2, 00122-109, OSTIA LIDO, Australia Austria Canada France www taly ROMA. :M.B. RATNANNWAR, 13, Merwan Mansion, Genjewala Lane, Borivali (W)., BOMBAY-400092. India : JUAN ANTONIO DELGADO, Avenida De Burgos, 30, 1, A, MADRID-28036 Spain Switzerland : CHARLES & MRS. MAGDA MATHYS, 5, Chemin Des Mouidins, 1256. Troinex (Canton de Geneva). : GAVIN BROWN, Brown's Geological Information Services Ltd., 134 Great Portland Street, London WIN 5PH. M.J. MURDOCH, 14A Bourne Ave, S. RUISLIP, MIDDLESEX, HAH 6TZ, ENGLAND. U. K. : CHRISTINE PETRUNIA, 270. Jay Street (APT. 1-C), BROOKLYN, U.S.A. NY-11201. URSULA SEH LMEYER, 191 Canal ST. #23 SAN RAFAEL, CA-94901. CONTENTS Page 1. 1. Editorial 2: Complete Dedication the only way 11 3. Mother (Poem) 12 4. Every Sahaja Yogi has to become a Guru 29 5. Shri Kundalini and Shri Jems Christ 39 6. An outline for understanding "the Deities" 41 7. Mantras 44 8. We bow to thee, Shri Mataji (Poem) 44 9. To Rakhi brother (Poem) 45 10. Dangers of Research into Parapsychology

 Editorial In the 12th Chapter of the Gita Lord Krishna has explained which of the devotees are dear to Him:- अद्वेष्टा सर्वभूताना निर्ममो निरहङ्कारः समदुःखसुखः क्षमी । सन्तुष्टः सततं योगी यतात्मा दृढ़निश्चयः । मय्यपितमनोव्रुद्धिय्यों मद्भक्तः समे प्रियः । मंत्रः करूण एव च । Adveshtä sarva bhhotänäm maitrah karuna eva cha i Nirmamo Nirhankärah sama dukkha Sukhah kshamee t Santushtah satatam Yogi yatāmā drudha Nishchayah i Mayyarpita mano buddhiryo madbhaktah same priyah "He, who is free from hate or malice towards all living beings and is friendly and compas- sionate towards them all, has no attachments or egoism and is forgiving by nature ; to him pleasure and pain are alike. He is ever-contented, steady in meditation and having subdued his sense-organs is self-controlled and possessed of firm conviction, has completely surrendered his mind and intellect to Me, such a devotee is dear to Me." Having no malice and being friendly and compassionate to all is one of the most difficult achievements for ardinary people. It may be possible for one to cultivate the former with great determination and constant practice of reminding oneself of this mentally accepted attitude but the latter is extremely difficult. However, it is not so, for Sahaja Yogis: The first is the precursor to the second. Developing one's ability to truly enjoy the collectivity would perhaps help. It is not enough to be merely in the group of Sahaja Yogis in order to be in the collectivity. A person carrying with him his own attachments and identifications even amidst Sahaja Yogis is in reality outside the collectivity. It should be possible to forget one's own indi- viduality. Pleasure and pain, joy and sorrow, love and hatred arise from the individuality. the product of one's ego. Accepting the incoveniences in order to accomodate others, accepting and following others' view point if correct, would help balancing a rightsided and individualistic person. Nirmala Yoga

 It is, therefore, necessary to mingle freely among Sahaja Yogis, participate in all collective activities and merge one's own attention in the collective attention of the group, One has to learn to und arstand and tolerate others and do whatever little is possible to help and please them without feeling any incovenience and adjusting with collective ideas. Gradually extending the bond of love and strengthening it and further extending it to all the Sahaja Yogis and becoming a part of Mother's universal love enveloping entire mankind and the totality. One is in the collectivity in the state of thoughtless awareness. The Spirit would manifest through the person established in the thoughtless awareness and relate with the Spirit of other persons, Attachment and ego have no place in one's relations. Forgiveness, compassion, sweet manners come out spontaneously. Shri Mataji has said at one place that looking at a person in thoughtlessness would make him also thoughtless. A person who is completely united with the Atma can understand the Atma of others, for he has experienced the oneness, the universality of the Atma and is always in the Atmabhāv. Shri Jnaneshwar has described this stage which can be called as the highest stage of collectivity in these words,.. 'हे विश्वाची मजे घर । ऐशी मति जयचि स्थिर ।। "He Vishwachi Maze Ghar Aishi mati jayächi sthir" His buddhi (the intellect) does not even slightly deviate from the idea that the whole universe is his home. Contentment becomes the nature of such a person, his chitta being ever united with the Atma does not get identified with any external object of sense pleasure. He does not desire anything else except the Paramätmä and has surrendered his mind and intellect (the budhi) to the Paramātmä. He has no worry about his life and other wordly affairs being aware that these are being looked after by the Supreme. Keeping attention on the lotus feet of Sakshat Shri Atmā Paramātmā Shri Adi Shakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi is, fully being in the essence of collectivity, at the hightest stage of evolution. Shri Mataji has granted to us the highest place, let us make our utmost to evolve and deserve it and stabilize at it completely. 2. Nirmala Yoga

 Her Holiness SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI COMPLETE DEDICATION THE ONLY WAY (Cowley Manor Seminar, 31-7-82) Today 1 am going to say something, this I should have said much earlier. this is the first time I'm saying this to you- that you have to dedicate yourself completely to me; not to Sahaja Yoga. but to me'. t Sahaja Yoga is just one of my aspects. As today I told you, that it is necessary that you have to recognise me. And: that recognition is fixed, that condition is fixed. I Leaving everything, you have to dedicate. cannot change it. As Christ has already said, that "Anything against me will be tolerated, ascend any further. Without questioning, will be forgiven, but anything against the Holy Ghost will not be". It's a very big war- ning. Perhaps people don't realize what it means. Of course none of you are against me, that's very true. After all you are my childern, I love you very much and you love me. That's only the warning that Christ has people ask me, that once we have got realisa- given you. But one must think why we are not progressing so fast, as we should have. Complete Dedication,-otherwise you cannot without arguing. Complete Dedication is the 'only' way you can achieve it. People still get caught up. Still get into problems. What's the reason? So many tion, how is it Mother we go down ? The 'only' reason is that Dedication is not When people are mesmerised they fall complete: if 'complete' reverence and 'com- "completely flat on the ground, in front of plete' dedication has not been established; their gurus. Absolutely'. They give up their you still do not know that I'm Divine-to money. they give up everything-homes, 'that' extent as you should. houses, families, children, and just go flat -when they are mesmerised. Without asking look into your mind, you'll find out that com- any questions, without going into 'any plete devotion that you had for say, Christ, detail, without trying to find out the life of their guru. All such people also go very have been, is not there. fast into darkness, into greater darknes, and into cemplete destruction. But you are Sahaja Yogis and you have to construct HH Es a), forget all the religions of the "that' extent as you should. I don't say all of you. But still if you look into your heart and or for any one of those who or for Krishna, Krishna said,"Sarva dharmänām parityajya mimdkam sharanam vraja" (सर्व. धर्मानाम् परित्यज्ज् yourself. world. Religions doesn't mean-it does not I didn't want to shatter your egos before, mean the religions like, Hindu, Christian, never to tell you in these words. Perhaps Muslim, but He was meaning all the suste- Nirmala Yoga

 nance. "Forget all the sustenance, and completely dedicate to me."-That was six to Me. thousand years back. And there are many who would still say that, "that we have com- pletely dedicated ourselves to Shri Krishna. Where is He now? Even those, whom by the way and Mother is very much by the have given,I have given realisation, they say waY- Im sorry it's not going to work out. I like that. Of course, there is no difference dont have to tell this to you because if you between Hin & Me, but today am the Tead Devi Mahatmya it's sufficient. Even if One. I am the one who has given you reali- sation. But our tirst consideration could be our jobs, our own problems, our family prob- lems-And dedication is the last. I'm itlusive-it is true-my name is Maha- mayā. I am illusive no doubt. But I'm illusive people who can talk. better, who can arque just to judge you. might, whatever is there, you have to hold on But our style of dedication is very fashio- nable and modern, in which Sahaja Yoga is you read Her 1000 names, it's sufficient: That She can be only achieved through 'bhakti". She can only be achieved through Dedication. She's only fond of Her bhaktas-the devatees. It's nowhere written that She is fond of better, who dress better, who live better, who have better surroundings : but Her devotees. Now the Dedication is a very important And this Devotion and Dedication should not part of the ascent. Why? Because when be a frenzy or anything, but should be you are precariously placed. when there is sustained', 'continuous', 'ever- flowing', 'ever immediate danger to your existence; at this growing', That's the only way, now, for further time, when the whole world is standing at a precarious position where it is going to be destroyed completely, it is 'very important that you 'cling' on to the thing that is going has a admission in the college, somebody has to save you. With complete might and complete' faith. development. For us, so many small problems are impor- some job to be done. All these considera- tions are dharmas which Shri Krishna has Like you are getting drenched in ordinary discribed "Sarva dharmänām parityajya māmé- water, doesn't matter. But if you are sinking in kam sharanam vraja": Give up all the the sea and there's a question of-this moment of existence and that moment of destruction- dharmas-'all' these so caled dharmas. Like a patni dharma (t-si) is the duty of a that time, if a hand comes forward to fetch wife, then the pati-dharma (sfa- is the you out, there's no time for you to think any- duty of a husband, then the putra-dharma more but cling on to it- with all your might, (ga-s) is the duty of a son, the pitā-dharma (frat-) is the duty of father, and duty of a citizen, and duty of a world-citizen. All these dharmas are to be given-up 'entirely. And you have to surrender fully from your with all your faith. When we have bädhäs, when we are surrounded by negativity, we get aware of it, and little-bit we get confused. And that's the time we want to cling on. But the bādhās give you ideas which are detrimental. So a big struggle is set At that time what is the best way? The best way is, to forget, 'every- This is an eternal personality. It is now for thing else. there is badhā or anything. With 'all' your make the use of your birth in these modern heart. I am what I am, I have been that, I'll be that. I'm not going to grow any more, or less. Forget that you are possessed or you to get out of me whatever is possible. To 4 Nirmala Yoga

 times. To 'grow' to your full maturity, To be out will also go into the myre. Anybody who able to work out the complete design that wants to come even near the myre, gets into Divine wants to do through you. As soon as the myre He becomes part and parcel of it. the Dedication starts, you become dynamic. The more we try to take help from others, we Clinging on to that. pull him more in the myre and we go more down, deep down into it. For this, meditation is the only way So the tree of Kundalini has to grow. And should say. Of course, rationally can do many things. You can rationally from that tree, Paramūtmä Himself, the Para- you Emotionally you may feel brahma Itself, has to pull you out. It grows me. accept closer to me in your heart. But through out of the myre, and the Parabrahma has to meditation, Surrender. Meditation is nothing pull you out-ons by one, take you in the but surrendering-is 'complete' surrendering. Hand and swing you out. But still when you Which is a difficult task for a modern are pulled out, your catch is not sufficient, man in the Western countries. He only you slip down again. You come up partly. surrenders mesmerise, again you go down It's very enjoyable to people who who tully mesmerise them, they become to be out of it, but still the feet have not slaves of people who mesmerise them, But in their 'own freedom, their ego is more cleansed. Uniess and until you are cleansed powerful than their Spirit-in their own how can you be completely blessed? You freedom. That's why all the free countries have to be fully blessed by the Divine, cloth- have gone to dogs. Because ego plays part, ed by the Love of God. not the Spirit. They cannot master their ego when they are free. Only if somebody can who go to these false gurus stick on to him just entangle their ego and mesmerise them, then they are alright-they are shut, 'com- pletely' they surrender. And it's so obvious just like cabbages ! Till they are 'completely" from the way these false people have mas- ruined they just go on surrendering 'every- tered their art of making slaves out of you. come out fully. Still you are not completely It is surprising to see, how the people or stick on to her, in such "tremendous' dedi- cation that you are amazed. They become THE thing' that they have. But in Sahaja Yoga, when people come, they do not surrender; but they are nouri- shed, they are looked after. Their health Freedom does not mean "ego", one should improves, their wealth improves, their mind understand. Freedom is killed by ego. Not improves, their relations improve, every way only killed but is disfigured and disgraced, is they feel better, their conditions improve. In your full freedom, 'complete freedom. you have to surrender. made ugly. Freedom in subtlest form is com- They are all the time getting the benefit. We plete egolessness, no angularities, complete have Ashrams which are beautiful, which are hollowness, just like the flute; so that the the cheapest, and the food-every advantage melody of God could be played well-that's that is available; best possible. Everything "complete' freedom.-no hang ups. is there. We have to realize that we are in the myre. Myre of ignorance, myre of sin. ment is for what ? All these blessings are: Ignorance brings sin. How are we to get out for what 7For your higher ascent. For of the myre? Anybody who tries to pull us getting out of the myre completely, But we don't realize that all this nourish- Nirmala Yoga

 Now, you have to adhere, you have to be when I see you quarrelling among yoLuTs elves. dedicated, you have to be devoted. We have Jealousies and and petty things which belong reservations, we hide things. We try to be to your past life, The help is not so much smart. That's a dangerous situation. You all gross that is felt, but it's a 'very deeper should, within yourself. try to see: What part is so, still. What conditioning is keep brothers and sisters. A 'deep' love should ing you out of Dedication, what is making exist. Selfishness has no place in Sahaja you have reservations: what fright, which Yoga. Miserliness has no place in Sahaja ego,what angle still sticking out into the myre What attachments, what relationships ? You of a very small mind. I'm not saying you have to get out of it. Unless and until you give me maney, of course.-But the way we fully get out of it, it's not going to work out. sense of security that is given to your Yoga. Has no place Miserliness is a sign look at money, the way we cling-on to it: There's no place for half-baked things, the material things, the material wealth, the It's a question of "now, or never", Christ material objects, the possessions. has said it. He had said it, "You give your Devotion and Dedication and then leave the Mother. Through Her you have your brothers rest to me". The greatest possession you have is your and sisters. Get out of that past life-that past, the I know who are progressing in Dedication and Devotion. I've seen people improving myre. That should be over now. You are so much. You need not face me, you need quite aware, how with my power of Love, not see me. In person I need not be there, 've protected you all: You know how, at It's all in the all-pervading power. That is every moment, I've helped you. At every all my life style, which knows each and point of your desire, I've come forward to everything about you. And only through fulfil it. That's one side-as I said the your bhakti--through your Devotion Dedication you can achieve me. and nourishment. But now your ascent has to come from you. Your rising has to come from you. That has to be worked out by My achievement is the complete manifes- you-and you alone. Not by any other tation of your Divine powers. It's very sahaja yogi or by me. I can only give you simple, made so simple. I'm only pleased by suggestions. Not only the suggestion, but people who are simple, innocent. who're not the warnings. And 'everything' is at hand. It's tricky, who are loving, affectionate to each all worked out so well. I'm informed. other, It's very easy to please me. When I informed before. You don't have to go any- see you loving each other. talking good of where. The whole thing is 'within' yourself. each other, helping each other, respecting You don't have to give money,. you don't each other, laughing aloud together, enjoying have to give anything. But develop that together each other's company. I get my first Dedication within yourself. blessing-first joy. I'm See, this man who interviewed me, said Try to love each other-in Dedication: that the unemployed are manoeuvred by the you". of my love. In the womb of my love you all But how ? Supposing I've a brush in my have resided. From my heart I've given you hand, I want to paint something. And the these blessings. I get disturbed, my hands brushI cannot manoeuvre. The brush is shake and you fall back in to the myre again angular, it's troublesome. It's incovenient to because you re all my children, created out politicians. "Let "God', manoeuvre Nirmala Yoga

 use that, or you can say it's uncomfortable, earth ? Who has created this earth ?-My it's awkward, it's clumsy. How can you use Mother, has created her. Who has created it ? Dedication is the easiest way to get rid af is greater than my Mother ?-No one else. all' your angularities, 'all your problems, 'all Why not go round my Mother only. What's the your badhas. Now watch and see it within yourself: much before Karttikeya arrived He was sitting "Are you dedicated ? Those who are fanati- With this present in His hand! cally adhering to me are also not correct. There should be no 'fanaticism about it. The understand-That's what logical is. It's 'very whole thing becomes a complete logical Jogical. And also logical it is, that "Mother this Sun ?-My Mother has created it. Who need to go all round the whole earth ?"-And His innocence gave Him this wisdom to thing. There is no fanaticism about it. feels my pain more thanT feel". What will you say when Christ was crucified for His She was Mahälakshmi Herself-so person might say, 'Ooh I I'm not going to see powerful ! She made Her Son sacrifice His the doctor. I'm not going, because Mother life, suffer like a human being. It was too has told me that She's going to look after much !-Make your son sacrifice when you Like, somebody says: "Now I've to go to a doctor, to see a doctor." Then the fanatic me". And when she gets sick, she'll come to Mother and fight. "Mother ! You had told me that you look after me and how is it l've got sick ?"-This is fanatic. have all the Powers in your hand to finish everyone ! But it was a very delicate job- to create this Agnya Chakra. What does that mean ? Does that mean What is Surrendering?-Deep down you should say "It's the Mother. She's there, She's my doctor. Whether. She treats me or not, whether She cures me or not I've nothing devotion, that She could ask "Him to do to say. I only know Her. 1 dont't know that. So when you expect Mother to do 'anyone' else."-It's very logical. The logic something for you,-There are people who say, is, that Mother is the most powerful thing: , I must that you know logically- it's true. And if get through', Alright, give a bandhan, you'll She is so, She'll cure me; but if She does get it. "Mother, I'm trying to discover this". not cure me, it's Her power, it's Her whim. Alright, you have it. 'Mother I'm trying to If She wants to cure me, She'll cure me. If get this job". You have it. She does not want to cure me, how can / put that He lacked something in His devotion?-On the contrary She was so sure of Him, of His Alright, Mother l'm giving this thesis, it. Now, it's the other way round. 'my' will upon 'Her? Like the Dedication of Shri Ganesha. That How many have dedication that of Christ ? when His Mother said, "Alright, between the -None. It's a fact ! Why is He the eldest two brothers, Karttikéya and Him, the one who brother?-because no one like Him. He went will go round the Mother Earth first, will get through all that-those 'horrible' sufferings- because He was part and parcel of His Mother. She suffered much more than Him. She also had I And Karttikéya had a 'very' quick-moving went through that suffering for a greater goal greater happiness, for a greater life, for a peacock, and He said, "Who is greater than higher life. That is 'real Dedication". But my Mother ? She is Adi Shakti ! What is this these false people can take advantage of this. the first prize". Now poor Ganesha had a little rat on which to move ; but vwisdom He peacock which used to tly. He looked at the Nirmala Yoga 7

 When they make the people suffer, they say complete Dedication and preparation for a "after all you have to suffer". See, how future life of a Sahaja Yogi, you accept. they make it up ! "You must suffer because, after-all, You must suffer, otherwise you can strugale, a problem; but inwardly is most not start" it's a 'very' subtle understanding. Very subtle it is. That will make it clear to you: That in Sahaja Yoga at first you are nourished, you're brought up. You're trained You're made alright. And 'all' the things ground was too much of a sacritice. that you do after that-the sufferings- are 'no to take out shoesa big sacrifice. Yesterday more sufferings to you because you've in a programme three people walked off become the Spirit. Nainam chhidanti shast- rani, nainam dahati pūvakah. A life, which outwardly looks to be a fulfilling. Once upon a time, when Sahaja Yogis came to me; to them, even to sit on the Even because they were asked to take out shoes; if somebody was making them bald- ieaded. They just walked-off. as Na chainam kledayantyapo, na shosayati But, why to grow in Sahaja Yoga ?-To grow ; to stand up. Like great children of a Great Mother. The work is 'tremendous. It's not for medium, mediocre people to do this job. Frightened, fearful. arrogant, cheeky -they cannot, they have no mettle. mūrutah. "जैন ডিदन्ति शस्त्राणि मैनं दहति पावक । ने भन कनेदयमयापो न मोसपति मारत :॥ -It cannot be killed by any instru- ment. It cannot be thrown away or blown away by any wind ; It cannot be burnt by any fire; there's no way you can destroy it. That is Spirit that you are. So, the Dedication in meditation. Com- plete Dedication in meditation must be practiced. It's not for tyour' good now you're So the nourishment has been given now. You've grown up, you're nourished. People, doing it. So-called 'your'. First you were a when they see Sahaja Yogis, they say, "Oh little baby, a small thing. Now you are that Collective Being, so. you are not doing they are like flowers ! Their faces-they giow ! How confident, how dignified, how anything for yourself, but for that collective being. You are 'growing to be 'aware' of that Whole, which you are going to become. Your jobs, your money, your wives, your husbands, the children, the father, mother, relations- You all beautiful ! But for what?-"To be the wheels of the Chariot of God". these considerations are over now. You've to bear the brunt: 'and the sacri- fice which are no more sacrifices to you have to take up the 'responsibility of Sahaja because Spirit gives, it never sacrifices. It's Yoga. Everyone of you is quite capable: quality is to give. So, you don't sacrifice, you're brought-up for that. Do whichever you just give. way you like, whatever are your capacities. With full Dedication you'll get it. Dedication is the thing. First the Mother has the labour pains. Alright. She has all the problems. Alright. When the child is grown, then he 'stands' by the Mother. He is the proud son. She is proud: She is prout of him and he is proud of Her. They stand together, they figtit the half-baked. We've to drop them We cannot battle together. That's only possible if have them. You don't have syinpathies with Complete Dedication is the only way you can grow further. There are some Sahaja Yogis who are Nirmala Yoga 8

 them. No good. If they prove alright we will What security can they give ? What help bring them back again,-But you leave that they can render to others ? You don't put your effort or put your to me. attention to them. You have to come up. You were seekers, then you've found it, now you've Steadfast wisdom is needed for that-stead- thrived over it, now you've grown up. For fast! Every moment. You need not blame what ?-Is to stand up. As l'm facing you your left side and right side for that. Nothing: today, you have to face the others, you have -you just get out of it. Cling on to it. The to face the people. You have to be out of it-completely. Parabrahma has come to look after you. Cling on to it. Even the death has to go back. Dedication doesn't mean that you don't then what about these minor things? talk of Sahaja Yoga. Many people think that keeping silent is the way you are dedi- cating. Only in meditation you should be. powerful. You know that is the most powar- But you have to get out of that still. Now, the name of your Mother is very ful name than all other names, the most Tell all the nations and Tell all the people, powerful mantra. But you must know how all over, the great message-that the time of to take it. With that 'complete" Dedication Resurrection is Here, Now, at this time, and you have to take that name. Not like any that you all are capable of doing it. other name. If somebody tries to sneer at you for that. with understanding, wisdom try to say things. the name of Guru, they hold their ears-to Individual likes and dislikes must be sacri- ficed. "I like this and I l ike this and I like taking the name if I am making any mistake that" must be given up. It doesn't mean please forgive me"-it means that. This mantra that you all become like machines. No. But the enslavement to this I must be given up. Enslavement to habits must be given up. I told-that all the 'Daisies' in You'll be amazed ! Once you are dedicated, you'll not eat much. You may not eat 'at all" sometimes. You need not even remember of food. You won't even remember what you've eaten. You wouldn't even remember where you slept, 'how' you slept. It's a life these Daisies you have, just go and smell that will be like a telescope expanding! You'll create your own visions, and complete surorised ! Amazing! How subtle it is. You know that in India when they take take the name of their Guru. Means, "While is 'very' powerful mantra. Only what you need is the Dedication, the dynamite of Dedication. Today England have fragrance now. She couldn't believe it. She said "I have never known that. On the contrary I always felt that Daisies had no fragrance and they were very funny-smelling flowers". I said, them". When she smelt them she was They are the 'most fragrant flowers of England today. Just the name !-Which means Nishkalankā (fac), means Nirmalā, which means completely 'without' any mala. What is this' mala 7-Is this myre. "Without' any myre : 'Nih. Sahasrāra is called as Nirananda, since long. Since ancient times called as Nirananda or Nirmala-ananda. So many call it as Nirmala nary people, but you're not. in Dedication, in complete Devotion. you have to do it 'now not for your own good, for your own achieve- completely getting out of the myre and standing on the land, singing aloud the praise of your Father. unour Those who are in the myre, what music can they give ? What songs they can sing ? ment-that's over now. Is for 'Absolutely' ! The joy of the 4IN. Nirmala Yaga

 ānanda or Nirānanda. That joy is the joy that tion, with understanding.-logical. Comple- you enjoy 'even' when you get crucified. That tely Dedicated; extracting all the nourishment joy is the joy that you enjoy 'even (when you are poisoned. "Even' on your death-bed, you Something like the leaves extract the sun's enjoy that joy. That joy is Nirânanda. So be prepared for the second phase. You selves, for a higher purpose, that they can be are in the front. It is 'very little time Ineed. But I need really people with 'steadfast Wisdom this earth works out the other way round. and Dedication'. Steadfast. "second' it should not go this side or that side. Then, we can progress fast, we can go ahead to fight the battle. Perhaps now you are aware of subtleties of the negativities. How they use their power-of course which is limited. Moon, you become the Sun, you become the -to destroy God's work. And how you have to be alert, equipped 'and dedicated. This I and you become the Spirit. You work for can only talk to you, I cannot say to the all of them. All the stars and universes you people who come to Caxton Hall. Some of them are half-baked, some of them are abso- lutely new, naive, and some of them are principle, on to your 'tattva'. That is how you absolutely third rate. But here, as you are jump on to 'everybody's' tattva. But be Dedi before me today, I cated on that Tattva, because I am the princi- kly, as Krishna has told only Arjuna, "Sarva dharmanām parityajya, māmėkam sharanam Vraja" and Dedicating it for a higher purpose. ray and give colour, achieve colour for them- Nothing on used by human beings later on. Everything works out for a purpose, but such an unselfish, such a wide, such a great dyna- mic purpose. "Even' for a You become the Ocean, you become the Earth, you become the Ether, the firmament- f become, and take up their work-That's what it is, BecauUse you have jumped on to your want to tell you very fran- a ple of all these. I 'am the tattva; "tattvamaya (sH). 1 am the Principle. Keep to your (तस्वमय) principle. There is no other way out. Vraja, means the one who is twice born, like a solid; solid personality. When you are solid then you which looks bigger in gross way. which must Dedicate. When you are perfected then appears in a gross way. But we I'am' the Kundalini. 1 am' essence. We can only understand Dedication of something саппоt you must Dedicate. dedicate ourselves to something that is so It will help you to get out of the myre and much 'subtler'. which is so much 'minuter, then it will help the 'Great' Cause. No one which is so much 'deeper" is so much 'effec- understands that "Why Mother is trying to tive, which is so much 'dynamic', so univer- help me?" They think She is too generous. I am not. I you are the ones who are capable of mani- festing God's joy on this earth. You are the mountain, who comes to oppress us like a flutes which are going to play the Melody of mountain, who is like Hitler, who is like false God. You are going to be used and man- guru. But to surrender to your 'subtier being oeuvred byGod. fect you to be the 'most beautiful instruments which is not audible, but, in effect is so of God. To be the 'right instrument of God. powerful'. Like the atomic bomb. When I don't know if you understand how sweet. beautiful life it would be-The life of Dedica- sal and so eternal. We cannot' think of dedicating ourselves to that. We can surren- der ourselves to somebody who looks like a have lotof common-sense. Because, I am doing all this to per- -which you cannot see with your eyes, the atom is split when it is not split, it is everywhere. But at the subtlest point it is 10 Nirmala Yoga

 Beyond all these conceptions you have so dynamic', that when you accept it, it becomes such a dynamic force of energy. become your Self. now ready, to be responsible, As your attention has now penetrated into the subtler side of this universe, get deep and deeper into it. The earth that takes the end of the root to the source of water, is the same as the source. Your Kundalini is the same as the Adi Kundalini, and it's power the Para- second phase, where you have to sail out, brahma. to be what you are made for. Like the ship is built, is brought to the sea, tried, and found out to be sea-worthy to sail out now, "into the sea. So this is the when you know everything about the ship, everything about the sea. With complete All these things are to be understood affer freedom and wisdom, you have to sail now. realisation, and after maturity. Before that it is not possible. That is why for the last eight years, I did not say these things to you. I was on a very patronising and sweet terms with you. And always I made you feel that you are obliging me. It is no obligation. Not afraid of any storms or any gales or any typhoons because now all you know. Your job is to cross through. May God bless you. MOTHER How great is your Love, O Mother of all. You have pulled your children from the myre, Snatched them from the jaws of living death, You have cleansed them, You have fed them when they were starving And given them the water of eternal Ljfe. How great is your Love You have elevated your beggar-children, You have clothed them with light You have brought them into the house of the Father, And seated them at His table. How great is your Love... You have illumined your children's hearts, You have taught them to look upon their Brothers and sisters with love, You have purified their minds And dispelled their fears. How great is your Love. You have joined all your children, As pearls on one thread in the great cosmic dance And the universe marvels at this sight of sights. As it is filled with the fragrance of Your lotus-children. How great is your Love... How great is your Love... How great is your Love... O Mother of all. Salutations to Thee, O Jagadambe, Thou Protectress of the Universe, Mother of All Salutations again and again. Nirmala Yoga 11

 Her Holiness Shri Mataji Every Sahaja Yogi Has to become A Guru Guru Nanak's Birthday. Nirmala Palace London, 1st November, 1982. This falis on the day of famous great full Religion by giving them money, many were moon, it is called as Sharada Indu, that's the taking to Islam. As a result the Hindus name of the Goddess also-SHARADA INDU: started hating the muslims and a big hatred developed among Muslims and Hindus. and-of That's how, in those circumstances where there was a quarrel going on between the the moon on this autumn season. This is the biggest moon, not in England, but in India Course -that day the moon is giving the greatest followers of MOHAMMAD and followers of light, and it's such a great thing that GURU NANAKA was born on such a day. As you know in India people celebrate birthdays according to dates of the moon, called as tithi, not as the dates we have here accor- ding to the sun. Hinduism, MOHAMMAD himself took his birth on this earth, though he had decided not to take any more births, he thought that it would solve the problem. Although, this incarnation is such that it never dies. Even if they leave the body, they are always around. And they are the ones who perform lots of This great personality was born in Punjab miracles when any ofher incarnation comes where people were unaware of God's ways. He was always bothered about the Dharma in all his lives, because as you know he was the PRIMAL MASTER, and the Primal Master is always placed in looking after our Void, in sustaining us, and giving us a model of an ideal master. And he always took birth either in the most difficult places like hills and dales and mountains, or they took places-which are symbolically he came on this earth not to even more difficult thing,-among the people who were horrid, and who needed their help. as MOHAMMAD did or say MOSES did, and So in india, that time somehow Punjab was regarded as the place where people did not SOCRATES-which followed into a religion. respect God or traditional Hindu idols, or you can say the statues that were regarded as the create understanding, to create unity betwaeen vibrating ones. But they worshipped money religions. This was a very big step for Sahaja (even now) and they worshipped power. And Yoga. After that as you know, he was born as at that time there was a King who was again-God knows where-no one knows on this earth. They help support and guide the seekers to go to the incarnations. So, to celebrate his birthday on such a is also a myth, because he never died. He is eternally living. They never grow and they date never die, But his birth is important, because propogate any particular type of the vaid before that ABRAHAM, LAO TSE, or But he came to create anmity-we can say, to where he was born, but he appeared as very anxious to convert people to Islamic Nirmala Yoga 12

 SHIRDI SAI NATH. He t00 said the same day you forget these things. It is very serious matter, one has to understand. You have got your realization through Sahaja Yoga. Now you have become Sahaja Yogis. But still I would say you are not full Sahaja Yogis. thing, that to talk ill of any religion is a sin. But these efforts are quite lost. Because the people who were Islamic at that time. or those who were Hindus, are now very great fanatics. So instead of them coming closer because every Sahaja Yogi has to be a Guru. and loving each other they have become fanatics. Though we find that Islam is all you are Yogis because ynu got your reali- spreading so fast Sikhism is spreading very fast too. In America there is a horrible guru he has started to spread Sikhism. He's con- verting all the white skinned people into doing, about all the problems of Kundalini, Sikhs. They are growing their hair, and they how to cure them. Everything about it was are also growing their beard, and wearing a karā (er) and all those required at the time of GURU Gobind Singh. people, who are twice-born, who are born by When the war had started they had to wear all these things, which was important. Because that's a very important point and which John war had started and to protect Hinduism or Hindus from the invasion of the Muslims- by the flesh. Those who are born by the flesh the fanaticism of the Muslims-they took to this kind of a military stuff. Actually if you Spirit, that's how you are twice born. And believe in God-nothing can be killed. But I when you know all about the Spirit and the think that Guru Gobind thought that he had Kundalini then you are a Sahaja Yogi. But to take it. Otherwise he is not a Sahaja Yogi. First of sation. But Yogis are of no use, you have to be Sahaja Yogis. So you were told about all the chakras, every thing that you are told to you. Now you became, with that. a different type of a race, a different type of five things that were the Spirit, not by the flesh. Remember that has said. That you are born by the Spirit not are in flesh. But if you are born by the unless and until you become Guru, you are not a full Sahaja Yogi. In all these prophetic religions, if you see, all the prophets who have spread all the religions, they were always attacked so badly that the Spirit is described as a t (Kala), as that they had to take to weapons. Even in Islam they had to take to weapons to protect Guru is described as the full moon-purnima- themselves. Now when these people took Guru Purnimā. Guru is the full moon, it's not to weapons they had some discipline put on just a phase. So from one phase you have the people. Without the discipline nothing is possible. And very strict discipline was there for the Sikhs. Now today's Sikhs are no gether, and you have ro cross the 16 stages to So to begin with, we must understand a phase of Moon, one phase of moon. But a to go to the stage where you become complete Guru. 16 phases there are alto- more Sikhs, thay are just outside, and inside they are not. I would not describe all the We have to become extremely objective strictness and discipline they had to through. But every disciple has to go through Because we have to become Gurus, no doubt. a very severe disciplining of himself if he Now you cannot just say that, Mother you has to become the Guru. There is no doubt give us a tape and we'll learn by heart and become the Guru. Now how do we do it? go about it. How do we become the Guru? about it. we'll go on to another person saying blah It is not that only somebody like Me blah blah blah blah. Same thing, whetever I've told you, or take my type and show comes and tells you do this do that, and next Nirmala Yoga 13

 them that this is our Mother, and She's like this and like that. But they will say alright She may be, but what about you, Sir ? most difficult thing for western people; because the matter is sitting on their Spirit: First the Spirit has to come-first phase-at least the Spirit has to be there. If you have to be the Spirit then the matter of moon has to be covered with that light. In the first phase we have to master Our body. Now Sahaja Yoga has a 'very big res- ponsibility. which I don't think people under- stand. I wish they could listen to me very intensely and understand it. So far if you see, Gurus remained Gurus and no dis iples So what do we do to master our body ? became Gurus. They were still regarded as disciples of a Guru, whether it was fake or anything. They never became Gurus them- must know all the crooks who try to master selves, So there was no need for them to grow, they had to take the name of their Guru alright. Christ and Mohammad Sähab had his own disciples. that we have to respect our body. This is the Nānaka had his own disciples, Shirdi Sai Nath first principle of respecting our body. Means had his own disciples. None of them became indulgence is sinful to the body, because Gurus. But now it is in your lot, sorry to indulgence gives you a body which is no good: say, that you have to become the Gurus. a privilege, actually. It's a very great privilege that you can master it. If I do not respect to become the Guru. And to become the Guru, Yyou, I cannot master you. So to master the we must learn what we have to do. This body first of all respect your body. And to also sometimes becomes just a lecture. I respect your body, you must look after your think so. Because I've already told you on body very well. But no indulgence. That First of all we must see that what are the things that drain out our bodily mastery. We us. So I have to first face my body. That first disciples, and foremost thing in Sahaja Yoga we learn his It's First of all you must respect your body so doesn't mean that you go and stand in the mud or rain for hours together or get exposed, to make your body absolutely sort of a abode for all the diseases and colds and coughs and things like that so your Mother suffers cleaning are the 10 attain- ments we have to have. Today all these 16 stages are to be seen, how we have to grow into a Guru. First is, we have complete discipline put your vishuddhi ! It's like a horse whose neck on ourselves. Mr Nick is attacked by everyone, No. you by not giving it diseases. Laziness is against it. attack yourself. You become Mr Nick now. You have to make this body subservient to is against your body. Lazy people who are not you,-that is the first mastery. The mastery bothered to dress up properly, to cover them- is that my body can sleep anywhere, it can selves up properly, look after their body prope- starve itself, it can live under any circums- rly, put oil into different screws that they have, tances, it dare not grudge. Anywhere; it to massage themselves. Look after the body, should be able to sleep any time, it should be that's the point. To look after the body you able to keep awake anytime. This body is to be mastered. Even if you read 'Ashtänga temple of God. And now you have become Yoga' first thing is mastery over the body, they the temple but if the temple is dirty, is sick, say. So after realisation the first thing you is unimpressive, is like a stick, or like a have to do is master this body, and is the balloon, nobody is going to come near it. So So you must look after your body is down. Nobody has to tell you, Like Persons who are lazy must know that laziness must give some time, because this body is the *To be published in Nirmala Yoga soon. Nirmala Yoga 14

 try to improve your personality, that it has to happens. People can go to any base limit- be a beautiful temple. Imean, you so many tips, that I think that in my lives time I have not given so many tips, even that on a full moon day you are over-active. , I have given you know, that's the problem, what to do? On this full moon day one has to realize as Guru. Because normally people who came to a Guru in those days were really. As the moon starts growing the activity starts. really great seskers. They would hang themselves upside down, just to please the Guru, for months together. So that was a very different quality people-but one or two. And when you have quantity quality goes down, I accept. But why not you people your body. The body should be presentable. take it upon yourselves that we'll make our And should not go with the so-called fashions quality first class ? So first of all train up your body well. You must take some exer- not go with the fashions of the day, and take cises in the morning, I have told you. That to something which is nonsensical, which people sleep after breakfast I am told, I was is not good for your appearance, which amazed. God has given you this house as a blessing, like a dandy person. We have to wear to be mare alert, to give His ight to others. Instead of that if the candle is not even 1s good. flickering what's the use. So what you have to do is to first of all brush up yourself, com- pletely. Make your body alright, alert. Actu- ally at your age one should not sleep for Englishman. I haven't tried that, even with a more than six or seven hours, I tell you. No barge pole. I just tell you at this time,-never need. Six or seven hours of deep sleep is in the morning time. Because I've been war- sufficient. I also, in the night I sleep about- ned: never wake up an Englishman, that is never before eleven sometimes at twelve, the greatest sin on this earth ! So why should Yesterday we slept at 20'clock, got up at the English be so much addicted to sleep? 5. 30 as usual. So how many ?-Three and The whole country is sieeping today. They a half hours sleep. And just now I slept want more wages, more wages so that they for about-at the most-for half an hour or an hour or so-finished. When you don't have to work, like me,-in the sense that even when mmed life. It was very difficult, from the very I sleep I am working. So to rest your body beginnig I saw Sahaja Yogis coming, in that to for such a long time you make your body sit wake them up was difficult. And these are the on your head and it will be very very difficult same people who were known for punctuality: for you to be a'ert. So first of all body must be looked after. There should be no self- punctuality, and they were so punctual that indulgence. I mean it can go to any extent of people used to set their watches-even in self indulgence. Like people don't keep their America. rooms clean, their clothes clean, they have no activities-all these nonsensical things. only it of wood. They used to sleep before also, is too low, too base to talk about: but it must be, because this is an old saying that: In the night also. But none of you so far are active in the night except for me. But if you come up you will be surprised, even in your sleep you will be activ a, So first and foremost thing is that you must look after of the day. It is very important. One should makes you look funny or very fashionable mean, this is too much. You see, dress which is in the centre, dignified, which Now I'm told that it is very difficult even to wake up in England. Somebody had told me, when I was young, that don't wake up an can sleep more. Eat and drink, drink and eat in between, sleep. This s the three progra- that they won the war at Waterloo because of They are the same people. Now the other side of it is that they sleep like logs 15 Nirmala Yoga

 Don't wake up an Englishman. But I used to think something clse about it why it is said. but it is nothing but simple laziness. So try siep on the other side. In the same way, to see why we sleep so much. if the left side this body is to be made immune to different is strong, people sleep, If the back Agnya is shocks, you see. strong people sleep. If the front Agnya is the water. You shock it with the water, so working too much then people don't sleep. it is waterproof. So a Sahaja Yogi has to be So even if I say, "Don't sleep", it mean that you put your right Agnya in working condition, to complain, because he's supposed to be all- that maans you start thinking. Which is against proof, you see. Anybody (Sahaja Yogi) who Sahaja Yoga again. So it would be left ägnya complains, you can say, "How are you comp- right ågnya, right ägnya left ágnya, left agnya, laining? because you have to be all-proof." left ägnya, right ägnya, lelt ägnya.It will be So no complaints of any kind, of Sahaja Yogis going from one to another. So in the centre you have to be with Chirst. second of the day: killing: beating, hitting, you will be always busy loaking after them, curing, looking after, guiding. Twenty four hours and you will be of no use to Sahaja Yoga. a day. And go and ask any realized soul who Those who have habits of complaininig and all is callad as AVADHUTA, the one who is a that should go to the hospital and stay there. master, they will tell you they hardly sleep for Complaining people ate really people who three hours or four hours. Because they can- not work when they are sleeping. so they sleep they all the time complain and try to torture for four hours, the rest of the time they are: you, and make a nuisance out of themselves. working : either they meditate and do things Such people cannot become Gurus. Imagine- by projection, or thay work with their hands if the Guru is complaining then what is he They are busy paople. they are Very busy. going to teach ? Only complaining. The tea- You have to be very busy people because now you are employed by God. And you have to students will be also experts in complaining. do full justice to this employment by working So you create a set of complaining disciples, hard. On the contrary you have seen that it you see, And when they come to Me what I is "very easy to get lazy. So now, as many find they all have double lists than yourselves of you are already feeling sleepy, put your. about their complaints. But also it is very First thing should be for all those people who characteristic. Like Australians seldom com- are lazy, is to put their rjght to the left seven plain, and if they do complain they are hit also times-let's have it With the right hand...It's very badly. Seldom you will find an Australian better? Now the back Agnya. Let's have it. complaining. I have got letters- except one or Laziness is first. Shri Krishna was against lazi- ness. Anywhere he got a chance he talked seldom they complain about themselves, against laziness, Alasya. the photograph you can do the same... Better that thing. So under 'any circumstances now? Tonight we have to keep awake: it's those who can live are the people who have a big problem. But don't sleep formally here. achieved the one-Sixteenth, only the one Alright ? Informally you can. Better ? Put youi sixteenth. a áa (Jaise rākhahu taisé your body. Say, you are sleeping on one side, you get a pain-then what do you do? You Like you put the watch in an all-proofed person. So he has no place are to be accepted or sympathized. If you start accepting people whe are conplaining type He is alert every have some sort of possession, Ithink, that chers will be expert in complaining and the two who have now found themselves out- Now watch me. On about their body comforts, this thing eyes, try Again. So the mastery should be, first of all, of hi rahu) Mother the way you keep it we are willing to stay. Of course the Mother has 16 Nirmala Yoga

 kept you very well. All the luxuries of world should not be a kind of a thing that like-they Mother has given you. She doesn't torture you have Ramazan, that they eat the most spicy like other Gurus have tortured. Once and for food during that time early in the morning, all, My Son has gone through all the tortures, there is no need to put you to any tortures or food I Starve yourself halfway and don't think troubles. But you should see how your body about food,-halfway. Gradually try to master reacts, and tell your body,'"Yes Mr body, will your tongue. Mastery of your tongue is only vou please now, beliave yourself and not try possible if you know how to starve yourself. to be indulgent." All these indulgences come to us through they fast morning till evening. I know of a our senses. So if you can master your body lady, if you ask them they say "I observe you will also master your senses, For example Monday, I observe Tuesday, I observe Wednes- the master, or we say the highest of the organs day, I observe Thursday, I observe Friday as a which controls most of the organs, I person- fast, and perhaps maybe if I do not starve on ally think, is the tongue. Because it's the pri- Saturday I will eat on Sunday." I have known mordial nonsense. By tongue we speak things such people in my life time-many-who just to hurt others. With tongue we learn how to go goon fasting. They are such experts and astutes on jabbering. With tongue we can show how you see, that they can show you that they can frivolous we are. Either we are tongue tied fast for 50 days, 80 days, 108 days, and 365 or tongue-loose, there's nothing in between days. Starving masters. So for them I have to with the tongue. That's only about talking tell, "you have to eat", when they are starving. part, that's lower. But when it comes higher,- Toyou I have to say, "Let us see which day we eating; all the time thinking about eating. I have told you a hundred times, that Sahaja celebrate today's great day of Nänaka! One day Yogis should go on really sometimes on absolutely bland boiled horrible food-just to test the tongue. Do it, try this, then try this. gramme, Tuesday we cannot because it is a day My father used to tell that you must burn when Hanuman has to work, Wednesday we your tongue a little bit. That's one of the cannot, because then the creativity takes place, tests he said one should do, But he was a hard taskmaster as a Guru. So we should see what our tongue can bear, Is it fussy about hard as Gurus, Friday we cannot, we have to food ? When it sees the food does it start work the shaktl of Mother, Saturday we cannot watering, first of all; does it take our atten- tion to food, is food important to us? So the Krishna. And Sunday how can it be, this is first thing. to overcome the problem of your the day of the son !" So which is the best day tongue is "to starve." Starvation is the only for starving, now let us see,-We should have way you can correct yourself. You see it you Thursday, because Thursday is the Guru's day starve yourself-say, morning just have little to and let us do some fasting-half day-half day eat, reduce it to half. You'll be surprised your can we? Can we start with half day then full intestine will be halved also. After some time day? Thursday let us have, maybe second half you cannot eat more even if you want to.because breakfast is essential I think. Without Your interest will go off. Train up yourself. breakfast you see, the horses cannot whine, Starvation is a very good thing. I think 40 days so let us have the second half or we can have that Christ did is a very good idea. But that the first half. then the whole day they starve thinking about This is for the western side. For eastern side can starve ourselves." Let us have one day to let us starve. Which day should we?-Monday we cannot, because Monday we have a pro- how can it be ? Thursday we cannot because we are Guru at that day, we have to work very because we have to do all the intrigue of Shri 17 Nirmala Yoga

 Actually you have to discipline yourself, down, sing Bhajans, this, that, let us do it. if you have to be the Gurus. It's like going to Should we? You have to 'get up' at 12 o'clock, a college, when you are left to yourself, it is you have to go to bed till 12 o'clock. Get up "you, who has to discipline yourself, nobody at 12 o'clock. You see the first half of the has to tell you that you do this and do that. night. one must sleep always, it's better. That's the measure to wake you up. In India it is the other way around. If you tell some- alright ? So the first half of the night you all body that you have to wake up at 5, the person have to sleep, anytime. You can sleep about 8 who has told you will be awakened at 4 o o'clock or 9 o'clock if you want to. But tha! clock himself, the one who has told; so thathe should not be important, what time you sleep, doesn't get up to wake him up. Did you follow you have to get up at 12 o'clock in the morn- me? And the whole house will be awakened ing, or say 'after 12. at 4 o'clock so that they can take up the duty from the person who has to get awakened. But the fellow who has to awaken might not sleep the whole night. It is just the other way round, the other extreme of it. Say it 1 am there, one night I sleep there. If I get up at one o'clock I find all of them sitting and meditating,-in the passage, up to the bathroom about Caxton Hall ! Alright so you can sleep everywhere. They have not gone home, not taken food, nothing. Just meditating, taking vibrations, corracting. Iam sleeping inside. In the night I want to go to the bathroom, I just cannot go because they are all meditating, your body much. You must devise a method Nobody is sleeping, nobody is sleeping, So it by which your body does 'see" that it has to is the other way around. So to you people get up at 12 o'clock, Better keep it that time. let us do one day. That you must have one day fasting, one day keeping, one awake Which day should it be? Let's see. Second half of the night is the better part, Shri Krishna was born in the night about 12 o'clock. Nänaka was born 12 o'clock in the night. All the Gurus mostly took their birth at 12 o'clock in the night. To celebrate that, we must have one day when we do not sleep after 12. But then what in the day time of Saturday or of Sunday. Sunday afternoon you can sleep.No, no, no that won't be alright. If you make any compensation then you are not tortuiing What do you think ? Altight. They will never-take it from me-they will not: You see work is not important what is important is your Spirit, your mastery, Work, in any case A day when there is no film! Half night.- you're not going to have after some time, so second half I mean, not the first half. Which that wwork is not important. This new work that day? Which is the most difficult day when you you have taken, better look after that. Forget can not, 'cannot' keep awake.-Sunday night;- about your work. Forget about these things. but there's a fim on! Without the film, you What is important is your Spirit. Otherwise see Treat yourself like that, joke with you cannot become Gurus. Spirit is the most yourself-now Sunday night is there a film important thing. The rest of the things are on ? After 12 there isn't. So Sunday night 'absolutely unimportant', a zero. l've been you get up at 12 o'clock. Let's have it. very slowly' trying to take you out of the mud Enjoy it. Don't get angry, Make a fun out of of materialism and of these mundane things. it. You think more about it, then you get But you have to work for God. You are upset. You just don't think about it, then special people, you'll enjoy it. It's like swimming. Get up at 12 o'clock, all of you, go for a bath, sit so God gives you all the blessings, everything. So, you have to make yourself a master, 18 Nirmala Yoga

 But the idea of luxurious life must be given of problems will follow. because /'ve awa- up. People want to make this life luxurious, kened your Kundalini; one part l'va done. But then you'll have the luxury of this world but another part that is your heart, you have not not the luxury of God's blessings, One of opened. You must give your heart to Sahaja the two you have to select. Either you lead Yoga. You have not opened your heart as yet. a life which is luxurious on the material level, Heart has to be opened. You are still worried or you lead a luxurious life of God's blessings, about your father, mother, brother, sister, wife, One of the two you have to choose, the time children. Open your heart fully to Sahaja has come. So nothing is important you see, Yoga. In a doubtless way. Then only doubt- the insecurity of money also is another nonsense. At least you people should not until you open your heart, Kundalini rising has have it. I mean you will never starve at least, but Indians if they do not work they will but the heart has not opened. If the Mother starve. But you people can never starve, if Earth sends forth her power through the seed you are unemployed, government is happy and the seed doesn't open, then what's the more, as long as you don't bother them. If use ? It's all a myth. Open your heart to you sit at home and meditate they'll be very Sahaja Yoga. Open your heart to Spirit, and happy. So to earn more money or to make more money is not important at all in Sahaja realize this, many people also perhaps do not Yoga. Most important thing is to be the realize that you have come on this earth to be Spirit. For that whetever is to be done has the Spirit and not to be workers of human to be done. Let everything suffer, you don't beings, You must understand your greatness, make your Spirit suffer. Because you have and know that you are not like mundane to become the full moon, like Guru Nānak. people. That's why you are blessed. Who is How much did Guru Nanak aarn ? You should find out, how did he live his life ? time back by Blake, that such and such There is nothing to bother about money, people are going to come on this earth"men because more money is not needed. Just of God." Men of God; What do you have in needed for your food and your living. And your heart ? Your heart will be like a stone. then money is arranged if you need any extra money sometimes, emergencies. I've is a stone heart, and this stone is going to done it for many Australians, you know. But those are the people who have dedicated letely. Open your heart hundred percent. themselves fully, And that is why they have been helped, whenever there is an emergency bave problems of money. And how much they they don't have to bother. But the dedication work ftor Sahaja Yoga, day in and day out, less awareness will settle down. Unless and no meaning. Because the Kundalini is tising say, "Mother we are the Spirit." You have to blessed so much ? You are described long Unless and until there is light of the Spirit it hurt everyone, is going to ruin you comp- You have met Indian Sahaja Yogis, they how much they have contributed for Sahaja Yoga. You can imagine, about 7 lakhs of Because that goes hand in hand. If you rupees they have collected, Rustom knows. 7 not worried about yourself after rea-- lakhs of rupees, they have collected for their lisation, about your Spirit, you'll have all the ishram. 7 lakhs is about £35000. £ 35000 they problems of the world. First and foremost is have collected-only in Bombay. In Delhi financial problems. Then, physical problem, they have collected about 5 lakhs, £ 25000. mental problem, emotional problem. All kinds They are working, they have families they nothing to your work, actually. are Nirmala Yoga 19

 have children, but what they think about is costs so much, 300 pounds every week: I'm 'nothing but Sahaja Yoga, 'nothing but Sahaja amazedl Every one of you should be responsi- Yoga, nothing but Sahaja Yoga. They give most be for every electricity, everything that you of their money for Sahaja Yoga, I think. They spend here. This is God's place. Somebody live with minimum. if I tell them why don't has given the car, everybody wants to use the car. You see this saving the pounds is still go- say, "Mother, I have worn lots of shirts in my ing on the heads of Sahaja Yogis. If they satisfied ! "We have can save by taking somebody's carthey would found the Atma now, let us dress up the Atma. borrow. Never borrow anybody's car. It's We have found out our heart, let us become not for you, you must have your self respect, the heart". What is the need to worry about why to borrow anybody's car? It's not to be these things ? We have done enough of all done. So the second point of the Self is self First is the respect of your body. and are poor, but they are not. Wherever they can the second is self-respect. We are arrogant, their money they will save it. They we can be rude, but we have no self respect. But it is the training that is lacking, you see suddenly I find after war there has been no you buy another shirt for yourself, they will previous life," So this nonsense. I tell you they will think they respect. save used to give me some money before, I said, "No I don't need just now, there's no need" They said I have no place to keep; there is teaching how to be self respecting. no trust, nothing, how are we to do it ? They continued like this till about, I think, in, 74, when I went back we thought of starting might have been created I don't know why an ashram, because you people were all coming there. So I said alright,-now you kind of a thing has come, but it is so. Very have to give me money, all the Sahaja Yogis can give me money, whatever they have prevalent. But you people have to be other way saved. And you'll be amazed everyone came out with 1000 rupees, 'every one' of them- whether he was a labourer or-every one of going to die, I can tell you this much. You all them-1000 rupees minimum. Up to 21000. In 3 years' time they had saved-because people should not be allowed to stay in Sahaja they thought it is our responsibility to save money for Sahaja Yoga. Tomorrow if vwe have to have an ashram how are we going to have ? person can spoil the whole. Only people But we still indulge into things. So this is who want to be Gurus have to stay in the what is the Gurupada (,). Like in the war, might be-the atmosphere that-"I'm above everything, don't care for others." May have been; I don't know why this round: 'Others are first and then yourself. With your self respect. Doesn't matter, nobody is must have self respect; and such mediocre Yoga,-at least in the ashram, because it brings a bad name to all Sahaja Yoga. One ashram. It's not going to be made a convenie- nce for anyone. So today is such a great day of Guru Nānaka's birthday, and we have to see his own life, how he spent his own life, how he lived and in what conditions he managed. So the first thing is to look after, disci- plining yourself, feeling responsible for Sahaja Yoga. But the other way around is that, "We are going to look after ourselves, we have to be- come this, we have to grow, we haveto do it. Then it's just the other way round, everything worksout, I don't have to tellyou. You know this is so base and so gross that after being here for so many years, you should all have become AVADHUTAS by now, absolutely. Controlling all elements, everything, should have been I was amazed people told me that in the ashram people keep the lights on, and the oil Nirmala Yoga 20

 possible; but still you are under the grip of the exist there, too. It is said about all of them elements, how can you control it ? First of that they had powers over the elements. So all get out of the slavery, this mental slavery. how much we are lacking ? Still we are like "Alright if it is there, it is there, if it is not other people who are selling cheap things, or there it doesn't matter. Nothing is more im- portant than me, I am the king of the whole are of no value, You are the ones who have world. If I have to sleep on the ground I can sleep if I have to sleep, in the palaces I can sleep, nothing can dominate me."-Then you are l've put-in this land of yours. And the time the master. You know in India, there are some is coming for me to go. Only three years more Sahaja Yogis who are contralling definitely con- trolling, elements. We have examples of that. ashram. We need not pay for it, but, you have lots of things have been published you know to be ready to occupy it, otherwise you cannot in Nirmala Yoga, you must have heard. But you meet them, you'll find they are AVADHUTAS and when they talk you feel a great sage is bless you ? This is the point one should ask talking, and the way they behave-all the time you see their behaviour and everything is so great. We need people of that calibre today, thing, it just goes as a big roaring, I don't because that is the situation of all nations. You know if the frequency has reached your ears who are busy making cheap things, or who to save the whole world. And the maximum of my life, blood and toil andeverything, sweat, are left; before that, I hope, we establish an occupy it I can tell you, you cannot get any more blessings of God. So why should God oneself. Are you your awn Spirit ar you are all else but the Spirit? But when I say some- have to be extra-good, because today is not a or not, but l would request you now,-as Gavin time when we can allow things to go, as they has asked me for Guru Nanaka's day, I really are. Or we are not just disciples, we all have to didn't wannt to come. Because to talk of become GURUS. And it is not the tine when you can play with time. You cannot play with has to be a very great person. Because such EVIL. You have to surmount it. You have to come on top of it, it is the time when the whole Everything else is important-then how can ship is going to be drowned ar saved. This you talk of Sahaja Yoga coming there. I went is the situation today. And that's why you to America, I was surprised! Americans what- have got your realization from God. if that ever it is, few people,-but to them Sahaja precarious time had not arrived, how many Yoga is the most important thing. They talk of you really think you deserved it? But you of nothing but Sahaja Yoga, their life is Sahaja got it, because the time is such that everybody Yoga, morning till evening they are working must be given realization, and they must be out Sahaja Yoga, nothing else-they are not given all powers so that they come up. But bothered. Australians you know. But the Heart if you do not open your heart, put all your is not open, the Spitit has not shown its light. 1t attention to your Spirit, these powers will not is the one that gives you complete satistaction, work out. None of these powers will work complete jay, complate Guru's out in you. This is the problem. Every Guru had a command on the ele- ments. Nānaka, you know definitely. People were sitting there and they asked him for the is within you, if you are going to give that.... water and he put his hand on a rock and the water started pouring down. That's why it is called Punjab. Punja : five; and the five rivers told you, to have self respect. The one who Guru Nunaka and to liear about him, one a light to bear, you have to make up yourself. principle, because thhenn you start giving. If there is no light what are you giving? Darkness? What e are you giving to others ? The darkness that So the second phase, has to be, as I have Nirmala Yoga 21

 asks, demands, has dearth, has no self staff that will guide others not a support to respect. "Who can give me? When I forgive nobody can give me." We have to learn to give, and give and give and give, does not matter. Tan so worried sometimes that I do not give you any hard tests, I tell you. Even a little bit when you try to be funny, you do get a little bit hurt, but again I soothe you. you. If you are yourself a lanky-panky person, how are you going to hold all the masses to you and how are you going to guide them. So, strong' effort, "very tenacious' effort must be made. Form your own rules and regulations. Treat yourself as a disciple. You are the Guru. you are the disciple. But it's sort of mediocrity you see, it's medio- crity. It's not going to help. This is the age of mediocres. In the politics are mediocres, useless people. You go in the economics there are mediocres, everywhere there are mediocres. In Sahaja Yoga we have to have extra-brilliant, Spirit. The Spirit that is the Guru, and the extra-sacrificing, extra-dynamic, extra-com- passionate people, otherwise Sahaja Yoga is your emotions, your intellect-everything is a not going to work out. If you fail, it will be disciple, and you are the Guru. For this you do your responsibility. Naturally, you want me to help you, I have done my level best, you see. All the quick methods, you see, instant, person who is courageous, and a person who is like Puja, all that I've allowed you to have. of that quality. When you go to India you must But that does not stay in you, does not retain meeta gentleman called Harishchandra, a very in you, the vibrations are so much, you have simple fisherman. He's a graduate, of course, no idea. Some people have felt a gale com- ing out. Gale, So it is there. You may not feel it. If you ask Gagangiri Maharaj he'll realization-I've told you this story once, again tell you what happened to him when he first I'll tlell you, what sort of man he is.-He told faced me. But to you nothing happens. What if a gale comes to rock of Gibraltar, it doesn't the other side, on a small little island, to talk feel it. So as far as I am concerned l've work- about Sahaja Yoga. There were 25 people ed very hard, you know that. And I know you and it was a storm, really a tempest. So he "can' come up, you have that potential in went and stood before the sea, and towards So the 3rd phase of this thing is to be the rest of it is the disciple. Your body, your mind not need people of very great intellect. You do not need people of very great education, but a but a simple man. Works in a bank. When he came to me and Sahaja Yoga-and got his me that they went to the sea, he was to go to the wind that was blowing and he stuck out his hand and said, "Stop it now. I have to go you. So, you must make your own rules and for Mother's work, this is God's work. Will regulations, nobody needs to make. If some-you stop! Until I come back home. you are body makes so much, you make your own so much; like tea drinking, like mad! I mean I just don't understand. It's like a life which is witnessed. He went there, did all the work, a swing-it-in you see, it has no direction, it has no guidance. If you are the master., you then the water started raining, it started drizzl- must at leasL be the driver ef your car., if not ing down. He's an ordinary man to look at: 1 Ethe master. You should stand on your both legs and know that you are the Guru, that you great Englishman. He lives in a very ordinary must have your own staff in your hand, the way, his wife is a fisherwoman also. She sorts going to keep it like that." Once, he said it, and the whole thing stopped. They all saw, came back home, and when he entered his door mean compared to you people, you are really Nirmala Yoga 22

 Out fishes and sells them in the market. But from madness, Mother can you cure them ? his body is so well built and shining and the So now first I cure mother and father. Then muscles so developed and the man, he stands I'm martied, my wife is like this, my child is up and the way he talks! And 'absolutely like this then my house, then my motorcar, humble person. fishermen. While he has got 'thousands of suddenly from A to Z, from Z to A. Alright, I fishermen as his disciples, but he doesn't call them disciples, he says they are all Mother's Why to cure the mother. father, brother, children. Thousands ! you don't know. He sisters, every relationship, the 10th marriage has been calling me to go to them, and all that and the 11th divorce? Why to correct all this? but they come to my programme, some of them. For what? And one day I have to go down, to those islands, any one of the islands he said you come they will be all there the whole day purpose cannot be served, what is the use of waiting for you. But the way he is there is doing it? The purpose is that you at least surprising. When I am there he brings fishes leave all these things in my hands and for me. But I said, you see | eat fishes that detach yourself. But you want to bring the you bring but what about my other children. He said no, next time, all the fishes will be Detachment. But the idea of detachment sent to you. And he sent one truck-load to is this ! "I'm very detached about money, me, you would not believe! I said now I Mother, absolutely. I'm not bothered. I keep don't even have truck-load of disciples, who the lights on, why to worry about money ? is going to eat all this? And he said, "Nothing, This is the argument "Why should we worry I just went and told fishermen that Mother about looking after the gas and all that, after has asked for fishes and everybody gave their all we are detached people. We are in deta- fishes. One day they will not have fishes, chment, you see. We are not attached to what is there, what does it matter." Imagine those people who live day-to-day in that other type of detachment that I see, very country. Modi told the newspaper people interesting one is this one: "I'm very deta- that we con control the elements somehow ched, so I'm not bothered about having a by Mother's grace. So the newspaper people bath, having all kinds of diseases, having all felt they were very much boasting. But it is kinds of problems wthin myself, giving my true, they can. To them it is not boasting it problems to others. I'm detached ! Why is just what it is they are seeing. They are should I cover myself ? I'm detached: If I telling the truth, you see. But that should get cold, I'm detached, let everybody get cold happen. We should also have some things from me. What can I do, I'm detached. I've to boast here. Important. HWA then my dog, then my umbrellal I have ta go No wonder Christ chose can do, up to a point, but for what? For what? It must have some purpose, and if that case to Me as well as worry about it. money." But who is going to pay ? The got cold, so what does it matter, I'm a deta- ched personality. Why should others mind ? So now we have the other phase as I told They should also get detached." This is the you, is of becoming the Guru of yourself. ridiculous limit we can go in our idea of Detaching yourself, identifying yourself with detachment ! Detachment is from within. the Spirit which is growing in its light. So You are not bothered-You are not bothe- detachment. One has to develop detachment. red. You know your Mother. The first "My mother, it starts like that; my mother is detachment is shown in generosity. Detach- suffering from cancer, my father is suffering ment is generosity. Grezna is., She sold Nirmala Yoga 23

 her ornaments for nothing at all. I mean When you say we' you will find it will be would never have accepted that money. but different. she just sold them. It's remarkable. She Norman." "This Norman won't listen," like sold them She is Polish not English. She sold her ornaments ; and this is what commu- nism has done to people, They are very Munna)-this Munna, won't go, he's very detached, communists are very detached people I tell you. Of course I would never take that money, that's theirs, but the way ment, in which you are not in the picture.. she did it, just like that, For God's work alright you are a witness. You are the witness in the what is ornaments-take it. I mean you know show. So this detachment should work in I've given away so many of my ornaments to such a way that you should witness the whole keep relations alright. The other day I gave show, you're not involved into it. But just away my Kara (Fr) to Christine, you know that when she got engaged. Just it came out of the hand and went away. I was detachd Yoga also-political issue; nothing short of you see, I never even felt the coming out I So political issue We are not here fighting much detached that Christlne told me she was cramped up with pressure but to me it was just, just nothing, Dust. So that detachment -that we have to decide. So, as far as all has to come. Now you should know which these things concerned, are detachment and part you are there. Like idea of detachment attachment to Spirit. should not be that-I would say hippy style of detachment, that you have right to expleit be our attitude on our mental level. Physi- everybody else. And the other type as told you which is very ridiculous. /t's not an idea, it's a thing, it's your awareness itself which is detached. So, these four evel what you bave to do, is to understand things for your material side is important. the 'essence' of every writing, try to discrimi- What you eat is not so important, because whatever you eat, if the brain is going to be avidyā will kilt you, will take away your such a non-sensical thing it's better whether energy, but vidya will sustain. So try to find you eat it or not, makes no difference does it ? Analyze it, like in the hotel, what will you have, "I'll have pancakes," what will you Or take your name, like "this children say, I asked a little boy, will you go home ? "1 will go, but this-(his name was obstinate, what can I do ?" This is detach- ment. To speak in third person is detach- see what happens, in collectivity also. It be- comes a political issue certainly, in Sahaja like union leaders. We are all leaders ! Where is the time to fight ? Whom are we to fight So we go further-see now what should cally you have seen that you have to develop a complete detachment in these four ways that I have told you Now on your mental nate between Vidyā and avidya. Because out books which are supporting vidya. I was surprised, there is a lady Barbara, she met only last time Gavin, and she has Written such a tremendous book, you'd be amazed I I mean of such a level on Sahaja Yogal-Very direct. I'll show you that, and you know that have, "I'Il have this l'll have that", for what ? T just don't understand why waste so much energy, why not you all have pancakes all of you put together. It's a very big thing you book is now being considered for giving her know. Or today I'll have this. T. Out of all this materialism what comes out is Mr T. So we develop this Mr I. So the word go away, we should speak 'we'. "We" means you and all the Sahaja Yogis put together. a doctorate, can you believe it ! In an Ameri- can university ; of course that's only possible in America. But still that book has that Ilevel, I was amazed at the book I So try to gather nourishment-like reading Devi Mahātmya, must 24 Nirmala Yoga

 reading about, finding out about Bible and time, they are busy, you know. All the time. firiding about other scriptures, about Kuran-- clearing out,-when they came here, they this that,-and which supports you, which said "We have to clear out this Brompton nourishes you. Blake, Kabir, Nânaka. I mean there are so many.-Laotze. This is the good bridge, then we have to clear out this -is the knowledge. But you'll be amazed, London, then we have to clear out this Eng- once you start doing it. it comes to you. met a man near Rähuri-as you know we go all the time they were busy, you see, clearing there,and there's a man who just drives a bullock cart. and he had brought the bullock this. Oh God this horrible, bring some shoes, cart to take me down to one of the program- do this co that," all the time they were busy mes, you know what we do there. And he morning till evening, They would go up- was sitting there, we were waiting,I was talking, to him. And I felt an sitting there to drive me,- mean uneducated the mundane things and all that. Then absolutely. he's never known books, he does not know how to write, but the way he was They put all of them there and they put them, tälking I said. "Oh God, from where this kno- and the map there, "now see now, (to dolls) wledge From where was all this coming, this wisdom, I Such wisdom, I Dolls are their wisdom that I was just stunned, I was disciples. Teaching the dolls, "you see, stunned reallyI From a man who is not even don't sit like this, you must sit properly, you been to any school-college. Christ did not don't know. You can't bend your knees ? go to any school or college. Such wisdom, better learn that, you must learn to bend your you can't imagine. You meet him next: time knees," because dolls have straight legs I when you go there. If somebody could And 'all" the boys, even the little children, translate him.you feel like touching his feet the way-extremely unassuming simple doing Sahaja Yoga. Every level they are man, wearing a white, clean topi and working. clean dress- and driving me down. And to him this was the whole world-is to drive me; he said "it must be the greatest of all-something I must have done-to be able to drive you." And in such simple ways he was explaining Square, then we have to clear out this Knights veau ! land. Where is the map of England, bring it," out, and then, "this place is this, this place is stairs in the 1oom and they are busy. They Avadhuta is are busy people, they have no time to talk of I brought some dolls and toys, for them. s tell you l" SuIch talking to dolls like that. now you look-after, alright?" You know they're have seen the way they are busy all the time As today I was telling Rustom about my own father. You see, he was a learned man, of course. But when he talked, he used to talk of something,-like I told him about the the 'greatest' privilege of state of a person, called 'Sambhranta.' (avla) He told me that, "Human beings are very dilfe- rent from God. When God incarnates then the Sambhranta state, which is awakening between the subconscious to the conscious state, is direct, you see. He comes down directly to me about the character of the bulloeks and the human beings-just imagine ! And the things he talked about, if I tell you, you won't believe-so I just don't know..That's the sign of a great man, he doesn't talk of frivolous things, he has no time to talk about frivolous But human beings go this way, they never things. go straight. See God descends, so he descends properly, but ascent is always in a-very separate I have seen my own grandchildren-they way. It goes on like this, and he gathers never talk of frivolous things, they have no everything that is in his subconscious, so the Nirmala Yoga 25

 Out of your seeking you have done one good thing-to have read everything whether good or bad, whatever it is. But now after realisation, you must try to find out what you have to read. what you have to know, it should be nourishing. sambhränta state, where he is waking up, is such dangerous thing that hecan gather up anyth ing. And by the time he gathers up the dreams he becomes something so funny. He may look at God whom he has seen in his dream like a witch, and the witch like a bird." a Talk that is nourishing, helpful. So in talk you should have Compassion. If you are I saw him always busy. Imean to talk to him, I founda companion and he found me a companion sort of a thing. He could talk, talking to someone you should be full of because his attention was there. His attention compassion. Sahaja Yoga is a system of was not how every body has made their hair, compassion. A Guru has to be 'very-very and how they are sitting down or what dres- patient. It is not like other Gurudom, or even ses they are making, or what do you have in real Gurus had no patience. This is a system this thing-nothing. His attention was on the where patience is the only way it will work Spirit, his own Spirit and Spirit of others. And out, because no Gurus gave realisation, it is he was so dynamic in his brain that he knew only you who have to give it. And you know your dictionary by heart, I tell you. He 'never consulted dictionary all his life-neither San- skrit nor English, and he was master of 14 have failed Mother, we can't give him realisa- languages. Can you imagine ! How he must have managed He used to play tennis very well, he used to swim for 3 miles every day. they said, "Mother there's one fellow sitting 3 miles. He had muscles that he could just wanted to aviod, you see, but they said. lift you up, Yes ! Very healthy personality, Alright, so raised his Kundalini, raised it up, healthy man. Very generous, 'very generous. Much more generous than me, so you can imagine. 'Very generous, to him nothing least bothered how much we are working on mattered, "alright you like it, take it". He'll him I He's just thinking he's obliging us." So starve himself but he ll be generous. And a then two or three people came forward, man of principle. what is realisation. The other day we met one: the fellow sitting tight. They said, "We tion, it's a hopeless case". I said, "Really ?" So I went there-at the end of it you see, tied it up, my hands bearing now."Oh no, I didn't feel anything". I said this fellow is brought a light, put the light before him, did bandhan here and everything: Again I raised So we come to the second point which is his Kundalini thrice;"No, not at all..I"it went actually we have started the fifth one-which is mentally you must only take to things which Isaid, "Sir, I'm sorry, you are too great for are nourishing. Through vibratory awareness you will know. Ask other Sahaja Yogis, if you do not know. But take nourishing things to read and not horrible, detrimental to your out, I said "Really, I am convinced about you, growth. If you read them, you are responsi- ble. You are real great readers I must say- You have to have "tremendous' patience and you ask any name, everyone knows. I said who was Gropius, everyone knows. You need You see if not be an academician to tell. Everyone knows, what happened, who is this, who is that. on like that for half an hour, then I gave up. realisation ! We'll try again". "I'm not convinced..." And I was fagged so you allow us to go", and then I came out. sense of humour-you just can't tell him off. I told him You are good for nothing, useless, you have a bad KUNDALINI , you go away from here get away, get lost." I Nirmala Yoga 26

 couldn't say these things to him, 1 had to in this ane year, last one year". bear him through-and not only, in the because it is too much. Piease make a end I had to say you are a great man, you Because otherwise he would have used for your brains you have given away to others some other method. Because, already the without thinking about it,-or have thought of EGO was so big that with all the pins I put giving. Since Christmas let Us say, to this inside it, it could not deflate, it was made of Christmas. a special fibre I think ! It was such a difficult task. So one has to know that we have to be compassionate. We have to read some- thing that nourishes our compassion. Read for which you don't have to spend any money. of people who gave away everything that they Just give a hand. I have seen, very easy to had. Tukaräma. Read Tukārāma. Tukārāma was a poor man. And one day he went to some place and did some good job, so they just sitting. Tea is brought to them, food is gave him lots of sugar cane. His children were very fond of sugar cane. So on the way just put the plate also before: go and wash. every child would ask, "give me one sugar cane". He was giving to everyone. When he came home only one was left. So the children unimnannerly to be like this. In Sahaja Yoga you said, "we are three". He said, "It's alright; next time I will bring for you, share it among you three". And they had it, they said, "better have it, now one more child will come and Very great-a very great man, a realized soul. this will also go away". So one has to know He was a great person. So he knew so many about lives who have been "giving'. Read things. And one day I was there-in the about people who have been giving'. They night you see, there was a doctor, we were gave their lives. They crucified them, they his guests in a wayY, for dinner vwe had gone tortured them. They allowed to be exploited. there. In the night the call came that, "1 They allowed to ba poisoned. Read of such need you very much",-to the doctor The sacrifice, of great sacrifices. We are lucky doctor said, "Now I'ni tired". He was another people that we have seen all those things with very giving person, no doubt. He said, "Oh our own eyes. But at least you be one of them, you must come, I have a big problem. See I that you can at least, if not see, visualise it. Saw a little baby. You can. Bring that as your principle. list of things. "how many things", except see. Heart is opening. Think of giving On material level, other help is there to give. But no. we don't even give the other help, make out, labour saving devices. Now. 1 have come here, some will be running, others are brought of them everything is done. They'll Its not only selfishness but it is unmannerly, have to be extremely busy helping others, at every point. To be helpful. You know Ravi Shankar's Guru was a He said, "What baby have you found ?" So we move now, from detachment, which I've told you four types of detachment, and then I told you the nourishment of your mind which is suffering now, and the mother is and nourishment to your heart. Nothing dead and nobody is to look after it." So I nourishes more to a person than giving away. said *"Alright I'll also come with you"- Nothing nourishes your heart, your compas- sion, unless and until you learn to give away. with him, So, he was sitting with the little Now will you please make a list of things, thing near his heart. So the doctor said, "how many things you have given away "What are you doing ?" He said, "Its a baby,"-he was an old man,-he said, "I found a baby of a deer because I knew I will touch the baby. I went Nirmala Yoga 27

 He said, "I'm trying to give him my life if But this is gracious; you see when somebody possible, so that when you come at least you is paying, you look on the other side. It may find him alive". o be gracious, I don't know, whatever it is, it's he took out the thing-doctor-his cost and just the same; filth I tell you.. all that, and he said, "alright put it down". He put it down very cautinusly, I mean he You may have to work till 2 o'clack, you may was a realized soul, no doubt. I put my hand have to work at 4 a'clock, doesn't matter. on the thing and it came to life, and it started, y alright. he was very happy. He said, ou have to work: because compassion itself is are a Devi, you are a Goddess, I joy giving, because your Spirit is the Ocean of But one bad thing you have done." Just like this,just love. So So compassion ; compassion at any point. You have to work. you have to work, you can tell you. Compassion. There is no other way, there is no other way to enjoy your Spirit but to Give. to Give, to Give. Doesn't matter if you have not eaten your food, doesn't matter. Nothing matters. Many a times a you know that I don't have food for 24 hours sometimes, still I am I said "What ? "You are married." I said, "But Devis must marry, also." He said, "No, supposing you have married miserly man, then what will happen to you ?" I said, "I will see to it that. 1 don't ving- (is not nečessary for this body to eat. marry a miserly man. That would be the greatest curse." said, "I will see to it that, I don't the faod of this body is compassion. That nourishes So you have to ba miserly towards yourself, but you must have compassion. He said, "I had the same type of a wif: who was miserly. and I got fed up with her first of all, for thankfulness. This is the other for her miserliness." So that is what it is : misarliness should be 'hated, absolutely to be I should say, of thankfulness to God. He has hated, absolutely to be the worst of all. Its given you realization. He has given you this like leprosy for Sahaja Yogis. Miserliness. It's body. Do you'realize that this body, human Heart, open your heart. Open your heart quality one should have. it's a higher quality saving saving pounds, you know. That 'must go away from your mind, Miserliness to yourself is good, miserliness to othars is bad. body He has given to you. He has given you everything. Count your blessings. Even to have the morning, to enjoy it as a human being. Gregoire told me a shocking thing. He said, You are not in any 'bandhan', you are not in any 'pâsha' (T), you are not pashus (), you are not animals. Animals are pashus. You are free people, God has given you freedom. And he has given you His realization. Sense of "this is our culture." I said "Your culture ! what is it ?" You see, he said that "if we go in a hotel, and if somebody is paying. we start looking thankfulness. But our language is such, this side and that." "thank you, thank you, thank you," finished. I said, "Realy I". He said, that is very It is only in the lips, it finishes ; lipservice. common. I just cannot believe it! This is From your heart thank Him, from your heart. culture! It is the opposite of culture. Whatever Not outside just go to church, "thank you. you may call it, it's not culture at all. Culture God very much," alright done, finished. It's would be to come forward, "Alright I'll pay". to thank Him from your heart, write praise. But Americans are even worse, they'll say, "I Praise. Sing praise, "glory to God." to the paid for you yesterday, you pay today for great who has created us. Your disciples are (Contd. on p. 38) me." It's absolutely disgraceful miserliness. Nirmała Yega 28

 Shri Kundalini Shakti and Shri Jesus Christ Translation of Shri Mataji's advice given in Marathi at Hinduja Auditorium, Bombay. 28th September The subject "Shri Kundalini Shakti and Yoga and get Self-tealization. After Self- Je us Christ" is very attractive and realization, the vibrations of 'Chaitanya' begins Shri interesting. It is altogether a new subject for the comman people because nobody has at matter is true, then waves of cool vibrations any time before, attempted to establish any would start flowing into the palms: but if connection between Jesus Christ and Shri tiie same be untrue, hot vibrations would be Kundalini Shakti. On ths Virāta tree of religion, felt. In this manner, you are able to know as to flow from your hands. If a particular saints of various kinds bloomed as flowers in to whether any particular matter is true many countries and languages. It is only the Virāta who can know the relation inter-se or not. Whatever the Christians know about Lord Jesus Christ is on account of the Bible. This amongst these beautiful flowers. Wherever they went, these flowers spread the sweet fragrance of religion. But even the people book IS very enigmatical. It is so much deep surrounding these saints could not grasp fhe and profound that many persons have not significance of that fragrance. It is therefore, been able to understand the hidden meaning futile to expect the common people to under- stand the relation inter-se between a saint and says 7 will come to thee as tongues of flames the Adi-Shakti, the primordial Mother. You would be able to experience or under- be emitting flames of fire and therefore, they stand my view-point if you could attain the would not be able to witness Him". The real plane from which I am talking to you. Because meaning of this is that "you would witness at present, you do not have the necessary equipment to comprehend whether or not t I am telling you is the truth. In other of the Truth embodied therein. The Bible Israeli people explained this to mean that, "When the Lord would incarnate, He would Me in the Sahasrāra Chakra", You will find many references to the Kundalini Shakti and and Sahasrara in the Bible, but only a brief what words, you are not yet equipped to under- reference is possible here. stand what the truth is. Until you are able to understand the meaning of the Self, the physical body would ramain imperfect and not against me, are with me". It means, "the would be unable to verify the truth. But once the physical instrument is connected with truth You are able to verify the Truth. It follows these persons, they have no knowledge about therefore, that first you have to accept Sahaja them. Jesus Christ has said that, "Those who are persons who are not against me belong to me." If the Christians are asked to identify Nirmala Yoga 29

 Two great powers are combined in JesUs Mätā; was addressed as "Yesu". Even today, Christ. The first power is that of Shri Ganesha, we notice that in northern Indian somebody who is recognised as his original power; and named "Yeshu" is not addressed as such but the other is that of Shri Kärttikeya. Because of this, the incarnation of Jesus Christ is of Yashoda' came the word, Yeshu' and then complete "Brahman Tattva" or 'Aumkār'. Shri further became the word"Jesu" and finally Krishna, He being the father of Jesus Christ, bestowed a number of booons on Jesus Christ prior to his birth. One of these boons was that, "You (Jesus Christ) would dwell on a plane higher than that of mine. be explained to mean, that while the plane of period when Jesus Christ lived on the Earth, Shri Krishna is the Vishuddhi Chakra, located at the base of our neck, the plane of Jesus is haw the seekers should know the Virta- Agnya Chakra, which is located at the junction of the optic thalamus (pineal and pitutary Jesus Christ was the Goddess Mahā Lakshmi, alands). The second boon granted by Shri herself. Mother Mary is none other than the Krishna was that, "You (Christ) would be the support of the whole universe". The third boon was, that, "You would be the first to re- ceive one-sixteenth part of all the offerings made to Me in Pooja". In this way, after bestowing a number of boons, Shri Krishna permitted Shri Jesus Christ to incarnate on the earth. You would understand these thir.gs destruction. These powers have their centres better, if you read "Mārkandéya Purāna". Shri located around the cranium of our head. Mārkandėya, the author of the Purana has When the incarnation of Kalki takes place, all beautifully explained a number of such subtler these eleven powers perform the work of dest- points. as "Jésu". It is therefore, clear that from the name "Jesus Christ'. АЙ Whenever, Jesus Christ told stories about His Father, he was actually speaking about Shri Krishna, he was talking about Virāta, Although, Shri Krishna did not reincarnate during the This could his teachings centred round the theme as to Purusha' or God Almighty. The Mother of Goddess Mahã Lakshmi. She is the Adi Shakti the Primordial Mother. Therefore, Jesus Christ used to address his Mother as the "Holy Ghost". Jesus Christ possesses all powers of Ekädasha Rudras, that is eleven powers of ruction. Out of these eleven powers one is In the same Purana, there is a araphic that of Shri Hanumāna, the other i of Shri Bhairava. In the Bible, these two powers are description of Shri Maha Vishnu. If you would listen to this description while in medi- named as Saint Gabriel and Saint Michael res- tation, you vwould notice that the description pectively. After Self-realization in Sahaja Yoga one can awaken these powers by addressing them in Sanskrit, Marathi or even in English. Now, if you study the etimology of the The Nadi on our right side, which is known as word. 'Christ', you would know that the word "Pingala-Nadi', is activated by the power of has originated from a corrupted form of word, Shri Hanumäna. Whenever, any sort of pres- Krishna'. As a matter of fact, the father of sure or constriction develops inside this Nädi, Jesus Christ is Shri Krishna. That is why He it is instantly relieved by Chanting the mantra is called "Christ'. The manner in which his of Shri Hanumana. Similarly, even by chant- name 'Jesus' originated is also very interesting. ing the name of Saint Michael one would The mother of Shri Krishna. Shri Yashoda experience relief in the Ida-Nadi. Ida-Nādi is on is of Jesus Christ only. "See Nirmala Yoga Vol. 18 (Nav.-Dec. 83), page 26 Nirmala Yoga 30

 or insults you, then your mind is engrossed Saint Michael or Shri Bhairava, Obviously, in contemplating on these matters and you get chanting the Mantra of their names relieves disturbed. You continue to think all the time about such a man, and by repeated remember- ance of these events you put yourself in The aforesaid matters can be verified by trouble. To overcome such troubles, we advise our left side and and manifests the power of any trouble or constriction on the Ida Nadi. any person after Self-realızation in Sahaja Yoga. The purport why I am telling you all this, is to impress upon you that it is absurd to qua- re! against yourselves after grouping as Hindus or Muslims or Christians. If you could see the principle behind all this, you would realise that all these saints are like many flowers on the same tree of religion and are connected with each other because of the one and the every such person to forgive one and all. Forgiveness is thus a very powerful weapon we have received from Jesus Christ. It enables one to get rid of troubles caused by others. I have told you earlier that Jesus Christ possessed a number of powers and that He was endowed with the powers of 'Ekūdasha Rudras'. Then how is it that He was crucified and could not save Himself from this dreadful event? Jesus Christ, with His several powers, could have completely annihilated His oppon- ents in a moment. His Mother, Mary, was none else but Adi Shakti, the Primordial Mother Herself. She also could not bear the atrocities on Her son. And yet it happened. Perhaps God desired to stage a drama. AReally speaking, Jesus Christ was beyond happiness same power. Perhaps, you would be surprised to know that in Sahaja Yoga, the awakening of the Kundalini very much depends on the condition of the Agnyã Chakra of the seeker. In the present age, many persons are found with highly inflated ego (Ahamkāra). That is so, because most of them lead an extremely - egocentric life. tie attitude, that man falls from his true religion. It is on account of the egois- or sorrow and he had to enact the drama in perfect and faultless manner. were those who crucified him ! Jesus Christ rode on a donkey so that foolishness among the people of those days could be eradicated. foolish How . Man is misled, and therefore remains conti- nuously busy working, thinking etc. Which are complementary to the growth of the ego. Jesus Christ is of great help tor securing If you suffer from headache and you pray to freedom from the ego. Jesus Christ to forgive all those who have put you in trouble, you will be cured of your headache without the aid of any medđicines. As Paigambar (prophet) Mohammad wrote about awakeaning of the Kundalini and the ways of protecting oneself from wicked However, before such a thing can happen, you (Satanic) powers, so also Jesus Christ told in very lucid mariner about the powers in us as well as the weapons. have to awaken your 'Kundalini by accepting Sathaja Yoga, and get Self- realization. The reason is that the Agnya Chakra, which is the Jesus principle in you, becomes active only The first among these weapons is "forgive- after awakening of the Kundalini in Sahaja Yoga and not otherwise. Agnyā Chakra is form in Shri Ganesha principle, manifests very subtle. The physicians are also unable to notice it. There is a very subtle door in this principle. In fact forgiveness is a very power- Chakra. That is why Jesus Christ said, "I am ful weapon. It protects man against the ego. the door". Jesus Christ incarnated on this earth for facilitating the passage through this ness" the one which operates in the ""Proksha' itself in the form of forgiveness' in human If somebody hurts you or puts you in trouble 31 Nirmala Yoga

 door, and he himself was the first to pass whether he is a pious Saint, a Sahaja Yogi through it. would immediately feel the cool breeze on his palm, if the answer is in affirmative. People crucified Jesus Christ because of their ego. They could not conceive of an idea that some human being can appear on the strengthening the ego; for instance one boasts earth as an incarnation of God Their intellec- The past events in one's life, result in that he is a disciple of such and such person etc. Man is unaware of the factual evidence tual pride could not accept this idea and they rejected the Truth because of the ego. What facing him. Obviously due to the streng- was the bad deed for which Jesus was cruci- thening of ego, he loses sight of the real fied ? He had on the contrary cured many meaning of the Self ('Sva' T). It is therefore people of their ailments. He preached the necessary Truth and taught many good things to the of the "SELF". Suppose the river Ganges people. He showed them the way to live a is flowing from a particular place, and you go very cultured life. He always preached Love. In spite of this, the people tortured him. But flowing from that place, and that you are they would bow before those who teach filthy actually sitting on the Ganges,-this will be and rotten things and make a fool of them, ridiculous. Therefore, accept only that which What a height of stupidity! These days any is factually or materially present before you. Tom, Dick or Harry becomes a Guru, robs the In the case of Jesus Christ, the circum- people, squeezes money from them. Such stances were similar. Jesus Christ tried to persons are held in high esteem. On the awaken the Kundaiini, but with great diffi- contrary if a gcod person, who stands by the culty could give realization to some twenty Truth, wishes to show the true path, the one persons, people, not only won't listen to him but have got realization. Christ could have given assault him. To educate such very stupid realization to many more but His disciples people God Almighty sent His beloved Son, thought that He could only cure sick persons Jesus Christ, on this earth. But the people and that there was no other significance of crucified him. They have been, ever since realization to them. On many occasions repeatedly doing the same thing. If you read. Jesus Christ demonstrated walking on the you will find that whenever God incarnated, surface of water. This could be because He or any Sage or Saint took birth on this earth, himself was, "Pranava" (g) AUMKARA the people have harmed them and tortured Inspite of all this, people could not under- them. Instead of learning from them, they stand that Christ was the son of God. behaved with them stupidly. We will notice In Sahaja Yoga, a number of seekers have the same story about Shri Gyanéshwara and Shri Tukarāma, the great saints of Mahärashtra, Similar treatment was meted out to Shri Guru that the ego is very subtle. Another thing 1 Nānaka and prophet Mohammad. Man always want to tell you, is about fighting with your runs away from the Truth and tries to embrace ego.That is not correct thing to do. The ego the untruth. to understand the meaning at some other place and say that Ganges is But in Sahaja Yoga, thousands ' got Self-relization diseases. Man should, therefore, understand and got rid of the is not in any way effected by your fighting with it. It should get absorbed in your own Whenever there is an incarnation of God. Self. When your attention is focussed on the or a Saint is born, and you ask a question Kundalini, and it pierces your Brahmarandhra, whether such a person is an incarnation or and therefore, merges with Virāta', it is at this 32 Nirmala Yoga

 stage that ego is absorbed. The real ego is the ego of the VIRATA SHAKTI. In fact VIRATA is the real ego. You cannot free yourself from the Jesus Christ incarnated on this earth with his ego. What do you do? That which1 ego (Aham Karoti, Sah Ahamkara'). You just complex, and is the seat of the subtle principle ask yourself as to what is it that you actually of 'Aumkāra' or "Pranava". In fact Jesus Christ do? You can do nothing except changing is the'Aumkār', the "Pranava'. The connec- the form of dead matter. Can you transform tion between the Kundalini and Jesus Christ a flower into a fruit? You are endowed with is the same as the one that exists between the the nose, the face, the beautiful human body, moon and the moonlight or the sun and the How did this happen? We achieved this sunlight. human form from amoeba. How could this have happened? It is undoubtedly the grace of God Almighty which enabled us to have this beautiful human form. Can we repay you and understand the meaning of "Self. In n order to explain the meaning of the 'Self. do is seatin the Agnya Chakra. Agnya Chakra is very The Kundalini, that is Mother Gauri, crea- ted Shri Ganesha by Her will-power, Tapasya and noble deeds. It was when Shri Ganesha Him for th s? Can you do anything which is prepared himself for incarnation that Jesus similar? After man succeeded in producing a test tube baby, his ego swelled considerably. Really speaking here also man did not create respect of which man has not been able to any living organism. As in the case of cross- find any satisfactory explanation. Have you breeding of two plants, so it has been done here by uniting two living human cells. But how much it has inflated the ego balloon ! Then, Man reached the moon, hovw much How you came inte this world ? There are further inflation of his ego took place ! What is our ego in comparison to His, who created explain these things ? We say that earth has Christ was born. There are many things in this world in ever considered how a seed sprouts 7 How you breathe ? How you make movements ? Wherefrom the power in your brain comes? many such things. Can any man satisfactorily the sun, the moon, the stars and the whole universe? In fact our ego is false. It is fake. came? A number of things need unfoldment. gravitational force. But from where this force The true ego is the ego of the VIRATA PURU- SHA. Because it is the Virāta that is doing of an illusion, You have yet to come out of This is because you are under the influence everything. that illusion. Your illusion has to be blown You, should know that it is the "Virāta up, otherwise it would grow from strength to Purusha who alone is doing everything. strength. For spritual evolution of man, it is Therefore. let all things be done by the Virāta, At every you are just like a machine: Suppose speaking before a microphone, and my voice is peared. All of you know that Shri Vishnu carried to you through the medium of the microphone, then the microphone is only a "Sākshi' or a witness. It is I, who is doing demonstrat: the life of an ideal king. Similar the speaking and the power is flowing was the life of Shri Krishna and the life of through the microphone. necessary to demalish his illusion. I am stage of evolution, the incarnations have ap- incarnated as Shri Râma, and wandered in the forests. He staged a beautiful drama to Ang Jesus Christ. In the same way. you are simply an instru- ment of God Almighty. The Virāta has made you, so let the power of Virāta flow through the stupidity of the people of that time. When we study the life of Jesus Christ, one thing is noticed prominently. That is Nirmala Yoga 33

 Because of that stupidity this magnificent did not change his mission, He did not personality was crucified. And what height separate himself from the society, considering of stupidity ! When the people were asked to express their opinion as to whether a thief on occasions he attended certain marriage or Jesus be released, the Jews demanded ceremonies and made the arrangements. The himself to be a 'Sanyasi". On the contrary Bible says that at one marriage occasion he transformed drinking water into fresh grape Juice. Now, man has picked up this one inci- that the thief be released and Jesus Christ crucified. We know the state of these people today! dent to suggest that since Jesus Christ made The sin committed by them will not be wash- ed away in many many lives. And even now these persons are enveloped in their ego. They think that they have done a virtuous deed. Even now, if these people seek pardon of God, saying that. "O Gad ! pardon us 1or Chakra and to dissolve our ego. My job is to crucifying your sacted principle. Forgive us for destroying your sacred principle", God will immediately forgive them. But man pierce your Sahasrara Chakra. This work is finds it very difficult to apologise. He com- mits a number of evil deeds. How many wine out of water, he used to drink wine, In Hebrew language you would notice that the word wine means pure juice of fresh grapes. It does not mean alcohol. Jesus Christ incarnated to open the Agnya pardon us for awaken y our Kundalini power so that it could of collective nature: I have therefore, to do it in the case of one and all. 1 want to tell you about Jesus Christ, Guru Nänaka, King persons can be found in the world who have worshipped the Saints? Take the instance of Janaka and a number of other incarnations Shri Kabir or Shri Guru Nanaka. The people have persecuted them at every step. In this Similarly. I wish to talk to you about incarna- world the people have not given anything to and the way they relate with the collectivity. tions of Shri Rama, Shri Krishna etc., and also the saints except harm and torture. But about Shri Shiva. because all the powers of I tell you now, that circumstances have chang- ed. The Satya Yoga has commenced. You the time has come for collective conscious- may try, but now you would not succeed in persecuting or torturing any saint. This is due to Jesus Christ himself. For Jesus Christ God shall find Him and millions of people has set in motion a mighty power in this will be able to do so. Sahaja Yoga is the world which would make such wicked people suffer. They would be punished. Bible. You are judged only after you come The Ekädasha Rudras of Jesus Christ are all in readiness to strike. would now torture any saint, would be after coming to Sahaja Yoga. After getting completely ruined. It is a great sin to torture that, which means everything, it is important any saint. You try to understand this from the example of Jesus Christ. Do not commit it. Many people ask me, "Mataji, when such stupidity hereafter; otherwise you may would we be stable?" The answer is very get completely ruined. If one great lesson is simple. Suppose you are sailing in a boat. to be learnt from the life of Jesus, then that is that you have to remain contented in the state in which the Almighty has placed you. Jesus these Gods and deities are in us. Now, ness to manifest. In this Kaliyuga, all those who are seeking Last Judgement. This is described in the to Sahaja Yoga. For that purpose you, how- ever, have to surrender yourself completely Those who to dwell in it, to be settled and stabilised in Then you know when the boat becomes stable : so also while riding a bicycle, you understand that when you do not wobble, you Nirmala Yoga 34

 know you are in balance and stable. So also spoiled their Agnya Chakras. The reason is in Sahaja Yoga our stability is understood. that these people follow a wrong Guru or The judgement in this matter is to be made by the individual himself. it is only when places. Many of the eye-diseases are caused stabilise in Sahaja Yoga, that the state of due to such wrong practices. In order to bow before or touch their heads at wrong you thoughtless awareness is established. So keep the Agnya Chakra in proper order, one long as the Kundalini power does not pass should always read the scriptures and the through the Agnya Chakra, the stage of sacred texts: One should never read unholy thoughtless awarenss is not reached. This is literature. Many people may say, What does the first step in the way of thoughtless aware- that matter? On account of our profession, ness of the seeker. As soon as the Kundalini we have to do certain things which may not crosses the Āgnyā Chakra, the thoughtless be strictly proper". But then, by doing such awareness is established. It is the power of unholy activities the eyes get spoiled. I never Jesus Christ which is instrumental in opening could understand, as to why people are bent the subtle door located above the Agnya upon doing wrong deeds. Even by looking Chakra. For that purpose you are to recite the' Lord's prayer composed by Jesus Christ. Chakra may get constricted. Jesus Christ After crossing this door, the Kundalini power firmly told, "Thou shall not commit adultery. enters the limbic area of the brain. It is after the Kundalini enters this area, which is also eyes". Thus, it again comes to the eyes. If at any unchaste and filthy man the Agnya But I tell you, thou shall not have adultrous termed as the Kingdom of God, that the state of thoughtless awareness is established. In and your eyes get weakened. This does not the limbic area of the brain there are Chakras which activate the seven main Chakras and become an unholy or improper person. It is also the secondary Chakras in the body. your eyes are unholy, you have eye troubles mean that if you have to use spectacles, you the law of life that you have to use spectacles at an advanced age. The eyes are spoiled Now. let us consider the reasons why the because you do not keep them steady, and Agnya Chakra is speiled. One of the main are always moving them from one place to reasons of this deterioration are your eyes. You should take great care of the eyes, as people is constantly shifting from one object they are very important. Then the Agnya to another. These people are not even aware Chakra is also spoiled on acount of bowing that such action spoils the eyes. before or touching one's head at the feet of an unauthorised Guru. That is why Jesus Agnya Chakra lies in the manner in which you Christ has told not to bow one's head before work. If you overwork then you become every person or place, because by doing so, you unknowingly lose everything whatever may be good, but even then, if it is beyond you have gained. You should bow your head the normal level, be it over-reading, over- only before an authorised person, that is the stitching or over-thinking, it will spoil the one who is an incarnation of God. Do not Agnya Chakra. The reason is that while you bow before any wrong place. This is very overwork, you forget God. During the course important. If you bow your head before a of such work, God consciousness does not wrong person or place, your Agnya Chakra stabilize in you. will get constricted. In Shahja Yoga, I have noticed that nowadays, many persons have There is no hypocracy in it. It is not some- another. So also the attention of some The other reason of deterioration of the work-conscious. The work that you are daing The Kundalini is the Truth. It is sacred. Nirmala Yoga 35

 thing which can be purchased in a shop. This there are many exercises for the eyes which is the absolute Truth. As long as you cannot help to keep the Agnya Chakra in a healthy recognise the Truth by following Väma Marg condition. One of these is to watch yaur own or the wrong path. When you will merge into the Truth, when you will get absorbed in it. is the plan and where do you propose to go?" only then you would understand that you are but an instrument of God Almighty, the Holy Father, that you are the instrument through If you do this, the strain on the eyes due to which the power of God flows and that you are the instrument of the same power of love of God, which pervades the whole universe and directs all movement therein. This power that part of the back of the head that is exac- is made available to you only because of tly behind the forehead. It is in the area which Jesus Christ, through His crucifixtion. What a great sacrifice on the part of Christ ! It is fingers (about 5 inches) above the base of the due to Him that our Agnya Chakra has opened. neck, and is known as the area of Shri Maha f the Agnya Chakra of any person odoes not Ganésha. Shri Ganesha incarnated as Mahā open, Kundalini would not rise, because the Moolidhära Chakra would also remain Christ. Shri Christ's place is in the centre constricted till the Agnya Chakra remains ego and think of yourself that. "Yes Sir, what This is how you may address yourself as if, you are observing your own image in a mirror. ego wili be minimised. The other area which is very important is is at a distance of about the thickness ofeight Ganesha and the same incarnation is of Jesus of the forehead and is surrounded by the If a person's Agnya Chakra kingdom of the Ekādasha Rudras. Jesus much constricted, the Kundalini Christ is the Master of that kingdom. The of Shri Maha constricted. is too power would not rise, whatever efforts you Ekädasha Rudras comprise may make. For removing the catch on the Ganesha, as also Shri Shadānan (The Lord Agnya Chakra, we apply "Kumkum". has the effect of reducing the troubles of the awakening of the "Kundalini' you would ex- ego as also other troubles. When the "Kum- perience that your vision is somewhat dimmed kum is applied on the forehead above the Agnya Chakra, the Chakra is opened and dalini' awakens. the pupils of your eyes are Kundalini risas. Such is the intimate connec- tion between Jesus Christ and the Kundalini Power. Shri Ganesha, who is stationed at the Moolädhāra, and protects the modesty of Christ or contemplating or meditating on Him Shri Kundalini also opens the door at the would relieve Agnya Chakra. At the same time Agnya Chakra, for the Kundalini [to pass it should be remembered that merely following through it. with six faces). If you open your eyes, after or blurred. This is so because when the Kun- dialated and get cooled. This happens on account of the action of para-sympathetic nervous system. Mere thinking of Shri Jesus the conventions or traditions and the lines of succession made after Him does not mean What is it that we have to do for maintain ing the Agnya Chakra in order? The ways are many. Extremity in every action spoils the society. and thereforeexcessiveness in any truths. Foremost amongst them is that look- walk of life is not proper and should be avoi- ing at any women with evil intentions is a ded. Maintaining the balance enables our great sin. You can iealise the extent of the eyes to get rest. In Sahaja Yoga, there are a number of remedies for this, but it is absolutely ral people who stare at women at road sides necessary to get Self-realization, first. Then with evil intentions. Jesus Christ told about contemplation of Jesus Christ. Now, I will be telling you some eternal enormous sin that is being committed by seve- Nirmala Yoga 36

 this matter some 2000 years ago. But He did have no insight, misrepresent the matters. not tell it so openly. That is why 1 have to temind you about this bad habit. Jesus Christ told us about this matter and was Crucified. Jesus only told that this should not be done, because it is filthy. He did not tell about the bad con- sequences of this action. This habit makes and the Kundalini power, This, in fact is the man behave like a beast, as his mind is day and night engrossed in evil thoughts. In our Yaga science it has been advised that the mind should be controlled and kept on the correct path. You should app'oach Godwith all atten- tion centred on Him. In reality, giving Baptism means the awakening of the Kundalini power so that after it rises and pierces the Sahasrüra, there is the union of the all-pervading power of Gad makes final job of the Kundalini power. Butthe clergy know nothing about this. On the contrary, they are vainly trying to do something which they are not even authorised to do. Otherwise you will find these clergymen involved in all sorts of acts of kindness-kindness to animals, service of the poor, service of patients and so We are made out of Yoga. Our's is the on. You would say, "Mataji, these are all land of Yoga. We are not egoistic, nor do we want to be so. We desire to live on this land deeds, but then, it is not the work of God. It as Yogis. A day will dawn, when the whole is not ths work of God to serve the poor by world would bow to this country (India) in paying them mɔney. The real work of God reverence. Then people would know who Jesus Christ was, and from where He came ! Kingdom of God, and to enable them to unite He would then be worshipped with due res- pect on this sacred land. In India, even today, perity, happiness, beauty and grace, is in reality the modesty of women is protected and they the work of God. God will not catch the feet are treated with proper respect. All over our of the persons who commit theft, or speak ljes country, we regard the mother with great or wander around because of poverty. To help reverence. When the people from other coun- tries would visit this land they would know done by any person. You would notice some that it is in this country that real Christianity Christians involved in proselytesing work. is practiced with great devotion, but not in They would go to a remote corner where the countries which profess the Christian reli- Adiväsis gion. noble deeds". Yes, certainly they are noble consists in helping the people to enter the with God. To make their life full of peace, pros- such persons is an act of kindness and can be (Aboriginals) reside. There they would do some work of service to the Adivāsi people and then convert all of the Adiväsis to Jesus Christ said that "we should ba born Christianity, But one thing should be made again." In our country we refer to this process clear, that this is not the work of God. The as "Dwija" or born for the second time. The second birth of any human being is possible only by awakening of Kundalini power. So long as the Kundalini is not awakened, one will not aquire, the second birth, and so long Sahaja Yoga, we do not perform any work of as we do not have rebirth we will not be able pseudo-kindness. If we go to any hospital, to recognise God. You read the Bible after realization. You will be surprised to know awakening of 'Kundalini' they are automatically that Jesus Christ has told nothing but the healed, because within us is the power of importance of Sahaja Yoga. Everything has been explained with minor details. Those who power of lave starts flowing through their work of God is eternal. In Sahaja Yoga, the patients get healed when their "Kundalini is awakened. In we can easily heal 25-30 patients. With the Love. Due to awakening of Kundalini this Nirmala Yoga 37

 bodies and the same power cures them. Jesus such filthy manner is an outright insult of Him. Christ healed many with the same power of By relating every petty and mundane things love flowing through him. Jesus Christ did not help anybody with materialistic things. know this. "Sai Nath Bidi" or Lakshmi We have to understand these things minutely. Hing,-advertising like this is an insult of God. Do not repeat the mistakes of the past. You What do these people gain by doing so? Some get yourself realized. This is your first duty After people say that, "Mother, this will do us Self-realization your powers are awakened. good". What is this good? By that expression These awakened power have healed diseases they mean they get more money. If a business like cancer which are considered as incurable. is carried in this fashion, one or the other day In fact you can cure any disease. Diseases it would surely bring them in trouble. This is like cancer can be cured only in Sahaja Yoga. the insult of God. But those who get cured again resume their old paths and habits. They are no more in search of God. Such persons remember God only when they want to be cured of some disease. They do not otherwise think it neces- Sary to seek God. Why then should God care for those who do not desire to be the light of nations were made up of "earth principle God ? Such persons, whether cured or not. would not spread the light in this world, God Would light only such lamps which would spread the light in the whole world. Why through the resurrection that His disciples will God cure the stupid people ? Why will could know that He was no other than God God help those who do not wish to do His work or those who do not want to seek Him ? pets, started reciting His name, started deliver- The work to relieve poverty or social work ing lectures on Him. should not be mistaken for the work of God. You should with God, you commit great sins. Jesus Christ came to save and liberate the whole mankind. He was not the personal possession of any particular sect. He himself was 'Aumkar incarnate. He was "Pranava and the 'Truth. The bodies of the other incar- whereas the body of Jesus was made of the soul principle (STH a). That is why He was resurrecred after death.And it was only Himself. Then they started beating the trum- The most important thing is that God incarnated. If the people should recognise Him and secure spiritual Some people degrade the relationship with development and bliss, this would enlighten God to the lowest level. At one place, 1 abserved on an advertisement board: "Shri everywhere. May all of you acquire the Yoga Sãi Näth Bidi". To use the name of God in of God. Many many blessings. the soul and spread happiness, and bliss Contd. from page 28 sitting and every moment when you are talking you are thinking about Mother or about God. You'll be amazed! passible if you have sensitivity, if you have memory. The greatest miracle of this world is giving what God has given you. so today I that everybody has to die and nobody remem- bers it But another one, is that everybody is become half moon, only in mind. And the blessed by God but nobody knows it. But you are 'sa specially' blessed. So what you should Alright ? do ? Be in joy, be grateful, so that bliss comes to you. Without thankfulness nothing is going to work out. Thankful heart. You need a heart that is thankful to God so that he gives It's only you. When you give others he will definitely give. But don't think it is your own. You are have told you 8-fold movement. So you have other half, keep it for the next 'Guru Purnima'. MAY GOD BLESS YOU Nirmala Yoga 38

 An Outline for Understanding "The Deities" The Father Aspect 1. Before a cosmic cycle (the Creation) starts, the ultimate reality is undifferentiated as Parabrahma; it is infinity. abstract. without manifestation The Creation starts when this reality separates into two : Shri Sadashiva, the Primordial Father and Shri Adi Shakti, the Pri- mordial Mother. "HE is the Eternal Witness: "SHE“ is His power, the Haly Ghost. Shri Vishnu incarnated as Shri Rāma some ago in India. Shri Rüma was the son of a King and educated as the heir to the throne. He was the "philosopher King" descri- a warrior of unmatchable 8,000 vears bed by Plato, courage, skill and decorum. His life was a platform on which He demonstrated how to a very righteous (Dharmic) life. Shri Rama provides us with a model for a perfect pattern of human relationshjps: He was energies which structure the cosmos : "A-the perfect as a son, husband, brother, father, and seed energy of desire, Shri Mahākuli;U-the king. He is the Deity of the heart chakra and on this subtle level He establishes the potential and 'M-the seed energy of evolution, Shri within man to manifest the qualities needed as Through the energy of Aum. the Primordial Word, SHE then creates the whole universe. lead Aum is the expression of the three seed seed energy of action, Shri Mahāsaraswati; Mahalakshmi. a father, son and husband etc. Aum also stands for the principle of Divine innocence and purity which permeates the cosmos and is personified at a later stage by expresses the all pervading greatness of God the elephant God. Shri Ganesha. Shri Vishnu incarnated as Shri Krishna some 6,000 years ago, also in India. He the Almighty (Virāta). One most remarkable aspect of Shri Krishna is that He is Yogesh- wara, the Lord of Yoga, absolutely detached 2. Then, before our own material universe, the world of the deities is created; the three main deities are Shri Shiva, Shri Vishnu and Shri from wordly involvements while performing Brahmadeva. Of these three, Shri Shiva never incarnates. He is the manifestation of pure spiritual existence. His wife (shakti or power) is Shri Părvati. Shri Vishnu is the guide of action where man acts as a detached instru- evolution and the one who incarnates to trigger the next step in evolution. His wife is interferences of the ego's own desires. The Shri Lakshmi, giver of prosperity. Shri Brahma- deva, the creator, incarnates very rarely. One example however, is Shri Hazrat Ali, the son-in- law of Mohammad Sahab and husband of Kundalini. Fätimaji. The wife of Shri Brahmadeva is Shri Saraswati, Goddess of beauty, arts and music. 3. An incarnation can come in complete form (Avatar) or as a limited manifestation and Shri Shiva integrates to manitest yet another (Anshavatär). The most famous and most recent avatårs of Shri Vishnu are Shri Räma (Adi Guru). He is the one who incarnates very and Shri Krishna. The incarnations are of four often to assist Shri Vishnu in His evolutionary types: the Father, the Primordial Master, the Son, The Mother. all worldly functions very successfully indeed. He introduced to the human consciousness the notion of "leela", the play, the detached ment of the Unconscious, freed from the witnessing power of Shri Krishna is esta- blished within the Vishuddhi Chakra. It can be awakened in man by the power of the The Primordial Master Aspect The innocence of Shri Brahmā, Shri Vishnu aspectof the one reality: The Primordial Master, task. There have been ten major manifestations of the Primordial Master aspect: Abraham, 39 Nirmala Yoga

 Zarathustra, Lao Tzu, all the Deities, integrates all their qualities Moses, Contucius, Socrates, Rajā Janaka, Mohammed, Guru within the love of the Mother. It is the power Nānak, Sai Baba of Shirdi (second half of 19th of the Mother that awakens all the aspects of century). The relates to the area of the subtle body known comfort, counsel and redeem. as the Void (or Ocean of Illusion). His incarnations have given man the principles for maintaining a balance in his daily life and Primordial Master aspect the Deities in man. She has the power to 4. All the Deities are aspects of the one God. The incarnations are those aspects at work in universal history. They all control some specific element of theinner mechanism: a chakra or nidi. They are eternally living and acting to support the great work of Sahaja Yoga. By mastering the art of mantras, and, above all, by awakening the devotion of the heart, the Sahaja Yogi can enter into contact the energy of the avoid extremes. When Kundalini enlightens the void area man be- comes his own master (his own guru). The Son Aspect Shri Ganesha incarnated as Lord Jesus Christ some 2,000 years ago in Israel. His with all these aspects of God to be helped and shakti is the Virgin Mary. Lord Jesus esta- blished within the Agnya chakra the potential protected. Finally, the Divine qualities will for man to forgive and be forgiven, to clear himself from the effects of his sins and blossom and manifest through his chakras. 5. The Deities are ruling over a very karmas. The Divine child. Lord Jesus was complex pantheon of beings other than human the word Aum made flesh. In the Indian beings: tradition Christ is known as Shri Mahāvishnu. The Divine child also came on this earth in his On the side of goodness are the Devas which control the forces of nature; Indra warrior aspect as Shri Kärttikeya. rain, Väyu : wind, Agni: fire, Adi Bhoomi the earth, Varuna : the ocean. (and many The Mother Aspect The Adi Shakti is the Great Mother, The others). In fully establishing one's relation- Holy Ghost. She also incarnates, either in Her ship with these Devas one can ultimately own right (as Shri Durgā 10,000 years ago) control the elements. There are also Celestial or in one of Her many aspects. She is the beings, such as the Archangels: Gabriel: one who controls the whole cosmic show. She has incainated, for instance, in her Mother aspect as the Mother of Christ (Mary): Satanic beings exist also. These forces are in her wife aspect as Shri Sitä, in the case of at work to deprive man from achieving his Shri Rama; and Shri Radha, the wife of Shri spiritual becoming : Shri Mataji named the Krishna. She was the sister (Nänaki) of the Satanic forces which are now in human form Primordial Master, Guru Nānak ; and the when She visited America in 1972 and daughter Fätimāji of the Primordial Master, warned of the damage they can do to the Mohammād Sahab. Hanumana, Michael : Bhairava. On the side of evil various categories of spiritual body of men. They have all been destroyed by Shri Mataji in previous incar- nations and will be destroyed again. In the Today Her most complete incarnation is living on meantime it is up to us to take advantage of Her the earth to start the Golden Age: in this advent and become Spiritual Beings through incarnation Her name is Shri Mataji Nirmala Self-realisation. Devi. Shri Mataji, as the Shakti or Power of Jai Shri Mataji Nirmala Yoga 40

 Mantras There are two types of Mantrās : (1) the Affirmation, and (2) the Poem of Praise. We use them in different circumstances. The Affirmation When a chakra has been affected, and if the residing deity of the chakra recedes, the qualities of that chakra do not maintain themselves without constant attention and nourish- ment. The Affirmation is used to bring our attention back to the qualities so the deity returns, making these qualities return and act spontaneously within us. The Affirmations Centre Shri Matāji, make me the innocence. (1) Moolädhāra (2) Swadishthân Shri Mätāji, make me the creative knowledge. Shri Mătăji, make me satisfied. (3) Nābhi (3a) Void Shri Mataji, make me my own guru/master. Shri Matāji, make me a fearless person. Shri Mătāji, make me a detached witness. Shri Mätaji, make me a part and parcel of the whole. Shri Mātāji, make me a self-correcting and discriminating person. Shri Mätāji, make me forgiving and sacrificing person. Shri Mätaji, please give me my Self-Realisation. Shri Mätäji, please be in my head. Shri Mätāji, please establish my Self-Realisation. Shri Mätāji, please accept my complete surrender and my sincerest thanks for making me a Sahaja Yogi (ni). (4) Heart (5) Vishuddhi Hamsa (6) Agnya (7) Sahasrāra Left Side Shri Matāji, by Your Grace, (1) Moolädhăra a I am the powerful innocence of a child. (2) Swadishthān Shri Matāji, by Your Grace, I am the pure knowledge/technique of the Divine that acts. Shri Matāji, by Your Grace, I am satisfied. Shri Mātāji, by Your Grace I am peace. Shri Mätāji, by Your Grace Shri Mâtaji, am I my own guru/master? Shri Matāji, by your Grace, I am my own guru/master. Shri Mätāji, by Your Grace, as I am the pure knowledge, I am my own guru. Shri Matāji, am I the Spirit? Shri Matāji, by Your Grace, I am the Spirit. Shri Matāji, by Your Grace, please forgive me for any mistakes against my (3) Nabhi I am a generous person. (3a) Void (4) Heart Spirit. Shri Mätăji, by Your Grace, I am the instrument of Mother's Love. Nirmala Yoga 41

 Shri Mätäji, I am not guilty. As I am the Spirit, by Your Grace, how I be guilty? Can (5) Vishuddhi Shri Matāji, by Your Grace, please forgive me. (6) Agnya (7) Right Sahasrāra Shri Mātāji, by Your Grace, I am protected from all the challenges and (left side) I will be victorious over all the challenges to ascent. Shri Mataji, by Your Grace, I am fortunate to be in the attention of the Holy Spirit. Whole left side Right Side (1) Moolädhära. Shri Mätäji, verily You are the Killer of devils. (2) Swädishthãn Shri Mätāji, I do nothing. Verily You are the Doer and You are the Enjoyer. Shri Mātāji, verily You are the Royal Dignity in me. Shri Matiji, verily You solve my money family worries and take care of my well-being. (3) Nabhi Shri Mataji, verily You are my Guru/Master. Shri Mätāji, verily You are the responsibility in me. Shri Mätāji, verily You are the boundaries of good conduct and the benevolence of a good father. Shri Mätāji, verily You are the sweet countenance of my words and (3a) Void (4) Heart (5) Vishuddhi deeds. Shri Mätäji, I forgive everyone and I forgive myself. Shri Mätāji, by Your Grace, please keep me in Your attention. (6) Agnya (7) Left Sahasrāra Shri Mätäji, verily You are the Victory over all the challenges to (right side) Whole right ascent. Shri Mātāji, verily You are the Holy Spirit. (Also) Ask the question of Shri Mätāji relating to your job; e.g. for a teacher: "Shri Mätaji, are You the Teacher of all teachers?" side Shri Mataji, verily You are the Teacher of all the teachers. The Poem of Praise These verses are said in Sanskrit and praise the residing deities now in the Being of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, thus giving sustenance and energy to those centres. The qualities of the Deities manifest themselves in your everyday life spontaneously, bringing you towards an integration of all the qualities of the Divine. Sanskrit is used, for when the Kundalini rises, She makes vibrations. These vibrations are sounds (the language of the Gads). Sanskrit derives its sounds from those vibrations. The Poems of Praise Aum tvaméva sākshät, Shri..sākshät, Shri Adi Shakti Mätāji, Shri Nirmalä Dévi Namo Namah, Nirmala Yoga 42

 (1) Moolädhära (Centre) Ganésha Gauri and Kundalini Mātā (2) Swädhishthän (Centre and Right) Brahmadéva Saraswati (Left) Nirmalā Vidya (Centre) Lakshmi Näräyana (Left) Graha Lakshmi or Hazrat-Ali/Fatima (Right) Räja Lakshmi (3) Näbhi Adi Guru Dattātréya (3a) Void (Centre) Jagadambā (Left) Shiva Pārvati (Right) Sita Ram (4) Heart (Centre) Radhā Krishna (Left) Vishnumäyā (Right) Yashoda or Vitthala Rukmini (5) Vishuddhi (Centre) Mary Jesus (Left-on right temple) Mahavira (Right-on left temple) Buddha (Back) Maha Ganésha (Front) Mahā Kārttikéya (6) Agnya Om tvaméva sākshāt, Shri Mahālakshmi, Mahasarasvati, Mahākāli, Trigunāt- mikā, Kundalini sākshāt, Shri Adi Shakti Matāji, Shri Nirmalā Dévi Namo (7) Sahasrāra Namah. Om tvaméva säkshät, Shri Kalki säkshāt, Shri Adi Shakti Mätāji, Shri Nirmalā Dévi Namo Namah. Om tvaméva sākshät, Shri Kalki säkshät, Shri Sahasrära swämini, Moksha Pradāyini, Mätāji, Shri Nirmalā Devi Namo Namah. Nadis (Channels) Mahākāli/ Bhairava Whole Left side (1) Idā Nādi Mahāsarasvati/Hanumâna Whole Right Side (II) Pingala Nādi Mahālakshmi/Ganesha The Centre (III) Sushumnā Nādi "I am the Enjoyer of All your doings-not of My doings anymore " -Shri Mataji 43 Nirmala Yoga SF

 WE BOW TO THEE, SHRI MATAJI Beyand time is the Spirit, That, You've helped us become, For now we know, that we are, And what it is you've done. We bow to Thee, Shri Mataji, The voice of God who speaks, From far beyond duality. You guide the one who seeks. Evolving thus, through many lives, Fighting what must be fought, With Your help, the seeker wins. The victory he's sought. In winning, he surrenders, Desires that come ta him, He withdraws all his senses, In Yoga goes within. There he finds, in Love with God, Heart's peace and joy, indeed, Becomes the bloom and the fruit. You planted, as a seed. JAI SHRI MATAJI To Rakhi Brother In your Presence. Dear brother so sweet, Dear brother, accept this ever endless love, for which I am, but a channel, As a sister, allow me, to lighten your burdens, express this joy, creative and prospering, So solid, sublime, yet frank, So Powerful, lovely and soothing, This eternal Shakti swells This Kundalini elevates, and dances over my head, So overjoyed is She to be, in company of thee. Strengthened by my inner strength, bowing to the Purity. To be greeted by your smiling face, Reflecting Spirit, Enlightened Soul, Ignites a love, which few can know, And we pray, Desiring to share, to serve spreading fragrant smell. We shall break the superficial bond, Collectively get united. As our Vishuddhis blossom, Man, in his evolution softens, May our love for one another broaden, gaining subtler ways of exploring, This Sahaja family love, of brother and sister, With subtler joys start flowing With Shri Mataji's blessings, Through us it grow, This love, so humbly exists Divinity created. Deep, within, from lifetime's longing It satisfies, and quenches, a thirst for innocence and sweetness as tender as a new seed planted. Jai Shri Mataji Nirmala Yoga 44

 DANGERS OF RESEARCH INTO PARAPSYCHOLOGY Perception) does not manifest a growth of the subjects' native psychic power: rather, it manifests a communication between the system of awareness of the researcher and the awareness of disincarnated (dead) individuals, who can then fill the resear- Your Excellency. On behalf of a group of friends of your great Country, I take the liberty to draw the attention of the concerned authorities to some aspects of the research into parapsychology, telepathy and other forms of extrasensory perception undertaken in various parts of the US Administration, cher's awareness/energy system with their own perceptory abilities. For instance. the forthcoming book by the reporter Ronald McRae, seemingly based on Pentagon, NASA and CIA papers, as well as the recent Congress report on "psy" pheno- mena, tend to suggest that the US authorities not belong to him but to the entity which has are dedicating great attention to this matter Here are The subject then manifests extrasensory perceptions, hardly aware that the new "psy" powers (the old Sanskrit term is "siddhi") do parasitically intruded into his psyche. Such entities, or dead spirits are called "bhoota bāddhä" in Sanskrit or "préta" in the Buddhist why they. some few reasons should be careful in doing so, and I trust that you may wish to pass on the information . It is traditionally warned by the contained in this letter to those in your knowledgeable ancient scriptures of Asia, to Government who are dealing with these have no relationships whatever with such parapsychology projects. I happen to be part of a team who have warning, based on the story of the Gadarene been involved for the past ten years with a very advanced albeit little known form of traditional yoga, which enables me, inter alia, to understand very well the mechanism of parapsychological phenomena, and thus to recognize its inherent dangers. These experi- merital findings reflect and verify the teachings and guidance of a London-based world authority on traditional spiritual yoga who latter's sympathetic nervous system and the tradition. entities and not to use their powers. The early Christian tradition issued the same Swine. We should now understand why these warnings are necessary. ESP is, to the psyche, the same as inflation in the economy or cancer within the physical body: a case of 'overheating. As one or many "bhoots" are feeding on the energy system of one living being. the stress on the has totally mastered the various fields of resulting drain on the parasympathetic nervous energy. will cause long term damage; any dysfunction of the nervous system, insomnia, fields present for the psychic, (and even mental febrility, depression, schizophrenia etc. parapsychological manifestations. The serious threat that enguiries in these physical) health of the subject who undertakes can be a manifestation of the long term such research, finds its roots in the following consequences of such spiritual possession- basic principle: A further step in the process manifests, when Unlike the tenet parapsychological theorists the stress caused by the "bhoots" creates would have us believe, ESP (Extra-Sensory problems at the physical level, thus contri- *Th is is the copy of the letter communicated by a Sahaja Yogi to the ambassador of U.S.A. in London. Nirmala Yoga 45

 Repistered with the Registrar of Nawasapais under fiegd. No36999|81 are making claver use of the "bhoot" ability to maximize the energy of a sub- jecr's sympathetic nervous energy, and cash handsomely on these short-term manipulations (psychic equivalent of asset-stripping). buting to disuases like cancer (including leukaernia), multiple sclerosis, or apilepsy. Unfortunately the causal link between the presence of "bhoots" and psychosomatic disorders has not been generally recognized by medical science, while the short term effects of ESP can be quite seductive and include. for instance, increased creativity or s0-called .curative powers stated principle is correct (ie. that "psy phenomena are .caused by dead spirits intru- research inevitably and invariably. in one ding the psyche of a living human being) it form or another, recoils back on its author or means the following: We are aware that Interest in ESP in the US Government is stimulated by the reported progress of parapsychological research in the USSR. But it must be emphasised that such Yet if the above- on the person to whom it is applied. The end result is clearly negative. Between ESP and old-fashioned bleck magic, there is e difference in degree, perhaps, but not in nature. Relativety hostile researcher, sorcerer or nation, is to lead benign "bhoots" can help in curative powers, telepathy, clairvoyance, sediesthe- The best protection against ESP by a a balanced and, yes, moral life. "Bhoots" cannot parasite the psyche of a normal individual, especially when such a person does not invite ESP by türning his attention psychokinesis, reflexologyi more sia, hostile dead entities (in Sanskrit "raksha- sas, or demons) are possessing criminal towärds it. There are, moreover, many techni- maniacs or sex sadists, who very often ques by which to overcome and get rid of manifest a completely split personality or multiple personalities: On the other hand, the mass level use of tbhoots", that is the can readily be supplemented it required, will possibility of hypnotizing masses, is a prove timely and useful to officers of your factor that politios cannot afford to ignore: Government assessing the potential of "psy" Hitler or Khomeini are among those practices within the Administration, and, along reminding us of the fact. But there are with our deep concern for the outcome, ex- also much subtler trends: "bhoots", which can be mastered easily I hope that the above information, which various sects and noticeably many Indian fake gurus highest consideration. press to you, Excellency, the assurance of my "NOW WE HAVE TO UNDERSTAND THAT WE ARE CARRYING THE LIGHT IN OUR HANDS. AND THE LIGHT SHOULD NOT SHAKE, WE HAVE TO HOLD THE LIGHT AND WE SHOULD HAVE A CONCENTRATED ATTENTION TOWARDS THE MAINTENANCE OF THE LIGHT". SHRI MATAJI Edited & Poblished by sh. S.C. Rai 43, Bunglow Road, Delhi-110007 & Printed at The Central Electric Press, 80-D, Kamla Nagar, Delhi-110007, One issue Rs. .00, Annual Subscription Rs. 51.00 Foreign (by Aimmajl £ 714)



----------------------

1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Nirmala Yoga
Vol, 4 No. 24
Bi-Monthly
Vol.
Nov.-Dec. 1984
+
"Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns all the religions and
seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga THE UNION"
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-1.txt 
 NIRM ALA YOGA
43, Bungalow Road, Delhi-110007 (India)
Founder : Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Editorial Board : Dr. S.K. Mathur, Sri A.S. Mishra, Sri R.D. Kulkarni
Representatives
: CHERYL REBEIRO, 1267, Burke Road, KEW 3101, VICTORIA.
: INGE KELLY, Gartnergasse 17/10, 1030 VIENNA.
: LORI & CARY HYNEK, 3151, Heather Street, Vancouver, B.C. V5Z 3K2.
ALEXANDRE PICOVSCHI, 175, Av. Ledru Rollin PARIS-75011.
: ANTONIO SARACINO, PIAZZA E, MILLO 9 e/2, 00122-109, OSTIA LIDO,
Australia
Austria
Canada
France
www
taly
ROMA.
:M.B. RATNANNWAR, 13, Merwan Mansion, Genjewala Lane, Borivali (W).,
BOMBAY-400092.
India
: JUAN ANTONIO DELGADO, Avenida De Burgos, 30, 1, A, MADRID-28036
Spain
Switzerland : CHARLES & MRS. MAGDA MATHYS, 5, Chemin Des Mouidins,
1256. Troinex (Canton de Geneva).
: GAVIN BROWN, Brown's Geological Information Services Ltd., 134 Great
Portland Street, London WIN 5PH.
M.J. MURDOCH, 14A Bourne Ave, S. RUISLIP, MIDDLESEX, HAH 6TZ,
ENGLAND.
U. K.
: CHRISTINE PETRUNIA, 270. Jay Street (APT. 1-C), BROOKLYN,
U.S.A.
NY-11201.
URSULA SEH LMEYER, 191 Canal ST. #23 SAN RAFAEL, CA-94901.
CONTENTS
Page
1.
1. Editorial
2: Complete Dedication the only way
11
3. Mother (Poem)
12
4. Every Sahaja Yogi has to become a Guru
29
5. Shri Kundalini and Shri Jems Christ
39
6. An outline for understanding "the Deities"
41
7. Mantras
44
8. We bow to thee, Shri Mataji (Poem)
44
9. To Rakhi brother (Poem)
45
10. Dangers of Research into Parapsychology
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Editorial
In the 12th Chapter of the Gita Lord Krishna has explained which of the devotees are dear
to Him:-
अद्वेष्टा सर्वभूताना
निर्ममो निरहङ्कारः समदुःखसुखः क्षमी ।
सन्तुष्टः सततं योगी यतात्मा दृढ़निश्चयः ।
मय्यपितमनोव्रुद्धिय्यों मद्भक्तः समे प्रियः ।
मंत्रः करूण एव च ।
Adveshtä sarva bhhotänäm maitrah karuna eva cha i
Nirmamo Nirhankärah sama dukkha Sukhah kshamee t
Santushtah satatam Yogi yatāmā drudha Nishchayah i
Mayyarpita mano buddhiryo madbhaktah same priyah
"He, who is free from hate or malice towards all living beings and is friendly and compas-
sionate towards them all, has no attachments or egoism and is forgiving by nature ; to him
pleasure and pain are alike. He is ever-contented, steady in meditation and having subdued
his sense-organs is self-controlled and possessed of firm conviction, has completely
surrendered his mind and intellect to Me, such a devotee is dear to Me."
Having no malice and being friendly and compassionate to all is one of the most difficult
achievements for ardinary people. It may be possible for one to cultivate the former with
great determination and constant practice of reminding oneself of this mentally accepted
attitude but the latter is extremely difficult. However, it is not so, for Sahaja Yogis: The
first is the precursor to the second. Developing one's ability to truly enjoy the collectivity
would perhaps help. It is not enough to be merely in the group of Sahaja Yogis in order to
be in the collectivity.
A person carrying with him his own attachments and identifications even amidst Sahaja
Yogis is in reality outside the collectivity. It should be possible to forget one's own indi-
viduality. Pleasure and pain, joy and sorrow, love and hatred arise from the individuality.
the product of one's ego. Accepting the incoveniences in order to accomodate others,
accepting and following others' view point if correct, would help balancing a rightsided and
individualistic person.
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-3.txt 
 It is, therefore, necessary to mingle freely among Sahaja Yogis, participate in all collective
activities and merge one's own attention in the collective attention of the group, One has to learn
to und arstand and tolerate others and do whatever little is possible to help and please them
without feeling any incovenience and adjusting with collective ideas. Gradually extending the
bond of love and strengthening it and further extending it to all the Sahaja Yogis and
becoming a part of Mother's universal love enveloping entire mankind and the totality.
One is in the collectivity in the state of thoughtless awareness. The Spirit would manifest
through the person established in the thoughtless awareness and relate with the Spirit of other
persons, Attachment and ego have no place in one's relations. Forgiveness, compassion, sweet
manners come out spontaneously. Shri Mataji has said at one place that looking at a person
in thoughtlessness would make him also thoughtless. A person who is completely united
with the Atma can understand the Atma of others, for he has experienced the oneness, the
universality of the Atma and is always in the Atmabhāv. Shri Jnaneshwar has described this
stage which can be called as the highest stage of collectivity in these words,..
'हे विश्वाची मजे घर । ऐशी मति जयचि स्थिर ।।
"He Vishwachi Maze Ghar Aishi mati jayächi sthir" His buddhi (the intellect) does not even
slightly deviate from the idea that the whole universe is his home.
Contentment becomes the nature of such a person, his chitta being ever united with the
Atma does not get identified with any external object of sense pleasure. He does not desire
anything else except the Paramätmä and has surrendered his mind and intellect (the budhi)
to the Paramātmä. He has no worry about his life and other wordly affairs being aware that
these are being looked after by the Supreme.
Keeping attention on the lotus feet of Sakshat Shri Atmā Paramātmā Shri Adi Shakti
Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi is, fully being in the essence of collectivity, at the hightest stage of
evolution. Shri Mataji has granted to us the highest place, let us make our utmost to evolve
and deserve it and stabilize at it completely.
2.
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Her Holiness SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
COMPLETE DEDICATION
THE ONLY WAY
(Cowley Manor Seminar, 31-7-82)
Today 1 am going to say something, this I
should have said much earlier.
this is the first time I'm saying this to you-
that you have to dedicate yourself completely
to me; not to Sahaja Yoga. but to me'.
t Sahaja Yoga is just one of my aspects.
As today I told you, that it is necessary
that you have to recognise me. And: that
recognition is fixed, that condition is fixed. I Leaving everything, you have to dedicate.
cannot change it. As Christ has already said,
that "Anything against me will be tolerated, ascend any further. Without questioning,
will be forgiven, but anything against the
Holy Ghost will not be". It's a very big war-
ning. Perhaps people don't realize what it
means. Of course none of you are against
me, that's very true. After all you are my
childern, I love you very much and you love
me. That's only the warning that Christ has people ask me, that once we have got realisa-
given you. But one must think why we are
not progressing so fast, as we should have.
Complete Dedication,-otherwise you cannot
without arguing.
Complete Dedication is the 'only' way you
can achieve it.
People still get caught up. Still get into
problems. What's the reason? So many
tion, how is it Mother we go down ?
The 'only' reason is that Dedication is not
When people are mesmerised they fall complete: if 'complete' reverence and 'com-
"completely flat on the ground, in front of plete' dedication has not been established;
their gurus. Absolutely'. They give up their you still do not know that I'm Divine-to
money. they give up everything-homes, 'that' extent as you should.
houses, families, children, and just go flat
-when they are mesmerised. Without asking look into your mind, you'll find out that com-
any questions, without going into 'any plete devotion that you had for say, Christ,
detail, without trying to find out the life of
their guru. All such people also go very have been, is not there.
fast into darkness, into greater darknes,
and into cemplete destruction. But you are
Sahaja Yogis and you have to construct HH Es a), forget all the religions of the
"that' extent as you should. I don't say all of
you. But still if you look into your heart and
or for any one of those who
or for Krishna,
Krishna said,"Sarva dharmänām parityajya
mimdkam sharanam vraja" (सर्व. धर्मानाम् परित्यज्ज्
yourself.
world. Religions doesn't mean-it does not
I didn't want to shatter your egos before, mean the religions like, Hindu, Christian,
never to tell you in these words. Perhaps Muslim, but He was meaning all the suste-
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-5.txt 
 nance. "Forget all the sustenance, and
completely dedicate to me."-That was six to Me.
thousand years back. And there are many
who would still say that, "that we have com-
pletely dedicated ourselves to Shri Krishna.
Where is He now? Even those, whom by the way and Mother is very much by the
have given,I have given realisation, they say waY- Im sorry it's not going to work out. I
like that. Of course, there is no difference dont have to tell this to you because if you
between Hin & Me, but today am the Tead Devi Mahatmya it's sufficient. Even if
One. I am the one who has given you reali-
sation. But our tirst consideration could be
our jobs, our own problems, our family prob-
lems-And dedication is the last.
I'm itlusive-it is true-my name is Maha-
mayā. I am illusive no doubt. But I'm illusive people who can talk. better, who can arque
just to judge you.
might, whatever is there, you have to hold on
But our style of dedication is very fashio-
nable and modern, in which Sahaja Yoga is
you read Her 1000 names, it's sufficient: That
She can be only achieved through 'bhakti". She
can only be achieved through Dedication.
She's only fond of Her bhaktas-the devatees.
It's nowhere written that She is fond of
better, who dress better, who live better, who
have better surroundings : but Her devotees.
Now the Dedication is a very important And this Devotion and Dedication should not
part of the ascent. Why? Because when be a frenzy or anything, but should be
you are precariously placed. when there is sustained', 'continuous', 'ever- flowing', 'ever
immediate danger to your existence; at this growing', That's the only way, now, for further
time, when the whole world is standing at a
precarious position where it is going to be
destroyed completely, it is 'very important
that you 'cling' on to the thing that is going has a admission in the college, somebody has
to save you. With complete might and
complete' faith.
development.
For us, so many small problems are impor-
some job to be done. All these considera-
tions are dharmas which Shri Krishna has
Like you are getting drenched in ordinary discribed "Sarva dharmänām parityajya māmé-
water, doesn't matter. But if you are sinking in kam sharanam vraja": Give up all the
the sea and there's a question of-this moment
of existence and that moment of destruction-
dharmas-'all' these so caled dharmas. Like
a patni dharma (t-si) is the duty of a
that time, if a hand comes forward to fetch wife, then the pati-dharma (sfa- is the
you out, there's no time for you to think any- duty of a husband, then the putra-dharma
more but cling on to it- with all your might, (ga-s) is the duty of a son, the pitā-dharma
(frat-) is the duty of father, and duty of a
citizen, and duty of a world-citizen. All
these dharmas are to be given-up 'entirely.
And you have to surrender fully from your
with all your faith.
When we have bädhäs, when we are
surrounded by negativity, we get aware of it,
and little-bit we get confused. And that's
the time we want to cling on. But the bādhās
give you ideas which are detrimental. So a
big struggle is set At that time what is the
best way? The best way is, to forget, 'every- This is an eternal personality. It is now for
thing else.
there is badhā or anything. With 'all' your make the use of your birth in these modern
heart.
I am what I am, I have been that, I'll be
that. I'm not going to grow any more, or less.
Forget that you are possessed or
you to get out of me whatever is possible. To
4
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-6.txt 
 times. To 'grow' to your full maturity, To be out will also go into the myre. Anybody who
able to work out the complete design that wants to come even near the myre, gets into
Divine wants to do through you. As soon as the myre He becomes part and parcel of it.
the Dedication starts, you become dynamic. The more we try to take help from others, we
Clinging on to that.
pull him more in the myre and we go more
down, deep down into it.
For this, meditation is the only way
So the tree of Kundalini has to grow. And
should say. Of course, rationally
can do many things. You can rationally from that tree, Paramūtmä Himself, the Para-
you
Emotionally you may feel brahma Itself, has to pull you out.
It grows
me.
accept
closer to me in your heart. But through out of the myre, and the Parabrahma has to
meditation, Surrender. Meditation is nothing pull you out-ons by one, take you in the
but surrendering-is 'complete' surrendering. Hand and swing you out. But still when you
Which is a difficult task for a modern are pulled out, your catch is not sufficient,
man in the Western countries. He only you slip down again. You come up partly.
surrenders
mesmerise, again you go down It's very enjoyable
to people who
who tully mesmerise them, they become to be out of it, but still the feet have not
slaves of people who mesmerise them, But
in their 'own freedom, their ego is more cleansed. Uniess and until you are cleansed
powerful than their Spirit-in their own how can you be completely blessed? You
freedom. That's why all the free countries have to be fully blessed by the Divine, cloth-
have gone to dogs. Because ego plays part, ed by the Love of God.
not the Spirit. They cannot master their ego
when they are free. Only if somebody can who go to these false gurus stick on to him
just entangle their ego and mesmerise them,
then they are alright-they are shut, 'com-
pletely' they surrender. And it's so obvious just like cabbages ! Till they are 'completely"
from the way these false people have mas- ruined they just go on surrendering 'every-
tered their art of making slaves out of you.
come out fully. Still you are not completely
It is surprising to see, how the people
or stick on to her, in such "tremendous' dedi-
cation that you are amazed. They become
THE
thing' that they have.
But in Sahaja Yoga, when people come,
they do not surrender; but they are nouri-
shed, they are looked after. Their health
Freedom does not mean "ego", one should improves, their wealth improves, their mind
understand. Freedom is killed by ego. Not improves, their relations improve, every way
only killed but is disfigured and disgraced, is they feel better, their conditions improve.
In your full freedom, 'complete freedom.
you have to surrender.
made ugly. Freedom in subtlest form is com-
They are all the time getting the benefit. We
plete egolessness, no angularities, complete have Ashrams which are beautiful, which are
hollowness, just like the flute; so that the the cheapest, and the food-every advantage
melody of God could be played well-that's that is available; best possible. Everything
"complete' freedom.-no hang ups.
is there.
We have to realize that we are in the
myre. Myre of ignorance, myre of sin. ment is for what ? All these blessings are:
Ignorance brings sin. How are we to get out for what 7For your higher ascent. For
of the myre? Anybody who tries to pull us getting out of the myre completely,
But we don't realize that all this nourish-
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Now, you have to adhere, you have to be when I see you quarrelling among yoLuTs elves.
dedicated, you have to be devoted. We have Jealousies and and petty things which belong
reservations, we hide things. We try to be to your past life, The help is not so much
smart. That's a dangerous situation. You all gross that is felt, but it's a 'very deeper
should, within yourself. try to see: What
part is so, still. What conditioning is keep brothers and sisters. A 'deep' love should
ing you out of Dedication, what is making exist. Selfishness has no place in Sahaja
you have reservations: what fright, which Yoga. Miserliness has no place in Sahaja
ego,what angle still sticking out into the myre
What attachments, what relationships ? You of a very small mind. I'm not saying you
have to get out of it. Unless and until you give me maney, of course.-But the way we
fully get out of it, it's not going to work out.
sense of security that is given to your
Yoga. Has no place Miserliness is a sign
look at money, the way we cling-on to it:
There's no place for half-baked things, the material things, the material wealth, the
It's a question of "now, or never", Christ material objects, the possessions.
has said it. He had said it, "You give your
Devotion and Dedication and then leave the Mother. Through Her you have your brothers
rest to me".
The greatest possession you have is your
and sisters.
Get out of that past life-that past, the
I know who are progressing in Dedication
and Devotion. I've seen people improving myre. That should be over now. You are
so much. You need not face me, you need quite aware, how with my power of Love,
not see me. In person I need not be there, 've protected you all: You know how, at
It's all in the all-pervading power. That is every moment, I've helped you. At every
all my life style, which knows each and point of your desire, I've come forward to
everything about you. And only through fulfil it. That's one side-as I said the
your bhakti--through your Devotion
Dedication you can achieve me.
and nourishment. But now your ascent has to
come from you. Your rising has to come
from you. That has to be worked out by
My achievement is the complete manifes- you-and you alone. Not by any other
tation of your Divine powers. It's very sahaja yogi or by me. I can only give you
simple, made so simple. I'm only pleased by suggestions. Not only the suggestion, but
people who are simple, innocent. who're not the warnings. And 'everything' is at hand. It's
tricky, who are loving, affectionate to each all worked out so well. I'm informed.
other, It's very easy to please me. When I informed before. You don't have to go any-
see you loving each other. talking good of where. The whole thing is 'within' yourself.
each other, helping each other, respecting You don't have to give money,. you don't
each other, laughing aloud together, enjoying have to give anything. But develop that
together each other's company. I get my first Dedication within yourself.
blessing-first joy.
I'm
See, this man who interviewed me, said
Try to love each other-in Dedication: that the unemployed are manoeuvred by the
you".
of my love. In the womb of my love you all But how ? Supposing I've a brush in my
have resided. From my heart I've given you hand, I want to paint something. And the
these blessings. I get disturbed, my hands brushI cannot manoeuvre. The brush is
shake and you fall back in to the myre again angular, it's troublesome. It's incovenient to
because you re all my children, created out politicians. "Let "God', manoeuvre
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-8.txt 
 use that, or you can say it's uncomfortable, earth ? Who has created this earth ?-My
it's awkward, it's clumsy. How can you use Mother, has created her. Who has created
it ?
Dedication is the easiest way to get rid af is greater than my Mother ?-No one else.
all' your angularities, 'all your problems, 'all Why not go round my Mother only. What's the
your badhas.
Now watch and see it within yourself: much before Karttikeya arrived He was sitting
"Are you dedicated ? Those who are fanati- With this present in His hand!
cally adhering to me are also not correct.
There should be no 'fanaticism about it. The understand-That's what logical is. It's 'very
whole thing becomes a complete logical Jogical. And also logical it is, that "Mother
this Sun ?-My Mother has created it. Who
need to go all round the whole earth ?"-And
His innocence gave Him this wisdom to
thing. There is no fanaticism about it.
feels my pain more thanT feel". What will
you say when Christ was crucified for His
She was Mahälakshmi Herself-so
person might say, 'Ooh I I'm not going to see powerful ! She made Her Son sacrifice His
the doctor. I'm not going, because Mother life, suffer like a human being. It was too
has told me that She's going to look after much !-Make your son sacrifice when you
Like, somebody says: "Now I've to go to
a doctor, to see a doctor." Then the fanatic
me". And when she gets sick, she'll come to
Mother and fight. "Mother ! You had told me
that you look after me and how is it l've got
sick ?"-This is fanatic.
have all the Powers in your hand to finish
everyone ! But it was a very delicate job-
to create this Agnya Chakra.
What does that mean ? Does that mean
What is Surrendering?-Deep down you
should say "It's the Mother. She's there,
She's my doctor. Whether. She treats me or
not, whether She cures me or not I've nothing devotion, that She could ask "Him to do
to say. I only know Her. 1 dont't know that. So when you expect Mother to do
'anyone' else."-It's very logical. The logic something for you,-There are people who say,
is, that Mother is the most powerful thing: , I must
that you know logically- it's true. And if get through', Alright, give a bandhan, you'll
She is so, She'll cure me; but if She does get it. "Mother, I'm trying to discover this".
not cure me, it's Her power, it's Her whim. Alright, you have it. 'Mother I'm trying to
If She wants to cure me, She'll cure me. If get this job". You have it.
She does not want to cure me, how can / put
that He lacked something in His devotion?-On
the contrary She was so sure of Him, of His
Alright, Mother l'm giving this thesis,
it.
Now, it's the other way round.
'my' will upon 'Her?
Like the Dedication of Shri Ganesha. That
How many have dedication that of Christ ?
when His Mother said, "Alright, between the -None. It's a fact ! Why is He the eldest
two brothers, Karttikéya and Him, the one who brother?-because no one like Him. He went
will go round the Mother Earth first, will get through all that-those 'horrible' sufferings-
because He was part and parcel of His Mother.
She suffered much more than Him. She also
had I And Karttikéya had a 'very' quick-moving went through that suffering for a greater goal
greater happiness, for a greater life, for a
peacock, and He said, "Who is greater than higher life. That is 'real Dedication". But
my Mother ? She is Adi Shakti ! What is this these false people can take advantage of this.
the first prize". Now poor Ganesha had a
little rat on which to move ; but vwisdom He
peacock which used to tly. He looked at the
Nirmala Yoga
7
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-9.txt 
 When they make the people suffer, they say complete Dedication and preparation for a
"after all you have to suffer". See, how future life of a Sahaja Yogi, you accept.
they make it up ! "You must suffer because,
after-all, You must suffer, otherwise you can strugale, a problem; but inwardly is most
not start" it's a 'very' subtle understanding.
Very subtle it is. That will make it clear to
you: That in Sahaja Yoga at first you are
nourished, you're brought up. You're trained
You're made alright. And 'all' the things ground was too much of a sacritice.
that you do after that-the sufferings- are 'no to take out shoesa big sacrifice. Yesterday
more sufferings to you because you've in a programme three people walked off
become the Spirit. Nainam chhidanti shast-
rani, nainam dahati pūvakah.
A life, which outwardly looks to be a
fulfilling.
Once upon a time, when Sahaja Yogis
came to me; to them, even to sit on the
Even
because they were asked to take out shoes;
if somebody was making them bald-
ieaded. They just walked-off.
as
Na chainam kledayantyapo, na shosayati
But, why to grow in Sahaja Yoga ?-To
grow ; to stand up. Like great children of
a Great Mother. The work is 'tremendous.
It's not for medium, mediocre people to do
this job. Frightened, fearful. arrogant, cheeky
-they cannot, they have no mettle.
mūrutah.
"जैন ডিदन्ति शस्त्राणि मैनं दहति पावक ।
ने भन कनेदयमयापो न मोसपति मारत :॥
-It cannot be killed by any instru-
ment. It cannot be thrown away or blown
away by any wind ; It cannot be burnt by
any fire; there's no way you can destroy it.
That is Spirit that you are.
So, the Dedication in meditation. Com-
plete Dedication in meditation must be
practiced. It's not for tyour' good now you're
So the nourishment has been given now.
You've grown up, you're nourished. People, doing it. So-called 'your'. First you were a
when they see Sahaja Yogis, they say, "Oh little baby, a small thing. Now you are that
Collective Being, so. you are not doing
they are like flowers ! Their faces-they
giow ! How confident, how dignified, how anything for yourself, but for that collective
being. You are 'growing to be 'aware' of that
Whole, which you are going to become. Your
jobs, your money, your wives, your husbands,
the children, the father, mother, relations-
You all
beautiful !
But for what?-"To be the wheels of the
Chariot of God".
these considerations are over now.
You've to bear the brunt: 'and the sacri-
fice which are no more sacrifices to you have to take up the 'responsibility of Sahaja
because Spirit gives, it never sacrifices. It's Yoga. Everyone of you is quite capable:
quality is to give. So, you don't sacrifice, you're brought-up for that. Do whichever
you just give.
way you like, whatever are your capacities.
With full Dedication you'll get it. Dedication
is the thing.
First the Mother has the labour pains.
Alright. She has all the problems. Alright.
When the child is grown, then he 'stands' by
the Mother. He is the proud son. She is
proud: She is prout of him and he is proud
of Her. They stand together, they figtit the half-baked. We've to drop them We cannot
battle together. That's only possible if have them. You don't have syinpathies with
Complete Dedication is the only way you
can grow further.
There are some Sahaja Yogis who are
Nirmala Yoga
8
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-10.txt 
 them. No good. If they prove alright we will What security can they give ? What help
bring them back again,-But you leave that they can render to others ?
You don't put your effort or put your
to me.
attention to them. You have to come up. You
were seekers, then you've found it, now you've Steadfast wisdom is needed for that-stead-
thrived over it, now you've grown up. For fast! Every moment. You need not blame
what ?-Is to stand up. As l'm facing you your left side and right side for that. Nothing:
today, you have to face the others, you have -you just get out of it. Cling on to it. The
to face the people.
You have to be out of it-completely.
Parabrahma has come to look after you. Cling
on to it.
Even the death has to go back.
Dedication doesn't mean that you don't then what about these minor things?
talk of Sahaja Yoga. Many people think
that keeping silent is the way you are dedi-
cating. Only in meditation you should be. powerful. You know that is the most powar-
But you have to get out of that still.
Now, the name of your Mother is very
ful name than all other names, the most
Tell all the nations and Tell all the people, powerful mantra. But you must know how
all over, the great message-that the time of to take it. With that 'complete" Dedication
Resurrection is Here, Now, at this time, and you have to take that name. Not like any
that you all are capable of doing it.
other name.
If somebody tries to sneer at you for that.
with understanding, wisdom try to say things. the name of Guru, they hold their ears-to
Individual likes and dislikes must be sacri-
ficed. "I like this and I l ike this and I like taking the name if I am making any mistake
that" must be given up. It doesn't mean please forgive me"-it means that. This mantra
that you all become like machines. No. But
the enslavement to this I must be given up.
Enslavement to habits must be given up. I told-that all the 'Daisies' in
You'll be amazed ! Once you are dedicated,
you'll not eat much. You may not eat 'at all"
sometimes. You need not even remember
of food. You won't even remember what
you've eaten. You wouldn't even remember
where you slept, 'how' you slept. It's a life these Daisies you have, just go and smell
that will be like a telescope expanding!
You'll create your own visions, and complete surorised ! Amazing! How subtle it is.
You know that in India when they take
take the name of their Guru. Means, "While
is 'very' powerful mantra. Only what you need
is the Dedication, the dynamite of Dedication.
Today
England have fragrance now. She couldn't
believe it. She said "I have never known
that. On the contrary I always felt that
Daisies had no fragrance and they were very
funny-smelling flowers". I said,
them". When she smelt them she was
They are the 'most fragrant flowers of
England today. Just the name !-Which means
Nishkalankā (fac), means Nirmalā, which
means completely 'without' any mala. What
is this' mala 7-Is this myre. "Without' any
myre : 'Nih.
Sahasrāra is called as Nirananda, since long.
Since ancient times called as Nirananda or
Nirmala-ananda. So many call it as Nirmala
nary people, but you're not. in Dedication,
in complete Devotion. you have to do it 'now
not for your own good, for your own achieve-
completely
getting out of the myre and standing on the
land, singing aloud the praise of your Father.
unour
Those who are in the myre, what music
can they give ? What songs they can sing ?
ment-that's over now. Is for
'Absolutely' ! The joy of the
4IN.
Nirmala Yaga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-11.txt 
 ānanda or Nirānanda. That joy is the joy that tion, with understanding.-logical. Comple-
you enjoy 'even' when you get crucified. That tely Dedicated; extracting all the nourishment
joy is the joy that you enjoy 'even (when you
are poisoned. "Even' on your death-bed, you Something like the leaves extract the sun's
enjoy that joy. That joy is Nirânanda.
So be prepared for the second phase. You selves, for a higher purpose, that they can be
are in the front. It is 'very little time Ineed. But
I need really people with 'steadfast Wisdom this earth works out the other way round.
and Dedication'. Steadfast.
"second' it should not go this side or that side.
Then, we can progress fast, we can go ahead
to fight the battle. Perhaps now you are aware
of subtleties of the negativities. How they
use their power-of course which is limited. Moon, you become the Sun, you become the
-to destroy God's work. And how you have
to be alert, equipped 'and dedicated. This I and you become the Spirit. You work for
can only talk to you, I cannot say to the all of them. All the stars and universes you
people who come to Caxton Hall. Some of
them are half-baked, some of them are abso-
lutely new, naive, and some of them are principle, on to your 'tattva'. That is how you
absolutely third rate. But here, as you are jump on to 'everybody's' tattva. But be Dedi
before me today, I cated on that Tattva, because I am the princi-
kly, as Krishna has told only Arjuna, "Sarva
dharmanām parityajya, māmėkam sharanam
Vraja"
and Dedicating it for a higher purpose.
ray and give colour, achieve colour for them-
Nothing on
used by human beings later on.
Everything works out for a purpose, but such
an unselfish, such a wide, such a great dyna-
mic purpose.
"Even' for a
You become the Ocean, you become the
Earth, you become the Ether, the firmament-
f become, and take up their work-That's what
it is, BecauUse you have jumped on to your
want to tell you very fran-
a ple of all these. I 'am the tattva; "tattvamaya
(sH). 1 am the Principle. Keep to your
(तस्वमय)
principle.
There is no other way out. Vraja, means
the one who is twice born, like a solid; solid
personality. When you are solid then you which looks bigger in gross way. which
must Dedicate. When you are perfected then appears in a gross way. But we
I'am' the Kundalini. 1 am' essence. We
can only understand Dedication of something
саппоt
you must Dedicate.
dedicate ourselves to something that is so
It will help you to get out of the myre and much 'subtler'. which is so much 'minuter,
then it will help the 'Great' Cause. No one which is so much 'deeper" is so much 'effec-
understands that "Why Mother is trying to tive, which is so much 'dynamic', so univer-
help me?" They think She is too generous. I
am not. I
you are the ones who are capable of mani-
festing God's joy on this earth. You are the mountain, who comes to oppress us like a
flutes which are going to play the Melody of mountain, who is like Hitler, who is like false
God. You are going to be used and man- guru. But to surrender to your 'subtier being
oeuvred byGod.
fect you to be the 'most beautiful instruments which is not audible, but, in effect is so
of God. To be the 'right instrument of God. powerful'. Like the atomic bomb. When
I don't know if you understand how sweet.
beautiful life it would be-The life of Dedica-
sal and so eternal. We cannot' think of
dedicating ourselves to that. We can surren-
der ourselves to somebody who looks like a
have lotof common-sense. Because,
I am doing all this to per- -which you cannot see with your eyes,
the atom is split when it is not split, it is
everywhere. But at the subtlest point it is
10
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-12.txt 
 Beyond all these conceptions you have
so dynamic', that when you accept it, it
becomes such a dynamic force of energy. become your Self. now ready, to be responsible,
As your attention has now penetrated into the
subtler side of this universe, get deep and
deeper into it. The earth that takes the end
of the root to the source of water, is the same
as the source. Your Kundalini is the same as
the Adi Kundalini, and it's power the Para- second phase, where you have to sail out,
brahma.
to be what you are made for.
Like the ship is built, is brought to the
sea, tried, and found out to be sea-worthy to
sail out now, "into the sea. So this is the
when you know everything about the ship,
everything about the sea. With complete
All these things are to be understood affer freedom and wisdom, you have to sail now.
realisation, and after maturity. Before that it
is not possible. That is why for the last eight
years, I did not say these things to you. I
was on a very patronising and sweet terms
with you. And always I made you feel that
you are obliging me. It is no obligation.
Not afraid of any storms or any gales or any
typhoons because now all you know. Your
job is to cross through.
May God bless you.
MOTHER
How great is your Love, O Mother of all.
You have pulled your children from the myre, Snatched them from the jaws of living death,
You have cleansed them, You have fed them when they were starving
And given them the water of eternal Ljfe.
How great is your Love
You have elevated your beggar-children, You have clothed them with light
You have brought them into the house of the Father,
And seated them at His table. How great is your Love...
You have illumined your children's hearts, You have taught them to look upon their
Brothers and sisters with love, You have purified their minds
And dispelled their fears. How great is your Love.
You have joined all your children, As pearls on one thread in the great cosmic dance
And the universe marvels at this sight of sights.
As it is filled with the fragrance of Your lotus-children. How great is your Love...
How great is your Love...
How great is your Love...
O Mother of all.
Salutations to Thee, O Jagadambe, Thou Protectress of the Universe, Mother of All
Salutations again and again.
Nirmala Yoga
11
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Her Holiness Shri Mataji
Every Sahaja Yogi Has to become
A Guru
Guru Nanak's Birthday.
Nirmala Palace London,
1st November, 1982.
This falis on the day of famous great full Religion by giving them money, many were
moon, it is called as Sharada Indu, that's the taking to Islam. As a result the Hindus
name of the Goddess also-SHARADA INDU: started hating the muslims and a big hatred
developed among Muslims and Hindus.
and-of That's how, in those circumstances where
there was a quarrel going on between the
the moon on this autumn season.
This is the biggest moon,
not in England, but in India
Course
-that day the moon is giving the greatest followers of MOHAMMAD and followers of
light, and it's such a great thing that GURU
NANAKA was born on such a day. As you
know in India people celebrate birthdays
according to dates of the moon, called as
tithi, not as the dates we have here accor-
ding to the sun.
Hinduism, MOHAMMAD himself took his
birth on this earth, though he had decided
not to take any more births, he thought that
it would solve the problem. Although, this
incarnation is such that it never dies. Even
if they leave the body, they are always around.
And they are the ones who perform lots of
This great personality was born in Punjab miracles when any ofher incarnation comes
where people were unaware of God's ways.
He was always bothered about the Dharma
in all his lives, because as you know he was
the PRIMAL MASTER, and the Primal Master
is always placed in looking after our Void, in
sustaining us, and giving us a model of an
ideal master. And he always took birth either
in the most difficult places like hills and dales
and mountains, or they took places-which are symbolically he came on this earth not to
even more difficult thing,-among the people
who were horrid, and who needed their help. as MOHAMMAD did or say MOSES did, and
So in india, that time somehow Punjab was
regarded as the place where people did not SOCRATES-which followed into a religion.
respect God or traditional Hindu idols, or you
can say the statues that were regarded as the create understanding, to create unity betwaeen
vibrating ones. But they worshipped money religions. This was a very big step for Sahaja
(even now) and they worshipped power. And Yoga. After that as you know, he was born
as at that time there was a King who was again-God knows where-no one knows
on this earth. They help support and guide
the seekers to go to the incarnations. So, to
celebrate his birthday on such a
is also a myth, because he never died. He is
eternally living. They never grow and they
date
never die,
But his birth is important, because
propogate any particular type of the vaid
before that ABRAHAM, LAO TSE, or
But he came to create anmity-we can say, to
where he was born, but he appeared as
very anxious to convert people to Islamic
Nirmala Yoga
12
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-14.txt 
 SHIRDI SAI NATH. He t00 said the same day you forget these things. It is very serious
matter, one has to understand. You have
got your realization through Sahaja Yoga.
Now you have become Sahaja Yogis. But
still I would say you are not full Sahaja Yogis.
thing, that to talk ill of any religion is a sin.
But these efforts are quite lost. Because
the people who were Islamic at that time. or
those who were Hindus, are now very great
fanatics. So instead of them coming closer because every Sahaja Yogi has to be a Guru.
and loving each other they have become
fanatics. Though we find that Islam is all you are Yogis because ynu got your reali-
spreading so fast Sikhism is spreading very
fast too. In America there is a horrible guru
he has started to spread Sikhism. He's con-
verting all the white skinned people into doing, about all the problems of Kundalini,
Sikhs. They are growing their hair, and they how to cure them. Everything about it was
are also growing their beard, and wearing a
karā (er) and all those
required at the time of GURU Gobind Singh. people, who are twice-born, who are born by
When the war had started they had to wear
all these things, which was important. Because that's a very important point and which John
war had started and to protect Hinduism or
Hindus from the invasion of the Muslims- by the flesh. Those who are born by the flesh
the fanaticism of the Muslims-they took to
this kind of a military stuff. Actually if you Spirit, that's how you are twice born. And
believe in God-nothing can be killed. But I when you know all about the Spirit and the
think that Guru Gobind thought that he had Kundalini then you are a Sahaja Yogi. But
to take it.
Otherwise he is not a Sahaja Yogi. First of
sation. But Yogis are of no use, you have
to be Sahaja Yogis. So you were told about
all the chakras, every thing that you are
told to you. Now you became, with that. a
different type of
a race, a different type of
five things that were
the Spirit, not by the flesh. Remember that
has said.
That you are born by the Spirit not
are in flesh. But if you are born by the
unless and until you become Guru, you are
not a full Sahaja Yogi.
In all these prophetic religions, if you see,
all the prophets who have spread all the
religions, they were always attacked so badly that the Spirit is described as a t (Kala), as
that they had to take to weapons. Even in
Islam they had to take to weapons to protect Guru is described as the full moon-purnima-
themselves. Now when these people took Guru Purnimā. Guru is the full moon, it's not
to weapons they had some discipline put on just a phase. So from one phase you have
the people. Without the discipline nothing is
possible. And very strict discipline was
there for the Sikhs. Now today's Sikhs are no gether, and you have ro cross the 16 stages to
So to begin with, we must understand
a phase of Moon, one phase of moon. But a
to go to the stage where you become
complete Guru. 16 phases there are alto-
more Sikhs, thay are just outside, and inside
they are not. I would not describe all the We have to become extremely objective
strictness and discipline they had to
through. But every disciple has to go through Because we have to become Gurus, no doubt.
a very severe disciplining of himself if he Now you cannot just say that, Mother you
has to become the Guru. There is no doubt give us a tape and we'll learn by heart and
become the Guru. Now how do we do it?
go
about it. How do we become the Guru?
about it.
we'll go on to another person saying blah
It is not that only somebody like Me blah blah blah blah. Same thing, whetever
I've told you, or take my type and show
comes and tells you do this do that, and next
Nirmala Yoga
13
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-15.txt 
 them that this is our Mother, and She's like
this and like that. But they will say alright
She may be, but what about you, Sir ?
most difficult thing for western people;
because the matter is sitting on their Spirit:
First the Spirit has to come-first phase-at
least the Spirit has to be there.
If you have to be the Spirit then the matter
of moon has to be covered with that light.
In the first phase we have to master Our body.
Now Sahaja Yoga has a 'very big res-
ponsibility. which I don't think people under-
stand. I wish they could listen to me very
intensely and understand it. So far if you
see, Gurus remained Gurus and no dis iples So what do we do to master our body ?
became Gurus. They were still regarded as
disciples of a Guru, whether it was fake or
anything. They never became Gurus them- must know all the crooks who try to master
selves, So there was no need for them to
grow, they had to take the name of their
Guru alright. Christ and
Mohammad Sähab had his own disciples. that we have to respect our body. This is the
Nānaka had his own disciples, Shirdi Sai Nath first principle of respecting our body. Means
had his own disciples. None of them became indulgence is sinful to the body, because
Gurus. But now it is in your lot, sorry to indulgence gives you a body which is no good:
say, that you have to become the Gurus.
a privilege, actually. It's a very great privilege that you can master it. If I do not respect
to become the Guru. And to become the Guru, Yyou, I cannot master you. So to master the
we must learn what we have to do. This body first of all respect your body. And to
also sometimes becomes just a lecture. I respect your body, you must look after your
think so. Because I've already told you on body very well. But no indulgence. That
First of all we must see that what are the
things that drain out our bodily mastery.
We
us.
So I have to first face my body. That first
disciples, and foremost thing in Sahaja Yoga we learn
his
It's First of all you must respect your body so
doesn't mean that you go and stand in the
mud or rain for hours together or get exposed,
to make your body absolutely sort of a abode
for all the diseases and colds and coughs and
things like that so your Mother suffers cleaning
are the 10 attain-
ments we have to have.
Today all these 16 stages are to be seen,
how we have to grow into a Guru.
First is, we have complete discipline put your vishuddhi ! It's like a horse whose neck
on ourselves.
Mr Nick is attacked by everyone, No. you by not giving it diseases. Laziness is against it.
attack yourself. You become Mr Nick now.
You have to make this body subservient to is against your body. Lazy people who are not
you,-that is the first mastery. The mastery bothered to dress up properly, to cover them-
is that my body can sleep anywhere, it can selves up properly, look after their body prope-
starve itself, it can live under any circums- rly, put oil into different screws that they have,
tances, it dare not grudge. Anywhere; it to massage themselves. Look after the body,
should be able to sleep any time, it should be that's the point. To look after the body you
able to keep awake anytime. This body is
to be mastered. Even if you read 'Ashtänga temple of God. And now you have become
Yoga' first thing is mastery over the body, they the temple but if the temple is dirty, is sick,
say. So after realisation the first thing you is unimpressive, is like a stick, or like a
have to do is master this body, and is the balloon, nobody is going to come near it. So
So you must look after your body
is down.
Nobody has to tell you, Like
Persons who are lazy must know that laziness
must give some time, because this body is the
*To be published in Nirmala Yoga soon.
Nirmala Yoga
14
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-16.txt 
 try to improve your personality, that it has to happens. People can go to any base limit-
be a beautiful temple. Imean,
you so many tips, that I think that in my
lives time I have not given so many tips, even that on a full moon day you are over-active.
, I have given
you know, that's the problem, what to do?
On this full
moon day one has to realize
as Guru. Because normally people who
came to a Guru in those days were really. As the moon starts growing the activity starts.
really great seskers. They would hang
themselves upside down, just to please the
Guru, for months together. So that was a
very different quality people-but one or two.
And when you have quantity quality goes
down, I accept. But why not you people your body. The body should be presentable.
take it upon yourselves that we'll make our And should not go with the so-called fashions
quality first class ? So first of all train up
your body well. You must take some exer- not go with the fashions of the day, and take
cises in the morning, I have told you. That to something which is nonsensical, which
people sleep after breakfast I am told, I was is not good for your appearance, which
amazed.
God has given you this house as a blessing, like a dandy person. We have to wear
to be mare alert, to give His ight to others.
Instead of that if the candle is not even 1s good.
flickering what's the use. So what you have
to do is to first of all brush up yourself, com-
pletely. Make your body alright, alert. Actu-
ally at your age one should not sleep for Englishman. I haven't tried that, even with a
more than six or seven hours, I tell you. No barge pole. I just tell you at this time,-never
need. Six or seven hours of deep sleep is in the morning time. Because I've been war-
sufficient. I also, in the night I sleep about- ned: never wake up an Englishman, that is
never before eleven sometimes at twelve, the greatest sin on this earth ! So why should
Yesterday we slept at 20'clock, got up at the English be so much addicted to sleep?
5. 30 as usual. So how many ?-Three and The whole country is sieeping today. They
a half hours sleep. And just now I slept want more wages, more wages so that they
for about-at the most-for half an hour or an
hour or so-finished. When you don't have to
work, like me,-in the sense that even when mmed life. It was very difficult, from the very
I sleep I am working. So to rest your body beginnig I saw Sahaja Yogis coming, in that to
for such a long time you make your body sit wake them up was difficult. And these are the
on your head and it will be very very difficult same people who were known for punctuality:
for you to be a'ert. So first of all body must
be looked after. There should be no self- punctuality, and they were so punctual that
indulgence. I mean it can go to any extent of people used to set their watches-even in
self indulgence. Like people don't keep their America.
rooms clean, their clothes clean, they have no
activities-all these nonsensical things. only it of wood. They used to sleep before also,
is too low, too base to talk about: but it must be, because this is an old saying that:
In the night also. But none of you so far
are active in the night except for me. But if
you come up you will be surprised, even in
your sleep you will be activ a, So first and
foremost thing is that you must look after
of the day. It is very important. One should
makes you look funny or very fashionable
mean, this is too much. You see,
dress which is in the centre, dignified, which
Now I'm told that it is very difficult even
to wake up in England. Somebody had told
me, when I was young, that don't wake up an
can sleep more. Eat and drink, drink and eat
in between, sleep. This s the three progra-
that they won the war at Waterloo because of
They are the same people. Now
the other side of it is that they sleep like logs
15
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Don't wake up an Englishman. But I used to
think something clse about it why it is said.
but it is nothing but simple laziness. So try siep on the other side. In the same way,
to see why we sleep so much. if the left side this body is to be made immune to different
is strong, people sleep, If the back Agnya is shocks, you see.
strong people sleep. If the front Agnya is the water. You shock it with the water, so
working too much then people don't sleep. it is waterproof. So a Sahaja Yogi has to be
So even if I say, "Don't sleep", it mean that
you put your right Agnya in working condition, to complain, because he's supposed to be all-
that maans you start thinking. Which is against proof, you see. Anybody (Sahaja Yogi) who
Sahaja Yoga again. So it would be left ägnya complains, you can say, "How are you comp-
right ågnya, right ägnya left ágnya, left agnya, laining? because you have to be all-proof."
left ägnya, right ägnya, lelt ägnya.It will be So no complaints of any kind, of Sahaja Yogis
going from one to another. So in the centre
you have to be with Chirst.
second of the day: killing: beating, hitting, you will be always busy loaking after them,
curing, looking after, guiding. Twenty four hours and you will be of no use to Sahaja Yoga.
a day. And go and ask any realized soul who Those who have habits of complaininig and all
is callad as AVADHUTA, the one who is a that should go to the hospital and stay there.
master, they will tell you they hardly sleep for Complaining people ate really people who
three hours or four hours. Because they can-
not work when they are sleeping. so they sleep they all the time complain and try to torture
for four hours, the rest of the time they are: you, and make a nuisance out of themselves.
working : either they meditate and do things Such people cannot become Gurus. Imagine-
by projection, or thay work with their hands if the Guru is complaining then what is he
They are busy paople. they are Very busy. going to teach ? Only complaining. The tea-
You have to be very busy people because now
you are employed by God. And you have to students will be also experts in complaining.
do full justice to this employment by working So you create a set of complaining disciples,
hard. On the contrary you have seen that it you see, And when they come to Me what I
is "very easy to get lazy. So now, as many find they all have double lists than yourselves
of you are already feeling sleepy, put your. about their complaints. But also it is very
First thing should be for all those people who characteristic. Like Australians seldom com-
are lazy, is to put their rjght to the left seven plain, and if they do complain they are hit also
times-let's have it With the right hand...It's very badly. Seldom you will find an Australian
better? Now the back Agnya. Let's have it. complaining. I have got letters- except one or
Laziness is first. Shri Krishna was against lazi-
ness. Anywhere he got a chance he talked seldom they complain about themselves,
against laziness, Alasya.
the photograph you can do the same... Better that thing. So under 'any circumstances
now? Tonight we have to keep awake: it's those who can live are the people who have
a big problem. But don't sleep formally here. achieved the one-Sixteenth, only the one
Alright ? Informally you can. Better ? Put youi sixteenth. a áa (Jaise rākhahu taisé
your body. Say, you are sleeping on one side,
you get a pain-then what do you do? You
Like you put the watch in
an all-proofed person. So he has no place
are to be accepted or sympathized. If you start
accepting people whe are conplaining type
He is alert every
have some sort of possession, Ithink, that
chers will be expert in complaining and the
two who have now found themselves out-
Now watch me. On about
their body
comforts, this thing
eyes, try Again.
So the mastery should be, first of all, of
hi rahu) Mother the way you keep it we
are willing to stay. Of course the Mother has
16
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-18.txt 
 kept you very well. All the luxuries of world should not be a kind of a thing that like-they
Mother has given you. She doesn't torture you have Ramazan, that they eat the most spicy
like other Gurus have tortured. Once and for food during that time early in the morning,
all, My Son has gone through all the tortures,
there is no need to put you to any tortures or food I Starve yourself halfway and don't think
troubles. But you should see how your body about food,-halfway. Gradually try to master
reacts, and tell your body,'"Yes Mr body, will your tongue. Mastery of your tongue is only
vou please now, beliave yourself and not try possible if you know how to starve yourself.
to be indulgent."
All these indulgences come to us through they fast morning till evening. I know of a
our senses. So if you can master your body lady, if you ask them they say "I observe
you will also master your senses, For example Monday, I observe Tuesday, I observe Wednes-
the master, or we say the highest of the organs day, I observe Thursday, I observe Friday as a
which controls most of the organs, I person- fast, and perhaps maybe if I do not starve on
ally think, is the tongue. Because it's the pri- Saturday I will eat on Sunday." I have known
mordial nonsense. By tongue we speak things such people in my life time-many-who just
to hurt others. With tongue we learn how to go goon fasting. They are such experts and astutes
on jabbering. With tongue we can show how you see, that they can show you that they can
frivolous we are. Either we are tongue tied fast for 50 days, 80 days, 108 days, and 365
or tongue-loose, there's nothing in between days. Starving masters. So for them I have to
with the tongue. That's only about talking tell, "you have to eat", when they are starving.
part, that's lower. But when it comes higher,- Toyou I have to say, "Let us see which day we
eating; all the time thinking about eating. I
have told you a hundred times, that Sahaja celebrate today's great day of Nänaka! One day
Yogis should go on really sometimes on
absolutely bland boiled horrible food-just to
test the tongue. Do it, try this, then try this. gramme, Tuesday we cannot because it is a day
My father used to tell that you must burn when Hanuman has to work, Wednesday we
your tongue a little bit. That's one of the cannot, because then the creativity takes place,
tests he said one should do, But he was a
hard taskmaster as a Guru. So we should see
what our tongue can bear, Is it fussy about hard as Gurus, Friday we cannot, we have to
food ? When it sees the food does it start work the shaktl of Mother, Saturday we cannot
watering, first of all; does it take our atten-
tion to food, is food important to us? So the Krishna. And Sunday how can it be, this is
first thing. to overcome the problem of your the day of the son !" So which is the best day
tongue is "to starve." Starvation is the only for starving, now let us see,-We should have
way you can correct yourself. You see it you Thursday, because Thursday is the Guru's day
starve yourself-say, morning just have little to and let us do some fasting-half day-half day
eat, reduce it to half. You'll be surprised your can we? Can we start with half day then full
intestine will be halved also. After some time day? Thursday let us have, maybe second half
you cannot eat more even if you want to.because breakfast is essential I think. Without
Your interest will go off. Train up yourself. breakfast you see, the horses cannot whine,
Starvation is a very good thing. I think 40 days so let us have the second half or we can have
that Christ did is a very good idea. But that the first half.
then the whole day they starve
thinking about
This is for the western side.
For eastern side
can starve ourselves." Let us have one day to
let us starve. Which day should we?-Monday
we cannot, because Monday we have a pro-
how can it be ? Thursday we cannot because
we are Guru at that day, we have to work very
because we have to do all the intrigue of Shri
17
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-19.txt 
 Actually you have to discipline yourself, down, sing Bhajans, this, that, let us do it.
if you have to be the Gurus. It's like going to Should we? You have to 'get up' at 12 o'clock,
a college, when you are left to yourself, it is you have to go to bed till 12 o'clock. Get up
"you, who has to discipline yourself, nobody at 12 o'clock. You see the first half of the
has to tell you that you do this and do that. night. one must sleep always, it's better.
That's the measure to wake you up. In India
it is the other way around. If you tell some- alright ? So the first half of the night you all
body that you have to wake up at 5, the person have to sleep, anytime. You can sleep about 8
who has told you will be awakened at 4 o o'clock or 9 o'clock if you want to. But tha!
clock himself, the one who has told; so thathe should not be important, what time you sleep,
doesn't get up to wake him up. Did you follow you have to get up at 12 o'clock in the morn-
me? And the whole house will be awakened ing, or say 'after 12.
at 4 o'clock so that they can take up the duty
from the person who has to get awakened.
But the fellow who has to awaken might not
sleep the whole night. It is just the other
way round, the other extreme of it. Say it 1
am there, one night I sleep there. If I get up
at one o'clock I find all of them sitting and
meditating,-in the passage, up to the bathroom about Caxton Hall ! Alright so you can sleep
everywhere. They have not gone home, not
taken food, nothing. Just meditating, taking
vibrations, corracting. Iam sleeping inside.
In the night I want to go to the bathroom, I
just cannot go because they are all meditating, your body much. You must devise a method
Nobody is sleeping, nobody is sleeping, So it by which your body does 'see" that it has to
is the other way around. So to you people get up at 12 o'clock, Better keep it that time.
let us do one day. That you must have one day
fasting, one day keeping, one awake Which day
should it be? Let's see.
Second half of the night is the better part,
Shri Krishna was born in the night about
12 o'clock. Nänaka was born 12 o'clock
in the night. All the Gurus mostly took
their birth at 12 o'clock in the night. To
celebrate that, we must have one day when
we do not sleep after 12. But then what
in the day time of Saturday or of Sunday.
Sunday afternoon you can sleep.No, no, no
that won't be alright. If you make any
compensation then you are
not tortuiing
What do you think ? Altight. They will
never-take it from me-they will not: You
see work is not important what is important is
your Spirit, your mastery, Work, in any case
A day when there is no film! Half night.- you're not going to have after some time, so
second half I mean, not the first half. Which that wwork is not important. This new work that
day? Which is the most difficult day when you you have taken, better look after that. Forget
can not, 'cannot' keep awake.-Sunday night;- about your work. Forget about these things.
but there's a fim on! Without the film, you What is important is your Spirit. Otherwise
see Treat yourself like that, joke with you cannot become Gurus. Spirit is the most
yourself-now Sunday night is there a film important thing. The rest of the things are
on ? After 12 there isn't. So Sunday night 'absolutely unimportant', a zero. l've been
you get up at 12 o'clock. Let's have it. very slowly' trying to take you out of the mud
Enjoy it. Don't get angry, Make a fun out of of materialism and of these mundane things.
it. You think more about it, then you get But you have to work for God. You are
upset. You just don't think about it, then special people,
you'll enjoy it. It's like swimming. Get up at
12 o'clock, all of you, go for a bath, sit so God gives you all the blessings, everything.
So, you have to make yourself a master,
18
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-20.txt 
 But the idea of luxurious life must be given of problems will follow. because /'ve awa-
up. People want to make this life luxurious, kened your Kundalini; one part l'va done. But
then you'll have the luxury of this world but another part that is your heart, you have not
not the luxury of God's blessings, One of opened. You must give your heart to Sahaja
the two you have to select. Either you lead Yoga. You have not opened your heart as yet.
a life which is luxurious on the material level, Heart has to be opened. You are still worried
or you lead a luxurious life of God's blessings, about your father, mother, brother, sister, wife,
One of the two you have to choose, the time children. Open your heart fully to Sahaja
has come. So nothing is important you see, Yoga. In a doubtless way. Then only doubt-
the insecurity of money also is another
nonsense. At least you people should not until you open your heart, Kundalini rising has
have it. I mean you will never starve at least,
but Indians if they do not work they will but the heart has not opened. If the Mother
starve. But you people can never starve, if Earth sends forth her power through the seed
you are unemployed, government is happy and the seed doesn't open, then what's the
more, as long as you don't bother them. If use ? It's all a myth. Open your heart to
you sit at home and meditate they'll be very Sahaja Yoga. Open your heart to Spirit, and
happy. So to earn more money or to make
more money is not important at all in Sahaja realize this, many people also perhaps do not
Yoga. Most important thing is to be the realize that you have come on this earth to be
Spirit. For that whetever is to be done has the Spirit and not to be workers of human
to be done. Let everything suffer, you don't beings, You must understand your greatness,
make your Spirit suffer. Because you have and know that you are not like mundane
to become the full moon, like Guru Nānak. people. That's why you are blessed. Who is
How much did Guru Nanak aarn ? You
should find out, how did he live his life ? time back by Blake, that such and such
There is nothing to bother about money, people are going to come on this earth"men
because more money is not needed. Just of God." Men of God; What do you have in
needed for your food and your living. And your heart ? Your heart will be like a stone.
then money is arranged if you need any
extra money sometimes, emergencies. I've is a stone heart, and this stone is going to
done it for many Australians, you know. But
those are the people who have dedicated letely. Open your heart hundred percent.
themselves fully, And that is why they have
been helped, whenever there is an emergency bave problems of money. And how much they
they don't have to bother. But the dedication work ftor Sahaja Yoga, day in and day out,
less awareness will settle down. Unless and
no meaning. Because the Kundalini is tising
say, "Mother we are the Spirit." You have to
blessed so much ? You are described long
Unless and until there is light of the Spirit it
hurt everyone, is going to ruin you comp-
You have met Indian Sahaja Yogis, they
how much they have contributed for Sahaja
Yoga. You can imagine, about 7 lakhs of
Because that goes hand in hand. If you rupees they have collected, Rustom knows. 7
not worried about yourself after rea-- lakhs of rupees, they have collected for their
lisation, about your Spirit, you'll have all the ishram. 7 lakhs is about £35000. £ 35000 they
problems of the world. First and foremost is have collected-only in Bombay. In Delhi
financial problems. Then, physical problem, they have collected about 5 lakhs, £ 25000.
mental problem, emotional problem. All kinds They are working, they have families they
nothing to your work, actually.
are
Nirmala Yoga
19
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-21.txt 
 have children, but what they think about is costs so much, 300 pounds every week: I'm
'nothing but Sahaja Yoga, 'nothing but Sahaja amazedl Every one of you should be responsi-
Yoga, nothing but Sahaja Yoga. They give most be for every electricity, everything that you
of their money for Sahaja Yoga, I think. They spend here. This is God's place. Somebody
live with minimum. if I tell them why don't has given the car, everybody wants to use the
car. You see this saving the pounds is still go-
say, "Mother, I have worn lots of shirts in my ing on the heads of Sahaja Yogis. If they
satisfied ! "We have can save by taking somebody's carthey would
found the Atma now, let us dress up the Atma. borrow. Never borrow anybody's car. It's
We have found out our heart, let us become not for you, you must have your self respect,
the heart". What is the need to worry about why to borrow anybody's car? It's not to be
these things ? We have done enough of all done. So the second point of the Self is self
First is the respect of your body. and
are poor, but they are not. Wherever they can the second is self-respect. We are arrogant,
their money they will save it. They we can be rude, but we have no self respect.
But it is the training that is lacking, you see
suddenly I find after war there has been no
you buy another shirt for yourself, they will
previous life," So
this nonsense. I tell you they will think they
respect.
save
used to give me some money before, I said,
"No I don't need just now, there's no need"
They said I have no place to keep; there is teaching how to be self respecting.
no trust, nothing, how are we to do it ? They
continued like this till about, I think, in, 74,
when I went back we thought of starting might have been created I don't know why
an ashram, because you people were all
coming there. So I said alright,-now you kind of a thing has come, but it is so. Very
have to give me money, all the Sahaja Yogis
can give me money, whatever they have prevalent. But you people have to be other way
saved. And you'll be amazed everyone came
out with 1000 rupees, 'every one' of them-
whether he was a labourer or-every one of going to die, I can tell you this much. You all
them-1000 rupees minimum. Up to 21000.
In 3 years' time they had saved-because people should not be allowed to stay in Sahaja
they thought it is our responsibility to save
money for Sahaja Yoga. Tomorrow if vwe have
to have an ashram how are we going to have ? person can spoil the whole. Only people
But we still indulge into things. So this is who want to be Gurus have to stay in the
what is the Gurupada (,).
Like in the war, might be-the atmosphere
that-"I'm above everything, don't care for
others." May have been; I don't know why this
round: 'Others are first and then yourself. With
your self respect. Doesn't matter, nobody is
must have self respect; and such mediocre
Yoga,-at least in the ashram, because it
brings a bad name to all Sahaja Yoga. One
ashram. It's not going to be made a convenie-
nce for anyone.
So today is such a great day of Guru
Nānaka's birthday, and we have to see his
own life, how he spent his own life, how he
lived and in what conditions he managed.
So the first thing is to look after, disci-
plining yourself, feeling responsible for Sahaja
Yoga.
But the other way around is that, "We are
going to look after ourselves, we have to be-
come this, we have to grow, we haveto do it.
Then it's just the other way round, everything
worksout, I don't have to tellyou. You know this
is so base and so gross that after being here
for so many years, you should all have become
AVADHUTAS by now, absolutely. Controlling
all elements, everything, should have been
I was amazed people told me that in the
ashram people keep the lights on, and the oil
Nirmala Yoga
20
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-22.txt 
 possible; but still you are under the grip of the exist there, too. It is said about all of them
elements, how can you control it ? First of that they had powers over the elements. So
all get out of the slavery, this mental slavery. how much we are lacking ? Still we are like
"Alright if it is there, it is there, if it is not other people who are selling cheap things, or
there it doesn't matter. Nothing is more im-
portant than me, I am the king of the whole are of no value, You are the ones who have
world. If I have to sleep on the ground I can
sleep if I have to sleep, in the palaces I can
sleep, nothing can dominate me."-Then you are l've put-in this land of yours. And the time
the master. You know in India, there are some is coming for me to go. Only three years more
Sahaja Yogis who are contralling definitely con-
trolling, elements. We have examples of that. ashram. We need not pay for it, but, you have
lots of things have been published you know to be ready to occupy it, otherwise you cannot
in Nirmala Yoga, you must have heard. But you
meet them, you'll find they are AVADHUTAS
and when they talk you feel a great sage is bless you ? This is the point one should ask
talking, and the way they behave-all the time
you see their behaviour and everything is so
great. We need people of that calibre today, thing, it just goes as a big roaring, I don't
because that is the situation of all nations. You know if the frequency has reached your ears
who are busy making cheap things, or who
to save the whole world. And the maximum
of my life, blood and toil andeverything, sweat,
are left; before that, I hope, we establish an
occupy it I can tell you, you cannot get any
more blessings of God. So why should God
oneself. Are you your awn Spirit ar you are
all else but the Spirit? But when I say some-
have to be extra-good, because today is not a or not, but l would request you now,-as Gavin
time when we can allow things to go, as they has asked me for Guru Nanaka's day, I really
are. Or we are not just disciples, we all have to didn't wannt to come. Because to talk of
become GURUS. And it is not the tine when
you can play with time. You cannot play with has to be a very great person. Because such
EVIL. You have to surmount it. You have to
come on top of it, it is the time when the whole Everything else is important-then how can
ship is going to be drowned ar saved. This you talk of Sahaja Yoga coming there. I went
is the situation today. And that's why you to America, I was surprised! Americans what-
have got your realization from God. if that ever it is, few people,-but to them Sahaja
precarious time had not arrived, how many Yoga is the most important thing. They talk
of you really think you deserved it? But you of nothing but Sahaja Yoga, their life is Sahaja
got it, because the time is such that everybody Yoga, morning till evening they are working
must be given realization, and they must be out Sahaja Yoga, nothing else-they are not
given all powers so that they come up. But bothered. Australians you know. But the Heart
if you do not open your heart, put all your is not open, the Spitit has not shown its light. 1t
attention to your Spirit, these powers will not is the one that gives you complete satistaction,
work out. None of these powers will work complete jay, complate Guru's
out in you. This is the problem.
Every Guru had a command on the ele-
ments. Nānaka, you know definitely. People
were sitting there and they asked him for the is within you, if you are going to give that....
water and he put his hand on a rock and the
water started pouring down. That's why it is
called Punjab. Punja : five; and the five rivers told you, to have self respect. The one who
Guru Nunaka and to liear about him, one
a light to bear, you have to make up yourself.
principle,
because thhenn you start giving. If there is no
light what are you giving? Darkness? What
e are you giving to others ? The darkness that
So the second phase, has to be, as I have
Nirmala Yoga
21
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-23.txt 
 asks, demands, has dearth, has no self staff that will guide others not a support to
respect. "Who can give me? When I forgive
nobody can give me." We have to learn to
give, and give and give and give, does not
matter. Tan so worried sometimes that I do
not give you any hard tests, I tell you. Even a
little bit when you try to be funny, you do
get a little bit hurt, but again I soothe you.
you.
If you are yourself a lanky-panky person,
how are you going to hold all the masses to
you and how are you going to guide them. So,
strong' effort, "very tenacious' effort must be
made. Form your own rules and regulations.
Treat yourself as a disciple. You are the Guru.
you are the disciple.
But it's sort of mediocrity you see, it's medio-
crity. It's not going to help. This is the age
of mediocres. In the politics are mediocres,
useless people. You go in the economics there
are mediocres, everywhere there are mediocres.
In Sahaja Yoga we have to have extra-brilliant, Spirit. The Spirit that is the Guru, and the
extra-sacrificing, extra-dynamic, extra-com-
passionate people, otherwise Sahaja Yoga is your emotions, your intellect-everything is a
not going to work out. If you fail, it will be disciple, and you are the Guru. For this you do
your responsibility. Naturally, you want me
to help you, I have done my level best, you
see. All the quick methods, you see, instant, person who is courageous, and a person who is
like Puja, all that I've allowed you to have. of that quality. When you go to India you must
But that does not stay in you, does not retain meeta gentleman called Harishchandra, a very
in you, the vibrations are so much, you have simple fisherman. He's a graduate, of course,
no idea. Some people have felt a gale com-
ing out. Gale, So it is there. You may not
feel it. If you ask Gagangiri Maharaj he'll realization-I've told you this story once, again
tell you what happened to him when he first I'll tlell you, what sort of man he is.-He told
faced me. But to you nothing happens. What
if a gale comes to rock of Gibraltar, it doesn't the other side, on a small little island, to talk
feel it. So as far as I am concerned l've work- about Sahaja Yoga. There were 25 people
ed very hard, you know that. And I know you and it was a storm, really a tempest. So he
"can' come up, you have that potential in went and stood before the sea, and towards
So the 3rd phase of this thing is to be the
rest of it is the disciple. Your body, your
mind
not need people of very great intellect. You do
not need people of very great education, but a
but a simple man. Works in a bank. When
he came to me and Sahaja Yoga-and got his
me that they went to the sea, he was to go to
the wind that was blowing and he stuck out
his hand and said, "Stop it now. I have to go
you.
So, you must make your own rules and for Mother's work, this is God's work. Will
regulations, nobody needs to make. If some-you stop! Until I come back home. you are
body makes so much, you make your own so
much; like tea drinking, like mad! I mean I
just don't understand. It's like a life which is witnessed. He went there, did all the work,
a swing-it-in you see, it has no direction, it
has no guidance. If you are the master., you then the water started raining, it started drizzl-
must at leasL be the driver ef your car., if not ing down. He's an ordinary man to look at: 1
Ethe master. You should stand on your both
legs and know that you are the Guru, that you great Englishman. He lives in a very ordinary
must have your own staff in your hand, the way, his wife is a fisherwoman also. She sorts
going to keep it like that." Once, he said it,
and the whole thing stopped. They all saw,
came back home, and when he entered his door
mean compared to you people, you are really
Nirmala Yoga
22
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-24.txt 
 Out fishes and sells them in the market. But from madness, Mother can you cure them ?
his body is so well built and shining and the So now first I cure mother and father. Then
muscles so developed and the man, he stands I'm martied, my wife is like this, my child is
up and the way he talks! And 'absolutely like this then my house, then my motorcar,
humble person.
fishermen. While he has got 'thousands of suddenly from A to Z, from Z to A. Alright, I
fishermen as his disciples, but he doesn't call
them disciples, he says they are all Mother's Why to cure the mother. father, brother,
children. Thousands ! you don't know. He sisters, every relationship, the 10th marriage
has been calling me to go to them, and all that and the 11th divorce? Why to correct all this?
but they come to my programme, some of them. For what?
And one day I have to go down, to those
islands, any one of the islands he said you
come they will be all there the whole day purpose cannot be served, what is the use of
waiting for you. But the way he is there is doing it? The purpose is that you at least
surprising. When I am there he brings fishes leave all these things in my hands and
for me. But I said, you see | eat fishes that detach yourself. But you want to bring the
you bring but what about my other children.
He said no, next time, all the fishes will be Detachment. But the idea of detachment
sent to you. And he sent one truck-load to is this ! "I'm very detached about money,
me, you would not believe! I said now I Mother, absolutely. I'm not bothered. I keep
don't even have truck-load of disciples, who the lights on, why to worry about money ?
is going to eat all this? And he said, "Nothing, This is the argument "Why should we worry
I just went and told fishermen that Mother about looking after the gas and all that, after
has asked for fishes and everybody gave their all we are detached people. We are in deta-
fishes. One day they will not have fishes, chment, you see. We are not attached to
what is there, what does it matter." Imagine
those people who live day-to-day in that other type of detachment that I see, very
country. Modi told the newspaper people interesting one is this one: "I'm very deta-
that we con control the elements somehow ched, so I'm not bothered about having a
by Mother's grace. So the newspaper people bath, having all kinds of diseases, having all
felt they were very much boasting. But it is kinds of problems wthin myself, giving my
true, they can. To them it is not boasting it problems to others. I'm detached ! Why
is just what it is they are seeing. They are should I cover myself ? I'm detached: If I
telling the truth, you see. But that should get cold, I'm detached, let everybody get cold
happen. We should also have some things from me. What can I do, I'm detached. I've
to boast here. Important.
HWA
then my dog, then my umbrellal I have ta go
No wonder Christ chose
can do, up to a point, but for what? For what?
It must have some purpose, and if that
case to Me as well as worry about it.
money." But who is going to pay ? The
got cold, so what does it matter, I'm a deta-
ched personality. Why should others mind ?
So now we have the other phase as I told They should also get detached." This is the
you, is of becoming the Guru of yourself. ridiculous limit we can go in our idea of
Detaching yourself, identifying yourself with detachment ! Detachment is from within.
the Spirit which is growing in its light. So You are not bothered-You are not bothe-
detachment. One has to develop detachment. red. You know your Mother. The first
"My mother, it starts like that; my mother is detachment is shown in generosity. Detach-
suffering from cancer, my father is suffering ment is generosity. Grezna is., She sold
Nirmala Yoga
23
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-25.txt 
 her ornaments for nothing at all. I mean When you say we' you will find it will be
would never have accepted that money. but different.
she just sold them. It's remarkable. She Norman." "This Norman won't listen," like
sold them She is Polish not English. She
sold her ornaments ; and this is what commu-
nism has done to people, They are very Munna)-this Munna, won't go, he's very
detached, communists are very detached
people I tell you. Of course I would never
take that money, that's theirs, but the way ment, in which you are not in the picture..
she did it, just like that, For God's work alright you are a witness. You are the witness in the
what is ornaments-take it. I mean you know show. So this detachment should work in
I've given away so many of my ornaments to such a way that you should witness the whole
keep relations alright. The other day I gave show, you're not involved into it. But just
away my Kara (Fr) to Christine, you know
that when she got engaged. Just it came out
of the hand and went away. I was detachd Yoga also-political issue; nothing short of
you see, I never even felt the coming out I So political issue We are not here fighting
much detached that Christlne told me she was
cramped up with pressure but to me it was
just, just nothing, Dust. So that detachment -that we have to decide. So, as far as all
has to come. Now you should know which these things concerned, are detachment and
part you are there. Like idea of detachment attachment to Spirit.
should not be that-I would say hippy style
of detachment, that you have right to expleit be our attitude on our mental level. Physi-
everybody else. And the other type as
told you which is very ridiculous. /t's not
an idea, it's a thing, it's your awareness
itself which is detached. So, these four evel what you bave to do, is to understand
things for your material side is important. the 'essence' of every writing, try to discrimi-
What you eat is not so important, because
whatever you eat, if the brain is going to be avidyā will kilt you, will take away your
such a non-sensical thing it's better whether energy, but vidya will sustain. So try to find
you eat it or not, makes no difference does
it ? Analyze it, like in the hotel, what will
you have, "I'll have pancakes," what will you
Or take your name, like "this
children say, I asked a little boy, will you go
home ? "1 will go, but this-(his name was
obstinate, what can I do ?" This is detach-
ment. To speak in third person is detach-
see what happens, in collectivity also. It be-
comes a political issue certainly, in Sahaja
like union leaders. We are all leaders ! Where
is the time to fight ? Whom are we to fight
So we go further-see now what should
cally you have seen that you have to develop
a complete detachment in these four ways
that I have told you Now on your mental
nate between Vidyā and avidya. Because
out books which are supporting vidya. I was
surprised, there is a lady Barbara, she met
only last time Gavin, and she has Written
such a tremendous book, you'd be amazed I
I mean of such a level on Sahaja Yogal-Very
direct. I'll show you that, and you know that
have, "I'Il have this l'll have that", for what ?
T just don't understand why waste so much
energy, why not you all have pancakes all of
you put together. It's a very big thing you book is now being considered for giving her
know. Or today I'll have this. T. Out of all
this materialism what comes out is Mr T. So
we develop this Mr I. So the word
go away, we should speak 'we'. "We" means
you and all the Sahaja Yogis put together.
a doctorate, can you believe it ! In an Ameri-
can university ; of course that's only possible
in America. But still that book has that Ilevel,
I was amazed at the book I So try to gather
nourishment-like reading Devi Mahātmya,
must
24
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-26.txt 
 reading about, finding out about Bible and time, they are busy, you know. All the time.
firiding about other scriptures, about Kuran-- clearing out,-when they came here, they
this that,-and which supports you, which said "We have to clear out this Brompton
nourishes you. Blake, Kabir, Nânaka. I mean
there are so many.-Laotze. This is the good bridge, then we have to clear out this
-is the knowledge. But you'll be amazed, London, then we have to clear out this Eng-
once you start doing it. it comes to you.
met a man near Rähuri-as you know we go all the time they were busy, you see, clearing
there,and there's a man who just drives a
bullock cart. and he had brought the bullock this. Oh God this horrible, bring some shoes,
cart to take me down to one of the program- do this co that," all the time they were busy
mes, you know what we do there. And he morning till evening, They would go up-
was sitting there, we were waiting,I was
talking, to him. And I felt an
sitting there to drive me,- mean uneducated the mundane things and all that. Then
absolutely. he's never known books, he does
not know how to write, but the way he was They put all of them there and they put them,
tälking I said. "Oh God, from where this kno- and the map there, "now see now, (to dolls)
wledge From where was all this coming, this
wisdom, I Such wisdom, I Dolls are their
wisdom that I was just stunned, I was disciples. Teaching the dolls, "you see,
stunned reallyI From a man who is not even don't sit like this, you must sit properly, you
been to any school-college. Christ did not don't know. You can't bend your knees ?
go to any school or college. Such wisdom, better learn that, you must learn to bend your
you can't imagine. You meet him next: time knees," because dolls have straight legs I
when you go there. If somebody could And 'all" the boys, even the little children,
translate him.you feel like touching his
feet the way-extremely unassuming simple doing Sahaja Yoga. Every level they are
man, wearing a white, clean topi and working.
clean dress- and driving me down. And to
him this was
the whole world-is to drive me; he said
"it must be the greatest of all-something
I must have done-to be able to drive you."
And in such simple ways he was explaining
Square, then we have to clear out this Knights
veau
! land. Where is the map of England, bring it,"
out, and then, "this place is this, this place is
stairs in the 1oom and they are busy. They
Avadhuta is are busy people, they have no time to talk of
I brought some dolls and toys, for them.
s
tell you l" SuIch talking to dolls like that.
now you look-after, alright?" You know they're
have seen the way they are busy all the time
As today I was telling Rustom about my
own father. You see, he was a learned man,
of course. But when he talked, he used to
talk of something,-like I told him about the
the 'greatest' privilege of
state of a person, called 'Sambhranta.' (avla)
He told me that, "Human beings are very dilfe-
rent from God. When God incarnates then the
Sambhranta state, which is awakening between
the subconscious to the conscious state,
is direct, you see. He comes down directly
to me about the character of the bulloeks and
the human beings-just imagine ! And the
things he talked about, if I tell you, you won't
believe-so I just don't know..That's the sign
of a great man, he doesn't talk of frivolous
things, he has no time to talk about frivolous But human beings go this way, they never
things.
go straight. See God descends, so he descends
properly, but ascent is always in a-very separate
I have seen my own grandchildren-they way. It goes on like this, and he gathers
never talk of frivolous things, they have no everything that is in his subconscious, so the
Nirmala Yoga
25
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-27.txt 
 Out of your seeking you have done one
good thing-to have read everything whether
good or bad, whatever it is. But now after
realisation, you must try to find out what you
have to read. what you have to know, it
should be nourishing.
sambhränta state, where he is waking up, is such
dangerous thing that hecan gather up anyth
ing. And by the time he gathers up the dreams
he becomes something so funny. He may look
at God whom he has seen in his dream like a
witch, and the witch like a bird."
a
Talk that is nourishing, helpful. So in
talk you should have Compassion. If you are
I saw him always busy. Imean to talk to
him, I founda companion and he found me a
companion sort of a thing. He could talk, talking to someone you should be full of
because his attention was there. His attention compassion. Sahaja Yoga is a system of
was not how every body has made their hair, compassion. A Guru has to be 'very-very
and how they are sitting down or what dres- patient. It is not like other Gurudom, or even
ses they are making, or what do you have in real Gurus had no patience. This is a system
this thing-nothing. His attention was on the where patience is the only way it will work
Spirit, his own Spirit and Spirit of others. And out, because no Gurus gave realisation, it is
he was so dynamic in his brain that he knew only you who have to give it. And you know
your dictionary by heart, I tell you. He 'never
consulted dictionary all his life-neither San-
skrit nor English, and he was master of 14 have failed Mother, we can't give him realisa-
languages. Can you imagine ! How he must
have managed He used to play tennis very
well, he used to swim for 3 miles every day. they said, "Mother there's one fellow sitting
3 miles. He had muscles that he could just wanted to aviod, you see, but they said.
lift you up, Yes ! Very healthy personality, Alright, so raised his Kundalini, raised it up,
healthy man. Very generous, 'very generous.
Much more generous than me, so you can
imagine. 'Very generous, to him nothing least bothered how much we are working on
mattered, "alright you like it, take it". He'll him I He's just thinking he's obliging us." So
starve himself but he ll be generous. And a then two or three people came forward,
man of principle.
what is realisation. The other day we met
one: the fellow sitting tight.
They said, "We
tion, it's a hopeless case". I said, "Really ?"
So I went there-at the end of it you see,
tied it up, my hands bearing now."Oh no, I
didn't feel anything". I said this fellow is
brought a light, put the light before him, did
bandhan here and everything: Again I raised
So we come to the second point which is his Kundalini thrice;"No, not at all..I"it went
actually we have started the fifth one-which
is mentally you must only take to things which Isaid, "Sir, I'm sorry, you are too great for
are nourishing. Through vibratory awareness
you will know. Ask other Sahaja Yogis, if you
do not know. But take nourishing things to
read and not horrible, detrimental to your out, I said "Really, I am convinced about you,
growth. If you read them, you are responsi-
ble. You are real great readers I must say- You have to have "tremendous' patience and
you ask any name, everyone knows. I said
who was Gropius, everyone knows. You need You see if
not be an academician to tell. Everyone knows,
what happened, who is this, who is that.
on like that for half an hour, then I gave up.
realisation ! We'll try again".
"I'm not convinced..." And I was fagged
so you allow us to go", and then I came out.
sense of humour-you just can't tell him off.
I told him You are good for
nothing, useless, you have a bad KUNDALINI
,
you go away from here get away, get lost." I
Nirmala Yoga
26
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-28.txt 
 couldn't say these things to him, 1 had to in this ane year, last one year".
bear him through-and not only, in the because it is too much. Piease make a
end I had to say you are a great man, you
Because otherwise he would have used for your brains you have given away to others
some other method. Because, already the without thinking about it,-or have thought of
EGO was so big that with all the pins I put giving. Since Christmas let Us say, to this
inside it, it could not deflate, it was made of Christmas.
a special fibre I think ! It was such a difficult
task. So one has to know that we have to
be compassionate. We have to read some-
thing that nourishes our compassion. Read for which you don't have to spend any money.
of people who gave away everything that they Just give a hand. I have seen, very easy to
had. Tukaräma. Read Tukārāma. Tukārāma
was a poor man. And one day he went to
some place and did some good job, so they just sitting. Tea is brought to them, food is
gave him lots of sugar cane. His children
were very fond of sugar cane. So on the way just put the plate also before: go and wash.
every child would ask, "give me one sugar
cane". He was giving to everyone. When he
came home only one was left. So the children unimnannerly to be like this. In Sahaja Yoga you
said, "we are three". He said, "It's alright;
next time I will bring for you, share it among
you three". And they had it, they said, "better
have it, now one more child will come and Very great-a very great man, a realized soul.
this will also go away". So one has to know He was a great person. So he knew so many
about lives who have been "giving'. Read things. And one day I was there-in the
about people who have been giving'. They night you see, there was a doctor, we were
gave their lives. They crucified them, they his guests in a wayY, for dinner vwe had gone
tortured them. They allowed to be exploited. there. In the night the call came that, "1
They allowed to ba poisoned. Read of such need you very much",-to the doctor The
sacrifice, of great sacrifices. We are lucky doctor said, "Now I'ni tired". He was another
people that we have seen all those things with very giving person, no doubt. He said, "Oh
our own eyes. But at least you be one of them, you must come, I have a big problem. See I
that you can at least, if not see, visualise it. Saw a little baby.
You can. Bring that as your principle.
list of things. "how many things", except
see.
Heart is opening. Think of giving On
material level, other help is there to give.
But no. we don't even give the other help,
make out, labour saving devices. Now. 1 have
come here, some will be running, others are
brought of them everything is done. They'll
Its not only selfishness but it is unmannerly,
have to be extremely busy helping others,
at every point. To be helpful.
You know Ravi Shankar's Guru was a
He said, "What baby have you found ?"
So we move now, from detachment, which
I've told you four types of detachment, and
then I told you the nourishment of your mind which is suffering now, and the mother is
and nourishment to your heart. Nothing dead and nobody is to look after it." So I
nourishes more to a person than giving away. said *"Alright I'll also come with you"-
Nothing nourishes your heart, your compas-
sion, unless and until you learn to give away. with him, So, he was sitting with the little
Now will you please make a list of things, thing near his heart. So the doctor said,
"how many things you have given away "What are you doing ?"
He said, "Its a baby,"-he was an old
man,-he said, "I found a baby of a deer
because I knew I will touch the baby. I went
Nirmala Yoga
27
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-29.txt 
 He said, "I'm trying to give him my life if But this is gracious; you see when somebody
possible, so that when you come at least you is paying, you look on the other side. It may
find him alive". o be gracious, I don't know, whatever it is, it's
he took out the thing-doctor-his cost and just the same; filth I tell you..
all that, and he said, "alright put it down".
He put it down very cautinusly, I mean he You may have to work till 2 o'clack, you may
was a realized soul, no doubt. I put my hand have to work at 4 a'clock, doesn't matter.
on the thing and it came to life, and it started, y
alright. he was very happy. He said, ou have to work: because compassion itself is
are a Devi, you are a Goddess, I joy giving, because your Spirit is the Ocean of
But one bad thing you have done."
Just like this,just love. So
So compassion ; compassion at any point.
You have to work. you have to work, you
can tell you.
Compassion. There is no other way, there is
no other way to enjoy your Spirit but to Give.
to Give, to Give. Doesn't matter if you have
not eaten your food, doesn't matter. Nothing
matters. Many a times a you know that I don't
have food for 24 hours sometimes, still I am
I said "What ?
"You are married."
I said, "But Devis must marry, also."
He said, "No, supposing you have married
miserly man, then what will happen to
you ?" I said, "I will see to it that. 1 don't ving- (is not nečessary for this body to eat.
marry a miserly man. That would be the
greatest curse."
said, "I will see to it that, I don't the faod of this body is compassion. That
nourishes So you have to ba miserly towards
yourself, but you must have compassion.
He said, "I had the same type of a wif:
who was miserly. and I got fed up with her first of all, for thankfulness. This is the other
for her miserliness." So that is what it is :
misarliness should be 'hated, absolutely to be I should say, of thankfulness to God. He has
hated, absolutely to be the worst of all. Its given you realization. He has given you this
like leprosy for Sahaja Yogis. Miserliness. It's body. Do you'realize that this body, human
Heart, open your heart. Open your heart
quality one should have.
it's a higher quality
saving saving pounds, you know. That 'must
go away from your mind, Miserliness to yourself
is good, miserliness to othars is bad.
body He has given to you. He has given
you everything. Count your blessings. Even to
have the morning, to enjoy it as a human being.
Gregoire told me a shocking thing. He said, You are not in any 'bandhan', you are not in
any 'pâsha' (T), you are not pashus (), you
are not animals. Animals are pashus. You are
free people, God has given you freedom. And
he has given you His realization. Sense of
"this is our culture."
I said "Your culture ! what is it ?"
You see, he said that "if we go in a hotel,
and if somebody is paying. we start looking thankfulness. But our language is such,
this side and that."
"thank you, thank you, thank you," finished.
I said, "Realy I". He said, that is very It is only in the lips, it finishes ; lipservice.
common. I just cannot believe it! This is From your heart thank Him, from your heart.
culture! It is the opposite of culture. Whatever Not outside just go to church, "thank you.
you may call it, it's not culture at all. Culture God very much," alright done, finished. It's
would be to come forward, "Alright I'll pay". to thank Him from your heart, write praise.
But Americans are even worse, they'll say, "I Praise. Sing praise, "glory to God." to the
paid for you yesterday, you pay today for great who has created us. Your disciples are
(Contd. on p. 38)
me." It's absolutely disgraceful miserliness.
Nirmała Yega
28
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-30.txt 
 Shri Kundalini Shakti and
Shri Jesus Christ
Translation of Shri Mataji's advice given in
Marathi at Hinduja Auditorium, Bombay.
28th September
The subject "Shri Kundalini Shakti and Yoga and get Self-tealization. After Self-
Je us Christ" is very attractive and realization, the vibrations of 'Chaitanya' begins
Shri
interesting. It is altogether a new subject for
the comman people because nobody has at matter is true, then waves of cool vibrations
any time before, attempted to establish any would start flowing into the palms: but if
connection between Jesus Christ and Shri tiie same be untrue, hot vibrations would be
Kundalini Shakti. On ths Virāta tree of religion, felt. In this manner, you are able to know as
to flow from your hands. If a particular
saints of various kinds bloomed as flowers in
to whether any particular matter is true
many countries and languages. It is only the
Virāta who can know the relation inter-se
or not.
Whatever the Christians know about Lord
Jesus Christ is on account of the Bible. This
amongst these beautiful flowers. Wherever
they went, these flowers spread the sweet
fragrance of religion. But even the people book IS very enigmatical. It is so much deep
surrounding these saints could not grasp fhe and profound that many persons have not
significance of that fragrance. It is therefore, been able to understand the hidden meaning
futile to expect the common people to under-
stand the relation inter-se between a saint and says 7 will come to thee as tongues of flames
the Adi-Shakti, the primordial Mother.
You would be able to experience or under- be emitting flames of fire and therefore, they
stand my view-point if you could attain the would not be able to witness Him". The real
plane from which I am talking to you. Because meaning of this is that "you would witness
at present, you do not have the necessary
equipment to comprehend whether or not
t I am telling you is the truth. In other
of the Truth embodied therein. The Bible
Israeli people explained this to mean that,
"When the Lord would incarnate, He would
Me in the Sahasrāra Chakra", You will find
many references to the Kundalini Shakti and
and Sahasrara in the Bible, but only a brief
what
words, you are not yet equipped to under- reference is possible here.
stand what the truth is. Until you are able to
understand the meaning of the Self, the
physical body would ramain imperfect and not against me, are with me". It means, "the
would be unable to verify the truth. But once
the physical instrument is connected with truth
You are able to verify the Truth. It follows these persons, they have no knowledge about
therefore, that first you have to accept Sahaja them.
Jesus Christ has said that, "Those who are
persons who are not against me belong to
me." If the Christians are asked to identify
Nirmala Yoga
29
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-31.txt 
 Two great powers are combined in JesUs Mätā; was addressed as "Yesu". Even today,
Christ. The first power is that of Shri Ganesha, we notice that in northern Indian somebody
who is recognised as his original power; and named "Yeshu" is not addressed as such but
the other is that of Shri Kärttikeya. Because
of this, the incarnation of Jesus Christ is of Yashoda' came the word, Yeshu' and then
complete "Brahman Tattva" or 'Aumkār'. Shri further became the word"Jesu" and finally
Krishna, He being the father of Jesus Christ,
bestowed a number of booons on Jesus Christ
prior to his birth. One of these boons was
that, "You (Jesus Christ) would dwell on a
plane higher than that of mine.
be explained to mean, that while the plane of period when Jesus Christ lived on the Earth,
Shri Krishna is the Vishuddhi Chakra, located
at the base of our neck, the plane of Jesus is haw the seekers should know the Virta-
Agnya Chakra, which is located at the junction
of the optic thalamus (pineal and pitutary Jesus Christ was the Goddess Mahā Lakshmi,
alands). The second boon granted by Shri herself. Mother Mary is none other than the
Krishna was that, "You (Christ) would be the
support of the whole universe". The third
boon was, that, "You would be the first to re-
ceive one-sixteenth part of all the offerings
made to Me in Pooja". In this way, after
bestowing a number of boons, Shri Krishna
permitted Shri Jesus Christ to incarnate on
the earth. You would understand these thir.gs destruction. These powers have their centres
better, if you read "Mārkandéya Purāna". Shri located around the cranium of our head.
Mārkandėya, the author of the Purana has When the incarnation of Kalki takes place, all
beautifully explained a number of such subtler these eleven powers perform the work of dest-
points.
as "Jésu". It is therefore, clear that from
the name "Jesus Christ'.
АЙ
Whenever, Jesus Christ told stories about
His Father, he was actually speaking about Shri
Krishna, he was talking about Virāta, Although,
Shri Krishna did not reincarnate during the
This could
his teachings centred round the theme as to
Purusha' or God Almighty. The Mother of
Goddess Mahã Lakshmi. She is the Adi Shakti
the Primordial Mother. Therefore, Jesus Christ
used to address his Mother as the "Holy
Ghost".
Jesus Christ possesses all powers of
Ekädasha Rudras, that is eleven powers of
ruction. Out of these eleven powers one is
In the same Purana, there is a araphic that of Shri Hanumāna, the other i of Shri
Bhairava. In the Bible, these two powers are
description of Shri Maha Vishnu. If you
would listen to this description while in medi-
named as Saint Gabriel and Saint Michael res-
tation, you vwould notice that the description pectively. After Self-realization in Sahaja Yoga
one can awaken these powers by addressing
them in Sanskrit, Marathi or even in English.
Now, if you study the etimology of the The Nadi on our right side, which is known as
word. 'Christ', you would know that the word "Pingala-Nadi', is activated by the power of
has originated from a corrupted form of word, Shri Hanumäna. Whenever, any sort of pres-
Krishna'. As a matter of fact, the father of sure or constriction develops inside this Nädi,
Jesus Christ is Shri Krishna. That is why He it is instantly relieved by Chanting the mantra
is called "Christ'. The manner in which his of Shri Hanumana. Similarly, even by chant-
name 'Jesus' originated is also very interesting. ing the name of Saint Michael one would
The mother of Shri Krishna. Shri Yashoda experience relief in the Ida-Nadi. Ida-Nādi is on
is of Jesus Christ only.
"See Nirmala Yoga Vol. 18 (Nav.-Dec. 83), page 26
Nirmala Yoga
30
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-32.txt 
 or insults you, then your mind is engrossed
Saint Michael or Shri Bhairava, Obviously, in contemplating on these matters and you get
chanting the Mantra of their names relieves disturbed. You continue to think all the time
about such a man, and by repeated remember-
ance of these events you put yourself in
The aforesaid matters can be verified by trouble. To overcome such troubles, we advise
our left side and and manifests the power of
any trouble or constriction on the Ida Nadi.
any person after Self-realızation in Sahaja
Yoga. The purport why I am telling you all this,
is to impress upon you that it is absurd to qua-
re! against yourselves after grouping as Hindus
or Muslims or Christians. If you could see the
principle behind all this, you would realise
that all these saints are like many flowers on
the same tree of religion and are connected
with each other because of the one and the
every such person to forgive one and all.
Forgiveness is thus a very powerful weapon
we have received from Jesus Christ. It enables
one to get rid of troubles caused by others.
I have told you earlier that Jesus Christ
possessed a number of powers and that He
was endowed with the powers of 'Ekūdasha
Rudras'. Then how is it that He was crucified
and could not save Himself from this dreadful
event? Jesus Christ, with His several powers,
could have completely annihilated His oppon-
ents in a moment. His Mother, Mary, was
none else but Adi Shakti, the Primordial
Mother Herself. She also could not bear the
atrocities on Her son. And yet it happened.
Perhaps God desired to stage a drama. AReally
speaking, Jesus Christ was beyond happiness
same power.
Perhaps, you would be surprised to know
that in Sahaja Yoga, the awakening of the
Kundalini very much depends on the condition
of the Agnyã Chakra of the seeker. In the
present age, many persons are found with
highly inflated ego (Ahamkāra). That is so,
because most of them lead an extremely
-
egocentric life.
tie attitude, that man falls from his true religion.
It is on account of the egois-
or sorrow and he had to enact the drama in
perfect and faultless manner.
were those who crucified him ! Jesus Christ
rode on a donkey so that foolishness among
the people of those days could be eradicated.
foolish
How
.
Man is misled, and therefore remains conti-
nuously busy working, thinking etc. Which
are complementary to the growth of the ego.
Jesus Christ is of great help tor securing If you suffer from headache and you pray to
freedom from the ego.
Jesus Christ to forgive all those who have put
you in trouble, you will be cured of your
headache without the aid of any medđicines.
As Paigambar (prophet) Mohammad wrote
about awakeaning of the Kundalini and the
ways of protecting oneself from wicked However, before such a thing can happen, you
(Satanic) powers, so also Jesus Christ told in
very lucid mariner about the powers in us as
well as the weapons.
have to awaken your 'Kundalini by accepting
Sathaja Yoga, and get Self- realization. The
reason is that the Agnya Chakra, which is the
Jesus principle in you, becomes active only
The first among these weapons is "forgive- after awakening of the Kundalini in Sahaja
Yoga and not otherwise. Agnyā Chakra is
form in Shri Ganesha principle, manifests very subtle. The physicians are also unable
to notice it. There is a very subtle door in this
principle. In fact forgiveness is a very power- Chakra. That is why Jesus Christ said, "I am
ful weapon. It protects man against the ego. the door". Jesus Christ incarnated on this
earth for facilitating the passage through this
ness" the one which operates in the ""Proksha'
itself in the form of forgiveness' in human
If somebody hurts you or puts you in trouble
31
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-33.txt 
 door, and he himself was the first to pass whether he is a pious Saint, a Sahaja Yogi
through it.
would immediately feel the cool breeze on his
palm, if the answer is in affirmative.
People crucified Jesus Christ because of
their ego. They could not conceive of an idea
that some human being can appear on the strengthening the ego; for instance one boasts
earth as an incarnation of God Their intellec-
The past events in one's life, result in
that he is a disciple of such and such person
etc. Man is unaware of the factual evidence
tual pride could not accept this idea and they
rejected the Truth because of the ego. What facing him. Obviously due to the streng-
was the bad deed for which Jesus was cruci- thening of ego, he loses sight of the real
fied ? He had on the contrary cured many meaning of the Self ('Sva' T). It is therefore
people of their ailments. He preached the necessary
Truth and taught many good things to the of the "SELF". Suppose the river Ganges
people. He showed them the way to live a is flowing from a particular place, and you go
very cultured life. He always preached Love.
In spite of this, the people tortured him. But flowing from that place, and that you are
they would bow before those who teach filthy actually sitting on the Ganges,-this will be
and rotten things and make a fool of them, ridiculous. Therefore, accept only that which
What a height of stupidity! These days any is factually or materially present before you.
Tom, Dick or Harry becomes a Guru, robs the In the case of Jesus Christ, the circum-
people, squeezes money from them. Such stances were similar. Jesus Christ tried to
persons are held in high esteem. On the awaken the Kundaiini, but with great diffi-
contrary if a gcod person, who stands by the culty could give realization to some twenty
Truth, wishes to show the true path, the one persons,
people, not only won't listen to him but have got realization. Christ could have given
assault him. To educate such very stupid realization to many more but His disciples
people God Almighty sent His beloved Son, thought that He could only cure sick persons
Jesus Christ, on this earth. But the people and that there was no other significance of
crucified him. They have been, ever since realization to them. On many occasions
repeatedly doing the same thing. If you read. Jesus Christ demonstrated walking on the
you will find that whenever God incarnated, surface of water. This could be because He
or any Sage or Saint took birth on this earth, himself was, "Pranava" (g) AUMKARA
the people have harmed them and tortured Inspite of all this, people could not under-
them. Instead of learning from them, they stand that Christ was the son of God.
behaved with them stupidly. We will notice In Sahaja Yoga, a number of seekers have
the same story about Shri Gyanéshwara and
Shri Tukarāma, the great saints of Mahärashtra,
Similar treatment was meted out to Shri Guru that the ego is very subtle. Another thing 1
Nānaka and prophet Mohammad. Man always want to tell you, is about fighting with your
runs away from the Truth and tries to embrace ego.That is not correct thing to do. The ego
the untruth.
to understand the
meaning
at some other place and say that Ganges is
But in Sahaja Yoga, thousands
'
got Self-relization
diseases. Man should, therefore, understand
and got rid of the
is not in any way effected by your fighting
with it. It should get absorbed in your own
Whenever there is an incarnation of God. Self. When your attention is focussed on the
or a Saint is born, and you ask a question Kundalini, and it pierces your Brahmarandhra,
whether such a person is an incarnation or and therefore, merges with Virāta', it is at this
32
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-34.txt 
 stage that ego is absorbed. The real ego is the
ego of the VIRATA SHAKTI. In fact VIRATA is
the real ego. You cannot free yourself from the Jesus Christ incarnated on this earth with his
ego. What do you do? That which1
ego (Aham Karoti, Sah Ahamkara'). You just complex, and is the seat of the subtle principle
ask yourself as to what is it that you actually of 'Aumkāra' or "Pranava". In fact Jesus Christ
do? You can do nothing except changing is the'Aumkār', the "Pranava'. The connec-
the form of dead matter. Can you transform tion between the Kundalini and Jesus Christ
a flower into a fruit? You are endowed with is the same as the one that exists between the
the nose, the face, the beautiful human body, moon and the moonlight or the sun and the
How did this happen? We achieved this sunlight.
human form from amoeba. How could this
have happened? It is undoubtedly the grace
of God Almighty which enabled us to have
this beautiful human form. Can we repay
you and understand the meaning of "Self. In
n
order to explain the meaning of the 'Self.
do is seatin the Agnya Chakra. Agnya Chakra is very
The Kundalini, that is Mother Gauri, crea-
ted Shri Ganesha by Her will-power, Tapasya
and noble deeds. It was when Shri Ganesha
Him for th s? Can you do anything which is prepared himself for incarnation that Jesus
similar? After man succeeded in producing a
test tube baby, his ego swelled considerably.
Really speaking here also man did not create respect of which man has not been able to
any living organism. As in the case of cross- find any satisfactory explanation. Have you
breeding of two plants, so it has been done
here by uniting two living human cells. But
how much it has inflated the ego balloon !
Then, Man reached the moon, hovw much How you came inte this world ? There are
further inflation of his ego took place ! What
is our ego in comparison to His, who created explain these things ? We say that earth has
Christ was born.
There are many things in this world in
ever considered how a seed sprouts 7 How
you breathe ? How you make movements ?
Wherefrom the power in your brain comes?
many such things. Can any man satisfactorily
the sun, the moon, the stars and the whole
universe? In fact our ego is false. It is fake. came? A number of things need unfoldment.
gravitational force.
But from where this force
The true ego is the ego of the VIRATA PURU-
SHA. Because it is the Virāta that is doing of an illusion, You have yet to come out of
This is because you are under the influence
everything.
that illusion. Your illusion has to be blown
You, should know that it is the "Virāta up, otherwise it would grow from strength to
Purusha who alone is doing everything. strength. For spritual evolution of man, it is
Therefore. let all things be done by the Virāta, At every
you are just like a machine: Suppose
speaking before a microphone, and my voice is peared. All of you know that Shri Vishnu
carried to you through the medium of the
microphone, then the microphone is only a
"Sākshi' or a witness. It is I, who is doing demonstrat: the life of an ideal king. Similar
the speaking and the power is flowing was the life of Shri Krishna and the life of
through the microphone.
necessary to demalish his illusion.
I am stage of evolution, the incarnations have ap-
incarnated as Shri Râma, and wandered in
the forests. He staged a beautiful drama to
Ang
Jesus Christ.
In the same way. you are simply an instru-
ment of God Almighty. The Virāta has made
you, so let the power of Virāta flow through the stupidity of the people of that time.
When we study the life of Jesus Christ,
one thing is noticed prominently. That is
Nirmala Yoga
33
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-35.txt 
 Because of that stupidity this magnificent did not change his mission, He did not
personality was crucified. And what height separate himself from the society, considering
of stupidity ! When the people were asked
to express their opinion as to whether a thief on occasions he attended certain marriage
or Jesus be released, the Jews demanded ceremonies and made the arrangements. The
himself to be a 'Sanyasi". On the contrary
Bible says that at one marriage occasion he
transformed drinking water into fresh grape
Juice. Now, man has picked up this one inci-
that the thief be released and Jesus Christ
crucified.
We know the state of these people today! dent to suggest that since Jesus Christ made
The sin committed by them will not be wash-
ed away in many many lives. And even now
these persons are enveloped in their ego.
They think that they have done a virtuous
deed. Even now, if these people seek pardon
of God, saying that. "O Gad ! pardon us 1or Chakra and to dissolve our ego. My job is to
crucifying your sacted principle. Forgive us
for destroying your sacred principle", God
will immediately forgive them. But man pierce your Sahasrara Chakra. This work is
finds it very difficult to apologise. He com-
mits a number of evil deeds. How many
wine out of water, he used to drink wine, In
Hebrew language you would notice that the
word wine means pure juice of fresh grapes.
It does not mean alcohol.
Jesus Christ incarnated to open the Agnya
pardon us for
awaken y our Kundalini power so that it could
of collective nature: I have therefore, to do
it in the case of one and all. 1 want to tell
you about Jesus Christ, Guru Nänaka, King
persons can be found in the world who have
worshipped the Saints? Take the instance of Janaka and a number of other incarnations
Shri Kabir or Shri Guru Nanaka. The people
have persecuted them at every step. In this Similarly. I wish to talk to you about incarna-
world the people have not given anything to
and the way they relate with the collectivity.
tions of Shri Rama, Shri Krishna etc., and also
the saints except harm and torture. But about Shri Shiva. because all the powers of
I tell you now, that circumstances have chang-
ed. The Satya Yoga has commenced. You the time has come for collective conscious-
may try, but now you would not succeed in
persecuting or torturing any saint. This is
due to Jesus Christ himself. For Jesus Christ God shall find Him and millions of people
has set in motion a mighty power in this will be able to do so. Sahaja Yoga is the
world which would make such wicked
people suffer. They would be punished. Bible. You are judged only after you come
The Ekädasha Rudras of Jesus Christ are
all in readiness to strike.
would now torture any saint, would be after coming to Sahaja Yoga. After getting
completely ruined. It is a great sin to torture that, which means everything, it is important
any saint. You try to understand this from
the example of Jesus Christ. Do not commit it. Many people ask me, "Mataji, when
such stupidity hereafter; otherwise you may would we be stable?" The answer is very
get completely ruined. If one great lesson is simple. Suppose you are sailing in a boat.
to be learnt from the life of Jesus, then that is
that you have to remain contented in the state
in which the Almighty has placed you. Jesus
these Gods and deities are in us. Now,
ness to manifest.
In this Kaliyuga, all those who are seeking
Last Judgement. This is described in the
to Sahaja Yoga. For that purpose you, how-
ever, have to surrender yourself completely
Those who
to dwell in it, to be settled and stabilised in
Then you know when the boat becomes
stable : so also while riding a bicycle, you
understand that when you do not wobble, you
Nirmala Yoga
34
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-36.txt 
 know you are in balance and stable. So also spoiled their Agnya Chakras. The reason is
in Sahaja Yoga our stability is understood. that these people follow a wrong Guru or
The judgement in this matter is to be made
by the individual himself. it is only when places. Many of the eye-diseases are caused
stabilise in Sahaja Yoga, that the state of due to such wrong practices. In order to
bow before or touch their heads at wrong
you
thoughtless awareness is established. So keep the Agnya Chakra in proper order, one
long as the Kundalini power does not pass should always read the scriptures and the
through the Agnya Chakra, the stage of sacred texts: One should never read unholy
thoughtless awarenss is not reached. This is literature. Many people may say, What does
the first step in the way of thoughtless aware- that matter? On account of our profession,
ness of the seeker. As soon as the Kundalini we have to do certain things which may not
crosses the Āgnyā Chakra, the thoughtless be strictly proper". But then, by doing such
awareness is established. It is the power of unholy activities the eyes get spoiled. I never
Jesus Christ which is instrumental in opening could understand, as to why people are bent
the subtle door located above the Agnya upon doing wrong deeds. Even by looking
Chakra. For that purpose you are to recite
the' Lord's prayer composed by Jesus Christ. Chakra may get constricted. Jesus Christ
After crossing this door, the Kundalini power firmly told, "Thou shall not commit adultery.
enters the limbic area of the brain. It is after
the Kundalini enters this area, which is also eyes". Thus, it again comes to the eyes. If
at any unchaste and filthy man the Agnya
But I tell you, thou shall not have adultrous
termed as the Kingdom of God, that the state
of thoughtless awareness is established. In and your eyes get weakened. This does not
the limbic area of the brain there are Chakras
which activate the seven main Chakras and become an unholy or improper person. It is
also the secondary Chakras in the body.
your eyes are unholy, you have eye troubles
mean that if you have to use spectacles, you
the law of life that you have to use spectacles
at an advanced age. The eyes are spoiled
Now. let us consider the reasons why the because you do not keep them steady, and
Agnya Chakra is speiled. One of the main are always moving them from one place to
reasons of this deterioration are your eyes.
You should take great care of the eyes, as people is constantly shifting from one object
they are very important. Then the Agnya to another. These people are not even aware
Chakra is also spoiled on acount of bowing that such action spoils the eyes.
before or touching one's head at the feet of
an unauthorised Guru. That is why Jesus Agnya Chakra lies in the manner in which you
Christ has told not to bow one's head before work. If you overwork then you become
every person or place, because by doing so,
you unknowingly lose everything whatever may be good, but even then, if it is beyond
you have gained. You should bow your head the normal level, be it over-reading, over-
only before an authorised person, that is the stitching or over-thinking, it will spoil the
one who is an incarnation of God. Do not Agnya Chakra. The reason is that while you
bow before any wrong place. This is very overwork, you forget God. During the course
important. If you bow your head before a of such work, God consciousness does not
wrong person or place, your Agnya Chakra stabilize in you.
will get constricted. In Shahja Yoga, I have
noticed that nowadays, many persons have There is no hypocracy in it. It is not some-
another. So also the attention of some
The other reason of deterioration of the
work-conscious. The work that you are daing
The Kundalini is the Truth. It is sacred.
Nirmala Yoga
35
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-37.txt 
 thing which can be purchased in a shop. This there are many exercises for the eyes which
is the absolute Truth. As long as you cannot help to keep the Agnya Chakra in a healthy
recognise the Truth by following Väma Marg condition. One of these is to watch yaur own
or the wrong path. When you will merge into
the Truth, when you will get absorbed in it. is the plan and where do you propose to go?"
only then you would understand that you are
but an instrument of God Almighty, the Holy
Father, that you are the instrument through If you do this, the strain on the eyes due to
which the power of God flows and that you
are the instrument of the same power of love
of God, which pervades the whole universe
and directs all movement therein. This power that part of the back of the head that is exac-
is made available to you only because of tly behind the forehead. It is in the area which
Jesus Christ, through His crucifixtion. What
a great sacrifice on the part of Christ ! It is fingers (about 5 inches) above the base of the
due to Him that our Agnya Chakra has opened. neck, and is known as the area of Shri Maha
f the Agnya Chakra of any person odoes not Ganésha. Shri Ganesha incarnated as Mahā
open, Kundalini would not rise, because
the Moolidhära Chakra would also remain Christ. Shri Christ's place is in the centre
constricted till the Agnya Chakra remains
ego and think of yourself that. "Yes Sir, what
This is how you may address yourself as if,
you are observing your own image in a mirror.
ego wili be minimised.
The other area which is very important is
is at a distance of about the thickness ofeight
Ganesha and the same incarnation is of Jesus
of the forehead and is surrounded by the
If a person's Agnya Chakra kingdom of the Ekādasha Rudras. Jesus
much constricted, the Kundalini Christ is the Master of that kingdom. The
of Shri Maha
constricted.
is too
power would not rise, whatever efforts you Ekädasha Rudras comprise
may make. For removing the catch on the Ganesha, as also Shri Shadānan (The Lord
Agnya Chakra, we apply "Kumkum".
has the effect of reducing the troubles of the awakening of the "Kundalini' you would ex-
ego as also other troubles. When the "Kum- perience that your vision is somewhat dimmed
kum is applied on the forehead above the
Agnya Chakra, the Chakra is opened and dalini' awakens. the pupils of your eyes are
Kundalini risas. Such is the intimate connec-
tion between Jesus Christ and the Kundalini
Power. Shri Ganesha, who is stationed at
the Moolädhāra, and protects the modesty of Christ or contemplating or meditating on Him
Shri Kundalini also opens the door at the would relieve Agnya Chakra. At the same time
Agnya Chakra, for the Kundalini [to pass it should be remembered that merely following
through it.
with six faces).
If you open your eyes, after
or blurred. This is so because when the Kun-
dialated and get cooled. This happens on
account of the action of para-sympathetic
nervous system. Mere thinking of Shri Jesus
the conventions or traditions and the lines of
succession made after Him does not mean
What is it that we have to do for maintain
ing the Agnya Chakra in order? The ways are
many. Extremity in every action spoils the
society. and thereforeexcessiveness in any truths. Foremost amongst them is that look-
walk of life is not proper and should be avoi- ing at any women with evil intentions is a
ded. Maintaining the balance enables our great sin. You can iealise the extent of the
eyes to get rest. In Sahaja Yoga, there are a
number of remedies for this, but it is absolutely ral people who stare at women at road sides
necessary to get Self-realization, first. Then with evil intentions. Jesus Christ told about
contemplation of Jesus Christ.
Now, I will be telling you some eternal
enormous sin that is being committed by seve-
Nirmala Yoga
36
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-38.txt 
 this matter some 2000 years ago. But He did have no insight, misrepresent the matters.
not tell it so openly. That is why 1 have to
temind you about this bad habit. Jesus Christ
told us about this matter and was Crucified. Jesus
only told that this should not be done, because
it is filthy. He did not tell about the bad con-
sequences of this action. This habit makes and the Kundalini power, This, in fact is the
man behave like a beast, as his mind is day
and night engrossed in evil thoughts. In our
Yaga science it has been advised that the mind
should be controlled and kept on the correct
path. You should app'oach Godwith all atten-
tion centred on Him.
In reality, giving Baptism means the
awakening of the Kundalini power so that
after it rises and pierces the Sahasrüra, there
is the union of the all-pervading power of Gad
makes final job of the Kundalini power. Butthe clergy
know nothing about this. On the contrary,
they are vainly trying to do something which
they are not even authorised to do. Otherwise
you will find these clergymen involved in all
sorts of acts of kindness-kindness to animals,
service of the poor, service of patients and so
We are made out of Yoga. Our's is the on. You would say, "Mataji, these are all
land of Yoga. We are not egoistic, nor do we
want to be so. We desire to live on this land deeds, but then, it is not the work of God. It
as Yogis. A day will dawn, when the whole is not ths work of God to serve the poor by
world would bow to this country (India) in paying them mɔney. The real work of God
reverence. Then people would know who
Jesus Christ was, and from where He came ! Kingdom of God, and to enable them to unite
He would then be worshipped with due res-
pect on this sacred land. In India, even today, perity, happiness, beauty and grace, is in reality
the modesty of women is protected and they the work of God. God will not catch the feet
are treated with proper respect. All over our of the persons who commit theft, or speak ljes
country, we regard the mother with great or wander around because of poverty. To help
reverence. When the people from other coun-
tries would visit this land they would know done by any person. You would notice some
that it is in this country that real Christianity Christians involved in proselytesing work.
is practiced with great devotion, but not in They would go to a remote corner where the
countries which profess the Christian reli- Adiväsis
gion.
noble deeds". Yes, certainly they are noble
consists in helping the people to enter the
with God. To make their life full of peace, pros-
such persons is an act of kindness and can be
(Aboriginals) reside. There they
would do some work of service to the Adivāsi
people and then convert all of the Adiväsis to
Jesus Christ said that "we should ba born Christianity, But one thing should be made
again." In our country we refer to this process clear, that this is not the work of God. The
as "Dwija" or born for the second time. The
second birth of any human being is possible
only by awakening of Kundalini power. So
long as the Kundalini is not awakened, one
will not aquire, the second birth, and so long Sahaja Yoga, we do not perform any work of
as we do not have rebirth we will not be able pseudo-kindness. If we go to any hospital,
to recognise God. You read the Bible after
realization. You will be surprised to know awakening of 'Kundalini' they are automatically
that Jesus Christ has told nothing but the healed, because within us is the power of
importance of Sahaja Yoga. Everything has
been explained with minor details. Those who power of lave starts flowing through their
work of God is eternal.
In Sahaja Yoga, the patients get healed
when their
"Kundalini is awakened. In
we can easily heal 25-30 patients. With the
Love. Due to awakening of Kundalini this
Nirmala Yoga
37
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-39.txt 
 bodies and the same power cures them. Jesus such filthy manner is an outright insult of Him.
Christ healed many with the same power of By relating every petty and mundane things
love flowing through him. Jesus Christ did
not help anybody with materialistic things. know this. "Sai Nath Bidi" or Lakshmi
We have to understand these things minutely. Hing,-advertising like this is an insult of God.
Do not repeat the mistakes of the past. You What do these people gain by doing so? Some
get yourself realized. This is your first duty After people say that, "Mother, this will do us
Self-realization your powers are awakened. good". What is this good? By that expression
These awakened power have healed diseases they mean they get more money. If a business
like cancer which are considered as incurable. is carried in this fashion, one or the other day
In fact you can cure any disease. Diseases it would surely bring them in trouble. This is
like cancer can be cured only in Sahaja Yoga. the insult of God.
But those who get cured again resume their
old paths and habits. They are no more in
search of God. Such persons remember God
only when they want to be cured of some
disease. They do not otherwise think it neces-
Sary to seek God. Why then should God care
for those who do not desire to be the light of nations were made up of "earth principle
God ? Such persons, whether cured or not.
would not spread the light in this world, God
Would light only such lamps which would
spread the light in the whole world. Why through the resurrection that His disciples
will God cure the stupid people ? Why will could know that He was no other than God
God help those who do not wish to do His
work or those who do not want to seek Him ? pets, started reciting His name, started deliver-
The work to relieve poverty or social work ing lectures on Him.
should not be mistaken for the work of God.
You should
with God, you commit great sins.
Jesus Christ came to save and liberate the
whole mankind. He was not the personal
possession of any particular sect. He himself
was 'Aumkar incarnate. He was "Pranava
and the 'Truth. The bodies of the other incar-
whereas the body of Jesus was made of the
soul principle (STH a). That is why He was
resurrecred after death.And it was only
Himself. Then they started beating the trum-
The most important
thing is that God incarnated. If the people
should recognise Him and secure spiritual
Some people degrade the relationship with development and bliss, this would enlighten
God to the lowest level. At one place, 1
abserved on an advertisement board: "Shri everywhere. May all of you acquire the Yoga
Sãi Näth Bidi". To use the name of God in of God. Many many blessings.
the soul and spread happiness, and bliss
Contd. from page 28
sitting and every moment when you are
talking you are thinking about Mother or
about God. You'll be amazed!
passible if you have sensitivity, if you have
memory. The greatest miracle of this world is giving what God has given you. so today I
that everybody has to die and nobody remem-
bers it But another one, is that everybody is become half moon, only in mind. And the
blessed by God but nobody knows it. But you
are 'sa specially' blessed. So what you should Alright ?
do ? Be in joy, be grateful, so that bliss comes
to you. Without thankfulness nothing is going
to work out. Thankful heart. You need a
heart that is thankful to God so that he gives
It's only you. When you give others he will definitely
give. But don't think it is your own. You are
have told you 8-fold movement. So you have
other half, keep it for the next 'Guru Purnima'.
MAY GOD BLESS YOU
Nirmala Yoga
38
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-40.txt 
 An Outline for Understanding "The Deities"
The Father Aspect
1. Before a cosmic cycle (the Creation)
starts, the ultimate reality is undifferentiated
as Parabrahma; it is infinity. abstract. without
manifestation The Creation starts when this
reality separates into two : Shri Sadashiva, the
Primordial Father and Shri Adi Shakti, the Pri-
mordial Mother. "HE is the Eternal Witness:
"SHE“ is His power, the Haly Ghost.
Shri Vishnu incarnated as Shri Rāma some
ago in India. Shri Rüma was the
son of a King and educated as the heir to the
throne. He was the "philosopher King" descri-
a warrior of unmatchable
8,000 vears
bed by Plato,
courage, skill and decorum. His life was a
platform on which He demonstrated how to
a very righteous (Dharmic) life. Shri
Rama provides us with a model for a perfect
pattern of human relationshjps: He was
energies which structure the cosmos : "A-the perfect as a son, husband, brother, father, and
seed energy of desire, Shri Mahākuli;U-the king. He is the Deity of the heart chakra and
on this subtle level He establishes the potential
and 'M-the seed energy of evolution, Shri within man to manifest the qualities needed as
Through the energy of Aum. the Primordial
Word, SHE then creates the whole universe.
lead
Aum is the expression of the three seed
seed energy of action, Shri Mahāsaraswati;
Mahalakshmi.
a father, son and husband etc.
Aum also stands for the principle of Divine
innocence and purity which permeates the
cosmos and is personified at a later stage by expresses the all pervading greatness of God
the elephant God. Shri Ganesha.
Shri Vishnu incarnated as Shri Krishna
some 6,000 years ago, also in India. He
the Almighty (Virāta). One most remarkable
aspect of Shri Krishna is that He is Yogesh-
wara, the Lord of Yoga, absolutely detached
2. Then, before our own material universe,
the world of the deities is created; the three
main deities are Shri Shiva, Shri Vishnu and Shri from wordly involvements while performing
Brahmadeva. Of these three, Shri Shiva never
incarnates. He is the manifestation of pure
spiritual existence. His wife (shakti or power)
is Shri Părvati. Shri Vishnu is the guide of action where man acts as a detached instru-
evolution and the one who incarnates to
trigger the next step in evolution. His wife is interferences of the ego's own desires. The
Shri Lakshmi, giver of prosperity. Shri Brahma-
deva, the creator, incarnates very rarely. One
example however, is Shri Hazrat Ali, the son-in-
law of Mohammad Sahab and husband of Kundalini.
Fätimaji. The wife of Shri Brahmadeva is Shri
Saraswati, Goddess of beauty, arts and music.
3. An incarnation can come in complete
form (Avatar) or as a limited manifestation and Shri Shiva integrates to manitest yet another
(Anshavatär). The most famous and most
recent avatårs of Shri Vishnu are Shri Räma (Adi Guru). He is the one who incarnates very
and Shri Krishna. The incarnations are of four often to assist Shri Vishnu in His evolutionary
types: the Father, the Primordial Master, the
Son, The Mother.
all worldly functions very successfully indeed.
He introduced to the human consciousness
the notion of "leela", the play, the detached
ment of the Unconscious, freed from the
witnessing power of Shri Krishna is esta-
blished within the Vishuddhi Chakra. It can
be awakened in man by the power of the
The Primordial Master Aspect
The innocence of Shri Brahmā, Shri Vishnu
aspectof the one reality: The Primordial Master,
task. There have been ten major manifestations
of the Primordial Master aspect: Abraham,
39
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-41.txt 
 Zarathustra, Lao Tzu, all the Deities, integrates all their qualities
Moses, Contucius,
Socrates, Rajā Janaka, Mohammed, Guru within the love of the Mother. It is the power
Nānak, Sai Baba of Shirdi (second half of 19th of the Mother that awakens all the aspects of
century). The
relates to the area of the subtle body known comfort, counsel and redeem.
as the Void (or Ocean of Illusion). His
incarnations have given man the principles
for maintaining a balance in his daily life and
Primordial
Master aspect the Deities in man. She has the power to
4. All the Deities are aspects of the one
God. The incarnations are those aspects at
work in universal history. They all control
some specific element of theinner mechanism:
a chakra or nidi. They are eternally living
and acting to support the great work of Sahaja
Yoga. By mastering the art of mantras, and,
above all, by awakening the devotion of the
heart, the Sahaja Yogi can enter into contact
the energy of the
avoid extremes.
When
Kundalini enlightens the void area man be-
comes his own master (his own guru).
The Son Aspect
Shri Ganesha incarnated as Lord Jesus
Christ some 2,000 years ago in Israel. His with all these aspects of God to be helped and
shakti is the Virgin Mary. Lord Jesus esta-
blished within the Agnya chakra the potential protected. Finally, the Divine qualities will
for man to forgive and be forgiven, to clear
himself from the effects of his sins and
blossom and manifest through his chakras.
5. The Deities are ruling over a very
karmas. The Divine child. Lord Jesus was complex pantheon of beings other than human
the word Aum made flesh. In the Indian beings:
tradition Christ is known as Shri Mahāvishnu.
The Divine child also came on this earth in his
On the side of goodness are the Devas
which control the forces of nature; Indra
warrior aspect as Shri Kärttikeya.
rain, Väyu : wind, Agni: fire, Adi Bhoomi
the earth, Varuna : the ocean. (and many
The Mother Aspect
The Adi Shakti is the Great Mother, The others). In fully establishing one's relation-
Holy Ghost. She also incarnates, either in Her ship with these Devas one can ultimately
own right (as Shri Durgā 10,000 years ago) control the elements. There are also Celestial
or in one of Her many aspects. She is the beings, such as the Archangels: Gabriel:
one who controls the whole cosmic show.
She has incainated, for instance, in her
Mother aspect as the Mother of Christ (Mary): Satanic beings exist also. These forces are
in her wife aspect as Shri Sitä, in the case of at work to deprive man from achieving his
Shri Rama; and Shri Radha, the wife of Shri spiritual becoming : Shri Mataji named the
Krishna. She was the sister (Nänaki) of the Satanic forces which are now in human form
Primordial Master, Guru Nānak ; and the when She visited America in 1972 and
daughter Fätimāji of the Primordial Master, warned of the damage they can do to the
Mohammād Sahab.
Hanumana, Michael : Bhairava.
On the side of evil various categories of
spiritual body of men. They have all been
destroyed by Shri Mataji in previous incar-
nations and will be destroyed again. In the
Today
Her most complete incarnation is living on meantime it is up to us to take advantage of Her
the earth to start the Golden Age: in this advent and become Spiritual Beings through
incarnation Her name is Shri Mataji Nirmala Self-realisation.
Devi. Shri Mataji, as the Shakti or Power of
Jai Shri Mataji
Nirmala Yoga
40
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-42.txt 
 Mantras
There are two types of Mantrās : (1) the Affirmation, and (2) the Poem of Praise. We
use them in different circumstances.
The Affirmation
When a chakra has been affected, and if the residing deity of the chakra recedes, the
qualities of that chakra do not maintain themselves without constant attention and nourish-
ment.
The Affirmation is used to bring our attention back to the qualities so the deity returns,
making these qualities return and act spontaneously within us.
The Affirmations
Centre
Shri Matāji, make me the innocence.
(1) Moolädhāra
(2) Swadishthân Shri Mätāji, make me the creative knowledge.
Shri Mătăji, make me satisfied.
(3) Nābhi
(3a) Void
Shri Mataji, make me my own guru/master.
Shri Matāji, make me a fearless person.
Shri Mătāji, make me a detached witness. Shri Mätaji, make me a part
and parcel of the whole.
Shri Mātāji, make me a self-correcting and discriminating person.
Shri Mätāji, make me forgiving and sacrificing person.
Shri Mätaji, please give me my Self-Realisation.
Shri Mätäji, please be in my head.
Shri Mätāji, please establish my Self-Realisation.
Shri Mätāji, please accept my complete surrender and my sincerest thanks
for making me a Sahaja Yogi (ni).
(4) Heart
(5) Vishuddhi
Hamsa
(6) Agnya
(7) Sahasrāra
Left Side
Shri Matāji, by Your Grace,
(1) Moolädhăra
a
I am the powerful innocence of a child.
(2) Swadishthān Shri Matāji, by Your Grace, I am the pure knowledge/technique of the
Divine that acts.
Shri Matāji, by Your Grace, I am satisfied.
Shri Mātāji, by Your Grace I am peace.
Shri Mätāji, by Your Grace
Shri Mâtaji, am I my own guru/master?
Shri Matāji, by your Grace, I am my own guru/master.
Shri Mätāji, by Your Grace, as I am the pure knowledge, I am my own guru.
Shri Matāji, am I the Spirit?
Shri Matāji, by Your Grace, I am the Spirit.
Shri Matāji, by Your Grace, please forgive me for any mistakes against my
(3) Nabhi
I am a generous person.
(3a) Void
(4) Heart
Spirit.
Shri Mätăji, by Your Grace, I am the instrument of Mother's Love.
Nirmala Yoga
41
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-43.txt 
 Shri Mätäji, I am not guilty. As I am the Spirit, by Your Grace, how
I be guilty?
Can
(5) Vishuddhi
Shri Matāji, by Your Grace, please forgive me.
(6) Agnya
(7) Right Sahasrāra Shri Mātāji, by Your Grace, I am protected from all the challenges and
(left side)
I will be victorious over all the challenges to ascent.
Shri Mataji, by Your Grace, I am fortunate to be in the attention of the Holy
Spirit.
Whole left
side
Right Side
(1) Moolädhära. Shri Mätäji, verily You are the Killer of devils.
(2) Swädishthãn Shri Mätāji, I do nothing. Verily You are the Doer and You are the Enjoyer.
Shri Mātāji, verily You are the Royal Dignity in me.
Shri Matiji, verily You solve my money family worries and take care of my
well-being.
(3) Nabhi
Shri Mataji, verily You are my Guru/Master.
Shri Mätāji, verily You are the responsibility in me.
Shri Mätāji, verily You are the boundaries of good conduct and the
benevolence of a good father.
Shri Mätāji, verily You are the sweet countenance of my words and
(3a) Void
(4) Heart
(5) Vishuddhi
deeds.
Shri Mätäji, I forgive everyone and I forgive myself.
Shri Mätāji, by Your Grace, please keep me in Your attention.
(6) Agnya
(7) Left Sahasrāra Shri Mätäji, verily You are the Victory over all the challenges to
(right side)
Whole right
ascent.
Shri Mātāji, verily You are the Holy Spirit. (Also) Ask the question of Shri
Mätāji relating to your job; e.g. for a teacher: "Shri Mätaji, are You the
Teacher of all teachers?"
side
Shri Mataji, verily You are the Teacher of all the teachers.
The Poem of Praise
These verses are said in Sanskrit and praise the residing deities now in the Being
of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, thus giving sustenance and energy to those centres. The qualities
of the Deities manifest themselves in your everyday life spontaneously, bringing you towards
an integration of all the qualities of the Divine.
Sanskrit is used, for when the Kundalini rises, She makes vibrations. These vibrations
are sounds (the language of the Gads). Sanskrit derives its sounds from those vibrations.
The Poems of Praise
Aum tvaméva sākshät, Shri..sākshät, Shri Adi Shakti Mätāji, Shri Nirmalä Dévi Namo
Namah,
Nirmala Yoga
42
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-44.txt 
 (1) Moolädhära (Centre) Ganésha Gauri and Kundalini Mātā
(2) Swädhishthän (Centre and Right) Brahmadéva Saraswati (Left) Nirmalā Vidya
(Centre) Lakshmi Näräyana (Left) Graha Lakshmi or Hazrat-Ali/Fatima
(Right) Räja Lakshmi
(3) Näbhi
Adi Guru Dattātréya
(3a) Void
(Centre) Jagadambā
(Left) Shiva Pārvati
(Right) Sita Ram
(4) Heart
(Centre) Radhā Krishna
(Left) Vishnumäyā
(Right) Yashoda or Vitthala Rukmini
(5) Vishuddhi
(Centre) Mary Jesus
(Left-on right temple) Mahavira
(Right-on left temple) Buddha
(Back) Maha Ganésha
(Front) Mahā Kārttikéya
(6) Agnya
Om tvaméva sākshāt, Shri Mahālakshmi, Mahasarasvati, Mahākāli, Trigunāt-
mikā, Kundalini sākshāt, Shri Adi Shakti Matāji, Shri Nirmalā Dévi Namo
(7) Sahasrāra
Namah.
Om tvaméva säkshät, Shri Kalki säkshāt, Shri Adi Shakti Mätāji, Shri
Nirmalā Dévi Namo Namah. Om tvaméva sākshät, Shri Kalki säkshät,
Shri Sahasrära swämini, Moksha Pradāyini, Mätāji, Shri Nirmalā Devi Namo
Namah.
Nadis (Channels)
Mahākāli/ Bhairava
Whole Left side
(1) Idā Nādi
Mahāsarasvati/Hanumâna
Whole Right Side
(II) Pingala Nādi
Mahālakshmi/Ganesha
The Centre
(III) Sushumnā Nādi
"I am the Enjoyer of All your doings-not of My doings anymore "
-Shri Mataji
43
Nirmala Yoga
SF
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-45.txt 
 WE BOW TO THEE, SHRI MATAJI
Beyand time is the Spirit,
That, You've helped us become,
For now we know, that we are,
And what it is you've done.
We bow to Thee, Shri Mataji,
The voice of God who speaks,
From far beyond duality.
You guide the one who seeks.
Evolving thus, through many lives,
Fighting what must be fought,
With Your help, the seeker wins.
The victory he's sought.
In winning, he surrenders,
Desires that come ta him,
He withdraws all his senses,
In Yoga goes within.
There he finds, in Love with God,
Heart's peace and joy, indeed,
Becomes the bloom and the fruit.
You planted, as a seed.
JAI SHRI MATAJI
To Rakhi Brother
In your Presence.
Dear brother so sweet,
Dear brother, accept this ever endless love,
for which I am, but a channel,
As a sister, allow me,
to lighten your burdens,
express this joy, creative and prospering,
So solid, sublime, yet frank,
So Powerful, lovely and soothing,
This eternal Shakti swells
This Kundalini elevates,
and dances over my head,
So overjoyed is She to be,
in company of thee.
Strengthened by my inner strength,
bowing to the Purity.
To be greeted by your smiling face,
Reflecting Spirit,
Enlightened Soul,
Ignites a love, which few can know,
And we pray,
Desiring to share, to serve
spreading fragrant smell.
We shall break the superficial bond,
Collectively get united.
As our Vishuddhis blossom,
Man, in his evolution softens,
May our love for one another broaden,
gaining subtler ways of exploring,
This Sahaja family love,
of brother and sister,
With subtler joys start flowing
With Shri Mataji's blessings,
Through us it grow,
This love, so humbly exists
Divinity created.
Deep, within,
from lifetime's longing
It satisfies, and quenches,
a thirst for innocence and sweetness
as tender as a new seed planted.
Jai Shri Mataji
Nirmala Yoga
44
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-46.txt 
 DANGERS OF RESEARCH INTO
PARAPSYCHOLOGY
Perception) does not manifest a growth of
the subjects' native psychic power: rather,
it manifests a communication between the
system of awareness of the researcher and
the awareness of disincarnated (dead)
individuals, who can then fill the resear-
Your Excellency.
On behalf of a group of friends of your
great Country, I take the liberty to draw the
attention of the concerned authorities to some
aspects of the research into parapsychology,
telepathy and other forms of extrasensory
perception undertaken in various parts of the
US Administration,
cher's awareness/energy system with their
own perceptory abilities.
For instance. the forthcoming book by the
reporter Ronald McRae, seemingly based on
Pentagon, NASA and CIA papers, as well as
the recent Congress report on "psy" pheno-
mena, tend to suggest that the US authorities not belong to him but to the entity which has
are dedicating great attention to this matter
Here are
The subject then manifests extrasensory
perceptions, hardly aware that the new "psy"
powers (the old Sanskrit term is "siddhi") do
parasitically intruded into his psyche. Such
entities, or dead spirits are called "bhoota
bāddhä" in Sanskrit or "préta" in the Buddhist
why they.
some few reasons
should be careful in doing so, and I trust that
you may wish to pass on the information . It is traditionally warned by the
contained in this letter to those in your knowledgeable ancient scriptures of Asia, to
Government who are dealing with these have no relationships whatever with such
parapsychology projects.
I happen to be part of a team who have warning, based on the story of the Gadarene
been involved for the past ten years with a
very advanced albeit little known form of
traditional yoga, which enables me, inter alia,
to understand very well the mechanism of
parapsychological phenomena, and thus to
recognize its inherent dangers. These experi-
merital findings reflect and verify the teachings
and guidance of a London-based world
authority on traditional spiritual yoga who latter's sympathetic nervous system and the
tradition.
entities and not to use their powers. The
early Christian tradition issued the same
Swine. We should now understand why these
warnings are necessary.
ESP is, to the psyche, the same as inflation
in the economy or cancer within the physical
body: a case of 'overheating. As one or
many "bhoots" are feeding on the energy
system of one living being. the stress on the
has totally mastered the various fields of
resulting drain on the parasympathetic nervous
energy. will cause long term damage; any
dysfunction of the nervous system, insomnia,
fields present for the psychic, (and even mental febrility, depression, schizophrenia etc.
parapsychological manifestations.
The serious threat that enguiries in these
physical) health of the subject who undertakes
can be a manifestation of the long term
such research, finds its roots in the following consequences of such spiritual possession-
basic principle:
A further step in the process manifests, when
Unlike the tenet parapsychological theorists the stress caused by the "bhoots" creates
would have us believe, ESP (Extra-Sensory problems at the physical level, thus contri-
*Th is is the copy of the letter communicated by a Sahaja Yogi to the ambassador of U.S.A. in London.
Nirmala Yoga
45
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-47.txt 
 Repistered with the Registrar of Nawasapais under fiegd. No36999|81
are making claver use of the "bhoot"
ability to maximize the energy of a sub-
jecr's sympathetic nervous energy, and
cash handsomely on these short-term
manipulations (psychic equivalent of
asset-stripping).
buting to disuases like cancer (including
leukaernia), multiple sclerosis, or apilepsy.
Unfortunately the causal link between the
presence of "bhoots" and psychosomatic
disorders has not been generally recognized
by medical science, while the short term
effects of ESP can be quite seductive and
include. for instance, increased creativity or
s0-called .curative powers
stated principle is correct (ie. that "psy
phenomena are .caused by dead spirits intru- research inevitably and invariably. in one
ding the psyche of a living human being) it form or another, recoils back on its author or
means the following:
We are aware that Interest in ESP in the
US Government is stimulated by the reported
progress of parapsychological research in the
USSR. But it must be emphasised that such
Yet if the above-
on the person to whom it is applied. The
end result is clearly negative.
Between ESP and old-fashioned bleck
magic, there is e difference in degree,
perhaps, but not in nature. Relativety hostile researcher, sorcerer or nation, is to lead
benign "bhoots" can help in curative
powers, telepathy, clairvoyance, sediesthe-
The best protection against ESP by a
a balanced and, yes, moral life. "Bhoots"
cannot parasite the psyche of a normal
individual, especially when such a person
does not invite ESP by türning his attention
psychokinesis, reflexologyi more
sia,
hostile dead entities (in Sanskrit "raksha-
sas, or demons) are possessing criminal towärds it. There are, moreover, many techni-
maniacs or sex sadists, who very often ques by which to overcome and get rid of
manifest a completely split personality or
multiple personalities: On the other hand,
the mass level use of tbhoots", that is the can readily be supplemented it required, will
possibility of hypnotizing masses, is a prove timely and useful to officers of your
factor that politios cannot afford to ignore: Government assessing the potential of "psy"
Hitler or Khomeini are among those practices within the Administration, and, along
reminding us of the fact. But there are with our deep concern for the outcome, ex-
also much subtler trends:
"bhoots", which can be mastered easily
I hope that the above information, which
various sects
and noticeably many Indian fake gurus highest consideration.
press to you, Excellency, the assurance of my
"NOW WE HAVE TO UNDERSTAND THAT WE ARE CARRYING THE LIGHT IN
OUR HANDS. AND THE LIGHT SHOULD NOT SHAKE, WE HAVE TO HOLD THE
LIGHT AND WE SHOULD HAVE A CONCENTRATED ATTENTION TOWARDS
THE MAINTENANCE OF THE LIGHT".
SHRI MATAJI
Edited & Poblished by sh. S.C. Rai 43, Bunglow Road, Delhi-110007 & Printed at The Central Electric
Press, 80-D, Kamla Nagar, Delhi-110007, One issue Rs. .00, Annual Subscription Rs. 51.00
Foreign (by Aimmajl £ 714)
