Nirmala Yoga Bi-Monthly March-April 1984 Vol. 4 No. 20 5F "Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns al the religions and seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga-THE UNION" +- 5F

 NIRM ALA YOGA 43, Bungalow Road, Delhi-110007, (India) Founder: Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Editorial Board : Dr. S.K. Mathur, Sri A.S. Mishra, Sri R.D. Kulkarni Representatives CHERYL HYNES, 1267, Burke Road, KEW 3101, VICTORIA. :ZORANA BEDKE, Gartnergasse 17/10, 1030 VIENNA. LORI TODRICK, 4518 Woodgreen Drive, West Vancouver, BC. V7S2V1. MARIE ROUGER, 175. Av. Ledru Rollin PARIS-750001. ALEISSANDRA PALLINI, via Monserrato 105-109, ROMA 00186. M.B. Ratnannwar, 13, Merwan Mansion, Genjewala Lane, Borivali (W). Australia Austria Canada France Italy India BOMBAY-400092. RAJARAM SHANKAR RAJWADE. 840, Sadashiva Peth, PUNE-411030. DANIEL & ROXANA DEVINE, Angel Luis De Herran, 38, 6", 4, MADRID-33. Spain Switzerland : CHARLES & MRS. MAGDA MATHYS. 5, Chemin Des Mouldins, 1256, Troinex (Canton de Geneva). : GAVIN BROWN. Brown's Geological Information Services Ltd., 134 Great Portland Street, London WIN 5PH. M.J. MURDOCH, 14A Bourne Ave, S. RUISLIP, MIDDLESEX, HAH 6TZ, ENGLAND. U. K. :CHRISTINE PETRUNIA, 270, Jay Street (AP T. 1-C) BROOKLYN, NY-11201. URSULA SEHLMEYER, 191 Canal ST. SAN RAFEL, CA-94901. U.S.A. CONT ENTS Page 1. Editorial 2. Nirvana (Poem) 3. Birthday-Puja 4. From the Heart 5. What is expected of Sahaja Yogis & where are we ? 6. Advice to Brides to be 7. AttentionI 8. Prayer to Almighty 9. Attention-II 10. Shri Mataji's advice to Western Women 11. March in Delhi 12. Austria-one year later 13. A True Passage of India 14. Sahaja Yoga & Physical Cure-Part IV 15. "Kavach of the Devi" 11 12 17 18 25 26 33 38 39 40 42 44

 Editorial Pundalika, a devotee of Shri Krishna was in the past life infatuated with his wife to the total negligence of his parents. In his time, a pilgrimage was done on foot, or in a bullock-cart if one could afford. Pundalika carried his young wife on shoulders and had the aged parents walk after him. On the way he met Rohidas, a saint and a cobbler by profession, who was doing the work with hands while singing Lord's praise. Rohidas loved his parents so much that in order to entertain them, he had seated them on a swing and tied the other end of pulling-string to his hair-locks so that the swing would move with his head, as his hands were engaged. This was an eye-opener to Pundalika and it transformed him into a great devotee and the most obedient and loving son. Immediately, he seated his parents on shoulders and took the wife along, on foot. On his return he busied himself in his parents' service seeing God in them. One day Lord of the universe, Shri Krishna, the Virata, pleased with Pundalika's devotion, arrived at his place. However, Pundalika had no time to spare from the service of his parents and threw a brick towards the Lord to stand upon and wait. Pundalika remained engrossed in the work and Lord kept patiently waiting to bless him, and ultimately resided at the same place. Years rolled by. The famous shrine of Shri Vitthala was built there and Pandharpur acquired a unique importance in the spiritual world. Pundalika also came to be regarded as the ideal son who preferred serving his parents to the Lotus Feet of Paramätmā. Parents told their young sons to follow the example set by him. One more moral of the story, which people in general have missed, is "the compassion of the Lord". Saint Rämdās understood it and expressed his disapproval in words" O Pundalika, how arrogant you are to keep Shri Vitthal waiting!". Compassion is the nature of the Lord. There are numerous instances of it in the lives of saints. He helped Kabira in weaving, scrubbed vessels for Janābai, a saint and maid servant of Nämdeva. It has been said that God is so tender hearted that He is compassionate without any reason. It has been amply proved by hard and tireless work of Shri Mataji for the past 14 years to awaken the divinity within mankind. Nirmala Yoga 1

 She has been travelling thousands of kilometres every year to take as many people as possible to the safety of Sahaja Yoga, and patiently, curing, correcting and improving hundreds of Sahaja Yogis. No other Sadguru in spiritual history of the world, has worked so hard for the disciples, No other preceptor has accepted so many disciples and conferred so many powers on them. As we find from history, great gurus and even the incarnations were selective in this regard. Intention of writing these lines is to be gratefully aware of the troubles that She has been taking for us and introspect for our efforts to grow. A self search by everyone would be imperative as to whether we are working as much as we should, whether we are careful about our attention, whether, we have imbibed, even partly, the qualities She likes us to have, and what we have done to light the lamp in others. Shri Mataji has been working without any rest Every sahaja yogi and yogini should pray from the heart that She should have enough rest. It is desired that Her tours this year, may be planned keeping sufficient time for rest during, and in-between the tours. Much as everyone would like Her to be 'prasanna it behoves of all to find out for themselves, whether their/our own behaviour, made Her 'aprasanna', It may appear to be natural to be desiring to have an audience but, in that case one would play in the hands of ego and negative forces. Hence it must be very clearly understood and inculcated that personal proximity is not, necessarily, being close in reality. Meditation is more important than a personal meeting, as it is the Spirit that communicates in the former, while in the latter, ego may possibly dominate on the person, making him casual and disregarding the protocols. Receptivity to the vibrations is more pleasing to Her than anything else and meditation is the only way to enhance it. She has bestowed upon all, enough powers to cure ourselves and others and solve other problems just by desiring a solution. All should therefore make a vow not to approach Her with a problem. Her grace is like the sun-shine. It is for us to allow it to come in through the window of our attention. It is the duty of every Sahaja-yogi to behave in the manner that would please Her, albeit, not artificially. A genuinely pleasing nature emanates from within spontaneously. It is felt by others in one's approach, in conversation, in every act. Merely the presence of such a person can be joyous to other|Sahaja yogis. Perhaps, inner transformation that is brought about by intensive and extensive practice of Sahaja yoga, would give such nature, in that the Spirit would manifest itself, in every act, and give ideas as to what to do and what not to do in the personal presence of Shri Mataji. Divine protocols are known to the Spirit and are observed naturally in thoughtless state. Such a person becomes completely attentive, very humble, loving and enjoying, automatically, when Shri Mataji is personally present, for She is the deity of his/her meditation. He would never try to attract Her attention. or make himself heard or press his point in conversation with Her. He never tries to be close or away, and is happy where he is, for he has realized Her presence within himself. He never tells Her his own problems, nor those of his relations. Sahaja yoga is the way of life for such a person. Shri Mataji's advice has permeated in every moment of his life. A group of such dedicated Sahaja yogis, loving and affectionate to each other, enjoying the divine bliss within and without is indeed, the bouquet of most beautiful, fragrant flowers that would please the supreme Goddess. 2. Nirmala Yoga

 On the auspicious occasion of Her birthday, may it be our resolve to present Her with these bouquets and garlands: May every person be the Shrine of Adi-shakti, May our beings, our pränas, all that we enjoy be the offerings to Her in Puja. May whatever we do knowingly and unknowingly be dedicated to Her. गतं दुखं, गतं पापं गतं दारिद्रय मेव च । आगता परम चैतन्यं पुण्योहं तव दर्शनात ।॥ Gatam dukkham gatam pāpam gatam däridryameva cha i Āgată parama chaitanyam punyoham tava darshanāt i With your Darshan great chaitanya' and' punya' have come, and grief, sin and poverty have vanished. NIRVANA She laughs in the leaves of the trees as they blow Her fragrance unfolds In the flowers that grow From where I stand In the sunrise I behold a Land Right before my eyes From where I stand In the sunrise I behold a Land Right before my eyes There attachments dissolve The body is healed Worldly riddles are solved Sacred truths are revealed I can reach that Land By my dear Mother's grace She takes my hand; I set the pace In the present, in peace Plagued no more by dreams of what might have been Or what yet might be. I can dwell in that land Watch the Play from above Subtle colour, subtle light A land cool and pure Joy by day, peace by night Mother's presence is there At one with the truth In God's Kingdom of Love, Her smile is the sun Her radiance, the moon In the waters She runs In the clouds She moves -CHRISTINE Nirmala Yoga

 Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Birthday Puja SYDNEY 21-3-83 It is so great to be with you people today Let us forget about what dents we have with- on this auspicious day; to be with Australlans in ourselves. WWe have to know that we are who have proved to be very good Sahaja prophets. This assumption has to be establi- Yogis and who have progressed in a very shed-that We are prophets. If you could just speady manner in their spiritual life me greatest pleasure to be with my children you'll emit the glory of God Like a flowel here. As you know I have so many children when it blossoms, It has its fragrance which all over the world apart from the ones whom flows automatically; but it is only human beings I actually physically gave birth. We have to think of all those today who are away from us, deny or to assume what they are. Even if thousands of miles, praying to God Almighty for they have become prophets they still linger their spiritual ascent. you get all the rest- because you do not ascend you do not get what is needed. That's your true nature. Its like acting in a drama, why there are problems. And even today I had becoming the actor. Like somebody Is acting to solve some problems before I could come like Shiväji so he becomes as if he's Shivāji. to puja. But if you decide that we have to The whole lifestyle, everything changes-he ascend spiritually within us then everything that becomes like Shiväji. But the same person you have to receive, all the blessings that God if he's acting like Hitler, becomes like Hitler wants to shower upon you, to make you the Both are artificial. Artificial they become. citizen of His great Kingdom, where you are no more judged, you are no more chastised, you are no more put to any test, of where you will reside in eternal love of God and in His are, not the artificial which has gone back, glory. It gives what you are, what you have become, assume who have freedom even not ta assume. To Because as you ascend on with what they are not, in imagination and are still ego-orientated. Is falsehood. Is not Now when you are really prophets you find it difficult to be the real person what you which is no more there, all finished. The sinner is dead, the egoistical is not there, the frigh- I could not believe about ten years back, tened one is gone forever, you are a prophet. that within ten years l'll be able to achieve Rise in the glory of that personality. People this rasult. We should not judge the progress who are not prophets who are not Godly, of Sahaja Yoga in relation to other plastic who are doing anti-God activities can assume gurus. Even to create one saint will require to be prophets. But those who are really thousand lives to pass, and so many have prophets do not want to assume the situation- become prophets, it is a very big thing for you. that they 'are". Nirmale Yoga

 As soon as you assume, you become quality was extremely humble and they knew that. We must today get over this kind of the difference between them and Christ and play our mind has been doing so far. All the Mother. Also they knew the difference falsehood has to drop out. Of course as | said, I ten years l'l achieve these results, with of Christ. They were not realised souls, They so many devils around I'm afraid it must go to you people also, that beautiful. despite all hurdles and problems you had, you have ascended. Ascended so far. and have become beautiful prophets. You are transformed that little more-just to assume what you are, will make you feel so sweet. I talked to my granddaughter, elder one. and she's just a little girl, only 11 years of äge, but she told her mother "Now I ean't you have, most of you have done it, is to talk to Nani (grandmother) because She's a retract your attention from perversion: Most Goddess. How can I talk to Her! I feel shy." At of you have done it. Your eyes are better that age ! While in her own life as they are saying she's top in all the class, she's the Vanity. Still people are jealous, competitive. editor in a magazine in her school. She's You still have some lurking materialism. A tremendous. And she's so humble that she between them and others and they took to could never have dreamt that in lives which were pure, illumined by the name us to entice you, aleansed themselves and kept their lives So Satiaja Yogis can't afford to have these six enemies.: First of all, the temper which really doesn't behove. Compassion. Replace temper with compassion. Today is 60th birthday and we have to just fight only six enemies within ourselves. Second is which now, steady, But still you are egoistical. new thing that is coming, you are getting told her mother I feel shy to talk to Năni. attached to your families. So we have to She's a goddess, how can I talk to Her. And change it now, in a different use. Same thing can be used for doing God's work. They can be used as the six hands of Sahaja Yogis. The first one is the anger. You have to be angry Rustom told me that there are vibrations emitting from her. That's how you have to grow. First of all with yourself when you do wrong things. And not to feel guilty but angry with yourself for doing wrong things. Guilty is the best way never to get rid of it. It's like a store house kept for personal archives, locked up. you have to Know you are prophets and you must know that I the Adi Shakti, I am the one who has come on this earth for the first time in this form to am the Holy Ghost Iam do this tremendous task. The more you'll I have suffered a lot because of your guilty business very much. And they come out one by one. So you have to be angry with You will change tremendously. I knew yourself when you feel guilty: "How can I feel guilty ? Why did 1 do such a thing ? I'm not going to do it." So develop your anger have to prove it, that l'm that. Christ had against yourself and not against others. And discipies who were not even realised souls anger could be reserved for the day of war. and they have spread Christianity-whatever it Otherwise when the war will break out all Under such circumstances that Christ the Arjunas will drop their bows and it will be was crucified and they were left high and dry, said that "Arjuna was a great warrior-till the just twalve people struggling but they put it war started." So we are not going to waste our energy in warring with things which are understand this the better it would be. I'll have to say that openly one day and we have said it. But now it is you people who i. up. They were very humble people, their Nirmala Yoga

 just like shadows. Not to fight the shadow. Sex, the perversion, has to be diverted to it. towards your family, your wife and you have to respect your chastity, you lead a chaste life. Not to be like a dog, but like-to be like a human being. All that attention has to become chastity which is your power, which is your protection, which is your connection with liberation of women, not women. the Divine. Not forced chastity but a chastity of balance and understanding. With your proud. Proud that you are Sahaja family, with your wife, in a very chaste way proud that vou have been born in such time you can live. Same with women-is more women I would say. That they should not join hands with other men who talk against vou should come up to that level. Like some your husbands, or who teach you against people I find suddenly become morose, politics of this fighting men, there's no end This is basically, they knew they have to live with men, they can't fight them. But men themselves fought; even in America it was Abraham Lincoln who fought for the So you have to be not egoistical, but Yogis, when you have to carry on the duties of God's work. That God has chosen you ! So that thrown out of Sahaja Yoga who try to tell recluses, in Sahaja Yoga. They will never be women against their husbands. This is a very Supposing somebody gives you a diamond, sanctum santorium place where you should not interfere against the husband. Nobody has right. If there is any problem you should let me know. Is a sign of stupidity. Then Tecluses, some people feel "I shall not take the vanity must be made into pride. You should be proud that you are Sahaja Yogis, really proud. Raise your heads with pride that we are Sahaja Yogis. Pride is never 't" should go away from the dictio- oppressive, it's a glorious thing to be proud. But vanity is....Actually pride is nothing nary of people who are supposed to be Sahaja but the expression of self-esteem. Begging, borrowing, mimicry, all these things come from the less understanding of yourself. So vanity should be the pride, and the pride Yoga, a discreet dynamism, a wise dynamism. should be the expression of self esteem. Self I won't have to solve your problems any esteem is very different from ego. One is reality, another is complete artificiality. Men should be brought round. There should be now should behave like men and not like competition between yourself, the one who women, those, like slaves to be tied with a you were and what you are. Who wins ? rope whenever their women want them to.. Whether your past or present. Your present They have to lead the society. For the women's rights in India, the women never fought, with the men. They never fought with the men because men are also fathers, brothers, and they are concerned about the Sahaja Yogis in acquisition. Sometimes I well-being of women. Women seldom fought have also seen competition in shouting, there because they knew once they start screaming and being harsh to others-there's forgiven because God has given you so much. you are proud, you put it on and show off. But when you have been given your Spirit, you should be proud and not behave like any job now. I'll not go out. I'l sit at home and meditate." There's no place for such people in Sahaja Yoga. I can't do this'. The word "can Yogis. You just can't say 'I can't do it'. You just can't say 'l can't do it'. Yogis. So the self-esteem will give you that kind of a dynamism which is needed for Sahaja more. The quality of competition and jealousy should go fast, faster and faster, leaving your past behind as much as you can. There should be no competition between Nirmala Yoga 6/1

 a big competition on. Let us have competition they are the machines and don't kill your in compassion, in mildness, in sweetness, in machines by shouting at them, by screaming beautiful behaviour. Who is more cultured, at them and by putting them down, making who is more gentlemanly, who is deeper: keep them diffident. We'll have no place. We have somebody an ideal before you like that, whom you think is a very gentlemanly person or a lady who is really like a lady. But on machines, they are the hands and you are the the contrary if you have a lady who behaves like a man, as your ideal, that is also the power they will suffer. So there should not right. Or a man who behaves like a woman, that's also not ideal. Or the other -my child, and his child, there should not be way round. A woman who tries to show that such competition, take out your mind from women are different from men and women there. There would be complete sharing. So must get this.in Sahaja Yoga there is nothing like women and men, that women must get this and men must get that. Because you are Spirit But the cover that you have, the body Thay have to have some people to share. The that you have, the light you have, the lamp that you have, is a different thing, and to keep the light on, a woman has to be a woman and now Can we alone have it ? Cannot enjoy. man has to be a man. As yesterday I told you that an apple should not try to be a gentle and kind with each other. The people mango and mango should not try to be an apple. It loks nice to be the best apple, and looks nice to be the best mango. So the Snare more. Who is more generous. Materia- recluses, those who say that you have to get out of it, behave really not like human beings but I think like-I don't know what animals do that way. Like when you get your doles alter money, counting money, you become you cannot become indolent, you cannot. As Crackpots really, those who count their far as possible don't like people taking money morning to evening are real crackpots. doles. Not a sign of good Sahaja Yogis. They always lose money, there's something You all should be hardworking, you must have Wrong with their brain. qualifications, you should be good people on top of everything. Good student, good cooks, good mothers, good fathers, good administrators-from where are we going to get these people. We cannot be dishwashers, to encourage them to do God's work. You have to support them, because they are the power. Of course if these hands go against be no competition between children and you the competition should end in sharing. How much we share ? How much can we share ? See drunkards canno! sit and drink alone. thieves must have ten people to thieve. But when it comes to the nector of God's love There's no enjoyment at all in it. So let us be who are going to enjoy the nector by which they get more and more of that-who lism should be taken to its beauty, You can have one thing done with your hand. That's much more beautiful than running Count your blessings. See life, the beauty in matter. How life has worked. See this wood, I see the pattern it has created on that, the life. But it's not morose, its not dead, it's not insipid, it's bubbling. You see in art, you So the competition between women and can see in all that is beautiful, the reflection of men must be stopped. Women must have God's creative power and the joy He wanted can we ? their own place and men must have their own place. men are their hands. If you are the shakti, you to do that. You are the masters. to emit for your happiness. While you become slaves of matter. He never wanted And women must know that Nirmala Yoga 7.

 Last of all is the attachment to your because they're your responsibility but do for children, to your wife, your, your, your.. other children more than you Would like to Whatever is mine is not 'l'. My house, that's do for your own child. So this complete not . My this, my, my. my, must be given identification with up, is to be destroyed. Instead of that, you protectiveness, will give you trouble. You should say we'. We is a good word. I so have to believe that your family is the family many times say "we. And people start of your Father, and your Mother is looking wondering what they-somebody asked me, after it. f you think you can look after your "Mother, when you say 'we', what do you mean, family by youtself-go ahead I So don't be how can you make us feel that way, that we ever-protective, don'tbe too worried, too upset are all one, the way you say 'we." I said why about your family. not ? You are all part and parcel of my body. Aren't we 'we ? Do I separate my finger from my heart ? If you are part and parcel of my that your children also dan't beoome like that body then I have to talk like "we" because l'm conscious of this collective being sitting here. has fallen off ask other children to help. So we have to talk like "we" and not "I, my" Form plays in which you should show, how a and when you have to address about yourself child who is coming, who canndt wälk pro- speak it in a third person, like you can say: perly, hew ather children goa and try and find "This Nirmala is now going to London." Really aut methods how to help him to come out. is true because this body's going there but Teach tham, through drama, through stories, my heart is going to remain here. So to say through various things, what is goodness. that I am going is not true-if I am Adi Shakti You must help éven without the idea of help. where am I going ? I'm going nowhere, I'm It's a pleasure, it's a privilege. It's a great everywhere. Where can I go ? There's no place where1 don't reside and if I have to go such a place, is Hell only where I don't habit to serve 'your child first-is absolutely want to go. So, what I say that "This Nirmala is going now. Leaving Australia." Tomorrow 'll be leaving. So what happens ? Just ing back something for your children-is all this body has to go-that's all. Like that, you start saying about your body. This mind lives in small well". Get over it. Try, men to of mine, this mind of Mr. so and so. Is better form your own group of men and women to address yourself as Mr. or Mrs. or Miss. should form their group of women. There " should be no instruction to women from men your children, over- And keep a very sociable temperament so If orte child Toll them how to share. honour that you can do. You must change your ideas completely. Many people have a very vulgar, shows bad breeding. Must serve others first, and then your own family. Keep- a sign of a person who is like a frog who So Miss, will you please get up now? Better address yourself. Children talk like that. Like a third person. You'll be amazed, you will many funny things, I can't understand, how see the joke behind the whole thing. You'll these things work out. But, it is because one know how to laugh at yourself. "O Mr. so and side you feel your family is too much, your so, come along now, he's behaving like this." husband is too much, you must be absolutely And you'll really become a master of yourself, secluded from all the rest, or on the other because you know how to handle this baby. side it is that you give up your husband com- It will give that sense of maturity. So to say pletely-he's no good, the marriage is unsuc- this is my child, this is my wife; of course you cessful, and stick on to something else which have to look after your wife and your children is supposed to be a something, higher goal, too much. Is not proper.I have discovered so Nirmala Yaga

 of destruction. So both things are not good. family not to your people, but to others. All You must stand for your husband or wife of them are all over, you know how they are or for your children, when it is right. But You write to them because you know they're "obviously you should not do it, 'apparently heads of the thing. Like if you write to Gregoire, you should not do it. If you tell your child, "Alright I understand, but I do't want to do it to Genevieve in Geneva. You have met all of in the public..." People should not also know them-you should write ! Ladies must write that he's your child. The way he mixes up with others; stays with others, shares with is in Lusanne why not write to him? He's others, that's a Sahaja Yogi, should be. You there; now do you know that his wife has know as for myself I've not even given reali- sation to my children so far. Can you believe it ? Leave alone the knowledge of Kundalini. how many people I know so many things, all You can teach them. I know I can give them any time I want. I have not given them time yourself with that love. Tomorrow you go to at all, no time to them. If you see, how much America or to any one of these places, you time do I spend with my own daughters ? have there your brothers and sisters already Very little time. In the whole year, this year established. Write to them I was there for three days with her. So the Mother what you think. You only write to relationship at this time is the most important, is of Sahaja Yoga and Sahaja Yogis. have write letters to me especially. But write nice Seen some Sahaja Yogis write to their parents to their mothers to their brothers, much more its like sending flowers. than they write to the other Sahaja Yogis. Its there. it will be a very good idea. very amazing. To their fathers but not to other Sahaja Yogis. you can write to Ruth in Italy, you can write to ladies and men must write to men. Arneau to go to America for a delivery ? We should know about each other very intimately. About the details. That's how; you must flood about your me sometimes but never to each other. Don't sweet letters, poetic letters, they'll feel happy, Taking ideas from This will overcome these six enemies and make them your slaves and use them for You must start writing to other Sahaja your purpose. Then they'll become great Yogis. Those who have lived in London, how things. Then they'll be your assistants, then many of them are writing to people in Lon- they'll be your commanders of your army, don ? Have they made any friends or anything? they'l be your decorations. It is all in your -nothing of the kind. They are so busy with hands, with wisdom, you have to do it. At their own problems, they're not bothered, to this time, at the age where I've reached-I create that bondage of love. no interest in Sahaja Yoga. They stayed in mature like this, child like this, just like a the ashram in London. How many of you young girl and an old woman, all put together are writing letters to them ? To London and every year, every time. But I've definitely people. How many letters do you write ? Now you have met them in this programme, how many of you are writing letters to them maturity as far as my knowledge about human and keep in contact. How much does it take beings is concerned because they are-when to write a letter ? Nothing. I hope as soon as I was born they were strangers to me-just you go back today you all should write letters strangers, imagine that Adi Shakti should say about today's birthdayhow it was cele- brated, in a beautiful way. Not to your was absolutely a stranger. But know, I've grown, was always there, same age. I've always been As if, they have matured in understanding human beings. I've definitely got better understanding and this, but it's true ! Despite I have created you, Nirmala Yoga

 Ive I've understood you very well, know you are you don't need me much any more. told you whatever wes heeded for your counselling. I have täught you the method, how to redeem others, and comfort them. You know everything. Now just become masters in this art. Forgetting your past. You are all great people, all of you. So, when next year, I should see you sitting on this seat, net children are very obstinate. Its bhootish in my lap. On your own, teaching ydur İsn't it ? Let him go. He won't listen. Better children. Let the second deneration start my children / know how much you love me and how much you are ciose to me. (Why is he crying so much ? "... he wants to go to the toilet" Let him go. ""he wants me to go with him, he should go himself" Let him go, this is the thing you see these See. Alright take him down. What to go do, you see, very obstinate. They're bhoots, seaond eeneration has to come and you have Such a big boy can't go to the toilet. to fook after the sècond generatiun. I want to disturb, that's all. now. The first genetation is ready, now the Just to be a real grandmother of very grand children, You must really slap him now, if you give that's a special privilege and real promotion and maturity.. Look at this (raih ib pouring down) He's yöing to tlood your Parramatta (river in Sydney). Because I have said now I'm the Holy Ghost Everybody seems to be can sometimes only go away with slapping over-happy and joybus. So thank you very much for having me here and think of al the Sahaja Yogis all round the world, all of them. two slaps now, his bhoot will go away. Two slaps and next time he won't do it. You see at this time you must siap, not very hard but let him know that you don't like it. Bhoots I have seen especially with children it hap- pens. Two slaps on the face and they're alright. Because they're bhoots you gse and Today I think we should send some tele- grams, about twelve telegrams if possible, to all the centres, saying 60th birthday of Mother was celebrated with great joy. She they have to go away.) whatever I have said Now to you yesterday about children be careful. You have to make your children assets and sends blessings, or something. They'll be not liabilities, on Sahaja Yoga. Sa try to train them up properly. Bring them up. they deserve a good hand, to handle. In the beginning you have to be very strict and day. So they call it 61, and we are going to punish them if they do anything wrong, so they know what is right, what is wrong. And once they grow up you'll be amazed what an asset they are. Some of them are very good children but if the in- fluence of the bad children comes up too much they might spoil the good children also. So better encourage children who are good, who have been very sweet. very happy. But according to Indian's method it's a 61st, because the day I was born, that was also a birthday. That was a real birth- have a big programme in India also. You are specially favoured people, andI hope you'll favour me specially too. This year I hope, all of you are going to take up a new role and a new style of life where you become mild people, not docile men but mild people and docile women. Women have docile, domesticated. They theyll such joy. We to look nice, be more They become gentle So I think of my young age, of my childhood smile better, they create and the dream, how it has come true. What- ever I have dreamt, is beyond my imagi- nation. It's done now, as far as l'm concerned create joy. How much joy do we create. are here to create joy and not to enjoy rights, which artificial. To some are 10 Nirmala Yoga

 How much joy do we give to others. So down, its there, enjoy it and then give it to today on this great occasion we have to feel others. Like a fountain of joy you should our joy within our heart. Very deep down give. May God bless you. within us lies that source of joy. So we have to go deep down within ourselves and feel the joy of this sixty year old Mother of the Holy Ghost and I have come for this yours, that 1 have within myself. Go deep special time. that is the resurrection time. Declare to all the nations now, that / am 3P FROM THE HEART At Diwali Puja Shri Mother gave us a lesson. We recited with Shri Ganesha the mantra to Shri Ganesha. Once Shri Mataji stopped us and said "Do it again, but this time do it from the heart". We obeyed and there was a beautiful lift of vibrations and strong flow of the cool breeze, "You see how the vibrations respond" Shri Mataji said. Since then wa have been learning every day more and more the depth, value and beauty of life when all thoughts, words and deeds come from the heart. Mother often exhorts us to use sweet words, to think of how we can do sweet things for our brothers and sisters. Acting from thêe heart one cannet do otherwise. We glimpse the possible depth of feeling that awaits us and anticipate with joy the realisation of it. Astrologically the movement of Pluto-in many ways Mother's planet, though they are all Her planets-into Scorpio heralds this new exploration of the depths of our being and promises to bring the light of knowledge and maternal love to the dark corners that still exist inside us. All the badha of the past, karma and negativity will be brought up to the surface where it will wither in the face of a Spirit completely surrendered to the Great Mother of the universe. Diwali Puja coincided exactly with Pluto's entry into Scorpio, also at this time Uranus ruler of the water-bearer, and representative of us as Sahaja Yogis in Shri Mataji's chart- moves into Her sixth house, the house of Virgo. Leaving the fifth house (Leo) indicates that Shri Mataji can no longer be as gay and easy going with us. She has said that soon She will no longer be able to forgive She will only be able to destroy negativity in this manifestation, In the sixth house there is work to be done, purity to be attained, and preparation for the ultimate union. Scorpio is the sign of transformation, death of ego to release the soaring eagle of the Spirit. Shri Mataji has said that Sahaja Yoga is changing, there are already enough people in the kingdom, now we have to go deep and those who cannot change must go. Jai Shri Adi Shakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Namo Namah. -UK Newsletter, 4, Dec. 1983 Nirmala Yoga 11

 BCRDI PUJA Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi 13 Feb. 1984 "What is expected of Sahaja Yogis and where are we ?" दुरितांचे तिमिर जावो विश्व स्वधर्म सूर्ये पाहो जो जे वांछिल तो ते लाहो प्राणिजात ॥ वर्षत सकल मंगली ईश्वरनिष्ठांची मांदियाली अनवरत भूमंडला भेटतू भूतां ।। चला कल्पतरुंचे आरब चेतना चितामणीचे गाव बोलते जे अणंव पीयूषांचे।। चंद्रमे जे अलांछन मातंड जे तापहीन ते सर्वाही सदा सज्जन सोयरे होतु ।। -Shri Gyaneshwara Duritanché timir jāvo Vishvwa swadharma süryé päho Jo jé vanchila to té Läho Pränijäta n Varshata sakala mangali Ishwarnishthänchi mandiyäli Anavarata bhūmandalā bhétatü bhūtā n Chala Kalpatarunché ārava Chétană chintămaniché gãva Bolaté jé arnava Piyüshanché n Chandramé je alānchana Mārtanda je tăpahina Té sarvāhī sadă sajjana soyaré hotu n Vishwa swadharma suryé päho': The whole universe will see the light, the sun of One Amrita is the nectar, the nectar of life. You Universal Religion. Jo je vānchila to te läho': will be the oceans of bubbling nectar which Whatever you will desire, whatever they will are talking. Like this ocean is here. See the desire, they will get it. 'Pränijāta': all the human trees and the ocean. beings. 'Varshata sakala mangali Ishwarnish- thānchi mändiyäli Anavarata bhümandala bhé- tatu, bhūtā,: when you will meet us, there will be a shower of blessings, and of course, of the moon without any spots on it-immaculate Chaitanya; when you will meet us-that's Me! taiking-oceans of talking or bubbling Amrita. Ocean that talks in a way that it just emits nectar, the nectar of Bliss. That's you people. "Chandramé je alanchana': They will be like moons- which has no spots. No blemishes, "Chala Kalpatarunche ārava': This is Without any blemishes. 'Martanda jé tipahina": Like the sun without any heat in it; that is you. Té sarväht sadă sajjana soyaré hotu: All such people who will be righteous-who will the description of the Sahaja yogis, you must listen to this. That they will be the forests, Like forest-you'll see many:- thousands. Like moving forests of huge stand for the right, for the truth-are going to trees of giving blessings. Trees that give berelated to each other: Going to be related blessings and can give-Kalpatarus are trees in the whole world. that give you whatever you want. So they will be like moving forests; means all of you that the great saints of Maharashtra that time, are like that-great. That you will be like the greatest was Gyāneshwara. Because he the great trees like these trees are-great saw the future that is going to come. And he trees-which are moving, but which are best- owing blessings upon others, giving them will become prophets and they will have what they want. Kalpataru. Now, with this beginning we understand told peole about you: that the men of God powers to make others prophets. Now we do not realise "What are we", when we become Sahaja Yogis. We become "Bolaté jé arnava plyüshänché': They will be -now, 'you' people. They will be the ocean of Nirmala Yoga 12

 so much, still worried about things, which You are all relations to each other. These are have no value. If you see, in the ultimate, the relations which are relations of deep all these things have no value, these are so friendship. Friendship has no bias, has no temporary. And if you go on wasting your lust, no greed, nothing. Its just friendship. energy about things that have no spiritual It's 'pure' relationship. And we are that. value, that does'nt matter you are going to waste your life. Because you have 'that' which is described. "The oceans which are talking nectar". Oceans of talking nectar. ing: Sometimes I don't understand if I'm Nectar, not the nectar that we understand; talking to real Sahaja Yogis or I'm talking to nectar of spiritual Bliss. you are that! (I just don't understand. Am I talking just- I mean it has any meaning or not, in your hearts ? Or l'm just talking without any mean- some walls here who are not bothered about And when you are that, what is expected what I'm talking. of you about yourself? Just find out, you just find out yourself; reflect back. "What is saying. It's important; otherwise how are expected of me; myself ? What am I doing you going to learn this ? about it ? 1 am worried about this nonsense, Bring down your attention to what I'm Where is your attention ?..) So, its alright to say it is all Love, its all that nonsense, and I'm supposed to be the Ocean of Blissful Nectar ! I'm supposed to be affection, its all goodness, it's all very sweet the forests of the Kalpatarus the trees that give the boon to the people, huge, big trees ! thing. you see. "But', you must know that And then what am I doing? you have to come up. These trees have come up after a great "My giving capacity is so low! What do struggle against the whole atmosphere, I give others ? I don't even have attention against the whole surroundings. They have that can absorb the energy of the Divine. The attention should be such that I should be able to absorb the attention of the Divine. Instead of that, my attention is on wrong here to come up, to fight yourself, to find out come up on their own, except for the Mother Earth to which they are connected. So you people must know that you all are things. And what am I doing ? What do I 'do' about myself is that, 1'm attention ? not trying to manifest that special quality, the highest quality, the one that I am. I'm born after ages, I've been born so many times. I've been a saint, I've been going round seeking is your what's wrong with you. Where First of all "The attention has to move in that outward you grow and inward you hold fast to your Mother. With "complete respect. Those who can are absolutely useless. If any tree doesn't try to hold fast this Mother Earth, it will fall out. Imean, that is what it is doing and for what it is rewarded. It is nothing to do with the Mother Earth. This If you understand that, then you'll know Mother Earth has this speciality. And if this that what importance it has today on this day Mother Earth is not going to be linked by such a manner I've been going round, and again God. when I'm born in this life-time for a such a tremendous task, I'm again last with the same non-sense. I'm still moving about with the not do, same non-sense." of our International Seminar. you, by your purposeful adherence, continu- Internationally you are all related to each ous identification, you are going to fall off like a dead tree. other and to nobody else-"Internationally". Nirmala Yoga 13

 So, it's very important to understand that gathered through our up-bringing, through you 'are great, no doubt. These trees are great. They have fought through, they have other Gurus, 'and our own mental projec- come up, but where is your 'attention ? And tions, 'are' going to be extremely dangerous what are you here for ? What is needed ? Sticking to things which are 'against your whole also it will effect. growth. Bothered about things which go against you, all the time, The first and fore- most thing that goes against us is our own hove non-sensical ego. We must understand this Advent, at this time which is being described is the one, the greatest barrier within us. And and prophecised. Prophecy was made long we 'have" to get out of it. The Kundalini has time back. If we understand that we have to rise like the tree has risen up. And the come on this earth for that' purpose, we ego is the biggest hurdle for most of us. "really separate ourselves from all the rest It appears in many ways. We Tfight the of the non-sense that goes on, and try to rise Mother Earth which is giving you the source. You are the very being of that Mother. 'She has created you, "She' has made you. Because of Her you have come up, You are fighting Her! Arguing Her! Going against Her. This is your ego, how will you grow? And once you start growing, the sun can of technique and this and that, you have to help you, the sky can help you, everything can help you; the nature can help you. But you must have the "complete' desire to rise above your dwarfness, above your selfishness Toga is a above your conditioning and specially your our rationality, through our reading, through for every individual Sahaja Yogi and as a So we have to take a vow today, that we are going to behave in a manner which be- "our' Advent-not Mother's-Our towards the sky-as these trees have done. You should not follow any other Sahaja Yogi in all anti-growth activities. And any- ane who tries to create a kind of a group, or tries to impress you by saying that he can teach you something higher, lower, alI kinds forget it. First of all you must know that Sahaja growth "within', and 'that growth expresses itself outside, So, that 'within growth is to be done by you fully-with full understanding. Then I don't have to tell you ego. All this when we say that you are this, about anyone, You won't be vulnerable to non- there's no need to be puffed up. You see, if I tell a little tree that you are going to be a big tree, does'nt mean that it has become a big tree. One has to become the big tree by pushing forward. And that quality like intellectualising everything. Intelligence is Gyaneshwara, like Tukaräma, like Rämadasa, nothing for God, because God has created it. you all have to become that quality. They So you have to see 'through' that. never saw me, I just nourished them, without they seeing me. selves, on their own virtues, on their own qualities, on their own greatness. You have and you have to understand that emotions sensical talk and jabbering. You have some people who are intellec- tuals. Intellectuals have a bad habit of There are some people who are very emo- But they nourished them- tional, and try to express themselves emo- tionally. You have to get out of these ideas to be great like that ! Instead of that if you live with false notions about yourself, artificial absurd ideas, all non-sense that we have can play a very dangerous role in life. Now, we have decided to have so many things, marriages in Bordi, which is a very nice thing and auspicious thing. I am very happy that 14 Nirmala Yoga

 we are going to have so many marriages, It with the same attention as You are doing, and is auspicious. Because marriages are sup- ported, blessed by God. Your's is special, because I'm sitting here before you fo: these much. Talk too much, do nothing. Try to try to settle ourselves". Quiten yourself, be silent. We talk too marriages. reserve your energy in that silent dignity You must have full idea as to what you But don't make a fuss out of a marriage. Don't create a problem by being superficial "are'. You must understand what you have been about marriage. These are the marriages of upto, what have you done about it ? Talking, Brahma-ekatva (wg ) where one feels talking, talking ! That's not the way it is go- the Oneness of the Spirit, of the all-pervading ing to work out. power. Try to know that these matriages are done amongst saints and not among ordinary fine. The future seems very jubiliant, every- people. Try to respect the inner quality of a thing is fine, But the highest above every- person. If somebody is a Sahaja Yogi of a thing is : "the hope of your Mother that you high quality that must be respected and that must be loved. And not the outer qualities. Give attention to that. Think about it: that The outward qualities are non-sensical. You you' are going to do it. "must' respect each other when you marry. because you are all saints. The atmosphere is nice, everything is are going to emancipate the whole world" You have to be the walking, talking, moving forests of that Divine Love, that You are saints of very high quality. I've Ritambharā Pragnya. told you, and the potential is so great, which is already described to you-That only your important day. I feel that if this Bordi ses- I hope you understand today is a very 'assumption' can fetch you that great- сал sion works out well, may be wemight achieve a lot next year. ness.... The whole world is hoping this thing Now, we look forward to a puja today3B to happen-that they should get such people and try to absorb. My chakras work very on this earth; those, which are described. hard and actually I find it sometimes impos- The 'whole world is watching your pro- Igress, the whole world is 'expecting this to happen. The whole world has already 'pro- nounced' it. - sible to accept a puja. Today is a puja of a great day and a great time today. At this time a big reservoir has to be opened up. But it has to be chan- And where are we ? where 'are" we ? Our nelised through people. And how can I progress is so slow. channelise it through people who are filled with vanity, with stupidity or with small- mindedness? We're worried about material things, worldly things, superficial things, artificial things. stupid things, You have to be 'large', 'huge", big-heart- ed', 'great' people. You are 'all' born-again, So one has to understand that you are who were great, today again. But somehow here today for this International Seminar to you are still mixed-up with your surroun- everybody seems to be youn- promise me..... dings. ger than me in this group-but you have to tance and the importance of the timeis to So try to understand your own impor- promise that: worship yourself. To worship: 'but to be "Mother, we will work with the same zeal, worshippable ! Nirmala Yoga 15

 You all think that only by dressing up properly, or by putting up any show like that, You are so great that you can 'know what we become worshippable, We do not! we should be worshippable to ourself. To see, them? Who helped them? Today, you are that whether we are doing, it has that grace just like VIPSI and beauty, the love and the greatness of the saints, who are very great saints, not ordinary but 'tremendous' saints. It is being described actually Gyaneshwara in this poem much close to each other; you are not alone you are. Who told them ? Who looked after So please try to understand that you have to have a 'very humble attitude towards all - has the saints, and towards Sahaja Yoga. Try to really worshipped you. I wish we had people absorb as much as possible. Be kind to like Gyäneshwara, but they are all inside my body. You are all outside. And whatever he said has to be fulfilled. Not only that. but whatever he said is the Truth. yourself. May God Bless you All.... So keep that dignity, keep that feeling, that you have come here in a very big posi- tion. And so keep that understanding within For all these pujas you must have that depth, that greatness of those great saints yourself. who came on this earth. worked for you, created this atmosphere. Think of them, ideas, you see, identify it with Christ. Christ what they have done. They have Tought all is Ma, now, sitting before you. It is all said the time. They were tortured. They had none of these facilities that you have. They feel the attention, It's all said about me. Now, people who come from Christian about Me. Try to identiy it with Me. I can had nothing of this enjoyment; nothing of the kind. While you have got it all, everything on a plate. So, be deserving people, autho- rised people, and work it out in that way. some books. In the same way Christians are Otherwise, this world we cannot change. I have to say one thing, that when we are identified, say, Hindus are identified with identified with some books. But because Christianity has been, like Islam and all that, This puja has 'very special' significance an organised religion, the identification is according to me and has to be done by much more in the brain. It's very difficult to people who 'know' that they 'are' these great get out of it. And you do not know that personalities. It has nothing to do with your so-called artificial positions in life; or any- chapter, if you read thrice, you'll think there are thing that is outside. It's the inside. Bible itself has so much discrepencies. Every three Christs born on this earth; because it does'nt tally with one Christ to another. If you carefully read about Christ, you'll be sur- In this seminar one mustinot, too much talk about outside things. But just talk about God, your Mother or about Sahaja Yoga. Best prised that the way they have described thing is to talk about your Mother, so it neutralises both the ends, and it works out It works out better. It is the simple thing one has to understand, that, God has been so kind to you, so kind. You don't have to fight for your saintliness, nothing. brothers and sisters. You are 'all here, so Sahaja Yogis because we are standing with Christ in one, must have been born 'before John the Baptist, another one was born 'after John the Baptist ! Like that it goes on. So there is a kind of an attack, even on You are 'all the scriptures. We must understand as 16 Nirmala Yoga

 the light in our hand, we should try to under- a manner that you create a proper Mother- stand that all these books have attack of all hood within yourself, and a discipline that the negativity. Like in our Indian temples, you want your children to imbibe and your you'll always find negative people going husband to have. there and doing all the Täntrik-Vidya and all this base things. You've seen your Mother, own Mother- Even in the Churches you has been sitting for nine or ten hours some- know we have got people now who call times at one place. Not even getting out of this place. But I've seen people, that they can't sit for two hours at a place, even if they are meditating. And they get up, disturb themselves "Charismatic". So this is going on, and they are going to their own doom by taking to this kind of a wrong attitude. So it is to be understood everybody else and come down-this is a that you should not be so much conditioned sign that we lack in our discipline, that our by those things. You should keep yourself parents did not diseipline us, that we did not discipline ourselves. above to see what is the truth of every religion. That they belong to the same princi- So now the first thing is that you have to ple and we should not adhere to something have perfect discipline of your temperament because we were born in that, or we are and is a sign that you are the people who conditioned into it. That's not a sign of a represent this Mother Earth who has a special wisdom and a special power to express that wisdom. So all of you have to be 'extremely careful that whatever you do will be reflected in the whole family and in the whole Sahaja Yoga system. Now. when you get married to your husbands, try to understand that you are Yogi. A yogi has no religion outside. He has no nationality. He is rifted of all these things. So try to understand that you are a yogi and you need not adhere to these psycho- logical conditioning that are being created in your mind. the Mother Earth, and you have to give. And because you have powers, you can give. Be- cause you have so many Shaktis within you, you have to give. That means you are supe- rior in a way, that you can give. So that your ego should not stand up all the time and say "why should I do it? Why should 17" You understand that, then you'll rise much higher. Because of the organised religion it is even 'more' difficult to get out of it. And that's what we don't understand. We want to bring everything to that, which is gone and which is being perverted, which is being spoilt and which is being misrepresented. And then you start enjoying hood. this woman- So try to have your own understanding of the whole thing of the past. So try to be good mothers, good wives, and responsible Sahaja Yoginis. Those, who, Advising the brides-to-be, Shri Mataji Said : after marriage, try to deviate their husbands You're entering into a married life and you from Sahaja Yoga are really the most cursed have been virgins so far and now you have to enter into the another life, of marriage. others, you should be careful what you talk, And its a great responsibility on all of you to see that you make your marriages successful. people that you are married in Sahaja Yoga. And you have to see that you behave in such ones. You should have sweet tongue for you've to be responsible. You are special I hope you'll keep this in mind. 17 Nirmala Yoga UF

 Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi ATTENTION-I DOLLIS HILL 26-5-1980 Today I am going to talk to you about Attention should absorb all that I am saying- Attention. What is Attention what is the "it is not meant for anybody else". You better movement of Attention and what are the sit in thoughtless awareness, that's the best ways and methods of raising our Attention. way, so that it goes into you, otherwise it is Keep it in broad ways. Alright? But when like a lecture, you know. That you listen to I am saying all these things you must know me has not effect. Every, lecture will trans- that I am talking to you individually. It is form you because after all I am speaking. not about others. Always the first thing But because you always think of others and human beings do is, when l am speaking to you think of your problems all the time some you, you try to find out about whom Mataji thing non-sensical is going on, about which is speaking. This is the best way of putting you are worried-and the Attention is so over- your Attention on to something else. If you loaded that whatever is said to you, does not put your Attention to yourself-that "this is for me, and me and me alone", then it will attentive and knowing that all these non- have an effect because these are 'mantras'. And sensical things have no value. Is your atten- that is why it is wasted, because whatever is tion that has to come up and has to grow. given to you is thrown onto another person. So the Attention that you have, is the only So just now utilise it, by being go into you. So, attention is the whole of the canvas way to know the reality. Your own Attention of your being. Is a complete canvas-is is important, not the Attention of others or your Attention on others. This must be being is the attention. How much you have "clearly' understood. If you understand this gone into it, how much you have discovered point that the whole thing is to be consumed it. how far you have raised it-is a different by you, through your Attention, to raise your- point. self to a higher situation, it will work out; otherwise, it is like giving food to you and going to another person who is getting is a different point. But your Attention is nourished, while you are getting nothing. God: if you become enlightened to that And that person also may not be able get extent. It is like a canvas; you can say, it is the attention. Complete canvas of your Attention is 'Chitta' and God is Attention How far your Attention has been enlightened nourished because he does not know that you are throwing it to that person. like a canvas; which is spread-out for a film; and whatever aptitudes or, you can say, the So today as I am going to speak to you drags or movements of your Attention has, about Attention, you should know that your shows on that canvas. I do not know what Nirmale Yoga 18

 is the word for Vritti' in English language. It is not aptitude, but a person gets prone accordingly. It is all stored up within you- to, or his Attention is dragged to-I do not know there is a word in English language for past-is given out of the Attention through that man and you will start addressing to him whether it is about the future or about the bubbling process, which depends on your dragging nature, where you are dragged; that - is called Vritti', but I do not know what you Vritti,. So our Attention is just a pure', comple tely' pure canvas, and is acted upon by the call it in English language, I do not know. three Gunas we have, to begin with. And What you are prone to'. the three Gunas come to you, as you know. one from your past, one from your future sense and one from the present. Now what- ever have been your experiences about a particular thing or a particular occasion, so far which you are drawn to. Whatever is your is completely recorded in your memory. For temperament, it acts like that. For example, example, if you see the black colour, all that if you see a man walking, say blindly, he goes with the black colour is recorded in your "Vritti' is a very neutral word. It does not mean anything bad. It means where you are drawn to. "Vritti means a temperament by cannot see things. One person may get as you see this black angry with that person. Another may have memory. As soon colour, quite a lot of it comes out. That pity for that person. Third man may come means as soon as you see this with your Attention, the Attention gets muddled up or temperament that you have developed through you can say the Attention gets coloured with your three Gunas. all the memories about this black colour. And then your action takes place according are identified with this, your "Vritti“, your to the way your Attention is effected. For temperament, then you are still in a mis- example, just now, something was burnt by identified area. Let us take a case of some- these flames. Now all of you became aware body who has been possessed before, Now of it. Next time whenever you will see a flame, first thing will happen will be that you away. But the memory remains in the brain will be cautious about it. It is not going to happen again, but the whole memory will is stronger in a person, left side is stron- come to you and you will try to be cautious and warn others because your Attention will become 'aware" of that, as soon as you will see that; because that canvas of your Atten- tion itself will start throwing out these pictures thing starts coming into you, bubbling out and out of itself, through your past experiences, on you think you are again possessed. It is the to the canvas. This is a living canvas. Or memory which gives you, 'it is a myth'. It is may be, that if you have got some ideas which the memory that tells you 'Oh I you are again you hava premeditated, or thought of, of the future-for example, you must have thought means, you always live in your memory-your of somebody that if I meet that man I will tell memory is stronger than yourself. If you him like this. As soon as you will meet that could make yourself stronger than your me- man, your Attention will start bubbling out mory, nothing can possess you. But after you with those ideas that are coming about this get your realization, you are not still identified Is the "Vritti', is the forward to help him out. That is why this Attention becomes identified with you and when you coming to Sahaja Yoga his possession goes that he was possessed and the memory ger, then that memory lingers on and as soon as that person comes in contact with anyone which has got something to do with the past possession it clicks, and the whole possessed.' Because your left side is weak, Nirmala Yoga 19

 So both the situations have been of 'no with that state of mind in which you sea your ego and super-ego as myths. Still you get help" to you. Of 'no help' to you for your caught up into your ego and super ego, and growth, except that both these institutions that is why your attention is still in a mess. develop so much that you are away from the In a pure simple way of Attention, in an real experiencing. The real innocent child, he sees everything in "Pratyak- stops, because your Attention is so much, sha", something, for a child, because he has no memory. So he will have to burn his hand to up with fear, with pain, with unhappiness, feel that this burns. He has to touch some- with hopelessness, dejection. The other side thing cold to know that it is cold. His me- if you indulge toomuch-on to the right hand mory is not yet built up. So into the actual side-little bit also, you start getting elated, experiencing of it, he lives, but that 'actual excited, over-dominating. The colour of the experiencing becomes memory. And once the left side is blue, and the blue colour starts memory is built up stronger, the whole per- changing to the black. While on the right hand sonality is effected by memory. All the con- ditioning of all kinds comes through that. or yau can say golden. Then yellow, then Your reading, even the whole atmosphere can orange and then red. come to you. You see sometimes you smell sion on the right hand side. On the left hand a particular soap, or say a rose you smell it, side you go into a complete state of entropy when all the memories of smelling such a you can call it: or a state where you are rose sometimes comes to you and you may feel separated from yourself into complete frozen 'really' elated-sometimes, may be sometimes very unhappy, whatever may be the situation. frozen, on the other side you become com- So you may feel happy or unhappy. Because pletely heated up. Both these things are again whatever experiences you have had, has movement on the wrong direction. given you a memory. This memory might have given you a super-ego, or might have given you a ego. This canning might have Kept, that you keep your attention 'more' in the taken place. If it has been a ego and a super ego, then may be that if it was ego you must have felt happy. If it is satisfying to your ego you feel very happy. If it is not, if it is super ego, if you are suppressed by this then you feel very unhappy. So both things-like happiness or unhappiness are the states where you are still in the myth. Still the myth giving us light. It it is too much, it can burn exists. You have to still go beyond". So if you feel happy about some situation, you should know you are only happy before realization, because it is giving some support to your ego ight, and then 'or a Puja to. to bloat. And if you are unhappy, then you should know that there is some sort of sup- pression on your ego and there is a super ego balance' our Gunas properly, then we be- developing. experiencing means in actual experiencing of muddled up. So on one side if you move-on the left hand side-your Attention is muddled side it is, to begin with, yellow, light yellow So you go to aggres- state. So one side you become completely Even in the centre when the Attention is centre; there also because it is a 'very' sensi- tive point it does not stay there. For example, when we say, use fire, we burning the house. In the same way we can use it for creating smoke. But we can also use this fire in its proper way, if we use it, in its proper proportion for cooking the food, for can use it for like a big fire. If it is too little, it can burn like smoke. But in the centre when you know how to balance it, then you can use it for your own purpose-for cooking or for giving So in the same way when we 'really come gradually the 'master of the whole Nirmala Yoga 20

 situation. The Attention does not get drag- The strata goes higher. The Attention goes ged into things that we have been doing or that we have understood through our memo- ries, or through our experiences or whatever it is. And is not also dragged towards too much on the right hand side that we try to over- power, or try to dominate someone. Be- confused he is, the more he asserts himself: cause if you move too much that side you have seen it becomes blood. It is difficult for himself, so he asserts: This is the thing, this people to understand how, when we become is the thing'. I mean, if it is so, why should very religious minded, like now Iran, the you assert it ? But he goes on asserting "this movement is on the right-all the austerities, is the thing'. Then understand that he is all that, everything. Now blood-shed. Chris- tians also did the same. Brahmins did the lutely. And the way he asserts, and goes on same in India. Buddhists did the same, even talking about it, all the time, that means he is they talked of non-violence they got to blood- shed, because movement started right hand side. higher. At a higher state, and these things that used to bring in-by Tight side movement you get irin (vikshépa) confusion. Must you get confusion? Every intellectual, whatever bril- liant he may be, he is confused. And the more because he is confused, he is not sure of now going towards lunatic asylum. Abso- not sure. He becomes like a 'possessed' per- sonality. through his brains. That this is the thing, this is correct, we must all do this is what... When he explains everything Left hand side movement will take you to and he convinces many others who are con- very sly and dark methods. So right handed fused like him. They depend on him; he be- sided people like big nations who are supposed to be developed nations, they justify war. "We much more confused and they find somebody must have weapons to face each other, but who is not so much confused 'outwardly. you all each other are the same people from They stick on to him, and all of them get to God's point of view ! Why are you fighting ? I maen, God asks you, "Why are you fighting, what is the need ? Why do not you sit down properly and listen to each other? What are you fighting about? You are fighting aboutland-is it your father's land ? It belongs to God ! God has created this land. Why are you fighting?" But your Attention is such that immediately romanticism starts, you see. Sitting in the you say "Ohl This is mny land, this is my mother-land, this is my father-land, this is from Lord Byron. And they come into your my brother-land. But what about your' attention, then it becomes very 'strong passion land which is within you ? Is it not your comes a leader because you see they are war or some sort of a blood shed or some sort of-they want to see blood. They become heartless, passionless, compassionless, you can say Compassionless', loveless people. The other movement is the blue side, the So further blue is like the blue moon-light ? moon-light, you see! The ideas start coming with you. You think, "Oh, am still, you see, I have to find out my loves, you see," and you go on in search of your loves and this and that. These things really are not giving joy. That is why so many poems have been written that love is the 'most painful thing. is worse than death and all sorts of poems are written own? So if you go on telling these people that we should have no war they would not listen. Realisation is the only way. your attention gets higher and gets separated from By realisation that strata from where these things like that, so why did you get in it ? I mean, bubble in. You understand my point now? it is already written down. Books after booksl! 21 Nirmala Yoga

 Still why do you get into it ? You are already Attention to 'higher and higher so that warned about it that don't go after love, you come up to a point where you be- love is deception, love is this, that, it is very come One with the Attention of God. temporary, it is for the little while you get that Already your Attention is sparkled because ... By chance, if somebody could stop at a through your Attention you can see what is point by marrying somebody who is sweet wrong with you, you enough and realise that love and marriage wrong with others and you can see how far and all these things are in the "centre"; are you are going with yourself. But the pro- like the fire in the kitchen, are like the fire in gress is retarded because you do not know the temple, looks after it and does not overdo that this Attention is pure form and all that something about it, then may be that this you get into this attention is a mythical stuff, may be utilised. can see what is is a myth. If you drop this myth gradually, treat everything as a myth, and not depend In the same way the right-side movement on becoming unhappy or happy, just seeing of the Sun-Line, if people think that 'yes, Sun the thing, your Attention will take a flight is important. We have to have Sun in the and it will be at a much higher level residing house, but you are not to become naked and insult the sun and get your skin cancerl Sun is not for your skin cancer. But if you like that and the movement upwards is much over-do, it is also it is dangerous. A person less. who exposes himself too much to planning, and doing that, and doing this, and doing all this-can land into 'very' great difficulties. So you have to balance that side also and this you can go much worse in that condition side and you have to be in the centre, in the also. For example, if you say that 'I am try- 'equilibrium. there. Instead of that 'every movement you go this way or that way, you see, it goes on Even in Sattwa-guna, when you rise, ing to be Sattwa-guni,. In Sattwa-guni it 1s that you start seeing everything, discrimi- Now this word equilibrium does not exist in our day to day life, it exists only in the nating through your understanding.-not fiction or may be in the so-called scientific through vibrations, through understanding research. But as far as human beings are concerned, they do not know what equili- brium is 'Because of this, the Attention, though 'after' realisation comes up. still on the sides they just go down-this side or that side according to your vrittis (fa.) And do something great', like your salvation army, when these identifications still act in them. you see. Let them be salvaged by them- they are prone to go down again in their I do not know what salvation they are Attention. And again start bubbling out the going to do. So these ideas,-'ideas' I am same thing as they had. Should we not somehow or the other take out our Attention from here ? Should we not give up this ? Should we be charitable ? Should we go and serve the people 7, There are people, who think 'Oh, we are going to selves, saying-of Sattwa-Guna can also immobolise you and can 'really' freeze you down once Now, one has to become lighter in one's for all and that also "can' work in you in 'such' own mind and should 'think that we have a sly manner, wwe can say, in such a secretive dropped all that now, why are we there?" manner that you will not feel it. All these One should become lighter, with all that load ideas of helping each others, being charitable, flowing out, because you are here to raise your "lets have a charity association,"-finishedI Nirmala Yoga 22

 Once you work in a charity association, your Attention is tinished there. Because of analysis it does not fit any timel into me, they wouldn't allow, they may not. It might be expedited. But say, for example, But if your Attention goes higher, say tmy if you had not discovered these things-for Attention is"I am only nothing but a charity, I mean what am 1 It just flows. become the charity. So the difference bet- ween a person who is a realised and a not realised is this that the Attention which was giving myth as reality to you is gone now, is gone higher. It can see that it is myth, the Attention can clearly see that it is a myth. And you can see that yourself and you can Till you burnt out your complete Attention remove yourself. That-of course I have to give you a push no-doubt and l'am working kept your balance in science also it would hard on that; to give you a push-but you have helped, but the balance was lost there. should also know that mythical things must Give anything to human beings and they be dropped out, otherwise you will not grow. know how to make the worst out of it. They "All' mythical things must be dropped out. And the best way to do it is to be in thought- less example take it like that-and the science was not discovered, your Attention would have been at least better off. Because of science, your Attention is also very much in confusion. So I do not know which one to praise whether the seience or the primitive- ness, See when you raise yourself to science also, you got to another extreme as usual. You just you were not satisfied. I mean if you had will go to the extreme, You give them a horse, they cannot go ordinary trotting or awareness: because as soon as you transcend these three Gunas you become galloping they must have a double gallop till thoughtlessly aware. You have to cross Agnya, and once you have crossed Agnya these three Gunas, 'absolutely you go into a state where you are Gunātit, you are beyond gunas. So you do not deliberately do any- thing, but it just works out. they fall and die. Every thing you see, they are just on the run all the time. So first thing needed is to steady down yourself and tell yourself: "Now all these mythical things I am not going to allow to come to my Attention." All these things are nothing but myths, But analysis is one of the diseases of the but you are giving too much importance to West. What are you analysing ? What are myths. You are taking them bit too seriously. you analysing-you ask yourself. I feel like They are just mythical. Now, I mean, when you are realised now you laugh at people who laughing at the whole analysis that goes on. See, they will sit down take out a hair, split- just go mad over say, a moonlit night; alright ? hair into hundred, and-great But ask the fellow who is doing that-he will say "you are heartless, you have no feel- ing the analysers are sitting now. They can not even say how the chromosomes have that spindle ings. he will give you a big poetry out of action and-I mean at that minute level the it. You go and see anyone of these people things are worked out. They cannot say how whó are tiding a high horse, who are at the a cell divides. What are they analysing sitting helm of affairs and you will feel like laughing at them. But they will think that "you are useless, you are doing no work, you are good " So now down here ? Now, they have analysed for a purpose, for nothing, you are just wasters. also done for God. Through their analysis for you, because you are enlightened, now, now my things are recorded. Through their is to understand that our Attention has to analysis I can go to the TV-if they allow me move higher 'and' higher, at a higher space. Nirmala Yoga 23

 Because unless and until you are sure, I am Now, actually what has happened in realisation-your Kundalini has risen and has not going to give you a wrong idea about come up.Just like you can say a small, thin yourself. I want to see how far 'still your hair-one hair, say. And that has broken Attention is moving. And I know; still you your Sahasrara. And now the grace is flow- ing into it. But it is a 'very small movement self. That is why the confidence is not that has taken place-of course which is a very difficult movement no doubt; but it has taken place. Now you have not expanded like this. Your Chakras are only pierced in the center, but the rest of the Attention is still in- bardly a car can pass through and the fellow are not sure. Still you are not sure of your- there. First of all you have to learn how to drive, then you are tested. There will be five stones put together, the distance will be only that tact. Actually it is so intact, that you do not even feel that it is pierced. Now you have to "expand that. Open it out so that more strands of Kundalini can rise and your Atten- tion, which is in these centers, expanus. By it s all a myth that upsets you.It is all a will say you bring it zigzag-and you cannot do it. Why ? That is how he makes you a master. The mastery of your Attention will come when you will start 'seeing' that expansion it drives out all that is mythical on the sides. On every centre we have our Attention which is being enlightened in centre through this light passing "eternal life. through. But the light is too small for the darkness that you have collected. Specially too simple to understand that you have accep- for the people of the West I would say, your ted myth as truth. Just drop it, it is all myth. confusions you must get rid of them. But still you identify. Because if I ask you any thing"how are you." Means what ? Means thingas which used to frighten you or to elate you are still confused. Alright ? Confusion should go. One confusion was there that "this is realisation or not." 1 hope that is over now with you people. At least now you believe it is self-realisation, I had to tell people," No, no you are self realised now, you already drenched into that bliss. Keep it up. "are"still they would jump up like a jack in the box. They will say, "No, we're, not Mother. How do you say this is realisation ? We ex- pect 'this' out of realisation and that' out of realisation, that we'll be flying out of the door if we are realised" or some thing non- sensical like that. Thank God, these ideas You must remember when you first got your myth that upsets you. Just throw it away. Just throw it away and understand that you are "the eternal Attention." That you are the " That only thing that keeps you. away from it is ignorance, and the ignorance is the You will be amazed how your Attention will rise and you will see all these non-sensical you, will drop out, and you will just smile at it. And 'then only' you are going to enjoy yourselves fully because your Attention would be completely drenched into the bliss of "Self". I am saying: you will, I say: you 'are" Now, how to do it ? Actually, in every day-to-day life how to kill the memory of the past ? To kill the memory of the past, is to have new memories. realization. Always think of it. Whenever any such memoy comes to you, you try to think have gone away. But when we are realised, there is light how you got realisation. "Any' memory that that has come in us, we have to grow it, 'only is troublesome or even so-called elating, you by separating our Attention from the myths. just try to remember: "how realisation has It is 'all mythical. I also play with you. come to you." When you feel aggressive Nirmala Yoga 24

 about something or angry about something, If you could record the joy of raising the just try to remember how you felt the joy of Kundalini of others, you will feel a new surrendering. Just think of that joy of sur- rendering, of dissolving yourself. So the new memories must be built up. If you start building up new memories, then you will start called unhappiness and happiness will drop collecting moments which have such memories. Like a memary when you tried to help somebody, you raised the 'Kundalini of someone. Now the is just an experience-"Pratyaksha". That is problem would be that when you would be why I said you keep your eyes open. raising the 'Kundalini' of others, you would be in thoughtless awareness-there wouldn't be any thought-and thought is the only that. thing which impresses. But that time you can Trecord" the joy of raising the Kundalini. wealth of these beautiful moments will be accumulated. And all these moments which were giving you confusion or fear or so- establish other out and 'pure' joy will remain. Because now most of the experiences you have had are more of joy. Joy has no thoughts. It moments I hope you'll understand what I mean by May God Bless you all. PRAYER TO ALMIGHTY You must pray to God and ask what you want. Ask for "Complete satisfaction in my heart, Joy in my heart, Bliss in my heart; so that the whole world becomes blissful", "Give me Love, Love, that I could love the whole world, and that the whole world becomes one in Love". "Give salvation to the entire humanity, which is suffering". "Take me to your feet" "Cleanse me with Thy Love" Now see if there is God or not. You can feel it. Within yourself he hears you. He is the Glory of all the Glory. He Loves you, He protects you, He Guides you. He has created you to be really His Love. But accept it. Any time any thouhht is coming to you-pray; and you will he moving in the way of that Ocean which is Unconscious mind. which starts with thoughtless awareness. If you cannot become thoughtless, you pray to Him: " and forgive those who have done harm to me". Forgive me far what I've done, -Shri Mataji Bombay-9th Feb., 1975 25 Nirmala Yoga

 "SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI" ATTENTION-II 27TH JANUARY 1977 BORDI SHIBIR The quality of attention changes according think. We are just lying unconscious, they to the state of your condition. So where is the attention placed in the human being ? It is not a fixed point! We can say attention is the surface or the edge of awareness; wherever we are made aware the attention say, but eyes are open, hands are moving, legs are moving. That point is at the point of Vishuddhi chakra. If you can drawa line from here to the point where is the (pitha) of Vishuddhi chakra is inside the brain, along that " line if you are hit anywhere you become You can see from this analogy: All the filings of iron have got attentionless, you cannot pay attention any- a power to be attracted towards the magnet. Where is that power, you cannot locate. It is chakra because when this point is connected all over. Wherever the magnet is placed the with Vishuddhi chakra at the back if here, and filings are attracted, Our attention is also Bt the pitha inside, a kind of triangle is formed like that; that wherever we are attracted our attention goes there. It is existing in the attention. Your heart is moving. Your limbs whole body, in the sense that it can be diver- ted anywhere outside the body. Also inside the body in case there is any pain or any trouble. It floats over the nerves, it floats over the whole nervous system; but there is a controlling centre in the brain. If it is hit then we can remain conscious-but without any attention. Also if somebody is hit on the your other centres also, you do pay. This is Vishuddhi Chakra it can happen. It can avery big difference between a person who happen even in the lo wer Chakras, if some- body is hit, that portion will lose its attention because you cannot feel in that part. The difference is this that you can pay attention to those points if you want to, even if they are numbed; for example, if any hand is numb I can pay attention to that; means I can look centres of other people, that means your at it, I can think of it. But there is a point in our being; if that is hit, then we cannot even where. This line also passes through Agnya and all this line on this area can affect your are moving but you can not pay attention anywhere. So when you pay attention to something: actually you pay attention normally, when you are not realised, through your brain centres. After realisation you can pay attention through is realised and who is not realised or you can say that you can become effective through your other centres by paying attention to them, You can feel the centres which are obstructed in your body which you never felt before. Not only that, you can feel the central nervous system is being blessed by a new awareness by which it can convey to you Nirmala Yoga 26

 communicate to you the Attention paid by tallying this subtle with the gross. You start your centres, and also it can take your Attention again losing the vibrations. Actually after in a subtler way into the centres of others. getting Realisation I've seen with small children So first thing that happens to you is that your they sleep for very long hours. They become little inactive for some time, but if an elder Attention becomes subtler. Attention be- coming subtler means you start understanding gets it he'll immediately go to the book-stall, deeper things. For example a bird can see buy one book on Kundalini and start reading a flower but cannot feel the beauty of a flower about it. Then some of you, not understanding and a unrealised person can see the beauty that you've become somebody else, take it of a flower but cannot see the vibrations of for granted, already, "Mataji has been very a flower, So you become subtler. Your kind She says I am Paar (realised), but how am I to believe." As if by believing it they are going to give some money to me or I don't know what they are going to give. "I can see the vibrations coming, but what is the use of Attention becomes subtler. You definitely are at a higher evolutionary stage than the other people are. Now, we have to see how we use our getting the vibrations, why did She give us Attention. You have seen even when you were not realised that supposing you start idea of utility because that is human nature developing an art in your hand from your very childhood, than you develop the depth of that utility. Everything must be utilised. Man particular Art, because a kind of a Milinge thinks no end of himself so he starts putting grows on the nerves. In the same way when you are Realised, I would say 'when you are a newly born person', if you start respecting is to happen? What is the schedule? What your Attention, then gradually you develop a is this? What is that ?" depthness for Sahaja Yoga. But so many people when they get realised they hardly ike if we enjoy the beauty of a flower, we come second time, even if they come again just enjov. Do we go to the books and find they do not develop the feeling of vibrations more. They still go on being busy with their of ours, how to enjoy this flower and then day to day work wasting their Attention on things which do not give you the subtler feelings. So the subtleness, the depth of the Art of Sahaja does not develop. For example really don't know how to say, because it's a Vibrations ?"* Again come back to the gross has been so far-to make everything into his realisation into utility. "What utility it has? How many people are going to get it? What You've been given this subtleness to enjoy, just enjoy. Do we go to the books and find out what should we do about this enjoyment what to do and who has described about the flower so that we can see if this is fitting into that. But it is done very commonly and I a person vwho is over-read; as soon as he gets his realisation, he starts tallying it with what he has read. This makes his aention again wasted. As it is, his attention has been fixed by these conventional ideas, some of that's very foolish. Children are very sensible them are correct, foolish thing and I am only afraid that some- times if I say they will fee hurt. And as human beinos are, they get hurt for nothing at all, that way. Once they get it they start enjoying it, they just enjoy, they just sleep off, they are not bothered. They think that something that is to be enjoyed, let us enjoy it. some incorrect, some of them are absolutely false, some are useless, some are only because they wanted to make money, they have published some trash. As soon as you get Realisation you go back to your own gross awareness and start So, at the very outset, it happens like that and a man doesn't know that how he has 27 Nirmala Yoga

 And the physical enjoyment in Sahaja was ever in this Kali Yuga-in these modern Yoga itself is sufficient to keep your attention subtle. You do not have to fix your attention but you have to get subtler and subtler in your attention. Fixing up of your attention between joy and ugliness he does not have. as you know is a very wrong method. That was done by some Yogis and you know what only one reason but there are many reasons is the result of that. Their chakras were and as I described to you inherently it is the broken and finished. When they fixed their human gross activation before Realisation. attention onto Agnya Chakra you've seen that If he understands the disease from where it Agnya chakra is broken. You have not to fix has come sometimes it is easier to correct it. any attention but you have to make your You cannot just correct the disease without attention subtler and subtler. As I told that made himself even much more gross than he times. By organising things according to his own ideas and conceptions, he has becom so unnatural, so foolish that discrimination He is so confused. So first of all it is not a magnet when brought near the stones are a student of History you will know how nothing happens to the stones, they are just human beings have behaved. You just start there, you move the magnet anyway you like wondering what's wrong with these people. but when you take it to the iron filings only God created one world. Just think of a the filling are attracted towards the magnet. person like me coming on this earth; suddenly In the same way the attention of a Sahaja you will find there are so many countries being Yogi should be so subtle that he should feel the vibrations, he should think of vibrations, have if you cannot manage the whole world he should eat vibrations; drink vibrations and together, but then the fighting goes on, klling enjoy them. On the physical side many people All kinds of problems for nothing tell me that he went to their house and, "they at all. I mean it is such a mad house. So offered me laddoos and I had to eat, what can historically if you see. how man has made I do Mataji ?" Actually they felt attracted himself mad, it is not easy to compile all that towards the shape of the laddoos. They ate in one lecture. You will have to write it. But they don't see the vibrations of those volumes. I think there are already written laddoos. They just ate it off and they had a volumes. So there is historical back-ground stomach trouble. When they had stomach trouble then they said that, "Matāji we've lost our vibrations now what to do, we ate the laddoos." But if you have seen that there Physically those who come for physical are no vibrations in those laddoos you should handicap or physical trouble or something like have said that "today, I am not supposed to that, because they are, sick are sometimes little eat anything" or something like that and you better than people who do not have this, should not have eaten. If you see a born because definitely they get the relief part of realised child, he will never eat. Even if the mother beats the child, it says "alright beat me " Because they are not going to eat the filth. Such children are But I would say they too, once they get their supposed to be obstinate, they think they are relief they just disappear, not understanding obstinate because they know that there are that there is something greater than this to be no vibrations so why should we eat because understanding the history behind it. ff you created. Alright separate countries you can each other. which has spoiled your attention. the joy. If they get the relief there is a little shadow of joy that they feel and then they start understanding that it is to be enjoyed. but I am not going to eat. tasted and enjoyed, we are not going to enjoy it. 28 Nirmala Yoga

 Sa, on the physical side there are so many started the cabaret dance you know and we Ruch mistakes you are committing. If you take had tfo see after all, it would look very bad to-10W say, habits you have, Supposing you not to see naked woman." We are very have a habit of say, pulling yout lhair. There innocent people so we go on explaining "what was one lady who had a habit of pulling her to do now, this is the society, this is the hair and she used to become bald here and fashion, this is the style," this is how it is. bald here, than the hair used to grow this side and she used to have a bald head here and would pull her hair here; Suth a person. So she came to me for treatiTient. Imagine I So, I told her why do you do like this 7 She says, "Now, my attention is like that, it always rew realise really, that "to get realisation like starts pulling my hair." What to do, such an attention you have got. So her elder sister used to beat here on her hand any time she put her hand. She says that you must beat me, if you don't beat me, I'll beat you. But 3ll Her lives and even in this life. She must the beating was on and everybody, used to look at them what are they doing to each other and still she could not stop it. All monplace the whole thing. how we are habits are like this monkey business. All of about it. I thought by giving realisation you them are like that, because the matter is try- But a Sahaja Yogi is a special one. He is a chosen one. Because you haven't got your own value, you have not valued yourself as I have valued you. This is a fact which very this there must be something tremendous that Mataji must have done. She must have put in a lot of labour to work this out Herself. She must have done tremendous Tapasyas in have worked very hard day in and day ot, and here we are when we got it how com- will immediately see your value and you will you are something great and ing to sit on top of our attention all the time think that and so we form habits. Certain habits are alright convenient and convenience like that. Some people, to break habits, you know, they promising with gross things in life. There is say "we'll not sit on the ground nor sit on the chair." So where will you sit ? "We'll sit in you. One of you can lead all of them. a sitting pose and we'll practice that sort of a thing." You need not be such a non-sense. I am meaning that certain things are alright, don't go to extremes. But certain habits solved. They stand above them. They are which we They do not compromise. fashions for example, if somebody is smoking They do not bend, others bend before them. he forces you, you say "Alright". And one bad If the light starts falling and faltering on the habit we've got is not to say "No" to anyone. "How to say no, you see, they were all drink- ing and they offered us drinks and we said no, but they were just forcing us, then it looks have and a personality you should have, it is very bad you know, not to drink and they for you to decide. Does the attention get the gave one glass of drink to me and I said priority, when you understand how your alright, I'll have very little sip you know. One physical being presents, this body of yours day and I had it like that and then my rela- tions, you see, they came and they invited us for dinner and we had to go and then they I've seen people in groups when that you've got this realisation and the Sak- shätkär. shātkār. But it is not so and you start com- a huge populace which is to be led by 'one' of Leaders do not compromise, leaders do not solve the problems of the people when they lead them, but they give them problems to be acquire are mostiy because of much above them. roads what'll the person do who is carrying the light in the hand. You all are like the torches and what kind of a life you should has to be cleansed, has to be beautiful, has to be soft. kind, elegant, dignified. We 29 Nirmala Yoga

 are sitting down behaving in even an ordinary educated person won't your attention is lost. Then your gross habits, behave. The reason is you have not yet your old life that was there that has to be realised that you are the leaders and people chiselled out, is to be finished. And you can- manner sons and whó are your parents. That is how are watching you. There should be a kind of a Masti in you, 'Masti" (Hat) as they call here, you'll catch up there, you'll break your it, should be satisfied with yourself. So on the neck, then you'll come to me-"Mother! physical aspect what you eat, what you see, what you like, whole priorities must change. that has happened. What should be most important is Sahaja, in getting hot I am every circumstance, in every method a habit -Sahaja. not go on, for if you go on, you'll catch up I've broken my back, this has happened It's paining, I am getting headache, I am doing this." Till you become Sahaja it'll go on working on you. But why not become yourself ? For example a human Sahaja means "It's born with you." Sahaja being cannot sleep like a dog, if he starts doesn't mean easy. Many people confuse. sleeping like a dog because there are all dogs You have now got your right that one was born with you so now. so for you it is neces- sary that to know that you are a Sahaja and that you are not going to accept any thing trouble; because the dog doesn't feel, though that is Asahaja. Sahaja means that, Sahaja he might be getting pain but he doesn't feel it. means that you take the light of Sahaja above everything else over the darkness and not to reborn doesn't feel, he gets the problem but he accept darkness which is Asahaja. So how can you have habits which give you sympa- thetic bondage ? Sahaja means you have a special subtle awareness., A king doesn't clean the streets. around then he is going to get the pain. In the same way if you are going to be Asahaja, be- cause all are Asahajas you are going to get into You definitely feel it. The person who is not yet doesn't feel; you can feel it and you jolly well have to give it up; sooner the better. If you don't give it up then you are again going back to the same darkness and this new darkness may be hellish, can be terrible. It's better to die as human being because then you can go on being born again as animals, this and that. But to be born again and knowing you go on back again to your former habits, it can be very dangerous. That's how I fix your attention by On the physical side your attention is lost like that because you indulge into all Asahaja methods that you had before, that others have, you get lost into the Asahaja system of life. You have to change the com- plete system of the whole world in which people become Sahaja and not Asahaja, then only the whole thing will become Sahaja for your subtler being, the subtler being can only you. It is a big misunderstanding about enjoy. In the morning you did enjoy the Sahaja-Yogis. They think "Ohl when it will meditation, you had become subtler, I pushed come Sahaja then we will do this work, then we'll go round and talk to people-it should subtler by remembering what has happened, come Sahaja." Nothing doing I This is a very wrong attitude. Sahaja means that you have got the light of Sahaja within you and how can you tolerate anything else. Means you must know how to dress up, how to talk, where to go, whom to meet. Who are your mothers, who are your sisters, who are your a little fear into your mind to down there. But you have to keep yourself how physically you felt nice. One of the worst habits that human beings have is to see the watch. It's so painful to me when I am talking people see the watch. I just can't bear it. Because now you are beyond time, beyond space, what are you going to do Nirmala Yoga 30

 by saving time 7 What have you done so far ? problem, otherwise for human beings, it is not That shows your priorities. Our priorities difficult to tell him that "this is nice you drink." must change and you canchange them easily He takes it and he knows it is nice. He won't once you start enjoying, once you have tasted eat something that is bitter. If you have to the nectar of Divine Love (Amrit. a) then give him something horrible-tasting, you'll you are not going to drink dirty water. But have to give him chocolate first and chocolate you first of all remember that the joy that you later. But human beings when they become enjoy. That is one way of fixing-so called evolved, I've seen that they are more prone fixing-your subtleties. It's the attention that gets covered by the gross things of life, even previous attractions. So put your attention in the emotional side of it for example you fully tovwards Divine, pull it out completely have relationships. We have seen some Sahaja towards it so that there is no attention left Yogis being lost like that. They had some towards the gross sides. Even now I find very gross relationships with people, even people coming and asking me "Mataji I have Gurus and some of them were friends and a problem, I want a job, what should I do ? some other dirty relationships you can say This is to be done, that is to be done." Of and they couldn't give up and they are lost. So you have to sit down and find out "Why am attracts your attention means you have lost I not enjoying myself ? I am the loser, because of those things, if they were joy giving ! would not have run towards them fróm one form and you can enjoy it. So these gross to another. They never satisfied me fully, things are never gaing to give you joy so why so why to go back to them again ?" towards these horrible things, because of their course, that is by the way, is alright but if that sense of your understanding that you are a Sahaja Yogi and that your joy is in the subtier not ask for something which will give you that subtle joy, which you can enjoy-only you can The emotionalenjoyment: whom you regard enjoy. So this is what happens to as something very important are also to be attention, we get lost because of our previous weighed in the new dimension of your atten- ideas and our emotional bindings and we can tion and the subtleties. You consider somebody also say that our spiritual bindings-so called. as very near and dear and you have a business We are Hindus, Muslims, Christians. We relationship or some sort of a-I don't know what sorts of relations people have. You must Brahmins, Non-Brahmins and all kinds of know that it is very superficial and you cannot thingswe are, but we are not what we'are'; and have any joy out of it, like you drink water all these things also come back to you that from a cup. the water is superficial, the most important You get me any Jain from anywhere-or anyone thing is your tongue which can feel the water. If the tongue cannot feel the water and if the water feels like stones, what's the use of taking water ? So the most important thing is the taste in the tongue in the essence. In the same way the essence of our enjoyment is the joy and the joy is in feeling the vibra- tions; so wherever you get the joy you should he has a bädhã he can entice away at least have it. But this new awareness is notso much 5 per cent of Sahaja Yogis easily. He will gone into your being, that's why this is the our are vegetarians, Non-Vegetarians. We are Now the cup itself is superficial, we are Jains so we are very great people ! from anywhere-does he have the sense of vibrations ? Then how is it that person be- comes your Guru or that person can teach you about these things ? You are now a master. Does the headmaster come and learn from the boys who are admitted in the schools ? I've seen even a newcomer, who comes in and if talk big, he will show off and he will bring Nirmala Yoga 31

 some Guru inside and 5 per cent will run after that-minimum. How do you explain this ? Only thing is that you should not be one of them. Everyone should think for oneself and not for others. You should think that this you are capable of or not ? So in spiritual bindings also your attention is lost like that and all these dimensions are outside, foundation then the piling up and then you have those pillars and then you have to have the roof and that is how one after another they plan out things. But in God's own Kingdom, there is no planning. You sit down and just enjoy. If your attention is there all the work is done, full attention; and then he take out work and give full priority to that, do not compromise your way through. You have to help others Now, in description of Gokul of Vrindävan, also to come up and so you must remember for that also your attention should be on your Atma, On your Spirit, on God, completely one working, the Gopis in the household would with Him in that joy. The whole heart is there- leave every work-everything, the milk would and with your both hands and your both feet, be boiling and the work was half done or full with all your attention you can pull out people done, they were eating their food or in what- because your attention is all the time fed, ever pose they were sitting they would just nurtured and looked after, then you will enjoy you must have read that when Krishna used to play His flute all the women who were get up and run towards that Murali (Flute): and when they would go there they would stand just like a picture no movement in the also the lifting of the people. Nothing can be atright unless and until you body, nothingjust standing and listening with develop the subtleties of your attention; and they develop by receding your attention from speaking-just a Murali being played and all of all that is gross. Recede your attention when- them just listening like a picture. What was ever it goes too much into a thought, like it ? The enjoyment that they were feeling- thatOh, forget it. But into vibrations you enjoyment they were enjoying within them- pay full attention, seeing vibrations you pay selves, the joy that was pouring into them full attention, seeing your own vibrations pay with that Murali, just standing and listening, full attention, other things you need not worry full attention, what was so ? He was not even they will be all looked after. that's all. What is that ? That is the subtleness of that enjoyment just like meditation, they would stand. In the same way your attention and mind should be on Sahaja, on your being with God. That is how your attention is subtler in the kingdom of God. When the lotus is in the mud and it has to come out it finds its way You are one with God, put your centrifugal force towards God completely. through many crevices and many holes in that Put yourself in connection all the time with mud but when it is out in the open-absolutely liberated free then it does not go on dashing here and there but just opens out and receives the beautiful dew, and the dew melts the fragrance in the lotus. Automatically the The human mind is used to do things in fragrance starts flowing. It's a different a ritual way, that they think that if you have method, it's a different way of life that is God and the rest of the work is done just like instruments. The whole thing will start working. to raise this house you have to dig first the being Sahaja. 32 Nirmala Yoga

 Her Holiness Shri Mataji's Advice To Western Women And I think it is just the other way round Now, this is in the West. Now, the women are intelligent and the women of the in India. There the men will fuss. The men west being intelligent and educated have will say, "This is not good". They will say, developed a kind of a very complex situation "We are sick and you must look after us". around themselves. These things have made and all that. They don't say that we have to them a kind of a man without manliness, and look after you. They say that you have to that is why their whole behaviour becomes look after us. And the women think that, extremely understand, but now I've started under- shaktis and they have to bear it upon them- standing, that the way the women are, ihey selves and give them the joy. want to dominate men. But they don't understand that by dominating you cannot create good relationship. just don't because they are their wives, they are their odd. Sometimes Now, the women here have another very bad capacity, in Sahaja Yoga I have seen it, that they always say that the negativity Now, to dominate a man one way could attacks, all the time, for any rhyme and reason. be just to go on behaving like a man, you see, pushing him around and all that, saying, you have a child you feel more attacked by "Don't do this. I don't lika it. This is not negativity because you are on your own. good. That is not good". But that is not so Imagine ! When you have a child you have sophisticated. So, the other way is to all the such a great company of your child. I mean, time talk about the miseries of your past. "I am for an Indian mother, as soon as she is pre- like this, This is wrong with me". All the time gnant she feels the happiness. When the she's sick. All the time she's miserable. All child is born, she feels the company of the the time she's insecure, All the time she's child. so dependent, she needs her husband. She that her own child is there, and then, through wants the attention of the husband. The her child, she learns how to love other husband must look after her. Ultimately, I children. think the husbands must be getting absolutely fed up and running away from the wives. And that must be why the prostitution is so they put the same nonsense on them. "Oh, strong here, because at least the prostitute how bad is my husband, he has done so tries to please the husband and not to make much to me, and how bad is this world, and him miserable, because she has to earn her how bad was my mother..." And this is how Like just now somebody told me that when For her nothing more is needed than But here even when the children are born they try to dominate the children, making that living. 33 Nirmala Yoga

 For example, if my husband and I are sit- get to these "Les Miserables". From where ting and there is an interviewer, he will say that this woman is deaf and dumb, she doesn't talk. Really, many people who have seen us together say, "We never knew about child absolutely miserable. That is how we it has come 7-the sources are here. Now, if they are uneducated they are even worse, because they have a complex. If they you. Your husband never said a word about are less intelligent there is another problem. you." You see, like that, it is very common, woman just keeps outside. People didn't know They try to play all dirty tricks with the hus- band and with other people. If their husband that I could be Mataji because those who had has any relationship with anyone they don't known me otherwise had never seen me like it. It is most surprising, isn't it ? Like talking, because you are not supposed to friendship; or if the husband wants to talk to talk when your husband is talking, you just keep quiet. some other men,-not women of course, women you can have some objection,-but I can't understand, that they don't like friends of the husband, to come in the house. It is the other way round in India. The husband's friends are very much welcomed and looked round and opening his mouth a little bit to say after by the wife, and there is a sweet relation- ship between them, and they call her the sister-in-law. It is very sweet. Here it is the other way round. If there is an interviewer, the woman will talk first. The man will be sitting like a big mouse, looking something. The aggression of these women is very subtie. They come up with such sinister questions, anything they say has a sting and But here it is just the other way round. then you get fed up of such a person and that They just abhor all the relations of the hus- is why there are divorces. band, and this is something most surprising because the husband is not single. All his The men of the west are much better than relations are part and parcel of him. He is Indian men. They are not dominating. They understand the value of women. They have obliged to them, related to them, or he is attached to them, and if she really loves the given so much freedom to them. They have husband, then she should accept the other given them so much prestige and honour. But if you give something to women, they should be capable of bearing it up, isn't it? What is the use of giving everything equal to relationships also. Then, all their lives they have lived like this, by making, I would say, a show that they are miserable, and they continue with it after they are married. And in Sahaja Yoga also, I have seen the way they behave. them when they have no capacity to bear it? hat is why it is such an imbalance, I find, for women the way they are so sinister about the whole of life. Life is beautiful, full of joy, happiness, Towards any calamity an Indian woman bliss. Morning until evening if you go on will stand up. She is the one who will stand making somebody miserable then you are up, at the time of calamity. Otherwise she will not show. She is not on the scene. No- body will know there is a woman working, have got equality without evolving themselves she is not the one who will talk first. against life. You are against God. This they must realise. The whole thing is that they up to that point. Nirmala Yoga 34

 It is rather like the Arabs. They got Sahaja Yoga. Take it from me. All of them the Cadillacs. First they were an the camels will be thrown out. If you do not want to Or on the donkeys, then they became rich Arabs and they had Cadillacs. Now, by sit- ting in the Cadillac you don't become a cul- tured man. come up, you will be out for good. So, it is a challenge for all the Sahaja Yoginis in the West that you must be joyous. You must be happy people. You see, In the same way if the women ate suddenly made to feel, oh, they are equal, this, that; they have not developed that they build up their ego very subtly. If you pänache, as ydu say in your language. They just say that, "No, that is not good", imme- haven't developed that sophistication. So the diately they start cıying, you know they are inferiority works out and fhey go on pinching upset. Men don't know what to do, because the men alI the time. Every word, and the these women have picked up their own toungue also doesn't have that sweetness. Now, you see that in any case like this images and they want to do whatever they think, and if men see something more than they do, and say, "Do this. this would be But in our Sahaja Yoga we have seen some very great Sahaja Yoginis, who are better", they are finished. really senior women, I would suggest. Like you can say.., a solid woman, very solid woman, very solid woman, and she under- stands things very well. Like....she is a good wife, no doubt, she makes her husband happy. people have that sweetiess about their hus- bands and I have never seen them telling me about their miseries or thinking about their past or anything. Never. Never. They get identified with these things. So, you can't say that they are left-sided, but they are egotistical. And in this ego there is a sinister attitude by which they make the men and woman and children miserable. is another one. See, these So, this must be stopped now. Anymore of this misery is to be stopped in the West. Nothing. What is this misery you have got ? You should go and see the women of India who are smiling and laughing. They have children to look after. They have ten, eleven, twelve children to look after. They have no money. Early in the morning, at four o'clock, Always they said we were happily married. .....told me, "we were happily married". Her husband was a Russian, and they had a problem because of the war, but she never said that my husband made me miserable, or they have to get up and take their bath be- this thing, that thing. Never. I never heard them saying like that. And even if that is the laze out like you do. And then they go case, or something is there, you should be happy. Even if, say, your husband is a bad man, he is not a Sahaja Yogi, you should be shining. They come home, put the food happy. cause of conditions in India. They cannot to the well, fill the water and bring it home. You see beautiful, see their faces down there, slowly wake up their husbands, put things for his bath, look after their child- ren, clean the house. By the time the child- In Sahaja Yoga it is compulsory that you should be happy, you should be joyous and ren are up they see the clean house, you you have to be joyful. There is no place for should see how much they work hard. And people who are miserable. If they try to go you will not know that they are working. on with this they will have to get out of Absolutely silent. You have seen how these 35 Nirmala Yoga

 women used to cook. Did you ever hear come out and she is there with the powder any body outside ? As soon as people are coming they are serene. They are looking the towel. All the time they are running after them. They are intelligent, I mean,... is an income tax officer, do you know that ? motherly they are, to me. .....is an income tax officer. They are offi- cers, but how do they behave ? Have you motherly. ever seen them anywhere in anyway asserting themselves? Never. to sprinkle on my feet and to wipe them with up and down. You can't imagine how . To me, they are motherly. To their grandfather they are Early in the morning-this Shumi was about two and a half years old, very small-so early In India education is very strong. Most in the morning she used to see the grand- of the girls in India are at least graduates, father sitting there. She used to go into the actually, at least. But there is no ego about room, take his newspaper-just hardly used to it. They understand their position as wife walk, you see-and his spectacles and bring and as a woman, and they know that they are the ones who are the source of joy, and they have to give that joy to others. Here the women don't understand how much they can give joy. After all your Mother is a woman very sinister idea. It is very repulsive. It is and if She can give so much joy why not that I have seen it once, but when I talk to shouldn't you be able to? them to him. What does it take? But if the attention is all the time to extract others, it comes from some sort of them, I really feel very disgusted sometimes. And I feel, oh God, these women when they marry what will happen ? And when they marry, And this is what it is. I just don't under- stand, such a great potential. such a great I see. And that, is why the men here don't source just cut. Just cut. That is why, you know what to do. You see, if you have any see, the motherhood is lacking, nothing else problem, a woman has to bear it. but the motherhood. The women are all Indian women have great courage. Like when the war started in India, a woman, who was a widow and a queen, she rode on horse herself, she tied her sari, she took her child at right nothing wrong with them, it is the motherhood. Even a little child in India-see our Anu- pama is hardly now six years old. She came the back-she was a queen-and jumped from to speak in my ear, "Who is this baby here the fortress about a hundred feet down and sitting smiling ?" I said his name is Machendra she fought the British. She died, of course. Nath. "Ah! this is Machendra Nath."I She is a six year old girl, she doesn't know self-the general-wrote that, "We won the how to carry, you remember, she took the battle, but the victory and the glory was that baby. Then she wanted to give him some- thing to eat. If you have any child bring it e. These two girls will look after it, give like that. Wondrous. But they would only The British killed her. But the Britisher him- of Lakshmi Bai." Not only that but there are many women home food to it, they will look after it. They are just all the time, you know, nursing thne child- reach the cusp of just drama, that time they ren. Even to the grandfather, "Now,can I feed you ?" Grandmother of course, but to the grandfather ! "Can I feed you ? Would you like to have this ?" I take my bath, show up if there is a calamity. When things come up. Otherwise they are quiet. You see, that kind of thing should be the I womanhood, I mean, if I have to tell you Nirmala Yoga 36

 you will see how they will arrange it. They will get all the best vegetables of the market, the about Indian women, I will have to give you a big lecture. Really. And you have seen how they behave, how dignified and how best chickens of the market, and the best of sweet and . must take my hat off to them. everything and do the best that they can, put They are mature in the womanhood in the all their heart into it. "The saints are coming best possible way, the potential of women. to our house, the saints are coming to our house". See they have Worked so hard. If you remember a little girl who was married and she invited us for breakfast, about three years people think that Indian women are very back, a little one, very small. We had gone much suppressed because of their goodness. to a canal and she said, Tomorrow, Mother, They don't mind. They say our goodness you come and have breakfast at my place".. cannot be suppressed. Goodness is a thing and I said, "No, it is too much. many people, about thirty five people. How oppression and all that. They don't take to all will you feed us 7," And apart from that the other leaders were also there. "Oh, I will manage", she said, and when we went there she gave us such a nice breakfast. And all attached. You see, my daughter, now she the neighbouring women you see, they got receives her husband's phone calls practically up at 4 o'clock, did everything-and all of every day from Saudi Arabia. Look at my them in really great joy, that Mother is coming husband. Now, he is an old man of sixty-five to our house and they ware so enamoured about it. The beauty is this, and despite this, many We are so that is more important than suppression and Not at all. these nonsensical ideas. It is so nice. And then the husbands feel years. If you leave it to him he will telephone to me ten times I tell him don't telephone all the time, but he will go on telephoning. Thật is called as "fondness" in India. You see, that is the source, so you want to There are no words for joy here. There are talk and you want to have something. no words for different joys, but it is this fondness of people, and they were feeling obliged that we were eating. And I ate and want to extract from you. What is there for ate. I said, "No, I am too full, I can't eat any more," didn't like anything, or what ?"-and giving their potential and they go on eating some- and giving. So sweet. And so inany, I body's head all the time. How can they love think I told them thirty five, there were him? They cannot. But here it is the other way round, they men to give ? It is women who have to give. Women have to give. They don't realize and they said, "Mother, you fifty. Arranged like that also, and in a small little house, they arranged in front of the thing. Very silent, very silent. Very efficient, because of the efficiency. you see, of love, that they could manage it. And that is what I think of when I tell Indian men to marry western women. They shudder a bit, because why should they make themselves miserable ? Just think, if they know about western women as they are. It is so, sweet, and little, little things they do. It is so much energy that goes in. So So, this must change. We are Sahaja And this time I am going to write even Yogis. We have nothing to do with western to the Poona ladies, that they should arrange ideas of women and all that. I don't know, whatever book I have read about western nice. our food, not in the Rajwade Karyalaya and 37 Nirmala Yoga

 women, about the heroines and all that, they were never like this. This is something else I am sesing actually from what I have read. the source we have got. We are the source of joy. Accept this situation. We are the source of joy, of confidence, of love, and (Question: Could westerm women imitate atfection, ard kindness and gentleness. Then, once in a while, if the husband does wrong you have a right to tell him. He will never mind it. But all the time if you go on coaxing imitate, because you are Sahaja Yogis. You hinm he will say, "Oh, this permanent, mun- get it spontaneously. Just accept that. Now dane, every day." This needed saying. Even accept that. Whatever is the past is past. Australian women should be told. This is Indian women?) Also they should, but there is no need to You can do it. very common. But they are very Sweet, ah? Don't trouble the girls, if they don't trouble you, then you shouldn't trouble them. Our job is to make everybody happy and joyous. That is it. That is our job. That is MARCH in DELHI This year Delhi was specially blessed by affection. Finally Shri Radha Krishna sakshat Shri Mataji. A 800 capacity hall was over- Mataji's leela led everyone into the 5th dimen- flowing and people sat in the aisles listening sion of the pure spirit. The next day Shri in awe and spell bound silence to the Adi Mataji announced that She has apened the Shakti, Sahasrara of Delhi at the puja. After each lecture Shri Mataji gave realisa- tion and lifted the collective ego mountain. It was the most joyful and fulfilling mament performed thus integerating auspiciousness to see 1000 people get their realisation. At and festivity. She emphasised in the puja the end of each programme people would that love has to be the instrument to spread rush to touch Her Lotus feet and seek per- sonal blessings. The series of public pro- grammes reached the climax on Her Birthday living example of the warmth and love of our celebration programme. The Hall was over- crowded and it seemed that both man and ing and considerate in our attitude to others. the angels were struggling to grace the aus- picious occasion. Of course Shri Mataji gra- ciously bestowed many blessings on all Her children and said the most wonderful things. Every one enjoyed greatly the occasion. Before the puja, 2 sahaja marriages were Sahaja Yoga. How we should not come across as dry and harsh people but be the primordial Mother. It is important to be car- Sahaja Yagis are still weak in these aspects and should now pay more attention on it. It was indeed a very deep and moving puja. There is no doubt that the time has come for Sahaja Yoga to grow in leaps and bounds. A special gift to the Delhi Sahaj yogis Already the Delhi Temple is bursting to came as the Holi celeberation where all the seams and plans are over ground for the con- Sahaj yogis sang and danced through a riot of struction of a Big ashram. Let us pray to Holi colours. All the ego melted and every Shri Mataji that it should be ready to welcome one embraced each other with great love and Her in Her next visit. JAI MATAJI Nirmala Yoga 38

 October '83 JAI MATAJI Austria-One Year Later What a difference. The whole place feels Paris or at Guru Puja earlier in the year. transformed. The atmosphere is lighter and Since getting their realization just over a year and happier, ever since Shri Mataji's first visit ago many of the Austrians have become sud- here in September 1982 the weather has denly "jet-setters" of Sahaja Yoga, and have been so dry and sunny that no-one can believe done more travelling in this year than ever before in their desire to be close to Their Mother now that they have found Her again it. Day after day it goes on. In contrast, on the eve of Shri Maaji s after so long. arrival here for the second time in Septem- ber 83 Shri Indra blasted the negativity and the city was washed by a tremendous thunder- Everyone gathered at a Sahaja Yogi's flat to And now here She was in Vienna itself. wait for Shri Mataji's darshan. Mr. Dhumal spoke some introductory words and the exci- storm. This time Austrian Sahaja Yogis were joy- tement mounted till, suddenly, Shri Mataji fully and proudly waiting to greet Their arrived; radiant, beautiful in a green sari, Mother at the airport, and no less than thirty smiling and sitting to talk to us gathered of them at that. Only Shri Mataji knows how eagerly at Her Feet. long we had waited for this moment. She spoke to us about the subtle side of The weeks leading up to it were packed Shri Adi Bhoomi. It was she who created Shri with a tremendous buzz of organization in Kundalini. As Mother Earth she gives food which everyone took part, taking responsibility to the plants, animals and human beings. upon themselves and pulling their weight. Shri Kundalini is the nouishing Mother within We learnt a lot about collectivity in practice and generally things went smoothly so that wardly creative, the masculine aspects. we could really feel that it is Our Mother who is the Doer and we just Her instruments. us all. The other four elements are the out- In connection with this Shri Mataji emphasi- sed the special duties and characteristics of men and women, clearly stating that feminism is a We had no difficulty booking the hall for misdirected consciousness of women. the programmes, which took place in a famous Austria, and the bordering eastern countries building in the centre of Vienna right on the banks of the river Danube, which is the longest river in Europe and which carries the vibrations all the way to Russia and the Black Sea. As which were formerly a part of it, represent the pancreas of the universe they are thus part of the Left Nabhi chakra and indeed the role of wamen is especially misunderstood in this area of the world and in northern Europe as a Much time was also spent in scrubbing whole. Shri Mataji said that She will be dealing and painting our ashram which we received by Shri Mataji's Grace two months before Her hopes that the Germans will take to it when visit. Just in time to welcome all our dear She visits Germany in 1984. brothers and sisters from other countries, with such topics in the future and that She We pray that the nourishment of Shri many of whom we had been able to meet in Kundalini may now spread into the somewhat Nirmala Yoga 39

 barren north of Europe, and intend to orga- attend nize programmes in Munich and Budapest in order to express the key function of the vakia, Many new people came and all of us "bridge", which Shri Mataji says that Austria enjoyed a chance to really submerge our- has in the divine plan, between East and selves in vibrations, outside of the city, away West, left and right. a seminar in Drosendorf Castle, which is situated near the border with Czekoslo- from jobs and non-sahaj family. For many At the public programmes all the Sahaja people this proved to be a turning point and Yogis were taken thoughtless at the unsur- passsable brilliance with which Shri Mataji came up. worked out the whole affair. Just before the giving of realization at the last programme Sunday and witnessed something remark- all the Sahaja Yogis stood up at the side of the able; we started reading the holy names of packed auditorium and sang a hymn to the Devi and within minutes a fierce snow the Adi Shakti written by seekers centuries and thunderstorm had developed out of the as a result some strong new Sahaja Yogis We offered a Puja to Our Mother on the blue. It was so powerful that all the windows started rattling like mad. Then, as suddenly as it had appeared, the storm departed taking clouds, both gross and more subtle with it and leaving us bathed in the heavenly blue of an autumn sky. Sunshine. Vibrations. ago. "Come, O come my comforter, Enter into my heart, Come, O Spirit from above, Inflame us with Thy love, that we may be filled with holy bliss. Come, O Spirit from above." Shri Mataji we pray that the light may This came as quite a surprise to some break through on more and more evercast people who were there for the first time be- corners of this Mother Earth, that all our cause only minutes before, Shri Mataji had brothers and sisters may know the joy of witnessing Your ever beautiful, always strongly attacked the "Christian Churches". About a month after Shri Mataji's departure surprising and eternally splendid divine play. we wrote to all those seekers who had left their address with us and invited them to Bolo Bolo Shri Jaganmata Shri Mataji Ki Jai A True Passage of India During this extraordinary journey around Throughout the journey, this feeling of the the holy land of Maharashtra in India, we felt power of nature and the elements to soothe and shared so many experiences that it is you, to purify you, to give you joy continued difficult to give an account of them all. to increase ànd become more subtle. For the first time i was leaving Europe, the "Western world". So I wondered whether I soaks in the dams and rivers ! The water so would feel a kind of cultural shock. But the pure and fresh, so vibrated. After a very hot very first thing I experienced, even in a city day of travelling on the bus, we would just like Bombay, was that my ego gradually sub- sided and that my right side came back to let it flow over our hands and faces, and feel normal: a growing feeling of the intensity absolutely fresh. We felt our skins sparkle. of the present. I was already feeling the Miraculous water-in the true sense of the blessing of the vibrated earth of Mother India. word. Just the memory of our bathes and foot- put our hands in the water of the river Nirä, Nirmala Yoga 40

 A mote subtle experience. One day, the to twelve years of age, and their baby bro- dust blowing into the buses from the roads thers and sisters. The little girls, with their Was making us all cough. After six hours we wide bright eyes, smilingly asked my name. could hardly breathe. Suddenly, a sahaja That's the only thing they know how to say Vogi said: "If you just put your atfention on in English: "What's your name ?" And then the fact that this dust has been vibrated by they asked me Shri Rama's feet you wouldn't cough like that I" Immmediately, all the coughing stopped. Mataji had given a programme in the morning. The pain in my lungs vanished. And for the So i checked one, two, three,... little girls. Test of the journey thera was no more cough- Than I raised the Kundalinis of their little ing. The dust didn't bother me any more. to check whether a cool breeze was Gaming out of their sahasraras. Shri Their vibrations were beautiful. We brothers. Chitta! Yes, the attention Was the kay were all so joyous. It was a beautiful game. word. and spoke Our attention was our living together in a community: getting that she wanted me to raise her kundalini. up very early. giving your attention to other The vibrations were so strong ! It was so sahaja yogis from other countries to help or beautiful. I felt a deep joy. I said to myself: share and enjay something with them. Our attention was educated by the tapas, which were not really very hard. Not to mother put ma into meditation, we were both be troubled by discomfort, no "western" bath- smiling at each other. Sisters, true sisters, at rooms, etc. Not to fall asleep during the that moment. beautiful but long bhajans, which went on till four o'clock in the morning. Our divine Mother emiphasised it A girl took my hand to bring me to her it in all the pujas. mother. She explained something in Marathi. by The mother smiled and made me understand davaloped also "This is the real India; the true passage to India." Just the vibrations of this young Our sacred Shri Mataji bestowed us with such blessings I One was that the charming Most important, we learned to give our Indian girl who came to meet me when I first attention to vibrations. All Shri Mataji's pro- arrived in India was to become my "daughter- in-law" at the weddings at Bordi. grammes were in Hindi or Marathi; they went on for at least three to four hours. So we The weddings at Bordi were the climax had to give all our attention to meditation of our journey. We felt, as a sahaja yogi and the vibrations. Too bad for our western said, as if we were in the old times of the mind, which loves so much to enjoy the kingdom of Seeta and Rama, which we have meaning of all Shri Mataji's tremendous all read about in the "Amar Chitra Katha" comics. Indeed, the place nea: the sea; the high trees; the vibrations (it is near where Shri But the marvellous delicacy of these events Mataji opened the sahasrara of the world); was revealed to us. The deep affection and the big gathering of about 1000 sahaja yogis; love that grew in the community of sahaja the brides and bridegrooms looking like yogis: Australian, English, Italian, French, princesses and princes; the deep, solemn and dignified Vedantic ceremony performed before We neither speak nor understand Marathi. Shri Adi Shakti Herself-all this took us all communicated. with our Indian beyond time, beyond space to a place where speeches. Only in pujas would She speak to us in English. Austrian, and last but not least, Indian. But we friends by smiles and vibrations. I remember there is only sat-chit-ananda. one evening in Rahuri. We were sitting with Indian mothers, and children of about seven Jai Shri Mataji Antoinette S. Nirmala Yoga 41

 Sahaja Yoga and Physical Cure-Part IV When one is trained in medicine as an giving them their form. The interaction of the ordinary doctor, one is taught that this body energies that flow through different parts or is composed of organs, bones etc. One also aspects of the system are used to influence learns by investigation and direction what the universe-in the subtle plane as vibrations appears to happen and why it appears to and in the gross as activity. The causal works һаppen. by influencing the tanmätrās or causals of the Elements. As all three are the manifestations If one is a realised soul and a Yogi, one of the Ätmā and hence Paramātma's desire, knows that beneath the so-called gross body they are ultimately under its control. The is the subtle body and within that the causal body. The subtle body consists of Nädis expressing a portion of that absolute desire, and Chakras. The main ones are known to us. But in addition to the main ones, there sphere, When the whole system is clear, this are a total of 33 crores of lesser known ones happens effortlessly and without thoughts. connecting all the various Nadis and chakras If it is not, thought and effort intervene; how- to each other, in every conceivable way, ever they can in no way express the fullness, which the human mind cannot grasp. This simplicity, effortlessness and directness of the causal, sükshma (e, subtle) and Sthoola Divine. (e gross) Shariras (bodies) are the Tantra or instrument of Atma which is itself the reflection of the Paramätmā, the supreme manifest reality in the universe and itself a reflection of the Parabrahma or Absolute. individual human being is like a cell power and control, in its own individual When the average Sahaja Yogi gets his realization, many of these channels, Nādis and Chakras are blocked and their points of interaction twisted. Furthermore, the actual paths of the Nādis, can be pulled out of The Sükshma Sharira, controlling the alignments and twisted together like a knot Sthoola or gross body is the means, whereby of string. This blocks the manifestation of the desire of the Absolute is brought to play the Atma's power. Lord Shiva is known as in the gross world of the material creation. Shaktivähi. What this means is that all the These three bodies have no other functions. powers in the universe are borne by Him or more exactly all the Shaktis in the universe are an expression of the Paramātmā, as the sunbeams reflect the sun or the moon-beams The connection between Sthoola Sharira is through Âtmā, the causal body, the subtle body and finally the gross. Paramātmā to body. If there is a block in any part of this the moon. So, the Atmā, through its Shaktis system, one does not express fully the desire tries to manifest itself through the system and unblocks it using its powers. Sometimes when the block is too great, one feels pain In addition to the system outlined above, and sometimes one gets symptoms suggestive are the Five Elemental Sheaths or Koshas of certain diseases. Often, "the disease is the () starting with Ether as the subtlest and cure", in that if whatever inside is allowed to going down to Earth as the grossest. These work its way fully to the surface and out of surround the Ātmā or heart and stabilise the one's being, one becomes cured of that or drama of the Divine in one's existence, Sūkshma and eventually the Sthoola Sharira specific Bādhā or bondage. 42 Nirmala Yoga

 There are certain things that can be done to assist this process. First is to witness it without feeling sorry for oneself or proud of tions. Vibrations are a manifestation of the being able to bear such suffering. If one is a good Sahaja Yogi one knows that nothing incarnation of that Shakti is therefore the evil can attend ane and even pain and illness are parts of the redemption brought to us by sucked through the fingers and Sahasrāra and our Mother and should be borne. If one can- not bear-it becomes hard to be cured, for the they can be sucked directly through the heart, hand of our Divine Mother is blocked. The fourth and final method to which the first three are adjuncts is the taking of vibra- Shakti of the Paramātma. Shri Mataji as the source of all vibrations. Vibrations can be later directly by individual Chakras. When they work very powerfully. for the heart is the point of the creation and therefore of one's Secondly, there are certain substances that body. For this to happen, the heart should be have affinities for certain Chakras and Nādis. fully open to the Divine Mother's baing. These when used or kept near one can emit However, even the Vibrations of the heart can their vibrations to the diseased part, some- times strengthening it, sometimes shaking out the residue in the blocked Nädi. They sometimes act by giving the necessary shock to unblock a system so that the power of the unbalanced, block the process-and instead of Atmā can flow and take over that system, healing, prevent it. This is because they consist Much of Homeopathy which uses the subtle of single gross molecules which can act on a constituent of substances works like this, for single point only. Herbs or natural remedies, in Homeopathy the gross atoms and molecules however, are created by God and therefore, of substances are diluted out. This second balanced by Him to reflect the needs of the part requires knowledge and experience-but being. They contain many substances in vibrations help. be blocked and then the above methods can be used. Sometimes, modern medicines, being varying proportions which may also vary accor- ding to the seasons of the year or the phases of the moon, The moon, having the qualities Third, the various excretory manifestations. These substances loosened by the power of of the heart, rules and has a powerful effect the Atma have to be thrown out. In addition on various herbs, used individually. Although to the obvious, bathing strips substances off knowledge of pure medicine lies on the right, the skin and hair. In relation to the Sahasrāra, its power came from the left. Thus it was Shikākäi ( faereIf) is useful, for it was used by Lord Shiva, who allowed the Ashwins or the Adi Shakti as Shri Sita. Similarly, pus, is divine physicians to drink Soma, i.e. it was a form of excretion of Badhā, as is breathing He who gave them their power. out, especially in Pränäyama; looking at a flame in front of Shri Mataji's photograph etc. etc. All five Elements can be used for this. 115 All that I have written applies to realised souls only. -Dr. Rustom. Nirmala Yoga 43

 "KAVACH OF THE DEVI"* Amen in the Name of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, the Merciful, the Compassionate 3-5 The following nine names have been told by the great soul Brahmadeva himself. Durg is known by these names: The protection of Shri Chandi Salutation to Shri Ganesha. Salutations to Shri Saraswati. Salutations to Shri Guru. Salu- tations to the deity worshipped in the famijy. May there be no obstacle. first Shailaputri (the daughter of moun- tain) second Brahmacharini (one who observes Amen. Salutations to Näräyan. Amen. Salutations to Naranarattam ie. Shri Vishnu. celebacy) Amen. Salutations to the Goddess Saraswati. third Chandraghanta fourth Kooshmända fifth Skandamātă (mother of Kārtikeya) sixth Kätyäyani seventh Kälarātri Salutations to Ved-Vyāsa ie. the Sage Vyāsa, the all knowing. Now begins the "Kavach", of Devi The presiding sage for Shri Chandi-Kavach is Brahmā, the metre is Anushtup, the presi- ding deity is Chamunda; the main seed is "Anganyasakta Digbandha-devatā. It is recited as part of Sapta-Shati, to please Jagadamba, eighth Mahägauri ninth Siddhidātri 6-7 Those who are frightened, having been surrounded by the enemies on the battle- field or are burning in fire, or being at an impassable place, would face no calamity, and would never have grief, sorrow, fear, or evil, if they surrender to Durgā. the principle is mätar", Amen. Obeisance to Chandikā. Thus spoke Mārkandeya: 1. Amen. 0 Brahmadeva, please tell me that which is very secret and has not been told by anyone to anybody else, and which tedly, O Goddess of the Gods, you protect protects all human beings in this world. 8. Those who remember you with great devotion indeed have prosperity. Undoub- those who remember you. Brahmadeva said: 9 The Goddess Chāmunda sits on a Brahmin, there is Devi Kavach which corpse, Värahi rides on a buffalo, Aindri is is most secret and is useful to all beings. mounted on an elephant and Vaishnavi on a Please listen to that, O great sage. condor (garuda). Dear reader, This "Kavach of the Devi" has been translated by our brother Mr. Kulkarni from Poon%; many thanks to him ! This text can be read during our pujas and there is no need to comment on its obvious usefulness. The Kavach has been sanctified and vibrated as it was read to Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi during Her Adi Shakti Puja in Bombay in January 1984. Gregoire JAI SHRI MATAJI I Nirmala Yoga 44

 20-21 Thus, Goddess Chämunda, who vehicle of Kaumari is the peacock. Lakshmi, sits on corpse, protects me from all the ten the beloved of Shri Vishnu, is seated in a lotus directions. May Goddess Jayä protect me from the front and Vijayā from the rear: Ajita from the left and Aparājita from the right. Goddess Dyotini may protect the top-knot 10 Maheshwari is riding on a bull, the and is also holding a lotus in her hand. 11 The Goddess Ishwari, of white com- plexion, is riding on a bull and Brähmi, who is bedecked with all ornaments is seated on a and Vyavasthitā may protect my head. 22-23 May I be protected, by Mälädhari on the forehead, Yashaswini on the eye-brows, 12 All the mothers are endowed with Trinétră between the eye-brows, Yamaghanta Yoga and are adorned with different orna- on the nose, Shankhini on both the eyes, Dwāravāsini on the ears, may Kälika protect my cheeks and Shankari the roots of the Swan. ments and jewels. 13-15 All the Goddesses mounted in chariots and very angry. They are weilding conch, discus, mace, plough, club, javelin, axe, noose, barbed dart, trident, bow and arrows. These Goddesses are weil- ding their weapons, for destroying the bodies of demons, for the protection of their devotees mäyă- and for the benefit of gods are seen ears 24-27 May 1 be protected by Sugandha- nose, Charchika lip, Amrtakala lower-lip, Saraswati-tongue, Kaumari-teeth, Chandikä -throat, Chitra-ghanta sound-box, Mahā- crown of the head, Känmäkshi-chin. Bhadrakäli-neck, Sarvamangalā-speech, Dhanurdhari-back. May Neelagreevä protect the outer part of my throat and Nalakoobari- 16 Salutations to you 0 Goddess. of very dreadful appearance, of frightening windpipe, may Khadgini protect my shoulders valour, of tremendous strengh and energy, and Vajradhārini protect my arms. the destroyer of the worst fears. 28-30 May Devi Dandini protect both my hands, Ambikā-fingers. Shooleshwari my nails and may Kuleshwari protect my belly. 17-18 O Devi, it is difficult to have even a glance at you, you increase the fear of your enemies. Please come to my rescue. May May I be protected, by Mahadevi-breast, Goddess Aindri protect me from the east. Agni Devată (Goddess of fire) from the south- east, Värähi (Shakti of Vishnu in the form of the boar) from the south, Khadgadhārini (the shavähini-rectum. weilder of sword) from the south-west, Vāruni (the Shakti of Varuna the rain god) from the west and Mrgavähini (whose vehicle is the dear) may protect me from the north- Shuladhärini-abdomen, Lalită Deviheart, Kämini-navel, Guhyeshwari-hidden parts. Pootană-kämika-reproductive organs. Mahi- 31 May Goddess Bhagawati protect my waste, Vindhyaväsini-knees, and the wish- fulfilling Mahabalā may protect my hips. west. May Närasinhi protect my ankles. May 32 19 May Goddess Kaumäri (the Shakti of Taijasi protect my feet. may Shri protect my Kumār ie. Kartikeya) protect me from the north and Goddess Shooladharini from the north-east, Brahmäni (the Shakti of Brahmā) from above and Vaishnav (Shakti of Vishnu) Ordhvakeshini-hair, Kauberi-pores. Vägish- toes. May Talaväsini protect the soles of my feet. 33 May Danshträkarāli protect my nails, from below; protect me. wari-skin. Nirmala Yoga 45

 Regiatered with the Registrar of Newapepers under Regd Ne. 36999/81 34 May Goddess Pärvati protect-blood. one is successful everywhere, and all one's marrow of the bones, tat and bone: Goddess desires are fulfilled and that person enjoys Kälarätri-intastines. Mukuteshwari-blie (and great prasperity on the earth. liver). 45 That person who covers himself with 35 May Padmavati protect the chakras, Kavach becomes fearless, is nevar defeated in Choodimani- phlegm (or lungs), Jwälamukhi Tustre of the nails and Abhedya-all the worshipped in three worlds. joints the: battle and becomes worthy of being 46-47 One who reads with faith every day thrice (morning, afternoon and evening) shadow of my body, Dhemadhiriniego, the Kavacha of Devi, which is inaccessible even to the gods, receives the Divine arts, is undefeated in the three worlds, lives for a hundred yeaIs and is tree from accidental 36 Brahmani-semen, Chhiatreshwari the superego and intellect (buddhi). 37 Vajrahasta-prin, apan, vyin, udan, saman (five vital breaths), Kalyanashobhana -prenas (life force). deaths. All diseases, like bojis, scars, otc: are 48 38 May Yogini protect the sense organis finished. Moveable (scorpions and shakes) 1e the faculties of tasting, séeng, smellng, and immovsable (other) paisons cannot attect hearing and touching. May Niräyani protect sattwataje and tamo gunas him 49-52 All those, who cast magical spells, 39 Varähi the life, Vaishnavidharma, Lakshmi-success and fame, Chakrini Wealth by mantras arnd knowledge. or yantras. on others for evil purposes. all bhoots, gobiins, malevolent beings moving on the earth and in the sky. A0 Indrini clan, Chandika cattie. Mahi- all those who mesmerise others, of female lakshmi sons and Bhairavi-wife. goblins. all yakshas and gandharvas are 41 Supatha may protect my journey and destroyed just by the sight of the person way Mahilakshmi may having Kavach in his heart Kshemakari my protect me in the king's courts and Vijaya 53 That person receives more and more raspect and prowess. On the earth he rises every where. 42 O Goddess Jayanti, any place that has in prosperity and fame by reading the Kavacha not been mentioned in the Kavach and has and Sapta-shati. thus remained unprotected, may be protected by you. 54-56 His progeny would live as fong as the earth is rich with mountains and forests 43-44 One should invariably cover ong- By the grace of Mahamäyä, he wouid attain sėlf with this Kavacha (by reading) wherever the highest place, that is inaccessible even to one goes, and should not walk even a step the gods and is eternally blissful in the withaur it, if one desires auspiciousness Then company of Lord Shiva. Edited & Publiahuo by Sh. S.C. Ral 43. Bunglaw Road, Delhi-110007 & Printed at The Central Electric Press, B0-D, Kamie Nagar, Deihi-110007. One issue Rs 9.00, Annual Substriplion Ru 51.00 Foreign (by Airmail &7814)



----------------------

1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Nirmala Yoga
Bi-Monthly
March-April 1984
Vol. 4 No. 20
5F
"Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns al the religions and
seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga-THE UNION"
+-
5F
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-1.txt 
 NIRM ALA YOGA
43, Bungalow Road, Delhi-110007, (India)
Founder: Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Editorial Board : Dr. S.K. Mathur, Sri A.S. Mishra, Sri R.D. Kulkarni
Representatives
CHERYL HYNES, 1267, Burke Road, KEW 3101, VICTORIA.
:ZORANA BEDKE, Gartnergasse 17/10, 1030 VIENNA.
LORI TODRICK, 4518 Woodgreen Drive, West Vancouver, BC. V7S2V1.
MARIE ROUGER, 175. Av. Ledru Rollin PARIS-750001.
ALEISSANDRA PALLINI, via Monserrato 105-109, ROMA 00186.
M.B. Ratnannwar, 13, Merwan Mansion, Genjewala Lane, Borivali (W).
Australia
Austria
Canada
France
Italy
India
BOMBAY-400092.
RAJARAM SHANKAR RAJWADE. 840, Sadashiva Peth, PUNE-411030.
DANIEL & ROXANA DEVINE, Angel Luis De Herran, 38, 6", 4,
MADRID-33.
Spain
Switzerland : CHARLES & MRS. MAGDA MATHYS. 5, Chemin Des Mouldins,
1256, Troinex (Canton de Geneva).
: GAVIN BROWN. Brown's Geological Information Services Ltd., 134 Great
Portland Street, London WIN 5PH.
M.J. MURDOCH, 14A Bourne Ave, S. RUISLIP, MIDDLESEX, HAH 6TZ,
ENGLAND.
U. K.
:CHRISTINE PETRUNIA, 270, Jay Street (AP T. 1-C) BROOKLYN,
NY-11201.
URSULA SEHLMEYER, 191 Canal ST. SAN RAFEL, CA-94901.
U.S.A.
CONT ENTS
Page
1. Editorial
2. Nirvana (Poem)
3. Birthday-Puja
4. From the Heart
5. What is expected of Sahaja Yogis & where are we ?
6. Advice to Brides to be
7. AttentionI
8. Prayer to Almighty
9. Attention-II
10. Shri Mataji's advice to Western Women
11. March in Delhi
12. Austria-one year later
13. A True Passage of India
14. Sahaja Yoga & Physical Cure-Part IV
15. "Kavach of the Devi"
11
12
17
18
25
26
33
38
39
40
42
44
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Editorial
Pundalika, a devotee of Shri Krishna was in the past life infatuated with his wife to the total
negligence of his parents. In his time, a pilgrimage was done on foot, or in a bullock-cart if
one could afford. Pundalika carried his young wife on shoulders and had the aged parents
walk after him. On the way he met Rohidas, a saint and a cobbler by profession, who was
doing the work with hands while singing Lord's praise. Rohidas loved his parents so much
that in order to entertain them, he had seated them on a swing and tied the other end of
pulling-string to his hair-locks so that the swing would move with his head, as his hands
were engaged.
This was an eye-opener to Pundalika and it transformed him into a great devotee and the
most obedient and loving son. Immediately, he seated his parents on shoulders and took the
wife along, on foot. On his return he busied himself in his parents' service seeing God in
them. One day Lord of the universe, Shri Krishna, the Virata, pleased with Pundalika's
devotion, arrived at his place. However, Pundalika had no time to spare from the service of
his parents and threw a brick towards the Lord to stand upon and wait. Pundalika remained
engrossed in the work and Lord kept patiently waiting to bless him, and ultimately resided at
the same place. Years rolled by. The famous shrine of Shri Vitthala was built there and
Pandharpur acquired a unique importance in the spiritual world.
Pundalika also came to be regarded as the ideal son who preferred serving his parents to
the Lotus Feet of Paramätmā. Parents told their young sons to follow the example set by
him.
One more moral of the story, which people in general have missed, is "the compassion of
the Lord". Saint Rämdās understood it and expressed his disapproval in words" O Pundalika,
how arrogant you are to keep Shri Vitthal waiting!". Compassion is the nature of the Lord. There
are numerous instances of it in the lives of saints. He helped Kabira in weaving, scrubbed
vessels for Janābai, a saint and maid servant of Nämdeva. It has been said that God is so
tender hearted that He is compassionate without any reason. It has been amply proved by hard
and tireless work of Shri Mataji for the past 14 years to awaken the divinity within mankind.
Nirmala Yoga
1
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-3.txt 
 She has been travelling thousands of kilometres every year to take as many people as
possible to the safety of Sahaja Yoga, and patiently, curing, correcting and improving
hundreds of Sahaja Yogis.
No other Sadguru in spiritual history of the world, has worked so hard for the disciples,
No other preceptor has accepted so many disciples and conferred so many powers on them.
As we find from history, great gurus and even the incarnations were selective in this regard.
Intention of writing these lines is to be gratefully aware of the troubles that She has been
taking for us and introspect for our efforts to grow. A self search by everyone would be
imperative as to whether we are working as much as we should, whether we are careful about
our attention, whether, we have imbibed, even partly, the qualities She likes us to have, and what
we have done to light the lamp in others. Shri Mataji has been working without any rest
Every sahaja yogi and yogini should pray from the heart that She should have enough rest.
It is desired that Her tours this year, may be planned keeping sufficient time for rest during,
and in-between the tours. Much as everyone would like Her to be 'prasanna it behoves of
all to find out for themselves, whether their/our own behaviour, made Her 'aprasanna', It may
appear to be natural to be desiring to have an audience but, in that case one would play in the
hands of ego and negative forces. Hence it must be very clearly understood and inculcated
that personal proximity is not, necessarily, being close in reality. Meditation is more
important than a personal meeting, as it is the Spirit that communicates in the former, while
in the latter, ego may possibly dominate on the person, making him casual and disregarding
the protocols. Receptivity to the vibrations is more pleasing to Her than anything else and
meditation is the only way to enhance it. She has bestowed upon all, enough powers to
cure ourselves and others and solve other problems just by desiring a solution. All should
therefore make a vow not to approach Her with a problem. Her grace is like the sun-shine.
It is for us to allow it to come in through the window of our attention.
It is the duty of every Sahaja-yogi to behave in the manner that would please Her, albeit,
not artificially. A genuinely pleasing nature emanates from within spontaneously. It is felt
by others in one's approach, in conversation, in every act. Merely the presence of such a
person can be joyous to other|Sahaja yogis. Perhaps, inner transformation that is brought
about by intensive and extensive practice of Sahaja yoga, would give such nature, in that the
Spirit would manifest itself, in every act, and give ideas as to what to do and what not to do in
the personal presence of Shri Mataji. Divine protocols are known to the Spirit and are observed
naturally in thoughtless state. Such a person becomes completely attentive, very humble, loving
and enjoying, automatically, when Shri Mataji is personally present, for She is the deity of
his/her meditation.
He would never try to attract Her attention. or make himself heard or press his point in
conversation with Her. He never tries to be close or away, and is happy where he is, for he
has realized Her presence within himself. He never tells Her his own problems, nor those of
his relations. Sahaja yoga is the way of life for such a person. Shri Mataji's advice has
permeated in every moment of his life. A group of such dedicated Sahaja yogis, loving and
affectionate to each other, enjoying the divine bliss within and without is indeed, the bouquet
of most beautiful, fragrant flowers that would please the supreme Goddess.
2.
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-4.txt 
 On the auspicious occasion of Her birthday, may it be our resolve to present Her with these
bouquets and garlands: May every person be the Shrine of Adi-shakti, May our beings, our
pränas, all that we enjoy be the offerings to Her in Puja. May whatever we do knowingly
and unknowingly be dedicated to Her.
गतं दुखं, गतं पापं गतं दारिद्रय मेव च ।
आगता परम चैतन्यं पुण्योहं तव दर्शनात ।॥
Gatam dukkham gatam pāpam gatam däridryameva cha i
Āgată parama chaitanyam punyoham tava darshanāt i
With your Darshan great chaitanya' and' punya' have come, and grief, sin and poverty have
vanished.
NIRVANA
She laughs in the leaves
of the trees as they blow
Her fragrance unfolds
In the flowers that grow
From where I stand
In the sunrise
I behold a Land
Right before my eyes
From where I stand
In the sunrise
I behold a Land
Right before my eyes
There attachments dissolve
The body is healed
Worldly riddles are solved
Sacred truths are revealed
I can reach that Land
By my dear Mother's grace
She takes my hand;
I set the pace
In the present, in peace
Plagued no more by dreams
of what might have been
Or what yet might be.
I can dwell in that land
Watch the Play from above
Subtle colour, subtle light
A land cool and pure
Joy by day, peace by night
Mother's presence is there
At one with the truth
In God's Kingdom of Love,
Her smile is the sun
Her radiance, the moon
In the waters She runs
In the clouds She moves
-CHRISTINE
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Birthday Puja
SYDNEY
21-3-83
It is so great to be with you people today Let us forget about what dents we have with-
on this auspicious day; to be with Australlans in ourselves. WWe have to know that we are
who have proved to be very good Sahaja prophets. This assumption has to be establi-
Yogis and who have progressed in a very shed-that We are prophets. If you could just
speady manner in their spiritual life
me greatest pleasure to be with my children you'll emit the glory of God Like a flowel
here. As you know I have so many children when it blossoms, It has its fragrance which
all over the world apart from the ones whom flows automatically; but it is only human beings
I actually physically gave birth. We have to
think of all those today who are away from us, deny or to assume what they are. Even if
thousands of miles, praying to God Almighty for they have become prophets they still linger
their spiritual ascent.
you get all the rest- because you do not
ascend you do not get what is needed. That's your true nature. Its like acting in a drama,
why there are problems. And even today I had becoming the actor. Like somebody Is acting
to solve some problems before I could come like Shiväji so he becomes as if he's Shivāji.
to puja. But if you decide that we have to The whole lifestyle, everything changes-he
ascend spiritually within us then everything that becomes like Shiväji. But the same person
you have to receive, all the blessings that God if he's acting like Hitler, becomes like Hitler
wants to shower upon you, to make you the Both are artificial. Artificial they become.
citizen of His great Kingdom, where you are
no more judged, you are no more chastised,
you are no more put to any test, of where you
will reside in eternal love of God and in His are, not the artificial which has gone back,
glory.
It gives
what you are, what you have become,
assume
who have freedom even not ta assume. To
Because as you ascend on with what they are not, in imagination and
are still ego-orientated. Is falsehood. Is not
Now when you are really prophets you
find it difficult to be the real person what you
which is no more there, all finished. The sinner
is dead, the egoistical is not there, the frigh-
I could not believe about ten years back, tened one is gone forever, you are a prophet.
that within ten years l'll be able to achieve Rise in the glory of that personality. People
this rasult. We should not judge the progress who are not prophets who are not Godly,
of Sahaja Yoga in relation to other plastic who are doing anti-God activities can assume
gurus. Even to create one saint will require to be prophets. But those who are really
thousand lives to pass, and so many have prophets do not want to assume the situation-
become prophets, it is a very big thing for you. that they 'are".
Nirmale Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-6.txt 
 As soon
as you assume, you become quality was extremely humble and they knew
that. We must today get over this kind of the difference between them and Christ and
play our mind has been doing so far. All the Mother. Also they knew the difference
falsehood has to drop out. Of course as
| said, I
ten years l'l achieve these results, with of Christ. They were not realised souls, They
so many devils around
I'm afraid it must go to you people also, that beautiful.
despite all hurdles and problems you had, you
have ascended. Ascended so far. and have
become beautiful prophets. You are
transformed that little more-just to assume
what you are, will make you feel so sweet.
I talked to my granddaughter, elder one.
and she's just a little girl, only 11 years
of äge, but she told her mother "Now I ean't you have, most of you have done it, is to
talk to Nani (grandmother) because She's a retract your attention from perversion: Most
Goddess. How can I talk to Her! I feel shy." At of you have done it. Your eyes are better
that age ! While in her own life as they are
saying she's top in all the class, she's the Vanity. Still people are jealous, competitive.
editor in a magazine in her school. She's You still have some lurking materialism. A
tremendous. And she's so humble that she
between them and others and they took to
could never have dreamt that in lives which were pure, illumined by the name
us to entice you, aleansed themselves and kept their lives
So Satiaja Yogis can't afford to have these
six enemies.: First of all, the temper which
really doesn't behove. Compassion. Replace
temper with compassion. Today is 60th
birthday and we have to just fight only six
enemies within ourselves. Second is which
now, steady, But still you are egoistical.
new thing that is coming, you are getting
told her mother I feel shy to talk to Năni. attached to your families. So we have to
She's a goddess, how can I talk to Her. And change it now, in a different use. Same thing
can be used for doing God's work. They can
be used as the six hands of Sahaja Yogis. The
first one is the anger. You have to be angry
Rustom told me that there are vibrations
emitting from her.
That's how you have to grow. First of all with yourself when you do wrong things.
And not to feel guilty but angry with yourself
for doing wrong things. Guilty is the best
way never to get rid of it. It's like a store
house kept for personal archives, locked up.
you have to Know you are prophets and you
must know that I
the Adi Shakti, I am the one who has come
on this earth for the first time in this form to
am the Holy Ghost Iam
do this tremendous task. The more you'll I have suffered a lot because of your guilty
business very much. And they come out
one by one. So you have to be angry with
You will change tremendously. I knew yourself when you feel guilty: "How can I
feel guilty ? Why did 1 do such a thing ? I'm
not going to do it." So develop your anger
have to prove it, that l'm that. Christ had against yourself and not against others. And
discipies who were not even realised souls anger could be reserved for the day of war.
and they have spread Christianity-whatever it Otherwise when the war will break out all
Under such circumstances that Christ the Arjunas will drop their bows and it will be
was crucified and they were left high and dry, said that "Arjuna was a great warrior-till the
just twalve people struggling but they put it war started." So we are not going to waste
our energy in warring with things which are
understand this the better it would be.
I'll have to say that openly one day and we
have said it. But now it is you people who
i.
up. They were very humble people, their
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-7.txt 
 just like shadows. Not to fight the shadow.
Sex, the perversion, has to be diverted to it.
towards your family, your wife and you have
to respect your chastity, you lead a chaste
life. Not to be like a dog, but like-to be like a
human being. All that attention has to
become chastity which is your power, which is
your protection, which is your connection with liberation of women, not women.
the Divine. Not forced chastity but a chastity
of balance and understanding. With your proud. Proud that you are Sahaja
family, with your wife, in a very chaste way proud that vou have been born in such time
you can live. Same with women-is more
women I would say. That they should not
join hands with other men who talk against vou should come up to that level. Like some
your husbands, or who teach you against people I find suddenly become morose,
politics of this fighting men, there's no end
This is basically, they knew they have to
live with men, they can't fight them. But
men themselves fought; even in America it
was Abraham Lincoln who fought for the
So you have to be not egoistical, but
Yogis,
when you have to carry on the duties of God's
work. That God has chosen you ! So that
thrown out of Sahaja Yoga who try to tell recluses, in Sahaja Yoga. They will never be
women against their husbands. This is a very Supposing somebody gives you a diamond,
sanctum santorium place where you should
not interfere against the husband. Nobody
has right. If there is any problem you should
let me know. Is a sign of stupidity. Then Tecluses, some people feel "I shall not take
the vanity must be made into pride. You
should be proud that you are Sahaja Yogis,
really proud. Raise your heads with pride
that we are Sahaja Yogis. Pride is never 't" should go away from the dictio-
oppressive, it's a glorious thing to be proud.
But vanity is....Actually pride is nothing nary of people who are supposed to be Sahaja
but the expression of self-esteem. Begging,
borrowing, mimicry, all these things come
from the less understanding of yourself. So
vanity should be the pride, and the pride Yoga, a discreet dynamism, a wise dynamism.
should be the expression of self esteem. Self I won't have to solve your problems any
esteem is very different from ego. One is
reality, another is complete artificiality. Men should be brought round. There should be
now should behave like men and not like competition between yourself, the one who
women, those, like slaves to be tied with a you were and what you are. Who wins ?
rope whenever their women want them to.. Whether your past or present. Your present
They have to lead the society. For the
women's rights in India, the women never
fought, with the men. They never fought
with the men because men are also fathers,
brothers, and they are concerned about the Sahaja Yogis in acquisition. Sometimes I
well-being of women. Women seldom fought have also seen competition in shouting,
there because they knew once they start screaming and being harsh to others-there's
forgiven because God has given you so much.
you are proud, you put it on and show off.
But when you have been given your Spirit,
you should be proud and not behave like
any job now. I'll not go out. I'l sit at home
and meditate." There's no place for such
people in Sahaja Yoga. I can't do this'. The
word "can
Yogis.
You just can't say 'I can't do it'.
You just can't say 'l can't do it'.
Yogis.
So the self-esteem will give you that kind
of a dynamism which is needed for Sahaja
more. The quality of competition and jealousy
should go fast, faster and faster, leaving your
past behind as much as you can.
There should be no competition between
Nirmala Yoga
6/1
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-8.txt 
 a big competition on. Let us have competition they are the machines and don't kill your
in compassion, in mildness, in sweetness, in machines by shouting at them, by screaming
beautiful behaviour. Who is more cultured, at them and by putting them down, making
who is more gentlemanly, who is deeper: keep them diffident. We'll have no place. We have
somebody an ideal before you like that,
whom you think is a very gentlemanly person
or a lady who is really like a lady. But on machines, they are the hands and you are the
the contrary if you have a lady who
behaves like a man, as your ideal, that is also the power they will suffer. So there should
not right. Or a man who behaves like a
woman, that's also not ideal. Or the other -my child, and his child, there should not be
way round. A woman who tries to show that such competition, take out your mind from
women are different from men and women there. There would be complete sharing. So
must get this.in Sahaja Yoga there is nothing
like women and men, that women must get
this and men must get that. Because you are
Spirit But the cover that you have, the body Thay have to have some people to share. The
that you have, the light you have, the lamp
that you have, is a different thing, and to keep
the light on, a woman has to be a woman and now Can we alone have it ? Cannot enjoy.
man has to be a man. As yesterday I told
you that an apple should not try to be a gentle and kind with each other. The people
mango and mango should not try to be an
apple. It loks nice to be the best apple, and
looks nice to be the best mango. So the Snare more. Who is more generous. Materia-
recluses, those who say that you have to get
out of it, behave really not like human beings
but I think like-I don't know what animals
do that way. Like when you get your doles alter money, counting money, you become
you cannot become indolent, you cannot. As Crackpots really, those who count their
far as possible don't like people taking money morning to evening are real crackpots.
doles. Not a sign of good Sahaja Yogis. They always lose money, there's something
You all should be hardworking, you must have Wrong with their brain.
qualifications, you should be good people on
top of everything. Good student, good
cooks, good mothers, good fathers, good
administrators-from where are we going to
get these people. We cannot be dishwashers,
to encourage them to do God's work. You
have to support them, because they are the
power. Of course if these hands go against
be no competition between children and you
the competition should end in sharing. How
much we share ? How much can we share ?
See drunkards canno! sit and drink alone.
thieves must have ten people to thieve. But
when it comes to the nector of God's love
There's no enjoyment at all in it. So let us be
who are going to enjoy the nector by which
they get more and
more of that-who
lism should be taken to its beauty, You
can have one thing done with your hand.
That's much more beautiful than running
Count your blessings. See life, the beauty
in matter. How life has worked. See this
wood, I see the pattern it has created on that,
the life. But it's not morose, its not dead, it's
not insipid, it's bubbling. You see in art, you
So the competition between women and can see in all that is beautiful, the reflection of
men must be stopped. Women must have God's creative power and the joy He wanted
can we ?
their own place and men must have their
own place.
men are their hands. If you are the shakti, you to do that. You are the masters.
to emit for your happiness. While you
become slaves of matter. He never wanted
And women must know that
Nirmala Yoga
7.
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Last of all is the attachment to your because they're your responsibility but do for
children, to your wife, your, your, your.. other children more than you Would like to
Whatever is mine is not 'l'. My house, that's do for your own child. So this complete
not . My this, my, my. my, must be given identification with
up, is to be destroyed. Instead of that, you protectiveness, will give you trouble. You
should say we'. We is a good word. I so have to believe that your family is the family
many times say "we. And people start of your Father, and your Mother is looking
wondering what they-somebody asked me, after it. f you think you can look after your
"Mother, when you say 'we', what do you mean, family by youtself-go ahead I So don't be
how can you make us feel that way, that we ever-protective, don'tbe too worried, too upset
are all one, the way you say 'we." I said why about your family.
not ? You are all part and parcel of my body.
Aren't we 'we ? Do I separate my finger from
my heart ? If you are part and parcel of my that your children also dan't beoome like that
body then I have to talk like "we" because l'm
conscious of this collective being sitting here. has fallen off ask other children to help.
So we have to talk like "we" and not "I, my" Form plays in which you should show, how a
and when you have to address about yourself child who is coming, who canndt wälk pro-
speak it in a third person, like you can say: perly, hew ather children goa and try and find
"This Nirmala is now going to London." Really aut methods how to help him to come out.
is true because this body's going there but Teach tham, through drama, through stories,
my heart is going to remain here. So to say through various things, what is goodness.
that I am going is not true-if I am Adi Shakti You must help éven without the idea of help.
where am I going ? I'm going nowhere, I'm It's a pleasure, it's a privilege. It's a great
everywhere. Where can I go ? There's no
place where1 don't reside and if I have to
go such a place, is Hell only where I don't habit to serve 'your child first-is absolutely
want to go. So, what I say that "This Nirmala
is going now. Leaving Australia." Tomorrow
'll be leaving. So what happens ? Just ing back something for your children-is all
this body has to go-that's all. Like that, you
start saying about your body. This mind lives in small well". Get over it. Try, men to
of mine, this mind of Mr. so and so. Is better form your own group of men and women
to address yourself as Mr. or Mrs. or Miss. should form their group of women. There
" should be no instruction to women from men
your children, over-
And keep a very sociable temperament so
If orte child
Toll them how to share.
honour that you can do. You must change
your ideas completely. Many people have a
very vulgar, shows bad breeding. Must serve
others first, and then your own family. Keep-
a sign of a person who is like a frog who
So Miss, will you please get up now? Better
address yourself. Children talk like that. Like
a third person. You'll be amazed, you will many funny things, I can't understand, how
see the joke behind the whole thing. You'll these things work out. But, it is because one
know how to laugh at yourself. "O Mr. so and side you feel your family is too much, your
so, come along now, he's behaving like this." husband is too much, you must be absolutely
And you'll really become a master of yourself, secluded from all the rest, or on the other
because you know how to handle this baby. side it is that you give up your husband com-
It will give that sense of maturity. So to say pletely-he's no good, the marriage is unsuc-
this is my child, this is my wife; of course you cessful, and stick on to something else which
have to look after your wife and your children is supposed to be a something, higher goal,
too much. Is not proper.I have discovered so
Nirmala Yaga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-10.txt 
 of destruction. So both things are not good. family not to your people, but to others. All
You must stand for your husband or wife of them are all over, you know how they are
or for your children, when it is right. But You write to them because you know they're
"obviously you should not do it, 'apparently heads of the thing. Like if you write to Gregoire,
you should not do it. If you tell your child,
"Alright I understand, but I do't want to do it to Genevieve in Geneva. You have met all of
in the public..." People should not also know them-you should write ! Ladies must write
that he's your child. The way he mixes up
with others; stays with others, shares with is in Lusanne why not write to him? He's
others, that's a Sahaja Yogi, should be. You there; now do you know that his wife has
know as for myself I've not even given reali-
sation to my children so far. Can you believe
it ? Leave alone the knowledge of Kundalini. how many people I know so many things, all
You can teach them. I know I can give them
any time I want. I have not given them time yourself with that love. Tomorrow you go to
at all, no time to them. If you see, how much America or to any one of these places, you
time do I spend with my own daughters ? have there your brothers and sisters already
Very little time. In the whole year, this year established. Write to them
I was there for three days with her. So the Mother what you think. You only write to
relationship at this time is the most important,
is of Sahaja Yoga and Sahaja Yogis. have write letters to me especially. But write nice
Seen some Sahaja Yogis write to their parents
to their mothers to their brothers, much more its like sending flowers.
than they write to the other Sahaja Yogis. Its there. it will be a very good idea.
very amazing. To their fathers but not to
other Sahaja Yogis.
you can write to Ruth in Italy, you can write
to ladies and men must write to men. Arneau
to go to America for a delivery ? We should
know about each other very intimately. About
the details. That's how; you must flood
about your
me sometimes but never to each other. Don't
sweet letters, poetic letters, they'll feel happy,
Taking ideas from
This will overcome these six enemies and
make them your slaves and use them for
You must start writing to other Sahaja your purpose. Then they'll become great
Yogis. Those who have lived in London, how things. Then they'll be your assistants, then
many of them are writing to people in Lon- they'll be your commanders of your army,
don ? Have they made any friends or anything? they'l be your decorations. It is all in your
-nothing of the kind. They are so busy with hands, with wisdom, you have to do it. At
their own problems, they're not bothered, to this time, at the age where I've reached-I
create that bondage of love.
no interest in Sahaja Yoga. They stayed in mature like this, child like this, just like a
the ashram in London. How many of you young girl and an old woman, all put together
are writing letters to them ? To London and every year, every time. But I've definitely
people. How many letters do you write ?
Now you have met them in this programme,
how many of you are writing letters to them maturity as far as my knowledge about human
and keep in contact. How much does it take beings is concerned because they are-when
to write a letter ? Nothing. I hope as soon as I was born they were strangers to me-just
you go back today you all should write letters strangers, imagine that Adi Shakti should say
about today's birthdayhow it was cele-
brated, in a beautiful way. Not to your was absolutely a stranger. But know, I've grown,
was always there, same age. I've always been
As if, they have
matured in understanding human beings.
I've definitely got better understanding and
this, but it's true ! Despite I have created you,
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Ive
I've understood you very well, know you are you don't need me much any more.
told you whatever wes heeded for your
counselling. I have täught you the method,
how to redeem others, and comfort them. You
know everything. Now just become masters
in this art. Forgetting your past. You are
all great people, all of you. So, when next
year, I should see you sitting on this seat, net
children are very obstinate. Its bhootish in my lap. On your own, teaching ydur
İsn't it ? Let him go. He won't listen. Better children. Let the second deneration start
my children / know how much you love me
and how much you are ciose to me.
(Why is he crying so much ? "... he wants
to go to the toilet" Let him go. ""he wants
me to go with him, he should go himself"
Let him go, this is the thing you see these
See. Alright take him down. What to
go
do, you see, very obstinate. They're bhoots, seaond eeneration has to come and you have
Such a big boy can't go to the toilet. to fook after the sècond generatiun. I want
to disturb, that's all.
now. The first genetation is ready, now the
Just
to be a real grandmother of very grand children,
You must really slap him now, if you give that's a special privilege and real promotion
and maturity.. Look at this (raih ib pouring
down) He's yöing to tlood your Parramatta
(river in Sydney). Because I have said now
I'm the Holy Ghost Everybody seems to be
can sometimes only go away with slapping over-happy and joybus. So thank you very
much for having me here and think of al the
Sahaja Yogis all round the world, all of them.
two slaps now, his bhoot will go away. Two
slaps and next time he won't do it. You see
at this time you must siap, not very hard but
let him know that you don't like it. Bhoots
I have seen especially with children it hap-
pens. Two slaps on the face and they're
alright. Because they're bhoots you gse and Today I think we should send some tele-
grams, about twelve telegrams if possible,
to all the centres, saying 60th birthday of
Mother was celebrated with great joy. She
they have to go away.)
whatever I have said
Now
to you
yesterday about children be careful. You
have to make your children assets and sends blessings, or something. They'll be
not liabilities, on Sahaja Yoga. Sa try to
train them up properly. Bring them up.
they deserve a good hand, to handle. In the
beginning you have to be very strict and day. So they call it 61, and we are going to
punish them if they do anything wrong,
so they know what is right, what is
wrong. And once they grow up you'll be
amazed what an asset they are. Some of
them are very good children but if the in-
fluence of the bad children comes up too
much they might spoil the good children also.
So better encourage children who are good,
who have been very sweet.
very happy. But according to Indian's method
it's a 61st, because the day I was born, that
was also a birthday. That was a real birth-
have a big programme in India also.
You are specially favoured people, andI
hope you'll favour me specially too. This
year I hope, all of you are going to take up a
new role and a new style of life where you
become mild people, not docile men but mild
people and docile women. Women have
docile, domesticated. They
theyll
such joy. We
to
look nice,
be more
They become gentle
So I think of my young age, of my childhood smile better, they create
and the dream, how it has come true. What-
ever I have dreamt, is beyond my imagi-
nation. It's done now, as far as l'm concerned create joy. How much joy do we create.
are here to create joy and not to enjoy
rights, which
artificial. To
some
are
10
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-12.txt 
 How much joy do we give to others. So down, its there, enjoy it and then give it to
today on this great occasion we have to feel others. Like a fountain of joy you should
our joy within our heart. Very deep down give. May God bless you.
within us lies that source of joy. So we
have to go deep down within ourselves and
feel the joy of this sixty year old Mother of the Holy Ghost and I have come for this
yours, that 1 have within myself. Go deep special time. that is the resurrection time.
Declare to all the nations now, that / am
3P
FROM THE HEART
At Diwali Puja Shri Mother gave us a lesson. We recited with Shri Ganesha the mantra
to Shri Ganesha. Once Shri Mataji stopped us and said "Do it again, but this time do it from
the heart". We obeyed and there was a beautiful lift of vibrations and strong flow of the
cool breeze, "You see how the vibrations respond" Shri Mataji said. Since then wa have
been learning every day more and more the depth, value and beauty of life when all
thoughts, words and deeds come from the heart. Mother often exhorts us to use sweet
words, to think of how we can do sweet things for our brothers and sisters. Acting from thêe
heart one cannet do otherwise. We glimpse the possible depth of feeling that awaits us
and anticipate with joy the realisation of it.
Astrologically the movement of Pluto-in many ways Mother's planet, though they are
all Her planets-into Scorpio heralds this new exploration of the depths of our being and
promises to bring the light of knowledge and maternal love to the dark corners that still
exist inside us. All the badha of the past, karma and negativity will be brought up to the
surface where it will wither in the face of a Spirit completely surrendered to the Great
Mother of the universe.
Diwali Puja coincided exactly with Pluto's entry into Scorpio, also at this time Uranus
ruler of the water-bearer, and representative of us as Sahaja Yogis in Shri Mataji's chart-
moves into Her sixth house, the house of Virgo. Leaving the fifth house (Leo) indicates
that Shri Mataji can no longer be as gay and easy going with us. She has said that soon
She will no longer be able to forgive She will only be able to destroy negativity in this
manifestation, In the sixth house there is work to be done, purity to be attained, and
preparation for the ultimate union.
Scorpio is the sign of transformation, death of ego to release the soaring eagle of the
Spirit. Shri Mataji has said that Sahaja Yoga is changing, there are already enough people
in the kingdom, now we have to go deep and those who cannot change must go.
Jai Shri Adi Shakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Namo Namah.
-UK Newsletter, 4, Dec. 1983
Nirmala Yoga
11
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-13.txt 
 BCRDI PUJA
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
13 Feb. 1984
"What is expected of Sahaja Yogis
and where are we ?"
दुरितांचे तिमिर जावो विश्व स्वधर्म सूर्ये पाहो जो जे वांछिल तो ते लाहो प्राणिजात ॥
वर्षत सकल मंगली ईश्वरनिष्ठांची मांदियाली अनवरत भूमंडला भेटतू भूतां ।।
चला कल्पतरुंचे आरब चेतना चितामणीचे गाव बोलते जे अणंव पीयूषांचे।।
चंद्रमे जे अलांछन मातंड जे तापहीन ते सर्वाही सदा सज्जन सोयरे होतु ।।
-Shri Gyaneshwara
Duritanché timir jāvo Vishvwa swadharma süryé päho Jo jé vanchila to té Läho Pränijäta n
Varshata sakala mangali Ishwarnishthänchi mandiyäli Anavarata bhūmandalā bhétatü bhūtā n
Chala Kalpatarunché ārava Chétană chintămaniché gãva Bolaté jé arnava Piyüshanché n
Chandramé je alānchana Mārtanda je tăpahina Té sarvāhī sadă sajjana soyaré hotu n
Vishwa swadharma suryé päho': The whole
universe will see the light, the sun of One Amrita is the nectar, the nectar of life. You
Universal Religion. Jo je vānchila to te läho': will be the oceans of bubbling nectar which
Whatever you will desire, whatever they will are talking. Like this ocean is here. See the
desire, they will get it. 'Pränijāta': all the human trees and the ocean.
beings. 'Varshata sakala mangali Ishwarnish-
thānchi mändiyäli Anavarata bhümandala bhé-
tatu, bhūtā,: when you will meet us, there will
be a shower of blessings, and of course, of the moon without any spots on it-immaculate
Chaitanya; when you will meet us-that's Me!
taiking-oceans of talking or bubbling Amrita.
Ocean that talks in a
way that it just emits nectar, the nectar of
Bliss. That's you people.
"Chandramé je alanchana': They will be like
moons- which has no spots. No blemishes,
"Chala
Kalpatarunche ārava': This is Without any blemishes. 'Martanda jé tipahina":
Like the sun without any heat in it; that is you.
Té sarväht sadă sajjana soyaré hotu: All
such people who will be righteous-who will
the description of the Sahaja yogis, you
must listen to this. That they will be the
forests,
Like forest-you'll see many:-
thousands. Like moving forests of huge stand for the right, for the truth-are going to
trees of giving blessings. Trees that give berelated to each other: Going to be related
blessings and can give-Kalpatarus are trees in the whole world.
that give you whatever you want. So they
will be like moving forests; means all of you that the great saints of Maharashtra that time,
are like that-great. That you will be like the greatest was Gyāneshwara. Because he
the great trees like these trees are-great saw the future that is going to come. And he
trees-which are moving, but which are best-
owing blessings upon others, giving them will become prophets and they will have
what they want. Kalpataru.
Now, with this beginning we understand
told peole about you: that the men of God
powers to make others prophets.
Now we do not realise "What are we",
when we become Sahaja Yogis. We become
"Bolaté jé arnava plyüshänché': They will be
-now, 'you' people. They will be the ocean of
Nirmala Yoga
12
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-14.txt 
 so much, still worried about things, which You are all relations to each other. These are
have no value. If you see, in the ultimate, the relations which are relations of deep
all these things have no value, these are so friendship. Friendship has no bias, has no
temporary. And if you go on wasting your lust, no greed, nothing. Its just friendship.
energy about things that have no spiritual It's 'pure' relationship. And we are that.
value, that does'nt matter you are going to
waste your life. Because you have 'that'
which is described. "The oceans which are
talking nectar". Oceans of talking nectar. ing: Sometimes I don't understand if I'm
Nectar, not the nectar that we understand; talking to real Sahaja Yogis or I'm talking to
nectar of spiritual Bliss. you are that!
(I just don't understand. Am I talking just-
I mean it has any meaning or not, in your
hearts ? Or l'm just talking without any mean-
some walls here who are not bothered about
And when you are that, what is expected what I'm talking.
of you about yourself? Just find out, you just
find out yourself; reflect back. "What is saying. It's important; otherwise how are
expected of me; myself ? What am I doing you going to learn this ?
about it ? 1 am worried about this nonsense,
Bring down your attention to what I'm
Where is your attention ?..)
So, its alright to say it is all Love, its all
that nonsense, and I'm supposed to be the
Ocean of Blissful Nectar ! I'm supposed to be affection, its all goodness, it's all very sweet
the forests of the Kalpatarus the trees that
give the boon to the people, huge, big trees ! thing. you see. "But', you must know that
And then what am I doing?
you have to come up.
These trees have come up after a great
"My giving capacity is so low! What do struggle against the whole atmosphere,
I give others ? I don't even have attention against the whole surroundings. They have
that can absorb the energy of the Divine. The
attention should be such that I should be
able to absorb the attention of the Divine.
Instead of that, my attention is on wrong here to come up, to fight yourself, to find out
come up on their own, except for the Mother
Earth to which they are connected.
So you people must know that you all are
things. And what am I doing ?
What do I 'do' about myself is that, 1'm attention ?
not trying to manifest that special quality, the
highest quality, the one that I am. I'm born
after ages, I've been born so many times. I've
been a saint, I've been going round seeking
is your
what's wrong with you. Where
First of all "The attention has to move in
that outward you grow
and inward you hold fast to your Mother.
With "complete respect. Those who can
are absolutely useless. If any
tree doesn't try to hold fast this Mother
Earth, it will fall out. Imean, that is what it
is doing and for what it is rewarded. It is
nothing to do with the Mother Earth. This
If you understand that, then you'll know Mother Earth has this speciality. And if this
that what importance it has today on this day Mother Earth is not going to be linked by
such a manner
I've been going round, and again
God.
when I'm born in this life-time for a such a
tremendous task, I'm again last with the same
non-sense. I'm still moving about with the
not do,
same non-sense."
of our International Seminar.
you, by your purposeful adherence, continu-
Internationally you are all related to each ous identification, you are going to fall off
like a dead tree.
other and to nobody else-"Internationally".
Nirmala Yoga
13
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-15.txt 
 So, it's very important to understand that gathered through our up-bringing, through
you 'are great, no doubt. These trees are
great. They have fought through, they have other Gurus, 'and our own mental projec-
come up, but where is your 'attention ? And tions, 'are' going to be extremely dangerous
what are you here for ? What is needed ?
Sticking to things which are 'against your whole also it will effect.
growth. Bothered about things which go
against you, all the time, The first and fore-
most thing that goes against us is our own hove
non-sensical ego. We must understand this Advent, at this time which is being described
is the one, the greatest barrier within us. And and prophecised. Prophecy was made long
we 'have" to get out of it. The Kundalini has time back. If we understand that we have
to rise like the tree has risen up. And the come on this earth for that' purpose, we
ego is the biggest hurdle for most of us. "really separate ourselves from all the rest
It appears in many ways. We Tfight the of the non-sense that goes on, and try to rise
Mother Earth which is giving you the source.
You are the very being of that Mother. 'She
has created you, "She' has made you. Because
of Her you have come up, You are fighting
Her! Arguing Her! Going against Her. This
is your ego, how will you grow?
And once you start growing, the sun can of technique and this and that, you have to
help you, the sky can help you, everything
can help you; the nature can help you. But
you must have the "complete' desire to rise
above your dwarfness, above your selfishness Toga is a
above your conditioning and specially your
our rationality, through our reading, through
for every individual Sahaja Yogi and as a
So we have to take a vow today, that we
are going to behave in a manner which be-
"our'
Advent-not Mother's-Our
towards the sky-as these trees have done.
You should not follow any other Sahaja
Yogi in all anti-growth activities. And any-
ane who tries to create a kind of a group, or
tries to impress you by saying that he can
teach you something higher, lower, alI kinds
forget it.
First of all you must know that Sahaja
growth "within', and 'that growth
expresses itself outside, So, that 'within
growth is to be done by you fully-with full
understanding. Then I don't have to tell you
ego.
All this when we say that you are this,
about anyone, You
won't be vulnerable to non-
there's no need to be puffed up. You see,
if I tell a little tree that you are going to be
a big tree, does'nt mean that it has become
a big tree. One has to become the big tree
by pushing forward. And that quality like intellectualising everything. Intelligence is
Gyaneshwara, like Tukaräma, like Rämadasa, nothing for God, because God has created it.
you all have to become that quality. They So you have to see 'through' that.
never saw me, I just nourished them, without
they seeing me.
selves, on their own virtues, on their own
qualities, on their own greatness. You have and you have to understand that emotions
sensical talk and jabbering.
You have some people who are intellec-
tuals. Intellectuals have a bad habit of
There are some people who are very emo-
But they nourished them- tional, and try to express themselves emo-
tionally. You have to get out of these ideas
to be great like that !
Instead of that if you live with false
notions about yourself, artificial
absurd ideas, all non-sense that we have
can play a very dangerous role in life.
Now, we have decided to have so many
things, marriages in Bordi, which is a very nice thing
and auspicious thing. I am very happy that
14
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-16.txt 
 we are going to have so many marriages, It with the same attention as You are doing, and
is auspicious. Because marriages are sup-
ported, blessed by God. Your's is special,
because I'm sitting here before you fo: these much. Talk too much, do nothing. Try to
try to settle ourselves".
Quiten yourself, be silent. We talk too
marriages.
reserve your energy in that silent dignity
You must have full idea as to what you
But don't make a fuss out of a marriage.
Don't create a problem by being superficial "are'. You must understand what you have been
about marriage. These are the marriages of upto, what have you done about it ? Talking,
Brahma-ekatva (wg ) where one feels talking, talking ! That's not the way it is go-
the Oneness of the Spirit, of the all-pervading ing to work out.
power. Try to know that these matriages are
done amongst saints and not among ordinary fine. The future seems very jubiliant, every-
people. Try to respect the inner quality of a thing is fine, But the highest above every-
person. If somebody is a Sahaja Yogi of a thing is : "the hope of your Mother that you
high quality that must be respected and that
must be loved. And not the outer qualities. Give attention to that. Think about it: that
The outward qualities are non-sensical. You you' are going to do it.
"must' respect each other when you marry.
because you are all saints.
The atmosphere is nice, everything is
are going to emancipate the whole world"
You have to be the walking, talking,
moving forests of that Divine Love, that
You are saints of very high quality. I've Ritambharā Pragnya.
told you, and the potential is so great, which
is already described to you-That only your important day. I feel that if this Bordi ses-
I hope you understand today is a very
'assumption'
can fetch you that great-
сал
sion works out well, may be wemight achieve
a lot next year.
ness....
The whole world is hoping this thing
Now, we look forward to a puja today3B
to happen-that they should get such people and try to absorb. My chakras work very
on this earth; those, which are described.
hard and actually I find it sometimes impos-
The 'whole world is watching your pro-
Igress, the whole world is 'expecting this to
happen. The whole world has already 'pro-
nounced' it.
- sible to accept a puja.
Today is a puja of a great day and a great
time today. At this time a big reservoir has
to be opened up. But it has to be chan-
And where are we ? where 'are" we ? Our nelised through people. And how can I
progress is so slow.
channelise it through people who are filled
with vanity, with stupidity or with small-
mindedness?
We're worried about
material things, worldly things, superficial
things, artificial things.
stupid things,
You have to be 'large', 'huge", big-heart-
ed', 'great' people. You are 'all' born-again,
So one has to understand that you are who were great, today again. But somehow
here today for this International Seminar to you are still mixed-up with your surroun-
everybody seems to be youn-
promise me.....
dings.
ger than me in this group-but you have to tance and the importance of the timeis to
So try to understand your own impor-
promise that:
worship yourself. To worship: 'but to be
"Mother, we will work with the same zeal, worshippable !
Nirmala Yoga
15
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-17.txt 
 You all think that only by dressing up
properly, or by putting up any show like that, You are so great that you can 'know what
we become worshippable, We do not! we
should be worshippable to ourself. To see, them? Who helped them? Today, you are
that whether we are doing, it has that grace just like VIPSI
and beauty, the love and the greatness of the
saints, who are very great saints, not ordinary
but 'tremendous' saints. It is being described
actually Gyaneshwara in this poem
much close to each other; you are not alone
you are. Who told them ? Who looked after
So please try to understand that you have
to have a 'very humble attitude towards all
- has the saints, and towards Sahaja Yoga. Try to
really worshipped you. I wish we had people absorb as much as possible. Be kind to
like Gyäneshwara, but they are all inside my
body. You are all outside. And whatever he
said has to be fulfilled. Not only that. but
whatever he said is the Truth.
yourself.
May God Bless you All....
So keep that dignity, keep that feeling,
that you have come here in a very big posi-
tion. And so keep that understanding within
For all these pujas you must have that
depth, that greatness of those great saints yourself.
who came on this earth. worked for you,
created this atmosphere. Think of them, ideas, you see, identify it with Christ. Christ
what they have done. They have Tought all is Ma, now, sitting before you. It is all said
the time. They were tortured. They had
none of these facilities that you have. They feel the attention, It's all said about me.
Now, people who come from Christian
about Me. Try to identiy it with Me. I can
had nothing of this enjoyment; nothing of the
kind. While you have got it all, everything
on a plate. So, be deserving people, autho-
rised people, and work it out in that way. some books. In the same way Christians are
Otherwise, this world we cannot change.
I have to say one thing, that when we are
identified, say, Hindus are identified with
identified with some books. But because
Christianity has been, like Islam and all that,
This puja has 'very special' significance an organised religion, the identification is
according to me and has to be done by much more in the brain. It's very difficult to
people who 'know' that they 'are' these great get out of it. And you do not know that
personalities. It has nothing to do with your
so-called artificial positions in life; or any- chapter, if you read thrice, you'll think there are
thing that is outside. It's the inside.
Bible itself has so much discrepencies. Every
three Christs born on this earth; because it
does'nt tally with one Christ to another. If
you carefully read about Christ, you'll be sur-
In this seminar one mustinot, too much talk
about outside things. But just talk about God,
your Mother or about Sahaja Yoga. Best prised that the way they have described
thing is to talk about your Mother, so it
neutralises both the ends, and it works out
It works out better. It is the simple thing
one has to understand, that, God has been so
kind to you, so kind. You don't have to fight
for your saintliness, nothing.
brothers and sisters. You are 'all here, so Sahaja Yogis because we are standing with
Christ in one, must have been born 'before
John the Baptist, another one was born
'after John the Baptist ! Like that it goes
on.
So there is a kind of an attack, even on
You are 'all the scriptures. We must understand
as
16
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-18.txt 
 the light in our hand, we should try to under- a manner that you create a proper Mother-
stand that all these books have attack of all hood within yourself, and a discipline that
the negativity. Like in our Indian temples, you want your children to imbibe and your
you'll always find negative people going husband to have.
there and doing all the Täntrik-Vidya and all
this base things.
You've seen your Mother, own Mother-
Even in the Churches you has been sitting for nine or ten hours some-
know we have got people now who call times at one place. Not even getting out of
this place. But I've seen people, that they
can't sit for two hours at a place, even if they
are meditating. And they get up, disturb
themselves "Charismatic".
So this is going on, and they are going to
their own doom by taking to this kind of a
wrong attitude. So it is to be understood everybody else and come down-this is a
that you should not be so much conditioned sign that we lack in our discipline, that our
by those things. You should keep yourself parents did not diseipline us, that we did not
discipline ourselves.
above to see what is the truth of every
religion. That they belong to the same princi-
So now the first thing is that you have to
ple and we should not adhere to something have perfect discipline of your temperament
because we were born in that, or we are and is a sign that you are the people who
conditioned into it. That's not a sign of a represent this Mother Earth who has a special
wisdom and a special power to express that
wisdom. So all of you have to be 'extremely
careful that whatever you do will be reflected
in the whole family and in the whole Sahaja
Yoga system. Now. when you get married to
your husbands, try to understand that you are
Yogi.
A yogi has no religion outside. He has
no nationality. He is rifted of all these
things. So try to understand that you are a
yogi and you need not adhere to these psycho-
logical conditioning that are being created in
your mind.
the Mother Earth, and you have to give. And
because you have powers, you can give. Be-
cause you have so many Shaktis within you,
you have to give. That means you are supe-
rior in a way, that you can give. So that
your ego should not stand up all the time
and say "why should I do it? Why should 17"
You understand that, then you'll rise much
higher. Because of the organised religion it
is even 'more' difficult to get out of it. And
that's what we don't understand. We want
to bring everything to that, which is gone
and which is being perverted, which is being
spoilt and which is being misrepresented.
And then you start enjoying
hood.
this woman-
So try to have your own understanding of
the whole thing of the past.
So try to be good mothers, good wives,
and responsible Sahaja Yoginis. Those, who,
Advising the brides-to-be, Shri Mataji Said : after marriage, try to deviate their husbands
You're entering into a married life and you from Sahaja Yoga are really the most cursed
have been virgins so far and now you have
to enter into the another life, of marriage. others, you should be careful what you talk,
And its a great responsibility on all of you to
see that you make your marriages successful. people that you are married in Sahaja Yoga.
And you have to see that you behave in such
ones. You should have sweet tongue for
you've to be responsible. You are special
I hope you'll keep this in mind.
17
Nirmala Yoga
UF
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-19.txt 
 Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
ATTENTION-I
DOLLIS HILL
26-5-1980
Today I am going to talk to you about Attention should absorb all that I am saying-
Attention. What is Attention what is the "it is not meant for anybody else". You better
movement of Attention and what are the sit in thoughtless awareness, that's the best
ways and methods of raising our Attention. way, so that it goes into you, otherwise it is
Keep it in broad ways. Alright? But when like a lecture, you know. That you listen to
I am saying all these things you must know me has not effect. Every, lecture will trans-
that I am talking to you individually. It is form you because after all I am speaking.
not about others. Always the first thing But because you always think of others and
human beings do is, when l am speaking to you think of your problems all the time some
you, you try to find out about whom Mataji thing non-sensical is going on, about which
is speaking. This is the best way of putting you are worried-and the Attention is so over-
your Attention on to something else. If you loaded that whatever is said to you, does not
put your Attention to yourself-that "this is
for me, and me and me alone", then it will attentive and knowing that all these non-
have an effect because these are 'mantras'. And sensical things have no value. Is your atten-
that is why it is wasted, because whatever is tion that has to come up and has to grow.
given to you is thrown onto another person.
So the Attention that you have, is the only
So just now utilise it, by being
go into you.
So, attention is the whole of the canvas
way to know the reality. Your own Attention of your being. Is a complete canvas-is
is important, not the Attention of others or
your Attention on others. This must be being is the attention. How much you have
"clearly' understood. If you understand this gone into it, how much you have discovered
point that the whole thing is to be consumed it. how far you have raised it-is a different
by you, through your Attention, to raise your- point.
self to a higher situation, it will work out;
otherwise, it is like giving food to you and
going to another person who is getting is a different point. But your Attention is
nourished, while you are getting nothing. God: if you become enlightened to that
And that person also may not be able get extent. It is like a canvas; you can say, it is
the attention. Complete canvas of your
Attention is 'Chitta' and God is Attention
How far your Attention has been enlightened
nourished because he does not know that you
are throwing it to that person.
like a canvas; which is spread-out for a film;
and whatever aptitudes or, you can say, the
So today as I am going to speak to you drags or movements of your Attention has,
about Attention, you should know that your shows on that canvas. I do not know what
Nirmale Yoga
18
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-20.txt 
 is the word for Vritti' in English language.
It is not aptitude, but a person gets prone accordingly. It is all stored up within you-
to, or his Attention is dragged to-I do not
know there is a word in English language for past-is given out of the Attention through that
man and you will start addressing to him
whether it is about the future or about the
bubbling process, which depends on your
dragging nature, where you are dragged; that
- is called Vritti', but I do not know what you
Vritti,.
So our Attention is just a pure', comple
tely' pure canvas, and is acted upon by the call it in English language, I do not know.
three Gunas we have, to begin with. And What you are prone to'.
the three Gunas come to you, as you know.
one from your past, one from your future
sense and one from the present. Now what-
ever have been your experiences about a
particular thing or a particular occasion, so far which you are drawn to. Whatever is your
is completely recorded in your memory. For temperament, it acts like that. For example,
example, if you see the black colour, all that if you see a man walking, say blindly, he
goes with the black colour is recorded in your
"Vritti' is a very neutral word. It does not
mean anything bad. It means where you are
drawn to. "Vritti means a temperament by
cannot see things. One person may get
as you see this black angry with that person. Another may have
memory. As soon
colour, quite a lot of it comes out. That pity for that person. Third man may come
means as soon as you see this with your
Attention, the Attention gets muddled up or temperament that you have developed through
you can say the Attention gets coloured with your three Gunas.
all the memories about this black colour.
And then your action takes place according are identified with this, your "Vritti“, your
to the way your Attention is effected. For temperament, then you are still in a mis-
example, just now, something was burnt by identified area. Let us take a case of some-
these flames. Now all of you became aware body who has been possessed before, Now
of it. Next time whenever you will see a
flame, first thing will happen will be that you away. But the memory remains in the brain
will be cautious about it. It is not going to
happen again, but the whole memory will is stronger in a person, left side is stron-
come to you and you will try to be cautious
and warn others because your Attention will
become 'aware" of that, as soon as you will
see that; because that canvas of your Atten-
tion itself will start throwing out these pictures thing starts coming into you, bubbling out and
out of itself, through your past experiences, on you think you are again possessed. It is the
to the canvas. This is a living canvas. Or memory which gives you, 'it is a myth'. It is
may be, that if you have got some ideas which the memory that tells you 'Oh I you are again
you hava premeditated, or thought of, of the
future-for example, you must have thought means, you always live in your memory-your
of somebody that if I meet that man I will tell memory is stronger than yourself. If you
him like this. As soon as you will meet that could make yourself stronger than your me-
man, your Attention will start bubbling out mory, nothing can possess you. But after you
with those ideas that are coming about this get your realization, you are not still identified
Is the "Vritti', is the
forward to help him out.
That is why this Attention
becomes identified with you and when you
coming to Sahaja Yoga his possession goes
that he was possessed and the memory
ger, then that memory lingers on and as
soon as that person comes in contact with
anyone which has got something to do with
the past possession it clicks, and the whole
possessed.' Because your left side is weak,
Nirmala Yoga
19
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-21.txt 
 So both the situations have been of 'no
with that state of mind in which you sea your
ego and super-ego as myths. Still you get help" to you. Of 'no help' to you for your
caught up into your ego and super ego, and growth, except that both these institutions
that is why your attention is still in a mess. develop so much that you are away from the
In a pure simple way of Attention, in an real experiencing. The real
innocent child, he sees everything in "Pratyak- stops, because your Attention is so much,
sha",
something, for a child, because he has no
memory. So he will have to burn his hand to up with fear, with pain, with unhappiness,
feel that this burns. He has to touch some- with hopelessness, dejection. The other side
thing cold to know that it is cold. His me- if you indulge toomuch-on to the right hand
mory is not yet built up. So into the actual side-little bit also, you start getting elated,
experiencing of it, he lives, but that 'actual excited, over-dominating. The colour of the
experiencing becomes memory. And once the left side is blue, and the blue colour starts
memory is built up stronger, the whole per- changing to the black. While on the right hand
sonality is effected by memory. All the con-
ditioning of all kinds comes through that. or yau can say golden. Then yellow, then
Your reading, even the whole atmosphere can orange and then red.
come to you. You see sometimes you smell sion on the right hand side. On the left hand
a particular soap, or say a rose you smell it, side you go into a complete state of entropy
when all the memories of smelling such a you can call it: or a state where you are
rose sometimes comes to you and you may feel separated from yourself into complete frozen
'really' elated-sometimes, may be sometimes
very unhappy, whatever may be the situation. frozen, on the other side you become com-
So you may feel happy or unhappy. Because pletely heated up. Both these things are again
whatever experiences you have had, has movement on the wrong direction.
given you a memory. This memory might
have given you a super-ego, or might have
given you a ego. This canning might have Kept, that you keep your attention 'more' in the
taken place. If it has been a ego and a super
ego, then may be that if it was ego you must
have felt happy. If it is satisfying to your ego
you feel very happy. If it is not, if it is super
ego, if you are suppressed by this then you
feel very unhappy. So both things-like
happiness or unhappiness are the states
where you are still in the myth. Still the myth giving us light. It it is too much, it can burn
exists. You have to still go beyond". So if you
feel happy about some situation, you should
know you are only happy before realization,
because it is giving some support to your ego ight, and then 'or a Puja to.
to bloat. And if you are unhappy, then you
should know that there is some sort of sup-
pression on your ego and there is a super ego balance' our Gunas properly, then we be-
developing.
experiencing
means in actual experiencing of muddled up. So on one side if you move-on
the left hand side-your Attention is muddled
side it is, to begin with, yellow, light yellow
So you go to aggres-
state. So one side you become completely
Even in the centre when the Attention is
centre; there also because it is a 'very' sensi-
tive point it does not stay there. For example,
when we say, use fire, we
burning the house. In the same way we can
use it for creating smoke. But we can also
use this fire in its proper way, if we use it, in
its proper proportion for cooking the food, for
can use it for
like a big fire. If it is too little, it can burn
like smoke. But in the centre when you know
how to balance it, then you can use it for
your own purpose-for cooking or for giving
So in the same way when we 'really
come gradually the 'master of the whole
Nirmala Yoga
20
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-22.txt 
 situation. The Attention does not get drag- The strata goes higher. The Attention goes
ged into things that we have been doing or
that we have understood through our memo-
ries, or through our experiences or whatever
it is. And is not also dragged towards too
much on the right hand side that we try to over-
power, or try to dominate someone. Be- confused he is, the more he asserts himself:
cause if you move too much that side you
have seen it becomes blood. It is difficult for himself, so he asserts: This is the thing, this
people to understand how, when we become is the thing'. I mean, if it is so, why should
very religious minded, like now Iran, the you assert it ? But he goes on asserting "this
movement is on the right-all the austerities, is the thing'. Then understand that he is
all that, everything. Now blood-shed. Chris-
tians also did the same. Brahmins did the lutely. And the way he asserts, and goes on
same in India. Buddhists did the same, even talking about it, all the time, that means he is
they talked of non-violence they got to blood-
shed, because movement started right hand
side.
higher. At a higher state, and these things
that used to bring in-by Tight side movement
you get irin (vikshépa) confusion. Must you
get confusion? Every intellectual, whatever bril-
liant he may be, he is confused. And the more
because he is confused, he is not sure of
now going towards lunatic asylum. Abso-
not sure. He becomes like a 'possessed' per-
sonality.
through his brains. That this is the thing,
this is correct, we must all do this is what...
When
he explains everything
Left hand side movement will take you to and he convinces many others who are con-
very sly and dark methods. So right handed fused like him. They depend on him; he be-
sided people like big nations who are supposed
to be developed nations, they justify war. "We much more confused and they find somebody
must have weapons to face each other, but who is not so much confused 'outwardly.
you all each other are the same people from They stick on to him, and all of them get to
God's point of view ! Why are you fighting ?
I maen, God asks you, "Why are you fighting,
what is the need ? Why do not you sit down
properly and listen to each other? What are you
fighting about? You are fighting aboutland-is
it your father's land ? It belongs to God ! God
has created this land. Why are you fighting?"
But your Attention is such that immediately romanticism starts, you see. Sitting in the
you say "Ohl This is mny land, this is my
mother-land, this is my father-land, this is from Lord Byron. And they come into your
my brother-land. But what about your' attention, then it becomes very 'strong passion
land which is within you ? Is it not your
comes a leader because you see they are
war or some sort of a blood shed or some
sort of-they want to see blood. They become
heartless, passionless, compassionless, you
can say Compassionless', loveless people.
The other movement is the blue side, the
So further
blue is like the blue moon-light ?
moon-light, you see! The ideas start coming
with you. You think, "Oh, am still, you see,
I have to find out my loves, you see," and you
go on in search of your loves and this and
that. These things really are not giving joy.
That is why so many poems have been written
that love is the 'most painful thing. is worse
than death and all sorts of poems are written
own?
So if you go on telling these people that
we should have no war they would not listen.
Realisation is the only way.
your attention gets higher and gets separated
from
By realisation
that strata from where these things like that, so why did you get in it ? I mean,
bubble in. You understand my point now? it is already written down. Books after booksl!
21
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-23.txt 
 Still why do you get into it ? You are already Attention to 'higher and higher so that
warned about it that don't go after love, you come up to a point where you be-
love is deception, love is this, that, it is very come One with the Attention of God.
temporary, it is for the little while you get that Already your Attention is sparkled because
... By chance, if somebody could stop at a through your Attention you can see what is
point by marrying somebody who is sweet wrong with you, you
enough and realise that love and marriage wrong with others and you can see how far
and all these things are in the "centre"; are you are going with yourself. But the pro-
like the fire in the kitchen, are like the fire in gress is retarded because you do not know
the temple, looks after it and does not overdo that this Attention is pure form and all that
something about it, then may be that this you get into this attention is a mythical stuff,
may be utilised.
can see what is
is a myth. If you drop this myth gradually,
treat everything as a myth, and not depend
In the same way the right-side movement on becoming unhappy or happy, just seeing
of the Sun-Line, if people think that 'yes, Sun the thing, your Attention will take a flight
is important. We have to have Sun in the and it will be at a much higher level residing
house, but you are not to become naked
and insult the sun and get your skin cancerl
Sun is not for your skin cancer. But if you like that and the movement upwards is much
over-do, it is also it is dangerous. A person less.
who exposes himself too much to planning,
and doing that, and doing this, and doing all
this-can land into 'very' great difficulties. So
you have to balance that side also and this you can go much worse in that condition
side and you have to be in the centre, in the also. For example, if you say that 'I am try-
'equilibrium.
there. Instead of that 'every movement you
go this way or that way, you see, it goes on
Even in Sattwa-guna, when you rise,
ing to be Sattwa-guni,. In Sattwa-guni it
1s that you start seeing everything, discrimi-
Now this word equilibrium does not exist
in our day to day life, it exists only in the nating through your understanding.-not
fiction or may be in the so-called scientific through vibrations, through understanding
research. But as far as human beings are
concerned, they do not know what equili-
brium is 'Because of this, the Attention,
though 'after' realisation comes up. still on
the sides they just go down-this side or that
side according to your vrittis (fa.) And do something great', like your salvation army,
when these identifications still act in them. you see. Let them be salvaged by them-
they are prone to go down again in their I do not know what salvation they are
Attention. And again start bubbling out the going to do. So these ideas,-'ideas' I am
same thing as they had.
Should we not somehow or the other take
out our Attention from here ? Should we
not give up this ? Should we be charitable ?
Should we go and serve the people 7, There
are people, who think 'Oh, we are going to
selves,
saying-of Sattwa-Guna can also immobolise
you and can 'really' freeze you down once
Now, one has to become lighter in one's for all and that also "can' work in you in 'such'
own mind and should 'think that we have a sly manner, wwe can say, in such a secretive
dropped all that now, why are we there?" manner that you will not feel it. All these
One should become lighter, with all that load ideas of helping each others, being charitable,
flowing out, because you are here to raise your "lets have a charity association,"-finishedI
Nirmala Yoga
22
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-24.txt 
 Once you work in a charity association, your
Attention is tinished there.
Because of analysis it does not fit
any timel
into me, they wouldn't allow, they may not.
It might be expedited. But say, for example,
But if your Attention goes higher, say tmy if you had not discovered these things-for
Attention is"I am only nothing but a charity, I
mean what am 1 It just flows.
become the charity. So the difference bet-
ween a person who is a realised and a not
realised is this that the Attention which was
giving myth as reality to you is gone now, is
gone higher. It can see that it is myth, the
Attention can clearly see that it is a myth.
And you can see that yourself and you can Till you burnt out your complete Attention
remove yourself. That-of course I have to
give you a push no-doubt and l'am working kept your balance in science also it would
hard on that; to give you a push-but you have helped, but the balance was lost there.
should also know that mythical things must Give anything to human beings and they
be dropped out, otherwise you will not grow. know how to make the worst out of it. They
"All' mythical things must be dropped out.
And the best way to do it is to be in thought-
less
example take it like that-and the science
was not discovered, your Attention would
have been at least better off. Because of
science, your Attention is also very much in
confusion. So I do not know which one to
praise whether the seience or the primitive-
ness, See when you raise yourself to science
also, you got to another extreme as usual.
You just
you were not satisfied. I mean if you had
will go to the extreme, You give them a
horse, they cannot go ordinary trotting or
awareness: because as soon as you
transcend these three Gunas you become galloping they must have a double gallop till
thoughtlessly aware. You have to cross
Agnya, and once you have crossed Agnya
these three Gunas, 'absolutely you go into a
state where you are Gunātit, you are beyond
gunas. So you do not deliberately do any-
thing, but it just works out.
they fall and die. Every thing you see, they
are just on the run all the time. So first thing
needed is to steady down yourself and tell
yourself: "Now all these mythical things I am
not going to allow to come to my Attention."
All these things are nothing but myths,
But analysis is one of the diseases of the but you are giving too much importance to
West. What are you analysing ? What are myths. You are taking them bit too seriously.
you analysing-you ask yourself. I feel like They are just mythical. Now, I mean, when
you are realised now you laugh at people who
laughing at the whole analysis that goes on.
See, they will sit down take out a hair, split- just go mad over say, a moonlit night; alright ?
hair into hundred, and-great But ask the fellow who is doing that-he
will say "you are heartless, you have no feel-
ing the
analysers are sitting now. They can not even
say how the chromosomes have that spindle ings. he will give you a big poetry out of
action and-I mean at that minute level the it. You go and see anyone of these people
things are worked out. They cannot say how whó are tiding a high horse, who are at the
a cell divides. What are they analysing sitting helm of affairs and you will feel like laughing
at them. But they will think that "you are
useless, you are doing no work, you are good
" So now
down here ?
Now, they have analysed for a purpose, for nothing, you are just wasters.
also done for God. Through their analysis for you, because you are enlightened, now,
now my things are recorded. Through their is to understand that our Attention has to
analysis I can go to the TV-if they allow me
move higher 'and' higher, at a higher space.
Nirmala Yoga
23
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-25.txt 
 Because unless and until you are sure, I am
Now, actually what has happened in
realisation-your Kundalini has risen and has not going to give you a wrong idea about
come up.Just like you can say a small, thin yourself. I want to see how far 'still your
hair-one hair, say. And that has broken Attention is moving. And I know; still you
your Sahasrara. And now the grace is flow-
ing into it. But it is a 'very small movement self. That is why the confidence is not
that has taken place-of course which is a very
difficult movement no doubt; but it has taken
place. Now you have not expanded like
this. Your Chakras are only pierced in the
center, but the rest of the Attention is still in- bardly a car can pass through and the fellow
are not sure. Still you are not sure of your-
there.
First of all you have to learn how to drive,
then you are tested. There will be five stones
put together, the distance will be only that
tact. Actually it is so intact, that you do not
even feel that it is pierced. Now you have
to "expand that. Open it out so that more
strands of Kundalini can rise and your Atten-
tion, which is in these centers, expanus. By it s all a myth that upsets you.It is all a
will say you bring it zigzag-and you
cannot do it. Why ? That is how he makes
you a master. The mastery of your Attention
will come when you will start 'seeing' that
expansion it drives out all that is mythical on
the sides. On every centre we have our
Attention which is being enlightened in
centre through this light passing "eternal life.
through. But the light is too small for the
darkness that you have collected. Specially too simple to understand that you have accep-
for the people of the West I would say, your ted myth as truth. Just drop it, it is all myth.
confusions you must get rid of them. But
still you identify. Because if I ask you any
thing"how are you." Means what ? Means thingas which used to frighten you or to elate
you are still confused. Alright ? Confusion
should go. One confusion was there that
"this is realisation or not." 1 hope that is over
now with you people. At least now you
believe it is self-realisation, I had to tell
people," No, no you are self realised now, you already drenched into that bliss. Keep it up.
"are"still they would jump up like a jack in
the box. They will say, "No, we're, not Mother.
How do you say this is realisation ? We ex-
pect 'this' out of realisation and that' out of
realisation, that we'll be flying out of the
door if we are realised" or some thing non-
sensical like that. Thank God, these ideas You must remember when you first got your
myth that upsets you. Just throw it away.
Just throw it away and understand that you
are "the eternal Attention." That you are the
" That only thing that keeps you.
away from it is ignorance, and the ignorance is
the
You will be amazed how your Attention will
rise and you will see all these non-sensical
you, will drop out, and you will just smile at
it. And 'then only' you are going to enjoy
yourselves fully because your Attention would
be completely drenched into the bliss of
"Self". I am saying: you will, I say: you 'are"
Now, how to do it ?
Actually, in every day-to-day life how to
kill the memory of the past ? To kill the
memory of the past, is to have new memories.
realization. Always think of it. Whenever any
such memoy comes to you, you try to think
have gone away.
But when we are realised, there is light how you got realisation. "Any' memory that
that has come in us, we have to grow it, 'only is troublesome or even so-called elating, you
by separating our Attention from the myths. just try to remember: "how realisation has
It is 'all mythical. I also play with you.
come to you." When you feel aggressive
Nirmala Yoga
24
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-26.txt 
 about something or angry about something, If you could record the joy of raising the
just try to remember how you felt the joy of Kundalini of others, you will feel a new
surrendering. Just think of that joy of sur-
rendering, of dissolving yourself. So the new
memories must be built up. If you start
building up new memories, then you will start called unhappiness and happiness will drop
collecting
moments which have such memories. Like a
memary when you tried to help somebody, you
raised the 'Kundalini of someone. Now the is just an experience-"Pratyaksha". That is
problem would be that when you would be why I said you keep your eyes open.
raising the 'Kundalini' of others, you would be
in thoughtless awareness-there wouldn't
be any thought-and thought is the only that.
thing which impresses. But that time you
can Trecord" the joy of raising the Kundalini.
wealth of these beautiful moments will be
accumulated. And all these moments which
were giving you confusion or fear or so-
establish other out and 'pure' joy will remain. Because
now most of the experiences you have had
are more of joy. Joy has no thoughts. It
moments
I hope you'll understand what I mean by
May God Bless you all.
PRAYER TO ALMIGHTY
You must pray to God and ask what you want. Ask for "Complete satisfaction in my
heart, Joy in my heart, Bliss in my heart; so that the whole world becomes blissful",
"Give me Love, Love, that I could love the whole world, and that the whole world
becomes one in Love".
"Give salvation to the entire humanity, which is suffering".
"Take me to your feet"
"Cleanse me with Thy Love"
Now see if there is God or not. You can feel it. Within yourself he hears you. He
is the Glory of all the Glory.
He Loves you, He protects you, He Guides you. He has created you to be really His
Love. But accept it.
Any time any thouhht is coming to you-pray; and you will he moving in the way of
that Ocean which is Unconscious mind. which starts with thoughtless awareness.
If you cannot become thoughtless, you pray to Him: "
and forgive those who have done harm to me".
Forgive me far what I've done,
-Shri Mataji Bombay-9th Feb., 1975
25
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-27.txt 
 "SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI"
ATTENTION-II
27TH JANUARY 1977
BORDI SHIBIR
The quality of attention changes according think. We are just lying unconscious, they
to the state of your condition. So where is
the attention placed in the human being ? It
is not a fixed point! We can say attention
is the surface or the edge of awareness;
wherever we are made aware the attention
say, but eyes are open, hands are moving,
legs are moving. That point is at the point of
Vishuddhi chakra. If you can drawa line
from here to the point where is the (pitha) of
Vishuddhi chakra is inside the brain, along that "
line if you are hit anywhere you become
You can see from
this analogy: All the filings of iron have got attentionless, you cannot pay attention any-
a power to be attracted towards the magnet.
Where is that power, you cannot locate. It is chakra because when this point is connected
all over. Wherever the magnet is placed the with Vishuddhi chakra at the back if here, and
filings are attracted, Our attention is also Bt the pitha inside, a kind of triangle is formed
like that; that wherever we are attracted our
attention goes there. It is existing in the attention. Your heart is moving. Your limbs
whole body, in the sense that it can be diver-
ted anywhere outside the body. Also inside
the body in case there is any pain or any
trouble. It floats over the nerves, it floats
over the whole nervous system; but there is
a controlling centre in the brain. If it is hit
then we can remain conscious-but without
any attention. Also if somebody is hit on the your other centres also, you do pay. This is
Vishuddhi Chakra it can happen. It can avery big difference between a person who
happen even in the lo wer Chakras, if some-
body is hit, that portion will lose its attention
because you cannot feel in that part. The
difference is this that you can pay attention to
those points if you want to, even if they are
numbed; for example, if any hand is numb I
can pay attention to that; means I can look centres of other people, that means your
at it, I can think of it. But there is a point in
our being; if that is hit, then we cannot even
where. This line also passes through Agnya
and all this line on this area can affect your
are moving but you can not pay attention
anywhere.
So when you pay attention to something:
actually you pay attention normally, when you
are not realised, through your brain centres.
After realisation you can pay attention through
is realised and who is not realised or you can
say that you can become effective through
your other centres by paying attention to
them, You can feel the centres which are
obstructed in your body which you never felt
before. Not only that, you can feel the
central nervous system is being blessed by a
new awareness by which it can convey to you
Nirmala Yoga
26
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-28.txt 
 communicate to you the Attention paid by tallying this subtle with the gross. You start
your centres, and also it can take your Attention again losing the vibrations. Actually after
in a subtler way into the centres of others. getting Realisation I've seen with small children
So first thing that happens to you is that your they sleep for very long hours. They become
little inactive for some time, but if an elder
Attention becomes subtler. Attention be-
coming subtler means you start understanding gets it he'll immediately go to the book-stall,
deeper things. For example a bird can see buy one book on Kundalini and start reading
a flower but cannot feel the beauty of a flower about it. Then some of you, not understanding
and a unrealised person can see the beauty that you've become somebody else, take it
of a flower but cannot see the vibrations of for granted, already, "Mataji has been very
a flower, So you become subtler. Your kind She says I am Paar (realised), but how
am I to believe." As if by believing it they are
going to give some money to me or I don't
know what they are going to give. "I can see
the vibrations coming, but what is the use of
Attention becomes subtler. You definitely are
at a higher evolutionary stage than the other
people are.
Now, we have to see how we use our getting the vibrations, why did She give us
Attention. You have seen even when you
were not realised that supposing you start idea of utility because that is human nature
developing an art in your hand from your very
childhood, than you develop the depth of that utility. Everything must be utilised. Man
particular Art, because a kind of a Milinge thinks no end of himself so he starts putting
grows on the nerves. In the same way when
you are Realised, I would say 'when you are
a newly born person', if you start respecting is to happen? What is the schedule? What
your Attention, then gradually you develop a is this? What is that ?"
depthness for Sahaja Yoga. But so many
people when they get realised they hardly ike if we enjoy the beauty of a flower, we
come second time, even if they come again just enjov. Do we go to the books and find
they do not develop the feeling of vibrations
more. They still go on being busy with their of ours, how to enjoy this flower and then
day to day work wasting their Attention on
things which do not give you the subtler
feelings. So the subtleness, the depth of the
Art of Sahaja does not develop. For example really don't know how to say, because it's a
Vibrations ?"* Again come back to the gross
has been so far-to make everything into
his realisation into utility. "What utility it has?
How many people are going to get it? What
You've been given this subtleness to enjoy,
just enjoy. Do we go to the books and find
out what should we do about this enjoyment
what to do and who has described about the
flower so that we can see if this is fitting into
that. But it is done very commonly and I
a person vwho is over-read; as soon as he
gets his realisation, he starts tallying it with
what he has read. This makes his aention
again wasted. As it is, his attention has been
fixed by these conventional ideas, some of that's very foolish. Children are very sensible
them are correct,
foolish thing and I am only afraid that some-
times if I say they will fee hurt. And as human
beinos are, they get hurt for nothing at all,
that way. Once they get it they start enjoying
it, they just enjoy, they just sleep off, they
are not bothered. They think that something
that is to be enjoyed, let us enjoy it.
some incorrect, some
of them are absolutely false, some are
useless, some are only because they wanted to
make money, they have published some trash.
As soon as you get Realisation you go back
to your own gross awareness and start
So, at the very outset, it happens like that
and a man doesn't know that how he has
27
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-29.txt 
 And the physical enjoyment in Sahaja
was ever in this Kali Yuga-in these modern Yoga itself is sufficient to keep your attention
subtle. You do not have to fix your attention
but you have to get subtler and subtler in
your attention. Fixing up of your attention
between joy and ugliness he does not have. as you know is a very wrong method. That
was done by some Yogis and you know what
only one reason but there are many reasons is the result of that. Their chakras were
and as I described to you inherently it is the broken and finished. When they fixed their
human gross activation before Realisation. attention onto Agnya Chakra you've seen that
If he understands the disease from where it Agnya chakra is broken. You have not to fix
has come sometimes it is easier to correct it. any attention but you have to make your
You cannot just correct the disease without attention subtler and subtler. As I told that
made himself even much more gross than he
times. By organising things according to his
own ideas and conceptions, he has becom
so unnatural, so foolish that discrimination
He is so confused. So first of all it is not
a magnet when brought near the stones
are a student of History you will know how nothing happens to the stones, they are just
human beings have behaved. You just start there, you move the magnet anyway you like
wondering what's wrong with these people. but when you take it to the iron filings only
God created one world. Just think of a the filling are attracted towards the magnet.
person like me coming on this earth; suddenly In the same way the attention of a Sahaja
you will find there are so many countries being Yogi should be so subtle that he should feel
the vibrations, he should think of vibrations,
have if you cannot manage the whole world he should eat vibrations; drink vibrations and
together, but then the fighting goes on, klling enjoy them. On the physical side many people
All kinds of problems for nothing tell me that he went to their house and, "they
at all. I mean it is such a mad house. So offered me laddoos and I had to eat, what can
historically if you see. how man has made I do Mataji ?" Actually they felt attracted
himself mad, it is not easy to compile all that towards the shape of the laddoos. They ate
in one lecture. You will have to write it. But they don't see the vibrations of those
volumes. I think there are already written laddoos. They just ate it off and they had a
volumes. So there is historical back-ground stomach trouble. When they had stomach
trouble then they said that, "Matāji we've
lost our vibrations now what to do, we ate
the laddoos." But if you have seen that there
Physically those who come for physical are no vibrations in those laddoos you should
handicap or physical trouble or something like have said that "today, I am not supposed to
that, because they are, sick are sometimes little eat anything" or something like that and you
better than people who do not have this, should not have eaten. If you see a born
because definitely they get the relief part of realised child, he will never eat. Even if the
mother beats the child, it says "alright beat me
" Because they are
not going to eat the filth. Such children are
But I would say they too, once they get their supposed to be obstinate, they think they are
relief they just disappear, not understanding obstinate because they know that there are
that there is something greater than this to be no vibrations so why should we eat because
understanding the history behind it. ff you
created. Alright separate countries you can
each other.
which has spoiled your attention.
the joy. If they get the relief there is a little
shadow of joy that they feel and then they
start understanding that it is to be enjoyed.
but I am not going to eat.
tasted and enjoyed,
we are not going to enjoy it.
28
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-30.txt 
 Sa, on the physical side there are so many started the cabaret dance you know and we
Ruch mistakes you are committing. If you take had tfo see after all, it would look very bad
to-10W say, habits you have, Supposing you not to see naked woman." We are very
have a habit of say, pulling yout lhair. There innocent people so we go on explaining "what
was one lady who had a habit of pulling her to do now, this is the society, this is the
hair and she used to become bald here and fashion, this is the style," this is how it is.
bald here, than the hair used to grow this side
and she used to have a bald head here and
would pull her hair here; Suth a person. So
she came to me for treatiTient. Imagine I So,
I told her why do you do like this 7 She says,
"Now, my attention is like that, it always rew realise really, that "to get realisation like
starts pulling my hair." What to do, such an
attention you have got. So her elder sister
used to beat here on her hand any time she
put her hand. She says that you must beat
me, if you don't beat me, I'll beat you. But 3ll Her lives and even in this life. She must
the beating was on and everybody, used to
look at them what are they doing to each
other and still she could not stop it. All monplace the whole thing. how we are
habits are like this monkey business. All of about it. I thought by giving realisation you
them are like that, because the matter is try-
But a Sahaja Yogi is a special one. He is
a chosen one. Because you haven't got your
own value, you have not valued yourself as
I have valued you. This is a fact which very
this there must be something tremendous that
Mataji must have done. She must have put
in a lot of labour to work this out Herself.
She must have done tremendous Tapasyas in
have worked very hard day in and day ot,
and here we are when we got it how com-
will immediately see your value and you will
you are something great and
ing to sit on top of our attention all the time think that
and so we form habits. Certain habits are
alright convenient and convenience like that.
Some people, to break habits, you know, they promising with gross things in life. There is
say "we'll not sit on the ground nor sit on the
chair." So where will you sit ? "We'll sit in you. One of you can lead all of them.
a sitting pose and we'll practice that sort of
a thing." You need not be such a non-sense.
I am meaning that certain things are alright,
don't go to extremes. But certain habits solved. They stand above them. They are
which we They do not compromise.
fashions for example, if somebody is smoking They do not bend, others bend before them.
he forces you, you say "Alright". And one bad If the light starts falling and faltering on the
habit we've got is not to say "No" to anyone.
"How to say no, you see, they were all drink-
ing and they offered us drinks and we said
no, but they were just forcing us, then it looks have and a personality you should have, it is
very bad you know, not to drink and they for you to decide. Does the attention get the
gave one glass of drink to me and I said priority, when you understand how your
alright, I'll have very little sip you know. One physical being presents, this body of yours
day and I had it like that and then my rela-
tions, you see, they came and they invited us
for dinner and we had to go and then they I've seen people in groups when
that you've got this realisation and the Sak-
shätkär.
shātkār. But it is not so and you start com-
a huge populace which is to be led by 'one' of
Leaders do not compromise, leaders do not
solve the problems of the people when they
lead them, but they give them problems to be
acquire are mostiy because of much above them.
roads what'll the person do who is carrying
the light in the hand. You all are like the
torches and what kind of a life you should
has to be cleansed, has to be beautiful,
has to
be soft. kind, elegant, dignified.
We
29
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-31.txt 
 are sitting down behaving in
even an ordinary educated person won't your attention is lost. Then your gross habits,
behave. The reason is you have not yet your old life that was there that has to be
realised that you are the leaders and people chiselled out, is to be finished. And you can-
manner
sons and whó are your parents. That is how
are watching you. There should be a kind
of a Masti in you, 'Masti" (Hat) as they call here, you'll catch up there, you'll break your
it, should be satisfied with yourself. So on the neck, then you'll come to me-"Mother!
physical aspect what you eat, what you see,
what you like, whole priorities must change. that has happened.
What should be most important is Sahaja, in getting hot I am
every circumstance, in every method a habit
-Sahaja.
not go on, for if you go on, you'll catch up
I've broken my back, this has happened
It's paining, I am
getting headache, I
am doing this." Till you become Sahaja
it'll go on working on you. But why not
become yourself ? For example a human
Sahaja means "It's born with you." Sahaja being cannot sleep like a dog, if he starts
doesn't mean easy. Many people confuse. sleeping like a dog because there are all dogs
You have now got your right that one was
born with you so now. so for you it is neces-
sary that to know that you are a Sahaja and
that you are not going to accept any thing trouble; because the dog doesn't feel, though
that is Asahaja. Sahaja means that, Sahaja he might be getting pain but he doesn't feel it.
means that you take the light of Sahaja above
everything else over the darkness and not to reborn doesn't feel, he gets the problem but he
accept darkness which is Asahaja. So how
can you have habits which give you sympa-
thetic bondage ? Sahaja means you have a
special subtle awareness., A king doesn't
clean the streets.
around then he is going to get the pain. In the
same way if you are going to be Asahaja, be-
cause all are Asahajas you are going to get into
You definitely feel it. The person who is not yet
doesn't feel; you can feel it and you jolly well
have to give it up; sooner the better. If you
don't give it up then you are again going back
to the same darkness and this new darkness
may be hellish, can be terrible. It's better to die
as human being because then you can go on
being born again as animals, this and that.
But to be born again and knowing you go
on back again to your former habits, it can
be very dangerous. That's how I fix your
attention by
On the physical side your
attention is lost like that because you indulge
into all Asahaja methods that you had before,
that others have, you get lost into the Asahaja
system of life. You have to change the com-
plete system of the whole world in which
people become Sahaja and not Asahaja, then
only the whole thing will become Sahaja for your subtler being, the subtler being can only
you. It is a big misunderstanding about enjoy. In the morning you did enjoy the
Sahaja-Yogis. They think "Ohl when it will meditation, you had become subtler, I pushed
come Sahaja then we will do this work, then
we'll go round and talk to people-it should subtler by remembering what has happened,
come Sahaja." Nothing doing I This is a very
wrong attitude. Sahaja means that you have
got the light of Sahaja within you and how
can you tolerate anything else. Means you
must know how to dress up, how to talk,
where to go, whom to meet. Who are your
mothers, who are your sisters, who are your
a little fear into your mind to
down there. But you have to keep yourself
how physically you felt nice.
One of the worst habits that human beings
have is to see the watch. It's so painful to me
when I am talking people see the watch. I
just can't bear it. Because now you are beyond
time, beyond space, what are you going to do
Nirmala Yoga
30
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-32.txt 
 by saving time 7 What have you done so far ? problem, otherwise for human beings, it is not
That shows your priorities. Our priorities difficult to tell him that "this is nice you drink."
must change and you canchange them easily He takes it and he knows it is nice. He won't
once you start enjoying, once you have tasted eat something that is bitter. If you have to
the nectar of Divine Love (Amrit. a) then give him something horrible-tasting, you'll
you are not going to drink dirty water. But have to give him chocolate first and chocolate
you first of all remember that the joy that you later. But human beings when they become
enjoy. That is one way of fixing-so called evolved, I've seen that they are more prone
fixing-your subtleties. It's the attention that
gets covered by the gross things of life, even previous attractions. So put your attention
in the emotional side of it for example you fully tovwards Divine, pull it out completely
have relationships. We have seen some Sahaja towards it so that there is no attention left
Yogis being lost like that. They had some towards the gross sides. Even now I find
very gross relationships with people, even people coming and asking me "Mataji I have
Gurus and some of them were friends and a problem, I want a job, what should I do ?
some other dirty relationships you can say This is to be done, that is to be done." Of
and they couldn't give up and they are lost.
So you have to sit down and find out "Why am attracts your attention means you have lost
I not enjoying myself ? I am the loser, because
of those things, if they were joy giving !
would not have run towards them fróm one form and you can enjoy it. So these gross
to another. They never satisfied me fully, things are never gaing to give you joy so why
so why to go back to them again ?"
towards these horrible things, because of their
course, that is by the way, is alright but if that
sense of your understanding that you are a
Sahaja Yogi and that your joy is in the subtier
not ask for something which will give you that
subtle joy, which you can enjoy-only you can
The emotionalenjoyment: whom you regard enjoy. So this is what happens to
as something very important are also to be attention, we get lost because of our previous
weighed in the new dimension of your atten- ideas and our emotional bindings and we can
tion and the subtleties. You consider somebody also say that our spiritual bindings-so called.
as very near and dear and you have a business We are Hindus, Muslims, Christians. We
relationship or some sort of a-I don't know
what sorts of relations people have. You must Brahmins, Non-Brahmins and all kinds of
know that it is very superficial and you cannot thingswe are, but we are not what we'are'; and
have any joy out of it, like you drink water all these things also come back to you that
from a cup.
the water is superficial, the most important You get me any Jain from anywhere-or anyone
thing is your tongue which can feel the water.
If the tongue cannot feel the water and if the
water feels like stones, what's the use of
taking water ? So the most important thing
is the taste in the tongue in the essence. In
the same way the essence of our enjoyment
is the joy and the joy is in feeling the vibra-
tions; so wherever you get the joy you should he has a bädhã he can entice away at least
have it. But this new awareness is notso much 5 per cent of Sahaja Yogis easily. He will
gone into your being, that's why this is the
our
are vegetarians, Non-Vegetarians. We are
Now the cup itself is superficial,
we are Jains so we are very great people !
from anywhere-does he have the sense of
vibrations ? Then how is it that person be-
comes your Guru or that person can teach you
about these things ? You are now a master.
Does the headmaster come and learn from the
boys who are admitted in the schools ? I've
seen even a newcomer, who comes in and if
talk big, he will show off and he will bring
Nirmala Yoga
31
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-33.txt 
 some Guru inside and 5 per cent will run
after that-minimum. How do you explain this ?
Only thing is that you should not be one of
them. Everyone should think for oneself and
not for others. You should think that this you
are capable of or not ? So in spiritual bindings
also your attention is lost like that and all
these dimensions are outside,
foundation then the piling up and then you
have those pillars and then you have to have the
roof and that is how one after another they plan
out things. But in God's own Kingdom, there
is no planning. You sit down and just enjoy.
If your attention is there all the work is done,
full attention; and then he take out work and
give full priority to that, do not compromise
your way through. You have to help others
Now, in description of Gokul of Vrindävan, also to come up and so you must remember
for that also your attention should be on your
Atma, On your Spirit, on God, completely one
working, the Gopis in the household would with Him in that joy. The whole heart is there-
leave every work-everything, the milk would and with your both hands and your both feet,
be boiling and the work was half done or full with all your attention you can pull out people
done, they were eating their food or in what- because your attention is all the time fed,
ever pose they were sitting they would just nurtured and looked after, then you will enjoy
you must have read that when Krishna used
to play His flute all the women who were
get up and run towards that Murali (Flute):
and when they would go there they would
stand just like a picture no movement in the
also the lifting of the people.
Nothing can be atright unless and until you
body, nothingjust standing and listening with develop the subtleties of your attention; and
they develop by receding your attention from
speaking-just a Murali being played and all of all that is gross. Recede your attention when-
them just listening like a picture. What was ever it goes too much into a thought, like
it ? The enjoyment that they were feeling- thatOh, forget it. But into vibrations you
enjoyment they were enjoying within them- pay full attention, seeing vibrations you pay
selves, the joy that was pouring into them full attention, seeing your own vibrations pay
with that Murali, just standing and listening, full attention, other things you need not worry
full attention, what was so ? He was not even
they will be all looked after.
that's all. What is that ? That is the subtleness
of that enjoyment just like meditation, they
would stand. In the same way your attention
and mind should be on Sahaja, on your being
with God.
That is how your attention is subtler in the
kingdom of God. When the lotus is in the
mud and it has to come out it finds its way
You are one with God, put your
centrifugal force towards God completely. through many crevices and many holes in that
Put yourself in connection all the time with mud but when it is out in the open-absolutely
liberated free then it does not go on dashing
here and there but just opens out and receives
the beautiful dew, and the dew melts the
fragrance in the lotus. Automatically the
The human mind is used to do things in fragrance starts flowing. It's a different
a ritual way, that they think that if you have method, it's a different way of life that is
God and the rest of the work is done just like
instruments. The whole thing will start
working.
to raise this house you have to dig first the
being Sahaja.
32
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-34.txt 
 Her Holiness
Shri Mataji's Advice
To Western Women
And I think it is just the other way round
Now, this is in the West. Now, the
women are intelligent and the women of the in India. There the men will fuss. The men
west being intelligent and educated have will say, "This is not good". They will say,
developed a kind of a very complex situation "We are sick and you must look after us".
around themselves. These things have made and all that. They don't say that we have to
them a kind of a man without manliness, and look after you. They say that you have to
that is why their whole behaviour becomes look after us. And the women think that,
extremely
understand, but now I've started under- shaktis and they have to bear it upon them-
standing, that the way the women are, ihey selves and give them the joy.
want to dominate men. But they don't
understand that by dominating you cannot
create good relationship.
just don't because they are their wives, they are their
odd. Sometimes
Now, the women here have another very
bad capacity, in Sahaja Yoga I have seen it,
that they always say that the negativity
Now, to dominate a man one way could attacks, all the time, for any rhyme and reason.
be just to go on behaving like a man, you see,
pushing him around and all that, saying, you have a child you feel more attacked by
"Don't do this. I don't lika it. This is not negativity because you are on your own.
good. That is not good". But that is not so Imagine ! When you have a child you have
sophisticated. So, the other way is to all the such a great company of your child. I mean,
time talk about the miseries of your past. "I am for an Indian mother, as soon as she is pre-
like this, This is wrong with me". All the time gnant she feels the happiness. When the
she's sick. All the time she's miserable. All child is born, she feels the company of the
the time she's insecure, All the time she's child.
so dependent, she needs her husband. She that her own child is there, and then, through
wants the attention of the husband. The her child, she learns how to love other
husband must look after her. Ultimately, I children.
think the husbands must be getting absolutely
fed up and running away from the wives.
And that must be why the prostitution is so they put the same nonsense on them. "Oh,
strong here, because at least the prostitute how bad is my husband, he has done so
tries to please the husband and not to make much to me, and how bad is this world, and
him miserable, because she has to earn her how bad was my mother..." And this is how
Like just now somebody told me that when
For her nothing more is needed than
But here even when the children are born
they try to dominate the children, making that
living.
33
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-35.txt 
 For example, if my husband and I are sit-
get to these "Les Miserables". From where ting and there is an interviewer, he will say
that this woman is deaf and dumb, she
doesn't talk. Really, many people who have
seen us together say, "We never knew about
child absolutely miserable. That is how we
it has come 7-the sources are here.
Now, if they are uneducated they are even
worse, because they have a complex. If they you. Your husband never said a word about
are less intelligent there is another problem. you." You see, like that, it is very common,
woman just keeps outside. People didn't know
They try to play all dirty tricks with the hus-
band and with other people. If their husband that I could be Mataji because those who had
has any relationship with anyone they don't known me otherwise had never seen me
like it. It is most surprising, isn't it ? Like talking, because you are not supposed to
friendship; or if the husband wants to talk to talk when your husband is talking, you just
keep quiet.
some other men,-not women of course,
women you can have some objection,-but I
can't understand, that they don't like friends
of the husband, to come in the house. It is
the other way round in India. The husband's
friends are very much welcomed and looked round and opening his mouth a little bit to say
after by the wife, and there is a sweet relation-
ship between them, and they call her the
sister-in-law. It is very sweet.
Here it is the other way round. If there is
an interviewer, the woman will talk first. The
man will be sitting like a big mouse, looking
something.
The aggression of these women is very
subtie. They come up with such sinister
questions, anything they say has a sting and
But here it is just the other way round. then you get fed up of such a person and that
They just abhor all the relations of the hus- is why there are divorces.
band, and this is something most surprising
because the husband is not single. All his
The men of the west are much better than
relations are part and parcel of him. He is Indian men. They are not dominating. They
understand the value of women. They have
obliged to them, related to them, or he is
attached to them, and if she really loves the
given so much freedom to them. They have
husband, then she should accept the other given them so much prestige and honour.
But if you give something to women, they
should be capable of bearing it up, isn't it?
What is the use of giving everything equal to
relationships also.
Then, all their lives they have lived like
this, by making, I would say, a show that they
are miserable, and they continue with it after
they are married. And in Sahaja Yoga also,
I have seen the way they behave.
them when they have no capacity to bear it?
hat is why it is such an imbalance, I find, for
women the way they are so sinister about the
whole of life.
Life is beautiful, full of joy, happiness,
Towards any calamity an Indian woman bliss. Morning until evening if you go on
will stand up. She is the one who will stand making somebody miserable then you are
up, at the time of calamity. Otherwise she
will not show. She is not on the scene. No-
body will know there is a woman working, have got equality without evolving themselves
she is not the one who will talk first.
against life. You are against God. This they
must realise. The whole thing is that they
up to that point.
Nirmala Yoga
34
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-36.txt 
 It is rather like the Arabs. They got Sahaja Yoga. Take it from me. All of them
the Cadillacs. First they were an the camels will be thrown out. If you do not want to
Or on the donkeys, then they became rich
Arabs and they had Cadillacs. Now, by sit-
ting in the Cadillac you don't become a cul-
tured man.
come up, you will be out for good.
So, it is a challenge for all the Sahaja
Yoginis in the West that you must be joyous.
You must be happy people.
You see, In the same way if the women
ate suddenly made to feel, oh, they are equal,
this, that; they have not developed that they build up their ego very subtly. If you
pänache, as ydu say in your language. They just say that, "No, that is not good", imme-
haven't developed that sophistication. So the diately they start cıying, you know they are
inferiority works out and fhey go on pinching upset. Men don't know what to do, because
the men alI the time. Every word, and the these women have picked up their own
toungue also doesn't have that sweetness.
Now, you see that in any case like this
images and they want to do whatever they
think, and if men see something more than
they do, and say, "Do this. this would be
But in our Sahaja Yoga we have seen
some very great Sahaja Yoginis, who are better", they are finished.
really senior women, I would suggest. Like
you can say.., a solid woman, very solid
woman, very solid woman, and she under-
stands things very well. Like....she is a
good wife, no doubt, she makes her husband
happy.
people have that sweetiess about their hus-
bands and I have never seen them telling me
about their miseries or thinking about their
past or anything. Never. Never.
They get identified with these things. So,
you can't say that they are left-sided, but
they are egotistical. And in this ego there
is a sinister attitude by which they make
the men and woman and children miserable.
is another one. See, these
So, this must be stopped now. Anymore
of this misery is to be stopped in the West.
Nothing. What is this misery you have got ?
You should go and see the women of India
who are smiling and laughing. They have
children to look after. They have ten, eleven,
twelve children to look after. They have no
money. Early in the morning, at four o'clock,
Always they said we were happily married.
.....told me, "we were happily married".
Her husband was a Russian, and they had a
problem because of the war, but she never
said that my husband made me miserable, or they have to get up and take their bath be-
this thing, that thing. Never. I never heard
them saying like that. And even if that is the laze out like you do. And then they go
case, or something is there, you should be
happy. Even if, say, your husband is a bad
man, he is not a Sahaja Yogi, you should be shining. They come home, put the food
happy.
cause of conditions in India. They cannot
to the well, fill the water and bring it
home. You see beautiful, see their faces
down there, slowly wake up their husbands,
put things for his bath, look after their child-
ren, clean the house. By the time the child-
In Sahaja Yoga it is compulsory that you
should be happy, you should be joyous and ren are up they see the clean house, you
you have to be joyful. There is no place for should see how much they work hard. And
people who are miserable. If they try to go you will not know that they are working.
on with this they will have to get out of Absolutely silent. You have seen how these
35
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-37.txt 
 women used to cook. Did you ever hear come out and she is there with the powder
any body outside ? As soon as people are
coming they are serene. They are looking the towel. All the time they are running
after them. They are intelligent, I mean,...
is an income tax officer, do you know that ? motherly they are, to me.
.....is an income tax officer. They are offi-
cers, but how do they behave ? Have you motherly.
ever seen them anywhere in anyway asserting
themselves? Never.
to sprinkle on my feet and to wipe them with
up and down. You can't imagine how
. To me, they are
motherly. To their grandfather they are
Early in the morning-this Shumi was about
two and a half years old, very small-so early
In India education is very strong. Most in the morning she used to see the grand-
of the girls in India are at least graduates, father sitting there. She used to go into the
actually, at least. But there is no ego about room, take his newspaper-just hardly used to
it. They understand their position as wife walk, you see-and his spectacles and bring
and as a woman, and they know that they are
the ones who are the source of joy, and they
have to give that joy to others. Here the
women don't understand how much they can
give joy. After all your Mother is a woman very sinister idea. It is very repulsive. It is
and if She can give so much joy why not that I have seen it once, but when I talk to
shouldn't you be able to?
them to him. What does it take?
But if the attention is all the time to
extract others, it comes from some sort of
them, I really feel very disgusted sometimes.
And I feel, oh God, these women when they
marry what will happen ? And when they marry,
And this is what it is. I just don't under-
stand, such a great potential. such a great I see. And that, is why the men here don't
source just cut. Just cut. That is why, you know what to do. You see, if you have any
see, the motherhood is lacking, nothing else problem, a woman has to bear it.
but the motherhood. The women are all
Indian women have great courage. Like
when the war started in India, a woman, who
was a widow and a queen, she rode on horse
herself, she tied her sari, she took her child at
right nothing wrong with them, it is the
motherhood.
Even a little child in India-see our Anu-
pama is hardly now six years old. She came the back-she was a queen-and jumped from
to speak in my ear, "Who is this baby here the fortress about a hundred feet down and
sitting smiling ?" I said his name is Machendra she fought the British. She died, of course.
Nath. "Ah! this is Machendra Nath."I She
is a six year old girl, she doesn't know self-the general-wrote that, "We won the
how to carry, you remember, she took the battle, but the victory and the glory was that
baby. Then she wanted to give him some-
thing to eat. If you have any child bring it
e. These two girls will look after it, give like that. Wondrous. But they would only
The British killed her. But the Britisher him-
of Lakshmi Bai."
Not only that but there are many women
home
food to it, they will look after it. They are
just all the time, you know, nursing thne child- reach the cusp of just drama, that time they
ren. Even to the grandfather, "Now,can I
feed you ?" Grandmother of course, but to
the grandfather ! "Can I feed you ? Would
you like to have this ?" I take my bath,
show up if there is a calamity. When things
come up. Otherwise they are quiet.
You see, that kind of thing should be the
I womanhood, I mean, if I have to tell you
Nirmala Yoga
36
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-38.txt 
 you will see how they will arrange it. They will
get all the best vegetables of the market, the
about Indian women, I will have to give you
a big lecture. Really. And you have seen
how they behave, how dignified and how best chickens of the market, and the best of
sweet and . must take my hat off to them. everything and do the best that they can, put
They are mature in the womanhood in the all their heart into it. "The saints are coming
best possible way, the potential of women.
to our house, the saints are coming to our
house".
See they have Worked so hard. If you
remember a little girl who was married and
she invited us for breakfast, about three years people think that Indian women are very
back, a little one, very small. We had gone much suppressed because of their goodness.
to a canal and she said, Tomorrow, Mother, They don't mind. They say our goodness
you come and have breakfast at my place".. cannot be suppressed. Goodness is a thing
and I said, "No, it is too much.
many people, about thirty five people. How oppression and all that. They don't take to all
will you feed us 7," And apart from that the
other leaders were also there. "Oh, I will
manage", she said, and when we went there
she gave us such a nice breakfast. And all attached. You see, my daughter, now she
the neighbouring women you see, they got receives her husband's phone calls practically
up at 4 o'clock, did everything-and all of every day from Saudi Arabia. Look at my
them in really great joy, that Mother is coming husband. Now, he is an old man of sixty-five
to our house and they ware so enamoured
about it.
The beauty is this, and despite this, many
We are so that is more important than suppression and
Not at all.
these nonsensical ideas.
It is so nice. And then the husbands feel
years. If you leave it to him he will telephone
to me ten times I tell him don't telephone
all the time, but he will go on telephoning.
Thật is called as "fondness" in India. You see, that is the source, so you want to
There are no words for joy here. There are talk and you want to have something.
no words for different joys, but it is this
fondness of people, and they were feeling
obliged that we were eating. And I ate and want to extract from you. What is there for
ate. I said, "No, I am too full, I can't eat
any more,"
didn't like anything, or what ?"-and giving their potential and they go on eating some-
and giving. So sweet. And so inany, I body's head all the time. How can they love
think I told them thirty five, there were him? They cannot.
But here it is the other way round, they
men to give ? It is women who have to give.
Women have to give. They don't realize
and they said, "Mother,
you
fifty. Arranged like that also, and in a small
little house, they arranged in front of the
thing. Very silent, very silent. Very efficient,
because of the efficiency. you see, of love,
that they could manage it.
And that is what I think of when I tell
Indian men to marry western women. They
shudder a bit, because why should they make
themselves miserable ? Just think, if they
know about western women as they are.
It is so, sweet, and little, little things they
do. It is so much energy that goes in. So
So, this must change. We are Sahaja
And this time I am going to write even Yogis. We have nothing to do with western
to the Poona ladies, that they should arrange ideas of women and all that. I don't know,
whatever book I have read about western
nice.
our food, not in the Rajwade Karyalaya and
37
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-39.txt 
 women, about the heroines and all that, they
were never like this. This is something else
I am sesing actually from what I have read.
the source we have got. We are the source
of joy. Accept this situation. We are the
source of joy, of confidence, of love, and
(Question: Could westerm women imitate atfection, ard kindness and gentleness. Then,
once in a while, if the husband does wrong
you have a right to tell him. He will never
mind it. But all the time if you go on coaxing
imitate, because you are Sahaja Yogis. You hinm he will say, "Oh, this permanent, mun-
get it spontaneously. Just accept that. Now dane, every day." This needed saying. Even
accept that. Whatever is the past is past. Australian women should be told. This is
Indian women?)
Also they should, but there is no need to
You can do it.
very common. But they are very Sweet, ah?
Don't trouble the girls, if they don't trouble
you, then you shouldn't trouble them.
Our job is to make everybody happy and
joyous. That is it. That is our job. That is
MARCH in DELHI
This year Delhi was specially blessed by affection. Finally Shri Radha Krishna sakshat
Shri Mataji. A 800 capacity hall was over- Mataji's leela led everyone into the 5th dimen-
flowing and people sat in the aisles listening sion of the pure spirit. The next day Shri
in awe and spell bound silence to the Adi Mataji announced that She has apened the
Shakti,
Sahasrara of Delhi at the puja.
After each lecture Shri Mataji gave realisa-
tion and lifted the collective ego mountain.
It was the most joyful and fulfilling mament performed thus integerating auspiciousness
to see 1000 people get their realisation. At and festivity. She emphasised in the puja
the end of each programme people would that love has to be the instrument to spread
rush to touch Her Lotus feet and seek per-
sonal blessings. The series of public pro-
grammes reached the climax on Her Birthday living example of the warmth and love of our
celebration programme. The Hall was over-
crowded and it seemed that both man and ing and considerate in our attitude to others.
the angels were struggling to grace the aus-
picious occasion. Of course Shri Mataji gra-
ciously bestowed many blessings on all Her
children and said the most wonderful things.
Every one enjoyed greatly the occasion.
Before the puja, 2 sahaja marriages were
Sahaja Yoga. How we should not come
across as dry and harsh people but be the
primordial Mother. It is important to be car-
Sahaja Yagis are still weak in these aspects
and should now pay more attention on it. It
was indeed a very deep and moving puja.
There is no doubt that the time has come
for Sahaja Yoga to grow in leaps and bounds.
A special gift to the Delhi Sahaj yogis Already the Delhi Temple is bursting to
came as the Holi celeberation where all the seams and plans are over ground for the con-
Sahaj yogis sang and danced through a riot of struction of a Big ashram. Let us pray to
Holi colours. All the ego melted and every Shri Mataji that it should be ready to welcome
one embraced each other with great love and Her in Her next visit.
JAI MATAJI
Nirmala Yoga
38
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-40.txt 
 October '83
JAI MATAJI
Austria-One Year Later
What a difference. The whole place feels Paris or at Guru Puja earlier in the year.
transformed. The atmosphere is lighter and Since getting their realization just over a year
and happier, ever since Shri Mataji's first visit ago many of the Austrians have become sud-
here in September 1982 the weather has denly "jet-setters" of Sahaja Yoga, and have
been so dry and sunny that no-one can believe done more travelling in this year than ever
before in their desire to be close to Their
Mother now that they have found Her again
it. Day after day it goes on.
In contrast, on the eve of Shri Maaji s after so long.
arrival here for the second time in Septem-
ber 83 Shri Indra blasted the negativity and
the city was washed by a tremendous thunder- Everyone gathered at a Sahaja Yogi's flat to
And now here She was in Vienna itself.
wait for Shri Mataji's darshan. Mr. Dhumal
spoke some introductory words and the exci-
storm.
This time Austrian Sahaja Yogis were joy- tement mounted till, suddenly, Shri Mataji
fully and proudly waiting to greet Their arrived; radiant, beautiful in a green sari,
Mother at the airport, and no less than thirty smiling and sitting to talk to us gathered
of them at that. Only Shri Mataji knows how eagerly at Her Feet.
long we had waited for this moment.
She spoke to us about the subtle side of
The weeks leading up to it were packed Shri Adi Bhoomi. It was she who created Shri
with a tremendous buzz of organization in Kundalini. As Mother Earth she gives food
which everyone took part, taking responsibility to the plants, animals and human beings.
upon themselves and pulling their weight. Shri Kundalini is the nouishing Mother within
We learnt a lot about collectivity in practice
and generally things went smoothly so that wardly creative, the masculine aspects.
we could really feel that it is Our Mother who
is the Doer and we just Her instruments.
us all. The other four elements are the out-
In connection with this Shri Mataji emphasi-
sed the special duties and characteristics of men
and women, clearly stating that feminism is a
We had no difficulty booking the hall for misdirected consciousness of women.
the programmes, which took place in a famous Austria, and the bordering eastern countries
building in the centre of Vienna right on the
banks of the river Danube, which is the
longest river in Europe and which carries the
vibrations all the way to Russia and the Black
Sea.
As
which were formerly a part of it, represent the
pancreas of the universe they are thus part of
the Left Nabhi chakra and indeed the role of
wamen is especially misunderstood in this
area of the world and in northern Europe as a
Much time was also spent in scrubbing whole. Shri Mataji said that She will be dealing
and painting our ashram which we received
by Shri Mataji's Grace two months before Her hopes that the Germans will take to it when
visit. Just in time to welcome all our dear She visits Germany in 1984.
brothers and sisters from other countries,
with such topics in the future and that She
We pray that the nourishment of Shri
many of whom we had been able to meet in Kundalini may now spread into the somewhat
Nirmala Yoga
39
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-41.txt 
 barren north of Europe, and intend to orga- attend
nize programmes in Munich and Budapest in
order to express the key function of the vakia, Many new people came and all of us
"bridge", which Shri Mataji says that Austria enjoyed a chance to really submerge our-
has in the divine plan, between East and selves in vibrations, outside of the city, away
West, left and right.
a seminar in Drosendorf Castle, which
is situated near the border with Czekoslo-
from jobs and non-sahaj family. For many
At the public programmes all the Sahaja people this proved to be a turning point and
Yogis were taken thoughtless at the unsur-
passsable brilliance with which Shri Mataji came up.
worked out the whole affair. Just before the
giving of realization at the last programme Sunday and witnessed something remark-
all the Sahaja Yogis stood up at the side of the able; we started reading the holy names of
packed auditorium and sang a hymn to the Devi and within minutes a fierce snow
the Adi Shakti written by seekers centuries and thunderstorm had developed out of the
as a result some strong new Sahaja Yogis
We offered a Puja to Our Mother on the
blue. It was so powerful that all the windows
started rattling like mad. Then, as suddenly
as it had appeared, the storm departed taking
clouds, both gross and more subtle with it
and leaving us bathed in the heavenly blue
of an autumn sky. Sunshine. Vibrations.
ago.
"Come, O come my comforter,
Enter into my heart,
Come, O Spirit from above,
Inflame us with Thy love,
that we may be filled with holy bliss.
Come, O Spirit from above."
Shri Mataji we pray that the light may
This came as quite a surprise to some break through on more and more evercast
people who were there for the first time be- corners of this Mother Earth, that all our
cause only minutes before, Shri Mataji had brothers and sisters may know the joy of
witnessing Your ever beautiful, always
strongly attacked the "Christian Churches".
About a month after Shri Mataji's departure surprising and eternally splendid divine play.
we wrote to all those seekers who had left
their address with us and invited them to
Bolo Bolo Shri Jaganmata Shri Mataji Ki
Jai
A True Passage of India
During this extraordinary journey around Throughout the journey, this feeling of the
the holy land of Maharashtra in India, we felt power of nature and the elements to soothe
and shared so many experiences that it is you, to purify you, to give you joy continued
difficult to give an account of them all.
to increase ànd become more subtle.
For the first time i was leaving Europe, the
"Western world". So I wondered whether I soaks in the dams and rivers ! The water so
would feel a kind of cultural shock. But the pure and fresh, so vibrated. After a very hot
very first thing I experienced, even in a city day of travelling on the bus, we would just
like Bombay, was that my ego gradually sub-
sided and that my right side came back to let it flow over our hands and faces, and feel
normal: a growing feeling of the intensity absolutely fresh. We felt our skins sparkle.
of the present. I was already feeling the Miraculous water-in the true sense of the
blessing of the vibrated earth of Mother India. word.
Just the memory of our bathes and foot-
put our hands in the water of the river Nirä,
Nirmala Yoga
40
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-42.txt 
 A mote subtle experience. One day, the to twelve years of age, and their baby bro-
dust blowing into the buses from the roads thers and sisters. The little girls, with their
Was making us all cough. After six hours we wide bright eyes, smilingly asked my name.
could hardly breathe. Suddenly, a sahaja That's the only thing they know how to say
Vogi said: "If you just put your atfention on in English: "What's your name ?" And then
the fact that this dust has been vibrated by they asked me
Shri Rama's feet you wouldn't cough like
that I" Immmediately, all the coughing stopped. Mataji had given a programme in the morning.
The pain in my lungs vanished. And for the So i checked one, two, three,... little girls.
Test of the journey thera was no more cough- Than I raised the Kundalinis of their little
ing. The dust didn't bother me any more.
to check whether a cool
breeze was Gaming out of their sahasraras. Shri
Their vibrations were beautiful. We
brothers.
Chitta! Yes, the attention Was the kay were all so joyous. It was a beautiful game.
word.
and spoke
Our attention was
our living together in a community: getting that she wanted me to raise her kundalini.
up very early. giving your attention to other The vibrations were so strong ! It was so
sahaja yogis from other countries to help or beautiful. I felt a deep joy. I said to myself:
share and enjay something with them.
Our attention was educated by the tapas,
which were not really very hard. Not to mother put ma into meditation, we were both
be troubled by discomfort, no "western" bath- smiling at each other. Sisters, true sisters, at
rooms, etc. Not to fall asleep during the that moment.
beautiful but long bhajans, which went on
till four o'clock in the morning.
Our divine Mother emiphasised it A girl took my hand to bring me to her
it in all the pujas. mother. She explained something in Marathi.
by The mother smiled and made me understand
davaloped
also
"This is the real India; the true passage to
India." Just the vibrations of this young
Our sacred Shri Mataji bestowed us with
such blessings I One was that the charming
Most important, we learned to give our Indian girl who came to meet me when I first
attention to vibrations. All Shri Mataji's pro- arrived in India was to become my "daughter-
in-law" at the weddings at Bordi.
grammes were in Hindi or Marathi; they went
on for at least three to four hours.
So we
The weddings at Bordi were the climax
had to give all our attention to meditation of our journey. We felt, as a sahaja yogi
and the vibrations. Too bad for our western said, as if we were in the old times of the
mind, which loves so much to enjoy the kingdom of Seeta and Rama, which we have
meaning of all Shri Mataji's tremendous all read about in the "Amar Chitra Katha"
comics. Indeed, the place nea: the sea; the
high trees; the vibrations (it is near where Shri
But the marvellous delicacy of these events Mataji opened the sahasrara of the world);
was revealed to us. The deep affection and the big gathering of about 1000 sahaja yogis;
love that grew in the community of sahaja the brides and bridegrooms looking like
yogis: Australian, English, Italian, French, princesses and princes; the deep, solemn and
dignified Vedantic ceremony performed before
We neither speak nor understand Marathi. Shri Adi Shakti Herself-all this took us all
communicated. with our Indian beyond time, beyond space to a place where
speeches. Only in pujas would She speak to
us in English.
Austrian, and last but not least, Indian.
But we
friends by smiles and vibrations. I remember there is only sat-chit-ananda.
one evening in Rahuri. We were sitting with
Indian mothers, and children of about seven
Jai Shri Mataji
Antoinette S.
Nirmala Yoga
41
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-43.txt 
 Sahaja Yoga and Physical Cure-Part IV
When one is trained in medicine as an giving them their form. The interaction of the
ordinary doctor, one is taught that this body energies that flow through different parts or
is composed of organs, bones etc. One also aspects of the system are used to influence
learns by investigation and direction what the universe-in the subtle plane as vibrations
appears to happen and why it appears to and in the gross as activity. The causal works
һаppen.
by influencing the tanmätrās or causals of the
Elements. As all three are the manifestations
If one is a realised soul and a Yogi, one of the Ätmā and hence Paramātma's desire,
knows that beneath the so-called gross body they are ultimately under its control. The
is the subtle body and within that the causal
body. The subtle body consists of Nädis expressing a portion of that absolute desire,
and Chakras. The main ones are known to
us. But in addition to the main ones, there sphere, When the whole system is clear, this
are a total of 33 crores of lesser known ones happens effortlessly and without thoughts.
connecting all the various Nadis and chakras If it is not, thought and effort intervene; how-
to each other, in every conceivable way, ever they can in no way express the fullness,
which the human mind cannot grasp. This simplicity, effortlessness and directness of the
causal, sükshma (e, subtle) and Sthoola Divine.
(e gross) Shariras (bodies) are the Tantra
or instrument of Atma which is itself the
reflection of the Paramätmā, the supreme
manifest reality in the universe and itself a
reflection of the Parabrahma or Absolute.
individual human being
is like a cell
power and control, in its own individual
When the average Sahaja Yogi gets his
realization, many of these channels, Nādis
and Chakras are blocked and their points of
interaction twisted. Furthermore, the actual
paths of the Nādis, can be pulled out of
The Sükshma Sharira, controlling the alignments and twisted together like a knot
Sthoola or gross body is the means, whereby of string. This blocks the manifestation of
the desire of the Absolute is brought to play the Atma's power. Lord Shiva is known as
in the gross world of the material creation. Shaktivähi. What this means is that all the
These three bodies have no other functions. powers in the universe are borne by Him or
more exactly all the Shaktis in the universe are
an expression of the Paramātmā, as the
sunbeams reflect the sun or the moon-beams
The connection between
Sthoola Sharira is through Âtmā, the causal
body, the subtle body and finally the gross.
Paramātmā to
body. If there is a block in any part of this the moon. So, the Atmā, through its Shaktis
system, one does not express fully the desire tries to manifest itself through the system and
unblocks it using its powers. Sometimes
when the block is too great, one feels pain
In addition to the system outlined above, and sometimes one gets symptoms suggestive
are the Five Elemental Sheaths or Koshas of certain diseases. Often, "the disease is the
() starting with Ether as the subtlest and cure", in that if whatever inside is allowed to
going down to Earth as the grossest. These work its way fully to the surface and out of
surround the Ātmā or heart and stabilise the one's being, one becomes cured of that
or drama of the Divine in one's existence,
Sūkshma and eventually the Sthoola Sharira
specific Bādhā or bondage.
42
Nirmala Yoga
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-44.txt 
 There are certain things that can be done
to assist this process. First is to witness it
without feeling sorry for oneself or proud of tions. Vibrations are a manifestation of the
being able to bear such suffering. If one is a
good Sahaja Yogi one knows that nothing incarnation of that Shakti is therefore the
evil can attend ane and even pain and illness
are parts of the redemption brought to us by sucked through the fingers and Sahasrāra and
our Mother and should be borne. If one can-
not bear-it becomes hard to be cured, for the they can be sucked directly through the heart,
hand of our Divine Mother is blocked.
The fourth and final method to which the
first three are adjuncts is the taking of vibra-
Shakti of the Paramātma.
Shri Mataji as the
source of all vibrations. Vibrations can be
later directly by individual Chakras.
When
they work very powerfully. for the heart is the
point of the creation and therefore of one's
Secondly, there are certain substances that body. For this to happen, the heart should be
have affinities for certain Chakras and Nādis. fully open to the Divine Mother's baing.
These when used or kept near one can emit However, even the Vibrations of the heart can
their vibrations to the diseased part, some-
times strengthening it, sometimes shaking out
the residue in the blocked Nädi. They
sometimes act by giving the necessary shock
to unblock a system so that the power of the unbalanced, block the process-and instead of
Atmā can flow and take over that system, healing, prevent it. This is because they consist
Much of Homeopathy which uses the subtle of single gross molecules which can act on a
constituent of substances works like this, for single point only. Herbs or natural remedies,
in Homeopathy the gross atoms and molecules however, are created by God and therefore,
of substances are diluted out. This second balanced by Him to reflect the needs of the
part requires knowledge and experience-but being. They contain many substances in
vibrations help.
be blocked and then the above methods can
be used.
Sometimes, modern medicines, being
varying proportions which may also vary accor-
ding to the seasons of the year or the phases
of the moon, The moon, having the qualities
Third, the various excretory manifestations.
These substances loosened by the power of of the heart, rules and has a powerful effect
the Atma have to be thrown out. In addition on various herbs, used individually. Although
to the obvious, bathing strips substances off knowledge of pure medicine lies on the right,
the skin and hair. In relation to the Sahasrāra, its power came from the left. Thus it was
Shikākäi ( faereIf) is useful, for it was used by Lord Shiva, who allowed the Ashwins or
the Adi Shakti as Shri Sita. Similarly, pus, is divine physicians to drink Soma, i.e. it was
a form of excretion of Badhā, as is breathing He who gave them their power.
out, especially in Pränäyama; looking at a
flame in front of Shri Mataji's photograph etc.
etc. All five Elements can be used for this.
115
All that I have written applies to realised
souls only.
-Dr. Rustom.
Nirmala Yoga
43
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-45.txt 
 "KAVACH OF THE DEVI"*
Amen in the Name of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, the Merciful,
the Compassionate
3-5 The following nine names have been
told by the great soul Brahmadeva himself.
Durg is known by these names:
The protection of Shri Chandi
Salutation to Shri Ganesha. Salutations to
Shri Saraswati. Salutations to Shri Guru. Salu-
tations to the deity worshipped in the famijy.
May there be no obstacle.
first Shailaputri (the daughter of moun-
tain)
second Brahmacharini (one who observes
Amen. Salutations to Näräyan. Amen.
Salutations to Naranarattam ie. Shri Vishnu. celebacy)
Amen. Salutations to the Goddess Saraswati.
third Chandraghanta
fourth Kooshmända
fifth Skandamātă (mother of Kārtikeya)
sixth Kätyäyani
seventh Kälarātri
Salutations to Ved-Vyāsa ie. the Sage Vyāsa,
the all knowing.
Now begins the "Kavach", of Devi
The presiding sage for Shri Chandi-Kavach
is Brahmā, the metre is Anushtup, the presi-
ding deity is Chamunda; the main seed is
"Anganyasakta
Digbandha-devatā. It is recited as part of
Sapta-Shati, to please Jagadamba,
eighth Mahägauri
ninth Siddhidātri
6-7 Those who are frightened, having
been surrounded by the enemies on the battle-
field or are burning in fire, or being at an
impassable place, would face no calamity,
and would never have grief, sorrow, fear, or
evil, if they surrender to Durgā.
the principle is
mätar",
Amen. Obeisance to Chandikā.
Thus spoke Mārkandeya:
1. Amen. 0 Brahmadeva, please tell me
that which is very secret and has not been
told by anyone to anybody else, and which tedly, O Goddess of the Gods, you protect
protects all human beings in this world.
8. Those who remember you with great
devotion indeed have prosperity. Undoub-
those who remember you.
Brahmadeva said:
9 The Goddess Chāmunda sits on a
Brahmin, there is Devi Kavach which corpse, Värahi rides on a buffalo, Aindri is
is most secret and is useful to all beings. mounted on an elephant and Vaishnavi on a
Please listen to that, O great sage.
condor (garuda).
Dear reader,
This "Kavach of the Devi" has been translated by our brother Mr. Kulkarni from Poon%;
many thanks to him ! This text can be read during our pujas and there is no need to
comment on its obvious usefulness. The Kavach has been sanctified and vibrated as it
was read to Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi during Her Adi Shakti Puja in Bombay
in January 1984.
Gregoire
JAI SHRI MATAJI I
Nirmala Yoga
44
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-46.txt 
 20-21 Thus, Goddess Chämunda, who
vehicle of Kaumari is the peacock. Lakshmi, sits on corpse, protects me from all the ten
the beloved of Shri Vishnu, is seated in a lotus directions. May Goddess Jayä protect me
from the front and Vijayā from the rear: Ajita
from the left and Aparājita from the right.
Goddess Dyotini may protect the top-knot
10 Maheshwari is riding on a bull, the
and is also holding a lotus in her hand.
11 The Goddess Ishwari, of white com-
plexion, is riding on a bull and Brähmi, who
is bedecked with all ornaments is seated on a
and Vyavasthitā may protect my head.
22-23 May I be protected, by Mälädhari
on the forehead, Yashaswini on the eye-brows,
12 All the mothers are endowed with Trinétră between the eye-brows, Yamaghanta
Yoga and are adorned with different orna- on the nose, Shankhini on both the eyes,
Dwāravāsini on the ears, may Kälika protect
my cheeks and Shankari the roots of the
Swan.
ments and jewels.
13-15 All the Goddesses
mounted in chariots and very angry. They
are weilding conch, discus, mace, plough,
club, javelin, axe, noose, barbed dart, trident,
bow and arrows. These Goddesses are weil-
ding their weapons, for destroying the bodies
of demons, for the protection of their devotees mäyă-
and for the benefit of gods
are
seen
ears
24-27 May 1 be protected by Sugandha-
nose, Charchika lip, Amrtakala lower-lip,
Saraswati-tongue, Kaumari-teeth, Chandikä
-throat, Chitra-ghanta sound-box, Mahā-
crown of the head, Känmäkshi-chin.
Bhadrakäli-neck,
Sarvamangalā-speech,
Dhanurdhari-back. May Neelagreevä protect
the outer part of my throat and Nalakoobari-
16 Salutations to you 0 Goddess. of
very dreadful appearance, of frightening windpipe, may Khadgini protect my shoulders
valour, of tremendous strengh and energy, and Vajradhārini protect my arms.
the destroyer of the worst fears.
28-30 May Devi Dandini protect both my
hands, Ambikā-fingers. Shooleshwari my
nails and may Kuleshwari protect my belly.
17-18 O Devi, it is difficult to have even
a glance at you, you increase the fear of your
enemies. Please come to my rescue. May May I be protected, by Mahadevi-breast,
Goddess Aindri protect me from the east.
Agni Devată (Goddess of fire) from the south-
east, Värähi (Shakti of Vishnu in the form of
the boar) from the south, Khadgadhārini (the shavähini-rectum.
weilder of sword) from the south-west,
Vāruni (the Shakti of Varuna the rain god) from
the west and Mrgavähini (whose vehicle is
the dear) may protect me from the north-
Shuladhärini-abdomen, Lalită Deviheart,
Kämini-navel, Guhyeshwari-hidden parts.
Pootană-kämika-reproductive organs. Mahi-
31 May Goddess Bhagawati protect my
waste, Vindhyaväsini-knees, and the wish-
fulfilling Mahabalā may protect my hips.
west.
May Närasinhi protect my ankles. May
32
19 May Goddess Kaumäri (the Shakti of Taijasi protect my feet. may Shri protect my
Kumār ie. Kartikeya) protect me from the
north and Goddess Shooladharini from the
north-east, Brahmäni (the Shakti of Brahmā)
from above and Vaishnav (Shakti of Vishnu) Ordhvakeshini-hair, Kauberi-pores. Vägish-
toes. May Talaväsini protect the soles of my
feet.
33 May Danshträkarāli protect my nails,
from below; protect me.
wari-skin.
Nirmala Yoga
45
 1984_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-47.txt 
 Regiatered with the Registrar of Newapepers under Regd Ne. 36999/81
34 May Goddess Pärvati protect-blood. one is successful everywhere, and all one's
marrow of the bones, tat and bone: Goddess desires are fulfilled and that person enjoys
Kälarätri-intastines. Mukuteshwari-blie (and great prasperity on the earth.
liver).
45 That person who covers himself with
35 May Padmavati protect the chakras, Kavach becomes fearless, is nevar defeated in
Choodimani- phlegm (or lungs), Jwälamukhi
Tustre of the nails and Abhedya-all the worshipped in three worlds.
joints
the: battle and becomes worthy of being
46-47 One who reads with faith every
day thrice (morning, afternoon and evening)
shadow of my body, Dhemadhiriniego, the Kavacha of Devi, which is inaccessible
even to the gods, receives the Divine arts,
is undefeated in the three worlds, lives for a
hundred yeaIs and is tree from accidental
36 Brahmani-semen, Chhiatreshwari the
superego and intellect (buddhi).
37 Vajrahasta-prin, apan, vyin, udan,
saman (five vital breaths), Kalyanashobhana
-prenas (life force).
deaths.
All diseases, like bojis, scars, otc: are
48
38 May Yogini protect the sense organis finished. Moveable (scorpions and shakes)
1e the faculties of tasting, séeng, smellng, and immovsable (other) paisons cannot attect
hearing and touching. May Niräyani protect
sattwataje and tamo gunas
him
49-52 All those, who cast magical spells,
39 Varähi the life, Vaishnavidharma,
Lakshmi-success and fame, Chakrini Wealth by mantras
arnd knowledge.
or yantras. on others for evil
purposes. all bhoots, gobiins, malevolent
beings moving on the earth and in the sky.
A0 Indrini clan, Chandika cattie. Mahi- all those who mesmerise others, of female
lakshmi sons and Bhairavi-wife.
goblins. all yakshas and gandharvas are
41 Supatha may protect my journey and destroyed just by the sight of the person
way Mahilakshmi may having Kavach in his heart
Kshemakari
my
protect me in the king's courts and Vijaya
53 That person receives more and more
raspect and prowess. On the earth he rises
every where.
42 O Goddess Jayanti, any place that has in prosperity and fame by reading the Kavacha
not been mentioned in the Kavach and has and Sapta-shati.
thus remained unprotected, may be protected
by you.
54-56 His progeny would live as fong as
the earth is rich with mountains and forests
43-44 One should invariably cover ong- By the grace of Mahamäyä, he wouid attain
sėlf with this Kavacha (by reading) wherever the highest place, that is inaccessible even to
one goes, and should not walk even a step the gods and is eternally blissful in the
withaur it, if one desires auspiciousness Then
company of Lord Shiva.
Edited & Publiahuo by Sh. S.C. Ral 43. Bunglaw Road, Delhi-110007 & Printed at The Central Electric
Press, B0-D, Kamie Nagar, Deihi-110007. One issue Rs 9.00, Annual Substriplion Ru 51.00
Foreign (by Airmail &7814)
