Talk on Holi Day Date 17th March 1984 : Place New Delhi : Puja Type English & Hindi Speech Language CONTENTS | Transcript | 02 - 07 English 08 - 12 Hindi Marathi || Translation English Hindi Marathi

 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT ENGLISH TALK I wish you all happy Holi. This is a wonderful festival started by Shri Krishna long time back. After the advent of Rama, who was a very serious gentleman and who believed in a very sacrificing life of a benevolent king, when all these things were so much prevalent in the air that one has to be a benevolent person, one has to be charitable, one has to be sacrificing, one has to be serious and like the king – the whole atmosphere of the society was very serious atmosphere. Anything extreme if we do, we go to the wrong side as you know. So the whole society became a very serious society. In that seriousness it started taking to lot of ritualism. And the rituals of the time that were very absurd and funny. Like you shouldn't eat this food, you shouldn't touch this water, somebody should not touch you, you must take your bath, and in that wet clothes you must cook. All sorts of absurd things they started of as the – what you call the dharma – they thought this was the dharma, the ritualism of the worst type started. So much so that the brahmins in those days were not realized souls. They started giving them lot of ideas that if you give a cow to the Brahmin you will get moksha, or you must give this to brahmin, you must do that to brahmin. [Unclear] was all become a beggar's house. All these upset Shri Krishna very much, and as you know, all incarnations follow the 'Samayachar'. Samayachar means at that moment at that time whatever is the situation. And the samayachar at that time, He found that He had to flout all these vidhi-nishedhas by which you say this is good that is bad. Now, this happened actually in the North when Shri Krishna was here. And Shri Krishna never went down to the South till He became the King. So again [we can?] find the dif-ference between the North Indians and the South Indians that the South Indians don't celebrate Holi much. They celebrate other festivals but not this Holi festival so much. And here you see as everything has a bad result, somehow human beings know, whatever one does, you get into a bad result. So when Shri Krishna said it is a leela, it is God's leela. Everybody thought He is the 'Leela'. He became the leelamayi. So the gradual settling of this another abandonment, sort of temperament started in the North. That's why you find the people in the North are frivolous compared to the people in the South. The South can be - you can call them ab-solutely sometimes jada, ritualistic, very much bound by rituals. While in the North you find people absolutely abandoned, nothing in between. So this abandonment came in the north quite a lot, though some of the people stuck on to these very ritualistic things. So we had two types of people here. Those who were just frivolous – they would only cele-brate Holi, nothing else. For them no other function was higher than the Holi. Because Holi was frivolous and in the Holi they thought they can also take to drinks, they can take bhang, this, that. Actually Holi hasn't got that significance that you can take those intoxi-cating drugs. It is not so because Shri Krishna never drank. It is only the Shiva, who never incarnates but who drinks, means in the sense that He consumes all the drugs and all these intoxicating things within Himself. So there is no sense. I can't understand why people started taking bhang during Holi because they must have thought that if you have to be abandoned, you have to get rid of all your inhibitions, it is better to take to some sort of a drug like bhang and go mad and amuck. But it was never the case of Shri Krishna. He never went amuck. So the whole system has been misused in the North and same in the South that people have become extremely ritualistic, just jada, on the left side. And the North people are right sided without any inhibitions about this. And that's why you find that the North In-dian people do very well in the Western countries because they can adjust themselves better.

 Original Transcript : English Now this frivolity is not the game of Shri Krishna. He is never frivolous. He plays. He plays tricks but never frivolous. Inside, He is so deep. You know He is Yogeshwara. He is Yogeshwara, and how can Yogeshwara be frivolous man? He doesn't do it for frivolity. But He plays it in such a way that people, who get into problems, He tries to play tricks in such a way that the tricks are not felt injurious, or blatant, or in any way dangerous, or shocking to the people who need His help. So He does it in such a beautiful manner that He can just turn His finger, and He can create a situation in which a person becomes aware that He is [doing all?]. Now you know that I played so many tricks Myself, and you have all experienced those tricks that I play upon you. Now this is just to kill your ego, to kill your over-astuteness, or over-emphasis on laws and order, kaida kanun. And some people are extremely strict about time. So to put them out of time, you see, you can play lots of tricks with their watches. You can play tricks with their timing and all that. So to take you beyond, to take you beyond the time, the gunas, and the dharmas, Shri Krishna created a new awareness of leela in which the whole world is a leela. But it's only leela for people who are real-ized and settled in Realization. Not for people who are still imbedded in this ignorance. They are not the one who can do [this?]. So the Holi became a game. Holi was played only by [Gopa and Gopis?]). They were realized souls. So they played the Holi was alright. But nowadays everybody thinks he can play Holi's. Whatever sins they may commit, all their lives they can do the Holi. It is not allowed. It is not allowed to people who can, everybody cannot play Holi. It is only for the realized souls that they can play Holi. Then in this way you have noticed that when you are realized there is no jati-paati. You all become one caste. You are yogis. You all become yogis. There is no jath, there is no caste. There is no community. There is no race. There is no consciousness of class, and this class, and that class. Is all finished. You all sit together in one line thinking that you are a yogi. You will see a person coming from a very rich heritage, somebody who is earning thousands of rupees or pounds, and the another one is a very ordinary man – might be a just a sweeper also doesn't matter, he is a Sahaja Yogi. He is a Sahaja Yogi. Among Sahaja Yogis there is no caste system. There is no higher and lower ranking or anything like that. But you have to be a Sahaja Yogi to play the Holi, to meet each other with love, and make love in a way expressed that people feel that you are a recipient and a giver of love. Like people embrace. Men embrace a men, women embrace women, and they also... That's how you pass your vibrations [through it?]. That's how you express outwardly your love to your own body because you are all part and parcel of the same body. And if you are part and parcel of the same body, th must look after this hand, this hand must look after this hand. What you are doing is just you are circulating your love into this Virata's body, and so that the whole body feels the oneness. That's the situation [it is?]. his hand Then the colors are, the colors are all representing your chakras. These are all the chakras as you know. Every chakra has got different color. So what happens? These colors just get distributed in the air, in the atmosphere. During Holi time you [know you?] are representing those colors which are completely permeating into the atmosphere. So this is an-other thing when you play colors. When you color another person, you are just expressing that these, your chakras will be blessed. Red color is of the Mooladhara. All those colors that you use here are of different chakras. So just you are making the whole expression of your love that let it be you become completely filled with red color, means innocence, means innocence. Because as a child in the womb of the mother just sees the red color of the mother, color of the blood. So like that you see different colors are spread on the face. And [abhira?] is the green color of the guru tattwa. Like that all these colors have got significance that they are the colors of your chakras which you are spreading all over to your friends, to your other brothers and sisters who are Sahaja Yogis. So it has that symbolic expression that you are spreading your – actually the essence of your chakra, the basis of your chakra, the colors of your chakra, the fragrance of those chakras to other Sahaja Yogis. You just permeate, permeating. I don't know in Hindi language if there is a better word 3

 Original Transcript : English like in Marathi 'ud-har', udahr. 'Udhar' means just... [Talk for duration 11.38 to 12.44 continued in Hindi] ...red color, is the sign of innocence. So Kabira says that, “You put me into such a color. Oh, the one who is going to color me is the One". Rangaraj is the one who colors things. So He says, "Oh Rangaraj, make me so that the whole thing becomes red – innocence, fills me up with complete innocence." And innocence is the one he has asked for to be filled in. And same is with Shri Krishna that He played with all these different colors to show that there are different charkas within us apart from the red and the others that are there. All of them play a part to create a beautiful joyful personality. So the people who are of eccentric nature, one sided, one-track man and unusually seri- ous, if you see a conference of some, say, Western people, they are sitting very seriously like, you see, thinkers. And when it comes to frivolity, they are so stupid that I have seen eighty year old people doing the shake dance. They are already shaking, you know [laughing]. Plus they are doing the shake dance with a stick in the hand, you see, shaking [laughing]. And very well placed people, very well placed. They behave in such a stupid manner that you can't understand. Either they become stupid or unnecessarily serious drawn people, you see, showing-off as if they are very great thinkers. So these things are not necessary at all to put up a show. But it is something within yourself that you feel joyous and that a child-like. You [are?] become child-like. Your smile, laughter, every-thing is child-like, innocent, and that's what should happen to all of you. Now the Holi day is to be celebrated in Delhi. I'm very happy because in the North only Holi should be celebrated I think because here it is Shri Krishna [where?] did His leela, and He had this Holi time. But now I'm going to tell you one more thing about Shri Krishna which is important. One must know, which I never have a chance to tell you about health problems we have from the wrong ideas about Holi or about Shri Krishna. Firstly, the foremost thing about Shri Krishna you must know that He is Yogeshwara. He is detached. He is pure. So those who play Holi – sometimes I find they get involved [with people?] in a funny way. That sort of a thing is absolutely not the Holi. It is anti-Holi. Actually it is satanic. Because whatever is not liked by Shri Krishna if it is done, then it is satanic. They play Holi in a way that they try to have their perverted tempera-ment expressed. Secondly, the people who play Holi should know that they must put some oil on their body because Shri Krishna likes oil. They must eat some butter. Then they, or if they want, they can have some ghee put in their nose which is very important, and something in the ear to be put, some oil, that is very good. Because this is all drying things. So if you put all these things, then your Vishuddhi Chakra (will improve?). Specially the Vishuddhi Chakra should be covered with lot of ghee or with what you call the makhan, is butter. You put it here, and rub it on here [unclear]. Those people who have Vishuddhi Chakra... If they do it every day, – two drops of this ghee, and in the ear also one drop of oil, and here little ghee or makhan, the butter, is put here every day, will help you to have, at the back also, to have a very good Vishuddhi. Because Shri Krishna was fond of it. And He believed that the ladies of, the milkmaid from Gokul used to take all their butter to be sold in Mathura where these horrible rakshasas were living, and they were, you see, nourished with this butter. And this nourishment of the butter was making them very strong. So that's why He used to manage to steal the butter of these ladies for His own consumption and for the consumption of all the other children of Gokul because it should not go to these rakshasas. And this was His idea. But the essence of His life is this that one should understand that Shri Krishna what He preached is that for a higher goal you have to sacrifice the lower goals. This is the main thing - tattwa of His life, the principle of His life. For a higher goal you can sacrifice the lower goal. Like the lower goals are, now some people are, now this [unclear] [Take?]– the case of He is stealing the butter. He just stole butter, nothing else. Because butter was very important for the Vishuddhi Chakra of the Gokul people because with that they would have developed their self respect, their courage, and they would have raised their neck against these horrible rakshasas in Mathura. So it was important and [vital? invit- ing?] in those days to have this butter for the people. So the principle is you should not steal. Then how 4

 Original Transcript : English you can you steal butter? But the higher goal is to preserve the Vishuddhi Chakras of the people, so for that sake you can steal. But in our country, you see, every-thing can be understood very well in such a manner that you pervert it. Like now people think if Krishna used to steal, why not we steal? We can steal government money to fill our tummy. We can steal all their money from the people and have our own children be-ing cropped up. This is from higher goal to the lower goal. Just the other way round. So perverted. That from the higher goal to the lower goal. Now, for example, if you have to do something, say, for Mother, that is much more important than anything else. But when it comes to doing, first do for yourself and lastly for Me. That's all. And this is what I have to tell you today about something important which I should not mention. [Talk for duration 19.29 to 34.58 continued in Hindi] If you go to England, you can wear a dress like English. Because now that dress which-ever has come traditionally to them, has come because that suits that country. And when you come to India dress up like India. If supposing if you have to wear three-piece-suit here with a tie, I don't know how many of you will exist to go back. We'll have to just send back your suits. Can you think of three- piece-suits in India? It is so comfortable, you see, to be dressed up like the way the country is. And if it works out that you can keep up your dress here, you can. But you cannot. You know that very well. It is very suitable, comfortable dress that you have here, and is better to have a comfortable dress here where the tradition has brought it to that level that you wear such and such dress. So what I am trying to tell Indians that they need. Now you all can say that you don't like Indians, Indian ladies wearing frocks, do you? You would like to have Indian ladies wearing frocks? [pausing and people denying] That's it. So what I am trying to tell them that it doesn't suit. Your face is different, your style is different, you should wear your own dress. Instead of we are trying to follow you in your dress, in your behavior, in living. Some British parliamentarians have come to my house for dinner. He said, "Yours is the only house we find is Indian. Otherwise all the Lords who have disappeared from Eng-land have to come to India." I said, "Why?" "See, they have all the styles, the napkins, these, the bearers everything done in that way." No thali nothing, you never see plates, the courses, and even in England you don't find these things. You see very few people have courses, and they converging these spoons, forks, this, that, all things done in very meticulous way. Just like the English. Imagine. How can you have Indian food in that fashion? Can you? Imagine Indian food in courses [people laughing]. First you'll get rasam. [people laughin very much] Then idli. Then this, then that. And the Madrasis will say, "Baba, get away from here." [laughing] It is better to have plantain leaf than to have this course business. [laughing] How can you eat Indian food like that? And with the chapattis, you see, they start the course in a North Indian style. Then first the chapattis and with that only vegetables. Then with something else, something else, you will say, "Now, we are fed up, we're finished." With chapattis you eat with everything whatever you want. There's a choice you have. Now you start the courses here. This is the trouble is that we do not understand the value of tradition in our country. We should understand the value of our traditions, and every country we should understand the value of traditions. Whatever are good traditions are to be taken into con-sideration, are to be used by all the Sahaja Yogis. 99 As I told you that Krishna's main essence was to sacrifice the higher goal – no, just the other way. [laughing] Is Indian style is to sacrifice the higher goal for the lower goal, you see. But Krishna's style was to sacrifice the lower goal for the higher goal. He didn't be-lieve in anything, you see. He didn't believe in time, He didn't believe. So some people, you see, all the time slaves of this thing. SoI played tricks. As I told you, He didn't be-lieve in time. The way He did everything was so child-like sweet, beautiful, and the way He used to turn round people. You see, like Sudhama, when he came to Him to meet. Imagine. Then Sudhama, an old friend of His, with all tattered, torn clothes he comes to the 5

 Original Transcript : English main door. He rushes there with all his ornaments, everything. Just hugs him [into...?]. Otherwise, you see, here, say, if you meet somebody. I know some of the min-isters who were just like, they used to wear half pants before Me, little, little boys you see. But you go there. "It is alright. Make Her sit there." Then you sit down there for two hours in a cold room, then they just come, and look at you, and they say, "I don't recog-nize. Who are you?" Your own brother can do the same. This is the country. Now so this is not the thing, you see. He, for Him love was the main thing. How to express love, how He rushed out with all His ornaments, everything, without wearing chappals He just rushed out opened the door – "Oh God, My great friend has come. Ah!"He didn't see whether he had taken a bath or not. He is coming all the way. Here people will say, "Oh God! My sari will be spoiled. My clothes will be spoiled. It should be clean. It should be [this?]“. Don't learn all these bad habits. In love nobody is [different?]. In love nobody thinks of these things. What is 'clothes', can be changed. But a heart which is hurt, we cannot change. We hurt the people for small, small things. 99 Like I knew another horrible lady who lived in America. She looked like a [aryer?] all the time to Me otherwise. But she used to think no endof herself. She used to tie up her hair like this, you see. She had her own style. I don't know what it was. I couldn't locate that in America. And this one was so particular about her time, you see. So one day she in-vited us for tea, and we all were to go. Now Myself and Mrs. Nagan Singh – you see, very nice and dignified lady, and she is a Maharani, and all that – and we were rather late because our husbands didn't turn up. They're busy with their work. So she got very an-gry. She said, "Why did you come so late? After all, you see, if the husband had not come you could have come." Again I said, "We were waiting for our husbands who comes ear-lier." I was so, you see, annoyed. Mrs. Nagan Singh was just pinching Me. "See", she said that [laughing, unclear] You see, Mrs. Nagan Singh couldn't bear it. She said, "We are not going to have any tea because I think we can get better tea in our house without all this talking." And we got up and walked off, see. But she was so funny, and she started shouting at us. "Why did you come late?" So actually why did she invite us? She invited us for tea, to talk to us nicely, to be kind to us. Instead of that she was angry with us because we were late. Just imagine. So we can have tea in our own house. We didn't go to listen to her angry words. Isn't it? We just went to see her. 99 So this is what one should understand that Krishna's life was full of love. He didn't mind anything in love. Whatever sort it was, it is all love, and you see your Mother also. You know very well that I am very particular on neatness Myself, extremely neat Myself. In My house – it is a huge house you know, and should see the photographs of My house sometimes, so you will know how I lived there- you extremely neat. I'm very neat and tidy. But I never tell anybody else [unclear]. I Myself will go and clean My own things. Today in the bathroom it was all lying hotchpotch, and all that. I washed it Myself. I cleaned [immediately?]. I didn't tell anyone. I don't want to hurt anyone. Why should I hurt anyone? If I have to do, it I will do it. And even if they dirtied it, I never tell them that you should not dirty, you should not do like that. You see you should have that much sense that you should not hurt any one. Why are you cleaning the house? For whom? You are cleaning the house to make others happy. But cleaning for cleaning's sake has no sense. Why are you keeping the time? To keep others pleased. You are not doing it for time's sake. You are doing for pleasing others. But by that you are displeasing others, no use [being decent?]. No use doing this. I never grudge about anything – you have noticed. Despite the fact that I live in My own private way. I live in a very neat and clean way Myself. I'm very clean Myself. You see when I cook, I cook very well. But I see people cook in a very lethargic manner. If I take any [this?] work, I do it in such a meticulous way, so beautifully. I see to it that I do it proper. But people when I give them any work, they just started absolutely careless about it. They don't bother [Not clear]. You can't say. So what I' m trying to tell you that it is better that you see yourself, that you look after what you want to do yourself. But don't spoil the heart of others. Don't injure others. Don't say things which are harsh. Forget it. Forget it as far as possible. Just try to forget. And this will help you a lot. Because this kind of a tension mounts up very well. And this is what Krishna hit in His life. He just wanted to crush the tension of people because of time, because of vidhi-nishedhas, because of funny ideas about

 Original Transcript : English religion. All this He wanted to kill. He said, “This doesn't exist in that area where I [reside?]." 99 So this is what one has to learn from His life that you should try to be yourself very neat and clean. You should try to be yourself very generous. You should try to be yourself do-ing all the work. You shouldn't say, "I was doing all this postering, and this fellow didn't do." So what? Who asked you to do it? You better not. If you think you are doing some-thing, you better not. But if you think you are doing for your pleasures, alright. If I am cooking, I just cook. I cook, I enjoy. I don't bother how much My servant has done or any body else has done. I do everything. If it comes to that, I wash, and clean, and sweep, and [unclear] do everything, if it has to be done. I am enjoying. Because you don't enjoy your work, you want others to do. "What he has done? They have not done. I have not done. So if I do, he will all not do. So I should not do." That's not the way. That means you don't enjoy the work of God. Any work. You can wash the floor, anything. Shri Krishna you know that He went and cleared the [asking something in Hindi to the audi-ence] left over food of the guests who were there. He cleaned all that. Cleaned all that. And just imagine in India only the sweepers or somebody like that do that [unclear] at the place of Yudhistira, Dharma Raj. At his place He went and did. So just imagine. Christ washed the feet of His disciples. So for them no work is higher lower. It is just what is enjoyed [everything?]. And everything is great for them. 99 99 You know that Shri Krishna's life is so full of such incidents that you can't imagine how far He has gone in showing that your position, your, what you call the money, the way you live has no meaning at all. Has no meaning at all. It is all absurd. And what is most important is that we should not hurt anyone. We should not trouble anyone. We should not try to injure anybody's feelings. On the contrary we should be extremely sweet. In a sweet manner you should do [things]. And that's how He judged. When He told some-body some work. And He could judge a person that what sort of a person he is. Immediately He could judge that how deep the person is. You see, with dedication, a little work... Like Rama's life... And we have seen Shabari took out every little berry, and tested it that it should not be sour. You see, like that they judged a person how sincere and devoted that person is. Little work do you do, how beau-tifully. And it comes out very well. If your devotion is alright, if you are absolutely posi-tive personality, it works out. But otherwise it will fizzle out. You'll do all kinds of mis-takes because the heart is not there. So the heart should be there. This is Shri Krishna's specialty that His heart was there. And in His heart resided Shiva. This time we had a puja in Vittala's place because I wanted to take. Now Shiva, it is always the Vittala went to Shiva. But this time Shiva had to go to Vittala. So that the people in their bhakti, in their behavior, in their everything should remember that they have to become the spirit. In Shri Krishna's bhakti they should know that Krishna did everything so that you should become the spirit. You should not be bound by gunas, by kala, by anything. But you should be free people. He just tried to free you from all these things. But He didn't want you to be people of frivolity. You could be frolic. But you cannot be frivolous people. And the frivolity and all that He just abandoned. But what He wanted you to get rid of all these bandhanas which were keeping you down. I think we have had a nice time in this Holi, and we should always have such a nice time. Always with Shri Krishna's blessings you all should enjoy your Holi. But the greatest Holi is within yourself when you fill yourself with all kinds of colors. Your nature should be such that everybody should enjoy that color. That color that is within you, color of beauty – not artificial, just showing of, just giving something without any love. I tell you yesterday I went to the market just to buy some presents for you. And I just went, and actually I was just with full heart, and I got exactly for the foreigners I had to buy 45 pieces. Exactly. And such sweet things that when you see that you are going to love it, just sweet things. I got and I just said, "See, it's my love. Just the idea that I have to give something to these people. How it has worked out." So we'll do that ceremony now of giving presents to all the foreign people because Holi is the day you are supposed to give some presents. Alright? So we have something for you to be given.

 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT HINDI TALK Scanned from Hindi Nirmala Yog आप लोग रूपया तक देने भई सुबह चार बजे उठो, अगर कानफन्स है तो। से घबराते है । यह गलत वात जो जरूरी चोज है वह है ध्यान करना। जो बड़ा है। यह सुनकर तो मुझे बड़ा goal (उद्देश्य) है उसे देखना चाहिये। जो चीज आ्चय हुआ कि बम्बई के लोग है, बह है ज्यान करना। Conference (सभा) ह जो औ जरूरी चीज है, वो है ध्यान करना जो बड़ा यह goal सब में ककषमकश लगी रहेगी कि है उसे देखना चाहिए। दफ्तर थोड़ा सा आपने नहीं किया तो भी कुछ नहीं जायेगा, क्योंकि lower मंगिना पडता है। रूपया तो क भी बम्बई में goal (निम्न उदश्य) है । ऐसे हजारों दफ्तर वाले कम नहीं होता। आपको माजूम है कि वम्बई मैंने देख लिये जो कि फाइलों पर फाइल लाद के में लोग हज़ारों रुपया खर्च करते हैं और अपने मर गये लेकिन कोई पूछता भो नहीं कि कहां गये और यहाँ उन्होंने बना रखा है कि इतना रूपया हम कहाँ खत्म हो गए हजारों को में जानती है क्योंकि भगवान के माम पर रखेंगे। यह वड़ी शमें की बात मैंने जिन्दगी भर इन्हीं लोगों के साथ जिन्दगी काटी है कि इन लोगों को आपसे रूपया माँगना पड़ता है । तो दपतर की जो महत्ता है वो मैं अंब जानती हैं और इस तरह की चीजें नहीं होतो चाहिए । हैँ, उसको महत्ता आप मुझसे न बताये कि आज और अगले वक्त मैं ये न सुन पाऊ कि [अप लोगों से दफ्तर में ये था, ऐसा हुआ, दक्तर में मैं फंस गया । दफ्तर क्या चीज है। आपसे ध्यान नहीं होता । इतनो छोटो सी चीज पआपसे नहीं होती। ये भी आपको तन्दुरुस्ती ठीक हो जाती है, तंवियत ठीक सोचना चाहिये कि हम सां से हम सब ठीक करवाना Rটি र हैं। अगर पूजा होगी तो हम कितना रुपया दे। यहाँ रूपया माँगा जाता है । यह तो परमात्मा का काम है। आप यहाँ आकर के इतता लाभ उठाते हैं। चाहते हैं, हमने मां के लिए क्या किया। हो जाती है और आ्राप टाइम (समय) नहीं दे सकते अपने को, आप ध्यान नहीं कर सकते और भापको दुनिया भर के काम है, लेकिन आप के पास ध्यान सब प्पने मे न में सोचें कि हमने मां के लिये क्या किया। सबसे निम्न चीज है कि पसा देना । करने के लिये टाइम नहीं है । मतलब यह है कि डुससे निम्न कुछ है ही नहीं । मां कितना रुपया देती मूझे बाजार जाना था, माँ, मैं क्या करू, मुभे रहती हैं हर साल । हमने कितना रुपया दिया। जरूरी जाना था, सुना कि आज ताजी सबजी आई बो श्रीवास्तव साहब तो कोई सहजयोगी नहीं। थी तो लेने जाना था ले किन ध्यान के लिए उनकी लेकिन उनकी अक्ल बहुत जबरदस्त है कि अगर समय नहीं है । "मुझे अपते वनाऊ ज का मेंचिल्ग इसमें रुपया पसा दिया जाये तो अपना लाभ होता करना था, इसलिये मैं गई।" आदमियों का दूसरा है और उनको हो ही रहा है । उनको सारा लाभ है, "गाज दपतर में कान्फ्न्स थी, मुझे जाना ही हो रहा है रुपयों पैसों का और ग्राप] [लोगों को था इस कान्फेन्स में, तो मैं ध्यान नहीं कर सका ।" लाभ नहीं होता। फिर कहेंगे कि हमारी नौकरी के 8.

 Original Transcript : Hindi यही हमारे घोबी साहव के यहाँ है नहीं चलती. हमें घाटा आ रहा है। होगा ही । बो पर बैठोगी । एक हमारे धोबी साहृब थे यहीं दिल्ली में, बहुत पालो, करो। और अ्राप लोग दो-दो रुपये, चार-चार दिनों तक रहे, घोवी [अभी भी हैं। तो वे एक दिन रुपये के लिये, मुझे तो आश्चर्य है, मोटरों में घूनते सूटवूट पहनकर आये, वो तो धोबियों का ये कि हैं, सबके पास मोटरे हैं, पंट्रोल है, सब चीज, किसी का भी सुट झाड़क र पहन लिया, ये घोबी की श।नवाजी बहुत है। ये जो चीज़ ऊपर [आ] गई है जात है। तो किसी का सूट-बूट झाड़कर अ्राया । दिखावे की, दिखावा, ये अपने North India (उत्तरी तो कहने लगा कि माताजी केसा सूट लग रहा है ? अरे मैने कहा, ये तो साहब का सूट है । कम से कम अचछे होने चाहिये, मोटर होनी चाहिये, घर हमारे घर तो साहब का सूट पहन कर मत माना सून्दर होना चाहिये। लेकिन आपके मन्दिर में था। वो भी काफी लम्बा चौड़ा था, मैंने कहा इस कितना दीप जल रहा है, सादगी पे त रे कर । लिये तृम हमें छोड़ते नहीं हों. क्योंकि साहब का होता होशियार आदमो हैं, उन्होंने कहा चलो भया ये तो क भारत) की खास चीज है। ऊपर का दिखाया। कपड़े सादगो पे आइये, तभी अन्दरके आर्म-दो प की ओर तुम्हें dress (कपड़े) तुम्हें fit (सही) है, इसलिये तुम हमें छोड़ते नहीं हो, मू झे पता है। ये तो हम लोगों की दुर्दशा है । माने ये कि सूट ये मैं नहीं कह ती कि आप फकीरवनकर जिये । जरूर भाडेंगे, चाहे तो किसी की मारा हुआ हो ये वात नहीं है, मतलब ये है कि आदमो को कोई हज्जा नहीं। सूट झाडकर रौब झाड्ना। कितनी traditional (परम्पराचारी होना च हिये। Tradi- देर का रोब होता है? ये रौब कितने देर का ? एक tional तरीके से रहिये लेकिन जो glamorous क्षण भी नहीं। अन्दर का रौब होना चाहिये पना (चटक-मटक) है, ओर जो आदमियों की मनुष्य में, ग्रीर traditional (परम्पराचारी) नहीं हैं शानशोखो] है, वो खत्म होनी चाहिये । हम लोग हम लोग। औरते फीरन sleeveless (विना बाजू कोई अंग्र ज] नहीं कि कीमती सूट पहन करके घू में। का) पहनकर घमती हैं । मैंने देखा है त्रौरतों को क्या जरूरत है सूट पहनने को ? अपना देसी कपड़ा sleeveless फट में पहनेगी । sleeveless पहनना पहनिये । देसी तरीके से रहिये, इस में अपनी शोभा अपने यहाँ कोई देवी देवता, क भी मैंने सुना नहीं है । उसमें अपनापन । बेकार में अपने को show sleeveless पहनती थीं । हमारी लड़की ने एक बाजी (दिखावा) करना और दिखाना यहां इतना दिन कहा, "माँ यहाँ सब लड़कियाँ, जब दिल्ली आए. सब लड़कियां हमारे स्कूल में sleeveless पहनती तो हमने कहा, "जसा आती । एक बार हमारे चपरासी की बीवी मुझके तुम्हारा मन हो पर तुम क्यों नहीं पहनती ? मैंने कहा, "मैं तो नहीं पहन सकती, क्योंकि मैंने सब कुछ। अब मुझे क्या पता था कि ये चपरासी कभी पहना नहीं। मझे शर्म अरती है, ये शरीर क्यों वो तो खुला रहे । ये तो चौज ठीक नहीं। तो कहने लगी जब ठीक तहीं तो आप कहती कों न ही कि ये ठोक मैंने कहा सो के पर बठो ता बेठे न । मैंने कहा, हप्रा नहीं।" मैं ते कहु। पके पास अकल है, आप खुद कया भई, बैठतो कथों नहीं ? इवर-उध र देखने लगी तथ करिये कि अगर हम नहीं पहनेते और अगर तो कहती है, कि माँ बात ये है कि मैं नपराली की आपने पहनना है तो हम ब्यों पआ्रापको जबरदस्ती बीवो है। तो मैंने कहा, अच्छा चलो बंठो, कोई हर्जा करें । पर मैं कभी नहीं पहन गौ । There is no criteria (यह कोई आवश्यक नहीं है) ये तो कोई न जर जायेगी । show (दिखावा) है मैं अपको बता नहीं सकती । अगर किसी के घर जाइये तो मुझे तो समझ नहीं हैं, हम पहने ? मिलने प्राई। तो शनील का मुट प्रौर शनील का क । को बोबी है। मैंते कहा भया सोफ पर बठो मझमे भी अच्छे कपड़े पहन के आई थी। मतलब नहीं, तुन शनाल पहन कर आई हो, तो कहाँ जमोन

 Original Transcript : Hindi criteria (ग्रावश्यक) नहीं कि मैने कह दिया तो नहीं। कहने लगे में री कोई बौबो नहीं आई, आपने हा कर दिया। मैंने कहा कि प्राप प्रपना दिमाग आने वाली थी. वो कहा चली गई बो कहने लंगे लगाइये कि माँ क्यों नहीं पहनती। SIeeveless नहीं, क पहनेंगी, इतना लम्बा गला पहनेगी, ये सब तरीके उन्होंने कहा कि आ्रावरकी कोई सेक्रट्ी आई हुई हैं । आप छोड़ दीजिये । सहजयोगियों को ये शोभा नहीं देखा तो उनकी बी साहिवा वहाँ जोन पहनकर देता । कायदे के कपड़े पहनिये। जो कार्यदे के कपड़े पहुँची हुई थी। तो उन्होंने कहा, ये तो कोई सेक्रट्री हैं, श्पने traditional (परम्परागत)तरीके से । पाँच होगी। यो अपने को बड़ा खुवमूरत समझ कर घूम में ठीक से पायल होनी चाहिये, आपके पाँव में रही थी असल में औरत में जब dignity (मर्यादा विधिया होतो चाहिये. आपके गले में मंगलसूत्र होना चाहिये । कायदे की औरतें होनी चाहिये। बाबू की बीवी आई हृुई हैं, या वहाँ पर कोई जमा- बाल कटाकर बैठ गई, बाल किसलिए कटाने हैं दारनी के जैसी दिखाई देती है। हिन्दुस्तानी ओरत क्यों वाल कटाती हैं आप लोग ? पराप कोई ग्रज जो इस तरह के कड़े पहनती है बिलकुल जमा- जो वाल कटायें ? किसलिये अ्रापको बाल व टाने दारनी जैसे, कौर ऐोसे जमादारनीं जसे कपड़ पहन की जरूरत है ? कुछ समझ में नहीं प्राता । हमारे कारके घ मना कोई अच्छी वात नहीं । अपनी इज्जत यहाँ बाल कटाना सिर्फ विधवाओं का होता है र अपने हाथ में है। अगर आप अपनी इज्जत नही विधवाओं को भी बाल कटाना जो होता है, बिल्कुल रखेंगे तो दृनिया आपकी इज्जत नहीं करेगी आप मुं इन होता है। ये नहीं कि बाल कटाकर के hair लोग किस तरह के बपड़े पहन ते हैं, किस तरह dress (केश सजजा) वनाकर के घूरमना, सहज- चलते हैं, कि अपने देश के गर्व के साथ, जो अपने योगियों को शोभा नहीं देता । यहीं आदमियों का हाल है । अब ये लोग भी आजकल, मैंने सुना है कि dress (पहनावा) है हाँ कभी-कभी पहनना पड़ता यहाँ के आदरमी लोग भी, फेशन करते है । फेशन सहजयोग में विल्कुल नहीं शोभा देता, आपकी dignity (शन ) में । ऐसे आदमो को आपको माजूम नहीं कि कोई इज्जत सहजयोगी लोग रोब झाडने को जाते हैं औ्ौर यहाँ नहीं देता। परदेश में मैंने देखा है हमारे साथ एक पर जो हैं foreign (विदेशों) से आये हुये लोग हैं, cabinet minister (कन्द्रीय मंत्री) थीं, cabinet minister नहीं secretary (सविव) की बीवी वो तो कोई नहोीं ग्राई। उसके बाद हम बैठे तो र नहीं होगी तो वो मुझे लगेगी जैसे कि कोई अलक घूपना से देश का dress ( पहनावा) है वो सबसे अ्च्छा है formalities (औपचारिकता) पर, कभी आाप सूट पहन लीजिये, पर हर समय सूट पहनने की कोई जरूरत नहीं । तो यहाँ पर मैं देखती हूँ बहुत से कुछ सहजयोगी भी काफी मुझसे कहते हैं कि माी हमें इसलिये अच्छा नहीं लगता है कि वहाँ पर सब suited-booted (सुजे-धजे) लोग रहृते हैं । उनको अच्छा नहीं थीं Chief secretary (मुख्य सचित्र) chief t i Chief cabinet secretary की । उसकी बीबी प्राई एक बार । वो South India (दक्षिण भारत) को थी। उनको लगता है कि ये लोग क्या अजीब लोग लेकिन वो बीबो अ्रपने को बहुत अफलातून समझती हैं, थीं। तो दूबली-पतली थीं और एक दिन हम लोग है, उसे पहन सकते हैं । इतनो गर्मी हो रही है, उस पार्टी में गये खाना खाने । तो वहां पर देखा कि हम वक्त ये लोग अपने ये पहन करके आ रहे हैं। इनको गये तो हमको बड़ी इजजत के साथ उन्होंने हमें बैठाया। विल्कुल ही अपनती कोई प्रतिष्ठा नहीं । जो स्वयं हमारे husband (पति) भो बेडे, ओर ये महाशय अप्रतिष्ठित होते हैं, वो इस तरह से glamour जब वहाँ बैठे तो उन्होंने कहा कि आपकी बोबी कहा है ? कहने लगे आपको तो कोई बो बो आई वो चीज है जिससे आदमी में एक तरह की defi- लगता, क्योंकि आप उतका अनुकरण कर रहे हैं । इनके पास इतने अच्छे-श्रच्छे dress ( बस्व) (दिखावे) में रहते हैं । Glamour (दिखावा) तो 10

 Original Transcript : Hindi ciency (हीनता) होता है वो glamour लग ता रुचिकर ग्रौर सुल्दर है, और जो ऐसे फालतू चीजों है कि सिर पर डालडा का टीन रख लीजिये उसके के पोछे में श्रादमो जब जाता है तो उसका जो रूप ऊपर में बूफा बनाइये और फिर बो डालडा का है वो विद्रप हो जाता है। जैसे कि एक साहब पार्टी टोन या बालों में खुब ऐसे-रोसे सजा- सजा करके में बहुत बनठन कर गये, तो उन्होंने सोचा कि बंरा वाल-वाल वनायें । क्या जरूरत है ? कोई जरूरत है तो उनके हाथ में उन्होंने अरपने सारे गिलास- नहीं । आप विल्कुल सादगी से रहिये। कहीं आापने वर्गैरा पकड़ा दिये, और वो अ्पने को बड़ा लगा के कोई देवी को देखा है कि वो इस तरह के एक टाईन-बारई लगा के आये। मैंने कहा, इन राजा- वेकार के आडम्बर करती हैं। अगर करे, एक महाराजाओ का गवाल ही खराव हो गया। बड बार हमें जबरदस्ती ठेल-ठाल कर लोग ले गये बन के अये थे राजे और उनको उन्होंने सचने वी तो में तो भूत लगने लग गई। मैंने कहा है भगवान गिलास पकड़वा दिये। मैने कहा कि भई विचारों फ को इसे, वेकार की नीज, सरद्द हो गया। पर को एसे ही पकड़वा दिया उन्होंने । दो-एक दिन मेरे साथ भी ऐसा हो हआ। मैं एक पाटों में गई थी, तो बहीँ एक ambassador (राजदूत) साहब कसे लोग बदर्शत करते हैं और किस लिये ये सारा बदर्द्दाश्त करते हैं ? किसनिये ? इससे किसी को लाभ नही होता है, कोई सुखी नहीं होता, किसो को हिन्दुस्तान के बड़े अग्रेज बनकर आये थे । तो मैंने सोचा कि कोई नीग्रो-बीग्रो होगा, उस को भी बरा बनाकर के भेज दिया होगा। यहाँ पर कोई नीग्रो हैं तो ये बीजों को समझना चाहिये कि श्रीकृष्ण की कि क्या हैं । तो उसको मैंने खुद हो गिलास पकड़वा जो लीला है, उस लीला में सौष्ठव है, उसमें माधुय्यं दिया । तो ये दोडे-दोड़े प्राये कि अरे क्या करती हो, है, उसमें इस तरह की गंदगी नहीं है. कि जिसको अरे क्या करती हो? ये अपने ambassador (राज- देखते साथ ऐसा लगता है कि ये कया चले आ रहे दूत) साहब है । भई मैने कहा, कायदे से अपना बद हैं सामने से, चार तरह के बाल रंगा करके, ऐसा कालर का पहन करके, कायदे से आते तो मैं कहती बड़ा-सा चश्मा पहन करके, जैसे खव खार इससान भी कि हिन्दुस्तान के ambassador (राजदूत आपके ऊपर वला आ रहा है। उनके अन्दर सोष्ठव आये हये हैं। ये इतनी जी टाई वाई लगा करके आये था। उनके dress (वस्त्र) देखिये, पीताम्बर पहनते तो भी खूब मोटी, ऐसे-ऐसे फूलो हुई, बिल्कुूल जैसे थे । हमारे यहाँ कितने लोग पीताम्बर पहने हये हैं, बेरा लोग लगाते हैं। मैेंने कहा तमोज से कपड़े । क्योंकि वो तो पीता- पहनो ऐसे ही इंग्लैण्ड में आप देखिये कि रानी का म्बर पहनने से तो, अरे बाप रे ! हम तो विल्कुल जब वो होता है पारटो तो वहाँ भी ये चलता है। ये देहाती हो गये, कोई नहीं पीताम्बर पहनता और सब अंग्रेजों से हमने सीखा हुआा है फालतू का । तो वो मुकुट लगाते थे, वो भी मोर मुकुट लगाते, मोर वहाँ पर है कि tail coat (एक प्रकार का वस्त्र मुकुट उसको लगा लेते थे, क्योंकि थे तो भगवान ही आप पहनते हैं, जिसको दो क्या है long suit तो उनको मुकूट चढ़ाना है, तो मोर का लगा ले ते (लभ्बा सूट) कहते हैं। अब वो सबके पास तो होता थे। लेकिन अपने यहाँ दृफा बना लेते हैं । वाइये नहीं, कोई रखता न हीं, तो वहाँ एक Ross Bro- श्ीर प्रादमी लोग और क्या-क्या तमाये कर रहे thers (रॉस बन्धु) करके हैं। Ross Brothers हैं । इससे क्या फायदा ? जो गपलि यत पे ग्रादमी तो Ross Brothers जो हैं वो सबको देते हैं कि को रहना चाहिये। पहली चीज ये है कि अपने आप ये hire (भाड़े पर) करो। अब भेया अच्छे- को ये समझ लेना चाहिये कि हमें प्रसलियत पर भले लोग सीधे नहीं चलते, टे़े-टेढ़े चलते हैं । मैंने रहन। है । असलियत इन्सान की जो है वो बहुत कहा क्या वो तो comfortably (अरारामपूर्वक) चल आनंद नहीं आता। उल्टे घबराहट होने लगती है। बताइये ? जो कृष्ण पहनते थे ये 11

 Original Transcript : Hindi रहे हैं, उनको सब tight ( तंन) कपड़े, कोई लटके पहनेंगे नहीं तो विल्कुल जैसे वो beach ( समुद्र हये हैं, किसी के सहा तक पर जा रहा है, कोई ढीले- किना रे) पर पहन कर घूमते हैं, वसे हाले विल्कुल जोकर बने हुये हैं, Clown जैसे । मैंने दोनों चीज हम रे देश के लिये शोंभा नहीं दे iि । कहा जो अच्छे-भले लोग थे ये केसे लग रहे हैं। मुझे हमारा देंन भी बहुत बड़ा प्रतिष्ठावान है, क्योंकि तो हसी पे हंसी ग्राती रही। पूरे समय मुझे हसी बड़े पूर्वजन्म के सुकृत से प्राप इस देश में पदा हुये तो रही। इन्होंने पूछा तुम्हें हंसी क्यों प्राती है ? हैं इनको पूर्वजन्म का कुछ मालूम हो नहीं। फिर मैंने कहा ये देखो elown (जोकर), ये तो इनना उनके सुकृत को कौन बात करे। तुम्हारे तो पूर्वजन्म दमी है, इसकी क्या हो गया, ये clown पहनकर घमेंगे इतने सुकुत हुये इसी देश में आप पदा हये और इस देश में पंदा होने के बाद इसकी यान से रहे । औरतों को भी चाहिये कि इसकी शान से रहे देखिये कपड़ा पहना कीजिये के अच्छा जसे बना चला है । भवात को कृपा से जब से हम पहुँचे तो ये allow (इजाजत) आप अपना national dress (राष्ट्रीय पोषाक) पहन कर आइये। तो मैंने कहा, नहीं तो मैं तो आपके साथ चलती नहीं । Clown (जोकर) बनकर के मैं चलने नहीं वालो। ये सब भगवान की कृपा हो गई, समझे ना । फिर उस से अजीव-प्रजोब लोग हो गया कि आप हिन्दुस्तानो ढंग से । आपकी इज़्जत होगी, लोग अपको पसंद करेंगे, अरपको मानेगे। महाराष्ट्र में इस मासले में लोग काफी ये हैं। श्रासाती से अपना dress नहीं छुटता, आसानी से नहीं छुटता पर देहातों में तो बिल्कुल ३।। dressed आते हैं, varieties (भिन्न-भिनल्न रूप ) हो नहीं, चाहे कुछ हो जाये देहातो में विल्कुल नहीं आती हैं-कोई अरजीब तरह का पहन कर आते हैं, जिसको आरप प्रजीब से कहें मिलता है कि इनका national dress ( राष्ट्रीय के प्राप जेबर पहनिये, उसमें कोई हर्ज नही, क्योंकि पोषाक) क्या है । Variety (विभिन्नता) से आरता है, सब अपने tradtion (परम्परा) की तरह सारे जितने भी जेवर हैं ये सारे एक-एक चक्रों पे से कपड़ पहनते हैं। उनके देश में जो tradition उसकी शोभा के लिये हैं। लेकिन आपको कोई जरू- बनता है। अपने देश में भी जो कुछ tradition बने हैं, रत नहीं कि आप अप्रेजों जैसे फाक पहनकर घूमिये वो भी इस हिसाब से tradition बने हैं कि जिससे और या उनके जैसे कपड़े पहनिये । हां कभी आपको हमारेदेश में जो जरूरी चीज है, जिस तरह का dress formalities (लोकाचार) पर पहनना पड़े । पर (वस्त्र) पहना वो धोरे-धीरे बो tradition बाँधते अधिकतर अ्रपने ही देश का dress सह जधोगियों जाता है । जिस तरह का हमारे लिये शोभा देता को पहनना चाहिये, हरेक घ्रादमी को । जिस देश में है, उपयोगी है, उसको छोड़कर एकदम अंजों जैसे रहो, कपड़े पहनने की क्या जरूरत है ? ओर अंग्रेज जैसे dress पहनो । छूटता। उनका dress (पहनावा), मैं तो ये कहती । वो पर दिखने को तो हैं कि traditional dress प्राप पहनिये, सब तरह सौंदर्य ये अपने देश का tradition ( प रम्परा) है, श्रर ये अगर इंग्लैण्ड में रहो तो इंग्लेण्ड जैसा 12



----------------------

19840317_Talk On Holi Day_New Delhi.pdf-page0.txt 
 Talk on Holi Day
Date
17th March 1984
:
Place
New Delhi
:
Puja
Type
English & Hindi
Speech
Language
CONTENTS
| Transcript
|
02 - 07
English
08 - 12
Hindi
Marathi
||
Translation
English
Hindi
Marathi
 19840317_Talk On Holi Day_New Delhi.pdf-page1.txt 
 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT
ENGLISH TALK
I wish you all happy Holi.
This is a wonderful festival started by Shri Krishna long time back. After the advent of Rama,
who was a very serious gentleman and who believed in a very sacrificing life of a benevolent king,
when all these things were so much prevalent in the air that one has to be a benevolent person, one has
to be charitable, one has to be sacrificing, one has to be serious and like the king – the whole
atmosphere of the society was very serious atmosphere. Anything extreme if we do, we go to the
wrong side as you know. So the whole society became a very serious society. In that seriousness it
started taking to lot of ritualism. And the rituals of the time that were very absurd and funny. Like you
shouldn't eat this food, you shouldn't touch this water, somebody should not touch you, you must take
your bath, and in that wet clothes you must cook. All sorts of absurd things they started of as the – what
you call the dharma – they thought this was the dharma, the ritualism of the worst type started. So
much so that the brahmins in those days were not realized souls. They started giving them lot of ideas
that if you give a cow to the Brahmin you will get moksha, or you must give this to brahmin, you must
do that to brahmin. [Unclear] was all become a beggar's house.
All these upset Shri Krishna very much, and as you know, all incarnations follow the
'Samayachar'. Samayachar means at that moment at that time whatever is the situation. And the
samayachar at that time, He found that He had to flout all these vidhi-nishedhas by which you say this
is good that is bad.
Now, this happened actually in the North when Shri Krishna was here. And Shri Krishna never
went down to the South till He became the King. So again [we can?] find the dif-ference between the
North Indians and the South Indians that the South Indians don't celebrate Holi much. They celebrate
other festivals but not this Holi festival so much. And here you see as everything has a bad result,
somehow human beings know, whatever one does, you get into a bad result.
So when Shri Krishna said it is a leela, it is God's leela. Everybody thought He is the 'Leela'. He
became the leelamayi. So the gradual settling of this another abandonment, sort of temperament
started in the North. That's why you find the people in the North are frivolous compared to the people
in the South. The South can be - you can call them ab-solutely sometimes jada, ritualistic, very much
bound by rituals. While in the North you find people absolutely abandoned, nothing in between. So
this abandonment came in the north quite a lot, though some of the people stuck on to these very
ritualistic things. So we had two types of people here. Those who were just frivolous – they would
only cele-brate Holi, nothing else. For them no other function was higher than the Holi. Because Holi
was frivolous and in the Holi they thought they can also take to drinks, they can take bhang, this, that.
Actually Holi hasn't got that significance that you can take those intoxi-cating drugs. It is not so
because Shri Krishna never drank. It is only the Shiva, who never incarnates but who drinks, means in
the sense that He consumes all the drugs and all these intoxicating things within Himself. So there is
no sense. I can't understand why people started taking bhang during Holi because they must have
thought that if you have to be abandoned, you have to get rid of all your inhibitions, it is better to take
to some sort of a drug like bhang and go mad and amuck. But it was never the case of Shri Krishna. He
never went amuck.
So the whole system has been misused in the North and same in the South that people have
become extremely ritualistic, just jada, on the left side. And the North people are right sided without
any inhibitions about this. And that's why you find that the North In-dian people do very well in the
Western countries because they can adjust themselves better.
 19840317_Talk On Holi Day_New Delhi.pdf-page2.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
Now this frivolity is not the game of Shri Krishna. He is never frivolous. He plays. He plays tricks
but never frivolous. Inside, He is so deep. You know He is Yogeshwara. He is Yogeshwara, and how
can Yogeshwara be frivolous man? He doesn't do it for frivolity. But He plays it in such a way that
people, who get into problems, He tries to play tricks in such a way that the tricks are not felt injurious,
or blatant, or in any way dangerous, or shocking to the people who need His help. So He does it in such
a beautiful manner that He can just turn His finger, and He can create a situation in which a person
becomes aware that He is [doing all?].
Now you know that I played so many tricks Myself, and you have all experienced those tricks that
I play upon you. Now this is just to kill your ego, to kill your over-astuteness, or over-emphasis on
laws and order, kaida kanun. And some people are extremely strict about time. So to put them out of
time, you see, you can play lots of tricks with their watches. You can play tricks with their timing and
all that. So to take you beyond, to take you beyond the time, the gunas, and the dharmas, Shri Krishna
created a new awareness of leela in which the whole world is a leela. But it's only leela for people who
are real-ized and settled in Realization. Not for people who are still imbedded in this ignorance. They
are not the one who can do [this?].
So the Holi became a game. Holi was played only by [Gopa and Gopis?]). They were realized
souls. So they played the Holi was alright. But nowadays everybody thinks he can play Holi's.
Whatever sins they may commit, all their lives they can do the Holi. It is not allowed. It is not allowed
to people who can, everybody cannot play Holi. It is only for the realized souls that they can play Holi.
Then in this way you have noticed that when you are realized there is no jati-paati. You all
become one caste. You are yogis. You all become yogis. There is no jath, there is no caste. There is no
community. There is no race. There is no consciousness of class, and this class, and that class. Is all
finished. You all sit together in one line thinking that you are a yogi. You will see a person coming
from a very rich heritage, somebody who is earning thousands of rupees or pounds, and the another
one is a very ordinary man – might be a just a sweeper also doesn't matter, he is a Sahaja Yogi. He is a
Sahaja Yogi. Among Sahaja Yogis there is no caste system. There is no higher and lower ranking or
anything like that. But you have to be a Sahaja Yogi to play the Holi, to meet each other with love, and
make love in a way expressed that people feel that you are a recipient and a giver of love. Like people
embrace. Men embrace a men, women embrace women, and they also... That's how you pass your
vibrations [through it?]. That's how you express outwardly your love to your own body because you
are all part and parcel of the same body. And if you are part and parcel of the same body, th
must look after this hand, this hand must look after this hand. What you are doing is just you are
circulating your love into this Virata's body, and so that the whole body feels the oneness. That's the
situation [it is?].
his hand
Then the colors are, the colors are all representing your chakras. These are all the chakras as you
know. Every chakra has got different color. So what happens? These colors just get distributed in the
air, in the atmosphere. During Holi time you [know you?] are representing those colors which are
completely permeating into the atmosphere. So this is an-other thing when you play colors. When you
color another person, you are just expressing that these, your chakras will be blessed. Red color is of
the Mooladhara. All those colors that you use here are of different chakras. So just you are making the
whole expression of your love that let it be you become completely filled with red color, means
innocence, means innocence. Because as a child in the womb of the mother just sees the red color of
the mother, color of the blood.
So like that you see different colors are spread on the face. And [abhira?] is the green color of the
guru tattwa. Like that all these colors have got significance that they are the colors of your chakras
which you are spreading all over to your friends, to your other brothers and sisters who are Sahaja
Yogis. So it has that symbolic expression that you are spreading your – actually the essence of your
chakra, the basis of your chakra, the colors of your chakra, the fragrance of those chakras to other
Sahaja Yogis. You just permeate, permeating. I don't know in Hindi language if there is a better word
3
 19840317_Talk On Holi Day_New Delhi.pdf-page3.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
like in Marathi 'ud-har', udahr. 'Udhar' means just...
[Talk for duration 11.38 to 12.44 continued in Hindi]
...red color, is the sign of innocence. So Kabira says that, “You put me into such a color. Oh, the
one who is going to color me is the One". Rangaraj is the one who colors things. So He says, "Oh
Rangaraj, make me so that the whole thing becomes red – innocence, fills me up with complete
innocence." And innocence is the one he has asked for to be filled in. And same is with Shri Krishna
that He played with all these different colors to show that there are different charkas within us apart
from the red and the others that are there. All of them play a part to create a beautiful joyful
personality. So the people who are of eccentric nature, one sided, one-track man and unusually seri-
ous, if you see a conference of some, say, Western people, they are sitting very seriously like, you see,
thinkers. And when it comes to frivolity, they are so stupid that I have seen eighty year old people
doing the shake dance. They are already shaking, you know [laughing]. Plus they are doing the shake
dance with a stick in the hand, you see, shaking [laughing]. And very well placed people, very well
placed. They behave in such a stupid manner that you can't understand. Either they become stupid or
unnecessarily serious drawn people, you see, showing-off as if they are very great thinkers. So these
things are not necessary at all to put up a show. But it is something within yourself that you feel joyous
and that a child-like. You [are?] become child-like. Your smile, laughter, every-thing is child-like,
innocent, and that's what should happen to all of you.
Now the Holi day is to be celebrated in Delhi. I'm very happy because in the North only Holi
should be celebrated I think because here it is Shri Krishna [where?] did His leela, and He had this
Holi time. But now I'm going to tell you one more thing about Shri Krishna which is important. One
must know, which I never have a chance to tell you about health problems we have from the wrong
ideas about Holi or about Shri Krishna. Firstly, the foremost thing about Shri Krishna you must know
that He is Yogeshwara. He is detached. He is pure. So those who play Holi – sometimes I find they get
involved [with people?] in a funny way. That sort of a thing is absolutely not the Holi. It is anti-Holi.
Actually it is satanic. Because whatever is not liked by Shri Krishna if it is done, then it is satanic.
They play Holi in a way that they try to have their perverted tempera-ment expressed. Secondly, the
people who play Holi should know that they must put some oil on their body because Shri Krishna
likes oil. They must eat some butter. Then they, or if they want, they can have some ghee put in their
nose which is very important, and something in the ear to be put, some oil, that is very good. Because
this is all drying things. So if you put all these things, then your Vishuddhi Chakra (will improve?).
Specially the Vishuddhi Chakra should be covered with lot of ghee or with what you call the makhan,
is butter. You put it here, and rub it on here [unclear]. Those people who have Vishuddhi Chakra... If
they do it every day, – two drops of this ghee, and in the ear also one drop of oil, and here little ghee or
makhan, the butter, is put here every day, will help you to have, at the back also, to have a very good
Vishuddhi. Because Shri Krishna was fond of it. And He believed that the ladies of, the milkmaid
from Gokul used to take all their butter to be sold in Mathura where these horrible rakshasas were
living, and they were, you see, nourished with this butter. And this nourishment of the butter was
making them very strong. So that's why He used to manage to steal the butter of these ladies for His
own consumption and for the consumption of all the other children of Gokul because it should not go
to these rakshasas. And this was His idea.
But the essence of His life is this that one should understand that Shri Krishna what He preached
is that for a higher goal you have to sacrifice the lower goals. This is the main thing - tattwa of His life,
the principle of His life. For a higher goal you can sacrifice the lower goal. Like the lower goals are,
now some people are, now this [unclear] [Take?]– the case of He is stealing the butter. He just stole
butter, nothing else. Because butter was very important for the Vishuddhi Chakra of the Gokul people
because with that they would have developed their self respect, their courage, and they would have
raised their neck against these horrible rakshasas in Mathura. So it was important and [vital? invit-
ing?] in those days to have this butter for the people. So the principle is you should not steal. Then how
4
 19840317_Talk On Holi Day_New Delhi.pdf-page4.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
you can you steal butter? But the higher goal is to preserve the Vishuddhi Chakras of the people, so for
that sake you can steal. But in our country, you see, every-thing can be understood very well in such a
manner that you pervert it. Like now people think if Krishna used to steal, why not we steal? We can
steal government money to fill our tummy. We can steal all their money from the people and have our
own children be-ing cropped up. This is from higher goal to the lower goal. Just the other way round.
So perverted. That from the higher goal to the lower goal. Now, for example, if you have to do
something, say, for Mother, that is much more important than anything else. But when it comes to
doing, first do for yourself and lastly for Me. That's all. And this is what I have to tell you today about
something important which I should not mention.
[Talk for duration 19.29 to 34.58 continued in Hindi]
If you go to England, you can wear a dress like English. Because now that dress which-ever has
come traditionally to them, has come because that suits that country. And when you come to India
dress up like India. If supposing if you have to wear three-piece-suit here with a tie, I don't know how
many of you will exist to go back. We'll have to just send back your suits. Can you think of three-
piece-suits in India? It is so comfortable, you see, to be dressed up like the way the country is. And if it
works out that you can keep up your dress here, you can. But you cannot. You know that very well. It is
very suitable, comfortable dress that you have here, and is better to have a comfortable dress here
where the tradition has brought it to that level that you wear such and such dress. So what I am trying
to tell Indians that they need. Now you all can say that you don't like Indians, Indian ladies wearing
frocks, do you? You would like to have Indian ladies wearing frocks? [pausing and people denying]
That's it. So what I am trying to tell them that it doesn't suit. Your face is different, your style is
different, you should wear your own dress. Instead of we are trying to follow you in your dress, in your
behavior, in living.
Some British parliamentarians have come to my house for dinner. He said, "Yours is the only
house we find is Indian. Otherwise all the Lords who have disappeared from Eng-land have to come to
India."
I said, "Why?"
"See, they have all the styles, the napkins, these, the bearers everything done in that way."
No thali nothing, you never see plates, the courses, and even in England you don't find these
things. You see very few people have courses, and they converging these spoons, forks, this, that, all
things done in very meticulous way. Just like the English. Imagine. How can you have Indian food in
that fashion? Can you? Imagine Indian food in courses [people laughing]. First you'll get rasam.
[people laughin very much] Then idli. Then this, then that. And the Madrasis will say, "Baba, get away
from here." [laughing] It is better to have plantain leaf than to have this course business. [laughing]
How can you eat Indian food like that? And with the chapattis, you see, they start the course in a North
Indian style. Then first the chapattis and with that only vegetables. Then with something else,
something else, you will say, "Now, we are fed up, we're finished." With chapattis you eat with
everything whatever you want. There's a choice you have. Now you start the courses here. This is the
trouble is that we do not understand the value of tradition in our country. We should understand the
value of our traditions, and every country we should understand the value of traditions. Whatever are
good traditions are to be taken into con-sideration, are to be used by all the Sahaja Yogis.
99
As I told you that Krishna's main essence was to sacrifice the higher goal – no, just the other way.
[laughing] Is Indian style is to sacrifice the higher goal for the lower goal, you see. But Krishna's style
was to sacrifice the lower goal for the higher goal. He didn't be-lieve in anything, you see. He didn't
believe in time, He didn't believe. So some people, you see, all the time slaves of this thing. SoI played
tricks. As I told you, He didn't be-lieve in time. The way He did everything was so child-like sweet,
beautiful, and the way He used to turn round people. You see, like Sudhama, when he came to Him to
meet. Imagine. Then Sudhama, an old friend of His, with all tattered, torn clothes he comes to the
5
 19840317_Talk On Holi Day_New Delhi.pdf-page5.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
main door. He rushes there with all his ornaments, everything. Just hugs him [into...?]. Otherwise, you
see, here, say, if you meet somebody. I know some of the min-isters who were just like, they used to
wear half pants before Me, little, little boys you see. But you go there. "It is alright. Make Her sit
there." Then you sit down there for two hours in a cold room, then they just come, and look at you, and
they say, "I don't recog-nize. Who are you?" Your own brother can do the same. This is the country.
Now so this is not the thing, you see. He, for Him love was the main thing. How to express love, how
He rushed out with all His ornaments, everything, without wearing chappals He just rushed out
opened the door – "Oh God, My great friend has come. Ah!"He didn't see whether he had taken a bath
or not. He is coming all the way. Here people will say, "Oh God! My sari will be spoiled. My clothes
will be spoiled. It should be clean. It should be [this?]“. Don't learn all these bad habits. In love nobody
is [different?]. In love nobody thinks of these things. What is 'clothes', can be changed. But a heart
which is hurt, we cannot change. We hurt the people for small, small things.
99
Like I knew another horrible lady who lived in America. She looked like a [aryer?] all the time to
Me otherwise. But she used to think no endof herself. She used to tie up her hair like this, you see. She
had her own style. I don't know what it was. I couldn't locate that in America. And this one was so
particular about her time, you see. So one day she in-vited us for tea, and we all were to go. Now
Myself and Mrs. Nagan Singh – you see, very nice and dignified lady, and she is a Maharani, and all
that – and we were rather late because our husbands didn't turn up. They're busy with their work. So
she got very an-gry. She said, "Why did you come so late? After all, you see, if the husband had not
come you could have come." Again I said, "We were waiting for our husbands who comes ear-lier." I
was so, you see, annoyed. Mrs. Nagan Singh was just pinching Me. "See", she said that [laughing,
unclear] You see, Mrs. Nagan Singh couldn't bear it. She said, "We are not going to have any tea
because I think we can get better tea in our house without all this talking." And we got up and walked
off, see. But she was so funny, and she started shouting at us. "Why did you come late?" So actually
why did she invite us? She invited us for tea, to talk to us nicely, to be kind to us. Instead of that she was
angry with us because we were late. Just imagine. So we can have tea in our own house. We didn't go
to listen to her angry words. Isn't it? We just went to see her.
99
So this is what one should understand that Krishna's life was full of love. He didn't mind anything
in love. Whatever sort it was, it is all love, and you see your Mother also. You know very well that I am
very particular on neatness Myself, extremely neat Myself. In My house – it is a huge house you know,
and
should see the photographs of My house sometimes, so you will know how I lived there-
you
extremely neat. I'm very neat and tidy. But I never tell anybody else [unclear]. I Myself will go and
clean My own things. Today in the bathroom it was all lying hotchpotch, and all that. I washed it
Myself. I cleaned [immediately?]. I didn't tell anyone. I don't want to hurt anyone. Why should I hurt
anyone? If I have to do, it I will do it. And even if they dirtied it, I never tell them that you should not
dirty, you should not do like that. You see you should have that much sense that you should not hurt
any one. Why are you cleaning the house? For whom? You are cleaning the house to make others
happy. But cleaning for cleaning's sake has no sense. Why are you keeping the time? To keep others
pleased. You are not doing it for time's sake. You are doing for pleasing others. But by that you are
displeasing others, no use [being decent?]. No use doing this. I never grudge about anything – you
have noticed. Despite the fact that I live in My own private way. I live in a very neat and clean way
Myself. I'm very clean Myself. You see when I cook, I cook very well. But I see people cook in a very
lethargic manner. If I take any [this?] work, I do it in such a meticulous way, so beautifully. I see to it
that I do it proper. But people when I give them any work, they just started absolutely careless about it.
They don't bother [Not clear]. You can't say.
So what I' m trying to tell you that it is better that you see yourself, that you look after what you
want to do yourself. But don't spoil the heart of others. Don't injure others. Don't say things which are
harsh. Forget it. Forget it as far as possible. Just try to forget. And this will help you a lot. Because this
kind of a tension mounts up very well. And this is what Krishna hit in His life. He just wanted to crush
the tension of people because of time, because of vidhi-nishedhas, because of funny ideas about
 19840317_Talk On Holi Day_New Delhi.pdf-page6.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
religion. All this He wanted to kill. He said, “This doesn't exist in that area where I [reside?]."
99
So this is what one has to learn from His life that you should try to be yourself very neat and clean.
You should try to be yourself very generous. You should try to be yourself do-ing all the work. You
shouldn't say, "I was doing all this postering, and this fellow didn't do." So what? Who asked you to do
it? You better not. If you think you are doing some-thing, you better not. But if you think you are doing
for your pleasures, alright. If I am cooking, I just cook. I cook, I enjoy. I don't bother how much My
servant has done or any body else has done. I do everything. If it comes to that, I wash, and clean, and
sweep, and [unclear] do everything, if it has to be done. I am enjoying. Because you don't enjoy your
work, you want others to do. "What he has done? They have not done. I have not done. So if I do, he
will all not do. So I should not do." That's not the way. That means you don't enjoy the work of God.
Any work. You can wash the floor, anything. Shri Krishna you know that He went and cleared the
[asking something in Hindi to the audi-ence] left over food of the guests who were there. He cleaned
all that. Cleaned all that. And just imagine in India only the sweepers or somebody like that do that
[unclear] at the place of Yudhistira, Dharma Raj. At his place He went and did. So just imagine. Christ
washed the feet of His disciples. So for them no work is higher lower. It is just what is enjoyed
[everything?]. And everything is great for them.
99
99
You know that Shri Krishna's life is so full of such incidents that you can't imagine how far He has
gone in showing that your position, your, what you call the money, the way you live has no meaning at
all. Has no meaning at all. It is all absurd. And what is most important is that we should not hurt
anyone. We should not trouble anyone. We should not try to injure anybody's feelings. On the contrary
we should be extremely sweet. In a sweet manner you should do [things]. And that's how He judged.
When He told some-body some work. And He could judge a person that what sort of a person he is.
Immediately He could judge that how deep the person is.
You see, with dedication, a little work... Like Rama's life... And we have seen Shabari took out
every little berry, and tested it that it should not be sour. You see, like that they judged a person how
sincere and devoted that person is. Little work do you do, how beau-tifully. And it comes out very
well. If your devotion is alright, if you are absolutely posi-tive personality, it works out. But otherwise
it will fizzle out. You'll do all kinds of mis-takes because the heart is not there. So the heart should be
there. This is Shri Krishna's specialty that His heart was there. And in His heart resided Shiva. This
time we had a puja in Vittala's place because I wanted to take. Now Shiva, it is always the Vittala went
to Shiva. But this time Shiva had to go to Vittala. So that the people in their bhakti, in their behavior, in
their everything should remember that they have to become the spirit. In Shri Krishna's bhakti they
should know that Krishna did everything so that you should become the spirit. You should not be
bound by gunas, by kala, by anything. But you should be free people. He just tried to free you from all
these things. But He didn't want you to be people of frivolity. You could be frolic. But you cannot be
frivolous people. And the frivolity and all that He just abandoned. But what He wanted you to get rid
of all these bandhanas which were keeping you down.
I think we have had a nice time in this Holi, and we should always have such a nice time. Always
with Shri Krishna's blessings you all should enjoy your Holi. But the greatest Holi is within yourself
when you fill yourself with all kinds of colors. Your nature should be such that everybody should
enjoy that color. That color that is within you, color of beauty – not artificial, just showing of, just
giving something without any love. I tell you yesterday I went to the market just to buy some presents
for
you. And I just went, and actually I was just with full heart, and I got exactly for the foreigners I had
to buy 45 pieces. Exactly. And such sweet things that when you see that you are going to love it, just
sweet things. I got and I just said, "See, it's my love. Just the idea that I have to give something to these
people. How it has worked out." So we'll do that ceremony now of giving presents to all the foreign
people because Holi is the day you are supposed to give some presents. Alright? So we have
something for you to be given.
 19840317_Talk On Holi Day_New Delhi.pdf-page7.txt 
 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT
HINDI TALK
Scanned from Hindi Nirmala Yog
आप लोग रूपया तक देने भई सुबह चार बजे उठो, अगर कानफन्स है तो।
से घबराते है । यह गलत वात जो जरूरी चोज है वह है ध्यान करना। जो बड़ा
है। यह सुनकर तो मुझे बड़ा goal (उद्देश्य) है उसे देखना चाहिये। जो चीज
आ्चय हुआ कि बम्बई के लोग है, बह है ज्यान करना। Conference (सभा) ह जो
औ जरूरी चीज है, वो है ध्यान करना जो बड़ा यह goal
सब में ककषमकश लगी रहेगी कि है उसे देखना चाहिए। दफ्तर थोड़ा सा आपने नहीं
किया तो भी कुछ नहीं जायेगा, क्योंकि lower
मंगिना पडता है। रूपया तो क भी बम्बई में goal (निम्न उदश्य) है । ऐसे हजारों दफ्तर वाले
कम नहीं होता। आपको माजूम है कि वम्बई मैंने देख लिये जो कि फाइलों पर फाइल लाद के
में लोग हज़ारों रुपया खर्च करते हैं और अपने मर गये लेकिन कोई पूछता भो नहीं कि कहां गये और
यहाँ उन्होंने बना रखा है कि इतना रूपया हम कहाँ खत्म हो गए हजारों को में जानती है क्योंकि
भगवान के माम पर रखेंगे। यह वड़ी शमें की बात मैंने जिन्दगी भर इन्हीं लोगों के साथ जिन्दगी काटी
है कि इन लोगों को आपसे रूपया माँगना पड़ता है । तो दपतर की जो महत्ता है वो मैं अंब जानती
हैं और इस तरह की चीजें नहीं होतो चाहिए । हैँ, उसको महत्ता आप मुझसे न बताये कि आज
और अगले वक्त मैं ये न सुन पाऊ कि [अप लोगों से दफ्तर में ये था, ऐसा हुआ, दक्तर में मैं फंस गया ।
दफ्तर क्या चीज है। आपसे ध्यान नहीं होता ।
इतनो छोटो सी चीज पआपसे नहीं होती। ये भी
आपको तन्दुरुस्ती ठीक हो जाती है, तंवियत ठीक सोचना चाहिये कि हम सां से हम सब ठीक करवाना
Rটি
र हैं। अगर पूजा होगी तो
हम कितना रुपया दे। यहाँ
रूपया माँगा जाता है । यह तो परमात्मा का काम
है। आप यहाँ आकर के इतता लाभ उठाते हैं।
चाहते हैं, हमने मां के लिए क्या किया।
हो जाती है और आ्राप टाइम (समय) नहीं दे सकते
अपने को, आप ध्यान नहीं कर सकते और भापको
दुनिया भर के काम है, लेकिन आप के पास ध्यान
सब प्पने मे न में सोचें कि हमने मां के लिये
क्या किया। सबसे निम्न चीज है कि पसा देना ।
करने के लिये टाइम नहीं है । मतलब यह है कि डुससे निम्न कुछ है ही नहीं । मां कितना रुपया देती
मूझे बाजार जाना था, माँ, मैं क्या करू, मुभे रहती हैं हर साल । हमने कितना रुपया दिया।
जरूरी जाना था, सुना कि आज ताजी सबजी आई
बो श्रीवास्तव साहब तो कोई सहजयोगी नहीं।
थी तो लेने जाना था ले किन ध्यान के लिए उनकी लेकिन उनकी अक्ल बहुत जबरदस्त है कि अगर
समय नहीं है । "मुझे अपते वनाऊ ज का मेंचिल्ग इसमें रुपया पसा दिया जाये तो अपना लाभ होता
करना था, इसलिये मैं गई।" आदमियों का दूसरा है और उनको हो ही रहा है । उनको सारा लाभ
है, "गाज दपतर में कान्फ्न्स थी, मुझे जाना ही हो रहा है रुपयों पैसों का और ग्राप] [लोगों को
था इस कान्फेन्स में, तो मैं ध्यान नहीं कर सका ।" लाभ नहीं होता। फिर कहेंगे कि हमारी नौकरी
के
8.
 19840317_Talk On Holi Day_New Delhi.pdf-page8.txt 
 Original Transcript : Hindi
यही हमारे घोबी साहव के यहाँ है
नहीं चलती. हमें घाटा आ रहा है। होगा ही । बो पर बैठोगी ।
एक हमारे धोबी साहृब थे यहीं दिल्ली में, बहुत
पालो, करो। और अ्राप लोग दो-दो रुपये, चार-चार दिनों तक रहे, घोवी [अभी भी हैं। तो वे एक दिन
रुपये के लिये, मुझे तो आश्चर्य है, मोटरों में घूनते सूटवूट पहनकर आये, वो तो धोबियों का ये कि
हैं, सबके पास मोटरे हैं, पंट्रोल है, सब चीज, किसी का भी सुट झाड़क र पहन लिया, ये घोबी की
श।नवाजी बहुत है। ये जो चीज़ ऊपर [आ] गई है जात है। तो किसी का सूट-बूट झाड़कर अ्राया ।
दिखावे की, दिखावा, ये अपने North India (उत्तरी तो कहने लगा कि माताजी केसा सूट लग रहा है ?
अरे मैने कहा, ये तो साहब का सूट है । कम से कम
अचछे होने चाहिये, मोटर होनी चाहिये, घर हमारे घर तो साहब का सूट पहन कर मत माना
सून्दर होना चाहिये। लेकिन आपके मन्दिर में था। वो भी काफी लम्बा चौड़ा था, मैंने कहा इस
कितना दीप जल रहा है, सादगी पे त रे कर । लिये तृम हमें छोड़ते नहीं हों. क्योंकि साहब का
होता
होशियार आदमो हैं, उन्होंने कहा चलो भया ये तो
क
भारत) की खास चीज है। ऊपर का दिखाया।
कपड़े
सादगो पे आइये, तभी अन्दरके आर्म-दो प की ओर तुम्हें dress (कपड़े) तुम्हें fit (सही)
है, इसलिये तुम हमें छोड़ते नहीं हो, मू झे पता है।
ये तो हम लोगों की दुर्दशा है । माने ये कि सूट
ये मैं नहीं कह ती कि आप फकीरवनकर जिये । जरूर भाडेंगे, चाहे तो किसी की मारा हुआ हो
ये वात नहीं है, मतलब ये है कि आदमो को कोई हज्जा नहीं। सूट झाडकर रौब झाड्ना। कितनी
traditional (परम्पराचारी होना च हिये। Tradi- देर का रोब होता है? ये रौब कितने देर का ? एक
tional तरीके से रहिये लेकिन जो glamorous क्षण भी नहीं। अन्दर का रौब होना चाहिये
पना (चटक-मटक) है, ओर जो आदमियों की मनुष्य में, ग्रीर traditional (परम्पराचारी) नहीं हैं
शानशोखो] है, वो खत्म होनी चाहिये । हम लोग हम लोग। औरते फीरन sleeveless (विना बाजू
कोई अंग्र ज] नहीं कि कीमती सूट पहन करके घू में। का) पहनकर घमती हैं । मैंने देखा है त्रौरतों को
क्या जरूरत है सूट पहनने को ? अपना देसी कपड़ा sleeveless फट में पहनेगी । sleeveless पहनना
पहनिये । देसी तरीके से रहिये, इस में अपनी शोभा अपने यहाँ कोई देवी देवता, क भी मैंने सुना नहीं
है । उसमें अपनापन । बेकार में अपने को show sleeveless पहनती थीं । हमारी लड़की ने एक
बाजी (दिखावा) करना और दिखाना यहां इतना दिन कहा, "माँ यहाँ सब लड़कियाँ, जब दिल्ली आए.
सब लड़कियां हमारे स्कूल में sleeveless पहनती
तो हमने कहा, "जसा
आती । एक बार हमारे चपरासी की बीवी मुझके तुम्हारा मन हो पर तुम क्यों नहीं पहनती ? मैंने
कहा, "मैं तो नहीं पहन सकती, क्योंकि मैंने
सब कुछ। अब मुझे क्या पता था कि ये चपरासी कभी पहना नहीं। मझे शर्म अरती है, ये शरीर क्यों
वो तो खुला रहे । ये तो चौज ठीक नहीं। तो कहने लगी
जब ठीक तहीं तो आप कहती कों न ही कि ये ठोक
मैंने कहा सो के पर बठो ता बेठे न । मैंने कहा, हप्रा नहीं।" मैं ते कहु। पके पास अकल है, आप खुद
कया भई, बैठतो कथों नहीं ? इवर-उध र देखने लगी तथ करिये कि अगर हम नहीं पहनेते और अगर
तो कहती है, कि माँ बात ये है कि मैं नपराली की आपने पहनना है तो हम ब्यों पआ्रापको जबरदस्ती
बीवो है। तो मैंने कहा, अच्छा चलो बंठो, कोई हर्जा करें । पर मैं कभी नहीं पहन गौ । There is no
criteria (यह कोई आवश्यक नहीं है) ये तो कोई
न जर जायेगी ।
show (दिखावा) है मैं अपको बता नहीं सकती ।
अगर किसी के घर जाइये तो मुझे तो समझ नहीं
हैं, हम
पहने ?
मिलने प्राई। तो शनील का मुट प्रौर शनील का
क
।
को बोबी है। मैंते कहा भया सोफ पर बठो
मझमे भी अच्छे कपड़े पहन के आई थी। मतलब
नहीं, तुन शनाल पहन कर आई हो, तो कहाँ जमोन
 19840317_Talk On Holi Day_New Delhi.pdf-page9.txt 
 Original Transcript : Hindi
criteria (ग्रावश्यक) नहीं कि मैने कह दिया तो नहीं। कहने लगे में री कोई बौबो नहीं आई,
आपने हा कर दिया। मैंने कहा कि प्राप प्रपना दिमाग आने वाली थी. वो कहा चली गई बो कहने लंगे
लगाइये कि माँ क्यों नहीं पहनती। SIeeveless नहीं, क
पहनेंगी, इतना लम्बा गला पहनेगी, ये सब तरीके उन्होंने कहा कि आ्रावरकी कोई सेक्रट्ी आई हुई हैं ।
आप छोड़ दीजिये । सहजयोगियों को ये शोभा नहीं देखा तो उनकी बी साहिवा वहाँ जोन पहनकर
देता । कायदे के कपड़े पहनिये। जो कार्यदे के कपड़े पहुँची हुई थी। तो उन्होंने कहा, ये तो कोई सेक्रट्री
हैं, श्पने traditional (परम्परागत)तरीके से । पाँच होगी। यो अपने को बड़ा खुवमूरत समझ कर घूम
में ठीक से पायल होनी चाहिये, आपके पाँव में रही थी असल में औरत में जब dignity (मर्यादा
विधिया होतो चाहिये. आपके गले में मंगलसूत्र
होना चाहिये । कायदे की औरतें होनी चाहिये। बाबू की बीवी आई हृुई हैं, या वहाँ पर कोई जमा-
बाल कटाकर बैठ गई, बाल किसलिए कटाने हैं दारनी के जैसी दिखाई देती है। हिन्दुस्तानी ओरत
क्यों वाल कटाती हैं आप लोग ? पराप कोई ग्रज जो इस तरह के कड़े पहनती है बिलकुल जमा-
जो वाल कटायें ? किसलिये अ्रापको बाल व टाने दारनी जैसे, कौर ऐोसे जमादारनीं जसे कपड़ पहन
की जरूरत है ? कुछ समझ में नहीं प्राता । हमारे कारके घ मना कोई अच्छी वात नहीं । अपनी इज्जत
यहाँ बाल कटाना सिर्फ विधवाओं का होता है र अपने हाथ में है। अगर आप अपनी इज्जत नही
विधवाओं को भी बाल कटाना जो होता है, बिल्कुल रखेंगे तो दृनिया आपकी इज्जत नहीं करेगी आप
मुं इन होता है। ये नहीं कि बाल कटाकर के hair लोग किस तरह के बपड़े पहन ते हैं, किस तरह
dress (केश सजजा) वनाकर के घूरमना, सहज- चलते हैं, कि अपने देश के गर्व के साथ, जो अपने
योगियों को शोभा नहीं देता । यहीं आदमियों का
हाल है । अब ये लोग भी आजकल, मैंने सुना है कि dress (पहनावा) है हाँ कभी-कभी पहनना पड़ता
यहाँ के आदरमी लोग भी,
फेशन करते है । फेशन सहजयोग में विल्कुल नहीं
शोभा देता, आपकी dignity (शन ) में । ऐसे
आदमो को आपको माजूम नहीं कि कोई इज्जत सहजयोगी लोग रोब झाडने को जाते हैं औ्ौर यहाँ
नहीं देता। परदेश में मैंने देखा है हमारे साथ एक पर जो हैं foreign (विदेशों) से आये हुये लोग हैं,
cabinet minister (कन्द्रीय मंत्री) थीं, cabinet
minister नहीं secretary (सविव) की बीवी
वो तो
कोई नहोीं ग्राई। उसके बाद हम बैठे तो
र नहीं होगी तो वो मुझे लगेगी जैसे कि कोई अलक
घूपना
से
देश का dress ( पहनावा) है वो सबसे अ्च्छा
है formalities (औपचारिकता) पर, कभी आाप
सूट पहन लीजिये, पर हर समय सूट पहनने की कोई
जरूरत नहीं । तो यहाँ पर मैं देखती हूँ बहुत से
कुछ सहजयोगी भी काफी
मुझसे कहते हैं कि माी हमें इसलिये अच्छा नहीं
लगता है कि वहाँ पर सब suited-booted
(सुजे-धजे) लोग रहृते हैं । उनको अच्छा नहीं
थीं Chief secretary (मुख्य सचित्र) chief
t i Chief
cabinet secretary की । उसकी बीबी प्राई एक
बार । वो South India (दक्षिण भारत) को थी। उनको लगता है कि ये लोग क्या अजीब लोग
लेकिन वो बीबो अ्रपने को बहुत अफलातून समझती हैं,
थीं। तो दूबली-पतली थीं और एक दिन हम लोग है, उसे पहन सकते हैं । इतनो गर्मी हो रही है, उस
पार्टी में गये खाना खाने । तो वहां पर देखा कि हम वक्त ये लोग अपने ये पहन करके आ रहे हैं। इनको
गये तो हमको बड़ी इजजत के साथ उन्होंने हमें बैठाया। विल्कुल ही अपनती कोई प्रतिष्ठा नहीं । जो स्वयं
हमारे husband (पति) भो बेडे, ओर ये महाशय अप्रतिष्ठित होते हैं, वो इस तरह से glamour
जब वहाँ बैठे तो उन्होंने कहा कि आपकी बोबी
कहा है ? कहने लगे आपको तो कोई बो बो आई वो चीज है जिससे आदमी में एक तरह की defi-
लगता, क्योंकि आप उतका अनुकरण कर रहे हैं ।
इनके पास इतने अच्छे-श्रच्छे dress ( बस्व)
(दिखावे) में रहते हैं । Glamour (दिखावा) तो
10
 19840317_Talk On Holi Day_New Delhi.pdf-page10.txt 
 Original Transcript : Hindi
ciency (हीनता) होता है वो glamour लग ता रुचिकर ग्रौर सुल्दर है, और जो ऐसे फालतू चीजों
है कि सिर पर डालडा का टीन रख लीजिये उसके के पोछे में श्रादमो जब जाता है तो उसका जो रूप
ऊपर में बूफा बनाइये और फिर बो डालडा का है वो विद्रप हो जाता है। जैसे कि एक साहब पार्टी
टोन या बालों में खुब ऐसे-रोसे सजा- सजा करके में बहुत बनठन कर गये, तो उन्होंने सोचा कि बंरा
वाल-वाल वनायें । क्या जरूरत है ? कोई जरूरत है तो उनके हाथ में उन्होंने अरपने सारे गिलास-
नहीं । आप विल्कुल सादगी से रहिये। कहीं आापने वर्गैरा पकड़ा दिये, और वो अ्पने को बड़ा लगा के
कोई देवी को देखा है कि वो इस तरह के एक टाईन-बारई लगा के आये। मैंने कहा, इन राजा-
वेकार के आडम्बर करती हैं। अगर करे, एक महाराजाओ का गवाल ही खराव हो गया। बड
बार हमें जबरदस्ती ठेल-ठाल कर लोग ले गये बन के अये थे राजे और उनको उन्होंने सचने वी
तो में तो भूत लगने लग गई। मैंने कहा है भगवान गिलास पकड़वा दिये। मैने कहा कि भई विचारों
फ को इसे, वेकार की नीज, सरद्द हो गया। पर को एसे ही पकड़वा दिया उन्होंने । दो-एक दिन मेरे
साथ भी ऐसा हो हआ। मैं एक पाटों में गई थी,
तो बहीँ एक ambassador (राजदूत) साहब
कसे लोग बदर्शत करते हैं और किस लिये ये सारा
बदर्द्दाश्त करते हैं ? किसनिये ? इससे किसी को लाभ
नही होता है, कोई सुखी नहीं होता, किसो को हिन्दुस्तान के बड़े अग्रेज बनकर आये थे । तो मैंने
सोचा कि कोई नीग्रो-बीग्रो होगा, उस को भी बरा
बनाकर के भेज दिया होगा। यहाँ पर कोई नीग्रो हैं
तो ये बीजों को समझना चाहिये कि श्रीकृष्ण की कि क्या हैं । तो उसको मैंने खुद हो गिलास पकड़वा
जो लीला है, उस लीला में सौष्ठव है, उसमें माधुय्यं दिया । तो ये दोडे-दोड़े प्राये कि अरे क्या करती हो,
है, उसमें इस तरह की गंदगी नहीं है. कि जिसको अरे क्या करती हो? ये अपने ambassador (राज-
देखते साथ ऐसा लगता है कि ये कया चले आ रहे दूत) साहब है । भई मैने कहा, कायदे से अपना बद
हैं सामने से, चार तरह के बाल रंगा करके, ऐसा कालर का पहन करके, कायदे से आते तो मैं कहती
बड़ा-सा चश्मा पहन करके, जैसे खव खार इससान भी कि हिन्दुस्तान के ambassador (राजदूत
आपके ऊपर वला आ रहा है। उनके अन्दर सोष्ठव आये हये हैं। ये इतनी जी टाई वाई लगा करके आये
था। उनके dress (वस्त्र) देखिये, पीताम्बर पहनते तो भी खूब मोटी, ऐसे-ऐसे फूलो हुई, बिल्कुूल जैसे
थे । हमारे यहाँ कितने लोग पीताम्बर पहने हये हैं, बेरा लोग लगाते हैं। मैेंने कहा तमोज से कपड़े
। क्योंकि वो तो पीता- पहनो ऐसे ही इंग्लैण्ड में आप देखिये कि रानी का
म्बर पहनने से तो, अरे बाप रे ! हम तो विल्कुल जब वो होता है पारटो तो वहाँ भी ये चलता है। ये
देहाती हो गये, कोई नहीं पीताम्बर पहनता और सब अंग्रेजों से हमने सीखा हुआा है फालतू का । तो
वो मुकुट लगाते थे, वो भी मोर मुकुट लगाते, मोर वहाँ पर है कि tail coat (एक प्रकार का वस्त्र
मुकुट उसको लगा लेते थे, क्योंकि थे तो भगवान ही आप पहनते हैं, जिसको दो क्या है long suit
तो उनको मुकूट चढ़ाना है, तो मोर का लगा ले ते (लभ्बा सूट) कहते हैं। अब वो सबके पास तो होता
थे। लेकिन अपने यहाँ दृफा बना लेते हैं । वाइये नहीं, कोई रखता न हीं, तो वहाँ एक Ross Bro-
श्ीर प्रादमी लोग और क्या-क्या तमाये कर रहे thers (रॉस बन्धु) करके हैं। Ross Brothers
हैं । इससे क्या फायदा ? जो गपलि यत पे ग्रादमी तो Ross Brothers जो हैं वो सबको देते हैं कि
को रहना चाहिये। पहली चीज ये है कि अपने आप ये hire (भाड़े पर) करो। अब भेया अच्छे-
को ये समझ लेना चाहिये कि हमें प्रसलियत पर भले लोग सीधे नहीं चलते, टे़े-टेढ़े चलते हैं । मैंने
रहन। है । असलियत इन्सान की जो है वो बहुत कहा क्या वो तो comfortably (अरारामपूर्वक) चल
आनंद नहीं आता। उल्टे घबराहट होने लगती है।
बताइये ? जो कृष्ण पहनते थे
ये
11
 19840317_Talk On Holi Day_New Delhi.pdf-page11.txt 
 Original Transcript : Hindi
रहे हैं, उनको सब tight ( तंन) कपड़े, कोई लटके पहनेंगे नहीं तो विल्कुल जैसे वो beach ( समुद्र
हये हैं, किसी के सहा तक पर जा रहा है, कोई ढीले- किना रे) पर पहन कर घूमते हैं, वसे
हाले विल्कुल जोकर बने हुये हैं, Clown जैसे । मैंने दोनों चीज हम रे देश के लिये शोंभा नहीं दे iि ।
कहा जो अच्छे-भले लोग थे ये केसे लग रहे हैं। मुझे हमारा देंन भी बहुत बड़ा प्रतिष्ठावान है, क्योंकि
तो हसी पे हंसी ग्राती रही। पूरे समय मुझे हसी बड़े पूर्वजन्म के सुकृत से प्राप इस देश में पदा हुये
तो रही। इन्होंने पूछा तुम्हें हंसी क्यों प्राती है ? हैं इनको पूर्वजन्म का कुछ मालूम हो नहीं। फिर
मैंने कहा ये देखो elown (जोकर), ये तो इनना उनके सुकृत को कौन बात करे। तुम्हारे तो पूर्वजन्म
दमी है, इसकी क्या हो गया, ये clown
पहनकर घमेंगे
इतने सुकुत हुये इसी देश में आप पदा हये और
इस देश में पंदा होने के बाद इसकी यान से रहे ।
औरतों को भी चाहिये कि इसकी शान से रहे देखिये
कपड़ा पहना कीजिये
के
अच्छा
जसे बना चला है । भवात को कृपा से जब से हम
पहुँचे तो ये allow (इजाजत)
आप अपना national dress (राष्ट्रीय पोषाक)
पहन कर आइये। तो मैंने कहा, नहीं तो मैं तो
आपके साथ चलती नहीं । Clown (जोकर) बनकर
के मैं चलने नहीं वालो। ये सब भगवान की कृपा
हो गई, समझे ना । फिर उस से अजीव-प्रजोब लोग
हो गया कि
आप हिन्दुस्तानो ढंग से ।
आपकी इज़्जत होगी, लोग अपको पसंद करेंगे,
अरपको मानेगे। महाराष्ट्र में इस मासले में लोग
काफी ये हैं। श्रासाती से अपना dress नहीं छुटता,
आसानी से नहीं छुटता पर देहातों में तो बिल्कुल
३।।
dressed आते हैं, varieties (भिन्न-भिनल्न रूप ) हो नहीं, चाहे कुछ हो जाये देहातो में विल्कुल नहीं
आती हैं-कोई अरजीब तरह का पहन कर आते हैं,
जिसको आरप प्रजीब से कहें
मिलता है कि इनका national dress ( राष्ट्रीय के प्राप जेबर पहनिये, उसमें कोई हर्ज नही, क्योंकि
पोषाक) क्या है । Variety (विभिन्नता) से
आरता है, सब अपने tradtion (परम्परा) की तरह सारे जितने भी जेवर हैं ये सारे एक-एक चक्रों पे
से कपड़ पहनते हैं। उनके देश में जो tradition उसकी शोभा के लिये हैं। लेकिन आपको कोई जरू-
बनता है। अपने देश में भी जो कुछ tradition बने हैं, रत नहीं कि आप अप्रेजों जैसे फाक पहनकर घूमिये
वो भी इस हिसाब से tradition बने हैं कि जिससे और या उनके जैसे कपड़े पहनिये । हां कभी आपको
हमारेदेश में जो जरूरी चीज है, जिस तरह का dress formalities (लोकाचार) पर पहनना पड़े । पर
(वस्त्र) पहना वो धोरे-धीरे बो tradition बाँधते अधिकतर अ्रपने ही देश का dress सह जधोगियों
जाता है । जिस तरह का हमारे लिये शोभा देता को पहनना चाहिये, हरेक घ्रादमी को । जिस देश में
है, उपयोगी है, उसको छोड़कर एकदम अंजों जैसे रहो,
कपड़े पहनने की क्या जरूरत है ? ओर अंग्रेज जैसे dress पहनो ।
छूटता। उनका dress (पहनावा), मैं तो ये कहती
। वो पर दिखने को तो हैं कि traditional dress प्राप पहनिये, सब तरह
सौंदर्य
ये अपने देश का tradition ( प रम्परा) है, श्रर ये
अगर इंग्लैण्ड में रहो तो इंग्लेण्ड जैसा
12
