Nirmala Yoga Bi-Monthly Vol. 5 No. 27 May-June 1985 "Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns all the religions and seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga-THE UNION"

 NIRM ALA OGA 43, Bungalow Road. Dalhi-110007 (India) Founder : Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Editorial Board: Dr. S.K. Mathur, Sri A.S. Mishra, Sri R.D. Kulkarni Representatives Australia RAJEN MAHARAJ, 26, Ocean St, Bondi, NSW 2026 INGE KELLY, Josef Melichargasse 20, 1210 VIENNA. LORI & CARY HYNEK, 1540, Taylor Way, West Vancouver, B.C. VIS 1N4 M. CERNAY, 175, Av. Ledru Rollin PARIS-75011. :ANTONIO SARACINO, NIRMALA HOUSE, Localita Pichini s.n.s. 00010 S. Angelo Romano, ROMA M.B. RATNANNWAR, 13, Merwan Mansion, Genjewala Lane, Borivali (W), BOMBAY-400092. Austria Canada France Italy India : JUAN ANTONIO DELGADO, Avenida De Burgos, 30, 1, A. MADRID-28036 Spain Switzerland : CHARLES & MRS. MAGDA MATHYS. 5 Chemin Des Mouldins, 1256, Troinex (Canton de Geneva). :GAVIN BROWN, Brown's Geological Information Services Ltd., 134 Great Portland Street, London WIN 5PH. IAN BASCOMBE, 32, Hooker Road, Exeter, Devon, England CHRISTINE & MICHAEL PETRUNIA, 270, Jay Street (APT. 1-C), BROOKLYN, NY-11201. URSULA SEHLMEYER, 191 Canal ST. #23 SAN RAFAEL CA-94901. U. K. U.S.A. O NTENTS Page 1. Editorial 1 2. Mother's Holy Feet 3. The Song of Lord Ganesha 4. Sahaja Yogis have to ascend (Bordi 1985) 5. The Mother 6 The Culture of Universal Religion (Bordi 1985) 7 Establishing the Guru Principle (Guru Pooja 1982) 8. Shri Mahalakshmi Pooja 9. On the meaning of Islam 10. Advice given at Jung Society Hall, U.S.A. (1983) 11. Christmas at Nagpur in 1983 12. Shri C. P. Shrivastavajis speech at Birth Centenary 12 13 19 (Munich 1984) 26 28 29 45 Celebrations of Shri Prasad Rao Krishna Rao Salveji 48 Front Cover: Shri Mataji-Maharashtra tour 1984.

 Editorial The Hymns of Shri Dakshinamoorti is one of the most outstanding works of Shri Adi- Shankaracharya, The word Shri 'Dakshinamoorti' has niany connotations. 'Dakshina' is the south, As our beloved Mother has told us, Shri Shiva resides at Mount Kailäsh facing to the South. Another connotation is: Shri' is the Adi-Shakti, hence Shri Dakshinamoorti' is the Adi-Shakti and Sadashiva, the Primordial parents of the Universe, who are one like word and its meaning, in Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi. Also, 'Dakshina' suggests the beauty. Hence the word stands for beauty and divinity personificd, that is our Mother. The hymns have thirteen verses, nine out of which endas Salutations to Shri Guru Dakshina- moorti'. Indeed beloved Mother is Guru as well. In the eleventh verse Shri Dakshinamoorti has been deseribed as the Guru of three worlds viz the earth, the nether world, and the heavens. Our Mother looks after the entire creation-and accomodates it within Her being. In the thirteenth verse Adi-Shankaracharya has culogised that the Guru is very young but the disciples are getting old, the Guru is silent while the disciples are being enlightened. It is felt that understanding of the hymns would strengthen our desire to be one with the lotus feet of Sakshat Param-Parameshwari, Sakshat Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi. विश्वं द्पण दृश्यमान नगरीतुल्य पश्यन्नात्मनि मायया बहिरिवोद्भूतं यथा निद्रया ।॥। यः साकात्कुरुते प्रवोधसमये तस्मे श्री गुरूमूतये नम इदं श्रों दक्षिणामूतंये ॥ निजांतंगतं दर्पण । स्वात्मानमेवाद्वयं । Vishwam darpana drushyamana-nagaree tulyam nijäntargatam i Pashyannätmani mâyaya bahirivod-bhootam yathā nidraya 1 1 Yah sükshat-kurute prabodha-samaye swätmäna-mevādvayam i Tasmai Shri Guru moortaye nama idam Shri Dakshināmoortaye I t 1 Nirmala Yoga

 The universe is within oneself like reflection of a city in the mirror. But due to the Maya itappears to have come up outside the Selff as a dream seen in the sleep. Salutations to that Guru Shri Dakshinamorti who gives the realization through the enlightenment, that only the Self is everywhere, the only one and not the second. The first part of the verse states the true nature of phenomenal universe and how it appears to human-beings whereas in the second it is explained how the Guru brings about revelation of the truth. It is known to all that universe is created from the combination of three Gunas (the Satwa, the Rajas and the Tamas), and five elements (the earth, the water, fire, air and the ether). Also it owes its existence to Paramatma who it foundational for its functioning, The three Gunas and five elements which have originated from the power of desire of the Supreme Spirit are present in their causal states. Thus as a mirror is the cause of reflection, the Paramātmā is the cause of the universe which, is as illusory as the refiection in the mirror. While the Paramātmā is all pervading within, without and the cause of many universes. The Atman in its purest state is the "Sacchidanand-Swaroopa (of the form of truth- consciousness-bliss), all pervading and the totality. It receives its individuality due to limi- tations placed by Maya, owing to the desire of the Paramätmä. If a vessel is dipped in the ocean, water filled in it, is essentially the occan bound by the walls of the vessel. Similarly, the Atman is essentially the same as the Paramātmā enveloped by gross, subtle and causal bodies created from the combination of five clements and three Gunas that are present in their causal states within the being, on the Chakras and Channels of sympathetie and parasympathetic. According to one theory the primary limiting conditions viz, the innate ignorance reduces the universal consciousness to a limited creature by the Ichcha shakti of the Supreme: It is owing to this, that the Jeeva (empirical being) considers himself to be a separate entity cut-off from the universal stream of consciousness. It is the consciousness within self-limitations and impe.fections. Considering the fact of essential oneness of the Atma and the Paramātmā, the universe should appear unreal even to the empirical being. But it is mistaken as the reality owing to the play of Mäyā, as incidents experienced in the dreams are taken as real ones, owing to the sleep. As the sleep is the cause to give semblance of objectivity to ideas latent in the sub- conscious, the unreal universe appears as real owing to the ignorance. The truth shines within, when the Atma enlightens the inner organs by it's splendour after the veil of Maya is removed by the Guru. Our beloved Mother has removed the veil of Maya by awakening and raising the Kundalini and shown us the glimpse of ever-effulgent Atman. The light has to be developed through our efforts to enjoy the glory and splendour of the Atman and its ultimate oneness with the Paramatman. The ultimate oneness is to be perceived by withdrawing the attention from the universe, from the body and fixing it into the Atma. Sahaja Yogis are not free from the influence of Maya even after the enlightenment of their Antahkarana' (the inner organs). Even, wise and learned men, men who are clever and adept in the vision of exceedingly subtle Atman are Nirmala Yoga 2)

 overpowered by Tamas' and do not understand the Atman, They consider as true, what is simply super-imposed by delusion and attach themselves to its effects, The Maya has three gunas the Satwa, the Rajas and the Tamas as mentioned above. The Rajas has its Vikshepa shakti' or projecting power that produces mental modifications such as attachment, grief, anger etc. Avrti or the veiling power is the power of Tamas which makes things appear other than what they are and starts the projecting power. Thanks to our beloved Mother for endowing us with vibratory awareness following which Sahaja Yogis can liberate themselves from the bondage of Maya. Cool vibrations would indicate the balance between the Tämas and Räjas with the Atmä shining in its glory. Giving up the thoughts of non-Self which is evil, productive of misery and causes diversion from the path-way to God-realization, one should think of the Self the Bliss-absolute. Here shines eternally the Atman, the self-effulgent witness of everything. One must meditate on this Atman excluding all other thoughts, continuously, strengthening the identifications with the Atman. One must live without any concern for body, organs, and the world. The Self is Brahma, the Self is Vishnu, the Self is Indra, the Self is Shiva, the Self is this universe. Nothing exists except the Self. The Self is within and without, in the North, in the South, in the East in the West, above and below. AND THE SELF IS MOTHER'S LOTUS FEET May we meditate on them in the heart. MOTHER'S HOLY FEET त्रयाणा देवानां त्रिगुणजनितानां तव शिवे भवेत् पूजा पूजा तब चरणयोर्या विरचिता । तथा हि त्वत्पादोंद्ृहनमणिपोठस्य निकटे । स्थिता ह्येते शश्वन्मुकुलितकरोत्तंसमकुटा: ।। Trayănām devānām triguna-janitanām täva Shive, bhavet poojä poojā tava charanayorya vira chita 1 Tathá hi tvat-pādod vahana-manipeethasya nikate, Sthitā hyete shash vanmukulita karottamsa-makutāh 11 Verse 25, Saundarya Lahari i 1 O Spouse of Shiva! the homage rendered to Thy feet becomes by itself the homage rendered to the three gods born of Thy three Gunas. It is therefore, that these gods viz,. Brahman, Vishnu, and Rudra, ever stand by the jewelled seat on which Thy Feet rest, with their folded hands, adorning their crowns. Nirmala Yoga

 The Song of Lord Ganesha. I am Ganesha and I love all the carth. For I am the lord of the Virgin birth. I danced in the morning when the world began. And I danced when they crucified me as man. I love all mankind-and for it to be free I love it to grow as straight as a tree, I love my Mother and I love Her work, Hove Her hands and 1 love Her Feet. All mankind is within me and I long for my body to be free. I love the work of my creator Father- And I love the joy of my awesome Mother- I love mankind but they don't love me- For they feared and they hid and were not free. For in original sin, they chose to be free To hurt and destroy, and not love me. But I am the lover of the Universe, And I forgive it again and again And I soothe their hurts and long for their pain To be gone for ever, and for them again To love each other and to be pure- And enjoy my Parents' eternal store To live in Paradise eternally And, as my brothers And sisters, always to love me. For I am Lord of the dance, said he. -Dr. Rustom Nirmala Yoga

 Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Ji Sahaja Yogis have to Ascend sacrificing for the greatest cause International Seminar, Bordi Feb. 6, 1985 I'm immensely joyous to see all of you tion. They were not realised souls, without here. I do not know what to say from my side. feeling any joy around. With two clothes, Livi- The words get lost. They have no meaning. So ing in the jungles,-just two clothes. And the Imany of you aspiring to ascend to that state where you would have complete joy, bliss, and self is terribly cold; chilly, absolutely chilly. peace. This is what I could give you. And a And the clothes were not clothes actually, it Mother is only happy when She can give what- was cloth covering their body. Sleeping on the ever She has, to Her children. Her unhappi- open ground in a very severe winter,-or may ness, all Her restlessness, everything, is just to be the summer. Without any shoes they were achieve that end,-to gift all that She has. area where he visited-which I have seen my- asked to walk, for miles together, miles toge- ther! I do not know how much to thank you people to go through all this to get to that tre- asure that you have within yourself. "Sahaja" ked and trodden, you will be surprised. Buddha is the only word I could think when I started to manifest Sahasrăra understood by everyone so far. But you have realised that it is today a different style of Yoga his disciples,-there was no time to advertise, where first enlightenment is given, and then you are allowed to look after yourself. It was stay in one place, and the disciples used to go never done before.-It's just a venture of your Mother which has worked out. IF you go and see where Buddha has wal- was also young, he used to also walk. But his disciples used to walk much more, because he would go and station in a place, he would send opening. That's casily or to annouuce anything. So that heused to r round the villages, ask for bhikshā,-meaning the alms,-to gather some food from the vill- ages; cook one time, give part of it to Buddha, Otherwise, in the olden times, of course, and the rest of that they used to eat. the concern of the Divine was to get pcople enlightened. And they did not know how to all the villages, whatever was possible, and work it out. No incarnation ever tried to work would bring them to Buddha for a sermon. it out in this fashion. But whenever they tried, Such sacrifices ! They've lived in huts, caves, they tried to have a very severe hardship for in terrible darkness,–meditating. But they the seckers, Very severe hardships. They would go, work out, get people from never got realisation. Very few got their reali- sation. I wonder how many of you have read the treatise of Buddha, when he used to travel with thousands of his disciples-not giving realisa- There were pcople, who were sons of great princes, and princes, dukes, what you call, duch- 5. Nirmala Yoga

 My father sacrificed 'everything', every pie that he had, for the freedom struggle. He left And they walked for miles together with him nothing for us, not a single.. I should say, of in the thorny routes.-Because they felt that course, our family being rich we had silver and Bud dha's work was of such universal importance: gold and all that. But as faras all the cash money was concerned, was spent. And all this silver and gold also, thanks to English, that they took away from us, and they returned us when they went back. That is how we had some ess as you call all very-very' rich people. Women of very rich families followed him. that they are the part and parcel of such a trem- endous task ; that they should be taking part in Such a great work for humanity. This is not only in India, but even Vidit- . ämä who started the Zen system in Japan. In China, I was surprised, the amount of sacri- fices the had made; the way they lived ! snatched away. And I know, we lived in bea- silver and gold left in the family. 'Everything',all that is material,-was I mean if you see the way they were living in utiful houses, and then we shifted to huts and the conditions. You cannot imagine! And they lived there. Sacrifices to the Maximum. And ended up their lives like that. Working it out, without any proper guidance, because Buddha had died, there was no way out. They had to find their own ways. Then they found Maha- wash our clothes, live like very poor people, yana and Shvétäyäna-all kinds of things. we were very happy about it. Very proud ! We had only two changes. We used to sleeping on this kind of a thing (thin, rough floor mats). For my life, I remember that I Even if you see other seekers in other reli- never used to take a pillow. I never used chap- gions,-like at the time of Christ. Where did they pals for ages. I had only one sweater made out live ? And after the death of Christ it wns even worse, because they were persecuted, they were Till I passed out and I went to medical college, killed, they were tortured, crucified! It happened I had that sweater with me. I had only one with Moses also. His disciples were hounded, coat, throughout' my education. When I was so they had to all run towards India. Imagine in Lahore, which is terribly cold and sometimes the distances ! From that area to Kashmir, how they must have walked ! How they must have lived, how they must have carried. And in thousands' ! In thousands, they came, to of this kind of a material (very rough wollen). can be like London, it was worn out and fini- shed. But we never grudged, and never grumbl- ed, and never said that our father should have looked after us and done something, why did he just sacrifice everything for the country. Never', 'never', 'never'. India. Because they realised that they are doing a tremendous task, Something so "great' that they are supporting. But even today, when they sce us, any- In this country we had a struggle for free where, they know we are the children of such dom. I was part and parcel of that. My parents were part and parcel of that. They were rich people ; quite rich I should say, from every standard. You will be amazed, my father burnt all his suits; they were stitched in England. My Mahâtmä Gändhi. He made everybody so tran- mother burnt all her sarees. They used to spin sformed into a new personality of 'tremendous' their own clothes, and wear them. a great man. They have tremendous respect for us. That quality was created, I should say, by sacrifice. Tremendous" ! You cannot imagine Nirmala Yoga 6.

 how people lived ! All the money we had, killed and butchered ! Children died! Nobody teverything', that we had, all conveniences, shed tears. Nobody shed tears. But to feel that conveyance, all houses, everything was given you are for such a 'noble cause itself gives up.-Not only by my father but so many of you that joy. Joy, and that sense of involvement, them. And moreover, what I know about Maha- tma Gändhi and other people, what I have Otherwise we could have not got our free- dom. To get our freedom, this country has scen, how they were. Everybody was not allow- sacrificed so much. ed to come in. And anybody who did even slightest thing less than-whether he was a Now, after that, we are here to get our King's son or he was anybody's daughter or freedom, to get the freedom for our Spirit. To anything, 'any' little thing spoilt, 'anything', make our Sp.rit free from our greed, lust, from our anger, from our conditionings, from our terrible ego, from the body being enslaved by comfort. he was chucked out. I have stayed in Gändhi's Ashram, se I know what it is, and that's why you know I can go through rigorous life. It is his training. I must say Gandhiji had a I do not know how he managed. He was like "touch of Midas"-touched anybody, he be- came transformed, you see. And he was an They had to clean their latrines. Also the latri- extremely strict man.-Very kind to me, the children. But he was an 'extremely' strict man. He would not tolerate any nonsense at all! special charn. All the children, above twelve years had to clean the whole of that Ashram area, which is I think in 50 acres of land.-Every morning. nes of the guests.-I have done it. And they were allowed only two dresses. And nothing could be kept, even you cannot see 'even one Throughout,-f you study in the way all paper any where, any litter anywhere. So clean. th se people were brought up,-not only for free- spick and span. And the living places were so đom or independence, but even before that, for spiritual life, anywhere',-there is one thing is very common, is "Saerifice". ness that you are doing something great. Con- sciousness that you are part and parcel of the Abul Kaläm Azad, my father, of Whole. Such a big thing, such a big work. It's a any age group. or a child. And 5 0'clock, noble' cause. neat and tidy, It was all done with cowdung- completely with cowdung. "Everybody had to take a bath, eariy in the morning at 4 O'clock, with cold water. Whether it was Jawähar Läl And the conseious- - Nehru, any age group, or a child. And 5 O'clock, (Please don't raise your hands and raise your Kundalinis. Please be sented. That is not the way. Try to understand what I am talk- ing). And then there was one thing very com- mon. Very common among all of them: That the noble cause, the uplifiment of the 'noble cause made them sacrifice in such a Sahaja man- ner. Much more than the Sahaja Yogis some- times, who have got so much in Sahaja Yoga. They have got their joy, they have got their Spirit. And then, early in the morning at O'elock, you'll be surprised, getting up-for me it was alright,-and then to walk in those 50 acres of land to the centre of that hall- which was nothing but just an open space sur- rounded by some sort of huts where Gandhiji was living. To walk all the way after bath, after getting ready and all that. And snakes used to I have seen with my own eyes, such people in this country, whom you may call legendery but I have seen it. Thousands of people were Nirmala Yoga

 erawl along. Nobody was bitten, of course. I think the snakes understood that people were busy with the great job of freeing this great But now I fnd we have another kind of slavery. A slavery of selfishness, self-oriented It **This is my comfort. I must have this. should be enjoyable: I am enjoying, I'm this, I'm that". You" should cnjoy, otherwise it is not something great. I mean the whole thing should provide you some sort of a feeling, lights, of any kind. We instead of you providing the feeling.-Because And when Gandhiji would come-I mean sun- neople, I think. do not know what they are country. And we would sit, just like this, and snakes would be crawling. No lights were allowed. No only used sunlight. light was not there in the morning, at all-some lanterns were brought to put there. And we would see the snakes crawling up. doing. What sort of a work they are doing. They do not want to come up to that level, of that height, to see "What are you upto"? You are trying to save the whole world! But I never heard anybody complaining, but like a "war', drove with such "passion", every- body competing as to "what I can do, how I can be alright", Nobody "even thought of comfort ! Of course they were all about, say also themselves are so lousy. There, is no smar- This is one of the reasons Sahaja Yoga moves so slowly, because they see people who worry, who are worried about their comforts, this that, and 50 years, upto 50 years of age or something like that, may be. In the Ashram mostly peopie were upto 50 years of age, that time. tness about them. No feeling of that greatness' that they havc to do. You have to be smart. 1 you know you are on the war, how you behave ? And I have seen with my own eyes the people who had huge cars in the house and things like that, they sold off, they threw it Better people. I'm sure' we will get better away. They used to come by train to Wardhä people now, much better people. station and walk down. Gandhiji would not see anybody coming even in a tongă (horse-cart). family, this that. They worry about their own And they listened to him and obeyed him. I'm sure the mediocrity is much less now. They worry about little things of their problems, and their jobs, and this and that. I I have seen many missionaries, though mean, nobody could do like this to Gandhiji ! they are not upto the point, nothing very noble, I tell you, he would have slapped ! Take it but the way that's how they take people to task from me. and people work it out for them. I have sen them. In India we have missionaries. and they "solve vour own problems"; that's all. Though are the people who came from abroad, they just absolutely obediently listened to the you are-they are solved no doubt, you are church, and did whatever they said. It is as if to come to Sahaja Yoga means helped, God helps you so much. But how much are you doing about it ? Now today we are doing, as you know, the greatest of greatest work. Of course we have some great Sahaja Yogis, I do not deny that fact, We 'have', some. Much more than I had,-ever. And that is why I am political freedom to talk even about God. We very joyous about it. But the dedication we have,-We count every penny that we spend. How much we have got out of that penny, what did we do about it.–This is not the Because freedom is of course necessary, could not make even a small little needle at that time, we were not allowed, by the Govern- ment. So much oppressed. So we had to get out of the shackles of slavery, No doubt. way. Nirmala Yoga

 I feel sometines, as I was feeling all the Buddha never spent a single penny of his own. He got money from all his disciples. time, that you might be uncomfortable in Built all these big things and all that. He never many places. But I myself have seen the way had even a public help from any body else. you people have been in those places, most carelessly-the western Sahaja Yogis,- was So rise now. You must rise above your petty surprised ! That way Indians are better in this SPmall mind. R'se upto the paint where you should know "you are going to save the whole huma- Yogis have been misbehaving in a very funny nity". If vou cannot feel that, it is better to leave Sahaja Yoga. Sahaja Yoga is not meant for been behaving,-shouting at people, creating peaple who are lousy. In Marathi the word is problems. Some people come to see me, they a a Gabäle) Tukärāma has said", Yeryä talk to them in such a rude manner that gabādyāche kāma nohe". It is not the work of they run away. You can talk to them sweetly. the lousy. respect, And" some of the Indian Sahaja manner. It shocked me ! the way they have You have to be nice to them. Not to shout at people. Alright, I cannot meet everyone at Shivāji himself, when he fought his war, everytime, at every convenience, alright. But he caught hold of people, the Sardäras and the dukes of that time they were. They gave up shout at others. This is so "petty' and so 'low" "everything' they had, they gave up their lives, that I do not know how far I have to come 'everything'! Their children they sacrificed, they sacrificed 'whatever' they had. Shivaji had no money to pay them. You must have heard lots of stories about Shivaji. that does not mean that you have right to down. When you rise above all these petty things, you will develop that Divine discretion. That Divine discretion is the Real Blessing of God. While if you see how these Sahaja Yogis All other blessings that you think is blessing, are in this world, Kshéma (4) comes first is no blessing at all. Unless and until you can before Yoga (). It's like that. It's your grow what is the blessing ? Like a tree which Mother's Love. I want my children to be com- has known such a blessing that, "I have got fortable. They are newly born babes. Alright, rain", But öut of that rain if you cannot grow, they need comfort, they are to be looked what is the use of having that rain on you? after. You have to be compassionate, beautiful, sensible people, who are 'highest things on this But I cannot black-mail the Divine because the children are small. Can 1?1 am here to da earih. Take out your attention from all non- the job of God Almighty. And when you are my children,-Alright, His Grace will work. you get possessed. That is how you get condi- he will look after you. He will make you sense that you have been busy with. That is how tioned. Small-small things you see. In India we have another problem. We cannot tolerate another person. If any person But 'Grow now. Grow. You have to grow. is doing good for Sahaja Yoga, immediately a grow. group is built up. It is very common with Indians also. A group is built up to put him Get out of this small nonsense that you are. See your personality, how you live ? Where is your attention ? What do you think ? Are you thinking about Sahaja Yoga ? That is the most important thing for which you are chosen, down. This was notdone when Gandhiji was there. I donot know how it happens. It only happens Nirmala Yoga

 with poor leadership, I think I don't have that leadership. At the time of Gändhiji he used to Gagangadh Mahärāj who has fallen down com- "blast' people out, 'completely! I have known of a very great saint called pletely. If a person like him can fall down, you also can fall down, if you do not under- Cutting each other's throats, saying things stand what is your worth, what is your välue behind the back, forming groups. Anybody and what is the position you are given. who works out something nice, and I try to help that person to express himself, immediately a group comes up to press him. So we have to, today, with all our love for our Mother, have to decide in our heart that And there are some hopelessly peripheral, we are going to have large heartedness, of sacri- useless Sahaja Yogis in West and in the East, who try to make a mess of things. They think they are big Gurus, big people. Very sniall' people, chicken hearted, I should say. And they think they are very big, great people, because they can take good photographs, may vou the great souls, to save the humanity. You be, or that they can wear a dress in a particular must grow, you must grow, you have to grow. fices. What have we sacrificed so far ? Just think of it. Have we ? Did we sacrifice anything ? Please, try to understand that I lhave to use manner, or something like that stupid stuff as they are. And they try to dominate others. Such people will be thrown out. Absolutely. No ched. They make money. They save money. use having useless people in a machine like In America I was surprised the way people On money points also people are so wret- this, cheated me of money! Thousands ! In India alsó there is, it is a very common practice. Today is the beginning of a New Era, of a New Era of people of very high qualities, whose Spirit has been enlightened. Let us all think about it. Then, if you have career mindedness, and you are very ambitious, “How my job will remain, this that," you better get out of Sahaja Yoga ! It is not going to help us, at all. Now, vou have to rule yourself. And you have to rule others through compassion, love and discretion. Thirdly there are people who believe that, "This is my wife, this is my beloved, this is this," TODAY THAT'S THE BIG TIME THAT and all that nonsense. Why are you here ? For I DECLARE THAT IT IS THE UNIVERSAL what ?-Or "My children, my household, my RELIGION, THE NIRMALA RELIGION, mother, my father," all sorts of wretched WHICH IS FORMED OUT OF MY TEACH- people around. If you cannot rise above that, You cannot you cannot help me, I'm sorry. help. INGS OF LOVE. "But it does not mean by any chance that rou remain dwarfs. I am not going to spoil you. I am 'not' going to spoil you, by keeping you you have to be people of very great valour and diwarfy people. So, try to rise. Do not domi- great idealism and noble ideas. nate others. Respect. Respect each other. You are out for a very big work of Virāta. How much you know about thE Divine, nobody has follow the platoons to sell some things around. known so far ! But fix up yourself. You have to be very very strong people, Some are like petty shopkeepers, who In Marathi it is called bäzür bhungė. Nirmala Yoga 10

 So now you meditate upon this point that my children to be sacrificed on the altar of kere we are to establish the Univeral Religion of freedom. If you are doing it, I am a proud Ascent. It's a tremendous" task ! If I could do father and I will tell your mother to behave it alone, I would have done it. But I cannot. It herself. Tam so proud of you !" is only through you I have to do it. And you have a heritage. You come from a very great birth, where yau have this heritage. With 'that' heritage if I cannot manage you, I think I for eight months, the police was after my life. better give up your leadership. I cannot do I know what we have gone through. We were it. Such atmosphere I have passed through. I had to give up my college. I was absconding very young people, eighteen years, you can imagine! When we were fighting for our freedom, all of us were removed from schools because we were in the missionary schools, and the missi- your Spirit, you must seek the comfort of your onaries believe that Christ was born in Spirit. England, so they would not allow us to study in those schools. So we were all removed from schools. We had no education for sometime. I and this and that, nonsense. They should not could not pass my inter-seience for two years! I could not appear because they rusticated us should get out of Sahaja Yoga and leave us from colleges and schools. The Government alone. rusticated us, And now when you have got the freedom of There aresome people who are complainers, have come, or those who are Indians, they But, those who know they have come here, But we were such proud children, very not to enjoy themselves only, but to make the proud. I was of course very much thick in it. whole world enjoy what you have got. To I was never frightened. I was just an eighteen give it to them. And for that one has to sacrifice. year old girl. And I remember one day, some One has to bear the pangs. people came and told us that your father is transferred from this jail to another jail. They had such pride for us, all the people ! So they had brought cars to take us down. And they this and that. I've got blisters sometimes, were so many there. How much I bear your pangs when you are caught up, when you have troubles, when from you, everything. But I don't mind. Because it is my Life, my Mission, my And mother naturally was worried be- Existence, my everything-is for the purpose of cause I was a young girl. The police used to torture me, used to give me shocks, and make drop of my blood is for that. My satisfactions my life very miserable, beat me, and all that. are very different. So she was crying and she told an old gentle- man who was there that, "I'm worried about my daughter. I donot want her to be tortured Mother. Please try to rise. Be proud that you any more," So, I went and smiled at him, so he said, "No, you just don't. Stop it, now. feeling of great valour. Then only, then only You just don't do it. It's not proper. emancipation of humanity. Even' the last Please rememnber you are born of very brave are doing such tremendous task. Have that we can achieve results. You have seen so many wars, you have seen so many war pictures, you have seen how people have fought, how they have sacrifieed So my father, you see, took me aside. He said, "Don't listen to this old johnny. He is now about to die, forget him. I would like all 11 Nirmala Yoga

 themselves. And let us see what are we doing in this war. This is my.... I would again. This is my order ! not say request Just make your body your slave. Get out of the slavery of your body, of your condition- ings, and your nonsensical ego. May God Bless You ! Let us all meditate now. There is no need for tying up your Kundalinis, there is no need IS I'm sure, as a Mother I'm not so bad. But as a Father I think I lack some things. to give yourself bandhans. There's no need Please, try to come up. So that I should feel "at all' to do anything. If you come up to that that I did not lack in my Fatherly attitude to- wards you,-that awe, that understanding of a Father's expectations. This I'm not saying to you because this is some present situation, because of you particu- situation, that's all, that "what you are"! larly, or for anything which is very-sort of- present day problem.-None of these things. But is my announcement of this New Dimension you. Respect your self. Respect. into which we have to rise. And as in the war we have to declare, "Now Forward on." In the same way this is a declaration. In no way to degrade you, in no way to insult you, or to say anything about aiyone of you. But to just in- standing of your own values, and worth, and fuse that inspiration, which led thousands and discretion. You have to become sweet, nice thousands and millions and billions of people to people. But,' very-very powerful ! That you sacrifice for a greater cause. So now, have respect for your self. "Raise things. The control, complete control of your your heads !"" You are the ones who are going to self. ight. You are the ones who are responsible. Prepare yourself ! Prepare your hody, prepare E your mind. Be discreet. stage just now. There is no need to raise your hands and tying up your Kundalini, nof neces- sary. Nothing is to be done. Your Kundalinis are already tied up. Assume ! Assume that The Veeras (brave) ! And not the stupid. May God Bless you all. May God Bless May God Bless you. There's nothing, nothing more important lo. me than to see you rise to that level of under- can control yourself, your tongues and your May God Bless you again. Please meditate. Close your eyes. THE MOTHER मनस्त्वं व्योम त्वं मरुदसि मरुत्सारथिरसि त्वमापस्त्वं भूमिस्त्वयि परिणतायां न हि परम् । परिणमयितुं विश्ववपुषा चिदानन्दाकारं शिवयुवति भावेन विभृषे ।। त्वमेव स्वात्मानं Manas tvanm vyoma tavam marud asi marut-säthir asi, tvam āpas tvam bhumis tvayi parinatäyäm na hi param i Tvameva svātmänam parinamayitum vishvavapusha, Chidanandakāram Shivyuvati bhävena bibhrshe i 1 | Verse 35, Saundarya Lahari I1 O Youthful spouse of Shiva! Thou art the Mind (Manas) Thou the Ether, Thou the Air, Thou the Fire, Thou the Water, and Thou the Earth. When thou hast transformed Thyself (thus) there is nothing beyond. Thyself, with a view to manifesting Thyself in the form of the Universe, inwardly assumest the form of Consciousness and Bliss. Nirmala Yoga 12

 Shri Mataji Talk before Pooja The Culture of Universal Religion BORDI 7th Feb. 1985 Today is the second day of our new journey into the battlefield. Secondly, when I am telling you something, you think I am not telling 'you'; it doesn't re- gister in your brain. You think I am telling it to X, Y, Z but not to you; you are not in it. That is another sign there is no peace. Because there is no peace, there is no registration. We have to win people with love, compas- sion, affection and dignity. When we say it is a Vishva Dharma, is a Universal Religion we belong to, first and fore- most thing,-the essence of that-is Peace. The peace has to be within, to begia with. You have to be peaceful within yourself. If you are not peaceful, if you are playing tricks with your Those who have convex personalities, do not ego, if you are just satisfying yourself saying register anything. The registration is so poor, that you are peaceful, you are sadly mistaken. that whatever I say doesn't have any effect on Peace is to be enjoyed within yourself. It is them. Otherwise, whatever I say is a mantra. to be felt within yourself. So do not give wrong satisfactions to yourself, do not give should feel that effect, that penetration within false notions to yourself. yourself. Whatever goes into your head, that is going to work out. But what I find, that people have concave personalities. Then, they receive it. e It shuld have direct effect on you, and you you. But as if it is for somebody else, as if it is not for you,. cheat Don't This shows there is no peace within you. Peace has to be felt within yourself, and if you are not feeling that, you should not come Only the peace within can register whatever is and ask me, "Mother, why I am not feeling auspicious, whatever is nourishing for your it." Because I am not going to tell you that growth. So try to make peace with yourself. something is wrong with you. You have to work it out that you should feel peaceful within yourself. Donot fight with yourself, "Why should I do it ? I am so bad ! I should not have done it !"- All these we shouldn't do. Try not to fight with yourself, first of all. It is not that if you have too much of silence outside, you feel peaceful. The peace has to be 'within" yourself. You have it. Your Spirit is absolutely peaceful, Avyagra, (staT) Is it I catch ? Why.... ?." How am I to without restlessness. There is no restlessness answer such a question ? It is very aggressive. in your Spirit. Absolutely peaceful and steady. Then you fight with me, "Why am I like this ? Why should it be like this with me ? Why r I think it is very aggressive attitude of many Sahaja Yogis to come and ask me such a ques- It is for you to feel it. It is not for any- tion, "Why ...?" Because I can't tell you what body else to certify you. This is one thing. is wrong with you because it is no, in my culture. Nirmala Yoga 13

 You should find yourself what is wrong with very mild and sweet. Such a personality has to be developed;-outside. you. But it's not "what's wrong with you" is So, peace with your friends, peace with the problem. What is right with you is the Sahaja Yogis. If you can not be peaceful with attitude. Whatever is right with you put your Sahaja Yogis then you are no good. Absolutely no good. When you meet another Sahaja Yogi you can not bark like dogs at each other. Can you ? You leave three Sahaja Yogis together, and they end up with a big barking system. foot on that, establish yourself on that point. And then develop yourself higher. Peace is the keynote, as I said, for universal growth of this Religion. They can't manage within themselves. If there are hundred, then it is alright. But you can't It is disturbed by many things. Firstly, as leave three and four here and there. I said, by yourself. You should not have funny ideas about yourself. People have very funny ideas. I see Sahaja Yogis, as soon as they get and sisters. They are all born out of My realisation, or something better happens to Sahasrāra and nobody has the right to insult, them, they start telling others how to do to be sarcastic. Saying things which are harm- meditation, howto stand up, how to give band- ful. That is not friendship, thats' not friendship. han, how to do this and that. That is very very It is a kind of a very subtle enemity that you poor, it is very low level. Try to assimilate within yourself. First grow yourself. That growth itself will tell others how one should be. Your own character, your own temperament, Religion. You should be respectful. 7The more your own nature, your own behaviour-all this respectable you are to each other, the better it will tell others that this is a great man and they will try to follow your example. So the peace should be with your brothers are carrying on in your hearts. That 'cannot" be forgiven. If you say sarcastic things to others, you are not in the culture of Universal will be. I don't know how to tell you this. But say, there is a Sahaja Yogi, you should not call him like as you would call any Tom Dick and Harry. Like there's someone going. "Eh Mr. X, come here." No, people don't even say Mister. Please try to use their surnames- would be better. Mr.-Mr.-Mr.-.Would be better. Example is the best teaching. When the tree is small, even if it says "I am great," no- body is going to sit under the dwarf tree, But when it is a big tree, we can see the shade and everybody knows it is a big tree and they can come and sit under that. We don't have to tell. In the same way, when you grow, you don't have to certify that "I am great." It just Because this modern style of not using the surname has brought down the respect for cach works. Now the peace within expresses, first of all. other. But I think, Sahaja Yogis should try a peace with others. That is the first sign of new method and suggest to me even better manifestation of peace. Such a person doesn't methods, how to address each other in such a use harsh words, does not use cruel words. But he is also not a person who is ineffective, He create that peace within each other. is very effective, using very sweet and nice words. May be he begins by using harsh words, Very nasty remarks they are. There is no sense then he mellows down and comes down to a position where he is effective as well as he is way that you respect others. That respeet will Suddenly you come out with remarks. in it. That is not our culture. We belong to Universal Religion, how can it be that culture? Nirmala Yoga 14

 So, when you try to be peaceful with your mistake. I hope I have not hurt you. I hope I brotte s and sisters, try to be extremely respect- have not put your things in a wrong way." Like ful. When you write letters to each other, you that. Be on an apologetic mood. You can say "my dear brother in Sahaja Yoga-," I find that among Indians, Indians have that have seen all communists do that. Any body kind of a problem, they are more on apologe- tic mood. Sometimes, it is impossible to con- kind of a respect they have. You can't talk vince them. I will give you an example. We like street people and ordinary people. Because went down to Sängli, and you were so full in yon are really extraordinary, and all that is ex- the morning and the food was not ready. So they said that we cannot have food because it is late now and it will be later, so better we who belongs to any party does that. It's a traordinary has to be expressed through you. As I am talking to you of this new culture, let us understand how in many nations, peoples have adopted cultures and cultures. Japan, I know, has been effected very much by moder- thought that it was their mistake, "Now, it is nisation. But Zens taught them certain kind registered that we haven't given food to them, it of culture in which ; supposing, you see two Japanese have a car and they break each other's to convince them that they are no way hurt, they car, then they đon't say anything. They come out of their car, one will bow to another, that too much of food. "No, but still it will be another will bow to the other, and get into the registered in our name that we didn't offer them car and get out. sleep off. They felt very hurt, you know. They is a horrid thing we have done." And then, I had are happy that they are not eating, they have food and they slept without taking any food." It was impossible to convince them till the end, they were all the time feeling apologetic. Then if they have to claim something, they will go to the courts, but there they don't fight. Because what is the need ? When I as- ked, a Japanese, "How do you manage ?"" So they said, But what is the need to fight there on the street. Because after all, if it is to be paid, it's the insurance that is going to pay. If the car is broken, alright they are going to pay it, why to shout at him. ?" It's very sen- sible and practical, I think. Why to waste your breath for nothing at all ? You are not going to get anything. You see in Indian culture, we have some- thing very great, as Japanese, as I told you, that we are more on the apologetic style. Never on the aggressive. They don't try to find faults with others, but find faults in what way we have failed, how we have failed. This is something to be learned from Indians, if they have retain- ed their culture at all. It is actually in their blood. So that is how, our culture is going to be such that we will express complete peace But I have known people who drive, and they are abusing every person who comes across ön their drive. Realy it's curse like the way some within ourselves. And you must know that people drive. In the same way, they drive in their you are in one body, active. You are active own lives. All the time cursing this,-that one is like this, that one is doing like that, this one are never active. But those who are active have is bad. Even in Sahaja Yoga. They think they have a right to criticize each and every will happen to that poor body ? So try to make person except for themselves. cells in one body. All the cells of the body to be at peace with each other, otherwise, what peace. So to keep peace with others, be on an apologetic mood : "I hope I have not done this The second thing you can do to make peace is to talk les, Whenever there is a quarrel or Nirmala Yoga 15

 anything, just keep quiet. You see, it will have long to other Sahaja Yogis, how you respect better effect. If two persons are quarrelling, the things that are auspicious. So that is never try to solve it, but just keep quiet. what one has to have within yourself. The Quiet is very important. More to be silent. neatness, of piousness, of auspiciousness, of But it should not be another extreme like holiness. That is to be done with very great English culture, that they just donot talk,- care and understanding, and with that weight whatever it is. They don't talk, but, they think too much. You must keep quiet with the feel- weight of auspiciousness. You are auspiciou- ing that "May God bless these people some sense," It should not be ice frozen sea, but peace which is effective. Peace that is effec- tive. of auspiciousness we should walk. With that sness walking on this earth, yourself. You are peace on this carth. But, the way peace is put into this vessel has to be ncat, clean and has to be placed in such a way that nothing spills out. So in this new culture, we have to be ex- tremely peaceful people. And that peace should be expressed on your faces. People should understand that you are peaceful. So to have peace, the best way to put your mind right is to think of good things. Think of the flowers, not of the thorns. What good things others have done to you. What good That is why I say, if you are neatly dress- things there are. What are the beautiful mo- ed, if your hait are neatly put, people will feel ments you have had. And count your blessings. alright, otherwise if you reach some persons Cout your blessings. Otherwise you cannot with dishevelled hair, you know he gets distur- create peace. bed as it is : ""God knows what has happened to him ? From which quarrel this man is coming ? Somebody must have pulled his hair, like that. Keep your attention at peace. Keep or must have something gone wrong with him, the peace inside, with your attention inside. that the way he is dishevelled." So if you are Actually, if you really allow all my words to go neatly dressed, people are not put off so much, inside your brain, I am sure I'll achieve the because they think that "No, no, this cannot be, because this is after alI, he never had a quarrel. He is just coming peacefully from his house." In our culture, neatness in very impor- support anything that is boistrous or which is You need not pay attention to anything results. Just sucking......... But with the convex mind, it is very difficult. Another aspect of peace is 'never" try to tant. destructive. Anything that is destructive is never to be supported. But anybody who is Neatness of thought, neatness of mind, being Heatness of body, neatness of behaviour. How being fortured or aggressed or dominated, is you do things neatly is very important in our strength of peace, you can do it. Just try stand- culture. That is 'very very' important, which ing there, You don't have to fight for your may look very funny to some people. Because, whether you hold the fork this way or that Hitler when he came, people had to fight for way makes no difference, to me. It doesn't matter how you hold your fork or knife on a table. That is not so important. But it is defi- nitely important how you hold the 'aarti,' how be Bliss. People should see bliss working in you hold the pooja things, how you hold my photographs, how you hold the things that be- to be protected and supported. If you have the peace. But if it comes to that, a person like their peace. Now, the second part of our culture has to us. People should feel there is bliss. If a per- son is blissful, he looks blissful. He emits 16 Nirmala Yoga

 bliss. He radiates it. He does not look a miserable, unhappy creature, who is all the time grudging, grumbling or worried about this... .Cross your hearts. Feel the bliss. Tre- little petty things here and there. And nobody mendous bliss is within us. has the right to disturb anybody's bliss. Some- happened to us, that God has been so kind. body is in a blissful state, try to copy that (Will you please put your hands across. person and become that. But people get Feel it. .. May God bless you.) So this jealous of such people who are blissful, and try bliss you find everywhere, in a little thing also to disturb them. That is why so many saints you find there is bliss. were tortured, because they were so blissful and happy people. We have to enjoy our bliss within, that is important. Perhaps you are not aware of the bliss that you have, Not at all aware. You cross your hearts, you will feel bliss- ful. Cross your hearts. Feel the bliss like How much it has .... Zen taught people that they saw bliss in seeing only a moss, little bit of moss. And you see the nuoss and you say, "O God, what a be- autiful piece it is!" God has created little moss, and that moss has all that little little tentacles, Never, never before they were, so many and that bliss. But those who are vain people people who got realisation. Never before, in can never feel bliss. Vanity kills bliss. Ego kills the history, that Adishakti Herself came on this earth to solve your problems. Never be- fore, that people of very ordinary effort, of very little seeking, of very little understanding And, there it so happened that he got into ego. have been given realisation like this. It's like,- sometimes, if you see, like a stone becoming a diamond suddenly. You get cut a diamond appeared on the scene; He himself is the con- from a diamond. Such blissful state you are in. Tremendous peace has come. It is so cffec- tive. I myself don't know when I see them, I "Alright, I want you to do one thing for me". am really surprised, how it is working. bliss. Once Shivaji was building a huge fort. He felt-"See because of this work, sO many people are employed." His Guru Rāmdäsa troller of ego, because he was the incarnation of Hanumāna. So he came. And he said He said, "Yes Sir, what do you want me to do ? He said, "You break this boulder that is Bliss can only come through gratitude, ying here, such a big boulder, bit by bit." It Only through enlarging your heart with grati- side came a little stone which he took up just tude. Bliss is the reward of gratitude. The ike a coconut in his hand and he broke it. gratitude which is not just wordly or just And there was water and there was a frog spoken lip-service, but is from the heart. Is from the heart, gratitude of the heart. And the blissful people are 'never' jealous of others. Because what is greater than bliss ? Bliss has Water. Who am I to have this ego ?" So the so many dimensions, that you go beyond the realm of cause and effects. And all the angels, all the ganas are there to help you. You know that. It works out. This way it works out, that way...But you take it for granted. You don't have that effect of the bliss in you when you know this has happened, that has happen- ed. What a bliss ! started breaking when people hit it. And in- inside. And herealised-Shivaji- that, "if God has created this frog, He has also given him bliss came into him, that God has provided me with everything. It is just a red-carpet treat- ment for me. What have I done ?-nothing. It is so beautiful ! How many have got this bliss ? Have sympathy for them. Have com- passion for them-those who do not have. But bliss comes to you through your con- fidence. If you have no confidence in yourself, Nirmala Yoga 17

 bliss cannot be. And the 'worst' thing against confidence is: "Then what should 1 do ? Then So now you are authorised, actualised, com- how can I get it ? Then why not I have ?"-Is pletely moulded, Sahaja Yogis. Like the sand- the worst. You are fighting yourself alI the alwood ; sandalwood is not to be told by time. You are that, sitting on that, and still if taking a vow "it is sandalwood." It is sandal- you are saying that, "Why should not I have wood. Because every part of it has the frag- it," so what to answer ? I mean you just want rance of sandalwood. Every part of you, every to ask because you have to ask. It's there. bit of you must have the fragrance of a Sahaja Why are you asking ? Just feel it. If that Yogi. So you are not only actualised, you are works out, thai you feel where you are sitting, perfected. You are perfected. titen you will be surprised that vou are at peace with yourself. and there is bliss. Now you can't grow tails even if you want. So you must have the dignity of that Last of all, in this culture, vou have to hes authority in you. And dignity is very humble have like people who have authority. You have of dignitv is humility. I told you a story about the authority of your Spirit. You are authoris- ed. You have the Spirit. Those who are in authority never try to show olf. Because they anybody going this way. So the saint said are in authority, what is to show off ? Only Yes, you are the king, I know Sir. Your mad people show off, you sec. dignity. Dignity is 'never' arrogant. The sign a person who had gone out and he went and asked a blind man, a saint, if he had scen servant was here first, and then your Minister If somebody puts a label on the head I came, and now you have come." He was ama- am Inspector General of Police," people will zed; because he was blind. How could a blind say that take him to junatic asylum. In the person see these things ! He said, "I could same way, some people say, "I Yogi. What do you say ? I can do what I like." Then where should wve put him ? Your authority is yourself, your own being. People blind man, have you seen somebody going this should see in you what you are. You don't way ?." When your minister came he asked, have to carry lables with you that, "I am Sahaja "Have you seen someone going this way ?" Yogi such and such, X Y Z number; criminal But when you came, you said "Sir, I am sorry No. 5, criminal No. 10.... I am Sahaja make out from the humility." When your servant came, he said, "Eh to ask you such a question, but did you hear somebody was passing this way ?" You are authorised. Authority shows on your face. But now you are actualised on the authority. You see, all the authorities are arti- ficial. For example, somebody today is Prime will know that you have the authority from Minister, may become a beggar on the street. Could be. In democracy everything is possible. is trying to please you, and amuse you, and Sane in any authoritarian governments. So make vou happy, in the nature and also in today, you might be something at the height, the lectures! you might just go down. But a Sahaja Yogi will remain a Sahaja Yogi. You are authorised and actualised. Means whatever is your aut- vou have understood the Culture of your Uni- hority is part and parcel of your being. You versal Religion. Please try to adopt it. are that. Like you are a human being, you are a human being. This is what it is. Humility is the sign. How you talk to others, immediately people God. See the humbleness of Divine. How it So now we will have our pooja. I hope May God Bless you. Nirmala Yoga 18

 HER HOLINESS MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI "ESTABLISHING THE GURU PRINCIPLE" ADI GURU PUJA Nightingale Lane, London, Juiy 4, 1982 We all have assembled here to understand is not attended to is destroyed. So first of all the ways and methods of establishing our principle of a Master. Krita (a) Yuga means alert that if we do noi maintain our selves we wil the time when you have to do something; Krita: be destroyed. Because maintenance is not for when it is done. So you are the channels of maintenance sake. It is for stopping the dest- that way, doing the work of God. You are the ruction of your Guru Principle. When we are channels of God Almighty and His Power. On one side you have to carry the dignity, destroying our Guru Principle. So the attention the glory and the assumption that you are a Guru, on the other side you have to be comple- of this Guru Principle. tely surrendered to your God Almighty. All your dignity, your authority, comes from Him. themselves and maintain others. In the beginning And the third thing is that the way He has cre- ated this universe and you in a mood of play, nce principle they put very very strong rules you have to see His play. So a kind of mood and regulations. If you read Bible in the Levi that is cheerfulness should be rcally bubbling chapter you will find all the shariats (rules) that through you. So far the idea of Guru was that such a Riyadh, or in the Arabie countries. To maintain person never laughs, never smiles, always in a temper. That was alright for Gurus who did strong language like : such a person who does not have to have any contact with the public not do this should be killed to death, such a but hang themselves with a string somewhere in person does anything wrong of this kind should the Himalayas. But here we are facing the be killed by stoning. That was at the very begi- entire universe which has to receive the bub- nning, so the people now at that stage of bling streams of your love. But that does not evolution required that kind of a fear. This was mean that you have to be frivolous, because you cannot be. The divine play is not frivolous, to take away the freedom of human beings. it is joyful. And the joy does not have that But it was meant for people to give a great. duality. So, to get to the establishment of your Guru within themselves. At that stage they used the Principle first we should know how it is destro- frightening methods I should say, horribly yed. As it is, anything that is not looked after dangerous type. And that time people obeyed or maintained, that is destroyed. If you do not pay attention, say, to these beautiful plants here they will be destroyed, Even matter which where a stage started, people thought they must we kave to know that we must he attentive and negligent or lazy about it we are responsible for that we have is to be given to the maintenance The Gurus have the capacity to maintain when the Gurus tried to establish this maintena- are described which they are following now in that principle within yourself it's written in sueh not meant in any way to insult or to harm, or idea of the importance of the principle of Guru also. Then another evolutionary state took place 19 Nirmala Yoga

 time to get destroyed. Any one of these ele- ments if they are not lookedafter, get destroyed. That is the built-in capacity of the elements or of the matter as you can say. So to maintain them is important. become austere and start maintaining themsel- ves by tremendous austerity, so it was self-pro- jected, it was not projected towards the others, but projected towards themselves. We can say that the first wave started when the Guru, the Primordial Guru, said that if you don't do this then you will be killed. The second stage was when the disciples accepted this maintained by itself. It is not. Agreed that the within themselves and started telling themselves Spirit definitely enhances the beauty and the that if we do not do it we will kill ourselves. health of this element. But at the human level Austerity started on the basis of wisdom and there is always a greater force that is trying to not on obstinacy. But then it became even fana- destroy it. So till we have completely become the ticism. So it went to one extreme. It started Spirit there is chance of this destruction working with the idea of maintenanee. But maintenance it out. So people have an idea that once you become a Guru you need not maintain anything, it is itself became impossible or perhaps they thought they are not being able to maintain, they got confused and to them rules and regulations became more important than maintenance itself. Thus you find they destroyed themselves. One will say *why is this balance needed ?" and this is the important question we should be able to answer all the people who ask us. With- out the balance you cannot ascend. If you can- not ascend what's the use of our becoming hu- The wisdom or the essence of Guru Tattva is a man beings ? For example, everything is God balance. Like when you maintain a plant, if you but nobody is aware. At the human level you do not give it water it will die, if you give it too become aware, means everything exists, every- much water it will die. So the wisdom lies in thing is there, but it is not aware. So there is a understanding how much water should be given stone, that is also God, but it is not yet aware. to the plant so that it comes up at it's Like say this area is completely dark and we are blind. There is nothing to be seen, to be felt or experienced when you are in that condi- Now this wisdom has to be achieved through tion. Actually one thinks that darkness is the your vibratory awareness. You are placed under truth, that ignorance is the truth, but when the sun comes up and the light comes in and your realized souls before your Guru Tattva is fully eyes open, you start seeing everything. You start established. You have all the power that any Guru becoming aware. So at human level you are best. the most fortunate circumstances that you are can aspire, without having established vour Guru Tattva. Specially you are under the complete blanket of the clouds of your Mother's love. aware at the highest point. Now this awareness has to become the awa- reness of the Spirit. That has happened to you, But in no way Mother's love is going to you have felt the Spirit. But the balance is not allow you to destroy your Guru Principle. As I there as yet. Your Mother has pulled you out told you that Guru Principle is a very sensitive and made you that but still there is imbalance thing and is destroyed if you yourself do not inside. If you go slightly to the left you can be try to maintain it. First of all the destruction destroyed, you go to the right you will be destro- starts from the very source of our being. I mean yed. So you have to try both the things as I to say that our being is created by five elements, have told you the methods which I will and the five clements have a capacity all the explain, Nirmala Yoga 20

 First of all vou have to be austere with if you comb your hair then you are no good. If yourself, just separate yourself from yourself. you do not smell in the body then you are Separate yourself as a Spirit, and look at your ego and superego. Now you start watching the ego and super-ego-do not maintain it, they are the destroying forces. Now when you see the going to the other extreme. play as a witness of these destroying forces you will know how to also maintain yourself better. To separate yourself is easier when you take to austerity. no good. If you don't look like a pig, you are no good. All kinds of funny sort of ideas have crawled into the mind because they are But we have to learn from the Nature. Nature dresses up itself when it has to greet the spring, and when it is the winter, it just gets completely undressed, I should say, because the The worst thing that elements have done to leaves have to get to the Mother Earth and that you is that you have formed habits. All kinds the sun has to reach the Mother Earth. It is not of hangs up. Some people are fond of bathing, attached to anything. Surprisingly, it is much some people are fond of not bathing. Some more elemental than we are, While we, who are people are fond of getting up early in the mor- ning singing songs and waking up everyone, some are good at sleeping till 10 o'clock. Some like spiritual, should have no attachment. But this idea is also a mental idea, which is very light coloured dresses, some very loud col- the worst attachment. It's a very funny attach- oured dresses. If you are English then you want ment which makes me laugh, that is the biggest to have English style everything, horrible insipid joke that I've seen, that people get attached to mental ideas. It is like believing that whatever little bit. If you are Italian, you want to have you think mentally will just happen to you. Say carbohydrates too much. If you are Spanish for a mental person he has to go to a picnic, he will mentally put in his mind that he is going to Indians you want to have too much of spices. take this, that and that. He may even open a file So to change this habit you have to give up first and write it down that I am going to take this, this and this with me. And when he goes to the food. If you are French, you want to hiave wine you want to have too much of fats. It you are of all the extremes that you like. Now if you say that I like bland food, then picnic he finds that he is high and dry because he has not taken anything with him, that it is you should say I must cat lot of chillies. If you say I like pale colours, than you wear very loud ones. Go from one extreme to another extreme all in the file. Your Mother is good at speaking and She to begin with. But I have seen people when they sneaks to you but it should not be your mental go from one extreme they get stuck up on the attachment. Like, "Yes Mother says so" and other side also. So we have to be in the centre- everybody discusses with such great enthusiasm this is that, but it has not become part and par- cel of your being. But is a very common attach- ment nowadays with all the people knowing about everything and having nothing. This men- not to the extremes. A man who is an Avadhuta, the one who is a great Master, can never be hanged up by any hangs up. He cannot be ruled by any ideas that *"I like this." He sees beauty in the lush greenery and he sees beauty in the trees which are devoid of any leaves. tal attachment is to be really attacked. Becoming is seeing, becoming is experiencing. Becoming is sceing, it is experiencing, Like if I have to comc to this place I must come and 'see' Now the trend of getting to austerity in a very funny way, has started in the West. Like it. If I only have thoughts about it and mental 21 Nirmala Yoga

 So from the Nabhi chakra you come up to ideas, mental pictures, it is no good, it is not mine, it's not the truth. So when you become the Agnya chakra. Then above that comes the aware actually what happens that you 'sce' it third problem of destruction,-is emotional. yourselves, so let us see. Get out of that mental The emotional is a "very subtle one. Like some conception that you know already about it. You people, Sahaja Yogis, will sit down with a guitar do not know, because what you know is just and start singing as if they are all lovebirds, mental. That should be a part and parcel ofyour being. you see. So the most delicate one is the emotional. This emotional one is a collec- tivity in a camouflage. For example when the Sahaja Yogis meet they wilI hug themselves, Now how to do it? Some will say that we'll just go on being austere about it. Then that will kiss each other, they will be very very nice become againanother obsession. Some will say, alright Mother has said we should enjoy, so we will just enjoy. How to strike the balance is the swing on the tune of love. This is actually big problem. But should nat be with people who Vishuddhi at the collectivity point. And that have vibratory awareness. In that also you can of course is very difficult to get rid of, because be obsessed. I've seen people talking like they it gives you a very comfortable feeling. And are all great Sahaja Yogis and they are getting people get confused with emotions, they think it no vibrations and saying they are getting vibra- tions. It is so deceptive. to each other, and sit down and sing songs like hippies. Take the guitar in the hand and is joy. Joy only can be achieved through complete detachment. The detachment which is egoless and superegoless. So one has to think that we have to go further and see more and know about it. But if you then ask the French how are you, they- like this that means they are always in imba- lance. You ask an Englishman he will say talking about Sahaja Yoga, and they start "Don't know", or they say "I know"-there is thinking that they have become already Shri nothing in-between. Now we have to understand Krishna. They have even a greater ego than the that we are carrying the light in our hands. And person who is actually ignorant about Sahaja the light should not shake, we have to hold the Yoga. They start talking with such tremendous light tight. And we should have a concentrated ego that I myself am frightened of them. How attention towards the maintenance of the light. much they know about Sahaja Yogn, I some- And then to tell yourself that we have to see not just to understand mentally,-is to be that it is frightening. All this can be also said actually aware. Because you are complete that they feel that protocol is not alright and otherwise-you are the part and parcel of the there should be proper protocol, so we are whole-you are ! But only thing is that you looking after protocol, we are the guards of the have not yet seen that. You have mentally protocol, and all these things. accepted, but you have not "become' that. Because mental projection comes from thought. That means you are at the level of the thought. see the ego of others while those who are on the You have to become thoughtless. But if you ego side see the emotions of others. So one live on the basis of thought, then you are still criticizes another. But they don't see themselves, below the Agnya chakra. So all the thought- that they are falling into a trap into ene of the waves must be stopped to begin with and extremes. So unless and until rou are detached should say that alright let us see' now. But now the problem that human beings start facing is the assumption that they are Gurus. They start speaking about Sahaja Yoga, times think. And they start asserting it so much Now those who are on the emotional side you cannot see it. Nirmala Yoga 22

 I will not say that I committed a mistake medium of God's work. Sometimes I feel that but it happened to be a mistake. For the first all the bhoots have come to me for realization three years of Sahaja Yoga, I never talked of a and I am now going to become a bhoot my- bhoot. I thought that I would beable to manage self! Bhoot also means Bhootnäth, 1s the without that. But a lady came in Sahaja Yoga who was possessed and who tried all kinds of tantric tricks, so I had to tell them. Now every have to be the present and not the bhoot, Sahaja Yogi is a bundle of bhoots. You ask any Sahaja Yogi, "why did you do it ?" "Must be a bhoot". If you say that how is it that you have done such a thing. Then they will say 1 do not know, it is the bhoot who has Just start becoming, evolving, blossoming. Try done." They are never there, all the bhoots are there. name of Shri Shankara, Shri Shiva, because He gets after the bhoots all the time. But you bhoot means the past. Then what is there to be known? You become,-when you are in the present. You fo be in the present. Do not escape the present, face it. Don't feel guilty, nor blame the bhoot, both things are going to take you away from the present. Now just see the whole nature, the whole divine power, your ardent desire of ages, everything is on your side. The time has come. What have Now I don't understand how to deal, even as a Guru, because if my diseiples are there I can tell them hut if they are bhoots what am i to tell them ? Ican talk to Sahaja Yogis but not to bhoots, they won't tisten to me. greatest escape which Sahaja Yogis lhave found then you just see the peripheri moving, you now, which is the worst, which was never before. dan't mind. So sometimes I feel it was a mistake I introduced this word "bhoot." They excuse themselves by just saying, "Mother, it is some negativity". You are just 1here. we to do? Just stand in the centre'. At the Axis. Try to keep yourself at the Axis. And So this is the When you see yourself misbehaving in any way, punish yaurself. than the Divine punishes you, because that is a severe punishment. But do not feel guilty: because you have not done anything wrong, it is the bhoot which has done ! Sa we conme to the . It is better that you punish If you are detached, if like stone, then you cannot contain this negative water in itself in it. You don't become more negativity, you become more a guru, Now, when I say that you should point that we should realize that we are Gurus not be negative, supposing under such circums- tances you should not be a bhoot, you should be yourself, then they start feeling guilty. So become good Gurus. For example, we have all kinds of anti-Guru tricks are working out. I am your Guru, and it is anti your Guru, to play your nature. Sometimes people who are very these tricks upon yourself. and we cannot be bhoots. We have to change our outside also to to learn good manners. These manners become fond of food, I always tell them they should fast. Whatever you are fond of, try to give Now you will play these tricks with me what's the use? You have to gain something ments, your habits. Once your Guru Tattva and you are playing tricks against me. You is established, you will be accepted as a Guru. have to be more aware, You are not to be There will not be any need for you to say that destroyed. Apart from that you have to save others. How will you do it in case if you do not accept that it is your privilege, that it is that we are Gurus, people will know that this your fortune, that you have been chasen to be the is a Guru walking, you can see the divinity up. Try to overcome your sicknesses of attach- you are a Guru, people will know that you are. We don't have to then write on our foreheads 23 Nirmala Yoga

 walking, you can see the dignity walking, the glory coming up. Guru to me. And She is such a soothing per- sonality. All this green though is given to her by Sun, as they say, is just to soothe us all. You have to change from within and the She wears the green upon herself. And the light of that within enlightenment will be green is the Guru principle. She is the detached shown outside. But it should not be a mental personality. She is the magnetism, She atiracts. idea or an emotional idea but should be the When people are walking on Her, She is look- happening, the becoming, the awareness. You ing after them. She creates out of Her Svayam- have to experience through your own experi- bhoos (aiy), the selfmanifested stones, Her mentation upon yourself. Even I do that. attraction and concern is so great that with- When I cannot reach you from one end be- out Her we would be hanging in the air. And cause you are a bhoot, I reach you from the She keeps me to the brass tacks, as they say, other. If somebody says he is a bhoot, then I see that he suffers a little, and faces it, the Spirit and not bother about anybody else. The bhoot in him. For example, somebody-I tell someone that please do this and he forgets looks after us and nourishes u5 despite our so completely about it, and he says that it is a bhoot that has done. So then he loses his purse and then I say the bhoot must have explodes as an earthquake, and sometimes hot taken away the purse. to the reality. If I wanted I could be just the way She bears our sins, the way She always many defects, in the same way a Guru should do. She is "extremely forgiving. But She calcium and hot potassium can come out of Her. She produces sulfur for your cure. If But I experiment with myself. I first see England's soil becomes vibrated, then this soil how I should approach you. If it does not work out I try something eclse, within myself. clay for medicine, for every kind of treatment. Because it's a very tricky time we are with. If The understanding about Guru Tattva one can had can be used for medicine. In India people use gone according to the shariat (rules) have from the Mother Earth. you or the chapter of Levi, all the bhoots would not be here ! Maybe no Sahaja Yogis might have been left also! So let us touch the Mother Earth and bow to Her. May God Bless you. Jou. In the Kundalini shästra, Mother Earth is And this mental projection is such a com- the Kundalini. Moolādhära is the Mother mon thing that it is difficult to detach people, Earth. So for us, Kundalini is the most impor- but only way I can play tricks with you iš by tant thing. We don't have to worry about experimenting myself on you. In the same way what they have talked about in the Levi, that you must play with yourself and try to put you must not steal, you must not tell lies. yourself in an experimental box. What we have to worry is to keep your Kunda- lini up. Today is the day of Guru Puja, the day when you have to worship your Guru. You are really fortunate to have a Guru which is a 'absolutely practical". He must have common Mother. And my Mother and Guru is this sense and 'absolutely practical", he cannot be an Mother Earth which teaches me how to deal impractical person. A person who's impractical with human beings. And She is the one who is not a Guru. But practical in the common also at every stage of difficulties helps me to correct my own methods of Nirmală Vidyä. who knows how to deviate from right path and She has been such a kind Mother and a kind all that. That is the most impractical thing to So the Guri has to be a person who is way is understood as a man who is cunning, 24 Nirmala Yoga

 So in a way, Divine Power is like the blue is not the way a Guru has to move. There meaning of the Guru, Like the word has the is all common sense which should guide a meaning, and the word serves the meaning. But in a Guru Principle, the Divine serves the Guru, sense is a thing which is not cunningness by any Everything is at your disposal. When you are chance. The source of common sense is the a Guru all your chakras are at your disposal. All the universe is at your disposal. Because you are the Guru! Its like the director of the do ! Something absurd, something out of the Guru how to deal with a person. And common Spirit. The expression of a Guru is very very para- show, The stage man, the gentleman who is doxical. For example, a Guru will be extre- in charge of the lights, the gentleman who is mely practical, supposing he has to build his own house, a house or an ashram, or anything, to serve the director, because he is training the he will be extremely practical. He will be very economical, he will create something out of the blue, people will be amazed how he has done unchallenged, it should be of such a capacity it, so practical. But he will be so detached that if this ashram is to be donated to some- such a capable personality that nobody should body, in one second he will donate it. For be able to challenge the Guru, then only it acquiring, say for example, for acquiring a will work out. So you have to work it out in lamp, the Guru will be very practical, he will such a way that you are absolutely unchallenga- get the best and the chcapest and the most beautiful. And he will be very intense about it. But when it will come to giving he will be hody could do before, you are your own Guru. in charge of the loud speaker, 'everybody' has actors. But the Guru Principle has to be so much that nobody can challenge that, it should be ble. And you are specially fortunate that you can see yourself and correct jourself, which no- even more intense about it. That when he will give he will give with the same intensity. He will find out all practical methods how to donate, also to give away. So his acquiring is actually giving. He acquires to give. That's how he is the most practical. This situation 'never' happened. You are your own Guru. And let me be Mother. That would be the best for me your So today is the day when one has to deter- mine how far you are a Guru-first point. You have to take a pledge that you will establish You know that we cannot take anything your Guru Principle.-second point. Thirdly, with us. Only the Guru can take with him something. Nobody else can take it. Only Guru Principles in others. Fourthly, you have the Guru has all the disciples and disciples and disciples and disciples 'for ages who will sing Guru is a Mother. She is too kind to be a the praise. No other relationship is that eternal. It goes on reflecting for ages and ages and ages. It's one wave that falls and disappears, in any- strictness towards yourself and look after thing that you do every wave disappears, but yourself. not the wave of knowledge from a Guru. It's even higher than the Divine principle; be- cause it explains. The Divine principle cannot explain, it is the Guru who explains it. Not that it manifests but it explains and it works And one of the problems is that on every Guru out, so he is the master of the Divine Power. you have to pledge that you will establish to know that there is a little snag, that your Guru. Too mild to be a Guru. And extremely tolerant. So it is better that you take up this May God bless you. Become your own Guru. On every Guru day, I have a problem Puja day I think I should become a complete 25 Nirmala Yoga

 Guru and at least on one day I should not be they are, you see, it gave in and I got comp- a Mother. tricks it works against me. Last year in India please give me the sari to wear! I told them that this time I am going to be just Guru and you have to only give me a shawl, and I will not take any sari and nothing that Mother somebody has bought a sari ar like a Mother. And I was very stern with this is that and that is that, he gave lot of argu- them and I said that at any cost I am not going to take a sari, whatever you may do. to, you see, put me down in my place! But then And they were very unhappy because thcy had they used the greatest argument to out-wit nie, bought a sari for me and they said, "We have -first they said the sari is beautiful, this, that also stitched a blouse and petticoat and Mother it was alright; then they said the vibrations are you must accept, you are our Mother also". too good, even before opening the sari, the So I said, "I am going to be very hard like a Guru and nothing-doing today, nothing is going to convince me". But every time I try these letely drenched. And I came out and I said Today I had decided to be a 'real Guru and a very hard onel Then Warren came to say ments. And Rustom and Warren were trying vibratious were there. So all my efforts fizzled out. This is the play of the sweetness of Divine. Because again you become the Mother, What is called as Mādhurya. Madhurya' means then the whole thing becomes again that soft business. So I went to open a tap,-because in India we don't believe in wash basins you And that is what I have accepted, so first we see,-to wash my hands. And Indian taps as the sweetness. The sweetness. And this is the one that is such a hide and seek of joy in life. will have the Mother's Poojā. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Shri Mahalakshmi Pooja Sth Sept. 1983 Munich In the awareness it acts on the matter like aesthetics; people worry more about aesthetics than about possessions. And when they start growing higher and higher in their awareness Today is a great day of Mahalakshmi Pooja. Mahalakshmi is an incarnation of the Lakshmi, the power of Vishnu. She only incar- nated. This Mahalakshmi principle is born out of of seeking then they find that the attention the Lakshmi, who is the power of Sri Vishnu. should be such, that they should pay more im- When in a human being thedesire to rise higher portance to the aesthetics of things than to the comes in, the Lakshmi principle becomes the Mahalakshmi principle. Like in the West we can say, people have affluence of Lakshmi, so incarnates as Mahalakshmi. they wanted to rise above that principle and become Mahalakshmi. gross values. Now when this desire becomes evident in human beings, then only Lakshmi So She incarnated as Mahalakshmi when Rāma came on this earth, first time. And also Nirmala Yoga 26

 She incarnated as Radhā when Sri Krishna Christ had to erucify Himself so that people came on this earth. And when She came as could be resurrected. And sometimes Indians Mary, it was Mahalakshmi who bore the child asked me what did She do to be a Mahnla- that is Lord Jesus Christ. So the child She kshmi, what did She achieve ? I said, "with all bore was the great personality of Mahavishnu. Her powers to bear it. To play the drama it This Mahavishnu-tattwa is also represented, or We can say has an aspect, of others, which in- carnated on this earth as two children of Sita. They incarnated as Mahavira and Buddha, as Hassan and Hussein. imust be too much." So She is the redeemer and She connects you to God. In the sense She is the bridge. And the Kundalini rises over the bridge. And Kundalini is the Mahakali. Now we have a 15 Also at the time of the prophets Mahala- temple in India which you have visited of kshmi incarnates as a pure relationship with Mahalakshmi in Kolhapur; and there when them. Like Rājā Janaka's daughter was Jänaki, they sing, when they worship Mahalakshmi at means Sita : then She came on this earth as the daughter of Mohammed Sahib : and then She . came on this carth as Nänaki, the sister of Nānaku: So She resides as a pure relationship three of these gurus. that time they say "udho, udho, Ambe". That time they say "0 Ambe, the Kundalini, rise". But Kundalini is the potential of all the powers: Mahakali, Mahalakshmi, Mahāsaraswati, because it is the primordial Thus the Mahalakshmi's greatness is that, desire. Because She is the Holy Ghost, you through Her power only the Sushuma is cover- ed by Kundalini. She is tihe power of our evol- tition. And by Her power only we have risen to Mahakali, Mahalakshmi, Mahasaraswati. be iuman beings and by Her son's power we are going to become higher people. Thus the inmpor- Mahalukeshmi has helped us so much, Her bles- tance of Mahalakshmi is very great for all the sings are much. She looks after all our well- Sahaja Yogis. Because She guides our Vishnu- being, She is the one who looks after all our tattwa to its culmination, to its completion. problems of redemption, She is the one who Which is the principle of our evolution. Thus gives us all the possible help in our chakras She is a giver of Dharma, She gives us the and correction of them. And She is the one Dharma and She is the giver of the truth. She who gives us all that is material or physical well- is the one who relates us to our brain-the being so we have to be very very thankful to Her whole brain is Mahalakshmi's system. So it is today. You have to be grateful. She who exposes the whole of the knowledge as truth to us, on our central nervous system. I would like to congratulate him for making But at the state of Virata, when Vishnu be- comes, the Virāta, the great primordial being. tremendous programme. then She is called as Virātangana, as his see, so She contains all these three powers in it. Like Adi Shakti has all the three powers of So now today is a great day for us because And also today is Gregoire's birthday. So me come to Munich because we had such a May God bless you all. Before we start the Pooja power. must say that So these are the incarnations of Mahala- Hugo has been very very helpful, very active. kshmi about which I have told. There's so much can be said about this Mahalakshmi- wife. tattwa ; you are all blessed much by that. And so today we remember Her great in- appreciation of their hard work I would like to carnation as Maria, who was very great brcause give them a dinnerset with a platinum line on it, She had to bear terrible pain in Her heart with because platinum is the colour of the Maha- all Her powers that She had. She was a tremen- lakshmi..... Because Mahalakhmi is also dously powerful Lady. But despite that, She Annapurna. She supplies food to people, You bore all the tortures of Christ upon Her heart. can say Mahalakshmi is the grandest Graha And it was Her order and Her desire that Laxmi. So may God bless you all, He came all the way from Australia with his And I must say because of him I came here. As a token of my love and my complete Nirmala Yoga 27

 On the meaning of Islam In one of the suras of the Holy Quran it is written-"the only religion with Allah (or which he has) is Isläm-and there is no other religion to be accepted", What does this mean ? desire, the 'S/huddha iccha-, (E T) of the Universe. With great Grace his Shakti, the all beloved in the universe, has descended amongst us-to Allah is one of the names of the Virata, bring us Grace and the knowledge of the and it means that for Him Islām is necessary. Absolute-and share with us that Divine Glory. What is "Isläm ?"-it is surrender, and from Words cannot express or the mind comprehend the same root comes the ord Salam or peace. that this great force that is the absolute in the The Almighty, the Absolute, has chosen to Universe, the embodinent and personification manifest itself in the Universe through the of the "Shuddha Icchā of the Universe should chakra of the Virāta and to control it from have chosen-to take such a small body and there-and the Lord Krishna in his life has mingle freely amongst men. With Her power expressed the illusoriness of any other belief or and the power of Her body and being, She has opened out our chakras slowly one by one so that our awareness begins to become aware For the absolute is Lord or Master of al of and comprehend a fraction of the Majesty that is and exists, and there is no Good save and Glory of the Absolute. Really one cannot that which is desired by it. And we can only think or ask anything more, for it is all given form of expression. know what is desired by it if we are surrender- ed to it, if we can with a Small voice, like the child Samuel say, Speak Lord, your servant to us-And one must pray one's brothers and sisters not to waste their time in trivial pur- suits-but to place heart and soul and mind is listening." That is pure, true innocence, for and being, in totality at the feet of the Divine that is the innocence of the child that knows the Absolute. only its parents' command. It knows no "Dharma" or ritual, or Good or bad, only its parents' desire. For myself I cannot love and adore enough or worship or seek to serve the Glory of ny eternal Father, or turn with gratitude to Her who with insuperable Grace, Compassion and So the Lord has revealed that the only re- ligion acceptable to Him is total and pure Condescension entered this world of Mankind surrender-AIl else is an illusion to pamper our egos, and blind us to the reality of Him who is Absolute, the one and only one,-the to alter, change and raise me and all like me to the point and state where one may know Her eternal love-and Lord which are one and one beyond all rationality or knowledge or the same, for the one expresses the other etern- understanding, the one who is the Commander, ally, The brain cannot comprehend it, and the the Lord, and Master Absolute of the Universe. body is too small to express it fully. So one In all else we take pride, only in surrender do we love and adore Him who made us and is can only bow in silence and adore with all the fullness of the heart-and I pray you may do our ruler, and our Lord and of Universe, there is nothing else. So stop taking false pride in all the "Good" or "right" things one does, and love and adore and worship and seek with all the heart to serve Him and fulfil His pure so also. ॐ नमः इति। Anen -Dr. Rustom. 28 Nirmala Yoga

 MATAJI SHRI NIRMALA DEVI Advice given at C.G. Jung Society's Hall American Tour 16th Sept. 1983 At the very outset I have to confess that I say, and I found it difficult to explain to him. have no academic interest in philesophy and I Because first of all there are certain presump- don't know anything academically. Neither tions in our mind, and certain conditionings, have I known much of Jung till he died, and for which we really must thank Freud also, be- cause he is the one who could see that we have conditionings. That's one point about it. But he also could not go too far with him, because he could onlv see one side of the human being Now you are all great scholars and great which he has described here, the left side. there was a report about him in one of the Indian journals and I felt, that there was a great soul who has gone away. intellectuals, while I'm a simple housewife. And all that is simple is reality. Reality is not Now if you see the left side, is there as complicated. One must know it's the most shown, is the power of your desire. And the simple thing, is reality. And the more simple power of desire, naturally, he felt comes from we become, the easier it is for us to grasp the sex because the last chakra as you see, this red one, is the chakra called Moolādhāra chakra, The centre of Mooladhara, is the one that Now to understand Jung's problem, I have looks after the excretion of the body. It deals reality. no way out because I was not a student of with the pelvic plexus. psychology, but I got hold of sonie dictionary to know what he was meaning by saying Unconscious and collective unconscious and all should listen to it with an open mind, that's these words. Then later on, in London, I met a Jungian, an Indian boy-studied in Oxford secondly, that it is a hypothesis which I'm put- and all that, he became a psychiatrist, also he ting before you, as far as you are concerned. did his M.B.B.S., and then he became a psyc- hiatrist; very clever, intelligent person-and found that because he had an Indian back- ground, he could integrate properly, and he whatever Jung has said, can be proved, then related to me all the beautifu! things about you have to accept him as a person who knew Jung. Of course he also brought Doctor... to meet me, who got somehow cured of his ivity trouble, I think. And Doctor. ..., gave me a book as a present. It was so complicated that I gave up. But he was a very nice man I should the one force that acts in us is the power of Now, whatever I'm telling you today, you one request I have to make; as a scientist. And You need not take it for granted at all but I keep your mind open. And thirdly that when you find that it has been proved now, . quite a lot about Self and about the collec- Now you can see here, very clearly, that 29 Nirmala Yoga

 desire, left side. The right sidc one is the one I would say Freud, though he was not so clear that acts, the power of action. Now the right cut, his Libido. And beyond that is the sub- side you see is the yellow coloured one, is the conscious and the collective subconscious. So one that is the power of action. So now you the subconscious is not Unconscious. Subcon- may ask, what is Kundalini ? Kundalini is the sious is unconscious because of the language Now what is lacked in Freud's problem. It's a language problem, unconscious writing,-anything about purity, What is 'pure is such a big word: "Because it is not conscious on our central nervous system". But that's not pure, because it doesn't give you full satis- not what we are bothered about, subconscious faction. For example even economics has des- is on one side, we can leave it on one side. cribed that "wants in general are not satiable." Alright. Now on the other side if you se, what we call as the power of action, is the house,' then you have a house ; then you want futuristic thing. So on this side lies the future. to have a car, then you want to have a helicop- We have first the supra-conscious area and ter. God knows how it moves. So any desire then the collective supra-conscious, See the we have at human awareness is not pure desire. difference is that if you say these things are one top of another, we make a very big' mis- the sense of purity, if it is missing we cannot take. That mcans that if we have to rise to our unconscious,.. of course rising is also not there, for them it's to go down, the rising is not described. But what I have seen a picture of it, is that the unconscious is below-the unconscious which will never become conscious -then the unconscious, and then the subcon- scious and then the ego. It's rather confusing pure desire. desire? Desire like, "we want to have a house' is In particular we think that, 'alright, I'll have a But this Kundalini is the pure desire. So talk of Kundalini. Now this desire is put there as you see at the triangular bone and this is there at three and half coils. Coils in Sanskrit is called Kun- dala, that is why it is called Kundalini. Now this pure desire is kept in the bone called Sacrum. Now it is very signaificant. Sacrum in Greek language means sacred. That means Greek people also knew about this, that there is something sacred here. So that part of and one is the supraconscious and the colle- sacredness and auspiciousness is also missing. Now you see that here, that one is the subconscious and the collective subconscious, ctive supraconscious. Now the top thing, Now you clearly see here, there are three there where you see these petals and all these compartments are seen,-one on the left, one things, is a lotus,-is the superconsciousness. on the right and one in the centre. So it is That is the evolutionary ascent we have to not placed one on top of another,-this is an- other mistake, It is vertical. This is one big consciousness," which is really the collective mistake. That these are vertical, so, for your consciousness. Now this has two aspects. ascent you have got a clear cut passage, this is one point. Second point is, that when you say unconscious, means whatever is not conscious, Kundalini-because at the time of Pätänjali it whatever is not felt on your central nervous system is unconscious,-alright. But it's a very... everything mixed up together. But what is the purity about it ? achieve, is to "become conscious of the super- To say that Pātänjali did not say about was kept a secret, but he did write about, "after the ascent, what happens" very clearly. So the representation of the motherhood is here. This Kundalini is the Mother, which he could see. And the Father, Father is the If you say take the left side. According to Sahaja Yoga the left side represents the desire. one who rests on top of your head. So that is Nirmala Yoga 30

 If you go toomuch to this right side, you fall with the Wholc. So that means you are aware into the supra-conscious and to the collective of yourself as I,-beconies the Whole. This supra-conscious. That's why the balance has has to happen. What is called as the second- to be built in. Any vehicle which has to ascend like say an aeroplane, if it is not in balance it cannot ascend. To ascend one has to maintain superconsciousness. You have to become one birth'. Now you might say that, why Moses didn't the balance, and that's why the religion which talk about it ? Or Abraham didn't talk is nothing but "consciousness regulated by sup- about it ? Because their job was-you see they erconsciousness." Because these people came, are all connected with each other, only we are fighting, they are not, they are all together. Primordial Master. But the trouble is when people do not have cyes to see, one might say the elephant is just a tail or somebody might say it is just the leg, very dangerous. Anybody says I'm the incar- but they are all one together. But this inter- nation of Primordial Master, immediately either gration only takes place after you have got they will poison you, or they'll hang you by realisation, to understand that they say the the nearest tree. same thing, they have done the same thing. according to us, they were inearnations of the They didn't say so. Because to say this is You see that's what has been, I mean no- In a living process of a seed you can see, body wants to listen to anyone who says some- first the seed becomes the trunk, it has to be- come the trunk. That doesn't mean trunk is that throughout. Of course you can not crucify less important than the flower. So this is the trunk we can call it, here. All these great prophets like Moses and Abraham and all those people who were born to establish the suste- nance within us. It started from, also in India, religion, means our valencies, means otur suste- we had people Janaka, Nānaka and the end was the Shirdi Sãi Nath. There were ten main bevond this, that side or this side, then we become incarnations of these people who came in this part (VOID) and they reside within us to give us the religion. thing sensible or truthful. We have been doing me this time but there are lots of problems I face because I tell the truth. And the truth is that all of them who were born at this stage within us are looktng ofter our nance by which we are human beings. If we go either subnormal or abnormal. Now the subnormal people are the ones who go to the left side. Now I would like to Now the religion we talk of is outside re- say that another mistake was committed because ligion, is myth, is mythical. But inside religion of the idea of this Unconscious. That way the findings of the Indian seers-because in India there is nothing like a religion, it's just a beings have ten valencies, and that's how we seeking, A true seeking of a person. Is neither a Hindu, Muslim, Christian, those who are ten commandments relate to our ten valencies seers, you see they say "there is no caste for a within us, and that's how it works, that you seer". A person who is a seer, has no caste, he has no religion, he's nothing. Because he's much to this side, then you go to the left side, a human being he doesn't belong to any condi- then you fall a prey to subconscious, to collec- tioning of the kind, but to the truth itself. So, they found out through 'meditative method. is like a valeney. As we have a valency for carbon, four valencies, in the same way human have got the ten commandments. And these maintain the balance. Because if you go too tive subconscious. 31 Nirmala Yoga

 Not through reading, through mental projec- ting very fast, but then it comes to normal by tions or through imaginations or anything, but the action of the para-sympathetic. through meditative method. First they had to become realised souls. Like in Pätānjali So we have two types of left and right clearly but it is said. sympathetic nervous systems. Both can be activated by our own emergency created by us. it's not written "first you have to have Ishvar Pranidhän ( 7) means you must get your reali- Now see the left and right according to the sation, first, the God must be established within doctors is all just the same, for them it's quite you". Before that anything else you do is just a blind ally.-So para-sympathetic, they don't artificial. For example now, this thing they have put it here for me to speak. Supposing it was not connected to the mains, it would not work. It is a very simple thing again. I have stand is that the left and right are just the said. Any machinery, this one, if it is not put same, but it is not so. Left looks after the to the mains it doesn't work. In the same way human beings, who are not connected to the mains, if they start working out they cither go to left or to the right. want to talk, they're honest people because they don't want to talk about para-sympathe- g tic.-But sympathetic also what they under- emotional or the desires as you say, the emo- tional side, the conditioning side and also the subconscious. Because it creates the subcons- cious within us. The present subconscious is created by this (Ida) nadi or the channel. Now also we see very clearly, medically we can see this, what happens. That we have an for the action, it creates the supra-conscious autonomous nervous system within us. If youask side. Means a person is say a very very the doctors who's this "auto', they don't futuristic person. I mean Americans are very know they just say 'auto' because it works by futuristic and very speedy people, so what itself. Who's the 'auto' they cannot say. But in the happens ? They start moving to the right, too Now the right side one, as I told you, is You see brand- autonomous nervous system. ing is the way people just shut you out, you everything is for the future. I mean you are don't know what to say that you are autono sitting here and may be we are thinking of much of action, very speedy, very fast. You sce mous nervous system. Now if you ask them who is tauto ?-Because I did medicine and I was surprised the way they were going about with all the blindness; doesn't matter. tomorrow, "what I am going to cook;" sort of thing. So this is what happens to us when we start thinking about the future. And then we create a realm as the present supra-conscious within us. But beyond that lies the realm called as the collective supra-conscious. This autonomous nervous system has got two groups of nervous sympathetic another is para-sympathetic. Now systems, one is So as I told you there is "collective supra- system, conscious' and 'collective subconscious' and a though they call it autonomous, but it is under "collective super-consciousness'. Then we have our control. Because in sympathetic nervous another 'collective hell', we can call it. So we system, in any emergency it comes into play. have four types of collective consciousness, Like supposing I'm frightened, then I start But it is not conscious in our central nervous - system, that's why we call it unconscious.-It pathetic goes into action and when sympathetic is a general name given in English language goes into action, the para-sympathetic brings 'unconscious'-which is general name. But it back to the normal. Means, supposing you actually we have four types of unconscious and the sympathetic nervous running; then when I start running the sym are running very fast, your heart starts pulsa all of them are collective. - 32 Nirmala Yoga

 Now what happens to the collective sub- photographs taken by them. But we can not conscious? Collective subconscious is the area say definitely in this person it will pulsate like where all, that is dead since our creation, resīdes. that. With a stethoscope you can feel the All that is dead resides in that area. pulsation rising, and when you bring it to the top of your head you can feel the pulsation rising here. And when it stops you'll feel the Some doctorS cool breeze coming out of your head. Actually Recently I sawa very interesting documen- tary on cancer cure or cancer. Some doctors cool breeze coming out of your head, Actually had given a very good report, saying that, "if cool breeze. This is actualisation. the body is vulnerable for cancer",-accord- ing to Sahaja Yoga when you have too much in a sympathetic activity, then you are vulnerable Kundalini is the one who is the Mother for cancer,-"then an attack comes to you from principle within us, reflected as the Primordial the arca which is built since our creation." Mother. It was so great and 'courageous' of They are very near us. And they call that, as the Jung to talk about this, when Freud was so name is given to it as protein fifty eight (58), much accepted by everyone. Even now in you can call it the street number 58 as well, I London there are only twelve Jungians, you'll mean you can call it anything. So they call it protein fifty eight (58) and protein fifty two here. So he is the one who very courageously (52), that's what I gathered like that. But now what are these things force within us, which is a fact. And which that trigger ? They are the ones who trigger the can be proved. If you see historically now at cancer. This is one point we have to find out, what happens if you go to the collective sub- conscious. Now what happens actually is that this. be surprised, I'm so happy to sce so many of you put forward this idea that there is the Mother's they call it the time of Moses and Abraham. You see, "Moses crossing the bridge,' you see, this is significant here. This is the Void. We call it the Void, but Zen for them Void is different. So we cross this, In the same way Moses Because of this complete jumble of four collective consciousness you can say, because of crossed, through the bridging he did it. And not understanding that these are four areas this bridging takes place when the Kundalinirises kept like this, separately that way, this way (left from that triangular bone, and crosses over, and right), and downward and upward, absolu- then the first bridging takes place. tely nicely comparimented, the problem came, that they thought that we have to go into these areas first to understand about the depth of our why did they think like that ? Why is it they being. Now as you see, there is a clear cut did not have the right idea about it ? Why path in the centre, here. according to Sahaja Yoga, there is... Now one may ask the question then, then these mistakes were created, if they were realised souls 7 No doubt they were realised souls. But here the problem was, in this country, all these And another thing is,-Sahaja Yoga does it, Western countries, is that it's a very individual it works out, it's an actualisation, it is not just effort of a person, and traditionally it was not talking or theories. Actually you can see the known so much about it. Though Christ has Kundalini pulsating in the triangular bone, nof in everyone but on the pcople who have some problems on the Nabhi chakra, Nabhi centre or But then again we started an artificial type of a Svadhishthan centre if there is an obstruction, baptism, that you put some hand on some- then the Kundalini really pulsates. And you can body's head, anybody putting hand and saying see with your naked eyes. We have some of the openly said "That you have to be "born again' and that a transformation must take place now you are baptised. But there are people Nirmala Yoga 33

 Blake who said "A priest cursed on my supra-conscious ideas from them. Lämās are head", he said so. So the thing is that because known for their supra-conscious ideas, they it is not a knowledge of the ancient times in the Western area, people took an individual probe born, and where such and such person,-all the into the thing. Naturally whatever they found futuristic. And he had a training with them out was not supported, something was suppor- and they went down there, some of the people ted by their cxperiences whatever he had from went and told him how to use the supra-con- the dreams and all that, so he established it. like can tell you where the Lämå is going to be scious spirits to impress, or to possess the Germans and he managed that very well. But another problem is a person who Because of that they lost their consciousness, suddenly, through spontaneity only, through they didn't know what they were doing. In Kundälini awakening only, jumps on the stage, possession one doesn't know what he's doing. then he starts seeking about stage, about the frame work, how it is made, how, it is done. work that even animals can not do, worse than But because it is an individual approach it is animals. Without any sense of shame, without very linear, it is not going from one point to any sense of decency, without any sense of love many points but is linear. For example, he would go onto this point to find out, then onto uplike that and surprisingly they also called it as that point to find out, and then onto that point. a Father-land. Father-land, the right sided, the But supposing somebody who knows about the right sided manifestation you can say, the framework and also about the stage can tell manifestation of the action. So that's how we you about 'everything' and that is what is grew up with our action, developing our ego. needed today. Historically it was, I would say, First we had just the part which was the pitui- the Dharma, the religion was established, tary within us at an animal stage, but then historically, for our consciousness. Everybody' pituitary was pushed out, our ego came up. As has contributed. And that's how these possessed people did such or compassion. So the whole development came the action took place on the right hand side we developed this yellow stuff you see, it's like Then it came further onto this point (heart) a bile colour and all these people had bile where another centre is very important.-These trouble and liver trouble. Those who are over are all the mile-stones of our evolution,-mile active are aggressive people and they tend to -stones. At this point the advent of the aggress others. Motherhood came just to protect, for pro- tection, Because that time ascent was not so Nowthe problem was that India was domina- ted for three hundred years by English people. And She came as the Mother of the seekers to And the seers and all were ridiculed and protect them from evil forces. Now the evil laughed at, nobody even bothered to look at forces were from the left and from the right. them. So they disappeared into their caves and disappeared into places where they could not The left side people also are sly, those who be located. It was such an aggression of ego invade, those who torture are what you call on them. And later on they made our people the masochist sort of people and the right side to learn more about science and learn more as the sadist people. Then, when they die also, about 'their culture" and their achievements, they do not leave their habits and they then they impressed so much on the Indian people possess people and try to torture. For example that we took to your styles. All these seers much needed, but the protection of the seekers. Hitler used Lämās for this, and he got the got lost. Nirmala Yoga 34

 So fourteen thousand years back you'll be only from you. Now even if some people surprised, there was a great seer called Märka- want to talk what happens that they think we ndéya who has written all about Kundalini, are sort of challenging their ego. The problem about the ascent of the Kundalini and every- is even about religion or God, one cannot talk. thing. There was a great astrologer, I should In the meanwhile I'm very happy that Jung had say, he was the person India about sixteen or seventeen thousand who started astrology in warned that be careful about India," that was a very big thing he said. Because Jung came to years back, you can not really say when he knowabout India through people-some German started it. He wrote one great book called writers who went to India. Now their main Bhirigu Samhitā ( fgan. But before interest is to find support of the Freudian writing that he wrote another one called Nädi theory that what is sex, this thing, that thing, Grantha (नाडी गन्ध). Of course this is only that. Even though you'll be surprised written on the lotus leaves. And described-this Japanese have the same interest about India voluminous thing was later on completely de- They want to come and see what is tantrism picted and brought to up-to-date level by ano- and how these erotic things are there and they ther person about three hundred years back take zooni lens you see, and go on top of the whose name was Bhujandar.-Can you imagine these old temples to take a photograph of erotic that this man thousands of years back predict- things. It is so surprising for us, we never see ed clearly that the Sahaja Yoga will start in these things, why they are doing that. 1970 ! And that in that way the Kundalini will rise spontaneously, and people will get their realisation. Because when in the sixth century after the advent of Adi Shankarāchārya-who also pro- pounded that"It is the Kundalini who has to to be awakened and unless and until you get Because for an Indian, I mean for n Indian I'd say, not the Westernised but a real Indian, the highest goal in life is to get Self your Realisation you are nowhere near reli- Realisation. When my grandchild was born gion", these people came up just to attack,-the you see, her horoscope was cast. And when the negative attack. And all of them formed a very horoscope was cast, they sent a telegram for Dig belt, starting from Bengal going round my family, thc astrolger. "The great thing is that through the middle of India going towards the Guru is in her own family." She's a born Gujarat. And there they propounded that it is realised. But they said-but for them this was the through sex you can achieve your Realisation. greatest, to send a telegram to her family saying it is the greatest thing that “she has her Guru in they could make some money out of it also, by her family, so that she can get her realisa- helping the very licentious and permissive tion." So this is what it is. The whole attention: of the people in India should be, if they follow their traditions, is to get Self Realisation. Because a sort of a-that was the only way rulers in those days, by telling them that the sex is the way you can achieve God. Now here you can see very clearly that the centre which is supporting or which looks after In But as the Western people impressed them so much you see, so much of impression cane the sex activities, is below the Kundalini. from them, we had to learn about your scien- Sanskrit it also is written Shata Chakra bhedan ces, your all these things and we just forgot. (7 aa means six,-six cntures are to Not easy to talk to Indian doctors about how be pierced through. Shata chakra (4E ) six. Not the seventh. But these people said that any diseases whatsoever,-because they learn this is the Kundalini is in this centre which para-sympathic, if it is mastered, you can cure Nirmala Yoga 35

 tooks after the sex. Now, as a Mother I ty to that level". The reason was, that when do not want to condemn them so much so I you start insulting Divinity or purity then that would say that may be a mistake also. Because area becomes absolutely horrid. When the here resides a Deity, a symbol as you call it, purity is removed then you can do whatever which has got the head of an elephant. Because you like in that area. You can get possessions clephant is the wisest animal and the head of there, you can get all kinds of spirits there, you can do all kinds of witcheraft and all those gets ego, It's the human beings only, the hu- things, if you soniehow or other create an area where Divinity doesn't want to go. This was suggest that it is the pituitary only acting, and the principle. And that's what 'exactly they that it is an innocent. To represent the inno- used to create an area of this kind. Like there's a very great temple in India called Kamakhya Devi's temple, and all these tantrics went an animal signifies, that such a person never man animal only gets the ego part of it. So to cence in us. This symbol they must have seen, but not there and tried to do that, like having sex the whole of it, must have seen the part of the relationship in the temples and things like that. trunk and they must have thought that this And by that they saw to it that whatever is must be the Kundalini. So to give them a full Divine that is showing there, should be remov- ed and all the negativity could be brought in. benefit of the doubt, I would say like that, but people took too much advantage of it. So they started big competitions, that those people who can produce such erotic art and all that will be given so much money and this can Now in the Ten Commandments it is said Whatever is created by the Mother Earth should not be reproduced and then it should not be worshipped," Now we should find out, what happen, that can happen. Artists would not is created by the Mother Earth ? This point we take to it, so they gave them lots of tempta- miss. Whatever is created by Mother Earth, tions so that they would accept. Like in Nepal that Mother Earth Herself has produced some- they gave another temptation by saying that, thing Divine. Now in India people know about supposing, you see if you make the temples it, that it is so. I went to a place called Musal- out of the wood they can be destroyed. But the wädi, in a village, because I work more in the virgin who is, according to Indian mythology, villages, and there they told me a story, that, is the thunderbolt and the thunderbolt if you Mother there's place here where an English- man came about a hundred years back, an won't come near that. Just to make it repulsive engineer, and he tried to build a bandh for they made it. They gave all kinds of arguments. creating a nice tank there. And what happened Like they told the ministers, you see were very that at a particular point about 20-30 metres, austere people, and they wanted to have their he could not build it. Whenever he tried to own temples. So they told the king, "alright to build it, next day it used to be finished off. So please you we'll have some licentious thing out- he was quite surprised, and he's written down side but inside we'll keep very pure. Because in his own diary and all that,-they've publish- that is light, that is fertility, this that, all kinds ed the diary also. There he had to make a of story and theories they made up, just to bandh like this and go round' and then make it further. So I wanted to go and see the place. When I saw the place I knew this is something created by the Mother Earth. Now how do you know it is created by the Mother Earth is the want to keep it away, better makethings that she rcreate this kind of a new cult there. Now what happened, why they did it ? It's a very inportant point one should note, why these people tried to bring down Divinity, puri- point to which I'll come later on. 36 Nirmala Yoga

 So there 'are' places created by the Mother that I thought this is the place I should be born Earth, already', to vibarate the Divinity, the purity, the whole expression of Her compassion not Christianity, this is not Christ. So the way and love for human beings. But unless and until they made Christ naturally people denied Him: you are a realised soul you cannot feel them but He is the one who has suffered for us, defi- and understand them. Only a realised soul can nitely. So there is no suffering needed for us at feel them and understand them. For example all. If you ask for suffering you'll suffer. Only Stonchenge, I went there, Stonchenge is the thing, he is to be awakened here at Agnya same stuff. But the problem with them is that the chakra. people who are Druids who are doing all this worship don't know what it is. they don't know how to use it. So in this way the Mother Earth should take it for granted. What happens when has also crcated so many such places which have come out of the Mother Earth and they mach. Many people who have been to the are there. In India there are many places like that. Like in Maharashtra we have Ashtavinā- thines or those who think "I'm the guru, I yakas ( f eight of the symbols of know how to do it and I'm the one who has the innocence Deity as you say. Now because people are not realised souls, one can not talk to them. Because if I say that is the thing, how rise, the Kundalini won't rise. Now when it will you know ? so that I would be able to tell them that this is Now if I say about Christ or anyone, it should not be taken for granted at all', nobody the Kundalini rises ? Say, it is here in the sto- wrong gurus, who have been following wrong done it", they have to takc the name of Moses. Unless and until you take his name it won't reaches this point (Agnyă chakra) you have to take the name of Christ. Here (void) you have to take the name of Mohammad. Who was Mohammad ? Nobody else but Moses himself was born as Mohammad. So when the Kundalini ascends through the central path-You see the subject is so great that even if I give thousand lcctures I cannot cover it, so the thing is I'll try to cover every point little bit here and there. When the Kundalini ascends, I told you the cool breeze starts com- today are following Shariat. What is Shariat ? ing out of your head. So what happens to you? If you have read Bible, is the same as written For the first time you feel the cool breeze of the Holy Ghost. You'll be surprised the Islamic people for the Jews, same thing they are following what is written in the Bible, they are following. We are not following it, but they're following. Now some may deny Christ. That was Which shows that because when Moses came wrong thing to deny Christ, I must tell you down be found these people in such a big mess very frankly, it's a conditioning to deny him. and such a big hell, that he had to make a very Because you see, by denial what you have done, very strict law to pull them out of that hell, and you have denied an incarnation who came at that's why he gave such strict laws. Actually if *that' point. But the way they have made out you have read The book of Essenes' I was of Christ, naturally anybody would deny. The surprised that many people who have read it way they made Him an incarnation anybody showed it to me, that they really, clearly said would deny. I mean I got my birth, I mean I that the laws were not so strong, but Moses should say I got it because I deliberately got had to make them so strong because people born into a family which was a Protestant Christian, because they are the most sophisti- down so rapidly that he made those laws. But, cated fanatics ! Absolutely. Because it's such a rational thing they have made out of Christ, lims and imposed on them. were absolutcly hellish and they were going surprisingly, they are more followed by the Mus- Nirmala Yoga 37

 Now if you want to know what you are, through this suffering. There is no need to go say a Muslim wants to know about himself, he through the suffering at all. When Christ has should go and ask a Jew. And if you want to gone for you.-finished,-there is no need to go know about the Jew you should go and ask a through any suffering any more, just you have to awaken Christ within you. Just count your bless- ings one by one. It's a very cheerful thing, it's opinion of others will correct your conditionings not such a serious stuff. You see, like in Paris in the mind. Because you are 'barn' in one reli- I went they said "Mother never say you are the gion. It's a conditioning ! It's absolute condi- happiest person." I said "Why ? I am enjoying tioning. And this is the worst conditioning that completely." They said "No, you must say people have. Then how will you accept the you are very serious, and that you are suffering very much." I said "I'm not, how can I tell them lies ?""They all say you'll have to suffer." I said "Why"? They said "Because And that's why the Indian fake gurus have here everybody believes that we all have to accepted the advantage. You see they are very suffer." Les. Miserable you see. I said "Alright clever, cunning, absolutely cunningness per- these Les Miserable are sitting on the streets of sonified. They all came down here first, with Paris, drunk compietely, and prostitutes at the idea we don't talk about religion, finished. every lamp post, are the Les Miserable. They are So they suit us very well, if they don't talk the ones who have created their miseries like Christian. And if you want to know about a Christian you can ask an Indian, So it is the truth ? If you are conditioned you can never accept truth, about religion, about God then they're the best because it doesn't come in conflict with 'our' conditioning that we have. So they talk abiout this. This is howour mental projection has "flying in the air', for which people have paid taken us, to this kind of a hell, from which to six thousand pounds cach, for flying in the come out. Only Kundalini can help you. Now this is the Mother's thing-So we can say that first the Father's manifestation came, then air' 1 I am the one, in 1970 I 'openly took their Son, now the Holy Ghost has to come. nanies and 'denounced" them and and told the people who they were in previous lives ! At that time you see, so many of my disciples surd thing they teach, that there is the Father started shaking, they said "Mother what are you doing ? They are going to kill you." I said Mother. How can you have a Son and a "Let them try! Try their level best." Now people-Christianity is another ab- and the Son and the Holy Ghost but not the Father without the Mother, can you ? It is absurd but all intelligent people accept it and So these fake gurus came here, started the seriously talk about it. And, "Holy Ghost is cult, and started all kinds of these things. First a mystery! Don't talk about Holy Ghost, it's of all don't talk of God, and if you talk of a mystery !" Because, to say that Mother has God, then just make the person such a slave that he cannot get out of it. They use the in Christian religion, so called, they don't supra-conscious, or they use the left sided sub- have any place for the women to become the conscious. And that's how they have attacked priest or anything. you people. a part to play, is too much for them. Because My father was a great learned man who Now the people who have no idea as to was the master of fourteen languages and he what should happen they think we have to go translated Qurän-e-Shareef into Hindi, and 38 Nirmala Yoga

 very learned man, I should say, he was the one who told me about human beings, and how Napoleon was a Vintage hero. And now if their permutations and combinations work. you call any Frenchman a Napoleon he'll hit And I asked him "But why this Martin you back, he can't stand it. Because according Luther, who was a realised soul, put away the to him, he was very egoistical. So who is the Mother's position that way" ? He said "That hero today ? Somebody like Mahätmä Gandhi, time, you see,-we call it Samayachar- somebody who is the manifestation of the "according to the time". The Muslims were very womanly qualities, of the Mother's qualities of powerful, and he said that if he talked of the compassion, love, of nourishment of this Mother Mother he would have been hit hard. So he took a Earth. course where he said "She's the one who's there, who gave the birth to her child," and all that, but he wouldn't call her as a Primordial thing or a Primordial Power. For example, in the olden days, for us Now very interesting it is to see that this Kundalini is the one which is called as the Kumbha (#), in Sanskrit language, means the Aquarius. We call it Aquarius, as one of But the truth has to show itself. So in recent the signs, and is the same as Kumbha in San- times you have seen how the women have be- So it is the age of Aquarius, is the age of the Kundalini. Secondly is the age of the Kundalini which will nourish, which is the Because they think that if they become like Mother within you, which will rise, will give men, then they solve the problems. It's not you the completeness of it, and which will con- so. It's a pendulum. You see you move like nect you with your Spirit which ultimately gives you the enlightenment by which you beconte pendulous movement. What you have to do is I skrit language. come very conscious of themselves. Of course they are absolutely misled. Absolutely misled. a woman to a man, man to a woman, it's a collectively conscious. You become', again to rise in a spiral way, otherwise evolution is say, it's not just telling a story, you just be- come. Today we had a lady-I came a little carlier,-she came to sce me and apologised that "Mother I went to this Muktananda and got very badly hurt and I'm in terrible pain and not there. Evolution is the spiral movement. And it's not shown here how the Kundalini moves, but maybe later on I maybe able to tell you in details how the movement of the Kundalini have to get up every moment, I hope you don't takes place, and how the spiral movement of mind. I said "Alright you come up, and I'll the consciousness has taken place so far. In the same way the spiral movement has to take place, that in your evolutionary process you must thing her Kundalini rose and she felt the cool come 'above' the man and the wonman part of it. So this is completely misleading business that' "we dominate the men." And when I say this what is this cool breeze that is coming out of many ladies left you see, the hall, they were very your hands ? For the first time you feel the very angry with me that I was saying so, but subtle All Pervading Power about which it's fact. cure you. She came up, she's better now, but only breeze coming out of her head and she felt the cool breeze coming out of her hands. Now "everyone' has talked. The Rooh () as they call it, they call it, as the Brahma Tattva, And the woman is the Mother, she's in a way higher than man, I think. She's the Mother they call it by various names-is the All Perva- she has to nourish. She's here for nourishment ding Power of God's love. So the new awareness has to be that of nourish- ment, of compassion and love. So we come back to the origin, that first the God Almighty, the Father and Mother 39 Nirmala Yoga

 is His power, and He's the spectator and She's cannot pay for this realisation. It is your right the play. That's how it works. And the Son to have this, and you will have it. And how can is created to lead the people through this pro- I take money for it ?." So I was a big failure, blem of ego and super-ego, because it is so but many people came here. But out of that cult called 'Iwice born'. And one nature had to take up the resurrection as a of them walked up to me with a Bible in her hand to hit me, in one of the programmes! And much tight that someone of a "very great' came out a drama. every body was upset but I was just laughing ! Now Christ actually is described in Indian scriptures, but Christians won't go beyond Bible, they cannot. They're so bound. 15 We have a big film about it ! Because I said *Look at this one the twice born' walking with a Bible just to hit me." Bible to hit, I They will not go beyond Bible to see, To mean I ve never heard that. I heard that people them Bible is the last and the first and every- thing. It's surprising in everything they cross hand, but the Bible to use as a gun was the limits, but in understanding you must go to first time I saw such a fantastic thing ! other scriptures. That's why I really respect and appreciate Jung because he went out of the way to find out about everything with a very open conditioning that they can go onto any' limit of used to walk with a Bible and a gun in another So it can happen! You see, the people get so much possessed by the ideas and by the scientific mind. accepting something as the truth without find- Now, in the Indian scripture, in the Devi ing out, "what did I achieve out of it ?" Or Bhagvatam, where they have described the what did my forefathers achieve out of it ?"* Goddess, they have very clearly described Christ, Why not the Christians or the Jews or anyone absolutely, all and his life. But he is called as find out, what did they achieve ? Now, they'll Mahavishnu. Vishnu is the Deity at this point say it is postponed for, say ten thousand years. nābhi (chakra) which is responsible for our Why ? Supposing I say to anyone, "There's a evolution, But He's at Mahavishnu point. And diamond available for you here, just now, His description if you read, to the last bit of will you wait ?I tell you, people fron Australia it is so great, and He is the incarnation of the will come down. same innocence born on this earth. It's 'so clearly' described. o But if I say your Realisation is there, you must understand that all systems and all that Why do we have an egg for Easter ? Egg will work out, comes from the Unconscious represents a human being who have not got which is God Almighty, and in us he has work- realisation as yet. Because egg has to become out the system 'so bcautifully,' so delicately." the bird, and in Sanskrit language a realised Did you become a human being by any effort ? soul is called as Dvija born again, twice From amoeba stage He has made you a human born." being without giving you any trouble whatso- ever. What trouble did you take ? What did But in America I came in 1973,-of course you do ? Did you stand on your head or did I was a big failure because they told me, you pay for it ? You just got it spontancously. "Mother, without money nobody is going to So if you believe in that force that is there, of listen to you, you must charge some money. compassion and love, why should you not be- They cannot understand anything that can be lieve that if you have to get your realisation, it had without money." I said "But how much would work out spontancously. It has to work are you going to pay ? It's invaluable ! You out spontancously. 40 Nirmala Yoga

 So this Mother force that is there, the age passes through that blue line (Idänädi) into your of the Aquarius as you call it, this has to come up and nourish you. And it does. It has worked out wonders in India. Because Indian that you see you pass through your all subcon- villages are still very simple, thank God, they're scious area, so the dreams get distorted, they not educated, they're not complicated, they get a funny symbolism, sometimes you don't just start feeling the cool breeze and enjoying it, understand what's happening, it becomes a that's all. brain and that's how you start seeing the dreams. But when you are passing through sort of a mixed up expression and on that to They give up all habits, they give un all depend may not be so much good. wrong ideas their-all customs of caste and all those things they give up, and they become reality is that you become collectively conscious "extremely joyous. But that's not the end of and you develop this vibratory awareness by it. When you get your realisation, your material problems are solved surprisingly. Even mat- erial problems are solved, but not to that extent that you do not become Mr Ford, to have a central nervouis system is concerned. But actu- headache. But you become a person who is satisfied and you get a balanced amount of happens, what happens ? comfort and a balanced amount of living. Instead of that we must get the reality. The which you can feel the AlI Pervading Power. But this is just what you get as far as your conscious mind is concerned, as far as your ally what does it do, is the point ? When it First of all when the Kundalini rises above Actually you'll be surprised that comfort is also a myth. Because you see, look at me. this centre, Agnya chakra, then the suction takes place of the ego and super ego, so the For me I don't know what comfort is, I don't space is created. Actually you can feel the soft bone like a child, when it comes up, actually much about comfort. If you make nie sleep you can see. First of all the eyes dialate and on the street P'll sleep like a log of wood if you then it comes out from top of head and you start make me sleep in a palace, I'Il be there. After feeling the cool breeze, actually, here coming out. Now this is what you feel, but it acts in this way, that these vibrations are the vital forces We can say, not libido only, but all' these things mixed together which are in 'pure' form which are for your Hita (a, Hita means which from Jung's point of view that he took to is for your Spirit, we can say. And when you dreams as one of the very big, big experimental want to give vibrations to someone like that truthful manifestation of the Unconscious. But with your hand at the most, the person can be understand that why should people worry so all you don't carry anything with you at all. I mean nothing sticks to you, does it ? I mean once you have to sleep, you just sleep off. For another point I'd like to point out what happens, how do you get dreams, let's see. The dreams come to you from the Kundalini itself, in a way. So what happens the Kund- alini is not connected on the central path, but it is the record, is all our past, all our record is in there. Like a tape recorder has a tape, it is there. And what happens, that when you go very deep into Sushupti (gyfa) that's the stage they call it,very deep into you, then the symo- blism comes through that down below and cured. You can cure cancer patients. Now there's one gentleman who has come here luckily. I mean it's all Sahaja again I say, spontaneous, that I met him. And he was suff- ering from angina a very serious type of thing had happened, because they said he has to go to Houston, and he had booked his seats every- thing and was about to go. And then he came to Delhi, just to meet his friends because he Nirmala Yoga 41

 thought here something might happen so it's that I'm not here to cure anyone, or to do any- better to go and see them. And there they had thing but the Kundalini rises, She nourishes. It''s the Rotarians, you see they called me for a lec- your own. It's your Kundalini, it's your own ture, and I was speaking. There must be a lot Spirit, it works out. of people there and he came out with the ques- tion that "what about the heart ?" I said "Heart is completely under control with Sahaja say that "why you ?" I mean it's very com- Yoga". So he found it very difficult to find me out in Poona, but he just came to me, and I "Why of all the persons 'you" should do it ?" think 1 must have treated him for 10-15 minu- SO Now what am I doing here ? People might mon question in all the Western countries I said "You better to do it, I'll be very happy, tes and I said "Now you are alright". But first I'd like to retire with my husband with my he had a big convulsion sort of a thing because grand-children". But the thing is I have to do the force was there, and then suddenly he got , what can I do about it ? I mean to say, you rid of it and he's perfectly alright, he's normal, are intellectuals I'm not, you can drive a car, He went back to the doctors and they said 1 cannot, I canot operate a bank account I cannot What have you done ? these are not your X- do many things. Supposing I know how to do rays, these are not your reports, they are so different". And luckily this gentleman happens it ? And it's a thankless job, you have to work to be here in America. Kundalini why should you feel so hurt about really very hard, 24 hours job it is, you sce, and everybody wants gains out of it. So I don't But this is only one of the cases, I would understand that why should that ego come in say that luckily it so happened that Sahaja between ? Yoga has cured people like we can say the President of India, who was suffering, who came here for an operation for the cancer of to just cash your cheques, that's al the lungs. And when he was going I just went for. l've nothing to gain out of it, in the sense, to see him, because my husband knew him very that of course f feel very joyous, many people well and the High Commissioner just said that, get their realisation, and really get their own. "You know She's such and such, but also She's Because this is your own thing. It is within you But doesn't matter. I'm like a bank. I have l I'm here * Mataji Nirmala Devi", and I'm known in it is nothing to be paid for nothing to be work- India for this kind of things. So the wife of the ed out, it's just within you. But supposing one President said that, "Mother, please cure my person gets it, he can give it to others also. husband". And he was very much suffering, he Like one candle which is not enlightened can could not slep, and people were worried that be enlightened by another enlightened candle. he may not survive up to Delhi airport. And I Now this candle doesn't do anything except treated him for 10-15 minutes only, and he felt that it enlightens that candle, and that candle **now I'm feeling relaxed, I'm going to sleep". has to enlighten other candles. It is as simple as And next day when they reached Delhi, he that. Is nothing very serious. You don't have walked down and everybody was surprised! They had taken a sti cher, And he told thinking Jungians how will I address them you me, after that he went straight for a tour. And then later on his wife showed me that that, and I'm such a simple person how will I even the mark of his operation has disappear- tell them what I have to tell them ? But it is ed. So you can write to him and find out about such a simple thing I tell you, it's even simpler it if you want to find, but it's nothing import- than cooking. So one should not think that ant, it's just a by-product. So I must warn you to go into-See they had told me, 1 was really see, they're atready moving like that, like God could have made anything very complicat. Nirmala Yoga 42

 ed. See we breattie without even reading a book. ring ? He should have given it to your driver. Supposing you have to read a book, and then breathe, how many of us would survive ? Is as simple as that. Now if you have to go up, if poverty, completely ?" So this is what one has God has created this universe, and if he wants to think openly, with open mind you can save to save His universe and His creation, He has all these people from these cults and sects, to jolly well do something about it. If He has made us like this, He has to give us realisation too. And it is so 'surprising' that I find it is called as a sect, that's the best part of it ! From working out. Of course we cannot have 50 the year 1970 I'm the lone' person who's been million disciples like that, as these fake gurus "fighting and fighting these people who have have, because to create a plastic flower is very suffered from it, I'm the person who has been And if he's such a diamond ring fellow, why doesn't he solve our problems in India, our Now the best of part of it is that I'm also telling everyone about them. Their nature, what they have been, how they practice this, casy. You just give somebody a name, go on how they have managed you, what has happened repeating this name. Now they give a name, repeat the name of Rama. Now there is no con- nection, you go on pressing on your sympathe- people, now they call me also a sect. Now tic nervous system. Now Rāma could be a ser- vant dead somewhere, he just enters into you sect would be something like calling Christ as and you start jumping. You start jumping like Hitler. I mean I can't understand how these a frog. Some people came to my programme they were just jumping like a frog. So I said fighting them alone,-all these things. So this "Why are you jumping like a frog ?" They is what it is, and I'm very happy that you have said "Our guru said when the Kundalini rises given me your precious time today and listened then you jump like a frog". I said *Now are you going to become a frog or an carthworm ?" Use your brains ! That's the problem, you see, with all intelligence when it comes to their evo- lution, to the living process, they just don't wonderful people, because they are not so onc want to use their brains. TNhatever these gurus sided as Freudians are because you see, Freud tell them they are willing to do and do what- reduced us to a sex point. Absolutely are we ever they like. Like another guru is there who brings out diamonds this, that from the air. ridiculous ! I mean it doesn't behove anyone It's all jugglery, it's absolutely jugglery. Now what I'm saying, "what is the interest of God nothing but a sex point. But you live without in diamonds, what is His interest ? Why would He give you diamonds ?" You see diamonds existing ? you can always go and buy from somewhere. accepted Freud 'so much'? At least Jung at But people don't think. You know he's very that time, could see this point clearly, that it popular, he's very popular with affluent people. Why should they ask for diamonds ? I can understand Indians but he's not bothered about Indians so much. But he gave a diamond ring to a gentleman who was a very, very rich man. So I said Why did he give you a diamond get their realisation, they can give it to thousands. to you,-everything. Despite that, the shallow- ness, or the naivety we can say of the Western this is the limit ! I said now to call me as a twothings can gotogether, a person who has been to me. Now I would like to have a 'work-shop' because I know it would work out very fast with Jungians, because it has worked always. All those Jungians I have met have been sex points now ? I mean this is too much, very to say that about a human being, that you are the sex also, so are we not living, are we not I can't understand how people is not something that has to do with one human being, it's 'eollective'. And this is a happening that is collective. You'll be surprised that people, when they 43 Nirmala Yoga

 In India in thousands they get realisation, in There's a saying that whenever I want to thousands. And also should happen here in see my God I have to just bend my head America if our chakras are alright. Because towards my heart that's all. That's what it is, it's so simple, it's very simple. We have to you the vibrations here are not good. Because humble down, that money can not purchase you have witch-craft, you have all the gurus God. Because all religions are based on that. settled down in America. Imagine, how they Everybody, Mr Pope is having what you call all felt so attracted. All of them horrible that hat, donkey hat on the head with all the people are down here, and one better than the diamonds in it, and like that, what a crown he other. And I don't know how they have been has. What a crown he has, think of it ! And able to manage you. Your intelligence-what now like a pop-star he is waving to all the has happened to your brains ? I can't under- people, creating problems for these Polish stand how they have dominated you so much. people, and the political stunts he's creating. That one fellow just he wants you to learn Why don't you think about this ? All these flying. Why not ask him to fly himself ? Put things that condition people and making money him on that Pisa, what you call that Leaning out of it and seminars and this and that. I'm Tower of Pisa and let him fall down and let's really surprised where are you lost ? What are you doing ? Why don't you come to reality? That the Spirit is within, it is such a simple thing and that Kundalini is your own Mother, Sihe has the chakras here are very haywire", I must tell see if he can fly! What I'm saying, why don't you use your brains for these things 7 That's what it is, that's how you are going to find them out. But what happens, when they suffer-like this Mukta- nanda somebody asked me why is he danger- Why go to these false things and fake ideas and ous ? Somebody asked me a question, is one of the questions is there. Now before I came big, big things, There's no need at all. here, there was a lady sitting who has been to Muktananda. To me he's not only dangerous, but he's sinister, abslutely sinister. And do you know his children, so called, if they are his own Sahaja Yoga ? Nobody. So I have to talk, and children, two or them, and are now fighting for the diamonds that he has created out of imagine: I've got at least a thousand lectures this group of people here. And the diamonds are worth, I don't understand the money part. You see I don't understand.-million-billions, something like that -he's made out of "you talking, I was so happy that, that person can people here, all these diamonds. onfy one child, that's you. And She's so anxious to give you realisation, so very anxious that it will just work in a split of a second. So why? false conditioning, having big, big seminars and Actually for me it's not necessary even to come, but without talking who will come to I've talked and talked. So much talk, you can't in London, and they all feel that its something great. I don't know, but I wished I could stop now talking. The other day somebody was talk very well, I said "Now I will retire from What is the interest of a Divine person in talking, I will just do the raising of the Kunda- lini, you better see to the talking". And I'm one should understand. That you can not quite happy that Barbara also said in a quite good understand that you can get your knowledge way whatever it is, you people all enjoyed it. without paying for it, you must accept. Is the So may be that some of you might come up ego of money, Cut it out. You have to humble as great speakers in Sahaja Yoga and you might down yoursclf. If you humble down then it's be able to relieve me of this too much talking. Thank you very much. May God Bless you. diamonds ? What can you give ? This is what yours, is there, it's just in yvour heart. Nirmala Yoga 44

 CHRISTMAS AT NAGPUR IN 1983 At the gracious invitation of Our Beloved Shakti quietly seated Herself in the audience Mother, Shri Adi Shakti Mataji Sakshat Shri while the city notables ranged themselves either Mary Mahalakshmi, a small group of Sahaja side of the elderly Vice President of India in Yogis departed on 23rd December 1983 for his high red velvet chair. Mr C.P. Shrivastava Nagpur. We were very excited at the prospect as Secretary General of U.N. International of spending some time at Shri Mother's family MaritimeConsultative Organisation, sat in dig- seat-near to the place of Her advent upon nity and silence amongst them upon the dias. earth-in Maharashtra, the land of saints which has so filtered into our hearts and watered the roots of our spiritual growth. We had been how very respected was Shri Mataji's father. invited to attend the unveiling of a memorial As Mr C.P. Shrivastava stated: He was first and bust in honour of Shri Mataji's father Mr K.P. foremost an Indian concerned with the integ- Salve, a realised soul, acontemporary of Gandhi- ji in the struggle for Indian independence, a great scholar and patron of the Arts, and the in such an address, he declared that Mr Salve's much revered father of his nine children. It became very clear during the speeches ration and freedom of Indian people, Although he added, it is unusual to mention one's wife daughter was carrying on the tradition of Her On arrival at Nagpur railway station in the of the Indian nation, She was devoting Herself carly morn of Christmas Eve, we were quite to the unity of all humanity. His brief but heart unexpectedly met by one of Shri Mother's felt words shone like jewels to the Sahaja Yogis nephews and some of our Maharashtrian brothers. All faces were beaming with welcome. enjoying this praise of their Mother. We were whisked off to our residences in a peaceful government compound. The next inst- besides Her husband and exchanged handshake ant a melodious laugh floated out of a nearby with the politicians and dignitaries, some of room and we found oursclves at the Lotus Feet whom went to Her feet. Shri Mother called for of Our Holy Mother ! It was family scene: Shri Mother, sitting in an arm- chair, was looking at family photographs with her daughter and son-in-law. Generously She showed us a family group taken when She was Mother, at such a moment, seemed to signify fifteen. Then, as now, She is Shri Chandra Nibha with the most beautiful, most sweet, most kind find true independence and union in the childlike smile in the universe. After the cercmony, Shri Mataji walked an informal the Australian and English Sahaja Yogis pre- sent, to come forward and be introduced. For some of us it was the chance to go to Her Lotus Feet too. This obeissance to our Divine that only at the feet of Devi does all human- greatest family of all-that of the Spirit. 1t was Shri Mataji arrived at the unveiling fune- an affirmation of the principles of Sahaja Yoga tion with Her husband, Mr C.P. Shrivastava. that on this very Indian occasion honouring From tac moment we, Her eager children, saw Her enter the large decorated enclosure the of the country's independence from the British, stage was set for another drama. Before us was not so much Shri Mahamaya as the Devi, Her black hair streaming over a gleaming white ed to the holy soil of Maharashtra in the pre- silk sari bordered in gold and red. Yet Shri Adi the high spiritual values of Indian culture and all international barriers that had been or could ever be, were laid in the dust, surrender- sence of Adi Shakti Herself. See page 47 Nirmala Yoga 45

 At every moment of this most auspicious Shakti, who incarnated verily as Shri Mary, time in Nagpur, the Salve family looked after whose Son sowed the seeds of Resurrection, Shri Mataji's disciples with warm hospitality and Who Herself had now come to fill the and friendliness. It was very interesting for us Divine Cup with spiritual nectar. To be able to to see Shri Mahamaya in the midst of Her worship Shri Adi Shakti at this time, Christmas Christian family and relations, and one was Eve with Her family, was the best Christmas reminded of stories of Shri Krishna emongst present to us all. his own peoples, the Yadus, in Mathura and Dwarka. And so the show went on, and the Bishop rose to deliver his Christmas message. He was followed by a Presbyterian minister whose Even more appreciated was the spontane- ous darshan with Shri Mataji that afternoon, speech was immediately put into bandhan. (Per- She opened Christmas cards from Sahaja Yoga haps the best comment is to say that Shri centres around the world, interspersing Her Mother's grandchildren were busily shaking exclamations of surprise with anecdotes, com- ments and advice; emphasising at one point During it all, Shri Mataji was working and that we must make our own decisions and not their fingers and blowing on their hands). working... expect Her to do everything for us. On Sunday morning, Christmas Day, another scene unfolded. A message came from What a Christmas Eve we had I Shri Shri Mother that we were to attend the morn- Mother, followed by Her disciples, arrived at the pandal where music ind dancing were ted next door to house where Shri Mother underway to the accompaniment of many hands grew up and in the yard still stands the tree clapping, It ceased while Shri Lakshmi in the role of sister, cousin grandniother or aunty, gave Her Christmas gifts. The singing and laughter continued until the Bishop arrived.. Everyone began to sing hymns in Marathi, but upto open windows. It began to rain and the for Sahaja Yogis, the dearest sound was the Sahaja Yoginis suddenly found themselves at pure bell notes of their Mother. Hark the the side door ncar the pulpit. There in the first Herald Angles sing" was sung in a mixture of row, richly and regally dressed for Her Son's Marathi and English. We were seated to one side of Shri Mother when She called to three bespeetacled, was Shri Mother-a hymnbook of us to join the musicians for carol singing in m Her hand-scated beside Her daughter, English. So, we moved... ing service at the "1840 Church". It was situa- under which She often sat. By the time we arrived at the church it was very crowded, and outside rows of chairs crept birthday celebrations, with hair in a bun and husband and son-in-law. The grandchildren were elose by. Our Dearest Mother beckoned us in and There were now many hcads bobbing up and down between us and Our Beloved Mother pointed to the seats in front of Her. So, there opposite. But suddenly She looked transformed into Sakshat Shri Mary Mahalakshmi, Her cred near Their Saviour on Christmas Day in white, red gold sari, placed over Her head, framed a glowing and youthful face beatific gave his oration in Marathi during which Shri with a radiant smile. During "Silent Night Mataji raised his Kundalini. While he was Holy Night"-especially at the line "Christ the speaking She whispered to us on cach side of Saviour is born"-the vibrations flowed like a refreshing blissful breeze over us, for indeed at world that He gave His only begotten Son'. that moment we were paying homage to Adi "Then Shri Mataji smiled, lent back in Her we were-six elated and stunned Yoginis gath- a Presbyterian church. After hymns, the Bishop Her: "The text isAnd God so loved the 46 Nirmala Yoga

 In the afternoon Shri Mataji gave darshan to the Sahaja Yogis. We sat outside on the red chair and looked triumphant, as if to say, 'Yes, that is IT'. A beautiful hymn was sung with Shri Mother Maharashtran earth, listened to Her and took Mary Adi Shakti's face wreathed in smiles as Her clear voice rose towards pulpit and altar. were given their realisation and cured of dise- This lovely moment was followed by another ases. Shri Mother explained that the problems speech by the Presbyterian pastor of the pre- with protestant Christians is that they can argue vious evening. Again the grandchildren shook with great intellectuality and suavity, so much their fingers, and Shri Mataji worked-Her so that they tie themselves in knots. Consequ- huge bindi, covering the whole agyna, had been ently, they close their awarenss to the reality of formed into a distinct cross on the Ekadasha. the advent of the Comforter, the Redeemer, At the end of the service Shri Mahamaya added the Counsellor, the second coming of Christ, Her donation to the large container stuffed in their very midst. with notes which had sat on the centre of the altar for most of the morning. turns in going to Her Lotus Feet. More people Fellowing lunch the Sahaja Yogis walked down the quiet tree-lined street to the house of With Her husband, Shri Mataji left the Nagpur's Sahiaja Yogi. About 20 local people church and grected and kissed family members were present at Shri Mataji's progranime and scattered about. Perhaps to some it was more received their realisation. Then She departed than a kiss from a relation and their Spirit quietly for the airport. We remained while a heard the invitation of the Adi Shakti. We all Sahaja Yogi gave a follow-up talk telling the then re-entered the building, shook hands with newly-awakened souls how to establish their Bishop and priests, and followed Shri Mother realisation. In the garden the rain trickled from down the aisle to the main portals. There, just the leaves and foliage, freshening the semi-rural as with Lord Jesus, a miracle occurred-Shri scene. We all walked back to our residence in Adi Shakti cured a crippled man in the very the cool cleaning soft drizzle, praying that now gateway of the church ! He was very old and doddery, a servant of Her father. Shri Mother town of Nagpur, the childhood home of Shri smilingly encouraged and prodded Him into a chair. He was quite nervous. She spoke softly to him, took his walking stick gently from his tell. Shri Mother was the Devi, Shri Mahamaya hands. He recalled that She was the daughter Shri Adi Shakti, Shri Mary Mahalakshmi, Shri of his past enmployer and said to us that when Mather Mary, Lord Jesus, Shri Kalki, Shri Adi he first saw Her she was "chhoti"-very little. Guru, as much as She was mother, grand- Shri Mataji was all smiles. The old kindly mother, aunt, sister, wife. It was a lesson for fellow gained his realisation and walked away, us-for our attention-to be thrust into such a slowly but steadily without any help, quite be- mused at what had happened to him. a new and thriving centre would grow in the Adi Shakti Mataji. On such a weekened as this is so much to maya. And to see, at apparently serious mom- ments, that a glorious smile suffused Our Divine Mother's face. Throughout the two days. After church we were invited to the home of Shri Mataji's brother, a government minister Shri Maraji-despite the maya of Mrs Shri- for Chai (tea) and Christmas cake. There, ami- vastava-sought and gathered Her stray child- dst the bustle of family festivities, teacups and crumbs, Our Holy Mother cured a man's deaf- ness with the words: "Aham sakshat virata" in Her devotees. With Our Mother in our hearts his ear, and worked on some of his children. everyone enjoyed the play immensely. And what Afterwards the fanily gathered in the garden for a group photograph. ren to Her, cleared chakras, gave advice, guid- ed and taught, and looked after every need of a play it was ! And what a Director !! Jai Shri Mataji. 47 Nirmala Yoga

 Speech of Shri C.P. Shrivastavaji on the occasion of Birth Centenary Celebrations of Pujya Shri Prasad Rao Krishna Rao Salveji (resp. father of Shri Mataji) at Nagpur on 24th Dec, 1983. Indian. He came from Nagpur, Nagpur you Most respected Vice-President of India Hidaytullaji, Hon. and Respected Dy. Chief know is the heart of India. He belonged to Minister of Maharashtra, Shri Ramrao Adikji you but he did not belong only to Nagpur. and Hon. Shri Tidkeji, Respected Shri Madhul- Nagpur being the heart of India, he represent- karji, Shri Gaikwadji, Shri Kishor Kashikarji, ed the heart of India in New Delhi. He was Sabi Bhaiya and my dear brother-in law, my first and foremost an Indian. friend and the Central Minister Shri N.K.P. Salve. Sir. may I offer on behalf of the whole days I am posted abroad) very often I meet, Salve family, the large Salve family express to Punja bis, you our deep and profound greatitude for your Gujratis. What about Indians? He was first kindness indeed to be with us here today, The and foremost an Indian. And that created unveiling of the statue of my father-in-law could not have been done by the person better came from another state. I came from another than yourself. You have explained how lifelong state. But that created a tremendous impulse was your association with Shri Salveji and therefore it is most appropriate this should patriot, great leader one other significant fea- have been done in the manner it has been done today. But it is a moment of devotion for us, in touch with him-we all talk that we and all I can say, we aredeeply touched by the should not distinguish between caste, creed, very kind words in which you have referred to community, government, language, religion. my father-in-law, the various anecdotes you We all say that. But we say that on our lips. have narrated about the life spent with him I wish we all could say that from our heart. And and we feel deeply indebted, very proud. To Hon. Dy. Chief Minister, I say how profound were the same, he did not merely profess, that, is the Salve family to him. We all know he is he did not only preach that, but he sincerely the well-wisher of the family. My wife, Nirmala who is sitting here, always mentions that. I am very happy indeed and proud that, Sir, you are here today. You know when I come to my country India (as these Bengalis, Maharashtrians, and a tremendous impact on me. You know, he on mc. Apart from this that he was a great ture which almost captured anyone who came he did so. He not only said that all religions believed in that. And I don't think it even occurred to him to distinguish between persons from one area and another, or one language and another, or one religion and another. Now this again was so vital for the Unity of the To Shri N.K.P. Salve I am indebted for country. And he was totally dedicated to it. many things, but I am indebted to him most of all for having brought me in touch with my father-in-law, who became my father-in-law married his daughter. I was.very fortunate; later on. Shri N.K.P. Salve was a friend of because I came into the fold. I found, here mine in Lucknow University. I came to New was a person, who had dedicated his life to Delhi and very kindly he introduced me to his family. And that was a turning moment in try, and yet, please believe me, Sir, I was with my life. A turning moment because I had come from Lucknow, a provincial Capital with provi- never once mentioned, that he has done any neial ideas, and I met a person who was an sacrifice for the country. This word did not I told you, big change came in my life. I freedom struggle, who has fought for the coun- him on many occasions, at many places,-he 48 Nirmala Yoga

 Registered with the Registrar of Newspapers under Regd No. 36999/81 Shri Prasad Rao Krishna Rao Salve Edited & Published by Sh.. S.C. Rai 43, Bunglow Road, Delhi-110 007 & Printed at The Central Electric Press, 80-D, Kamla Nagar, Delhi-110 007. One issue Rs. 9.00. Annual Subscription Rs. 51.00 Foreign (by Airmail £ 7 S 14)

 occur to him. He thought always it was a great privilege for him to bave been in the forefront of country's freedom struggle; to have him, He has left behind him many of us here. been associated and been a colleague of pujya They are all very proud, very humbly proud Mahatma Gandhi, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehruji, hut we can really commemorate him. We are Maulana Azadji and so on. To hin that was most grateful Sir, that you have unveiled his AN end in itself-freedom struggle, fight for statue. It's a great reminder of the great person. freedom, attainment of independence. Sacrifices But in what way can we really commemorate that he made were never in the nature of an him. Today all of us can reaffirm.our faith in investment. He expected no return, He did not those values, being an Indian first and anything want any return. He never thought in those else thereafter, not distinguishing between one terms. To him the main thing was the country, community and other, one state and another we Indians, to become independent. When the but serving our motherland, with total dedica- country became independent it was a proud tion, Then alone we would be really respecting monient for him because We ull witnessed the his memory. On this day, let us then rededi- hoisting of our national flag. That was the re- cate ourselves to those noble ideals. turn. That's what he wanted and he lived to I could go on Sir, speaking about him be- cause I respected him. I loved him. I admired CAuse I respected him. Our thanks to you sir, to Dy. Chief Mini- ster, to Hon Minister, I thank my brother-in- law Shri N.K.P. Salve who is here. We studied What a valiant personafity he was. He was together we were friends, when we came to a political leader. He was a citizen. He was a New Delhi, he got me introduced to him what lover of cricket, He was a lover of music. You a wonderful association it has been, a friend, a name anything he had interest in it. What a brother-in-law. How proud I am of him. He is wonderful personality. But again another fea- now a Minister, he is serving the country. It is ture in him which must have impressed many my prayer that he may serve the country as he as it dealt me, was that many people came to is in various traditional ficids like his father see thar. see him. He saw many people but never did he and so he will. distinguish between the rich and the poor, And Shri Tidke has mentioned, it is not between the clders and children. He had time normal to mention one's wife in one's address, enough for everybody whoever it was, whether but I hope, you will forgive me. But 1 must it was an old man he gave hịm respect, if it mention she also is carrying the same tradition. I think her father's part in her is now leading rickshaw wala or whether it was a train driver her to promote a movement throughout the or a big Honourable Minister may be, to him world, on the same principles. The principle of all were Indians, equality rights and he truly togetherncss and that is even brotherly not just believed in that equality. He was a great citizen here in India but all over the world the brother- of India, a citizen of Nagpur, a great leader, a hood. You know, Sir, how difficult is the world of today, The quarrels all over the world. They can be resolved only by one human family. She He had a unique combination of values. is trying to serve that. You will see Salve fami- He never departed fronm those values, He never ly in any sphere whether it is politics, states- believed in compromise on values. Values to manship, religion, spirituality or humanity. him were the high aspect of living. He believed They are all trying to serve in their small way that if we had to live, if we have to live toge- and I am really proud to belong to that family ther then live according toa set of values. and on behalf of that family, I thank you all, was a child gave him love-whether it was a WILS great patriot. That's what he did till the end of his life. Sir, and all participants.



----------------------

1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Nirmala Yoga
Bi-Monthly
Vol. 5 No. 27
May-June 1985
"Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns all the religions and
seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga-THE UNION"
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-1.txt 
 NIRM ALA
OGA
43, Bungalow Road. Dalhi-110007 (India)
Founder : Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Editorial Board: Dr. S.K. Mathur, Sri A.S. Mishra, Sri R.D. Kulkarni
Representatives
Australia
RAJEN MAHARAJ, 26, Ocean St, Bondi, NSW 2026
INGE KELLY, Josef Melichargasse 20, 1210 VIENNA.
LORI & CARY HYNEK, 1540, Taylor Way, West Vancouver, B.C. VIS 1N4
M. CERNAY, 175, Av. Ledru Rollin PARIS-75011.
:ANTONIO SARACINO, NIRMALA HOUSE, Localita Pichini s.n.s. 00010
S. Angelo Romano, ROMA
M.B. RATNANNWAR, 13, Merwan Mansion, Genjewala Lane, Borivali (W),
BOMBAY-400092.
Austria
Canada
France
Italy
India
: JUAN ANTONIO DELGADO, Avenida De Burgos, 30, 1, A. MADRID-28036
Spain
Switzerland : CHARLES & MRS. MAGDA MATHYS. 5 Chemin Des Mouldins,
1256, Troinex (Canton de Geneva).
:GAVIN BROWN, Brown's Geological Information Services Ltd., 134 Great
Portland Street, London WIN 5PH.
IAN BASCOMBE, 32, Hooker Road, Exeter, Devon, England
CHRISTINE & MICHAEL PETRUNIA, 270, Jay Street (APT. 1-C),
BROOKLYN, NY-11201.
URSULA SEHLMEYER, 191 Canal ST. #23 SAN RAFAEL CA-94901.
U. K.
U.S.A.
O NTENTS
Page
1. Editorial
1
2. Mother's Holy Feet
3. The Song of Lord Ganesha
4. Sahaja Yogis have to ascend (Bordi 1985)
5. The Mother
6 The Culture of Universal Religion (Bordi 1985)
7 Establishing the Guru Principle (Guru Pooja 1982)
8. Shri Mahalakshmi Pooja
9. On the meaning of Islam
10. Advice given at Jung Society Hall, U.S.A. (1983)
11. Christmas at Nagpur in 1983
12. Shri C. P. Shrivastavajis speech at Birth Centenary
12
13
19
(Munich 1984)
26
28
29
45
Celebrations of Shri Prasad Rao Krishna Rao Salveji
48
Front Cover: Shri Mataji-Maharashtra tour 1984.
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Editorial
The Hymns of Shri Dakshinamoorti is one of the most outstanding works of Shri Adi-
Shankaracharya, The word Shri 'Dakshinamoorti' has niany connotations. 'Dakshina' is the
south, As our beloved Mother has told us, Shri Shiva resides at Mount Kailäsh facing to the
South. Another connotation is: Shri' is the Adi-Shakti, hence Shri Dakshinamoorti' is the
Adi-Shakti and Sadashiva, the Primordial parents of the Universe, who are one like word and
its meaning, in Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi. Also, 'Dakshina' suggests the beauty. Hence the
word stands for beauty and divinity personificd, that is our Mother.
The hymns have thirteen verses, nine out of which endas Salutations to Shri Guru Dakshina-
moorti'. Indeed beloved Mother is Guru as well. In the eleventh verse Shri Dakshinamoorti
has been deseribed as the Guru of three worlds viz the earth, the nether world, and the heavens.
Our Mother looks after the entire creation-and accomodates it within Her being. In the
thirteenth verse Adi-Shankaracharya has culogised that the Guru is very young but the disciples
are getting old, the Guru is silent while the disciples are being enlightened.
It is felt that understanding of the hymns would strengthen our desire to be one with the
lotus feet of Sakshat Param-Parameshwari, Sakshat Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi.
विश्वं द्पण दृश्यमान नगरीतुल्य
पश्यन्नात्मनि मायया बहिरिवोद्भूतं यथा निद्रया ।॥।
यः साकात्कुरुते प्रवोधसमये
तस्मे श्री गुरूमूतये नम इदं श्रों दक्षिणामूतंये ॥
निजांतंगतं
दर्पण
।
स्वात्मानमेवाद्वयं ।
Vishwam darpana drushyamana-nagaree tulyam nijäntargatam i
Pashyannätmani mâyaya bahirivod-bhootam yathā nidraya 1 1
Yah sükshat-kurute prabodha-samaye swätmäna-mevādvayam i
Tasmai Shri Guru moortaye nama idam Shri Dakshināmoortaye I t
1
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-3.txt 
 The universe is within oneself like reflection of a city in the mirror. But due to the Maya
itappears to have come up outside the Selff as a dream seen in the sleep. Salutations to that Guru
Shri Dakshinamorti who gives the realization through the enlightenment, that only the Self
is everywhere, the only one and not the second.
The first part of the verse states the true nature of phenomenal universe and how it appears
to human-beings whereas in the second it is explained how the Guru brings about revelation of
the truth. It is known to all that universe is created from the combination of three Gunas
(the Satwa, the Rajas and the Tamas), and five elements (the earth, the water, fire, air and the
ether). Also it owes its existence to Paramatma who it foundational for its functioning, The
three Gunas and five elements which have originated from the power of desire of the Supreme
Spirit are present in their causal states. Thus as a mirror is the cause of reflection, the
Paramātmā is the cause of the universe which, is as illusory as the refiection in the mirror.
While the Paramātmā is all pervading within, without and the cause of many universes.
The Atman in its purest state is the "Sacchidanand-Swaroopa (of the form of truth-
consciousness-bliss), all pervading and the totality. It receives its individuality due to limi-
tations placed by Maya, owing to the desire of the Paramätmä. If a vessel is dipped in the
ocean, water filled in it, is essentially the occan bound by the walls of the vessel. Similarly,
the Atman is essentially the same as the Paramātmā enveloped by gross, subtle and causal
bodies created from the combination of five clements and three Gunas that are present in
their causal states within the being, on the Chakras and Channels of sympathetie and
parasympathetic.
According to one theory the primary limiting conditions viz, the innate ignorance reduces
the universal consciousness to a limited creature by the Ichcha shakti of the Supreme: It is
owing to this, that the Jeeva (empirical being) considers himself to be a separate entity cut-off
from the universal stream of consciousness. It is the consciousness within self-limitations and
impe.fections.
Considering the fact of essential oneness of the Atma and the Paramātmā, the universe
should appear unreal even to the empirical being. But it is mistaken as the reality owing to
the play of Mäyā, as incidents experienced in the dreams are taken as real ones, owing to the
sleep. As the sleep is the cause to give semblance of objectivity to ideas latent in the sub-
conscious, the unreal universe appears as real owing to the ignorance. The truth shines within,
when the Atma enlightens the inner organs by it's splendour after the veil of Maya is removed
by the Guru.
Our beloved Mother has removed the veil of Maya by awakening and raising the Kundalini
and shown us the glimpse of ever-effulgent Atman. The light has to be developed through
our efforts to enjoy the glory and splendour of the Atman and its ultimate oneness with the
Paramatman.
The ultimate oneness is to be perceived by withdrawing the attention from the universe,
from the body and fixing it into the Atma. Sahaja Yogis are not free from the influence of
Maya even after the enlightenment of their Antahkarana' (the inner organs). Even, wise
and learned men, men who are clever and adept in the vision of exceedingly subtle Atman are
Nirmala Yoga
2)
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-4.txt 
 overpowered by Tamas' and do not understand the Atman, They consider as true, what is
simply super-imposed by delusion and attach themselves to its effects, The Maya has three
gunas the Satwa, the Rajas and the Tamas as mentioned above.
The Rajas has its Vikshepa shakti' or projecting power that produces mental modifications
such as attachment, grief, anger etc. Avrti or the veiling power is the power of Tamas which
makes things appear other than what they are and starts the projecting power. Thanks to
our beloved Mother for endowing us with vibratory awareness following which Sahaja Yogis
can liberate themselves from the bondage of Maya. Cool vibrations would indicate the
balance between the Tämas and Räjas with the Atmä shining in its glory.
Giving up the thoughts of non-Self which is evil, productive of misery and causes diversion
from the path-way to God-realization, one should think of the Self the Bliss-absolute. Here
shines eternally the Atman, the self-effulgent witness of everything. One must meditate on
this Atman excluding all other thoughts, continuously, strengthening the identifications with
the Atman. One must live without any concern for body, organs, and the world. The Self
is
Brahma, the Self is Vishnu, the Self is Indra, the Self is Shiva, the Self is this universe.
Nothing exists except the Self. The Self is within and without, in the North, in the South, in
the East in the West, above and below.
AND THE SELF IS MOTHER'S LOTUS FEET
May we meditate on them in the heart.
MOTHER'S HOLY FEET
त्रयाणा देवानां त्रिगुणजनितानां तव शिवे
भवेत् पूजा पूजा तब चरणयोर्या विरचिता ।
तथा हि त्वत्पादोंद्ृहनमणिपोठस्य निकटे ।
स्थिता ह्येते शश्वन्मुकुलितकरोत्तंसमकुटा: ।।
Trayănām devānām triguna-janitanām täva Shive,
bhavet poojä poojā tava charanayorya vira chita 1
Tathá hi tvat-pādod vahana-manipeethasya nikate,
Sthitā hyete shash vanmukulita karottamsa-makutāh 11
Verse 25, Saundarya Lahari i 1
O Spouse of Shiva! the homage rendered to Thy feet becomes by itself the homage rendered
to the three gods born of Thy three Gunas. It is therefore, that these gods viz,. Brahman,
Vishnu, and Rudra, ever stand by the jewelled seat on which Thy Feet rest, with their folded
hands, adorning their crowns.
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-5.txt 
 The Song of Lord Ganesha.
I am Ganesha and I love all the carth.
For I am the lord of the Virgin birth.
I danced in the morning when the world began.
And I danced when they crucified me as man.
I love all mankind-and for it to be free
I love it to grow as straight as a tree,
I love my Mother and I love Her work,
Hove Her hands and 1 love Her Feet.
All mankind is within me and I long for my body to be free.
I love the work of my creator Father-
And I love the joy of my awesome Mother-
I love mankind but they don't love me-
For they feared and they hid and were not free.
For in original sin, they chose to be free
To hurt and destroy, and not love me.
But I am the lover of the Universe,
And I forgive it again and again
And I soothe their hurts and long for their pain
To be gone for ever, and for them again
To love each other and to be pure-
And enjoy my Parents' eternal store
To live in Paradise eternally
And, as my brothers
And sisters, always to love me.
For I am Lord of the dance, said he.
-Dr. Rustom
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Ji
Sahaja Yogis have to Ascend
sacrificing for the greatest cause
International Seminar, Bordi
Feb. 6, 1985
I'm immensely joyous to see all of you tion. They were not realised souls, without
here. I do not know what to say from my side. feeling any joy around. With two clothes, Livi-
The words get lost. They have no meaning. So ing in the jungles,-just two clothes. And the
Imany of you aspiring to ascend to that state
where you would have complete joy, bliss, and self is terribly cold; chilly, absolutely chilly.
peace. This is what I could give you. And a And the clothes were not clothes actually, it
Mother is only happy when She can give what- was cloth covering their body. Sleeping on the
ever She has, to Her children. Her unhappi- open ground in a very severe winter,-or may
ness, all Her restlessness, everything, is just to be the summer. Without any shoes they were
achieve that end,-to gift all that She has.
area where he visited-which I have seen my-
asked to walk, for miles together, miles toge-
ther!
I do not know how much to thank you
people to go through all this to get to that tre-
asure that you have within yourself. "Sahaja" ked and trodden, you will be surprised. Buddha
is the only word I could think when I started
to manifest Sahasrăra
understood by everyone so far. But you have
realised that it is today a different style of Yoga his disciples,-there was no time to advertise,
where first enlightenment is given, and then
you are allowed to look after yourself. It was stay in one place, and the disciples used to go
never done before.-It's just a venture of your
Mother which has worked out.
IF you go and see where Buddha has wal-
was also young, he used to also walk. But his
disciples used to walk much more, because he
would go and station in a place, he would send
opening. That's casily
or to annouuce anything. So that heused to
r round the villages, ask for bhikshā,-meaning
the alms,-to gather some food from the vill-
ages; cook one time, give part of it to Buddha,
Otherwise, in the olden times, of course, and the rest of that they used to eat.
the concern of the Divine was to get pcople
enlightened. And they did not know how to all the villages, whatever was possible, and
work it out. No incarnation ever tried to work would bring them to Buddha for a sermon.
it out in this fashion. But whenever they tried, Such sacrifices ! They've lived in huts, caves,
they tried to have a very severe hardship for in terrible darkness,–meditating. But they
the seckers, Very severe hardships.
They would go, work out, get people from
never got realisation. Very few got their reali-
sation.
I wonder how many of you have read the
treatise of Buddha, when he used to travel with
thousands of his disciples-not giving realisa-
There were pcople, who were sons of great
princes, and princes, dukes, what you call, duch-
5.
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-7.txt 
 My father sacrificed 'everything', every pie
that he had, for the freedom struggle. He left
And they walked for miles together with him nothing for us, not a single.. I should say, of
in the thorny routes.-Because they felt that course, our family being rich we had silver and
Bud dha's work was of such universal importance: gold and all that. But as faras all the cash
money was concerned, was spent. And all this
silver and gold also, thanks to English, that
they took away from us, and they returned us
when they went back. That is how we had some
ess as you call all very-very' rich people.
Women of very rich families followed him.
that they are the part and parcel of such a trem-
endous task ; that they should be taking part in
Such a great work for humanity.
This is not only in India, but even Vidit- .
ämä who started the Zen system in Japan. In
China, I was surprised, the amount of sacri-
fices the had made; the way they lived ! snatched away. And I know, we lived in bea-
silver and gold left in the family.
'Everything',all that is material,-was
I mean if you see the way they were living in utiful houses, and then we shifted to huts and
the conditions. You cannot imagine! And they lived there. Sacrifices to the Maximum. And
ended up their lives like that. Working it out,
without any proper guidance, because Buddha
had died, there was no way out. They had to
find their own ways. Then they found Maha- wash our clothes, live like very poor people,
yana and Shvétäyäna-all kinds of things.
we were very happy about it. Very proud !
We had only two changes. We used to
sleeping on this kind of a thing (thin, rough
floor mats). For my life, I remember that I
Even if you see other seekers in other reli- never used to take a pillow. I never used chap-
gions,-like at the time of Christ. Where did they pals for ages. I had only one sweater made out
live ? And after the death of Christ it wns even
worse, because they were persecuted, they were Till I passed out and I went to medical college,
killed, they were tortured, crucified! It happened I had that sweater with me. I had only one
with Moses also. His disciples were hounded, coat, throughout' my education. When I was
so they had to all run towards India. Imagine in Lahore, which is terribly cold and sometimes
the distances ! From that area to Kashmir, how
they must have walked ! How they must have
lived, how they must have carried. And in
thousands' ! In thousands, they came, to
of this kind of a material (very rough wollen).
can be like London, it was worn out and fini-
shed.
But we never grudged, and never grumbl-
ed, and never said that our father should have
looked after us and done something, why did
he just sacrifice everything for the country.
Never', 'never', 'never'.
India.
Because they realised that they are doing a
tremendous task, Something so "great' that
they are supporting.
But even today, when they sce us, any-
In this country we had a struggle for free where, they know we are the children of such
dom. I was part and parcel of that. My parents
were part and parcel of that. They were rich
people ; quite rich I should say, from every
standard. You will be amazed, my father burnt
all his suits; they were stitched in England. My Mahâtmä Gändhi. He made everybody so tran-
mother burnt all her sarees. They used to spin sformed into a new personality of 'tremendous'
their own clothes, and wear them.
a great man. They have tremendous respect
for us.
That quality was created, I should say, by
sacrifice. Tremendous" ! You cannot imagine
Nirmala Yoga
6.
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-8.txt 
 how people lived ! All the money we had, killed and butchered ! Children died! Nobody
teverything', that we had, all conveniences, shed tears. Nobody shed tears. But to feel that
conveyance, all houses, everything was given you are for such a 'noble cause itself gives
up.-Not only by my father but so many of you that joy. Joy, and that sense of involvement,
them.
And moreover, what I know about Maha-
tma Gändhi and other people, what I have
Otherwise we could have not got our free-
dom. To get our freedom, this country has scen, how they were. Everybody was not allow-
sacrificed so much.
ed to come in. And anybody who did even
slightest thing less than-whether he was a
Now, after that, we are here to get our King's son or he was anybody's daughter or
freedom, to get the freedom for our Spirit. To anything, 'any' little thing spoilt, 'anything',
make our Sp.rit free from our greed, lust, from
our anger, from our conditionings, from our
terrible ego, from the body being enslaved by
comfort.
he was chucked out. I have stayed in Gändhi's
Ashram, se I know what it is, and that's why
you know I can go through rigorous life. It is
his training.
I must say Gandhiji had a
I do not know how he managed. He was like
"touch of Midas"-touched anybody, he be-
came transformed, you see. And he was an They had to clean their latrines. Also the latri-
extremely strict man.-Very kind to me, the
children. But he was an 'extremely' strict man.
He would not tolerate any nonsense at all!
special charn.
All the children, above twelve years had to
clean the whole of that Ashram area, which is
I think in 50 acres of land.-Every morning.
nes of the guests.-I have done it. And they
were allowed only two dresses. And nothing
could be kept, even you cannot see 'even one
Throughout,-f you study in the way all paper any where, any litter anywhere. So clean.
th se people were brought up,-not only for free- spick and span. And the living places were so
đom or independence, but even before that, for
spiritual life, anywhere',-there is one thing is
very common, is "Saerifice".
ness that you are doing something great. Con-
sciousness that you are part and parcel of the Abul Kaläm Azad, my father, of
Whole. Such a big thing, such a big work. It's a any age group. or a child. And 5 0'clock,
noble' cause.
neat and tidy, It was all done with cowdung-
completely with cowdung. "Everybody had to
take a bath, eariy in the morning at 4 O'clock,
with cold water. Whether it was Jawähar Läl
And the conseious-
-
Nehru,
any age group, or a child. And 5 O'clock,
(Please don't raise your hands and raise
your Kundalinis. Please be sented. That is not
the way. Try to understand what I am talk-
ing).
And then there was one thing very com-
mon. Very common among all of them: That
the noble cause, the uplifiment of the 'noble
cause made them sacrifice in such a Sahaja man-
ner. Much more than the Sahaja Yogis some-
times, who have got so much in Sahaja Yoga.
They have got their joy, they have got their
Spirit.
And then, early in the morning at
O'elock, you'll be surprised, getting up-for
me it was alright,-and then to walk in those
50 acres of land to the centre of that hall-
which was nothing but just an open space sur-
rounded by some sort of huts where Gandhiji
was living. To walk all the way after bath, after
getting ready and all that. And snakes used to
I have seen with my own eyes, such people
in this country, whom you may call legendery
but I have seen it. Thousands of people were
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-9.txt 
 erawl along. Nobody was bitten, of course. I
think the snakes understood that people were
busy with the great job of freeing this great
But now I fnd we have another kind of
slavery. A slavery of selfishness, self-oriented
It
**This is my comfort. I must have this.
should be enjoyable: I am enjoying, I'm this,
I'm that". You" should cnjoy, otherwise it is
not something great. I mean the whole thing
should provide you some sort of a feeling,
lights, of any kind. We instead of you providing the feeling.-Because
And when Gandhiji would come-I mean sun- neople, I think. do not know what they are
country.
And we would sit, just like this, and snakes
would be crawling. No lights were allowed. No
only used sunlight.
light was not there in the morning, at all-some
lanterns were brought to put there. And we
would see the snakes crawling up.
doing. What sort of a work they are doing.
They do not want to come up to that level, of
that height, to see "What are you upto"? You
are trying to save the whole world!
But I never heard anybody complaining, but
like a "war', drove with such "passion", every-
body competing as to "what I can do, how I
can be alright", Nobody "even thought of
comfort ! Of course they were all about, say also themselves are so lousy. There, is no smar-
This is one of the reasons Sahaja Yoga moves
so slowly, because they see people who worry, who
are worried about their comforts, this that, and
50 years, upto 50 years of age or something like
that, may be. In the Ashram mostly peopie
were upto 50 years of age, that time.
tness about them. No feeling of that greatness'
that they havc to do. You have to be smart.
1
you know you are on the war, how you behave ?
And I have seen with my own eyes the
people who had huge cars in the house and
things like that, they sold off, they threw it Better people. I'm sure' we will get better
away. They used to come by train to Wardhä people now, much better people.
station and walk down. Gandhiji would not see
anybody coming even in a tongă (horse-cart). family, this that. They worry about their own
And they listened to him and obeyed him.
I'm sure the mediocrity is much less now.
They worry about little things of their
problems, and their jobs, and this and that. I
I have seen many missionaries, though mean, nobody could do like this to Gandhiji !
they are not upto the point, nothing very noble, I tell you, he would have slapped ! Take it
but the way that's how they take people to task from me.
and people work it out for them. I have sen
them. In India we have missionaries. and they "solve vour own problems"; that's all. Though
are the people who came from abroad, they
just absolutely obediently listened to the you are-they are solved no doubt, you are
church, and did whatever they said.
It is as if to come to Sahaja Yoga means
helped, God helps you so much. But how much
are you doing about it ?
Now today we are doing, as you know, the
greatest of greatest work.
Of course we have some great Sahaja Yogis,
I do not deny that fact, We 'have', some. Much
more than I had,-ever. And that is why I am
political freedom to talk even about God. We very joyous about it. But the dedication we
have,-We count every penny that we spend.
How much we have got out of that penny,
what did we do about it.–This is not the
Because freedom is of course necessary,
could not make even a small little needle at
that time, we were not allowed, by the Govern-
ment. So much oppressed. So we had to get
out of the shackles of slavery, No doubt.
way.
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-10.txt 
 I feel sometines, as I was feeling all the
Buddha never spent a single penny of his
own. He got money from all his disciples. time, that you might be uncomfortable in
Built all these big things and all that. He never many places. But I myself have seen the way
had even a public help from any body else.
you people have been in those places, most
carelessly-the western Sahaja Yogis,- was
So rise now. You must rise above your petty surprised ! That way Indians are better in this
SPmall mind. R'se upto the paint where you should
know "you are going to save the whole huma- Yogis have been misbehaving in a very funny
nity". If vou cannot feel that, it is better to leave
Sahaja Yoga. Sahaja Yoga is not meant for been behaving,-shouting at people, creating
peaple who are lousy. In Marathi the word is problems. Some people come to see me, they
a a Gabäle) Tukärāma has said", Yeryä talk to them in such a rude manner that
gabādyāche kāma nohe". It is not the work of they run away. You can talk to them sweetly.
the lousy.
respect, And" some of the Indian Sahaja
manner. It shocked me ! the way they have
You have to be nice to them. Not to shout at
people. Alright, I cannot meet everyone at
Shivāji himself, when he fought his war, everytime, at every convenience, alright. But
he caught hold of people, the Sardäras and the
dukes of that time they were. They gave up shout at others. This is so "petty' and so 'low"
"everything' they had, they gave up their lives, that I do not know how far I have to come
'everything'! Their children they sacrificed,
they sacrificed 'whatever' they had. Shivaji had
no money to pay them. You must have heard
lots of stories about Shivaji.
that does not mean that you have right to
down.
When you rise above all these petty things,
you will develop that Divine discretion. That
Divine discretion is the Real Blessing of God.
While if you see how these Sahaja Yogis All other blessings that you think is blessing,
are in this world, Kshéma (4) comes first is no blessing at all. Unless and until you can
before Yoga (). It's like that. It's your grow what is the blessing ? Like a tree which
Mother's Love. I want my children to be com- has known such a blessing that, "I have got
fortable. They are newly born babes. Alright, rain", But öut of that rain if you cannot grow,
they need comfort, they are to be looked what is the use of having that rain on you?
after.
You have to be compassionate, beautiful,
sensible people, who are 'highest things on this
But I cannot black-mail the Divine because
the children are small. Can 1?1 am here to da earih. Take out your attention from all non-
the job of God Almighty. And when you are
my children,-Alright, His Grace will work. you get possessed. That is how you get condi-
he will look after you. He will make you
sense that you have been busy with. That is how
tioned. Small-small things you see.
In India we have another problem. We
cannot tolerate another person. If any person
But 'Grow now. Grow. You have to grow. is doing good for Sahaja Yoga, immediately a
grow.
group is built up. It is very common with
Indians also. A group is built up to put him
Get out of this small nonsense that you are.
See your personality, how you live ? Where
is your attention ? What do you think ? Are you
thinking about Sahaja Yoga ? That is the most
important thing for which you are chosen,
down.
This was notdone when Gandhiji was there.
I donot know how it happens. It only happens
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-11.txt 
 with poor leadership, I think I don't have that
leadership. At the time of Gändhiji he used to Gagangadh Mahärāj who has fallen down com-
"blast' people out, 'completely!
I have known of a very great saint called
pletely. If a person like him can fall down,
you also can fall down, if you do not under-
Cutting each other's throats, saying things stand what is your worth, what is your välue
behind the back, forming groups. Anybody and what is the position you are given.
who works out something nice, and I try to
help that person to express himself, immediately
a group comes up to press him.
So we have to, today, with all our love for
our Mother, have to decide in our heart that
And there are some hopelessly peripheral, we are going to have large heartedness, of sacri-
useless Sahaja Yogis in West and in the East,
who try to make a mess of things. They think
they are big Gurus, big people. Very sniall'
people, chicken hearted, I should say. And
they think they are very big, great people,
because they can take good photographs, may vou the great souls, to save the humanity. You
be, or that they can wear a dress in a particular must grow, you must grow, you have to grow.
fices.
What have we sacrificed so far ? Just think
of it. Have we ? Did we sacrifice anything ?
Please, try to understand that I lhave to use
manner, or something like that stupid stuff as
they are. And they try to dominate others. Such
people will be thrown out. Absolutely. No ched. They make money. They save money.
use having useless people in a machine like In America I was surprised the way people
On money points also people are so wret-
this,
cheated me of money! Thousands ! In India
alsó there is, it is a very common practice.
Today is the beginning of a New Era, of a
New Era of people of very high qualities, whose
Spirit has been enlightened. Let us all think
about it.
Then, if you have career mindedness, and
you are very ambitious, “How my job will
remain, this that," you better get out of Sahaja
Yoga ! It is not going to help us, at all.
Now, vou have to rule yourself. And you
have to rule others through compassion, love and
discretion.
Thirdly there are people who believe that,
"This is my wife, this is my beloved, this is this,"
TODAY THAT'S THE BIG TIME THAT and all that nonsense. Why are you here ? For
I DECLARE THAT IT IS THE UNIVERSAL what ?-Or "My children, my household, my
RELIGION, THE NIRMALA RELIGION, mother, my father," all sorts of wretched
WHICH IS FORMED OUT OF MY TEACH- people around. If you cannot rise above that,
You cannot
you cannot help me, I'm sorry.
help.
INGS OF LOVE.
"But it does not mean by any chance that
rou remain dwarfs. I am not going to spoil you.
I am 'not' going to spoil you, by keeping you you have to be people of very great valour and
diwarfy people. So, try to rise. Do not domi- great idealism and noble ideas.
nate others. Respect. Respect each other. You
are out for a very big work of Virāta. How
much you know about thE Divine, nobody has follow the platoons to sell some things around.
known so far ! But fix up yourself.
You have to be very very strong people,
Some are like petty shopkeepers, who
In Marathi it is called bäzür bhungė.
Nirmala Yoga
10
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-12.txt 
 So now you meditate upon this point that my children to be sacrificed on the altar of
kere we are to establish the Univeral Religion of freedom. If you are doing it, I am a proud
Ascent. It's a tremendous" task ! If I could do father and I will tell your mother to behave
it alone, I would have done it. But I cannot. It herself. Tam so proud of you !"
is only through you I have to do it. And you
have a heritage. You come from a very great
birth, where yau have this heritage. With 'that'
heritage if I cannot manage you, I think I for eight months, the police was after my life.
better give up your leadership. I cannot do I know what we have gone through. We were
it.
Such atmosphere I have passed through. I
had to give up my college. I was absconding
very young people, eighteen years, you can
imagine!
When we were fighting for our freedom, all
of us were removed from schools because we
were in the missionary schools, and the missi- your Spirit, you must seek the comfort of your
onaries believe that Christ was born in Spirit.
England, so they would not allow us to study
in those schools. So we were all removed from
schools. We had no education for sometime. I and this and that, nonsense. They should not
could not pass my inter-seience for two years!
I could not appear because they rusticated us should get out of Sahaja Yoga and leave us
from colleges and schools. The Government alone.
rusticated us,
And now when you have got the freedom of
There aresome people who are complainers,
have come, or those who are Indians, they
But, those who know they have come here,
But we were such proud children, very not to enjoy themselves only, but to make the
proud. I was of course very much thick in it. whole world enjoy what you have got. To
I was never frightened. I was just an eighteen give it to them. And for that one has to sacrifice.
year old girl. And I remember one day, some One has to bear the pangs.
people came and told us that your father is
transferred from this jail to another jail. They
had such pride for us, all the people ! So they
had brought cars to take us down. And they this and that. I've got blisters sometimes,
were so many there.
How much I bear your pangs when you
are caught up, when you have troubles, when
from you, everything. But I don't mind.
Because it is my Life, my Mission, my
And mother naturally was worried be- Existence, my everything-is for the purpose of
cause I was a young girl. The police used to
torture me, used to give me shocks, and make drop of my blood is for that. My satisfactions
my life very miserable, beat me, and all that. are very different.
So she was crying and she told an old gentle-
man who was there that, "I'm worried about
my daughter. I donot want her to be tortured Mother. Please try to rise. Be proud that you
any more," So, I went and smiled at him, so
he said, "No, you just don't. Stop it, now. feeling of great valour. Then only, then only
You just don't do it. It's not proper.
emancipation of humanity. Even' the last
Please rememnber you are born of very brave
are doing such tremendous task. Have that
we can achieve results.
You have seen so many wars, you have
seen so many war pictures, you have seen how
people have fought, how they have sacrifieed
So my father, you see, took me aside. He
said, "Don't listen to this old johnny. He is
now about to die, forget him. I would like all
11
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-13.txt 
 themselves. And let us see what are we doing
in this war.
This is my.... I would
again. This is my order !
not say request
Just make your body your slave. Get out
of the slavery of your body, of your condition-
ings, and your nonsensical ego.
May God Bless You !
Let us all meditate now. There is no need
for tying up your Kundalinis, there is no need
IS
I'm sure, as a Mother I'm not so bad.
But as a Father I think I lack some things. to give yourself bandhans. There's no need
Please, try to come up. So that I should feel "at all' to do anything. If you come up to that
that I did not lack in my Fatherly attitude to-
wards you,-that awe, that understanding of a
Father's expectations.
This I'm not saying to you because this is
some present situation, because of you particu- situation, that's all, that "what you are"!
larly, or for anything which is very-sort of-
present day problem.-None of these things.
But is my announcement of this New Dimension you. Respect your self. Respect.
into which we have to rise. And as in the war
we have to declare, "Now Forward on." In the
same way this is a declaration. In no way to
degrade you, in no way to insult you, or to say
anything about aiyone of you. But to just in- standing of your own values, and worth, and
fuse that inspiration, which led thousands and discretion. You have to become sweet, nice
thousands and millions and billions of people to people. But,' very-very powerful ! That you
sacrifice for a greater cause.
So now, have respect for your self. "Raise things. The control, complete control of your
your heads !"" You are the ones who are going to self.
ight. You are the ones who are responsible.
Prepare yourself ! Prepare your hody, prepare
E your mind. Be discreet.
stage just now. There is no need to raise your
hands and tying up your Kundalini, nof neces-
sary. Nothing is to be done. Your Kundalinis
are already tied up. Assume ! Assume that
The Veeras (brave) ! And not the stupid.
May God Bless you all. May God Bless
May God Bless you.
There's nothing, nothing more important lo.
me than to see you rise to that level of under-
can control yourself, your tongues and your
May God Bless you again.
Please meditate. Close your eyes.
THE MOTHER
मनस्त्वं व्योम त्वं मरुदसि मरुत्सारथिरसि
त्वमापस्त्वं भूमिस्त्वयि परिणतायां न हि परम् ।
परिणमयितुं विश्ववपुषा
चिदानन्दाकारं शिवयुवति भावेन विभृषे ।।
त्वमेव स्वात्मानं
Manas tvanm vyoma tavam marud asi marut-säthir asi,
tvam āpas tvam bhumis tvayi parinatäyäm na hi param i
Tvameva svātmänam parinamayitum vishvavapusha,
Chidanandakāram Shivyuvati bhävena bibhrshe i 1
| Verse 35, Saundarya Lahari I1
O Youthful spouse of Shiva! Thou art the Mind (Manas) Thou the Ether, Thou the Air,
Thou the Fire, Thou the Water, and Thou the Earth. When thou hast transformed Thyself (thus)
there is nothing beyond. Thyself, with a view to manifesting Thyself in the form of the Universe,
inwardly assumest the form of Consciousness and Bliss.
Nirmala Yoga
12
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Shri Mataji
Talk before Pooja
The Culture of Universal Religion
BORDI
7th Feb. 1985
Today is the second day of our new journey
into the battlefield.
Secondly, when I am telling you something,
you think I am not telling 'you'; it doesn't re-
gister in your brain. You think I am telling it
to X, Y, Z but not to you; you are not in it.
That is another sign there is no peace. Because
there is no peace, there is no registration.
We have to win people with love, compas-
sion, affection and dignity.
When we say it is a Vishva Dharma, is a
Universal Religion we belong to, first and fore-
most thing,-the essence of that-is Peace. The
peace has to be within, to begia with. You have
to be peaceful within yourself. If you are not
peaceful, if you are playing tricks with your Those who have convex personalities, do not
ego, if you are just satisfying yourself saying register anything. The registration is so poor,
that you are peaceful, you are sadly mistaken. that whatever I say doesn't have any effect on
Peace is to be enjoyed within yourself. It is them. Otherwise, whatever I say is a mantra.
to be felt within yourself. So do not give
wrong satisfactions to yourself, do not give should feel that effect, that penetration within
false notions to yourself.
yourself.
Whatever goes into your head, that is going
to work out. But what I find, that people have
concave personalities. Then, they receive it.
e It shuld have direct effect on you, and you
you. But as if it is for somebody else, as if it is
not for you,.
cheat
Don't
This shows there is no peace within
you.
Peace has to be felt within yourself, and if
you are not feeling that, you should not come Only the peace within can register whatever is
and ask me, "Mother, why I am not feeling auspicious, whatever is nourishing for your
it." Because I am not going to tell you that growth. So try to make peace with yourself.
something is wrong with you. You have to
work it out that you should feel peaceful within
yourself.
Donot fight with yourself, "Why should I do it ?
I am so bad ! I should not have done it !"-
All these we shouldn't do. Try not to fight
with yourself, first of all.
It is not that if you have too much of
silence outside, you feel peaceful. The peace
has to be 'within" yourself. You have it. Your
Spirit is absolutely peaceful, Avyagra, (staT) Is it I catch ? Why.... ?." How am I to
without restlessness. There is no restlessness answer such a question ? It is very aggressive.
in your Spirit. Absolutely peaceful and steady.
Then you fight with me, "Why am I like
this ? Why should it be like this with me ? Why
r
I think it is very aggressive attitude of many
Sahaja Yogis to come and ask me such a ques-
It is for you to feel it. It is not for any- tion, "Why ...?" Because I can't tell you what
body else to certify you. This is one thing. is wrong with you because it is no, in my culture.
Nirmala Yoga
13
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-15.txt 
 You should find yourself what is wrong with
very mild and sweet. Such a personality has
to be developed;-outside.
you.
But it's not "what's wrong with you" is
So, peace with your friends, peace with
the problem. What is right with you is the Sahaja Yogis. If you can not be peaceful with
attitude. Whatever is right with you put your Sahaja Yogis then you are no good. Absolutely
no good. When you meet another Sahaja Yogi
you can not bark like dogs at each other. Can
you ? You leave three Sahaja Yogis together,
and they end up with a big barking system.
foot on that, establish yourself on that point.
And then develop yourself higher.
Peace is the keynote, as I said, for universal
growth of this Religion.
They can't manage within themselves. If there
are hundred, then it is alright. But you can't
It is disturbed by many things. Firstly, as leave three and four here and there.
I said, by yourself. You should not have funny
ideas about yourself. People have very funny
ideas. I see Sahaja Yogis, as soon as they get and sisters. They are all born out of My
realisation, or something better happens to Sahasrāra and nobody has the right to insult,
them, they start telling others how to do to be sarcastic. Saying things which are harm-
meditation, howto stand up, how to give band- ful. That is not friendship, thats' not friendship.
han, how to do this and that. That is very very It is a kind of a very subtle enemity that you
poor, it is very low level. Try to assimilate
within yourself. First grow yourself. That
growth itself will tell others how one should be.
Your own character, your own temperament, Religion. You should be respectful. 7The more
your own nature, your own behaviour-all this respectable you are to each other, the better it
will tell others that this is a great man and
they will try to follow your example.
So the peace should be with your brothers
are carrying on in your hearts. That 'cannot"
be forgiven. If you say sarcastic things to
others, you are not in the culture of Universal
will be.
I don't know how to tell you this. But
say, there is a Sahaja Yogi, you should not call
him like as you would call any Tom Dick
and Harry. Like there's someone going. "Eh
Mr. X, come here." No, people don't even
say Mister. Please try to use their surnames-
would be better. Mr.-Mr.-Mr.-.Would be
better.
Example is the best teaching. When the
tree is small, even if it says "I am great," no-
body is going to sit under the dwarf tree, But
when it is a big tree, we can see the shade and
everybody knows it is a big tree and they can
come and sit under that. We don't have to
tell. In the same way, when you grow, you
don't have to certify that "I am great." It just
Because this modern style of not using the
surname has brought down the respect for cach
works.
Now the peace within expresses, first of all. other. But I think, Sahaja Yogis should try a
peace with others. That is the first sign of new method and suggest to me even better
manifestation of peace. Such a person doesn't methods, how to address each other in such a
use harsh words, does not use cruel words. But
he is also not a person who is ineffective, He create that peace within each other.
is very effective, using very sweet and nice
words. May be he begins by using harsh words, Very nasty remarks they are. There is no sense
then he mellows down and comes down to a
position where he is effective as well as he is
way that you respect others. That respeet will
Suddenly you come out with remarks.
in it. That is not our culture. We belong to
Universal Religion, how can it be that culture?
Nirmala Yoga
14
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-16.txt 
 So, when you try to be peaceful with your mistake. I hope I have not hurt you. I hope I
brotte s and sisters, try to be extremely respect- have not put your things in a wrong way." Like
ful. When you write letters to each other, you that. Be on an apologetic mood. You can
say "my dear brother in Sahaja Yoga-," I find that among Indians, Indians have that
have seen all communists do that. Any body kind of a problem, they are more on apologe-
tic mood. Sometimes, it is impossible to con-
kind of a respect they have. You can't talk vince them. I will give you an example. We
like street people and ordinary people. Because went down to Sängli, and you were so full in
yon are really extraordinary, and all that is ex- the morning and the food was not ready. So
they said that we cannot have food because it
is late now and it will be later, so better we
who belongs to any party does that. It's a
traordinary has to be expressed through you.
As I am talking to you of this new culture,
let us understand how in many nations, peoples
have adopted cultures and cultures. Japan, I
know, has been effected very much by moder- thought that it was their mistake, "Now, it is
nisation. But Zens taught them certain kind registered that we haven't given food to them, it
of culture in which ; supposing, you see two
Japanese have a car and they break each other's to convince them that they are no way hurt, they
car, then they đon't say anything. They come
out of their car, one will bow to another, that too much of food. "No, but still it will be
another will bow to the other, and get into the registered in our name that we didn't offer them
car and get out.
sleep off.
They felt very hurt, you know. They
is a horrid thing we have done." And then,
I had
are happy that they are not eating, they have
food and they slept without taking any food." It
was impossible to convince them till the end,
they were all the time feeling apologetic.
Then if they have to claim something, they
will go to the courts, but there they don't
fight. Because what is the need ? When I as-
ked, a Japanese, "How do you manage ?"" So
they said, But what is the need to fight there
on the street. Because after all, if it is to be
paid, it's the insurance that is going to pay.
If the car is broken, alright they are going to
pay it, why to shout at him. ?" It's very sen-
sible and practical, I think. Why to waste your
breath for nothing at all ? You are not going to
get anything.
You see in Indian culture, we have some-
thing very great, as Japanese, as I told you,
that we are more on the apologetic style. Never
on the aggressive. They don't try to find faults
with others, but find faults in what way we have
failed, how we have failed. This is something
to be learned from Indians, if they have retain-
ed their culture at all. It is actually in their
blood.
So that is how, our culture is going to
be such that we will express complete peace
But I have known people who drive, and
they are abusing every person who comes across
ön their drive. Realy it's curse like the way some within ourselves. And you must know that
people drive. In the same way, they drive in their you are in one body, active. You are active
own lives. All the time cursing this,-that one
is like this, that one is doing like that, this one are never active. But those who are active have
is bad. Even in Sahaja Yoga. They think
they have a right to criticize each and every will happen to that poor body ? So try to make
person except for themselves.
cells in one body. All the cells of the body
to be at peace with each other, otherwise, what
peace.
So to keep peace with others, be on an
apologetic mood : "I hope I have not done this
The second thing you can do to make peace
is to talk les, Whenever there is a quarrel or
Nirmala Yoga
15
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-17.txt 
 anything, just keep quiet. You see, it will have long to other Sahaja Yogis, how you respect
better effect. If two persons are quarrelling, the things that are auspicious. So that is
never try to solve it, but just keep quiet. what one has to have within yourself. The
Quiet is very important. More to be silent. neatness, of piousness, of auspiciousness, of
But it should not be another extreme like holiness. That is to be done with very great
English culture, that they just donot talk,- care and understanding, and with that weight
whatever it is. They don't talk, but, they think
too much. You must keep quiet with the feel- weight of auspiciousness. You are auspiciou-
ing that "May God bless these people some
sense," It should not be ice frozen sea, but
peace which is effective. Peace that is effec-
tive.
of auspiciousness we should walk. With that
sness walking on this earth, yourself. You are
peace on this carth. But, the way peace is put
into this vessel has to be ncat, clean and has
to be placed in such a way that nothing spills
out.
So in this new culture, we have to be ex-
tremely peaceful people. And that peace should
be expressed on your faces. People should
understand that you are peaceful.
So to have peace, the best way to put your
mind right is to think of good things. Think of
the flowers, not of the thorns. What good
things others have done to you. What good
That is why I say, if you are neatly dress- things there are. What are the beautiful mo-
ed, if your hait are neatly put, people will feel ments you have had. And count your blessings.
alright, otherwise if you reach some persons Cout your blessings. Otherwise you cannot
with dishevelled hair, you know he gets distur- create peace.
bed as it is : ""God knows what has happened
to him ? From which quarrel this man is
coming ? Somebody must have pulled his hair, like that. Keep your attention at peace. Keep
or must have something gone wrong with him, the peace inside, with your attention inside.
that the way he is dishevelled." So if you are Actually, if you really allow all my words to go
neatly dressed, people are not put off so much, inside your brain, I am sure I'll achieve the
because they think that "No, no, this cannot
be, because this is after alI, he never had a
quarrel. He is just coming peacefully from his
house." In our culture, neatness in very impor- support anything that is boistrous or which is
You need not pay attention to anything
results. Just sucking......... But with the convex
mind, it is very difficult.
Another aspect of peace is 'never" try to
tant.
destructive. Anything that is destructive is
never to be supported. But anybody who is
Neatness of thought, neatness of mind, being
Heatness of body, neatness of behaviour. How being fortured or aggressed or dominated, is
you do things neatly is very important in our strength of peace, you can do it. Just try stand-
culture. That is 'very very' important, which ing there, You don't have to fight for your
may look very funny to some people. Because,
whether you hold the fork this way or that Hitler when he came, people had to fight for
way makes no difference, to me. It doesn't
matter how you hold your fork or knife on a
table. That is not so important. But it is defi-
nitely important how you hold the 'aarti,' how be Bliss. People should see bliss working in
you hold the pooja things, how you hold my
photographs, how you hold the things that be-
to be protected and supported. If you have the
peace. But if it comes to that, a person like
their peace.
Now, the second part of our culture has to
us. People should feel there is bliss. If a per-
son is blissful, he looks blissful. He emits
16
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-18.txt 
 bliss. He radiates it. He does not look a
miserable, unhappy creature, who is all the
time grudging, grumbling or worried about this... .Cross your hearts. Feel the bliss. Tre-
little petty things here and there. And nobody mendous bliss is within us.
has the right to disturb anybody's bliss. Some- happened to us, that God has been so kind.
body is in a blissful state, try to copy that (Will you please put your hands across.
person and become that. But people get Feel it. .. May God bless you.) So this
jealous of such people who are blissful, and try bliss you find everywhere, in a little thing also
to disturb them. That is why so many saints you find there is bliss.
were tortured, because they were so blissful
and happy people. We have to enjoy our bliss
within, that is important. Perhaps you are
not aware of the bliss that you have, Not at
all aware.
You cross your hearts, you will feel bliss-
ful. Cross your hearts. Feel the bliss like
How much it has
....
Zen taught people that they saw bliss in
seeing only a moss, little bit of moss. And you
see the nuoss and you say, "O God, what a be-
autiful piece it is!" God has created little moss,
and that moss has all that little little tentacles,
Never, never before they were, so many and that bliss. But those who are vain people
people who got realisation. Never before, in can never feel bliss. Vanity kills bliss. Ego kills
the history, that Adishakti Herself came on
this earth to solve your problems. Never be-
fore, that people of very ordinary effort, of
very little seeking, of very little understanding And, there it so happened that he got into ego.
have been given realisation like this. It's like,-
sometimes, if you see, like a stone becoming a
diamond suddenly. You get cut a diamond appeared on the scene; He himself is the con-
from a diamond. Such blissful state you are
in. Tremendous peace has come. It is so cffec-
tive. I myself don't know when I see them, I "Alright, I want you to do one thing for me".
am really surprised, how it is working.
bliss.
Once Shivaji was building a huge fort.
He felt-"See because of this work, sO many
people are employed." His Guru Rāmdäsa
troller of ego, because he was the incarnation
of Hanumāna.
So he came. And he said
He said, "Yes Sir, what do you want me to
do ? He said, "You break this boulder that is
Bliss can only come through gratitude, ying here, such a big boulder, bit by bit." It
Only through enlarging your heart with grati- side came a little stone which he took up just
tude. Bliss is the reward of gratitude. The ike a coconut in his hand and he broke it.
gratitude which is not just wordly or just And there was water and there was a frog
spoken lip-service, but is from the heart. Is
from the heart, gratitude of the heart. And
the blissful people are 'never' jealous of others.
Because what is greater than bliss ? Bliss has Water. Who am I to have this ego ?" So the
so many dimensions, that you go beyond the
realm of cause and effects. And all the angels,
all the ganas are there to help you. You know
that. It works out. This way it works out,
that way...But you take it for granted. You
don't have that effect of the bliss in you when
you know this has happened, that has happen-
ed. What a bliss !
started breaking when people hit it. And in-
inside. And herealised-Shivaji- that, "if God
has created this frog, He has also given him
bliss came into him, that God has provided me
with everything. It is just a red-carpet treat-
ment for me. What have I done ?-nothing.
It is so beautiful ! How many have got this
bliss ? Have sympathy for them. Have com-
passion for them-those who do not have.
But bliss comes to you through your con-
fidence. If you have no confidence in yourself,
Nirmala Yoga
17
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-19.txt 
 bliss cannot be. And the 'worst' thing against
confidence is: "Then what should 1 do ? Then So now you are authorised, actualised, com-
how can I get it ? Then why not I have ?"-Is pletely moulded, Sahaja Yogis. Like the sand-
the worst. You are fighting yourself alI the alwood ; sandalwood is not to be told by
time. You are that, sitting on that, and still if taking a vow "it is sandalwood." It is sandal-
you are saying that, "Why should not I have wood. Because every part of it has the frag-
it," so what to answer ? I mean you just want rance of sandalwood. Every part of you, every
to ask because you have to ask. It's there. bit of you must have the fragrance of a Sahaja
Why are you asking ? Just feel it. If that Yogi. So you are not only actualised, you are
works out, thai you feel where you are sitting, perfected. You are perfected.
titen you will be surprised that vou are at peace
with yourself. and there is bliss.
Now you can't grow tails even if you want.
So you must have the dignity of that
Last of all, in this culture, vou have to hes authority in you. And dignity is very humble
have like people who have authority. You have of dignitv is humility. I told you a story about
the authority of your Spirit. You are authoris-
ed. You have the Spirit. Those who are in
authority never try to show olf. Because they anybody going this way. So the saint said
are in authority, what is to show off ? Only Yes, you are the king, I know Sir. Your
mad people show off, you sec.
dignity.
Dignity is 'never' arrogant.
The sign
a person who had gone out and he went and
asked a blind man, a saint, if he had scen
servant was here first, and then your Minister
If somebody puts a label on the head I came, and now you have come." He was ama-
am Inspector General of Police," people will zed; because he was blind. How could a blind
say that take him to junatic asylum. In the person see these things ! He said, "I could
same way, some people say, "I
Yogi. What do you say ? I can do what I
like." Then where should wve put him ? Your
authority is yourself, your own being. People blind man, have you seen somebody going this
should see in you what you are. You don't way ?." When your minister came he asked,
have to carry lables with you that, "I am Sahaja "Have you seen someone going this way ?"
Yogi such and such, X Y Z number; criminal But when you came, you said "Sir, I am sorry
No. 5, criminal No. 10....
I am Sahaja
make out from the humility."
When your servant came, he said, "Eh
to ask you such a question, but did you hear
somebody was passing this way ?"
You are authorised. Authority shows on
your face. But now you are actualised on the
authority. You see, all the authorities are arti-
ficial. For example, somebody today is Prime will know that you have the authority from
Minister, may become a beggar on the street.
Could be. In democracy everything is possible. is trying to please you, and amuse you, and
Sane in any authoritarian governments. So make vou happy, in the nature and also in
today, you might be something at the height, the lectures!
you might just go down. But a Sahaja Yogi
will remain a Sahaja Yogi. You are authorised
and actualised. Means whatever is your aut- vou have understood the Culture of your Uni-
hority is part and parcel of your being. You versal Religion. Please try to adopt it.
are that. Like you are a human being, you
are a human being.
This is what it is. Humility is the sign.
How you talk to others, immediately people
God. See the humbleness of Divine. How it
So now we will have our pooja. I hope
May God Bless you.
Nirmala Yoga
18
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-20.txt 
 HER HOLINESS MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
"ESTABLISHING THE GURU
PRINCIPLE"
ADI GURU PUJA
Nightingale Lane, London,
Juiy 4, 1982
We all have assembled here to understand is not attended to is destroyed. So first of all
the ways and methods of establishing our
principle of a Master. Krita (a) Yuga means alert that if we do noi maintain our selves we wil
the time when you have to do something; Krita: be destroyed. Because maintenance is not for
when it is done. So you are the channels of maintenance sake. It is for stopping the dest-
that way, doing the work of God. You are the ruction of your Guru Principle. When we are
channels of God Almighty and His Power.
On one side you have to carry the dignity, destroying our Guru Principle. So the attention
the glory and the assumption that you are a
Guru, on the other side you have to be comple- of this Guru Principle.
tely surrendered to your God Almighty. All
your dignity, your authority, comes from Him. themselves and maintain others. In the beginning
And the third thing is that the way He has cre-
ated this universe and you in a mood of play, nce principle they put very very strong rules
you have to see His play. So a kind of mood and regulations. If you read Bible in the Levi
that is cheerfulness should be rcally bubbling chapter you will find all the shariats (rules) that
through you.
So far the idea of Guru was that such a Riyadh, or in the Arabie countries. To maintain
person never laughs, never smiles, always in a
temper. That was alright for Gurus who did strong language like : such a person who does
not have to have any contact with the public not do this should be killed to death, such a
but hang themselves with a string somewhere in person does anything wrong of this kind should
the Himalayas. But here we are facing the be killed by stoning. That was at the very begi-
entire universe which has to receive the bub- nning, so the people now at that stage of
bling streams of your love. But that does not evolution required that kind of a fear. This was
mean that you have to be frivolous, because
you cannot be. The divine play is not frivolous, to take away the freedom of human beings.
it is joyful. And the joy does not have that But it was meant for people to give a great.
duality.
So, to get to the establishment of your Guru within themselves. At that stage they used the
Principle first we should know how it is destro- frightening methods I should say, horribly
yed. As it is, anything that is not looked after dangerous type. And that time people obeyed
or maintained, that is destroyed. If you do not
pay attention, say, to these beautiful plants
here they will be destroyed, Even matter which where a stage started, people thought they must
we kave to know that we must he attentive and
negligent or lazy about it we are responsible for
that we have is to be given to the maintenance
The Gurus have the capacity to maintain
when the Gurus tried to establish this maintena-
are described which they are following now in
that principle within yourself it's written in sueh
not meant in any way to insult or to harm, or
idea of the importance of the principle of Guru
also.
Then another evolutionary state took place
19
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-21.txt 
 time to get destroyed. Any one of these ele-
ments if they are not lookedafter, get destroyed.
That is the built-in capacity of the elements or
of the matter as you can say. So to maintain
them is important.
become austere and start maintaining themsel-
ves by tremendous austerity, so it was self-pro-
jected, it was not projected towards the others,
but projected towards themselves.
We can say that the first wave started when
the Guru, the Primordial Guru, said that if you
don't do this then you will be killed. The second
stage was when the disciples accepted this maintained by itself. It is not. Agreed that the
within themselves and started telling themselves Spirit definitely enhances the beauty and the
that if we do not do it we will kill ourselves. health of this element. But at the human level
Austerity started on the basis of wisdom and there is always a greater force that is trying to
not on obstinacy. But then it became even fana- destroy it. So till we have completely become the
ticism. So it went to one extreme. It started Spirit there is chance of this destruction working
with the idea of maintenanee. But maintenance it out.
So people have an idea that once you become
a Guru you need not maintain anything, it is
itself became impossible or perhaps they thought
they are not being able to maintain, they got
confused and to them rules and regulations
became more important than maintenance itself.
Thus you find they destroyed themselves.
One will say *why is this balance needed ?"
and this is the important question we should be
able to answer all the people who ask us. With-
out the balance you cannot ascend. If you can-
not ascend what's the use of our becoming hu-
The wisdom or the essence of Guru Tattva is a man beings ? For example, everything is God
balance. Like when you maintain a plant, if you but nobody is aware. At the human level you
do not give it water it will die, if you give it too become aware, means everything exists, every-
much water it will die. So the wisdom lies in thing is there, but it is not aware. So there is a
understanding how much water should be given stone, that is also God, but it is not yet aware.
to the plant so that it comes up at it's Like say this area is completely dark and we
are blind. There is nothing to be seen, to be
felt or experienced when you are in that condi-
Now this wisdom has to be achieved through tion. Actually one thinks that darkness is the
your vibratory awareness. You are placed under truth, that ignorance is the truth, but when the
sun comes up and the light comes in and your
realized souls before your Guru Tattva is fully eyes open, you start seeing everything. You start
established. You have all the power that any Guru becoming aware. So at human level you are
best.
the most fortunate circumstances that you are
can aspire, without having established vour Guru
Tattva. Specially you are under the complete
blanket of the clouds of your Mother's love.
aware at the highest point.
Now this awareness has to become the awa-
reness of the Spirit. That has happened to you,
But in no way Mother's love is going to you have felt the Spirit. But the balance is not
allow you to destroy your Guru Principle. As I there as yet. Your Mother has pulled you out
told you that Guru Principle is a very sensitive and made you that but still there is imbalance
thing and is destroyed if you yourself do not inside. If you go slightly to the left you can be
try to maintain it. First of all the destruction destroyed, you go to the right you will be destro-
starts from the very source of our being. I mean yed. So you have to try both the things as I
to say that our being is created by five elements, have told you the methods which I will
and the five clements have a capacity all the explain,
Nirmala Yoga
20
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-22.txt 
 First of all vou have to be austere with if you comb your hair then you are no good. If
yourself, just separate yourself from yourself. you do not smell in the body then you are
Separate yourself as a Spirit, and look at your
ego and superego. Now you start watching the
ego and super-ego-do not maintain it, they are
the destroying forces. Now when you see the going to the other extreme.
play as a witness of these destroying forces you
will know how to also maintain yourself better.
To separate yourself is easier when you take to
austerity.
no good. If you don't look like a pig, you
are no good. All kinds of funny sort of ideas
have crawled into the mind because they are
But we have to learn from the Nature.
Nature dresses up itself when it has to greet the
spring, and when it is the winter, it just gets
completely undressed, I should say, because the
The worst thing that elements have done to leaves have to get to the Mother Earth and that
you is that you have formed habits. All kinds the sun has to reach the Mother Earth. It is not
of hangs up. Some people are fond of bathing, attached to anything. Surprisingly, it is much
some people are fond of not bathing. Some more elemental than we are, While we, who are
people are fond of getting up early in the mor-
ning singing songs and waking up everyone, some
are good at sleeping till 10 o'clock. Some like
spiritual, should have no attachment.
But this idea is also a mental idea, which is
very light coloured dresses, some very loud col- the worst attachment. It's a very funny attach-
oured dresses. If you are English then you want ment which makes me laugh, that is the biggest
to have English style everything, horrible insipid joke that I've seen, that people get attached to
mental ideas. It is like believing that whatever
little bit. If you are Italian, you want to have you think mentally will just happen to you. Say
carbohydrates too much. If you are Spanish for a mental person he has to go to a picnic, he
will mentally put in his mind that he is going to
Indians you want to have too much of spices. take this, that and that. He may even open a file
So to change this habit you have to give up first and write it down that I am going to take this,
this and this with me. And when he goes to the
food. If you are French, you want to hiave wine
you want to have too much of fats. It you are
of all the extremes that you like.
Now if you say that I like bland food, then picnic he finds that he is high and dry because
he has not taken anything with him, that it is
you should say I must cat lot of chillies. If you
say I like pale colours, than you wear very loud
ones. Go from one extreme to another extreme
all in the file.
Your Mother is good at speaking and She
to begin with. But I have seen people when they sneaks to you but it should not be your mental
go from one extreme they get stuck up on the attachment. Like, "Yes Mother says so" and
other side also. So we have to be in the centre- everybody discusses with such great enthusiasm
this is that, but it has not become part and par-
cel of your being. But is a very common attach-
ment nowadays with all the people knowing
about everything and having nothing. This men-
not to the extremes.
A man who is an Avadhuta, the one who is
a great Master, can never be hanged up by any
hangs up. He cannot be ruled by any ideas that
*"I like this." He sees beauty in the lush greenery
and he sees beauty in the trees which are
devoid of any leaves.
tal attachment is to be really attacked.
Becoming is seeing, becoming is experiencing.
Becoming is sceing, it is experiencing, Like if I
have to comc to this place I must come and 'see'
Now the trend of getting to austerity in a
very funny way, has started in the West. Like it. If I only have thoughts about it and mental
21
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-23.txt 
 So from the Nabhi chakra you come up to
ideas, mental pictures, it is no good, it is not
mine, it's not the truth. So when you become the Agnya chakra. Then above that comes the
aware actually what happens that you 'sce' it third problem of destruction,-is emotional.
yourselves, so let us see. Get out of that mental The emotional is a "very subtle one. Like some
conception that you know already about it. You people, Sahaja Yogis, will sit down with a guitar
do not know, because what you know is just and start singing as if they are all lovebirds,
mental. That should be a part and parcel ofyour
being.
you see. So the most delicate one is the
emotional. This emotional one is a collec-
tivity in a camouflage. For example when the
Sahaja Yogis meet they wilI hug themselves,
Now how to do it? Some will say that we'll
just go on being austere about it. Then that will kiss each other, they will be very very nice
become againanother obsession. Some will say,
alright Mother has said we should enjoy, so we
will just enjoy. How to strike the balance is the swing on the tune of love. This is actually
big problem. But should nat be with people who Vishuddhi at the collectivity point. And that
have vibratory awareness. In that also you can of course is very difficult to get rid of, because
be obsessed. I've seen people talking like they it gives you a very comfortable feeling. And
are all great Sahaja Yogis and they are getting people get confused with emotions, they think it
no vibrations and saying they are getting vibra-
tions. It is so deceptive.
to each other, and sit down and sing songs
like hippies. Take the guitar in the hand and
is joy. Joy only can be achieved through complete
detachment. The detachment which is egoless
and superegoless.
So one has to think that we have to go
further and see more and know about it. But
if you then ask the French how are you, they-
like this that means they are always in imba-
lance. You ask an Englishman he will say talking about Sahaja Yoga, and they start
"Don't know", or they say "I know"-there is thinking that they have become already Shri
nothing in-between. Now we have to understand Krishna. They have even a greater ego than the
that we are carrying the light in our hands. And person who is actually ignorant about Sahaja
the light should not shake, we have to hold the Yoga. They start talking with such tremendous
light tight. And we should have a concentrated ego that I myself am frightened of them. How
attention towards the maintenance of the light. much they know about Sahaja Yogn, I some-
And then to tell yourself that we have to see
not just to understand mentally,-is to be that it is frightening. All this can be also said
actually aware. Because you are complete that they feel that protocol is not alright and
otherwise-you are the part and parcel of the there should be proper protocol, so we are
whole-you are ! But only thing is that you looking after protocol, we are the guards of the
have not yet seen that. You have mentally protocol, and all these things.
accepted, but you have not "become' that.
Because mental projection comes from thought.
That means you are at the level of the thought. see the ego of others while those who are on the
You have to become thoughtless. But if you ego side see the emotions of others. So one
live on the basis of thought, then you are still criticizes another. But they don't see themselves,
below the Agnya chakra. So all the thought- that they are falling into a trap into ene of the
waves must be stopped to begin with and extremes. So unless and until rou are detached
should say that alright let us see' now.
But now the problem that human beings
start facing is the assumption that they are
Gurus. They start speaking about Sahaja Yoga,
times think. And they start asserting it so much
Now those who are on the emotional side
you cannot see it.
Nirmala Yoga
22
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-24.txt 
 I will not say that I committed a mistake medium of God's work. Sometimes I feel that
but it happened to be a mistake. For the first all the bhoots have come to me for realization
three years of Sahaja Yoga, I never talked of a and I am now going to become a bhoot my-
bhoot. I thought that I would beable to manage self! Bhoot also means Bhootnäth, 1s the
without that. But a lady came in Sahaja Yoga
who was possessed and who tried all kinds of
tantric tricks, so I had to tell them. Now every have to be the present and not the bhoot,
Sahaja Yogi is a bundle of bhoots. You ask
any Sahaja Yogi, "why did you do it ?" "Must
be a bhoot". If you say that how is it that
you have done such a thing. Then they will
say 1 do not know, it is the bhoot who has Just start becoming, evolving, blossoming. Try
done." They are never there, all the bhoots are
there.
name of Shri Shankara, Shri Shiva, because He
gets after the bhoots all the time. But you
bhoot means the past.
Then what is there to be known? You
become,-when you are in the present. You
fo be in the present. Do not escape the present,
face it. Don't feel guilty, nor blame the
bhoot, both things are going to take you away
from the present. Now just see the whole
nature, the whole divine power, your ardent
desire of ages, everything is on your side. The
time has come. What have
Now I don't understand how to deal, even as
a Guru, because if my diseiples are there I can
tell them hut if they are bhoots what am i to tell
them ? Ican talk to Sahaja Yogis but not to
bhoots, they won't tisten to me.
greatest escape which Sahaja Yogis lhave found then you just see the peripheri moving, you
now, which is the worst, which was never before. dan't mind.
So sometimes I feel it was a mistake I introduced
this word "bhoot." They excuse themselves by
just saying, "Mother, it is some negativity".
You are just 1here.
we to do? Just stand in the centre'. At the
Axis. Try to keep yourself at the Axis. And
So this is the
When you see yourself misbehaving in any
way, punish yaurself.
than the Divine punishes you, because that is a
severe punishment. But do not feel guilty:
because you have not done anything wrong, it is
the bhoot which has done ! Sa we conme to the
. It is better that you punish
If you are detached, if like stone, then you
cannot contain this negative water in itself in it.
You don't become more negativity, you become
more a guru, Now, when I say that you should point that we should realize that we are Gurus
not be negative, supposing under such circums-
tances you should not be a bhoot, you should
be yourself, then they start feeling guilty. So become good Gurus. For example, we have
all kinds of anti-Guru tricks are working out. I
am your Guru, and it is anti your Guru, to play your nature. Sometimes people who are very
these tricks upon yourself.
and we cannot be bhoots.
We have to change our outside also to
to learn good manners. These manners become
fond of food, I always tell them they should
fast. Whatever you are fond of, try to give
Now you will play these tricks with me
what's the use? You have to gain something ments, your habits. Once your Guru Tattva
and you are playing tricks against me. You is established, you will be accepted as a Guru.
have to be more aware, You are not to be There will not be any need for you to say that
destroyed. Apart from that you have to save
others. How will you do it in case if you do
not accept that it is your privilege, that it is that we are Gurus, people will know that this
your fortune, that you have been chasen to be the is a Guru walking, you can see the divinity
up. Try to overcome your sicknesses of attach-
you are a Guru, people will know that you are.
We don't have to then write on our foreheads
23
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-25.txt 
 walking, you can see the dignity walking, the
glory coming up.
Guru to me. And She is such a soothing per-
sonality. All this green though is given to her
by Sun, as they say, is just to soothe us all.
You have to change from within and the She wears the green upon herself. And the
light of that within enlightenment will be green is the Guru principle. She is the detached
shown outside. But it should not be a mental personality. She is the magnetism, She atiracts.
idea or an emotional idea but should be the When people are walking on Her, She is look-
happening, the becoming, the awareness. You ing after them. She creates out of Her Svayam-
have to experience through your own experi- bhoos (aiy), the selfmanifested stones, Her
mentation upon yourself. Even I do that. attraction and concern is so great that with-
When I cannot reach you from one end be- out Her we would be hanging in the air. And
cause you are a bhoot, I reach you from the She keeps me to the brass tacks, as they say,
other. If somebody says he is a bhoot, then I
see that he suffers a little, and faces it, the Spirit and not bother about anybody else. The
bhoot in him. For example, somebody-I tell
someone that please do this and he forgets looks after us and nourishes u5 despite our so
completely about it, and he says that it is a
bhoot that has done. So then he loses his
purse and then I say the bhoot must have explodes as an earthquake, and sometimes hot
taken away the purse.
to the reality.
If I wanted I could be just the
way She bears our sins, the way She always
many defects, in the same way a Guru should
do. She is "extremely forgiving. But She
calcium and hot potassium can come out of
Her. She produces sulfur for your cure. If
But I experiment with myself. I first see England's soil becomes vibrated, then this soil
how I should approach you. If it does not
work out I try something eclse, within myself. clay for medicine, for every kind of treatment.
Because it's a very tricky time we are with. If The understanding about Guru Tattva one can
had
can be used for medicine.
In India people use
gone according to the shariat (rules) have from the Mother Earth.
you
or the chapter of Levi, all the bhoots would
not be here ! Maybe no Sahaja Yogis might
have been left also!
So let us touch
the Mother Earth and bow to Her.
May God Bless you.
Jou.
In the Kundalini shästra, Mother Earth is
And this mental projection is such a com- the Kundalini. Moolādhära is the Mother
mon thing that it is difficult to detach people, Earth. So for us, Kundalini is the most impor-
but only way I can play tricks with you iš by tant thing. We don't have to worry about
experimenting myself on you. In the same way what they have talked about in the Levi, that
you must play with yourself and try to put you must not steal, you must not tell lies.
yourself in an experimental box.
What we have to worry is to keep your Kunda-
lini up.
Today is the day of Guru Puja, the day
when you have to worship your Guru. You
are really fortunate to have a Guru which is a 'absolutely practical". He must have common
Mother. And my Mother and Guru is this sense and 'absolutely practical", he cannot be an
Mother Earth which teaches me how to deal impractical person. A person who's impractical
with human beings. And She is the one who is not a Guru. But practical in the common
also at every stage of difficulties helps me to
correct my own methods of Nirmală Vidyä. who knows how to deviate from right path and
She has been such a kind Mother and a kind all that. That is the most impractical thing to
So the Guri has to be a
person who is
way is understood as a man who is cunning,
24
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-26.txt 
 So in a way, Divine Power is like the
blue is not the way a Guru has to move. There meaning of the Guru, Like the word has the
is all common sense which should guide a meaning, and the word serves the meaning. But
in a Guru Principle, the Divine serves the Guru,
sense is a thing which is not cunningness by any Everything is at your disposal. When you are
chance. The source of common sense is the a Guru all your chakras are at your disposal.
All the universe is at your disposal. Because
you are the Guru! Its like the director of the
do ! Something absurd, something out of the
Guru how to deal with a person. And common
Spirit.
The expression of a Guru is very very para- show, The stage man, the gentleman who is
doxical. For example, a Guru will be extre- in charge of the lights, the gentleman who is
mely practical, supposing he has to build his
own house, a house or an ashram, or anything, to serve the director, because he is training the
he will be extremely practical. He will be very
economical, he will create something out of the
blue, people will be amazed how he has done unchallenged, it should be of such a capacity
it, so practical. But he will be so detached
that if this ashram is to be donated to some- such a capable personality that nobody should
body, in one second he will donate it. For be able to challenge the Guru, then only it
acquiring, say for example, for acquiring a will work out. So you have to work it out in
lamp, the Guru will be very practical, he will such a way that you are absolutely unchallenga-
get the best and the chcapest and the most
beautiful. And he will be very intense about
it. But when it will come to giving he will be hody could do before, you are your own Guru.
in charge of the loud speaker, 'everybody' has
actors.
But the Guru Principle has to be so much
that nobody can challenge that, it should be
ble. And you are specially fortunate that you
can see yourself and correct jourself, which no-
even more intense about it. That when he will
give he will give with the same intensity. He
will find out all practical methods how to
donate, also to give away. So his acquiring is
actually giving. He acquires to give. That's
how he is the most practical.
This situation 'never' happened. You are your
own Guru. And let me be Mother. That
would be the best for me
your
So today is the day when one has to deter-
mine how far you are a Guru-first point. You
have to take a pledge that you will establish
You know that we cannot take anything your Guru Principle.-second point. Thirdly,
with us. Only the Guru can take with him
something. Nobody else can take it. Only Guru Principles in others. Fourthly, you have
the Guru has all the disciples and disciples and
disciples and disciples 'for ages who will sing Guru is a Mother. She is too kind to be a
the praise. No other relationship is that eternal.
It goes on reflecting for ages and ages and ages.
It's one wave that falls and disappears, in any- strictness towards yourself and look after
thing that you do every wave disappears, but yourself.
not the wave of knowledge from a Guru.
It's even higher than the Divine principle; be-
cause it explains. The Divine principle cannot
explain, it is the Guru who explains it. Not
that it manifests but it explains and it works And one of the problems is that on every Guru
out, so he is the master of the Divine Power.
you have to pledge that you will establish
to know that there is a little snag, that your
Guru. Too mild to be a Guru. And extremely
tolerant. So it is better that you take up this
May God bless you. Become your own
Guru.
On every Guru day, I have a problem
Puja day I think I should become a complete
25
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-27.txt 
 Guru and at least on one day I should not be they are, you see, it gave in and I got comp-
a Mother.
tricks it works against me. Last year in India please give me the sari to wear!
I told them that this time I am going to be
just Guru and you have to only give me a
shawl, and I will not take any sari and nothing that Mother somebody has bought a sari ar
like a Mother. And I was very stern with this is that and that is that, he gave lot of argu-
them and I said that at any cost I am not
going to take a sari, whatever you may do. to, you see, put me down in my place! But then
And they were very unhappy because thcy had they used the greatest argument to out-wit nie,
bought a sari for me and they said, "We have -first they said the sari is beautiful, this, that
also stitched a blouse and petticoat and Mother it was alright; then they said the vibrations are
you must accept, you are our Mother also". too good, even before opening the sari, the
So I said, "I am going to be very hard like a
Guru and nothing-doing today, nothing is
going to convince me".
But every time I try these letely drenched. And I came out and I said
Today I had decided to be a 'real Guru
and a very hard onel Then Warren came to say
ments. And Rustom and Warren were trying
vibratious were there. So all my efforts fizzled
out.
This is the play of the sweetness of Divine.
Because again you become the Mother, What is called as Mādhurya. Madhurya' means
then the whole thing becomes again that soft
business. So I went to open a tap,-because
in India we don't believe in wash basins you And that is what I have accepted, so first we
see,-to wash my hands. And Indian taps as
the sweetness. The sweetness. And this is the
one that is such a hide and seek of joy in life.
will have the Mother's Poojā.
Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Shri Mahalakshmi Pooja
Sth Sept. 1983
Munich
In the awareness it acts on the matter like
aesthetics; people worry more about aesthetics
than about possessions. And when they start
growing higher and higher in their awareness
Today is a great day of Mahalakshmi
Pooja. Mahalakshmi is an incarnation of the
Lakshmi, the power of Vishnu. She only incar-
nated.
This Mahalakshmi principle is born out of of seeking then they find that the attention
the Lakshmi, who is the power of Sri Vishnu. should be such, that they should pay more im-
When in a human being thedesire to rise higher portance to the aesthetics of things than to the
comes in, the Lakshmi principle becomes the
Mahalakshmi principle. Like in the West we
can say, people have affluence of Lakshmi, so incarnates as Mahalakshmi.
they wanted to rise above that principle and
become Mahalakshmi.
gross values. Now when this desire becomes
evident in human beings, then only Lakshmi
So She incarnated as Mahalakshmi when
Rāma came on this earth, first time. And also
Nirmala Yoga
26
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-28.txt 
 She incarnated as Radhā when Sri Krishna Christ had to erucify Himself so that people
came on this earth. And when She came as could be resurrected. And sometimes Indians
Mary, it was Mahalakshmi who bore the child asked me what did She do to be a Mahnla-
that is Lord Jesus Christ. So the child She kshmi, what did She achieve ? I said, "with all
bore was the great personality of Mahavishnu. Her powers to bear it. To play the drama it
This Mahavishnu-tattwa is also represented, or
We can say has an aspect, of others, which in-
carnated on this earth as two children of Sita.
They incarnated as Mahavira and Buddha, as
Hassan and Hussein.
imust be too much."
So She is the redeemer and She connects you
to God. In the sense She is the bridge. And
the Kundalini rises over the bridge. And
Kundalini is the Mahakali. Now we have a
15
Also at the time of the prophets Mahala- temple in India which you have visited of
kshmi incarnates as a pure relationship with Mahalakshmi in Kolhapur; and there when
them. Like Rājā Janaka's daughter was Jänaki, they sing, when they worship Mahalakshmi at
means Sita : then She came on this earth as the
daughter of Mohammed Sahib : and then She .
came on this carth as Nänaki, the sister of
Nānaku: So She resides as a pure relationship three
of these gurus.
that time they say "udho, udho, Ambe". That
time they say "0 Ambe, the Kundalini, rise".
But Kundalini is the potential of all the
powers: Mahakali, Mahalakshmi,
Mahāsaraswati, because it is the primordial
Thus the Mahalakshmi's greatness is that, desire. Because She is the Holy Ghost, you
through Her power only the Sushuma is cover-
ed by Kundalini. She is tihe power of our evol-
tition. And by Her power only we have risen to Mahakali, Mahalakshmi, Mahasaraswati.
be iuman beings and by Her son's power we are
going to become higher people. Thus the inmpor- Mahalukeshmi has helped us so much, Her bles-
tance of Mahalakshmi is very great for all the sings are much. She looks after all our well-
Sahaja Yogis. Because She guides our Vishnu- being, She is the one who looks after all our
tattwa to its culmination, to its completion. problems of redemption, She is the one who
Which is the principle of our evolution. Thus gives us all the possible help in our chakras
She is a giver of Dharma, She gives us the and correction of them. And She is the one
Dharma and She is the giver of the truth. She who gives us all that is material or physical well-
is the one who relates us to our brain-the being so we have to be very very thankful to Her
whole brain is Mahalakshmi's system. So it is today. You have to be grateful.
She who exposes the whole of the knowledge
as truth to us, on our central nervous system. I would like to congratulate him for making
But at the state of Virata, when Vishnu be-
comes, the Virāta, the great primordial being. tremendous programme.
then She is called as Virātangana, as his
see, so She contains all these three powers in it.
Like Adi Shakti has all the three powers of
So now today is a great day for us because
And also today is Gregoire's birthday. So
me come to Munich because we had such a
May God bless you all.
Before we start the Pooja
power.
must say that
So these are the incarnations of Mahala- Hugo has been very very helpful, very active.
kshmi about which I have told. There's so
much can be said about this Mahalakshmi- wife.
tattwa ; you are all blessed much by that.
And so today we remember Her great in- appreciation of their hard work I would like to
carnation as Maria, who was very great brcause give them a dinnerset with a platinum line on it,
She had to bear terrible pain in Her heart with because platinum is the colour of the Maha-
all Her powers that She had. She was a tremen- lakshmi..... Because Mahalakhmi is also
dously powerful Lady. But despite that, She Annapurna. She supplies food to people, You
bore all the tortures of Christ upon Her heart. can say Mahalakshmi is the grandest Graha
And it was Her order and Her desire that Laxmi. So may God bless you all,
He came all the way from Australia with his
And I must say because of him I came
here. As a token of my love and my complete
Nirmala Yoga
27
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-29.txt 
 On the meaning of Islam
In one of the suras of the Holy Quran it is
written-"the only religion with Allah (or which
he has) is Isläm-and there is no other religion
to be accepted", What does this mean ?
desire, the 'S/huddha iccha-, (E T) of the
Universe.
With great Grace his Shakti, the all beloved
in the universe, has descended amongst us-to
Allah is one of the names of the Virata, bring us Grace and the knowledge of the
and it means that for Him Islām is necessary. Absolute-and share with us that Divine Glory.
What is "Isläm ?"-it is surrender, and from Words cannot express or the mind comprehend
the same root comes the ord Salam or peace. that this great force that is the absolute in the
The Almighty, the Absolute, has chosen to Universe, the embodinent and personification
manifest itself in the Universe through the of the "Shuddha Icchā of the Universe should
chakra of the Virāta and to control it from have chosen-to take such a small body and
there-and the Lord Krishna in his life has mingle freely amongst men.
With Her power
expressed the illusoriness of any other belief or and the power of Her body and being, She
has opened out our chakras slowly one by one
so that our awareness begins to become aware
For the absolute is Lord or Master of al of and comprehend a fraction of the Majesty
that is and exists, and there is no Good save and Glory of the Absolute. Really one cannot
that which is desired by it. And we can only think or ask anything more, for it is all given
form of expression.
know what is desired by it if we are surrender-
ed to it, if we can with a Small voice, like the
child Samuel say, Speak Lord, your servant
to us-And one must pray one's brothers and
sisters not to waste their time in trivial pur-
suits-but to place heart and soul and mind
is listening." That is pure, true innocence, for and being, in totality at the feet of the Divine
that is the innocence of the child that knows
the Absolute.
only its parents' command. It knows no
"Dharma" or ritual, or Good or bad, only its
parents' desire.
For myself I cannot love and adore enough
or worship or seek to serve the Glory of ny
eternal Father, or turn with gratitude to Her
who with insuperable Grace, Compassion and
So the Lord has revealed that the only re-
ligion acceptable to Him is total and pure Condescension entered this world of Mankind
surrender-AIl else is an illusion to pamper
our egos, and blind us to the reality of Him
who is Absolute, the one and only one,-the
to alter, change and raise me and all like me
to the point and state where one may know Her
eternal love-and Lord which are one and
one beyond all rationality or knowledge or the same, for the one expresses the other etern-
understanding, the one who is the Commander, ally, The brain cannot comprehend it, and the
the Lord, and Master Absolute of the Universe. body is too small to express it fully. So one
In all else we take pride, only in surrender do
we love and adore Him who made us and is
can only bow in silence and adore with all the
fullness of the heart-and I pray you may do
our ruler, and our Lord and of Universe, there
is nothing else. So stop taking false pride in
all the "Good" or "right" things one does,
and love and adore and worship and seek with
all the heart to serve Him and fulfil His pure
so also.
ॐ नमः इति।
Anen
-Dr. Rustom.
28
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-30.txt 
 MATAJI SHRI NIRMALA DEVI
Advice given at C.G. Jung
Society's Hall
American Tour
16th Sept. 1983
At the very outset I have to confess that I say, and I found it difficult to explain to him.
have no academic interest in philesophy and I Because first of all there are certain presump-
don't know anything academically. Neither tions in our mind, and certain conditionings,
have I known much of Jung till he died, and for which we really must thank Freud also, be-
cause he is the one who could see that we have
conditionings. That's one point about it. But
he also could not go too far with him, because
he could onlv see one side of the human being
Now you are all great scholars and great which he has described here, the left side.
there was a report about him in one of the
Indian journals and I felt, that there was a
great soul who has gone away.
intellectuals, while I'm a simple housewife.
And all that is simple is reality. Reality is not
Now if you see the left side, is there as
complicated. One must know it's the most shown, is the power of your desire. And the
simple thing, is reality. And the more simple power of desire, naturally, he felt comes from
we become, the easier it is for us to grasp the sex because the last chakra as you see, this red
one, is the chakra called Moolādhāra chakra,
The centre of Mooladhara, is the one that
Now to understand Jung's problem, I have looks after the excretion of the body. It deals
reality.
no way out because I
was not a student of
with the pelvic plexus.
psychology, but I got hold of sonie dictionary
to know what he was meaning by saying
Unconscious and collective unconscious and all should listen to it with an open mind, that's
these words. Then later on, in London, I met
a Jungian, an Indian boy-studied in Oxford secondly, that it is a hypothesis which I'm put-
and all that, he became a psychiatrist, also he ting before you, as far as you are concerned.
did his M.B.B.S., and then he became a psyc-
hiatrist; very clever, intelligent person-and
found that because he had an Indian back-
ground, he could integrate properly, and he whatever Jung has said, can be proved, then
related to me all the beautifu! things about you have to accept him as a person who knew
Jung. Of course he also brought Doctor...
to meet me, who got somehow cured of his ivity
trouble, I think. And Doctor. ..., gave me a
book as a present. It was so complicated that
I gave up. But he was a very nice man I should the one force that acts in us is the power of
Now, whatever I'm telling you today, you
one request I have to make; as a scientist. And
You need not take it for granted at all but
I keep your mind open. And thirdly that
when you find that it has been proved now,
. quite a lot about Self and about the collec-
Now you can see here, very clearly, that
29
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-31.txt 
 desire, left side. The right sidc one is the one I would say Freud, though he was not so clear
that acts, the power of action. Now the right cut, his Libido. And beyond that is the sub-
side you see is the yellow coloured one, is the conscious and the collective subconscious. So
one that is the power of action. So now you the subconscious is not Unconscious. Subcon-
may ask, what is Kundalini ? Kundalini is the sious is unconscious because of the language
Now what is lacked in Freud's problem. It's a language problem, unconscious
writing,-anything about purity, What is 'pure is such a big word: "Because it is not conscious
on our central nervous system". But that's
not pure, because it doesn't give you full satis- not what we are bothered about, subconscious
faction. For example even economics has des- is on one side, we can leave it on one side.
cribed that "wants in general are not satiable." Alright. Now on the other side if you se,
what we call as the power of action, is the
house,' then you have a house ; then you want futuristic thing. So on this side lies the future.
to have a car, then you want to have a helicop- We have first the supra-conscious area and
ter. God knows how it moves. So any desire then the collective supra-conscious, See the
we have at human awareness is not pure desire. difference is that if you say these things are
one top of another, we make a very big' mis-
the sense of purity, if it is missing we cannot take. That mcans that if we have to rise to
our unconscious,.. of course rising is also not
there, for them it's to go down, the rising is
not described. But what I have seen a picture
of it, is that the unconscious is below-the
unconscious which will never become conscious
-then the unconscious, and then the subcon-
scious and then the ego. It's rather confusing
pure desire.
desire? Desire like, "we want to have a house' is
In particular we think that, 'alright, I'll have a
But this Kundalini is the pure desire. So
talk of Kundalini.
Now this desire is put there as you see at
the triangular bone and this is there at three
and half coils. Coils in Sanskrit is called Kun-
dala, that is why it is called Kundalini. Now
this pure desire is kept in the bone called
Sacrum. Now it is very signaificant. Sacrum
in Greek language means sacred. That means
Greek people also knew about this, that there
is something sacred here. So that part of and one is the supraconscious and the colle-
sacredness and auspiciousness is also missing.
Now you see that here, that one is the
subconscious and the collective subconscious,
ctive supraconscious. Now the top thing,
Now you clearly see here, there are three there where you see these petals and all these
compartments are seen,-one on the left, one things, is a lotus,-is the superconsciousness.
on the right and one in the centre. So it is That is the evolutionary ascent we have to
not placed one on top of another,-this is an-
other mistake, It is vertical. This is one big consciousness," which is really the collective
mistake. That these are vertical, so, for your consciousness. Now this has two aspects.
ascent you have got a clear cut passage, this is
one point. Second point is, that when you say
unconscious, means whatever is not conscious, Kundalini-because at the time of Pätänjali it
whatever is not felt on your central nervous
system is unconscious,-alright. But it's a
very... everything mixed up together. But
what is the purity about it ?
achieve, is to "become conscious of the super-
To say that Pātänjali did not say about
was kept a secret, but he did write about,
"after the ascent, what happens" very clearly.
So the representation of the motherhood
is here. This Kundalini is the Mother, which
he could see. And the Father, Father is the
If you say take the left side. According to
Sahaja Yoga the left side represents the desire. one who rests on top of your head. So that is
Nirmala Yoga
30
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-32.txt 
 If you go toomuch to this right side, you fall
with the Wholc. So that means you are aware into the supra-conscious and to the collective
of yourself as I,-beconies the Whole. This supra-conscious. That's why the balance has
has to happen. What is called as the second- to be built in. Any vehicle which has to ascend
like say an aeroplane, if it is not in balance it
cannot ascend. To ascend one has to maintain
superconsciousness. You have to become one
birth'.
Now you might say that, why Moses didn't the balance, and that's why the religion which
talk about it ? Or Abraham didn't talk is nothing but "consciousness regulated by sup-
about it ? Because their job was-you see they erconsciousness." Because these people came,
are all connected with each other, only we are
fighting, they are not, they are all together. Primordial Master.
But the trouble is when people do not have
cyes to see, one might say the elephant is just a
tail or somebody might say it is just the leg, very dangerous. Anybody says I'm the incar-
but they are all one together. But this inter- nation of Primordial Master, immediately either
gration only takes place after you have got they will poison you, or they'll hang you by
realisation, to understand that they say the the nearest tree.
same thing, they have done the same thing.
according to us, they were inearnations of the
They didn't say so.
Because to say this is
You see that's what has been, I mean no-
In a living process of a seed you can see, body wants to listen to anyone who says some-
first the seed becomes the trunk, it has to be-
come the trunk. That doesn't mean trunk is that throughout. Of course you can not crucify
less important than the flower. So this is the
trunk we can call it, here. All these great
prophets like Moses and Abraham and all those
people who were born to establish the suste-
nance within us. It started from, also in India, religion, means our valencies, means otur suste-
we had people Janaka, Nānaka and the end
was the Shirdi Sãi Nath. There were ten main bevond this, that side or this side, then we become
incarnations of these people who came in this
part (VOID) and they reside within us to give
us the religion.
thing sensible or truthful. We have been doing
me this time but there are lots of problems I
face because I tell the truth.
And the truth is that all of them who were
born at this stage within us are looktng ofter our
nance by which we are human beings. If we go
either subnormal or abnormal.
Now the subnormal people are the ones
who go to the left side. Now I would like to
Now the religion we talk of is outside re- say that another mistake was committed because
ligion, is myth, is mythical. But inside religion of the idea of this Unconscious. That way the
findings of the Indian seers-because in India
there is nothing like a religion, it's just a
beings have ten valencies, and that's how we seeking, A true seeking of a person. Is neither
a Hindu, Muslim, Christian, those who are
ten commandments relate to our ten valencies seers, you see they say "there is no caste for a
within us, and that's how it works, that you seer". A person who is a seer, has no caste,
he has no religion, he's nothing. Because he's
much to this side, then you go to the left side, a human being he doesn't belong to any condi-
then you fall a prey to subconscious, to collec- tioning of the kind, but to the truth itself. So,
they found out through 'meditative method.
is like a valeney. As we have a valency for
carbon, four valencies, in the same way human
have got the ten commandments. And these
maintain the balance. Because if you go too
tive subconscious.
31
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-33.txt 
 Not through reading, through mental projec- ting very fast, but then it comes to normal by
tions or through imaginations or anything, but the action of the para-sympathetic.
through meditative method. First they had
to become realised souls. Like in Pätānjali
So we have two types of left and right
clearly but it is said. sympathetic nervous systems. Both can be
activated by our own emergency created by us.
it's not written
"first you have to have Ishvar Pranidhän
( 7) means you must get your reali- Now see the left and right according to the
sation, first, the God must be established within doctors is all just the same, for them it's quite
you". Before that anything else you do is just a blind ally.-So para-sympathetic, they don't
artificial. For example now, this thing they
have put it here for me to speak. Supposing
it was not connected to the mains, it would not
work. It is a very simple thing again. I have stand is that the left and right are just the
said. Any machinery, this one, if it is not put same, but it is not so. Left looks after the
to the mains it doesn't work. In the same way
human beings, who are not connected to the
mains, if they start working out they cither go
to left or to the right.
want to talk, they're honest people because
they don't want to talk about para-sympathe-
g
tic.-But sympathetic also what they under-
emotional or the desires as you say, the emo-
tional side, the conditioning side and also the
subconscious. Because it creates the subcons-
cious within us. The present subconscious is
created by this (Ida) nadi or the channel.
Now also we see very clearly, medically we
can see this, what happens. That we have an for the action, it creates the supra-conscious
autonomous nervous system within us. If youask side. Means a person is say a very very
the doctors who's this "auto', they don't futuristic person. I mean Americans are very
know they just say 'auto' because it works by futuristic and very speedy people, so what
itself. Who's the 'auto' they cannot say. But in the happens ? They start moving to the right, too
Now the right side one, as I told you, is
You see brand-
autonomous nervous system.
ing is the way people just shut you out, you everything is for the future. I mean you are
don't know what to say that you are autono sitting here and may be we are thinking of
much of action, very speedy, very fast. You sce
mous nervous system. Now if you ask them
who is tauto ?-Because I did medicine and I
was surprised the way they were going about
with all the blindness; doesn't matter.
tomorrow, "what I am going to cook;" sort of
thing. So this is what happens to us when we
start thinking about the future. And then we
create a realm as the present supra-conscious
within us. But beyond that lies the realm
called as the collective supra-conscious.
This autonomous nervous system has got
two groups of nervous
sympathetic another is para-sympathetic.
Now
systems, one is
So as I told you there is "collective supra-
system, conscious' and 'collective subconscious' and a
though they call it autonomous, but it is under "collective super-consciousness'. Then we have
our control. Because in sympathetic nervous another 'collective hell', we can call it. So we
system, in any emergency it comes into play. have four types of collective consciousness,
Like supposing I'm frightened, then I start But it is not conscious in our central nervous
- system, that's why we call it unconscious.-It
pathetic goes into action and when sympathetic is a general name given in English language
goes into action, the para-sympathetic brings 'unconscious'-which is general name. But
it back to the normal. Means, supposing you actually we have four types of unconscious and
the
sympathetic
nervous
running; then when I start running the sym
are running very fast, your heart starts pulsa
all of them are collective.
-
32
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-34.txt 
 Now what happens to the collective sub- photographs taken by them. But we can not
conscious? Collective subconscious is the area say definitely in this person it will pulsate like
where all, that is dead since our creation, resīdes. that. With a stethoscope you can feel the
All that is dead resides in that area.
pulsation rising, and when you bring it to the
top of your head you can feel the pulsation
rising here. And when it stops you'll feel the
Some doctorS cool breeze coming out of your head. Actually
Recently I sawa very interesting documen-
tary on cancer cure or cancer. Some doctors cool breeze coming out of your head, Actually
had given a very good report, saying that, "if cool breeze. This is actualisation.
the body is vulnerable for cancer",-accord-
ing to Sahaja Yoga when you have too much in
a sympathetic activity, then you are vulnerable Kundalini is the one who is the Mother
for cancer,-"then an attack comes to you from principle within us, reflected as the Primordial
the arca which is built since our creation." Mother. It was so great and 'courageous' of
They are very near us. And they call that, as the Jung to talk about this, when Freud was so
name is given to it as protein fifty eight (58), much accepted by everyone. Even now in
you can call it the street number 58 as well, I London there are only twelve Jungians, you'll
mean you can call it anything. So they call it
protein fifty eight (58) and protein fifty two here. So he is the one who very courageously
(52), that's what I gathered
like that. But now what are these things force within us, which is a fact. And which
that trigger ? They are the ones who trigger the can be proved. If you see historically now at
cancer. This is one point we have to find out,
what happens if you go to the collective sub-
conscious.
Now what happens actually is that this.
be surprised, I'm so happy to sce so many of you
put forward this idea that there is the Mother's
they call it
the time of Moses and Abraham. You see,
"Moses crossing the bridge,' you see, this is
significant here. This is the Void. We call it
the Void, but Zen for them Void is different.
So we cross this, In the same way Moses
Because of this complete jumble of four
collective consciousness you can say, because of crossed, through the bridging he did it. And
not understanding that these are four areas this bridging takes place when the Kundalinirises
kept like this, separately that way, this way (left from that triangular bone, and crosses over,
and right), and downward and upward, absolu- then the first bridging takes place.
tely nicely comparimented, the problem came,
that they thought that we have to go into these
areas first to understand about the depth of our why did they think like that ? Why is it they
being. Now as you see, there is a clear cut did not have the right idea about it ? Why
path in the centre, here. according to Sahaja
Yoga, there is...
Now one may ask the question then, then
these mistakes were created, if they were realised
souls 7 No doubt they were realised souls. But
here the problem was, in this country, all these
And another thing is,-Sahaja Yoga does it, Western countries, is that it's a very individual
it works out, it's an actualisation, it is not just effort of a person, and traditionally it was not
talking or theories. Actually you can see the known so much about it. Though Christ has
Kundalini pulsating in the triangular bone, nof
in everyone but on the pcople who have some
problems on the Nabhi chakra, Nabhi centre or But then again we started an artificial type of a
Svadhishthan centre if there is an obstruction, baptism, that you put some hand on some-
then the Kundalini really pulsates. And you can body's head, anybody putting hand and saying
see with your naked eyes. We have some of the
openly said "That you have to be "born again'
and that a transformation must take place
now you are baptised. But there are people
Nirmala Yoga
33
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-35.txt 
 Blake who said "A priest cursed on my supra-conscious ideas from them. Lämās are
head", he said so. So the thing is that because known for their supra-conscious ideas, they
it is not a knowledge of the ancient times in the
Western area, people took an individual probe born, and where such and such person,-all the
into the thing. Naturally whatever they found futuristic. And he had a training with them
out was not supported, something was suppor- and they went down there, some of the people
ted by their cxperiences whatever he had from went and told him how to use the supra-con-
the dreams and all that, so he established it.
like
can tell you where the Lämå is going to be
scious spirits to impress, or to possess the
Germans and he managed that very well.
But another problem is a person who Because of that they lost their consciousness,
suddenly, through spontaneity only, through they didn't know what they were doing. In
Kundälini awakening only, jumps on the stage, possession one doesn't know what he's doing.
then he starts seeking about stage, about the
frame work, how it is made, how, it is done. work that even animals can not do, worse than
But because it is an individual approach it is animals. Without any sense of shame, without
very linear, it is not going from one point to any sense of decency, without any sense of love
many points but is linear. For example, he
would go onto this point to find out, then onto uplike that and surprisingly they also called it as
that point to find out, and then onto that point. a Father-land. Father-land, the right sided, the
But supposing somebody who knows about the right sided manifestation you can say, the
framework and also about the stage can tell manifestation of the action. So that's how we
you about 'everything' and that is what is grew up with our action, developing our ego.
needed today. Historically it was, I would say, First we had just the part which was the pitui-
the Dharma, the religion was established, tary within us at an animal stage, but then
historically, for our consciousness. Everybody' pituitary was pushed out, our ego came up. As
has contributed.
And that's how these possessed people did such
or compassion. So the whole development came
the action took place on the right hand side
we developed this yellow stuff you see, it's like
Then it came further onto this point (heart) a bile colour and all these people had bile
where another centre is very important.-These trouble and liver trouble. Those who are over
are all the mile-stones of our evolution,-mile active are aggressive people and they tend to
-stones. At this point the advent of the aggress others.
Motherhood came just to protect, for pro-
tection, Because that time ascent was not so
Nowthe problem was that India was domina-
ted for three hundred years by English people.
And She came as the Mother of the seekers to And the seers and all were ridiculed and
protect them from evil forces. Now the evil laughed at, nobody even bothered to look at
forces were from the left and from the right. them. So they disappeared into their caves and
disappeared into places where they could not
The left side people also are sly, those who be located. It was such an aggression of ego
invade, those who torture are what you call on them. And later on they made our people
the masochist sort of people and the right side to learn more about science and learn more
as the sadist people. Then, when they die also, about 'their culture" and their achievements,
they do not leave their habits and they then they impressed so much on the Indian people
possess people and try to torture. For example that we took to your styles. All these seers
much needed, but the protection of the seekers.
Hitler used Lämās for this, and he got the got lost.
Nirmala Yoga
34
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-36.txt 
 So fourteen thousand years back you'll be only from you. Now even if some people
surprised, there was a great seer called Märka- want to talk what happens that they think we
ndéya who has written all about Kundalini, are sort of challenging their ego. The problem
about the ascent of the Kundalini and every- is even about religion or God, one cannot talk.
thing. There was a great astrologer, I should In the meanwhile I'm very happy that Jung had
say, he was the person
India about sixteen or seventeen thousand
who started astrology in
warned that be careful about India," that was
a very big thing he said. Because Jung came to
years back, you can not really say when he knowabout India through people-some German
started it. He wrote one great book called writers who went to India. Now their main
Bhirigu Samhitā ( fgan. But before interest is to find support of the Freudian
writing that he wrote another one called Nädi theory that what is sex, this thing, that thing,
Grantha
(नाडी गन्ध).
Of course this is only that. Even though you'll be surprised
written on the lotus leaves. And described-this Japanese have the same interest about India
voluminous thing was later on completely de- They want to come and see what is tantrism
picted and brought to up-to-date level by ano- and how these erotic things are there and they
ther person about three hundred years back take zooni lens you see, and go on top of the
whose name was Bhujandar.-Can you imagine these old temples to take a photograph of erotic
that this man thousands of years back predict- things. It is so surprising for us, we never see
ed clearly that the Sahaja Yoga will start in these things, why they are doing that.
1970 ! And that in that way the Kundalini will
rise spontaneously, and people will get their
realisation.
Because when in the sixth century after the
advent of Adi Shankarāchārya-who also pro-
pounded that"It is the Kundalini who has to
to be awakened and unless and until you get
Because for an Indian, I mean for n
Indian I'd say, not the Westernised but a real
Indian, the highest goal in life is to get Self your Realisation you are nowhere near reli-
Realisation. When my grandchild was born gion", these people came up just to attack,-the
you see, her horoscope was cast. And when the negative attack. And all of them formed a very
horoscope was cast, they sent a telegram for Dig belt, starting from Bengal going round
my family, thc astrolger. "The great thing is that through the middle of India going towards
the Guru is in her own family." She's a born Gujarat. And there they propounded that it is
realised. But they said-but for them this was the through sex you can achieve your Realisation.
greatest, to send a telegram to her family saying
it is the greatest thing that “she has her Guru in they could make some money out of it also, by
her family, so that she can get her realisa- helping the very licentious and permissive
tion." So this is what it is. The whole attention:
of the people in India should be, if they follow
their traditions, is to get Self Realisation.
Because a sort of a-that was the only way
rulers in those days, by telling them that the
sex is the way you can achieve God.
Now here you can see very clearly that the
centre which is supporting or which looks after
In
But as the Western people impressed them
so much you see, so much of impression cane the sex activities, is below the Kundalini.
from them, we had to learn about your scien- Sanskrit it also is written Shata Chakra bhedan
ces, your all these things and we just forgot. (7 aa means six,-six cntures are to
Not easy to talk to Indian doctors about how be pierced through. Shata chakra (4E )
six. Not the seventh. But these people said that
any diseases whatsoever,-because they learn this is the Kundalini is in this centre which
para-sympathic, if it is mastered, you can cure
Nirmala Yoga
35
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-37.txt 
 tooks after the sex. Now, as a Mother I ty to that level". The reason was, that when
do not want to condemn them so much so I you start insulting Divinity or purity then that
would say that may be a mistake also. Because area becomes absolutely horrid. When the
here resides a Deity, a symbol as you call it, purity is removed then you can do whatever
which has got the head of an elephant. Because you like in that area. You can get possessions
clephant is the wisest animal and the head of there, you can get all kinds of spirits there, you
can do all kinds of witcheraft and all those
gets ego, It's the human beings only, the hu- things, if you soniehow or other create an area
where Divinity doesn't want to go. This was
suggest that it is the pituitary only acting, and the principle. And that's what 'exactly they
that it is an innocent. To represent the inno- used to create an area of this kind. Like there's
a very great temple in India called Kamakhya
Devi's temple, and all these tantrics went
an animal signifies, that such a person never
man animal only gets the ego part of it. So to
cence in us.
This symbol they must have seen, but not there and tried to do that, like having sex
the whole of it, must have seen the part of the relationship in the temples and things like that.
trunk and they must have thought that this And by that they saw to it that whatever is
must be the Kundalini. So to give them a full Divine that is showing there, should be remov-
ed and all the negativity could be brought in.
benefit of the doubt, I would say like that,
but people took too much advantage of it. So
they started big competitions, that those people
who can produce such erotic art and all that
will be given so much money and this can
Now in the Ten Commandments it is said
Whatever is created by the Mother Earth
should not be reproduced and then it should not
be worshipped," Now we should find out, what
happen, that can happen. Artists would not is created by the Mother Earth ? This point we
take to it, so they gave them lots of tempta- miss. Whatever is created by Mother Earth,
tions so that they would accept. Like in Nepal that Mother Earth Herself has produced some-
they gave another temptation by saying that, thing Divine. Now in India people know about
supposing, you see if you make the temples it, that it is so. I went to a place called Musal-
out of the wood they can be destroyed. But the wädi, in a village, because I work more in the
virgin who is, according to Indian mythology, villages, and there they told me a story, that,
is the thunderbolt and the thunderbolt if you Mother there's place here where an English-
man came about a hundred years back, an
won't come near that. Just to make it repulsive engineer, and he tried to build a bandh for
they made it. They gave all kinds of arguments. creating a nice tank there. And what happened
Like they told the ministers, you see were very that at a particular point about 20-30 metres,
austere people, and they wanted to have their he could not build it. Whenever he tried to
own temples. So they told the king, "alright to build it, next day it used to be finished off. So
please you we'll have some licentious thing out- he was quite surprised, and he's written down
side but inside we'll keep very pure. Because in his own diary and all that,-they've publish-
that is light, that is fertility, this that, all kinds ed the diary also. There he had to make a
of story and theories they made up, just to bandh like this and go round' and then make
it further. So I wanted to go and see the place.
When I saw the place I knew this is something
created by the Mother Earth. Now how do you
know it is created by the Mother Earth is the
want to keep it away, better makethings that she
rcreate this kind of a new cult there.
Now what happened, why they did it ? It's
a very inportant point one should note, why
these people tried to bring down Divinity, puri-
point to which I'll come later on.
36
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-38.txt 
 So there 'are' places created by the Mother that I thought this is the place I should be born
Earth, already', to vibarate the Divinity, the
purity, the whole expression of Her compassion not Christianity, this is not Christ. So the way
and love for human beings. But unless and until they made Christ naturally people denied Him:
you are a realised soul you cannot feel them but He is the one who has suffered for us, defi-
and understand them. Only a realised soul can nitely. So there is no suffering needed for us at
feel them and understand them. For example all. If you ask for suffering you'll suffer. Only
Stonchenge, I went there, Stonchenge is the thing, he is to be awakened here at Agnya
same stuff. But the problem with them is that the chakra.
people who are Druids who are doing all this
worship don't know what it is. they don't know
how to use it. So in this way the Mother Earth should take it for granted. What happens when
has also crcated so many such places which
have come out of the Mother Earth and they mach. Many people who have been to the
are there. In India there are many places like
that. Like in Maharashtra we have Ashtavinā- thines or those who think "I'm the guru, I
yakas ( f eight of the symbols of know how to do it and I'm the one who has
the innocence Deity as you say. Now because
people are not realised souls, one can not talk
to them. Because if I say that is the thing, how rise, the Kundalini won't rise. Now when it
will you know ?
so that I would be able to tell them that this is
Now if I say about Christ or anyone, it
should not be taken for granted at all', nobody
the Kundalini rises ? Say, it is here in the sto-
wrong gurus, who have been following wrong
done it", they have to takc the name of Moses.
Unless and until you take his name it won't
reaches this point (Agnyă chakra) you have to
take the name of Christ. Here (void) you have
to take the name of Mohammad. Who was
Mohammad ? Nobody else but Moses himself
was born as Mohammad.
So when the Kundalini ascends through the
central path-You see the subject is so great that
even if I give thousand lcctures I cannot cover
it, so the thing is I'll try to cover every point
little bit here and there. When the Kundalini
ascends, I told you the cool breeze starts com- today are following Shariat. What is Shariat ?
ing out of your head. So what happens to you? If you have read Bible, is the same as written
For the first time you feel the cool breeze of
the Holy Ghost.
You'll be surprised the Islamic people
for the Jews, same thing they are following
what is written in the Bible, they are following.
We are not following it, but they're following.
Now some may deny Christ. That was Which shows that because when Moses came
wrong thing to deny Christ, I must tell you down be found these people in such a big mess
very frankly, it's a conditioning to deny him. and such a big hell, that he had to make a very
Because you see, by denial what you have done, very strict law to pull them out of that hell, and
you have denied an incarnation who came at that's why he gave such strict laws. Actually if
*that' point. But the way they have made out you have read The book of Essenes' I was
of Christ, naturally anybody would deny. The surprised that many people who have read it
way they made Him an incarnation anybody showed it to me, that they really, clearly said
would deny. I mean I got my birth, I mean I that the laws were not so strong, but Moses
should say I got it because I deliberately got had to make them so strong because people
born into a family which was a Protestant
Christian, because they are the most sophisti- down so rapidly that he made those laws. But,
cated fanatics ! Absolutely. Because it's such a
rational thing they have made out of Christ, lims and imposed on them.
were absolutcly hellish and they were going
surprisingly, they are more followed by the Mus-
Nirmala Yoga
37
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-39.txt 
 Now if you want to know what you are,
through this suffering. There is no need to go
say a Muslim wants to know about himself, he through the suffering at all. When Christ has
should go and ask a Jew. And if you want to gone for you.-finished,-there is no need to go
know about the Jew you should go and ask a through any suffering any more, just you have to
awaken Christ within you. Just count your bless-
ings one by one. It's a very cheerful thing, it's
opinion of others will correct your conditionings not such a serious stuff. You see, like in Paris
in the mind. Because you are 'barn' in one reli- I went they said "Mother never say you are the
gion. It's a conditioning ! It's absolute condi- happiest person." I said "Why ? I am enjoying
tioning. And this is the worst conditioning that completely." They said "No, you must say
people have. Then how will you accept the you are very serious, and that you are suffering
very much." I said "I'm not, how can I tell
them lies ?""They all say you'll have to
suffer." I said "Why"? They said "Because
And that's why the Indian fake gurus have here everybody believes that we all have to
accepted the advantage. You see they are very suffer." Les. Miserable you see. I said "Alright
clever, cunning, absolutely cunningness per- these Les Miserable are sitting on the streets of
sonified. They all came down here first, with Paris, drunk compietely, and prostitutes at
the idea we don't talk about religion, finished. every lamp post, are the Les Miserable. They are
So they suit us very well, if they don't talk the ones who have created their miseries like
Christian. And if you want to know about a
Christian you can ask an Indian, So it is the
truth ? If you are conditioned you can never
accept truth,
about religion, about God then they're the best
because it doesn't come in conflict with 'our'
conditioning that we have. So they talk abiout
this.
This is howour mental projection has
"flying in the air', for which people have paid taken us, to this kind of a hell, from which to
six thousand pounds cach, for flying in the come out. Only Kundalini can help you. Now
this is the Mother's thing-So we can say that
first the Father's manifestation came, then
air' 1
I am the one, in 1970 I 'openly took their Son, now the Holy Ghost has to come.
nanies and 'denounced" them and and told the
people who they were in previous lives ! At
that time you see, so many of my disciples surd thing they teach, that there is the Father
started shaking, they said "Mother what are
you doing ? They are going to kill you." I said Mother. How can you have a Son and a
"Let them try! Try their level best."
Now people-Christianity is another ab-
and the Son and the Holy Ghost but not the
Father without the Mother, can you ? It is
absurd but all intelligent people accept it and
So these fake gurus came here, started the seriously talk about it. And, "Holy Ghost is
cult, and started all kinds of these things. First a mystery! Don't talk about Holy Ghost, it's
of all don't talk of God, and if you talk of a mystery !" Because, to say that Mother has
God, then just make the person such a slave
that he cannot get out of it. They use the in Christian religion, so called, they don't
supra-conscious, or they use the left sided sub- have any place for the women to become the
conscious. And that's how they have attacked priest or anything.
you people.
a part to play, is too much for them. Because
My father was a great learned man who
Now the people who have no idea as to was the master of fourteen languages and he
what should happen they think we have to go translated Qurän-e-Shareef into Hindi, and
38
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-40.txt 
 very learned man, I should say, he was the one
who told me about human beings, and how Napoleon was a Vintage hero. And now if
their permutations and combinations work. you call any Frenchman a Napoleon he'll hit
And I asked him "But why this Martin you back, he can't stand it. Because according
Luther, who was a realised soul, put away the to him, he was very egoistical. So who is the
Mother's position that way" ? He said "That hero today ? Somebody like Mahätmä Gandhi,
time, you see,-we call it Samayachar- somebody who is the manifestation of the
"according to the time". The Muslims were very womanly qualities, of the Mother's qualities of
powerful, and he said that if he talked of the compassion, love, of nourishment of this Mother
Mother he would have been hit hard. So he took a Earth.
course where he said "She's the one who's there,
who gave the birth to her child," and all that,
but he wouldn't call her as a Primordial thing
or a Primordial Power.
For example, in the olden days, for us
Now very interesting it is to see that this
Kundalini is the one which is called as the
Kumbha (#), in Sanskrit language, means
the Aquarius. We call it Aquarius, as one of
But the truth has to show itself. So in recent the signs, and is the same as Kumbha in San-
times you have seen how the women have be- So it is the age of Aquarius, is
the age of the Kundalini. Secondly is the age of
the Kundalini which will nourish, which is the
Because they think that if they become like Mother within you, which will rise, will give
men, then they solve the problems. It's not you the completeness of it, and which will con-
so. It's a pendulum. You see you move like nect you with your Spirit which ultimately gives
you the enlightenment by which you beconte
pendulous movement. What you have to do is I
skrit language.
come very conscious of themselves. Of course
they are absolutely misled. Absolutely misled.
a woman to a man, man to a woman, it's a
collectively conscious. You become', again
to rise in a spiral way, otherwise evolution is say, it's not just telling a story, you just be-
come. Today we had a lady-I came a little
carlier,-she came to sce me and apologised
that "Mother I went to this Muktananda and
got very badly hurt and I'm in terrible pain and
not there.
Evolution is the spiral movement. And
it's not shown here how the Kundalini moves,
but maybe later on I maybe able to tell you
in details how the movement of the Kundalini have to get up every moment, I hope you don't
takes place, and how the spiral movement of mind. I said "Alright you come up, and I'll
the consciousness has taken place so far. In
the same way the spiral movement has to take
place, that in your evolutionary process you must thing her Kundalini rose and she felt the cool
come 'above' the man and the wonman part of it.
So this is completely misleading business that'
"we dominate the men." And when I say this what is this cool breeze that is coming out of
many ladies left you see, the hall, they were very your hands ? For the first time you feel the
very angry with me that I was saying so, but subtle All Pervading Power about which
it's fact.
cure you.
She came up, she's better now, but only
breeze coming out of her head and she felt the
cool breeze coming out of her hands. Now
"everyone' has talked. The Rooh () as
they call it, they call it, as the Brahma Tattva,
And the woman is the Mother, she's in a
way higher than man, I think. She's the Mother they call it by various names-is the All Perva-
she has to nourish. She's here for nourishment ding Power of God's love.
So the new awareness has to be that of nourish-
ment, of compassion and love.
So we come back to the origin, that first
the God Almighty, the Father and Mother
39
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-41.txt 
 is His power, and He's the spectator and She's cannot pay for this realisation. It is your right
the play. That's how it works. And the Son to have this, and you will have it. And how can
is created to lead the people through this pro- I take money for it ?." So I was a big failure,
blem of ego and super-ego, because it is so but many people came here. But out of that
cult called 'Iwice born'. And one
nature had to take up the resurrection as a of them walked up to me with a Bible in her
hand to hit me, in one of the programmes! And
much tight that someone of a "very great' came out a
drama.
every body was upset but I was just laughing !
Now Christ actually is described in Indian
scriptures, but Christians won't go beyond
Bible, they cannot. They're so bound.
15
We have a big film about it ! Because I said
*Look at this one the twice born' walking
with a Bible just to hit me." Bible to hit, I
They will not go beyond Bible to see, To mean I ve never heard that. I heard that people
them Bible is the last and the first and every-
thing. It's surprising in everything they cross hand, but the Bible to use as a gun was the
limits, but in understanding you must go to first time I saw such a fantastic thing !
other scriptures. That's why I really respect and
appreciate Jung because he went out of the way
to find out about everything with a very open conditioning that they can go onto any' limit of
used to walk with a Bible and a gun in another
So it can happen! You see, the people get
so much possessed by the ideas and by the
scientific mind.
accepting something as the truth without find-
Now, in the Indian scripture, in the Devi ing out, "what did I achieve out of it ?" Or
Bhagvatam, where they have described the what did my forefathers achieve out of it ?"*
Goddess, they have very clearly described Christ, Why not the Christians or the Jews or anyone
absolutely, all and his life. But he is called as find out, what did they achieve ? Now, they'll
Mahavishnu. Vishnu is the Deity at this point say it is postponed for, say ten thousand years.
nābhi (chakra) which is responsible for our Why ? Supposing I say to anyone, "There's a
evolution, But He's at Mahavishnu point. And diamond available for you here, just now,
His description if you read, to the last bit of will you wait ?I tell you, people fron Australia
it is so great, and He is the incarnation of the will come down.
same innocence born on this earth. It's 'so
clearly' described.
o
But if I say your Realisation is there, you
must understand that all systems and all that
Why do we have an egg for Easter ? Egg will work out, comes from the Unconscious
represents a human being who have not got which is God Almighty, and in us he has work-
realisation as yet. Because egg has to become out the system 'so bcautifully,' so delicately."
the bird, and in Sanskrit language a realised Did you become a human being by any effort ?
soul is called as Dvija born again, twice From amoeba stage He has made you a human
born."
being without giving you any trouble whatso-
ever. What trouble did you take ? What did
But in America I came in 1973,-of course you do ? Did you stand on your head or did
I was a big failure because they told me, you pay for it ? You just got it spontancously.
"Mother, without money nobody is going to So if you believe in that force that is there, of
listen to you, you must charge some money. compassion and love, why should you not be-
They cannot understand anything that can be lieve that if you have to get your realisation, it
had without money." I said "But how much would work out spontancously. It has to work
are you going to pay ? It's invaluable ! You out spontancously.
40
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-42.txt 
 So this Mother force that is there, the age passes through that blue line (Idänädi) into your
of the Aquarius as you call it, this has to come
up and nourish you. And it does. It has
worked out wonders in India. Because Indian that you see you pass through your all subcon-
villages are still very simple, thank God, they're scious area, so the dreams get distorted, they
not educated, they're not complicated, they get a funny symbolism, sometimes you don't
just start feeling the cool breeze and enjoying it, understand what's happening, it becomes a
that's all.
brain and that's how you start seeing the
dreams. But when you are passing through
sort of a mixed up expression and on that to
They give up all habits, they give un all depend may not be so much good.
wrong ideas their-all customs of caste and all
those things they give up, and they become reality is that you become collectively conscious
"extremely joyous. But that's not the end of and you develop this vibratory awareness by
it. When you get your realisation, your material
problems are solved surprisingly. Even mat-
erial problems are solved, but not to that extent
that you do not become Mr Ford, to have a central nervouis system is concerned. But actu-
headache. But you become a person who is
satisfied and you get a balanced amount of happens, what happens ?
comfort and a balanced amount of living.
Instead of that we must get the reality. The
which you can feel the AlI Pervading Power.
But this is just what you get as far as your
conscious mind is concerned, as far as your
ally what does it do, is the point ? When it
First of all when the Kundalini rises above
Actually you'll be surprised that comfort
is also a myth. Because you see, look at me.
this centre, Agnya chakra, then the suction
takes place of the ego and super ego, so the
For me I don't know what comfort is, I don't space is created. Actually you can feel the soft
bone like a child, when it comes up, actually
much about comfort. If you make nie sleep you can see. First of all the eyes dialate and
on the street P'll sleep like a log of wood if you then it comes out from top of head and you start
make me sleep in a palace, I'Il be there. After feeling the cool breeze, actually, here coming
out. Now this is what you feel, but it acts in this
way, that these vibrations are the vital forces
We can say, not libido only, but all' these
things mixed together which are in 'pure' form
which are for your Hita (a, Hita means which
from Jung's point of view that he took to is for your Spirit, we can say. And when you
dreams as one of the very big, big experimental want to give vibrations to someone like that
truthful manifestation of the Unconscious. But with your hand at the most, the person can be
understand that why should people worry so
all you don't carry anything with you at all. I
mean nothing sticks to you, does it ? I mean
once you have to sleep, you just sleep off.
For another point I'd like to point out
what happens, how do you get dreams, let's see.
The dreams come to you from the Kundalini
itself, in a way. So what happens the Kund-
alini is not connected on the central path, but
it is the record, is all our past, all our record is
in there. Like a tape recorder has a tape, it is
there. And what happens, that when you go
very deep into Sushupti (gyfa) that's the stage
they call it,very deep into you, then the symo-
blism comes through that down below and
cured. You can cure cancer patients.
Now there's one gentleman who has come
here luckily. I mean it's all Sahaja again I say,
spontaneous, that I met him. And he was suff-
ering from angina a very serious type of thing
had happened, because they said he has to go
to Houston, and he had booked his seats every-
thing and was about to go. And then he came
to Delhi, just to meet his friends because he
Nirmala Yoga
41
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-43.txt 
 thought here something might happen so it's that I'm not here to cure anyone, or to do any-
better to go and see them. And there they had thing but the Kundalini rises, She nourishes. It''s
the Rotarians, you see they called me for a lec- your own. It's your Kundalini, it's your own
ture, and I was speaking. There must be a lot Spirit, it works out.
of people there and he came out with the ques-
tion that "what about the heart ?" I said
"Heart is completely under control with Sahaja say that "why you ?" I mean it's very com-
Yoga". So he found it very difficult to find me
out in Poona, but he just came to me, and I "Why of all the persons 'you" should do it ?"
think 1 must have treated him for 10-15 minu-
SO
Now what am I doing here ? People might
mon question in all the Western countries
I said "You better to do it, I'll be very happy,
tes and I said "Now you are alright". But first I'd like to retire with my husband with my
he had a big convulsion sort of a thing because grand-children". But the thing is I have to do
the force was there, and then suddenly he got , what can I do about it ? I mean to say, you
rid of it and he's perfectly alright, he's normal, are intellectuals I'm not, you can drive a car,
He went back to the doctors and they said 1 cannot, I canot operate a bank account I cannot
What have you done ? these are not your X- do many things. Supposing I know how to do
rays, these are not your reports, they are so
different". And luckily this gentleman happens it ? And it's a thankless job, you have to work
to be here in America.
Kundalini why should you feel so hurt about
really very hard, 24 hours job it is, you sce, and
everybody wants gains out of it. So I don't
But this is only one of the cases, I would understand that why should that ego come in
say that luckily it so happened that Sahaja between ?
Yoga has cured people like we can say the
President of India, who was suffering, who
came here for an operation for the cancer of to just cash your cheques, that's al
the lungs. And when he was going I just went for. l've nothing to gain out of it, in the sense,
to see him, because my husband knew him very that of course f feel very joyous, many people
well and the High Commissioner just said that, get their realisation, and really get their own.
"You know She's such and such, but also She's Because this is your own thing. It is within you
But doesn't matter. I'm like a bank. I have
l I'm here
*
Mataji Nirmala Devi", and I'm known in it is nothing to be paid for nothing to be work-
India for this kind of things. So the wife of the ed out, it's just within you. But supposing one
President said that, "Mother, please cure my person gets it, he can give it to others also.
husband". And he was very much suffering, he Like one candle which is not enlightened can
could not slep, and people were worried that be enlightened by another enlightened candle.
he may not survive up to Delhi airport. And I Now this candle doesn't do anything except
treated him for 10-15 minutes only, and he felt that it enlightens that candle, and that candle
**now I'm feeling relaxed, I'm going to sleep". has to enlighten other candles. It is as simple as
And next day when they reached Delhi, he that. Is nothing very serious. You don't have
walked down and everybody was surprised!
They had taken a sti cher, And he told thinking Jungians how will I address them you
me, after that he went straight for a tour.
And then later on his wife showed me that that, and I'm such a simple person how will I
even the mark of his operation has disappear- tell them what I have to tell them ? But it is
ed. So you can write to him and find out about such a simple thing I tell you, it's even simpler
it if you want to find, but it's nothing import- than cooking. So one should not think that
ant, it's just a by-product. So I must warn you
to go into-See they had told me, 1 was really
see, they're atready moving like that, like
God could have made anything very complicat.
Nirmala Yoga
42
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-44.txt 
 ed. See we breattie without even reading a book. ring ? He should have given it to your driver.
Supposing you have to read a book, and then
breathe, how many of us would survive ? Is as
simple as that. Now if you have to go up, if poverty, completely ?" So this is what one has
God has created this universe, and if he wants to think openly, with open mind you can save
to save His universe and His creation, He has all these people from these cults and sects,
to jolly well do something about it. If He has
made us like this, He has to give us realisation
too. And it is so 'surprising' that I find it is called as a sect, that's the best part of it ! From
working out. Of course we cannot have 50 the year 1970 I'm the lone' person who's been
million disciples like that, as these fake gurus "fighting and fighting these people who have
have, because to create a plastic flower is very suffered from it, I'm the person who has been
And if he's such a diamond ring fellow, why
doesn't he solve our problems in India, our
Now the best of part of it is that I'm also
telling everyone about them. Their nature,
what they have been, how they practice this,
casy.
You just give somebody a name, go on how they have managed you, what has happened
repeating this name. Now they give a name,
repeat the name of Rama. Now there is no con-
nection, you go on pressing on your sympathe- people, now they call me also a sect. Now
tic nervous system. Now Rāma could be a ser-
vant dead somewhere, he just enters into you sect would be something like calling Christ as
and you start jumping. You start jumping like Hitler. I mean I can't understand how these
a frog. Some people came to my programme
they were just jumping like a frog. So I said fighting them alone,-all these things. So this
"Why are you jumping like a frog ?" They is what it is, and I'm very happy that you have
said "Our guru said when the Kundalini rises given me your precious time today and listened
then you jump like a frog". I said *Now are
you going to become a frog or an carthworm ?"
Use your brains ! That's the problem, you see,
with all intelligence when it comes to their evo-
lution, to the living process, they just don't wonderful people, because they are not so onc
want to use their brains. TNhatever these gurus sided as Freudians are because you see, Freud
tell them they are willing to do and do what- reduced us to a sex point. Absolutely are we
ever they like. Like another guru is there who
brings out diamonds this, that from the air. ridiculous ! I mean it doesn't behove anyone
It's all jugglery, it's absolutely jugglery. Now
what I'm saying, "what is the interest of God nothing but a sex point. But you live without
in diamonds, what is His interest ? Why would
He give you diamonds ?" You see diamonds existing ?
you can always go and buy from somewhere. accepted Freud 'so much'? At least Jung at
But people don't think. You know he's very that time, could see this point clearly, that it
popular, he's very popular with affluent people.
Why should they ask for diamonds ? I can
understand Indians but he's not bothered about
Indians so much. But he gave a diamond ring
to a gentleman who was a very, very rich man.
So I said Why did he give you a diamond get their realisation, they can give it to thousands.
to you,-everything. Despite that, the shallow-
ness, or the naivety we can say of the Western
this is the limit ! I said now to call me as a
twothings can gotogether, a person who has been
to me. Now I would like to have a 'work-shop'
because I know it would work out very fast
with Jungians, because it has worked always.
All those Jungians I have met have been
sex points now ? I mean this is too much, very
to say that about a human being, that you are
the sex also, so are we not living, are we not
I can't understand how people
is not something that has to do with one human
being, it's 'eollective'. And this is a happening
that is collective.
You'll be surprised that people, when they
43
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-45.txt 
 In India in thousands they get realisation, in
There's a saying that whenever I want to
thousands. And also should happen here in see my God I have to just bend my head
America if our chakras are alright. Because towards my heart that's all. That's what it is,
it's so simple, it's very simple. We have to
you the vibrations here are not good. Because humble down, that money can not purchase
you have witch-craft, you have all the gurus God. Because all religions are based on that.
settled down in America. Imagine, how they Everybody, Mr Pope is having what you call
all felt so attracted. All of them horrible that hat, donkey hat on the head with all the
people are down here, and one better than the diamonds in it, and like that, what a crown he
other. And I don't know how they have been has. What a crown he has, think of it ! And
able to manage you. Your intelligence-what now like a pop-star he is waving to all the
has happened to your brains ? I can't under- people, creating problems for these Polish
stand how they have dominated you so much. people, and the political stunts he's creating.
That one fellow just he wants you to learn Why don't you think about this ? All these
flying. Why not ask him to fly himself ? Put things that condition people and making money
him on that Pisa, what you call that Leaning out of it and seminars and this and that. I'm
Tower of Pisa and let him fall down and let's really surprised where are you lost ? What are
you doing ? Why don't you come to reality?
That the Spirit is within, it is such a simple thing
and that Kundalini is your own Mother, Sihe has
the chakras here are very haywire", I must tell
see if he can fly!
What I'm saying, why don't you use your
brains for these things 7 That's what it is, that's
how you are going to find them out. But what
happens, when they suffer-like this Mukta-
nanda somebody asked me why is he danger- Why go to these false things and fake ideas and
ous ? Somebody asked me a question, is one
of the questions is there. Now before I came big, big things, There's no need at all.
here, there was a lady sitting who has been to
Muktananda. To me he's not only dangerous,
but he's sinister, abslutely sinister. And do you
know his children, so called, if they are his own Sahaja Yoga ? Nobody. So I have to talk, and
children, two or them, and are now fighting
for the diamonds that he has created out of imagine: I've got at least a thousand lectures
this group of people here. And the diamonds
are worth, I don't understand the money part.
You see I don't understand.-million-billions,
something like that -he's made out of "you talking, I was so happy that, that person can
people here, all these diamonds.
onfy one child, that's you. And She's so anxious
to give you realisation, so very anxious that it
will just work in a split of a second. So why?
false conditioning, having big, big seminars and
Actually for me it's not necessary even to
come, but without talking who will come to
I've talked and talked. So much talk, you can't
in London, and they all feel that its something
great. I don't know, but I wished I could stop
now talking. The other day somebody was
talk very well, I said "Now I will retire from
What is the interest of a Divine person in talking, I will just do the raising of the Kunda-
lini, you better see to the talking". And I'm
one should understand. That you can not quite happy that Barbara also said in a quite good
understand that you can get your knowledge way whatever it is, you people all enjoyed it.
without paying for it, you must accept. Is the So may be that some of you might come up
ego of money, Cut it out. You have to humble as great speakers in Sahaja Yoga and you might
down yoursclf. If you humble down then it's be able to relieve me of this too much talking.
Thank you very much. May God Bless you.
diamonds ? What can you give ? This is what
yours, is there, it's just in yvour heart.
Nirmala Yoga
44
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-46.txt 
 CHRISTMAS AT NAGPUR IN 1983
At the gracious invitation of Our Beloved Shakti quietly seated Herself in the audience
Mother, Shri Adi Shakti Mataji Sakshat Shri while the city notables ranged themselves either
Mary Mahalakshmi, a small group of Sahaja side of the elderly Vice President of India in
Yogis departed on 23rd December 1983 for his high red velvet chair. Mr C.P. Shrivastava
Nagpur. We were very excited at the prospect as Secretary General of U.N. International
of spending some time at Shri Mother's family MaritimeConsultative Organisation, sat in dig-
seat-near to the place of Her advent upon nity and silence amongst them upon the dias.
earth-in Maharashtra, the land of saints which
has so filtered into our hearts and watered the
roots of our spiritual growth. We had been how very respected was Shri Mataji's father.
invited to attend the unveiling of a memorial As Mr C.P. Shrivastava stated: He was first and
bust in honour of Shri Mataji's father Mr K.P. foremost an Indian concerned with the integ-
Salve, a realised soul, acontemporary of Gandhi-
ji in the struggle for Indian independence, a
great scholar and patron of the Arts, and the in such an address, he declared that Mr Salve's
much revered father of his nine children.
It became very clear during the speeches
ration and freedom of Indian people, Although
he added, it is unusual to mention one's wife
daughter was carrying on the tradition of Her
On arrival at Nagpur railway station in the of the Indian nation, She was devoting Herself
carly morn of Christmas Eve, we were quite to the unity of all humanity. His brief but heart
unexpectedly met by one of Shri Mother's felt words shone like jewels to the Sahaja Yogis
nephews and some of our Maharashtrian
brothers. All faces were beaming with welcome. enjoying this praise of their Mother.
We were whisked off to our residences in a
peaceful government compound. The next inst- besides Her husband and exchanged handshake
ant a melodious laugh floated out of a nearby with the politicians and dignitaries, some of
room and we found oursclves at the Lotus Feet whom went to Her feet. Shri Mother called for
of Our Holy Mother ! It was
family scene: Shri Mother, sitting in an arm-
chair, was looking at family photographs with
her daughter and son-in-law. Generously She
showed us a family group taken when She was Mother, at such a moment, seemed to signify
fifteen. Then, as now, She is Shri Chandra
Nibha with the most beautiful, most sweet, most kind find true independence and union in the
childlike smile in the universe.
After the cercmony, Shri Mataji walked
an informal the Australian and English Sahaja Yogis pre-
sent, to come forward and be introduced. For
some of us it was the chance to go to Her Lotus
Feet too.
This obeissance to our Divine
that only at the feet of Devi does all human-
greatest family of all-that of the Spirit. 1t was
Shri Mataji arrived at the unveiling fune- an affirmation of the principles of Sahaja Yoga
tion with Her husband, Mr C.P. Shrivastava. that on this very Indian occasion honouring
From tac moment we, Her eager children, saw
Her enter the large decorated enclosure the of the country's independence from the British,
stage was set for another drama. Before us was
not so much Shri Mahamaya as the Devi, Her
black hair streaming over a gleaming white ed to the holy soil of Maharashtra in the pre-
silk sari bordered in gold and red. Yet Shri Adi
the high spiritual values of Indian culture and
all international barriers that had been or
could ever be, were laid in the dust, surrender-
sence of Adi Shakti Herself.
See page 47
Nirmala Yoga
45
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-47.txt 
 At every moment of this most auspicious Shakti, who incarnated verily as Shri Mary,
time in Nagpur, the Salve family looked after whose Son sowed the seeds of Resurrection,
Shri Mataji's disciples with warm hospitality and Who Herself had now come to fill the
and friendliness. It was very interesting for us Divine Cup with spiritual nectar. To be able to
to see Shri Mahamaya in the midst of Her worship Shri Adi Shakti at this time, Christmas
Christian family and relations, and one was Eve with Her family, was the best Christmas
reminded of stories of Shri Krishna emongst present to us all.
his own peoples, the Yadus, in Mathura and
Dwarka.
And so the show went on, and the Bishop
rose to deliver his Christmas message. He was
followed by a Presbyterian minister whose
Even more appreciated was the spontane-
ous darshan with Shri Mataji that afternoon, speech was immediately put into bandhan. (Per-
She opened Christmas cards from Sahaja Yoga haps the best comment is to say that Shri
centres around the world, interspersing Her Mother's grandchildren were busily shaking
exclamations of surprise with anecdotes, com-
ments and advice; emphasising at one point During it all, Shri Mataji was working and
that we must make our own decisions and not
their fingers and blowing on their hands).
working...
expect Her to do everything for us.
On Sunday morning, Christmas Day,
another scene unfolded. A message came from
What a Christmas Eve we had I Shri Shri Mother that we were to attend the morn-
Mother, followed by Her disciples, arrived at
the pandal where music ind dancing were ted next door to house where Shri Mother
underway to the accompaniment of many hands grew up and in the yard still stands the tree
clapping, It ceased while Shri Lakshmi in the
role of sister, cousin grandniother or aunty,
gave Her Christmas gifts. The singing and
laughter continued until the Bishop arrived..
Everyone began to sing hymns in Marathi, but upto open windows. It began to rain and the
for Sahaja Yogis, the dearest sound was the Sahaja Yoginis suddenly found themselves at
pure bell notes of their Mother. Hark the the side door ncar the pulpit. There in the first
Herald Angles sing" was sung in a mixture of row, richly and regally dressed for Her Son's
Marathi and English. We were seated to one
side of Shri Mother when She called to three bespeetacled, was Shri Mother-a hymnbook
of us to join the musicians for carol singing in m Her hand-scated beside Her daughter,
English. So, we moved...
ing service at the "1840 Church". It was situa-
under which She often sat.
By the time we arrived at the church it was
very crowded, and outside rows of chairs crept
birthday celebrations, with hair in a bun and
husband and son-in-law. The grandchildren
were elose by.
Our Dearest Mother beckoned us in and
There were now many hcads bobbing up
and down between us and Our Beloved Mother pointed to the seats in front of Her. So, there
opposite. But suddenly She looked transformed
into Sakshat Shri Mary Mahalakshmi, Her cred near Their Saviour on Christmas Day in
white, red gold sari, placed over Her head,
framed a glowing and youthful face beatific gave his oration in Marathi during which Shri
with a radiant smile. During "Silent Night Mataji raised his Kundalini. While he was
Holy Night"-especially at the line "Christ the speaking She whispered to us on cach side of
Saviour is born"-the vibrations flowed like a
refreshing blissful breeze over us, for indeed at world that He gave His only begotten Son'.
that moment we were paying homage to Adi "Then Shri Mataji smiled, lent back in Her
we were-six elated and stunned Yoginis gath-
a Presbyterian church. After hymns, the Bishop
Her: "The text isAnd God so loved the
46
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-48.txt 
 In the afternoon Shri Mataji gave darshan
to the Sahaja Yogis. We sat outside on the red
chair and looked triumphant, as if to say, 'Yes,
that is IT'.
A beautiful hymn was sung with Shri Mother Maharashtran earth, listened to Her and took
Mary Adi Shakti's face wreathed in smiles as
Her clear voice rose towards pulpit and altar. were given their realisation and cured of dise-
This lovely moment was followed by another ases. Shri Mother explained that the problems
speech by the Presbyterian pastor of the pre- with protestant Christians is that they can argue
vious evening. Again the grandchildren shook with great intellectuality and suavity, so much
their fingers, and Shri Mataji worked-Her so that they tie themselves in knots. Consequ-
huge bindi, covering the whole agyna, had been ently, they close their awarenss to the reality of
formed into a distinct cross on the Ekadasha. the advent of the Comforter, the Redeemer,
At the end of the service Shri Mahamaya added the Counsellor, the second coming of Christ,
Her donation to the large container stuffed in their very midst.
with notes which had sat on the centre of the
altar for most of the morning.
turns in going to Her Lotus Feet. More people
Fellowing lunch the Sahaja Yogis walked
down the quiet tree-lined street to the house of
With Her husband, Shri Mataji left the Nagpur's Sahiaja Yogi. About 20 local people
church and grected and kissed family members were present at Shri Mataji's progranime and
scattered about. Perhaps to some it was more received their realisation. Then She departed
than a kiss from a relation and their Spirit quietly for the airport. We remained while a
heard the invitation of the Adi Shakti. We all Sahaja Yogi gave a follow-up talk telling the
then re-entered the building, shook hands with newly-awakened souls how to establish their
Bishop and priests, and followed Shri Mother realisation. In the garden the rain trickled from
down the aisle to the main portals. There, just the leaves and foliage, freshening the semi-rural
as with Lord Jesus, a miracle occurred-Shri scene. We all walked back to our residence in
Adi Shakti cured a crippled man in the very the cool cleaning soft drizzle, praying that now
gateway of the church ! He was very old and
doddery, a servant of Her father. Shri Mother town of Nagpur, the childhood home of Shri
smilingly encouraged and prodded Him into a
chair. He was quite nervous. She spoke softly
to him, took his walking stick gently from his tell. Shri Mother was the Devi, Shri Mahamaya
hands. He recalled that She was the daughter Shri Adi Shakti, Shri Mary Mahalakshmi, Shri
of his past enmployer and said to us that when Mather Mary, Lord Jesus, Shri Kalki, Shri Adi
he first saw Her she was "chhoti"-very little. Guru, as much as She was mother, grand-
Shri Mataji was all smiles. The old kindly mother, aunt, sister, wife. It was a lesson for
fellow gained his realisation and walked away, us-for our attention-to be thrust into such a
slowly but steadily without any help, quite be-
mused at what had happened to him.
a new and thriving centre would grow in the
Adi Shakti Mataji.
On such a weekened as this is so much to
maya. And to see, at apparently serious mom-
ments, that a glorious smile suffused Our
Divine Mother's face. Throughout the two days.
After church we were invited to the home
of Shri Mataji's brother, a government minister Shri Maraji-despite the maya of Mrs Shri-
for Chai (tea) and Christmas cake. There, ami- vastava-sought and gathered Her stray child-
dst the bustle of family festivities, teacups and
crumbs, Our Holy Mother cured a man's deaf-
ness with the words: "Aham sakshat virata" in Her devotees. With Our Mother in our hearts
his ear, and worked on some of his children. everyone enjoyed the play immensely. And what
Afterwards the fanily gathered in the garden
for a group photograph.
ren to Her, cleared chakras, gave advice, guid-
ed and taught, and looked after every need of
a play it was ! And what a Director !!
Jai Shri Mataji.
47
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-49.txt 
 Speech of Shri C.P. Shrivastavaji on the occasion of Birth Centenary
Celebrations of Pujya Shri Prasad Rao Krishna Rao Salveji (resp. father
of Shri Mataji) at Nagpur on 24th Dec, 1983.
Indian. He came from Nagpur, Nagpur you
Most respected Vice-President of India
Hidaytullaji, Hon. and Respected Dy. Chief know is the heart of India. He belonged to
Minister of Maharashtra, Shri Ramrao Adikji you but he did not belong only to Nagpur.
and Hon. Shri Tidkeji, Respected Shri Madhul- Nagpur being the heart of India, he represent-
karji, Shri Gaikwadji, Shri Kishor Kashikarji, ed the heart of India in New Delhi. He was
Sabi Bhaiya and my dear brother-in law, my first and foremost an Indian.
friend and the Central Minister Shri N.K.P.
Salve. Sir. may I offer on behalf of the whole days I am posted abroad) very often I meet,
Salve family, the large Salve family express to Punja bis,
you our deep and profound greatitude for your Gujratis. What about Indians? He was first
kindness indeed to be with us here today, The and foremost an Indian. And that created
unveiling of the statue of my father-in-law
could not have been done by the person better came from another state. I came from another
than yourself. You have explained how lifelong state. But that created a tremendous impulse
was your association with Shri Salveji and
therefore it is most appropriate this should patriot, great leader one other significant fea-
have been done in the manner it has been done
today. But it is a moment of devotion for us, in touch with him-we all talk that we
and all I can say, we aredeeply touched by the should not distinguish between caste, creed,
very kind words in which you have referred to community, government, language, religion.
my father-in-law, the various anecdotes you We all say that. But we say that on our lips.
have narrated about the life spent with him I wish we all could say that from our heart. And
and we feel deeply indebted, very proud. To
Hon. Dy. Chief Minister, I say how profound were the same, he did not merely profess, that,
is the Salve family to him. We all know he is he did not only preach that, but he sincerely
the well-wisher of the family. My wife, Nirmala
who is sitting here, always mentions that. I am
very happy indeed and proud that, Sir, you are
here today.
You know
when I come to my country India (as these
Bengalis, Maharashtrians, and
a tremendous impact on me. You know, he
on mc. Apart from this that he was a great
ture which almost captured anyone who came
he did so. He not only said that all religions
believed in that. And I don't think it even
occurred to him to distinguish between persons
from one area and another, or one language
and another, or one religion and another. Now
this again was so vital for the Unity of the
To Shri N.K.P. Salve I am indebted for country. And he was totally dedicated to it.
many things, but I am indebted to him most
of all for having brought me in touch with my
father-in-law, who became my father-in-law married his daughter. I was.very fortunate;
later on. Shri N.K.P. Salve was a friend of because I came into the fold. I found, here
mine in Lucknow University. I came to New was a person, who had dedicated his life to
Delhi and very kindly he introduced me to
his family. And that was a turning moment in try, and yet, please believe me, Sir, I was with
my life. A turning moment because I had come
from Lucknow, a provincial Capital with provi- never once mentioned, that he has done any
neial ideas, and I met a person who was an sacrifice for the country. This word did not
I told you, big change came in my life.
I
freedom struggle, who has fought for the coun-
him on many occasions, at many places,-he
48
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-50.txt 
 Registered with the Registrar of Newspapers under Regd No. 36999/81
Shri Prasad Rao Krishna Rao Salve
Edited & Published by Sh.. S.C. Rai 43, Bunglow Road, Delhi-110 007 & Printed at
The Central Electric Press, 80-D, Kamla Nagar, Delhi-110 007. One issue Rs. 9.00.
Annual Subscription Rs. 51.00 Foreign (by Airmail £ 7 S 14)
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-51.txt 
 occur to him. He thought always it was a
great privilege for him to bave been in the
forefront of country's freedom struggle; to have him, He has left behind him many of us here.
been associated and been a colleague of pujya They are all very proud, very humbly proud
Mahatma Gandhi, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehruji, hut we can really commemorate him. We are
Maulana Azadji and so on. To hin that was most grateful Sir, that you have unveiled his
AN end in itself-freedom struggle, fight for statue. It's a great reminder of the great person.
freedom, attainment of independence. Sacrifices But in what way can we really commemorate
that he made were never in the nature of an him. Today all of us can reaffirm.our faith in
investment. He expected no return, He did not those values, being an Indian first and anything
want any return. He never thought in those else thereafter, not distinguishing between one
terms. To him the main thing was the country, community and other, one state and another
we Indians, to become independent. When the but serving our motherland, with total dedica-
country became independent it was a proud tion, Then alone we would be really respecting
monient for him because We ull witnessed the his memory. On this day, let us then rededi-
hoisting of our national flag. That was the re- cate ourselves to those noble ideals.
turn. That's what he wanted and he lived to
I could go on Sir, speaking about him
be-
cause I respected him. I loved him. I admired
CAuse I respected him.
Our thanks to you sir, to Dy. Chief Mini-
ster, to Hon Minister, I thank my brother-in-
law Shri N.K.P. Salve who is here. We studied
What a valiant personafity he was. He was together we were friends, when we came to
a political leader. He was a citizen. He was a New Delhi, he got me introduced to him what
lover of cricket, He was a lover of music. You a wonderful association it has been, a friend, a
name anything he had interest in it. What a brother-in-law. How proud I am of him. He is
wonderful personality. But again another fea- now a Minister, he is serving the country. It is
ture in him which must have impressed many my prayer that he may serve the country as he
as it dealt me, was that many people came to is in various traditional ficids like his father
see thar.
see him. He saw many people but never did he and so he will.
distinguish between the rich and the poor,
And Shri Tidke has mentioned, it is not
between the clders and children. He had time normal to mention one's wife in one's address,
enough for everybody whoever it was, whether but I hope, you will forgive me. But 1 must
it was an old man he gave hịm respect, if it mention she also is carrying the same tradition.
I think her father's part in her is now leading
rickshaw wala or whether it was a train driver her to promote a movement throughout the
or a big Honourable Minister may be, to him world, on the same principles. The principle of
all were Indians, equality rights and he truly togetherncss and that is even brotherly not just
believed in that equality. He was a great citizen here in India but all over the world the brother-
of India, a citizen of Nagpur, a great leader, a hood. You know, Sir, how difficult is the world
of today, The quarrels all over the world. They
can be resolved only by one human family. She
He had a unique combination of values. is trying to serve that. You will see Salve fami-
He never departed fronm those values, He never ly in any sphere whether it is politics, states-
believed in compromise on values. Values to manship, religion, spirituality or humanity.
him were the high aspect of living. He believed They are all trying to serve in their small way
that if we had to live, if we have to live toge- and I am really proud to belong to that family
ther then live according toa set of values. and on behalf of that family, I thank you all,
was a child gave him love-whether it was a
WILS
great patriot.
That's what he did till the end of his life.
Sir, and all participants.
