Nirmala Yoga Vol. 5 No. 30 Bi-Monthly Nov. Dec. 1985 "Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns all the religions and seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga-THE UNION"

 NIRMIALA YOGA 43, Bungalow Road, Delhi-10007 (lndia) Founder: Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Editorial Board : Dr. S.K, Mathur, Sr A.S. Mishra, Sri R.D. Kulkarni Representatives : RAJEN MAHARAJ, 26, Ocean St, Bondi, NSW 2026 Australia 1INGE KELLY, Josef Melichargasse 20, 1210 VIENNA. LORI & CARY HYNEK, 1540, Taylor Way, West Vancouver, B.C. VIS 1N4. Austria Canada France M. CERNAY, 175, Av. Ledru Rollin PARIS-75011. : ANTONIO SARACINO, NIRMALA HOUSE, Localita Pichini s.n.s., 00010 S. Angelo Romano, ROMA : M.B. RATNANNWAR, 13, Merwan Mansion, Genjewala Lane, Borivali (W).. BOMBAY-400092. Italy India : JUAN ANTONIO DELGADO, Avenida De Burgos, 30, 1, A, MADRID-28036 : CHARLES & MRS. MAGDA MATHYS, 5, Chemin Des Mouldins, 1256, Troinex (Canton de Geneva). Spain Switzerland U. K. : GAVIN BROWN, Brown's Geological Information Services Ltd., 134 Great Portland Street, London WIN 5PH. IAN BASCOMBE, 32, Hooker Road, Exeter, Devon, England U.S.A. :CHRISTINE & MICHAEL PETRUNIA, 270, Jay Street (APT. 1-C), BROOKLYN, NY-11201, URSULA SEH LMEYER, 191 Canal ST. #23 SAN RAFAEL, CA-94901. 8ONTENTS Page 1. Editarial 2. The New Age 3. Shri Ganesh Pooja (1983) 4. Shri Ganesh Pooja (1984) 5. Count your Blessings 6. Doubt and Ego 7. Achieve the Power of Spirit within 8. Appeal to Divine Wisdom 9. In praise of Wisdom 10. Wisdom and Fully contrasted 1 15 20 25 26 27 29 30 31 11. Mooladhara Chakra 33 12. Easter Pooja 1985 13. Sahaja Yoga-the biggest Blessing of Shri Mataji 14. Christian Tradition and Holy Ghost 15. The Knowledge of the Roots 16. The Right heart and the qualities of leadership 17. Sahaja in Europe : An overview 38 44 45 47 52 3rd Cover

 Editorial We have already considered in the earlier two issues, the first two verses of the hymns of Shri Dakshinamoorty. It is now proposed to study the poem in its totality in order to understand Shri Shankaracharya's philosophy. The poem presupposes, basic identity of the Atma and the Paramatma, that the universe is nothing but the Brahma, for nothing can exist outside the Brahma. The Brahma is pervading in everything in the universe and the universe is within the Brahma. The Maya exists and also does not exist at the same time. When a rope is mistaken for a snake, it is the play of Maya which creates that illusion. In reality there is no snake, but it is there as long as the idea of snake is attributed to the rope, The universe is described in the first verse in relation to the Self as reflection of a city in the mirror. As reflection is inside the mirror the universe is within the Self. Obviously like the reflection the universe is also unreal. However, it is mistaken as real and outside i.e. distinct from the Self, and in the process the cause ol the reflection, i.e. the Self. is ignored. In the verses 5 to 8 the play of Maya is elucidated. Regarding the Atma everyone is in the state of delusion; the body, sense organs, the Pranas, intellect (or the buddhi) are considered as the Atma. The universe is mistaken as real and independent of the Atma, in the course of interaction among various relationships. and the Atma is forgotten. Thus, as stated by Adi Shankaracharya, the Self is enveloped by Maya as the Sun/Moon are covered during the period of eclipse. However, it is the Self alone that becomes manifest in every state, i.e. in sleep or in wakeful state; in childhood or young or old age. The Seif remains unchanged in every change and is seen to be expressing itself as awareness. In fact, this entire world of subject-objects of differentiation and transmutation is nothing but the imagination of Maya (shakti-vilas-kalpita). This illusion is removed by the Grace of Lord Shri Dakshinamoorthy who is none else but the Atma the changeless principle in every change. It is further stated that creation and sustenance of the universe is entirely by the unimped- ed free will Swechchaya=Swa+iccha of the Paramatma or the Self. Shri Adi Shankara- Nirmala Yoga 1

 charya quotes the analogy of a juggler who creates and maintains his magical spell as long as he wishes. It is therefore seen that Maya is also the desire of the Paramatma. In Vivekachoodāmani Shri Adi Shankaracharya has described the Maya: "Avidya or the Maya, called also the "differentiated" is the power of the Lord. She is without beginning, is made of the three Gunas and is superior to them and their effects (as their cause). She is to be inferred by one of clear intellect from the effect She produces. It is She who brings forth the whole universe". It is also stated in the second verse of the hymn that before its creation the universe was latent within the Paramatma as tree in the seed. There was only the Self that had within itself the universe in the form of idea (Atma va idameka evagra aseet). The third verse tells us that Paramatma's Sphurana' (the activity, pulsation) is felt from all that is 'asat' i.e. non-self, meaning illusory. The Sat is the truth. In the process of negation for identifying 'the Sat' only awareness is left which discards everything else as non-Self. The awareness is the Chit hence the Self ie. "Sat' manifests itself as the Chit. The Chit is originated from the Sacchidananda ie, the Atma, i.e. Chaitanya. The Chaitanya is all pervading in inanimate and animate. in the former it is present as motion that keeps everything at its proper place and maintains the balance. It is the Chaitanya that bestows effulgence to the sun and the moon. In the lifteenth chapter of the Bhagavad Gita, the Lord says, The effulgence inherent in the sun which enlightens the entire universe and that which exists in the moon as well as in the fire, know it as My effulgence, and entering the earth it is I who sustain all beings by my powers and becoming the nectarean moon I nourish all plants". In Her lecture on the Principle' Mother has advised that by itself the seed cannot sprout nor can it sprout just in the contact of earth or water or air. It also cannot sprout if any of the three is not there as also the Sun. Each has its own principle and these principles have a principle. Obviously it is the Chaitanya that brings about everything. In the fourth verse it is advised that Shri Dakshinamoorthy makes every visible thing seen. Indeed the light of the sun and the moon has made everything visible. Awareness to see and identify the external world is the quality of the Self but for which the world would have been like non-existent. Apparently to animals the world has no meaning except as a source instinctively used for survival. The Chaitanya that is seen in the animal and plant worlds as instinctive activity and growth becomes more pronounced in human beings through the working of Antahkarana" the inner organs. This idea is well explained in the fourth verse, with a simile of a power- ful lamp (Mahadeepa) placed into a pitcher having numerous holes-light of the lamp shines through the holes. Similarly, knowledge of the Self (or Paramatma) pulsätes through the instruments like sense organs. It is thus seen that every stage of evolution brings forth increasing manifestation of the Self; in human beings, the Sat and the Chit are expressed through the conscious use of physical and mental faculties. It is done through ego, superego, conditioning, identifica- tion etc. When human beings become Sahaja Yogis. a step further in the evolutionary process, their awareness is purified and enlightened and blessed with one more dimension of collective consciousness. Nirmala Yoga 2.

 It is also stated that the knowledge of the Self pulsates (spandate ). According to Shiva-sutras Spanda' is the primordial manifestation of conseiousness of Shiva who is all- pervading Self in Adi Shankaracharya's philosophy. Although the Self shines as awareness in human beings. the pulsation is felt by Sahaja Yogis in Sahasrara, the Peetha of Self. With that the light of the Self entightens the attention and awareness and the 'Spanda the vibrations start flowing. The blissful Spanda of the Self is thus objectively enjoyed by Sahaja Yogis and is transmitted through their beings. The third attribute of Self viz: the Anand is thus expressed. The Atma truly shines like Mahadeepa' in Sahaja Yogis. At the ultimate stage as Shri Adi Shankaracharya says, it is the realisation of Shri Dakshi- namoorty as all-pervading all-encompassing Self one and not the second (Yah Sakshatku- rute Prabodha-Samaya Swatmanamevadvayam)-However, in order to be entitled to such tremendous blessing of the Paramatma Shri Dakshinamoorty, one has to firmly imbibe in the mind, the transient and illusory nature of the universe, and hence non-involvement in it. There should be firm conviction, that Shri Dakshinamoorty is manifesting himself in eight forms viz. the earth, water, fire, air, and ether fi.e. five elements), the sun and the moon. and one's own Spirit. Shri Dakshinamoorty, is, therefore, to be worshipped in these eight forms. One can also meditate that these eight forms are within oneself on the chakras and the Spirit being Shri Shiva, and establish the doubtless state of oneness with Supreme Being. This has been described in the ninth verse wherein it is also stated that if medita- ted in this way. it is experienced that there is nothing beyond Shri Dakshinamoorty. It may be recalled that 662nd epithet of Shri Adishakti in Shri Lalita Sahasranama, is Ashtamoorty. (having eight forms) Secondly, which is most important. is complete surrender. It is stated in the third verse, that the Lord confers the knowledge (Bodhayati) on those who surrender to Him (Ashritan) of Tatwamasi i.e. the primordial principle, the oneness of the Self and the Paramatma. To be the Ashrita, is to take shelter in Him. to have nothing else to look up to. Shri Adi Shankaracharya tells us that God reveals Himself to his devotees (Bhajatam) through Bhadra mudra', with right hand raised in assurance of bestowing the complete well-being. Accord- ing to the scriptures, when great sages like Sanaka and Sanadana were unable to grasp the ultimate, Shri Shiva assumed the form of a boy of 16 years, and sitting, facing to the south, by mere deep silence was able to give them the deep ktrowledge. Therefore, all knowledge emanates from Him. The 725th epithet of Shri Adi Shakti is Shri Dakshinamoorty roopini. It is She who has assumed the form of Shri Dakshinamoorty. According to verse 11, Shri Dakshinamoorty, the consciousness condensed (Chidghana). the Supreme God (Mahesha) of the form of Sachhidananda, resides at the roots of the Banyan tree. Apparently, the banyan tree represents the tree of Life (Urdhva moolamadhah Shakham). The origin of life is the lotus feet of Sakshat Shri Dakshinamoorty roopini Shakshat Adi Shakti. The preceding two verses tell that sitting at the base of the banyan tree, and imparting the knowledge to all saints and seekers, Shri Dakshinamoorty liberates them from the sortow of life and death, The Guru Shri Dakshinamoorty, imparts the know- ledge through silence and the disciples become doubtless. The Guru is young but disciples are looking old. The sacred Knowledge is expressed and received, in silence at the highest level of con- Nirmala Yoga

 sciousness, in the state of complete oneness of the Guru and the disciples. May be, some Igreat souls, have attained that level but Sakshat Shri Dakshinamoorty, Sakshat Shri Adi Shakti, has with limitless compassion descended amongst us. The saints of modern times assemble at the places of seminar. In Her kindness Sakshat Shri Dakshinamoorty roopini Sakshat Shri Mataji imparts the subtle Divine Knowledge as understandable knowledge to them. She raises their attention in the meditations to the level of doubtless awareness, and the realisation of Tatwamasi, of the primordial principle. Those who are truely the Ashritas enjoy and fill their pitchers with the Tatwa and become the Tatwa itself. For the tatwa is nothing but Sakshat Shri Dakshinamoorty roopini. Brahma Vid Brahmo bhavati: the knower of Brahma becomes the Brahma itself. Shri Adi Shankaracharya has promised in the tenth verse, that, whereas, the primordial principle i.e. the Self of everything (Sarvātmatatwa) has been explained in these hymns, studying, reflecting and meditating on these hymns would lead the seeker to the same pri- mordial principle. This study of the hymns of Shri Dakshinamoorty is by no means com- plete. The sarvātmatatwa has always been incomprehensible to common man due to his inability to achieve that purest state of attention and inner being in which it would manifest. Great children of Shree Adi Shakti have explained it in lucid and understandable language. Now Sakshat Shri Dakshinamoorty roopini, Sakshat Shri Mataji, Herself is doing the job. May all the seekers become Her Ashritas and fill their pitchers with the nectar of primor- dial principle flowing from Her lotus feet and liberate themselves. These few lines are dedicated at the lotus feet of Sakshat Shri Dakshinamoorty, Sakshat Shri Parabrahma. Sakshat Shri Adi Shakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi. Nirmala Yoga

 Shri MatajiNirmala Devi Plaw Hatch Seminar England The New Age 15th Nov. 1980 You can pick out people who are very is never done in any other process, that you generate the light, on your own, with your seriously interested in Sahaja Yoga who are dedicated, who have passion for Sahaja Yoga, will, with your understanding. with your who feel that it is the most important thing of freedom. For example a tree may give rise to seeds and seeds might become trees. seeds do not regenerate, they do not have a will.-Because here the seeds are human But life. Now, you must have realized, that you are the people who are the men of God and women beings. Only the human beings have the of God. And that you have to be prepared, will. Now you've been enlightened with to take this banner of New Age, of transform- ing Sahaja Yoga into Mahã Yoga, into a vast area of spirituality. You are the channels, and you are going to generate this energy. If you were just channels, then your responsi- bility would have been much less. your will. With your will you can regenerate, or you would say, you can generate on your own -Sahaja Yoga to go further. It's a very subtle understanding. that when a light comes, into this candle, it cannot regenerate of it's will any other: somebody else has to take it to that. So your will is very important But Sahaja Yoga is a very different type of in Sahaja Yoga. "What do you will". That a living process. Perhaps you might have noticed it, that once you receive your realiza- tion firstly it starts transforming you. Then it starts transforming others. By your presence you start transforming them. By your exist- is very, very important. Now will does not mean "desire. Will means 'desire put into action'. So what you do is to desire and then you put it into ance, you start transforming the atmosphere, action. You can do it. First of all you have to know that we must have desire. That is there no doubt. You are categorically seekers. the subtler problems of negativity, they all work out. Like a tree, when it is blossoming. the fragrance of the blossom creates a diff- I mean you are that category, you are born as erent type of aura, around itself, that it attracts seekers, you cannot get out of it. You are all the bees around to gather the honey. In seekers. Whatever may be your problems, realized, is from whatever source you might have come, whatever mistakes you may make, commit,- but you are seekers. Seekers are seekers. the same wBy, when a person enlightened, the area spreads and you start getting people attracted towards you. You have to remember few points about Sahaja For example in this room if you see how many Yoga, that you receive the light first, the lights there are? At the most 6.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, you see, in both the rooms put together. second step is that you generate the light. It Nirmala Yoga

 In this room only 5. Everybody is not a light. prayed to God and the divorce did not take You are the light givers and it is going to place; it is God's help. But this kind of pray- work out through your 'will'. So how power- ing can have another side, people can say ful our will should be? How dedicated we should be about our will? That, one has to know. you have to fathom out that will within explain that? They have no faith, they are you. Once you start doing this Sahaja Yoga, actually heathens, they are very successful in then you recognize how important is Sahaja life. So how do you explain that side? Yoga that it gives a real meaning to the whole creation. in the eyes of God and divine power. That has to work out-that's that were used before. Because people were the purpose of life. And surprisingly it is left to your will, not to my will. I've no will, faith, or blind-faith and the real faith. Because I've no action. So it is your will, which is going to work it out. So you have to dedi- cate. And now you have to weigh yourself: that time the faith was sustenance: How to How much Il'm willed? The seminars help sustaitn yourself? The second was to have you to see how much yau really will that faith that you will be resurrected, that you Sahaja Yoga should be successful. This is the second thing: To make it successful, what should we do? We must understand that the people who do not believe in God at all are quite successful. Then how do you Sahaja Yoga has another very great thing, that is, it is revelation of all the great terms not given realization, one could not talk of if they do not have their eyes how can you tell them about the light or the darkness? So will be your Spirit Now the third stage is today, to know that the basics of Sahaja Yoga, and try to see with- realization gives you experiences, and then in ourselves "do we understand the basics your faith is established. Not blind, but "open-enlightened faith For example you come into this house and see for yourself what it is, And then have faith in that. that it is so. Believe in that, that you've seen it now you've seen 'Sakshāt'. To have Säkshāt means to get the whole thing which you've first basic of Sahaja Yoga. So far, in 'all' the felt through your organs, five organs of per- religions, 'all' the great books, even Bible or ception. It's as clear as sunlight to prove Geetā, it is written that you must have faith. it. So this way is the real thing. no conjec- You must have faith. "Faith" word was never türe, no just-talking-about-it. So all these clarified in anyone of these books and mostly words that were used in the scriptures are a people thought blind'-faith is the only way revelation'. It means in actual life you've to believe,-is to have blind faith. It should "seen' these things happening. Like I say gt Hā But it was kept a great and the kundalini goes up, you've seen it many a times. I say Hã and you start feeling. That faith. So the people started working it out, only by sayingd (Ha) and (Hoo) and (Hee) you get the vibrations. It is 'absolutely' there, now you can see for yourself. There is no just-'that it would not work out or may work substantiated that it is God who has helped out, may not work out, may be true, may not It's and do we have those qualities by which we sustain those basics"? The first basic of Sahaja Yoga is that you have to become your Spirit, so that your body emits the powers of Spirit alone. This is the have been clarified. term as : faith. They do use: Blind faith, and for example you are walking on the road and you say I was thinking of God, and suddenly I found a gold ring, so that my faith was be true.All these things are not there. Or say that there me to get the gold ring. was a divorce or something like that and I true absolutely. Nirmala Yoga

 But first and foremost is. "You have to when you say, you want the Spirit to be become your Spirit." Without knowing the happy, what you are saying is this, that you Spirit you cannot know God. But the Spirit want your attention to be happy. If you keep itself is a sensitive thing. It is there no doubt, your attention happy and cheerful, completely it stays there no doubt, but that it should integrated with your being, not with your ego. shine in your attention. that your attention has to be congenial to the So from balancing and integration we go to Spirit. If the attention is not congenial, then third point, is discretion because you are the Spirit doesn't shine. Spirit will shine on an attention which is steady. Steady it by senior students. And now you know how to balancing, you bring a steady state. Balance be discreet. What to take, what not to your thoughts, balance your eyes, balance take. your desires. Try to balance it. Ego and super-ego, you balance it. Attention is balanced very much like that. You have to know This is where the discretion has to be used. very senior members of Sahaja Yoga, very It's very easy to criticize others, it's very easy to say others are wrong, but it should be the easiest to see what is wrong with you Now how do you do with your will? First because you cannot correct others, you can of all you desire and then you act. Where am I going? What am I doing? I am a seeker. Is this the thing I have to do as a seeker? Immediately balance will come. balancing has to come; foremost thing is to to tell the other man because she is your own. balance yourself. Any extreme behaviour In the same way it is better to correct yourself must be balanced. Any extreme attitude than to correct others. It's the easiest thing to towards life must be brought down. Now, correct yourself if you could look at your ego here we find that the will acts to oppose and which is stopping it. And who is the gainer? in an opposite direction. For become obstinate. They do not want to accept that we have to balance and they say, "Ohl I am alright," and they'll give all ex- planations to show they are alright. whom are you giving the explanations? You discretion and now with all this trainning in are fighting with yourseif. Why? Because Sahaja Yoga, you should be able to see even you are not yet integrated fully within your- rationally the discretian part of it. I've seen self. only correct yourself. It's as simple as that! Like a daughter is married ta another man, now supposing there is any problem between So this the two, it's better to tell your daughter than Who is the person who receives the benedic tion, and the bliss of Sahaja Yoga? For example people So the old habits that are within us which gives us obstinacy, must be seen with great For people who go by a same road all the time are extremely discreet, they know how to So the second point is the integration. turn, which turn to miss and which turn to Integration of your attention. Integration comes take and how to reach. That's the sign of in when you do some thing, you wish the same your maturity. So you have to be discreet. thing, you enjoy the same thing. If you want Another thing is that you have your vibrations something else, then you find integration is there to teach you discretion. But sometimes also wobbly in your attention. But if you want you may be missing them. So with rationa- your Spirit, you just want your Spirit to be lity if you discriminate and try to find out happy. Spirit is always happy. How are you what is wrong, where am I going wrong, you going to make the Spirit happy? Only thing will very easily understand that this part I am Nirmala Yoga 7.

 doing wrong and better check myself and no- body else. Because you are driving your own budhas from all kinds of people. From all types of Sahaja Yogis coming in, because car. You can only control your brakes and this is a wide gate where every one has to come. all sorts. They may have hundred not the brakes of another person. It's such a funny situation that people are driving every bhoots or they may have ten thousand. body else's car but not their own. So with Come along. Whatever type of bhoots there pre we know how to handle them."-This discretion you will know how to correct yourself even rationally. Now your ration- should be the attitude. Because I cannot ality is absolutely logical. Before, this, ration- give up any. I have to give chance to every- ality was illogical. But now with integration one. It is you who discriminate between your rationality becomes logical and it tells these and you throw those people away. I you "No, this is wrong, this cannot be." You just can't do it. I'm sorry! Some people will Practically come, shout at me, insult me, trouble me. know about everything now. everything. I do not think there is anything Alright doen't matter. They'll be alright. I requires information for you people. can put them out of circulation, when they Means you just try to think about something are absolutely useless. But till the end I will have to try. And it 1 find a slightest im- that That's all in and you will get the answer your brain. It's opened up, only thing that provement, I'll catch on to them. I may have to work much harder with them. They may be much more closer than other peaple are So then we go If they are lost people I have to look after from discretion to understanding. that when them. So you must know that it is your res- we discriminate and find out things, what you ponsibility that you should take your charge have to do is to find our own fault, correct and look after the other things that Mother them discreetly. Why tell about others? What has no time to look after. That's what the are we to do? If you people are of that level, quality you people ara. That quality of people. that you catch from even a butterfly flying All the Gods and all the Angels bow to you. around you; and a little leaf falling from the They are in attention to you. You have seen Even the Sun has come around, in these But clouds just surrounded by clouds he is there. I said. develop your discretion. If you are indiscreet then you must develop it. you must grow up, you must mațure. tree. I mean if you were at that level then ! would never have put you into this test. you are not. You are capable of much bigger Then you have to come up. test than this and its nice to play with these, isn't it? Otherwise why should anybody even do hitch hiking. Leave alone hitch hiking. beginning of Sahaja Yoga. If you do not why should people swim? I mean better to want to become collective-Sahaja Yoga is sit on the bank and see everything. Even not meant for individuals. 1his I must have said why go near the river. You may catch cold. So better sit in the house. And why even put on the light. you may see something and Here you are coming to become a collective you may get frightened. So better to sleep. being because Spirit is the collective being. The Even why to go to sieep, because you may quality of Spirit is that it is a collective being. dream. So that situation if it is there, that It is a part of the collective. It is absolutely touch-me-not business, then I can tell you one with the collective. It is so collective we cannot count. We are saldiers, and we have to develop immunities from all kinds of much it is collective. For example yesterday And a small thing like collectivity, it's the at least 6 years back, or seven years back in England and must be ten years back in India. that you cannot imagine on human level how Nirmala Yoga 8.

 was criticizing Geeta and the vishuddhi was everything on her, we all tried, she could not opened. Krishna is sitting here and talking be cured. And she vwas only interested in through me. There is no difference at all of doing that. Then she would write poems for And I am Krishna, I me and she wanted to read the poems. Mast am Mataji and I am Christ. So much one embarrassing thing. 1 told her. "Don't read", that you can't imagine how much oneness because all bhoots used to come out of her poem. We told her in so many ways. Went on for a year or so, still she was on and on, So for Spirit to be absolutely enlivened and she was just creating a problem for all the Sahaja Yogis. She was just a medium for we have to know that how do we articulate all these bhoots to come in. And I told her with others? How do we talk to others? many a times, you better not come here, Then I told her very frankly. Then I said, "you get out from here", I went up to that. Second But of course as I said that there are people year passed. Still she would not listen. Then about whom you should not bother at all. 1 just told her husband. that if she comes to They are not interested in Sahaja Yoga. They the programme we are going to report it to that. It's just the same. is there. It's such an unison that exists. within us, to be absolutely shining within us, What is our way of judging? are anti God. They are anti Christ. Forget the police, So her husband stopped her. But them. They have started another movement people have such sympathies you know, for towards hell. You cannot stop them. First start such bhoots, not seeing that she is going dealing with simpler people. But if anybody against Mother, she is going against Sahaja comes into my attention then you have to Yoga, she is bringing all kinds of bhoots accept that person. But on your own you inside, and that why should Mother say all don't go on wasting your energy with them. the time that she should not come? So when I do not say that you go to one of these I went away she started coming again. Every body told her, "Babal you don't come." But there were some sympathizers with herl "She But do not waste your energy with people, is a lady, why should you say anything to as Christ has said: "Don't cast pearls her", this and that. But when she came once before the swines". Because in the swine all absolutely adamantly, people told her "if you bhoots" places and you just go and fight with them, No. If possible, try if it works out. kinds of parasites live. don't go away, we'll throw you out". Still she would not go, she was just sitting down So in collectivity those who are Sahaja there. So one of them kicked her purse oul- Yogis those who have joined Sahaja yoga. side. I mean what's the use of touching her there should be complete unison and articula- purse also with your hands, you don't contact. tion. Absolutely. And enjoy each other's And then she got up to catch hold of her company. Everyone is a beautiful flower. But purse, because if the purse has gone out she I have seen people are more attached to other could'nt sit there. Since then she stopped, people who come in. Supposing a possessed coming and went away. And there were letters person comes in.... We had a very good ex- ample in India, one of the ladies who used to come was possessed. She would from there, you see. "This doesn't look nice for Sahaja Yogis to behave like this and to d every time throw away the purse like this, and this come, sit in front, she would never sit at thhe should not have happened. that should not back. And as soon as the tape would start have happened."I said this is indiscreet. If she would go on like this, like that. I tried she is a bhoot you tell her not to come, she Nirmala Yoga

 is not wanted there, she cannot be a Sahaja Yogini, she is not a seeker, she is a medium ledge. Once you realize that, then discrimina- of bhoots. Still she is troubling. Then who tion will work out much better. That you is sympathizing? Naturally the people who are possessed. They sympathize with another anyone. possessed person, She is not a Sahaja Y that. You are knowledgeable. You are know don't put down anyone, you don't discarc But they are not the samt as you are. This principle know. You are not saying that lower o ni. mus The collectivity has to be with the Sahaja higher or anything. But you are different Yogis. Not with others. Because it is not they are different. And they have to come anc there it is a fake thing. It's like "We are join you. They have to become. You canno brothers and sisters." How are you? You are become like that, but they can become like not feeling. It's not awakened within you. If a leaf says I am the flower, does she become? Sahaja Yoga, one of the very great basics for Leaf is a leaf and a flower is a flower. Among our grawth, is to discriminate. Trust Sahaja the flowers there should be collectivity. Yogis, do not trust non-Sahaja Yogis. Neve1 Because that's the natural thing that's there- existing. Not with others. This is one thing Yogi. Sahaja Yogi is your brother or sister, is which people do not know how to discrimi- companion, is everything. And the others nate. You are all one together but you'lIl fight all others, they are among each other, and when as soon as others come in. "Come along, come along They can come to this side. But they are not sit down." Surprising! 1 have happening! you. So discretion is very important. Ir trust a non-Sahaja Yogi compared to a Sahaja another party, you are another party. They are not your enemies. seen this the same as you are. This must come into you. So the collectivity will graw strong. You should know, by fighting with each other It's you who are my children. it's you who speak the same language. It's you who know you are reducing the power of Sahaja Yoga. everything. You are the people who are cove- ted. You are Princes.-They still have to be- come. That's a different point. You sit in your if the channels start fighting with each other, glory. The idea that all the saints should go to the feet of every third person. It's not that you are kings. You live like kings. You have to maintain distance from others who are com- By getting angry with each other you are reducing the power of Sahaja Yoga. Imagine how are you going to channelize the energy. So first of all, make your channel alright: And understand that we all channels put to- gether are going to do the work better. We moners. Don't allow your ego to develop, of all have to be together. Togetherness is to be coursel But know that you wouldn't enjoy your kingdom unless end until you get more people into it. You've to get more and more and more but keep your dignity. You are at that level. Keep your poise. And then deal and Sahasrara because I am the collectivity with others in the same manner "that you've of all the Gods. And all the centres are in the joined together". You are the saints. One brain, in the Sahasrara. And thirdly when it has to be assuming, assume one's powers. goes beyond a certain level, then you catch Assume; there is no pride. You are that, so you are that, so what is there to be proud of? Heart; this combination starts. If Ajnya left or I mean you are tealized souls; finished. How to right, any one of them joins in. you develop be conscious of it? You are that. So you are felt. When the collectivity is disturbed what is the centre you catch ? Can you tell ? .. Vishuddhi; on your Heart. So Vishuddhi. Sahasrara and Eküdasharudra. Nirmala Yoga 10

 Now how through left vishuddhi and right relationship between right vishuddhi and left vishuddhi we spoil other people? It's so evident. Supposing you have right vishuddhi sides of a coin. One side is aggressing, so on problem. In Japan I went there. Japanese the right hand side when people speak to people you know have certain ideas, in each other they oppress or aggress, they say which shyness and shame has no meaning. And a gentleman, who is the chairman of a very things they say. We have seen people talking big international company, came to see me in a hotet. And he had a big thing on his mouth white some sort of a thing like a Hanumäna. do it. Right-sided spoil the relationships by And 1 asked him, what's that supposed too much aggression, say for example one: to be? And he talked to mme and this party man will stand up and say that "I am thing was on his nose like that. I saw his the one", the another will say "I am the one". right vishuddhi was very badly caught. Still I The relationships between the political parties couidn't understand. So he said "I am sorry for this Madam, but this is there because I've another side is the one, also cannot articulate. got cold", So they put that thing on, whether you have to see the Queen or anyone. They it goes down too much, ends up in perverted will just put on that and then go and see. Because when you have cold, others catch. you find a friend came to stay and he ran That's one thing that catches the fastest. Now you had cold so I have caught. So to get a cold one learns that if somebody has this kind of a funny relationship when you cold, he himself says "Today I've got cold donot understand the purity of relationship in you don't come". If you have to give an excuse to some one that you don't want to problems. So in relationship right and left go anywhere, you say "I've got flu." Alright. vishuddhi both of them play a very big part. It's alright don't come.-Nobody bothers. vishuddhi is very close, as much as the two aggressive things. Extremely aggressive like that.-boastful, aggressive things. Left sided as I told you are the sly people, so they are ruined. They cannot articulate. The Because the relationship in the slyness when sex life. Then you go to somebody's house, away with the mother-or some sort of a nonsense like that. So on the left hand side social life, that drops down, that creates Then comes the Sahasrara. You know Sahasrara what it is. People want to judge me. They have a right to do it; I mean I can- not say no. You can judge me. You can do So this is the right vishuddhi, you can see it very clearly. But left vishuddhi you cannot see, but feel. Left vishuddhi creates all kinds of social problems. Right Vishuddhi creates what ever you like. I mean 1 cannot say that all kinds of political problems. For example you don't judge me. So we cannot say that those who have right vishuddhi are speakers. you don't judge me. I cannot say. You go on They have to talk too much. They may judging me. create problems with their right vishuddhi have got to judge me? i have such a camou- by talking too much or by keeping quiet, flage: just a bubble, and such a receding per- both ways. The left vishuddhi people say sonality. How are you going to judge me? Is somathing Now what is the instrument, you there any way of judging me? You can never horrible. sarcastic, something something nasty, sly. non-aggressive but catch me anywhere! It's a camouflage. Firstly screwing type. They might create holes into people you see. They don't believe in killing Where are you going to catch me? On the directly like that. So they want to do screw- contrary by all these attributes I create a pro- ing up. Screw the person here and there. The blem for you, that I am a Mahamiya. You I am prideless. I am egoless, I am actionless. 11 Nirmala Yoga

 cannot understand a person who does not What's the use of getting crucified, who is have pride. Because you all can talk to me going to raise the Kundalini? 1 would like very nicely, you can be very sweet and you can just sit next to me. And suddenly you would have said, "Keep your cross for a while come out with a remark which shows you I will have it later on". What's the use, just are not conscious of to whom you are talking. now, to destroy people? Let's see how many Suddenly something you do where you are come around, you see. So these powers are not conscious. Because I go on playing. Tam not required. Today the power of raising the extremely friendly with you, extremely nice to you. Absolutely prideless. You see anybody millions & millions of people is required. who has even this much position in life, he has a nose like that; mine is bent all the time! Nothing but humour. And then how are you life. In the sense l am going to get old, as going to understand my position? You see you're going to. I mean, today 1 should be there is no outside sign. There are no horns, old, I will be and be just like you! I am not there is nothing that I could be a cinema star, going to do anything outside. It's like a | am too simple, too sweet. There is no way by which you can 'really' feel that I am great. I âm absolutely mundane, ordinary. But type. And once you realize that, that all is extraordinary of the ordinary I am. This is a thing which people do not It's alright for those who are not realized, to do it. I mean if I were at that time I Kundalini of thousands & thousands and And I am going to be just like you all my German car. But it is you, who has to know the power of the German car. It's the best deliberately made like that. In the beginning understand. of course, you cannot even understand it. It goes on: "how .can it be, how can it be, She the does this, She does that "it goes on like that. You do not judge me, because that's not the But -excused. have felt you vibrations and got your realization through must be something. Put your attention way you will understand. Just realize, and like that to understand. Must be tremendous recognize, that there has to be somet hing thing inside this body. It cannot be possible tremendous. It was necessary to have soma- otherwise. It's so obvious otherwise to you people. me. one like that to do this 'tremendous' task. And it was necessary for you to be born, to be with me to help. I know those who are This is to be understood, that so far with me. They ll stand by me throughout. I Krishna, Christ, Râma, all of the them, nobody may judge them a little here and there, but I gave Self-realization to people en masse. They know they will come round. You have to had other powers, like Krishna had Samhār stand by me. Those who want to run away shakti, he could kill any one like this. I have they Il run away, today or tomorrow. I'l try. also all these powers with me, but obviously 'I try to get them round, as far as possible. I am a very simple, ordinary, mundane type of an Indian lady. And Christ had a power to get Himself crucified. I too have that. But I am not going to do all that. I have a power to Resurrect also. Why these powers are not degenerates. used? One should understand. Because now the main attention is to raise the Kundalini, liberate, more vibrations and I feel sick with and for that these powers are not required. that, because you can't take it. When you Give realization to any number of people. take vibrations / feel well. But those who So, we come to collectivity. To understand that you are cells in my body. And I have awakened you. If you degenerate, my body You have seen that all. When you are sick, I am sick. In the sense I emit, 12 Nirmala Yoga

 l give drunk fellovw. l'l have faith in themselves can only understand being and this and not those who have superiority con- you a joke of a drunkard. There were plex, or inferiority complex, . no faith in yourself. You should have faith went to a hotel. They wanted to in yourself that you are the chosen ones. You are really the people, specially 'made for they wanted, they did not know. So they went this great work. It's a tremendous thing and told the clerk that they would like to that you are all born. Once you realize and recognize it you would not bother about understand. "No, small small things of life. It's the quality bed." So he said, "Alright you want to in you that has to be nurtured and looked have a room with two beds." So he opened after, through collectivity. But collectivity a room and said these are the beds for you. of the 'Sahaja Yogis'. I know those who have So fully clothed as they were, they slept in proper reactions with things. Some Sahaja Yogi is coming; they feel very happy: "Oh he is coming!l" You say," there are five people who got realization," they feel very happy. my bed." So the first one says, "what should They will not sham, they'll be happy to go all out to see a Sahaja Yogi, to meet a Sahaja Yogi, throw them out" And there was a big strug- to do anything for a Sahaja Yogi. This is the gle and lot of noise in the room, So the tirst sign of a Sahaja Yogi. A Sahaja Yogi will go one says "I've got him out. secretly and help a Sahaja Yogi in difficulty. one says, "But he has thrown me out. Not just on money but anything. were drunk. They Complex means two drunkards who a room for themselves. God knows what have "two beds with a room". He didn't with a rooms the same bed. So one calls to another. Says he, "There is somebody in my bed." Other one says. "I too have someone in: we do." The second one says, "let's try to " The second So the first one says "Alright you can come and sleep with me," because he has thrown him This is a new race that is coming up. The out, so what to do?. This is what they others are human beings, you are not! You are! Bre not human beings any more. You are Sahaja Yogis. It's a different race. All over the world this race has to come: up So we have of arguing with them and getting angry. to build up ourselves. In one group, in ane getting into tension, understanding, Absolute unison. There should be no secrets, there should be no domination, speed of five hundred miles an hour. That's Everything should articulate, every one should talk to each other; every one should know what is happening with the other. You have to be 'absolutely" frank-open with each other. digest his drinks. So that is what is the Absolutely. Tell them your problems. "I catch on this, what to do? I catch on that, what power, drunk by money. drunk by that, some- to do? How to clear it out?" Not to feel shy. thing is there. And you are filled with the We have to enjoy ourselves. Also enjoy our light of God Almighty. That is what it is, the weaknesses, so that we clear them out. Laugh difference is. If you understand the difference, it out. Somebody has some habits, laugh it out. That's the best way to do it. This is the difference. So what is the use I mean they are drunk. If you see a drunkard, run with the my principle. No use arguing with a mad man ora drunkard. May be mad man may be alright. but drunkard,-till three hours he wouldn't difference. They are drunk. They are drunk by you will realize that no use fighting with these people. They are drunk. They are like that. If you talk to them, what can you say, I mean. The difference between a human being they don't understand. They just don't and a Sahaja Yogi is the same as a human understand. Let's forget it. I will give you 13 Nirmala Yoga

 such tests and things by which you will given any parallel, because youu are going come in contact with them, see them and get above human things. So far never such a out of it. without any harm being done to thing has existed. You are such unique crea- you. This is necessary: you have to touch tions that there isI cannot compare you with them. You have to go near them, you have to anything that was below. or1 should say, be with them. You are outside. | give which was on this level. The level is different. such tests to people and that should work So when you do everything the 'same way, you out! I know you can, that's why I give such tests to only people about whom l'm sure. that they will come out. This I think we you. That's why you are doing. This transi- should decide today that. we all are going to Tive with One heart. and One desire, with That's something I feel, that when you start One head and with One liver. All of us. giving any analogies and all that, how can Let's see, how it works out. are doing it because you are "aware of that Collectivity of the Primordial Being within tion is the point which you should catch. you give an analogy for something that never existed before? Never. Atula,-which cannot For example you go to a Hotel-five Sanaja be compared. That's one of the names oft Yogis. One says "I'll have that" every body the Goddess. So, I cannot give you anologies, will have that.-That's the sign. No decisions are needed. Why waste energy on decisions, arguments? Whether you eat fish and chips Spirit is awakened-in everybody is the Spirit or chips and fish, is the same. The quartel is Like that: Sahaja Yogi does not waste his fo ego, superego and all these nonsensical energies on this. You have seen your Mother, things, which are barriers in the growth of no choices. Just enjoyment. Where is the time to argue? It's joy pouring in. Let's enjoy. May God Bless You. but I can make you understand that if your which is a Collective Being,-then you do it because your Spirit does it. You don't care "living' collectivity. Now you 'have become livingly collective' and You'are' that It'sa new being that is within you. Ii you try to do some- See, why is the problem? That you have thing else, you will not like it, because this will. that any thing else does not have the time it's not your ego but your Spirit. As You have the will. And once you try before this you listened to your ego and were to bring the will in tune with each other, you happy with it, now you will be happy if you feel your ego is there, your ego hurts. You listen to your Spirit. Because now you have don't want to be, you don't want to lose that. become the Spirit. It's a very unique situa- or think that by doing so, you are becoming tion. You are the Spirit. And when you are sub-normal. No. You are a realised soul, and a the Spirit, then you become different. What realised soul is something so unique that analogies can I give?Then the responsibility is more also to understand. in that, when you be a parallel. For example I can say, if there say yes, another says yes'. See in saying "yes" is a wind blowing then all the trees move in you'll feel happy. Supposing you say fish & the same way. But human beings, if the chips, another says, fish & chips, another will wind is blowing....Supposing any wind is say fish & chips, everybody will say this. "Let's oming, somebody will go that way, some- go to the, right", "lets go to the right,""let us body will go that way, because they have a go to the right,"-everybody will say. Unless 'will'. But Sahaja Yogis, if the wind is blowing, and until there is somebody who knows' the all of them will put their heads against the wind job and says, "No, no. This is not the way. and fight it. This is a thing which 'cannot be Right is not, the way, Let usgo left." Everybody will. you cannot give a paralle! to it. There can't cor (Contd. on page 19) 14 Nirmala Yoga

 Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Shri Ganesh Puja Tivoli (italy) 11th Sept. 1983 Today we are celebrating the Birthday of how to cure the ills of bad feelings, all that Shri Ganesha, because it is a very impor- can be cured if you put your right hand to- tant thing tor all of us that we should celebr- wards me and the left hand to the Mother ate His Birthday: and yesterday we did the Earth. So, in action you do like that. Havana. But yesterday we had many new people so I could not talk to you very clearly about Shri Ganesha's deeper manifestations. thing' that is material, that has bhava (w) You know that He resides within us. We that has been creatad. He is the essence of have a very great asset within us that we everything that has been created. "Through know about Shri Ganesha, and that we can excite His powers: Now as He is the 'essence of every- Him" everything has been Created. When you develop that, you develop your sense of subtle creativity, and the sense of subtle ap- To manifest Shri Ganesha, we have to do preciation of creativity. Then you develop certain amount of Tapasya,-Penance. First your discretion of how to behave with others, we have to say, when we sit for meditation, in a beautiful manner, so that your ego is that, "1 am going to be worthy of Your appre- controlled. The behaviour should be such ciation. Make me humble. so that am appreciated by You, and my only desire is your behaviour. Your Mother is a good to please You". Then you sit down in com- plete preparedness, meditating over your Moolādhara, putting your attention to it with absolute purity. Now you have my photo- of things, but never show off, nor ever graph before you and you tell the photograph, assert that I am so knowledgeable. I live "Mother, You are Shri Ganesha. You give like a very very ordinary person with you, and me wisdom and discretion". So, attention at the moolüdhara chakra, which is actually gives you a shock. So, with your intelligence below the sacrum bone: You put your right or with your other powers-like if you are a hand towards the photograph, and left hand moneyed man or if you are more efficient, or on the Mother Earth. Novw this will tell you anything.--you should not try to impress on that your mind, or your brain which is full of others. But you must deal with it beautifully. confusion, which has no discretion, which is So the beauty comes when you are efficient complicated, which does the same mistakes and' you are loving. That is the central again and again, which does not understand point, that is the result. That you are know- that there should be no expression of ego in exampte. I think you know that I know quite a lot I do not in any way assert my personality that Nirmala Yoga 15

 ledgeable and you are humble. That you Have you seen a child being nursed by know everything about everyone but you are mother, how concentrated the child is. Suck- discreet. So in effect it is a complete per- ing everythingl It doesn't bother who is who, sonality that can only give that kind of a where he is sitting, what is it, what is catching. very soothing effect. So the soothing effect it doesn't bother as to who is next to you, comes as a result of beauty. So to develop it what is your relationship with others. Or it you have to meditate on your mooladhara chakra. doesn't bother, at all, as to the future, as to what he is to do next. T have seen many people get fanatic about Sahaja Yoga also. They think they are the real Nepoleons or Shivaji ! In Marāthi we call him Shiväji, but Shivaji was a much better person than Napoleon, better to call him Napoleon. Then they start guiding you in 10 days ahead agitated it they have to go everything-"This is not good, that is not good. I am a very great Sahaja Yogi IYou going, they have forgotten everything. Because are like this,"" and all that,-and very hot tem- pered because they are fanatics. Fanaticism and temper goes together. There is no love in fanaticism. If you tell them don't be a fanatic, they will start crying. So the fanati- cism of Sahaja Yoga is most blinding. It is something like, in front of the Temple of God you beg from other people for money. Sahaja trary I play tricks that everything goes wrong Yoga is one thing which should not lead you with people like that! And I want them to to 'any' fanaticism. You have to be prasanna- learn that this is not so important: To keep chitta, (aafa) which means be a very happy, joyous personality: and not everything to God. Because you don't know a tense, abrupt person. But this only achieves that when you are in the present you are in it's maximum result when everything is done in complete innocence, So innocence keeps you in the present. Innocent man is permanently relaxed. Suppos- ing I have to go today. Alright, so l'll go at the time when I have to go, what's the use of getting agitated about it? People get even after ten days. And when it really comes to they are not in the present. So to develop your innocence also is a very good idea 'to be in the present'. At the most what's going to happen? I mean whatever has to happen will happen in any case. So why worry? I am one person who is least worried, and nothing has gone wrong with me so far. On the con you should yourself in the present is your job and leave contact with the Divine power, but when you get out of the present you are not there you are under your ego or superego. But many people confuse innocence with stupidity. They think, to be stupid is inno- So for all of you I may try just to show cent. And a stupid man gets into an ego- jua3 trip in no time. Innocence is the wisest thing. that I am also playing with you to prepare you. I am least bothered about anything what- soever. What is such a disaster you have seen in your life, just tell me. the last dissolution of the whole universe. You 'cannot befool innocence, that's the main thing. No one can befool me, I am very in- nocent. Innocence is that which does not harm anyone, that does not think that it can solve the problems, but, it leaves everything What can I fear anymore? So when you get I have seen upset, think of something very serious that has happened to you before, and then you for God to solve. It is just existence itself- in the blessings of your Mother, as Ganesha was, just living on the complete blessings of will not be so much worried about the non- His Mother. It gives you concentration. sensical little things here and there. Nirmala Yoga 16

 So miraculous things will happen, through if somebody does it. He does not mind, your innocence. The more innocent you are the more blissful you will be. because it pleases the other person. But it does not go to his head or anything. On the contrary, when you are doting on such person, you start learning Now, many people should try this thing : sitting in a group together, meditating, saying the mantra of Shri Ganesha, to try to build up. Those who think too much, they should an expert on massaging the feet. So she said also try to say "Not this, not this, not this..". "Mother, just you give me one hour one day Even the superego when it gives you thoughts, and I will come and massage your Feet, you should say "not this, this...". So you will develop that state where alright, come such and such day, And when you stand yourself, and nothing else. So the she started massaging my feet. you see, she innocence plays, but it is not involved. it said, "What is happening! It is me who is sees the play. Just sees. It enjoys the play. relaxing". Just enjoys. So today when we are thinking of Shri Ganesha, let us desire that, "Within us His great power of innocence be when you try to pamper the innocence, when enlightened". There was somebody like that-this was not this, not because I have known that art". I said So, that is the beauty of innocence, that you try to dote on the innocence. it emits the beauty. It relaxes If there is a little And He is, on the other side, the source of child, and you want to kiss the child and you love. The source of emotional security. He's want to embrace the child and you want to like a child, a very charming, beautiful child. love the child-it is 'you' who is wanting, not and people feel extremely..... enchanted. the child. If you do not want it, you are abnormal. But if you want to dote on some- enchantment. Because motherly "charming" also is a very funny word. one, then that should relax' that person,- Because in the west people don't understand the one who does that. But if it is the other even innocence towards children. So you way round, that the other person gets tensed have to be childlike, not childish, confusion must not be there. But some people confuse oriented, then it is all wrong, absolutely it is it. They think it should be like a big baby, upside down. You get tensed up because you see; and that you have to be treated you think nothing should displease the like a big baby all the time, from bottle feeding person, you think the person needs it. You to nappy changing,-in Marathi it is called "Motha Bal" And there's no end to it. So this kind of thing, if it is done to someone, remember that, that 'you need it then why that really will become a stupid fellow in no should you worry that you should not do this time. up and the person whom you dote, gets ego- try to dote on the child thinking that the child needs it. It is 'you' who need it. If you particular thing the person will be displeased. So just by pleasing yourself you are really But Ganesha's enchantment has dignity. pleasing the other person.-one has to see it He may lok like a child, but He is an old that way. man. He is the eldest of all. And despite all these years, he has kept His innocence intact. So sometimes people confuse it with perspective. And that is what should come overdoting or caring too much,-and the into everyone spontaneously. When that innocent person doesn't like it much. Even comes in, you become a complete persona- So this is wisdom : To see things in right 17 Nirmala Yoga

 So nothing absurd should be done. No- lity. Ganesha is sufficient to make you com- plete, because He is complete. And as it is, thing overly should be done. Because there for you people to do it. it is easier, because you are already at a point where Ganeshä is ning for nothing at all,-it is useless pleased. Or we can say that you are pleased with yourself. So one should not feel that, or should not feel bad. If someone feels hurt or something, that means there is something lacking in that person. will be remorse and unnecessary heart bur- Now. in Sahaja Yoga another very impor- tant pointI have to tell you today. which is not so much besides Shri Ganesha's point, regarding which we always make mistakes. Certainly in India there have been lots of mistakes like that: Now I give you one example of Mr. X who is a great Sahaja Yogi. in the sense that he is a great organiser, he has done this, he has doe that, and we start adoring him. Or we may be jealous. One of the two things happen, either we adore or we are jealous Now, if you adore that person, then you should follow his footsteps. And if you are jealous, then it is more reason that you comes an fabsolutely left-side character. follow his footsteps so you become like him. I Supposing before realisation he is running am talking of wisdom. Now, but instead of that Complete personality is the personality where we can say that Shri Ganesha is resi- ding with all His powers. But some people have the right Ganesha and some people have the left Ganesha powers. Both the types of powers much developed. If a man has been licentious and very fond of the other sex and all that, he gets such a rebound that he be- after women, or the girl is running after the men, all that, gets such a rebound that, he just doesn't want to do that thing, as a filth, -he thinks its filth, that is one of the feelings that come in the mind of a person, when he doesn't hanker after this kind of nonsense. Like we have horrible names like heterosexuals when you adore-even whether you are a boy or a girl, you will jump on him, you will hug him and kiss him, you do all kinds of non- sensical things.-Which is 'not needed' to expiess that way. Like it happened with me that I was in and homosexuals and all sexual sorts. When London for the first time, I'd never known all you keep a healthy company of "your' type, this, and somebody who was quite hefty just of your sex,-company-healthy and pure. It is came and hugged me, and I didn't know very natural. And the another extreme nature what was the word in this langage. So 1 should not be followed. Like, I have seen ". So it is quite funny. I am not used to kissing at all, more attached to their daughters than to their at all'. Anybody kisses me. I get a fright wives. Funny thing. It is absurd. They pay you know. I can kiss a lady or a little boy more importance to the daughters than to the that is all right. that is done, but not every wife-it is something very absurd, it is not man, I cannot kiss-it's very funny, isn't it ? So good. It's again perversion. Or the women, this kind of adoration is not very wise. Ado- they love their son more than their husband. ration is to be felt in yourheart. Like yesterday It is absurd. And once it starts working like one of the gentlemen put his hand so strong that, it can go to any absurd limit, which is on me, that for two minutes I was just trying not in the 'maryadās in a told him in marithi "Put me down among some muslims, a habit, that they are the boundaries of to put it right. And this shaking hands is Sahaja Yoga. There has to be very healthy very horrible thing. Sometimes they cannot feel relationship. Friendship. but not attachment alright unless and until they have taken about a kilo of meat out. ...And this is how some- which looks funny and absurd. Nirmala Yoga 18

 dom af Shri Ganesha was that he was surendered to his Mother, that is all; he is not bothered. And when you are surendered then you just understand that you give up times, there are no maryadas left, even among ourselves.-So there should be maryádas. Now feeling jealousy is another thing. I have seen that when people feel jealous, they start coming and complaining against this person or that person know it is. Jealousy is the worst curse ever we can have, I think. because then you can't see anything that is good. Because you see a person is normal, you feel jealous of such a person. Then you feel, you are jealous so you have every right to do what you like. You just say," I am jealous of yoU. because you are so good. So, now I can be very bad." I it started with people telling that this is jealousy which is a bad thing; it was all right. But now the bad thing is taken as blackmail. you see, you use it for blackmailing others help you to develop your Ganesha Tattva. that, "Oh, alright! 1 am a bad man, so I am a bad man. You are a good man, alright, So what?"Just like that. To use it as a power. your ego and your superego to your Mother to bother about it, and you live with your in- nocence. And to understand aiso in a very gross way, we can say, to have Ganesha tattva (Principle) developed in you, you must eat things which are emitting Ganesha Principle. Like the Chana, like, 1 have found out. the Hazelnut. Then you can see that you should use a lot of these lemons, is a good idea. mean at first All these give you a good Ganesha Tattva. So all these things should be used, and there are many other things one can see thati which But the highest of all is to control your eyes. Not to see anything that is tempting. So put your eyes on the ground. Just watch your eyes when another sex arrives, how do you look at that person, with greed, with lust. And if you understand that then you will Like yesterday one madman came, a luna- tic. Now when this lunatic came, he wanted to sit in the front. And he just started taking advantage of his lunacy!-That if he is a start clearing your eyes very well. Another lunatic, he can behave the way he Because you are a drunkard you can behave the way you like. Now, what is the wisdom? Where is it lost? It is ridiculous. likes. thing is physically you should try to do one or two exercises to be able to put yourself flat on the Mother Earth, because that helps. So before doing the meditation to Shri Ganesha, you must first do that exercise, to losen the muscles so that you should touch the Mother Earth in a nore flat way. It will help. So, one has to be wise. When you are dealing with it, the wisdom is your glory. By wisdam you will be fair to yourself and fair to others. Wisdom is like an ocean, one can- not describe it in one lecture. Just try to enjoy your wisdom. And the greatest wis May God bless you So for todayI think I have said sufficiently. (Contd. from page 14) should 'know' that he knows the way. So the nourishment of Sahaja Yoga, that will be "Yes, let's go to the left. ArgumentS will the second half. fizzle out, because you are in 'unison. But the first half is the basics, which I've talked of. In second half I'l have to tell you about May God Bless You. 19 Nirmala Yoga

 SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI Shri Ganesha Puja RIFFELBERG SWITZERLANI 2nd Sept. 198 My Joy knows no bounds when we have the Saints of that state that people have tha come to worship this holy mountain which sensitivity and that kind of a movement. we have named as GANARAJ, Sometimes the words are not sufficient to hold the out- pour of your Joy. Unfortunately in the west, where Shraddhi is something very'superficial, anything like thi: takes them to something very superficial I come to you as a symbol of your Mother, anything like this takes them to something but the first son who was created was Shri very dirty, filthy, unholy. Instead of surrender Ganesh. And then, when the Mother Earth ing to the Sublime, and enjoying the greatness was created as a symbol of motherhood. She of the Sublime, they take to something very created many Shri Ganeshas in this universe. In carnal which belongs to the flesh But stil the cosmos, the star whichis called as Mars, is the people who are living in simple ways in Shri Ganesha. All these symbols were created for you the Sahaja Yogis to recognize them. To recognize all these symbols is easier if you are a realized soul. But we have had so many great realized souls in the past. of very high quality, and they recognized, they found out the symbols of Shri Ganesha, long time back. the villages, in the nature, must have realized the importance of this holy mountain. Thousands and thousands, millions of years back, the Mother Earth started producing Her Ganesha, It was first a huge ocean where Himālaya stands. Himalaya gradually started coming out of that ocean, in a flat way, like a Shiva-Lingam, which is the expression as the manifestation of the animals, they have the India is the microscopic form of the whole earth, Mother Earth. So, in the trianale of brains which are flat. But when the Himalayas Maharashtra we have got eight Ganeshas which are manifesting vibrations, and were recognized by great Saints of Maharashtra. But, as you have seen, as a grace of these great Saints, specially Maharashtra has created human beings who have SHRADDHA as the way that at certain points it rose up to a point highest expression of their emotion and mind becoming like Shri Genesha. And it was, to Because of that lofty vision in the mind begin with, of flat, again the same type. whenever they see something of this sublime nature, their thoughts go to God. Thanks to started coming out of that sea, the Mother Earth was pushed on sides. And the Mother Earth started giving folds to Her saree, you can say. Now, when that movement started. the saree gave waves of vibrations in such But then, still more folds started coming up, much later, when human brain started 20 Nirmala Yoga

 developing its ego. So the whole of that land was pushed up and another land joined it in Mother becomes the Father, and so She can such a manner that it formed an apex. The perform the complete function of a father and super-ego was pushed in and was brought to a mother. In that state only. Gauri the Daugh- the climax. That synchronizes with tne human brain, because the whole universe is respre- sented in our body as well, Her head, as snow or as rain. That is how a ter of the Mountains, conceived Shri Ganesha without the help of the Father. immaculate, The purity of the snow is hundred percent, and that covers the Mother Earth, gives the Now, the central axis of the Mother Earth formation of Innocence. All the tilth and dirt acted as the spinal cord. By this happening in that noes into the ocean is clarified by the the Himalayas, again there was a big push sun, which is also Shri Ganesha. and is onto all the mountains which were to be brought on top of the hills and mountains to created as Shri Ganesha and they got into their final forms. And the apex wa5 created. cover it. But to Ganesha it is a big problem to exist in a country which doesn't worship it. It So the Mother Earth as Gauri created all has no sense of respect. It is always aspired these Ganeshas! At the other end of these that they should climb over with their very ranges, must be the highest mountain because egoistical ambitions, of a low level and it is pushed the most. Mont-Blanc should be outward. higher than this. You see, when they pushed it, Himalaya was brought up to a point, up to a point it went, and then the waves created being would be "O God. 1 can see You in Ganesha of a certain height, not too much this sublime form, and how will I conquer my height. So it was pushed on the right hand- ignorance? How will I climb over my moun- side more, the ego went expressing in Mont- tain of arrogance to look at You?" Blanc, you see for example. And an the other side, it was created another Ganesha at the other end near Darjeeling. So Shri Ganesha the joy of the eyes, and the joy which is really was expressed even in Darjeeling, and you get the same kind of redness on that. I have seen another Shri Ganesha created in Delphi where they say is the Nabhi of the Mother are higher than you"l We had Himalayas for Earth. When you see the mountains like this, the idea that should come into a good human To an egoistical mind, the mountain is for not the Joy. but is a kind of a pleasure for them to see. Their ego gets challenged and they want to climb on the mountain. that we thousands and thousands of years in India : nobody ever thought of climbing itl When the Also when Shri Shiva Lingam is created, English came. they started doing it first time. along with Him always there is a Shri Then the French, Portugese, Spanish, all of Ganesha created, as in Amarnäth, where a drop of water falls on a particular area and creates the lingam. Plus that, another drop Why do they want to climb the mountains ? falls on another side and creates Shri Ganesha Is better to see them from a distance and exactly like the face them all did this and the Indians were looking at them bewildered," What are they doing ? ! adore them, than to climb over them to die !" Now the ocean is the Father, and the Mother Earth is your Mother. But when the in Switzerland it has gone, that they try to ski Mother Earth becomes a mountain, She is called as the Father. The reason is : She, at down; they go down in any case! And they that height, can catch the Father on top of break their legs. I told one Salhaja Yogi who But this egoistical mind can go further, as over these mountains. take the slopes to go 21 Nirmala Yoga

 wanted to come here for skiing, I said," Don't go there, it's not allowed by Sahaja Yoga. And he came back with broken legs. marry, and there was only one fellow who accapted to marry that woman. And that's how the marriage took place ! Now this lady, or So every way the games are also such that perhaps somebody who is like her has spreac it's just a satisfaction of the ego. 1 can under- stand small children going over a sleigh. but everybody wanted to marry her, everybody big old men moving like this for hours toge- ther, have they no other work to do? That their hands! It's not like that I At all ! When I shows they have no maturity of any kind, they are still stupid children playing with the stories that she was the most beautilul woman, raised the hands !I never asked people to raise heard it I was shocked. This woman. nobody wanted to marry her! TELT snow. There are all kinds of things that you have By all these doings, what happens is that got from your past, and you must try to get the holy places become like cemeteries ! Ima- gine, instead of putting flowers on Shri person who is not innocent cannot worship Ganesha you are putting dead bodies on His Shri Ganesha. In His right hand He has got Body. And, while skiing. putting those hard nails into the body of Shri Ganesha! It's true! There is no sense of respect Perhaps we don't out your head. like guillotine it is ! Those who respect ourselves, we are not mature enough. are not innocent. play games, try tricks, gossip. The first thing that should happen, that one induldge in filth, He cuts them off. Innocence folds his hands to Shri Ganssha and just sees is a very sharp thing I It does not have any those things. Just this should happen to all compromise, which you can see in the life of the Sahaja Yogis. out of it, otherwise you cannot rise high. A a "parasha" you must know that, a terrible instrument you see, with one stroke He takes Christ. With His trunk He throws people left and right and throws them out. He sees for a So the Innocence has to be developed to while, and if people remain still half-baked have that respect; if you are not innocent, you they are thrown out of Sahaja Yoga. cannot have respect. And in the Innocence you don't think you are the wisest of all and make everybody look like a fool. Nor do you lization, you can be IN the Sahaja Yoga, if you play games and put people down. But what I have seen, even coming to Sahaja Yoga. this is the worst part of it, I have seen people who and He is the one who throws you out of the play games after coming to Sahaja Yoga! periphery like a tangent you get out of Sahaja They gossip and say all kinds of wrong things Yoga. And when you get out of Sahaja Yoga, which I've never said before! There are so many kinds of things I hear that l'm amazed and then you may develop horrible diseases of how Sahaja Yogis are such creators of gossips. the mooladhara chakra. Those who are hit by Is this the way Ganesha would behave towards the Mother? That thinking yourself to be great be careful! Face yourself. see yourself, note people you say "Mother said so, and this happened, and that happened"? Ego is anti- Innocence, and that's why this kind of a non- sensical gossip people do. which I can'tunder- stand. it is so filthy, I just can't understand. who contribute nothing to Sahaja Yoga but Like there was one lady whom nobody would headaches! If some sane Sahaja Yogi starts No one should think that you have got Rea- do not take to Innocence. Innocence gives you complete sincerity, and Ganesha is the judge, you start going down and down and down, Him are the worst: if you have come near Him, ww.ww yourself. Another thing they told me, that some people think that they are great Sahaja Yogis 22 Nirmala Yoga

 telling the other Sahaja Yogi about some- juxtaposition to rise higher than the rest of thing sensible, this fellow puts up his right them to give them a proper lead. vishuddhi, pessing it hard on him to show that "you are talking because your right vishuddhi is catching". very cunning I You are nonsense. because He is fond of forgiving, and not to play games, because you are harming Vishnu principle tries to play with them and yourself, I'm telling you now. Those who thịnk punish them or kill them. But Ganesha Tattwa they can play with the lopholes must know that there's a loop round their neck! Like the becomes Ekādasha Rudra, and when Christ fallen angels you will go to the greater heights, or depths. of mire. So try to be honest to your- self. I can tell yOu that Shiva tolerates lot of has no compromise of any kind, and when this is going to come in that form, then there will be no compromise, no "Mataji", no crying, no argument, nothing: Shri Ganesha Himself will throw people into hell. So be careful on that! Today, in the Presence of Shri Ganesha, you have to take an oath that" Whatever is the past Any nation has any problem, any sins they have been committing or have committed of my country, I will get opposite to that!" before, should not be any more a tag with you! If a country has been cunning, then you should be innocent. If you are coming from a foxy- clan, you have to be innocent. Like you are Like I would say Indians are not very good with the money, in money matters they can be very horrid, and sometimes they create a coming from a thuggery clan, then Vou bave Problem with money matters: so, one has to to be extremely astute. If you are coming from the romantic clan, you have to be extremely only to be something innocent, but it is more pure! You have to be juxtaposition of whatever that t should be proved, that peaple should sins we are suffering from,; if you are the light know that you are innacent! Like I asked my in the darkness, yau have to be brilliant and not dark, and you have to give light in the darkness, to the dark, not to take darknessupon this would be honesty, so he answered, "This yourself ! So. if you really feel that the past of your country has been such and such, you better not in the essence of honesty." study it and know far yourself that you have to be just different. Some are comfort-loving, the essence of it. And the essence of honesty they should get out of that. Some are pleasure- is Innacence. Essence of sincerity is Innocence. loving, they should get out of that. Some are tempted with women and men and drinking Innocence is the one that gives you complete and all that, you should completely give up know that we have to be absolutely astute as far as money is concerned. It is not sufficient know that you are innocent! Like I asked my son-in law, he is a very honest man,-whether may be honesty for outside purpose, but it is So, that is how you have to be honest, in Essence of beauty, glory, is Innocence. And detachment. So, to such a symbol of Innocence and come out of it. when we bow, we must know what we have done about ourselves: Whatever has been There are deeper sins we have of cunning- your past. get out of it. Be just the opposite of ness, of aggressiveness, of slyness, all these thing what has been so bad before. Strongly against are to be studied and understood that what do all that you were before, in the darkness. That we have to do for our country is to get out of is the sign of your character, and of your it completely first of all, like the lotus out of strength, and will show to the world that your the mire. If your country is racist, then you Spirit which is enlightened within you has have to become a bsolutely a person completely given you that strength and that new dimen- integrated. Like that you have to be on the sion. Nirmala Yoga 23

 So the second oath we have to take befote will they respect. With their ego they want Shri Ganesha is that "/will be honest to myself. to judge everyone and condemn everyone. / will not deceive myself for anybody's sake." Now the third great thing about Shri Ganesha know anything. I was a stupid fool with my is that, for Him no Gods existexcept His Mother, ego." Humble down yourself in your heart, And you know all the stories about Shri Ganesh. how He adored His Mother. Because He knows His Motheris the Power, and that He is the source of your wisdom, He's the embodi- ment of wisdom, and the greatest wisdom He has: that it is better to worship the Mother than anybody else, because She is the Power. Accor- specjally because we have had so many mar- ding to Him, even the Father, if you have to jages. And now you are going to get children meet, you have to go through the Mother, and born to you. But don't get ideas that Shri secondly Father is just the Witness. All His Ganesha is born to you. Some people have securily, all His powers, all His beauty. In- such foolish ideas, I've seen that. So, get out of itl And tell yourself:" I don't open your heart. and love each other. Respect and love are the two things you have to promise to Shri Ganesha. If you cannot do that, your ascent is going to be very difficult. May God bless you. Today I have told you about Shri Ganesha. nocence, come from His Mother. So with the third oath you have to take th.at "for us, our Mother is so powerful, why should be afraid of anything? If She is going to give us the wisdom, why should we try to seek it any where else? You are their Trust, and you have to look after them. They have to develop into Shri Ganesha's level first of all. You have to mould them into that form. And give them more peace. more attention. What I feel that chil- dern, in childhood if they are not massaged fully, they become very restless children. I appear very innocent sometimes. but My innocenbe is complete intelligence I think. And that is the reason, you see, people take time to accept. But people like Shri Ganesha who are So it is important to understand how to give all the comfort to the child, and look after the child, but not spoil. the child. the wisest of all, know' the trick! It is a'great blessing of Shri Ganesha, be- cause it is He who creates the child within the mother's womb. He selects the face, the colour The another oath we have to take today that we'll respect every Sahaja Yogi from our heart, because they are made in the form of everything. With His magnetic power He ma- Shri Ganesha. We"ll not make fun of them, nages to attract the right type of genes. He does all such important things for you, All we'll not laugh at them. As long as they are in Sahaja Yoga we have to respect. But they the time busy, never rests. So full af joy and can be thrown away, they can get out of hard-work. Never complains. He is such a it. But unless and until this happens, do not put your ego on other people. Don't think that you understand everything. Don't think that you know everything. Respect each will be the support of the universe." support to your Mother. That's why it is said that it is the support of the Kundalini. Also when Christ was created, it was said that, "You and every person, not tor what he has read or for what he has learnt, but because he is a You are all my support too. But you have to be strong supports because I am a massive person! So to support me you have to be ex- great soul. I feel the whole West suffers from one. one simple disease, that is, they do not know tremely strong, and straight: because I have how to respect anyone. Whatever doesn't made you in the pattern of Shri Ganesha. suit their mind they wil never accept, nor 24 May God Bless You. Nirmala Yoga

 Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Zermatt. Switzerland 18 September, 1984 Count your Blessings Every Moment Only about an hour back I was telling that are identified with me. Unless and until you perhaps the Sahaja Yogis don't realise, even take up upon yourself the glory of Sahaja materially, how Divine is looking after them. Yoga,-that that is your job to establish:-and And what are 'they' doing about it ? be identified with it. They have so many, still, many identifica- tions, and they are not fully identified with the Divine, that Divine is so much identified identified. They have given lives for just a with you. This is definitely such a great piece of flag, just imagine ! So many have Even with a flag people are identified in this world, to a little piece of cloth, people are miracle, that should happen. Can you see this 'clearly now, so many miracles happen thing (Swayambhoo Matterhorn mountain). to you, but what about our sincerity? The sincerity of the Divine is there, but are we sincere, to that Divine? There are so many everything. And w hat are we doing ? You miracles like this, not one but thousand-and- one have happened, and in individual life, in collective life ; one has to write it down, it is given lives only to climb up this Ganesha's People have given their lives for silly-stupid things, given up their families, given up must think about it. So, God is very blissful, extremely bliss- ful. We should not "remarkable." develop "at all' a feeling, that "we are special people. that is why God has blessed us, so let Mother do all the job, and we sit down and take the blessings." How much the Divine has worked so far, and is working, so dei- cately, so choosingly. And how much have we given ? But either, sometimes vwe are identified with ego, sometimes we are identified vwith the conditionings of the things that we do not identify, and sometimes we are attached to a very petty-nonsensical thing,-that'snot pro- per. And there should not be little bit hint of any ego to think that "God is so kind to us so we are something great",-it's very wrong. We have enjoyed. Alright. we are here So many people do like that, I have seen. everybody is enjoying; nice. Are we going Not only in Europe, England, also in India back home and thinking that, that whatever we have enjoyed, we have to 'give some- this Mother is doing." or if you tell them thing to Sahaja Yoga. What have we given? You don't have to give up any thing as money said, so I did it." It is all w rong. You must and all non-sensical things, but you have to say that "It is ' who is doing it," then you give your heart to it. Is your heart there or they do like this, that "this is Mother's job, something they will say "it is Mother You' 25 Nirmala Yoga

 So be for Sahaja Yoga. What have i done ? you have other considerations ? careful. Nathing. Count your blessings Many people also believe that if you have become Sahaja Yogis, now you have a right to enjoy and not to do anything for Sahaja Yoga. And some of them, if they do some- thing, they think that now they are above board, nothing can happen to them. Even yesterday when I talked to my husband, I said. "Thanks to Sahaja Yoga, I am going to Zermatt, otherwise would never have gone there." My daughter told me that you don't wear any nylons, what But every moment you have to remember will happen to you ? In your lifetime you now they Turther in your spiritual life. How much time wouldn't be producing silk sarees." I said, you give for Sahaja Yoga, and how much "Thanks to Sahaja Yoga, I have no problem that you have to go further and further and will have to wear, because now time you give for collective work of Sahaja all my life!" Yoga should be found out. How much harm you are doing to Sahaja Yoga also should be seen. Those who are not fully identified, So tevery moment caunt your blessings Count your blessings. That is how you are can not have joy in life. They are neither going to have the 'Joy of Sahaja Yoga." Otherwise joy will be lost, even if you have here nor there. blessings. the joy wouldn't be there And the greatest blessing you should feel: when you realise that you are doing nothing May God bless you. Doubt and the Ego awareness, lost drowned and dissolved-in the purity of the ocean of it's own existence. To doubt oneself, is presumptuous, an arrogant act of the ego-and it's last defence. "I can accept everything. Shri Mataji. Sahaja The Awareness. the chitta, one's actions Yoga...but myself?"-And that question mark reverberates in the void of one's soul. How -they are not the Ocean, as are the gross silly it all is ! For the ego behaves as if it manifestations of the Creation. has created itself-and all the Universe: and sits nursing on it's own handiwork. -are the waves on the surface of the Ocean We should sink into the absoluteness of the Ocean and in the awesome presence of But the Universe in toto. in all it's entirety the Glorious Majesty of the Almighty be lost including oneself, is created by God, the in silence there. We are not making our- Absolute, the Almighty the above; and who selves perfected. fulfilled and realised souls has the presumption to dare to judge His the Shri Adishakti is doing it all. We have handiwork or question the perlection and completion of His creation ?-No one ; not even the great Deities and Angels on high. and Her handiwork-the Handiwork of the Then who are we, petty and minor souls, to question and consider ourselves through our ts just stop it all and become ourselves. no role to play in this so it is pointless pos- turing about doubting and judging ourselves Absolute, the Almighty the Divine. So let Amen = नमः इति petty egos. Sākshat Shri Adishakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Sunamah Sunamah TETA T arfenie अगवती माताजी श्री निर्मला देवी सुममः सुनम- One can only know oneself by immersing one's Self in one's Self and know there in the depths and the void that one is created perfect to be one with the Absolute and to be lost in that state of existence, in the मा्षात श्री आदिशाकि Amen नमः ति --Dr. Rustam Nirmala Yaga 26

 RAHURI Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi 26 February 1984 Achieve the power of Spirit I hope your journey has been comfortable have to see that you beat up your body, far and will be comfortable later on, as beat up your mind, beat up your ego, and so the source of comfort is your Spirit. And more you see to the comfort of your Spirit the in such a way that you grow into that problems of outside comforts drop off. You image for which you are made. are not bothered as to where you live, where you sleep, what you eat, what you do. So allow these gross sensitivities to drop down so that the inner, subtler sensitivities grow. That's why you are here, to get over your time, conditionings..I mean it is a rat-race, chisel it out so that it is beautifully made, Regarding other things. like my tours in your countries: I think, the greatest good is done to you when you come to 'this' country: as if you belong to this country and you were uprooted in some other country. And, and the rat race has to be somehow or other: when you come here you prosper so well ! And in that country I try so hard, I work so hard, do all kinds of things, all the time I spend with you, I do everything, day and stopped, once and for all, without". So here we can do it "without", and once you start meditating, that "within" can also be achieved night, all the time1 find it's impossible to and you can achieve that peace which all human beings should have, if we have to save this world from complete destruction. achieve much, that I see happening to you here. As if here you take absolutely with great ease the divinity of this place. And I As you must have realized that now the think this uprootedness has to be given up. Sahaja Yoga is growing much faster, and is I think as if you had immigrated into those taking a good speed. And we all have to countries and now you are back in your own! keep ourselves equipped to be able to be You are not found out by immigration laws, part and parcel of this great evolutionary and I think ! revolutionary process which is going to stir up the whole world. Now, under these circumstances we should change our tactics and start to establish our ashrams here, and aur own projects here. so that you people should come down and achieve more. You can earn For that, it is important also to see that we take ourselves to task and don't get into mediocre living and mediocre thinking. We here are people of very great potential. Not only your living there. But you should come that, but we are blessed by God's Divine here Power. Try to use that power within yoursell or three months "continuously and est- and try to be one with it. A little bit, you ablish yourself and grow. Because I don't and spend some time for IWO 27 Nirmala Yoga

 think it can be achieved there that good. snatch your bangles. You can move apout Because we've tried everything. So this is the way you like and nobody's going to bother. You won't meet 2 or 3 drunkards beating each other-nothing of the kind. So it's a very pure life here. That's a very big the ultimate outcome of our trips all over. Despite all kinds of hazardous routes and hazardous life here, we are doing very well. I must say wher see you I find you are all very good and you are very much better and it's all improved. Like watches, you see, when you have to make them immuned, you least I personally think that too much moderni- put them under absurd conditions and they sation won't suit this place. So you should get alright. Like that, now you are immuned ! They are put into troughs which are shaken makes your body slaves to your own com- very thoroughly as yesterday you were shaken forts and ideas of enslavement. in the buses. Then they are made to pass through water which is running very fast on them. And all this we are trying here; and I think your immunity is growing very fast to outward things, and you are becoming really solid eternal time pieces, the way you are created here, and I'm so very happy to see the development.-That's the main point nopes that you will really grow much faster which we have achieved here. achievement. And the comforts that you want you can create later on, if you want to have them. At not give them these useless ideas which In any case very good here, but the general clean- liness has to be taught to these people. All this giving and taking process will work out very well, I'm sure. And the way things are moving within yourself, I have great personal cieanlines is if you come to this country and stay here for some time, in a settled way, and then go back to your countries. That would be much better than to have a visit to your So the attention should be out-away from money: first of all. That is one of the biggest problems, Actually nobody can beli- countries, which I feel sometimes is just eve that affluent countries are much more money-minded than Indians are, though they are so developed. You see, the developed countries are 'much more' money minded. bombarded by negativity. The other point which I wanted to tell you is that you must learn to understand that than the Indians are-its very surprising! you have come here to gain something. No- When you see the way they count their D0ay is going to gain anything out of vou, pennies it is impossible to believe that these are really developed people. They are worse than beggarS sometimes So that is what you should get out of-the money part. Money tound What's that? How is it? This is the is horrible stuff that people count. I mean-it Is better to count the names of God than count the money-horrible coins So you have to gain something here. You are students and so you have to learn some- thing, and try to develop a sense of discipline Like a disciple who receives all that is house, that's nice", you see, like that. But if you go on seeing the thing which is of no importance and loose talking about things Then we have other things like gross that do not matter with you. All these have to be given up. Because you have so much time there that people sit down and jabber, can move in the night, anytime. You won't talk, loose talks, ugly talks, useless talks. meet anybody who will snatch your purse or That's not needed at all. On the contrary attachment to comfort. I don't think it's a very comfortable life there. Because here you Nirmala Yoga 28

 listen to all nonsensical talks, and try to keep it's better to be quiet, and assimilate more within yourself. Because here the people a good eye on that and be alert. so it don't have time, so they can't talk, they have help you. On the whole, I must say that this to work. But while you have time there to talk, also here, so we start like that; and that's very happy that it has brought forth 'so- a 'very' wrong thing. trip and the last trip, I am overjoyed andI am many possibilities before potential. /am very happy about it, that me and your Another talking is done with yourself somehow, in this year, we have achieved a also, quite a lot. Like you start analysing, new type of atmosphere among all of you, criticising and finding faults and all the time which is humble, which is quiet, which is thinking "Oh. this could have been better- peaceful, which is absorbing the Divine. I've harmed very much here...that has hap- which is a very, very great. joyous thing pened", all those things come into your for me. heads. So this kind of a inner talk also should be stopped; they are called as "murmuring souls" by Christ. who said muring souls". But these murmuring souls exist within us. So beware of them and don't So I thank you very much for all that. I "Beware of mur- hope you keep up your progress this way May God bless you all. The following lines are taken from "the Book of Wisdom" in the Old Testament They were spoken by King Solomon and written around 100 B.C- THE APPEAL TO DIVINE WISDOM King Solomon: "May God grant me to speak as he would wish and express thoughts worthy of his gifts., since he himself is the guide of wisdom, since he directs the sages. We are indeed in his hand. we ourselves and our words with all our understanding. foe, and technical knowledge. It was he who gave me true knowledge of all that is, who taught me the structure of the world and the properties of the elements, the beginning, end and middle of the times, the alternation of the solstices and the succession of the seasons, the revolution of the year and the position of the stars, the natures of animals and the instincts of wild beasts, the powers of spirits and the mental processes of men, the varieties of plants and the medical properties of roots. All that is hidden, all that is plain, I have come to know. instructed by wisdom who designed them all." Nirmala Yaga 29

 IN PRAISE OF WISDOM . "For within Her is a spirit intelligent. holy. unique, nianifold, subtle, active, incisive, unsullied. lucid, invulnerable, benevolent. sharp. irresistible; beneficient, loving to man, steadfast, depéndable, unperturbed almighty, all-surveying. peneträting all intelligent. pure and most subtle spirits: for Wisdom is quicker to move than any motion: She is so pure. She pervades and permeates all things. She is a breath of the power of God, pure emanation of the glory of the Almighty: hence nothing impure can find a way into Her. She is a reflection of the eternal light, untarnished mirror of God's active power, image of his goodness. Although alone, She can do all; Herself unchanging, she makes all things new. In each generation She passes into holy souls. She makes them friends of God and prophets; for God loves only the man who lives with Wisdom. She is indeed more splendid than the sun, She outshines all the constellations: compared with light, She takes first place. for light must yield to night. but over Wisdom evil can never triumph. She deploys Her strength from one end of the Earth to the other, ordering all things for good." JAI AGYA SOPHIA, HOLY WISDOM SAKSHAT SHRI NIRMALA MA! Nirmala Yoga 30

 Wisdom and Folly Contrasted In September 1983, in Tivoli near Rome, Shri Ganesha Pooja was celebrated in the Pre- sence of Sakshat Adi Shakti Shri Nirmala Devi Herself, as Lord Ganesha. During this ceremony an extract from the New English Bible was read, being the 8th chapter of Proverbs entitled "Wisdam and Folly contrasted" Through me princes act like princes, from me all rules on earth derive their nobility. Those who love me I love, those who search for me find me. In my hands are riches and honour, boundless wealth and the rewards of virtue. My harvest is better than gold, find gold, and my revenue better than pure silver. Ifollow the course of virtue, my path is the path of justice; I endow with riches those who love me and I will find their treasuries. "Hear how Wisdom lifts her voice and Understanding cries out. She stands at the cross-roads, by the wayside, at the top of the hill: beside the gate, at the entrance to the city, at the entry by the open gate she calls aloud : Men, it is to you I call, I appeal to every man: understand, you simple fools, what it is to be shrewd; you stupid people. understand what sense means. Listenl For I will speak clearly, you will have plain speech from me; for I speak nothing but truth and my lips detest wicked talk. All that I say is right, The Lord created me the beginning of his works, before all else that he made, long ago. Alone, I was fashioned in times long past; at the beginning, long before earth itself. When there was yet no ocean I was born, no springs brimming with water. Before the mountains were settled in thair place. long before the hills I was born, when as yet he had made neither land nor not a word is twisted or crooked All is straightforward to him who can under- stand, all is plain to the man who has knowledge. Accept instruction and not silver, knowledge rather than pure gold; for wisdom is better than red coral, no jewels can match her. | am Wisdom, I bestow shrewdness and show the way to knowledge and pru- lake nor the first clod of earth. When he set the heavens in their place I was there, when he girdled the ocean with the horizon. when he fixed the canopy of clouds overhead and set the springs of oceans firm in their place. when he prescribad its limits for the sea and knit together earth's foundations. dence. Pride, presumption, evil courses, subversive talk, all these I hate. I have force, I also have ability: understanding and power are mine. Through me kings are sovereign and governoIS make just laws. Then I was at his side each day, Nirmala Yoga 31

 for through me your days will be muitiplied and years will be added to your life. If you are wise, it will be to your own advantage, his darling and delight. playing in his presence continually, playing on the earth, when he had finished it. if you are haughty, you alone are to blame. The Lady Stupidity is a flighty creature: the simpleton, she cares for nothing. She sits at the door of her house, while my delight was in mankind, "Now, my sons, listen to me. listen to instruction and grow wise, do not reject it. Happy is the man who keeps to my ways, happy the man who listens to me, watching daily at my threshold with his eyes on the doorway; for he who find me finds life and wins favour with the Lord. while he who finds me not, hurts himself, anp all who hate me are in love with death. on a seat in the highest part of the town, to invite the passers by indoors as they hurry on their way: "Come in, you simpletons," she says. She says also to the food, "Stolen water is sweet and bread gor by stealth tastes good. Little does he know that death lurks there Wisdom has built her house, she has hewn her seven pillars: she has killed a beast and spiced her wine, and she has spread her table. She has sent out her maidens to proclaim from the highest part of the town, "Come in, you simpletons. She says also to the fool, "Come, dine with me and taste the wine that I have spiced. Cease to be silly, and you will live. you will grow in understanding." that her guesis are in the depths of Sheol." Without doubt this is Sri Ganesha describ- ing his Play, enjoying Himself as the Darling and Delight of our Lord Shiva, preferring wisdom to his favourite red coral (verse II: "for wisdom is better than red coral. no jewels can match her"). We can almost hear"To the Essence of the Prayer" in verse 6: "Listen! For I will speak clearly, you will have plain speech from me: for speak nothing but truth". Yes, oh Lord Ganesha, You who are Wis- dom and who bestows wisdom on us, we desire nothing but to listen to you, We know that the first step towards your Wisdom is to fear Lord Shiva and to be constantly vigilant Do not correct the insolent or they will hate in rder to please the Great Goddess, the Correct an insolent man, and be sneered at for your pain5, correct a bad man, and you will put your- self in the wrong. Queen of 14 worlds, Who contains all the universes. The researcher. seeker and, finally realised soul Carl Gustav Jung (1875-1961) says, in his book "Psychology and Religion that among the early Christian gnostics the teach a righteous man, and his learning ouality of "mother" was an attribute of the you: correct a wise man, and he will be your friend. Lecture a wise man, and he will grow wiser: will increase. Holy Spirit who was called "Sophia" meaning The first step to wisdom is the fear of the wisdom! lord, and knowledge of the Holy One is under- standing; JAI AGYA SSOPHIA, HOLY WISDOM, SAKSHAT SHRI NIRMALA MA ! -Ruth Nirmala Yoga 32

 Mooladhara Chakra Birmingham Seminar 20.4.1985 Today I wanted to talk about Mooladhara which is a very important subject. I think t have talked about it many a times. But., in find it difficult to feel myself. The reason is, the West I must say because of our wrong attitudes, and acceptance of wrong mental is not so sensitive, I would say. It is not projections of other people who are very dominating we have very much ruined our doesn't go near any other Mooladhara. Mooladhara. Mother. Ialso only feel your Mooladharas... To be very frank with you that's one centre 1 have a very, very strong Mooladhara, which I would say. It is not bothered. The attention of my Mooladhara It just recedes back; that's the action it plays all the time. So t also donot feel it unless Despite the fact that Kundalini has risen with whatever weaker power that Mooladhara and until it is very badly off. I mean the person had and has sustained itself, we must know that we can aiways fall in a trap to our different bifurcations which we have created before. It's a very serious matter, that the Mooladhara immediately I can feel it. So the correction chakra has been really shattered and ve have created pathways into which our attention can go if we are not very careful. is very close to me. then I feel the Mooladhara very strongly. But still I cannot. Supposing you give me something, that thing is used by you. of Mooladhara entirely depends on you. And without a strong Moaladhara you cannot rise high, do what you like. Now supposing if somebody is a dis- honest person or a miserly person, or money oriented, it is very gross and you can see it so clearly. You see yourself and you get so shocked: "Why did I say such a thing? Why did I do such a thing?" But when it comes to the left side nonsense, sins because it's a damaged one. It's one which against the Mother, it's a secretive action, that's only between you and yourself. Nobody on the physical side of the Mooladhara, but knows what goes on in your mind, excent on the emotional side as we call the "Mana you. Nobody knows what you are going to do next moment in your privacy when you Now for people who are Indians. who häve respected their Mooladharas, there are so many methods and ways given how to raise the power of Mooladhara. But that won't work out with the Western people. is a shattered one. and which does not work the left side. So, even you may not talk in that way. but your mind is still in that realm. And you Nobody can look into you except for your still think on that realm. Even mentally, you are alone. Nirmala Yoga 33

 are in it. Or you are seeing things, wanting to see such things, wanting to enjoy such bhoot. things. That lurking attraction is still there. Your Mooladhara cannot stand up. And we means you yourselt are siding with the You see a person as a Sokshi (in witness state), that means you see the person but you do not get a reaction, which is killer of joy. You yourself can feel yout Mooladharas very well. You can feel it on your finger tips also. have to realise, I'm talking to Western people. I would not say the same to the people from India, If you want to be kind to yourself know that you have to divert your And be alert about it. out much har- to deal with So now we have to work der: To be on the watch-out yourseif. And it is more a mental activity, attention towards a sane married life. But "mental", meaning the emotional side. You that also should not be too much. Because what I have learnt now, that in the West In have to watch your mind. very funny word "mind“ is. people have devised methods of transferring that attention from one person to another. Mental acrobatics of different type they have devised to destroy their pure attention. Don't But, "Mana", through which we cater to our emotional side, to our desires, where is it going? Where is this movement of our mind? What is it doing? You have to stand against play onto these. your mind, stand against your desires, or you can face it and see for yourself clearly what's happening. There are so many other things by which we express that we are still under the trap of bad Mooladhara. The way you dress up, the way you walk, the way you sit. the way you talk, the way you behave, to impress other people. I am to be impressed by other people in Sahaja Yoga itself. The only impression that should really work is the height of ascent that ethers have achieved. You can do it, it's not difficult. When the Kundalini can rise with alt shattered Moola- It's for you to decide. Nobody is going to correct you on this point. 1 know you people have been confessing to me, I never read your letters, to be very frank. Whatever letters you sent, I would not read them. Whatever confessions you have made, I burnt all those letters. I haven't got any idea as to what you wrote. Nor do I want to know about it. That's not my concern. My concern is that, now do not dwell upon the same ideas, on the same level. Or on any level dharas, I'm sure you can cure your Moola- dhara completely. But your question is first of all of strengthening the Mooladhara, for which I think you all have to go inta a kind of tapasyā. whatsoever, we can say. That's why I say sometimes that the Western people should take to less of meat, It is in thoughtless awareness you can combat the thoughts that come to you from wrong type of Mooladhara. Maybe some of especially the red meats and beef, and horses of you have got Bhoots on your Mooladhara. and dogs-and l don't know what else you And we have some physical treatment for eat. such bhoots also, which 'll tell to Gavin sometime which you can ask. But you can- not always say that "It is a bhoot and I'm so much heat Even fish is very good. alright. I'm away from the bhoot." You are not. Whenever you say / have a bhoot," Take more to vegetarian food. saying vegetarianism. you understand that. Take more to things which do not give you I'm not take to a life which is in a way ascetic, but don't take to these horrible health foods' Nirmala Yoga 34

 you don't mind your chastity being plund- not meant for human beings, but for animals ered! Everyone looking at you with dirty I You don't feel insulted I Because ego and it's horrible. This country store thing I is a dirty stuff. it does not mind. It feels rook once and I said"had enough of it." happy that people are watching you. They Country store-the whole country went into are plundering you. they are looting' your chastity. But Sahaja Yogis are not like that. But still I must say you must cleanse your hearts, So for you people where to go? Those cleanse your minds, take yourself out of it. Tcan't tolérute them I tell you. They re - also think. They churn your stonmach completely eyes my stomach. who are suffering from Mooladhara must know that food does make a difference, in The minds are very funnily placed and the powers of Mooladhara. So if you have that's why the biggest complications They are it down, it is over-excited, over-excited. Any very confused. Very confused people. Be- cause there is no wisdom in this kind of life, woman you lok at..I just don't understand, become just a sex-oriented personality. It is it's worse than monkeys! You have to soothe actually just the other way round. If you to get it cured, first of all you have to soothe there are-in the brains of people. man you touch, any woman you touch, any you are money-oriented. you want to preserve money; if you are possession-oriented you But it's not so outside that want to preserve it: if you get one little I can say that "you must respect yourself." It antique piece you want to preserve it; and why not this property of yours which is the highest of all, to be preserved, to be adorned, it down, cool it down, so that Ganesha bes- tows his blessings upon your Mooladhara. cannot work out with those words I know. You have to sit down, do meditation and to be worshipped? try to soothe it down. I'll discuss with Gavin and tell him what things can be done about it, because I can't tell you in the open like secretiy people are indulging into such things. this. But still this is all physical. Mentally And they're hypocritical sometimes, they don't you must be on the watch to see where does mind being hypocritical about it. They are this mind go-to dirty things. Why does Sahaja Yogis, alright. but in this matter they it always go to this sensation. See the birds. think they can go about the way they like. see the flowers, see the nature, see the beau- And sometimes some of them say that Mother tiful people, just see them. I'm quite worried on that point, that has said it's alright. Inever said so! There's one point can never compramise in this: Another horrible thing in the West is that You must have a chaste outlook towards your- the women must expose their body to get self. towards your life, towards your being. men excited. Men do the same I think. They towards your parsonality. You are saints. always try to excite each other and live in a stupid excitement. And if a saint doesn't have a good character, I call it the character, the essence of charac- ter-is not a saint. You have to expose beautiful things. like flowers, beautiful ornaments. alright. But you're not a thing ! It's your private property. "cannot be any compromise on that. You You don't put all your gold on the streets. do you? Better try that, sometimes. You works out, in a collective way, nobody cheats will mind people plundering your gold, And puts So this purity has to be maintained: there cannot hit at the roots of everything. If it but oneself, nobody deceives onself. Nirmala Yoga 35

 the mind into the right track of ascent. Think- crawling up in America before they become ng about the ascent, how you are going to forty years of age, is because their Moola- rise, thinking of the moment when you had dharas are out. Most of the diseases which the joys, thinking of the day where you met are incurable come because of weak Moola- me first, thinking of all the other beautlful dharas, on the physical side. On the mental and holy things, your mind can be cleansed. side, most of the mental problems we saw And whenever such a thought comes in, you there, I would say 90%, are due to weak Mooladhara. If a person has a strong Moola- know it's dhaia, powerful Mooladhara, it doesn't get difficult, but if you can get realisatoin why into trouble. Because you know there's a very strong hold of the Mooladhara in the back have to say, "not this, not this". It's more mental than physical I tell you. / not this also? there. You all have to understand that there is 'no compromise on this. And a day may come if you continue with it, you will be the brain. It's not the brain, mostly it's the thrown away completely, just like any other Mooladhara. So for physical safety and for devil is thrown out. So there is no com- And when your mind goes off, you blame your emotional safety also, you have to have a sane type of attitude towards Mooladhara. promise. Tell yourself, don't deceive your- self don't cheat yourself. You cannot ascend That's why I'm very anxious that you all if there is any lurking thing within you. You should get married, and after marriage, after will be dragged down, because that's your a few days, you find that your attention starts weakness, and you will become weaker, and diverting to other problems of married life. weaker and weaker. But not if you are not a Sahaja Yogi, because the sensationalisation has become Only question is where is your attention. Divert it. Divert your attention. First you will the main theme of modern life. And you are need some exercise, some effort. and after- tossed about on the rough sea of all these wards it will come automatically. You won't deliberate actions of the people. Media, have to exert, you won't have to worry: on books, ideas, everything, creates this horrible the contrary. it will become impossible how excitable temperament within you. to be otherwise. So much conditioning is there. We have played into the hands of conditioning, we have ruined ourselves. This conditioning is the subtlest of all, and the hypocritical. and has a very bad Vishuddhi. worst of all. Its impossible to combat in So many complications take place with this Sahaja Yoga, unless and until you 'individu- betore realisation. Forget the past. Whatever ally take up the responsibility of looking you have done, forget it. Just don't worry. after it. Such a person doesn't have any patience, doesn't have any balance. Actually he's But remember one thing, that you have damaged your Mooladhara, so you have to Mooladhara is one of the most delicate. bring it to normalcy. You have to make it a and the most powerful chakra. It has so many healthy, balanced centre, so that Shri Ganesha folds and it has so many dimensions. If your can rule over it. Mooladhara is not alright your memory will fail. If your Mooladhara is not alright, to begin vibrations become too much for me. Talking about Shri Ganesha, you know with, your wisdom will fail. You will have no sense of direction. The insanity that is now We talk of innocence, but to awaken Nirmala Yoga 36

 innocence within ourselves we must be on cussed openly, its a secret, between you and the full watch, on the full alertness about our yourself. It should not be written down any- minds. "What is it thinking? Where is it where, it should not be mentioned. Butshould be worked out by all of you. in such a way that you enjoy the bliss of Shri Ganesha. Is more for the ladies, I would say, than for men. Because men suffer much more than women going? Where is this thief going? Is he trying to do some tricks? Is he up to some tricks? Alright!" You have to be alert. very alert. I've been thinking of talking about it since long. But now Ihave to tell you one thing. do. And that's why women must be very That you'll be exposed! That is another qua- lity of Mahūmāya. She'll expose you, You'll your brothers. Unless and until you really be exposed I if you try to play tricks with me. "With me" means with your Kundalini. If you try to play tricks with your Kundalini you'll be exposed. And you'll be ashamed of your- like it if anyone tries to look at them, or tries selves. So please be careful. very careful about it. That again make your Mooladhara have killed themselves, burnt themselves up, very healthy. and powerful. May God bless you. careful. Develop very good relationships with establish your high character, men cannot be improved. You have seen in India women do not to touch them. They dan't like it: Women thousands of them,-because they thought some other people may come and touch their body. It's so related to your Atmä, to your Spirit. As if it is the body-innocence is the body of your Spirit. You all can be that. because you have become Yoginis now. They So our prayer should be that "Let our Mooladhara be healthy and strong". That's all. Let's pray- There are certain exercises for Mooladhara. were not Yoginis, but they knew one thing- I will explain to Gavin who is your leader in the power of their chastity. It's more for England. Thên he will pass it on to you It ladies here, that they should try to generate should be done verbally. It should not be that feeling of nobility, of chastity, of holiness written down. The leaders of the ashrams and around them, so that the men themselves other places should come and see me every month somstime, and these things should be themselves. talked. Because it's a secret, not to be dis- Thank you very much. respect them and develop that feeling within (contd. from Page 52) for it is like a machine without its dynamo mana-profound in his devotion. So were or power. The essence of Sahaja Yoga is the Lords Lakshmana, Bharata and Shatru- to be an instrument for the transmission of ghna. The subjects of Ayodhya loved them our profoundly Holy and Divine Mother's love-to all mankind and the creationand play and intermingling of different forms of without that all and everything loses its pure love, and the attacks of negativity on meaning. and were loved in return:-the whole story is this. Above the right heart is right vishuddhi; and below, the Liver and that supraconscious negativity loves to attack Right sided and Supraconscious negativity has to destroy love,-for it cannot survive with Love, but is downed, destroyed and suffocated by it The essence of right-sided these two Chakras-So it is only the Love and negativity is power, hatred, and control:-all devotion of the right heart, the power of the anti God activities. Love is the essence of God the Father the Almighty-and a radiation come this. Let us be aware of this and work of His Grace throughout all the Universe. It to purify ourselves and the Shri Holy Sangha is well known, the Lord Rama was profoundly of our Mother's Feet as the Lord Christ loving throughout all the Universe, as was the Mother Shri Seeta, and the Lord Hanu- it is well known Shiva Tattva in Lord Rama, that can over- washed the feet of his disciples. Amen -Dr. Rustom 37 Nirmala Yoga

 JAI SHRI MATAJI Easter Puja London 8-4-85 Happy Easter to you all. compassion, In the light of the Spirit you can see what we think as compassion is nothing but a kind of sympathy which leads you now- here. But one should learn to see everything So we celebrate Easter to show Christ tésurrected Himself. The Spirit that is Christ has to resurrect out of the material mani- festation of the Divine Itsell. The matter is time the light of the Spirit? We do not in the light of the Spirit. But do we use all the manifested because we ourselves have creat- ed it. Not that we are born out of matter, our body, but wE are attached to it, we want it, we want to have it. Whatever you want, that sustains itself, by your desire, because now you are on the stage. If you want to sustain standing in the society, how we relate our- the matter, if you want to keep the matter as the first priority, it will remain. It cannot dis- appear. It has to go out of your mind that world at large, all of them can tie us down For Christ it was difficult, because He was the Spirit. But He has shown you the way. He crucified Himself to show you the way. All the ideas about sophistication, about our selves to other dignitaries, or to our country, to our politics, to our economics and the matter cannot hold you any further to that tomb. You belong to another cate- Christ rose out of the matter, came out of gory. I've told you a hundred times. And a the tomb which symbolises the matter which category which is the Spirit, which can rise has enclosed us within, which has to be opened out with our spiritual power. Throw thing. This way are you conditioned; all absurd away the stone that is covering this grave. ideas have been accepted, which you cannot Get out of that and stand outside it. This is explain why you were conditioned like the message of Christ's resurrection. above all" the tombs and throw away every- this. The tomb that we have created, we have created ourselves, because we have allowed of England. English are very much conditioned people to dominate us. We have allowed them people. The others are Americans who are to make these graves for us, we have allowed abandoned. I mean, you cannot talk to them them to bury Christ within ourselves, because we were afraid. But Christ has to rise. So we create our own matter through our condition- much conditioned people, and when they are ings, through our fears, through our absolute too much conditioned they build their own wrong ideas about goodness, kindness and tombs. Why I talk more of conditioning. because about anything because they cannot be root- ed into anything. But the English are too Nirmala Yoga 38

 AIl these ideas are to be seen with a new dimension of awareness that you have. You sitting on top of it. And now when he gets are the Spirit. Why should you worry about the heat. the heated words come out of his anything else but your vibrations. Because moutl. We don't have to do anything; it is all you are saints. You should just worry about done, already. They are baked and cooked in the comfart of your Spirit. Whatever is con- genial to your Spirit, just go on doing that. abserving that. accumulating that and suck- wrong. That is only possible because yoau ing within yourself. All conditionings will tun away because these conditionings you related to the Absolute, if you do every thing accept because they look comfortable. but they are not, Christ is a great example and if are related to Christ. how can you do wrong? He is the one whom you lollow. if He is the That is one of the proofs that they are not one you have understood and recognised in Christians of any kind, because none of the the light of your Spirit, then you must knovw Christian organisations have done anything why did He go into the grave first of all. The good whatsoever except for creating fire for Man who was so powertul, Who when themselves. He will come Hell reduce all of them into ashes-such a great personality like Him of Ekädash Rudra. Why did Christ allow ing has worked within us because we have Himself to be crucified and to be buried into been so-called Christians, we have been that? Because He wanted to stoop down to going to churches, we have been worship- the level of other peaple, to come down to ping Christ as they told us, the way they told that level so that people should see that through His life they are shown that you can mented. be resurrected. Now the Resurrection has taken place. Sahaja Yogis are resurrected no doubt, but still one foot is in the grave! And the second one I do not know whether it will be out or in-it is just halfway through! One foot is of course outside, no doubt, but still is not yet touching the ground, and the other cannot be lifted unless you push the ground disadvantage, because Christ has been used this matter, again, to push it up. If you live with your Spirit, you should have no fears, you should have no worry. under lire, he himsell lit the fire and is now their own. I So why should we have fear? But we should know what is right and what is are with the absolute, That is the Spirit. And related to it. you are daing the right thing. It you TEHE So you can see clearly how this condition- us we worshipped Himeverything regi- The One who came to resurrect us from the bondage of the grave, we used Him to build our graves. Now you are out of it, thank God, but take out the other foot, fast. This is one advantage you have because you have Christ before you, but also there is a I5 to set you down in the grave. So change your concept about Christ. Know Him through vour vibrations, what He was. mean, as a child I knew what was going wrong with See now, I will tell you how God is show- Christians and left and right as a little girl of ing His ways. here. Like in Durham, the seven I used to give big lectures. Even when fellow is now under complete fire. he does Iwas baptised, I was horrified the way I was baptised by some stupid fellow! I did not Sanskrit is that know what was he up to. And then he put a Bhoot on my head, I think, or something not know what to do, and he himself is so stupid, as the saying in Vināsh Kāle Viprita buddhi: When your destruc- tion time comes you think of all perverted which hovered round and we met with a very things, vipareet buddhi. See to the way he big accident, I fell down. This bhoot must speaks, I mean,-blasphemous. And he is have put it in the horse, I feel, or somewhere, 39 NIrmala Yoga

 another bhoot. This priest. this stupid feilow. may accept him So the Anglicans, the who belonged to the Lutheran Church. I Anglo-Saxon brain. Iam saying, is going to don't know what you call that. Lutheran, accept Mr. Durham very well. I can see that. imagine,-Martin Luther's Church. And that Or else will juist leave and become Commu- is how they baptised me. I knew all abour it but I did not know what to do about it- has so many probiems. must have kicked him quite a lot! But. what- ever it is, so-called, he baptised me. I had to accept all foolish stupid things in this life, when you have, I would like you to think because I had to show I was quite normal. I mean, accepting stupid is normal these days, and to tolerate an idiot is even more normal. So I had to show that. I knew very thing. But what about us, we are so many, well what sort of a thing it was, this fellow was up to, and I accepted the nonsense he people sensibly, talk to these Anglicans, find did and many other things. I accepted just to show that I am nothing special. But I knew what you have found out. You need not say all about it. When I saw the way Christ was in the beginning only that described, I was aghast! I said, what are they doing to Christ. I mean, nicely second cruci- forter, that Christ has said. But we can start fixion going on.-You also know about it. nists. Have nothing to do with this God who So in the Seminar of yours in Birmingham over this new thing that has come up in the heart of the Universe. Everyone knows about Durham fellow, they know he is blight, every- let us try to find out how we can talk to these out about them, and communicate to them Shakti. or l am the Redeemer and the Com- talking about it. Find out these people, these Anglicans, church people, churchgoers who believe in God, who believe in Christ. 1 mean Thank God there are so many to whom I can falk and they understand my language, But they are voting. Can you imagine! They are the Resurrection will not be complete unless voting whether Christ was true or not. Can and until you pull out many out of their you vote like that? You feel you are in a graves. I don't know how you will go about it. lunatic assylum or what. It is terrible! They Look at this fellow in Durham who is getting are taking votes. can you imagine such a so much publicity when he is doing atll blas- phemous things. He is getting all the credit advantage. because they are so much con- and kudos from people;-what about us, what fused,-to give them a concrete idea as to are we doing? Why not we write to the news- papers, why not we talk to them? "Observer" has given us a clue I think. There is one gentleman, Mr. Wilson, who wrote quite nice things-why not write to him, some letters. been said about Christ. Just I can't bear it, it Get to it. Because, you see, what I am a little concerned about this matter is, as it is they are half-hearted creatures, Now, if this through it and see what you can do and tell Durham fellow speaks like that, that is the big authority on Christianity, Christ. His Mother and every body else. Now if this fellow he goes on like this, those who are half-baked will fall off to Communism, and the rest of them who may remain also, they much more sensible people than you are. I thing like that? At this moment we have an what is God, what is Christ, what is religion. One side I feel very hurt and unhappy-I think these three days I have gone through real Resurrection myself. The way things have is too much. You all should be stirred also, should be concerned, and you must go them: are you all mad or what? Why don't you listen to sanity? As you know, when I went to Australia, it is a different country altogether. They are Nirmala Yopa 40

 Invite them. Invite these intellectuals. Try to talk to them, tell them what is it. What do you call them, those who know about Bible? think the way they were exiled. they learnt a lesson and they are better. So I feel the English have to go into exile or jail for a while to understand. They are very sensible. Theologians-without logics I Call these Theo- extremely sensible people. You can talk to logians,-challenge them. Why not put a them sense. Everyone. The media is sensible, challenge? You are not alone, you are so the people are sensible. Thousands of them many. And don't tel them that you wear came. They repeated. First programme we had once, it was 1600, 2000. Can you imagine understand it, they are not that deep. You can such people? And out of them .repeats were 600. Now for the last how many years we are having the same them better. You go with your punky con- again. What Seminars are we going to do, all of us sitting and cooking some chicken, that's you, otherwise they are in for trouble. If they all. Or making some cake for Mother which are that stupid, why not handle them? It is She doesn't eat Let us take out our satisfac- tions from these little, little things into some- thing bigger. Let us talk about it, without clever. Stupid can be stupified very easily. fear. We have to go and talk and tell people about it. Take it a big way. There should be have to take it in a big way,-the whole thing no hindrance on this part. We are a very big what we are going to do. All of you should group and we can assert and we can talk give some concrete ideas as to what you and meet people saris when you come for my Puja! They won't wear your jeans. Or to convince them more, you can be punks ! That would appeal to 600people again and ditions, they will jolly well have to listen to very easy to handle a stupid person than to handle a person who is not stupid, or who is So I think we have to change our course, we would like to do. And that would be really the way it will work out. So now in the Seminar you must discuss more haw to falk to these people, how to create a platform for Sahaja Yoge. Find out how they create a platform out of nothing, like these punks, The situation has improved a lot because now I have to go to India as you know. and in India, for me, the situation is much better. It is not at all difficult. As you know. I went to the hills at the foothill of Himalayas. About. and once you do all these things you will be 3000 people came from all over-the little, surprised that they will have to listen. They little villages that they had. They didn't take will have to listen to you. even a second to recognise me-they were singing the praise of the Goddess of the Hills, Goddess of the Tigers, Goddess of the Lions. They just started singing my praise. Without ing them I am Adi Shakti-that they will not any lecture or anything. They were all joyous that I have been there, and they knew and they accepted me and finished. And I just had Shakti has to be an English lady. At least, to put my foot down there and I have done. Jaipur:-They said. Mother you just put your foot here. really So for me the situation is anything, but you can say She is the lady who Now go full ahead. I am giving you all freedom, do what you want. Except for tell- be able to digest, that an Indian has now become the Adi Shakti. They think now Adi Frenchl So don't mention me, If you want you can, but don't mention me as Guru or has shown us the way or something like that -not referring much to me but to them. very good in India. So let's see what you people are going to think you should go ahead with it and work do with these big big Seminars and lectures. it out because we have now had a lot of Why not get some outsiders to listen to you. patience and all nonsense going around us. Nirmala Yoga 41

 Better tell them, or are we going to allow all such a tearned book he wrote that in the of them to go to hell-diret. light of Gyaneshwara what is Sahaja Yoga. And he has written it so well that anybody Message of Easter,-East, comes from who is a theologian or anything like that in East. I don't know why they call it Easter. Have you ever thought of it? Why do they call translate that book for you. But it is all the it a Worcester Sauce- don't know. I don't know why they call anything! But Easter, Marathi language. He wrote such a nice book you can't explain. But Easter, it is coming from the East. The wisdom has to come from the East. the Resurrection has to come from tiat, I felt. And once it reaches into the hands the East, whether they like it or not. And that of any of these people. I mean, it will in any is the message of Easter today. That let us give them the chance of iēsuriection by talk- some copies, gave it to me. And all the copies ing to them-all of you. Just make it a point were sold out in that programme-"every 1o talk to people who are in charge of theo- copy was sold for Rs. 2 each logy, churches. Bibles. Go and talk to them "What are you doing? Are you mad? Why do you want to be slave people. You don't know anything." India will be impressed by it. I wish I could stanzas from Gyaneshwara, which is in on Sahaja Yoga and that is what he gave on my birthday this time. Something so substan- case. And he published himself, he brought So this is what we have to do now, Is to write, write to different magazines, met people, tell them we want to come and talk tO you. First of all yoi must know about Sahaja Yoga. You should be well equipped. It is not that you can show my photograph with a light here. That is not sufficient. What is the light here, also you have to show. know anything about Sahaja Yoga. Even in Only a few people know what is Sahaja Yoga - the rest of you do not know anything. Let us see what questions we have in our minds. Let us sit down and find out what are the Sahaja Yoga, they don't understand what the questions, what questions are we lacking in, what we have to understand in Sahaja Yoga. What part we don't know. Let's find out all those things, all the details. Let us write it down. "Everyone" of you. Whether it is a woman, man, child, everyone can do it. Find out what are the questions which are not yet answered in Sahaja Yoga. How can we ans- wer particular questions? Alright. All these Recently you must be knowing, that there things can be found out if you put your atten- is a book going to be published by Yogi tion to it you can easily find out what you need. Everyone has to do it. You must all be very good book. Of course, most of it I have equipped. If anybody asks you a question on Sahaja Yoga and you cannot answer, I mean how can you convince people. You take one ordinary so-called layman from. Christianity,-so-called Christianity again, Another thing I would suggest that we should have regular classes, to understand Sahaja Yoga properly. I have seen some people who are Sahaja Yogis for years, don't Bombay, people told that some of the ladies are absolutely zero as far as Sahaja Yoga is concerned. They don't understand what is chakras are. They listen to your lecture and then. just like a bubble, everything disappears from their minds. 1 don't know who gave them these ideas, but they were quite shock- ed. So let us have a class-like thing for Sahaja Yogis, on different topics and subjects let us work it out: Mahajan called 'Gita Enlightened' which is a helped him, he has been with me and all that, but doesn't matter, but he has understood the subiect. The other day they published a very beautiful book in Marathi. One Suravkar, 42 Nirmala Yoga

 atmosphere against Christ So we have to fight and that is how we should become the people the man is layman and the Christianity is also lay. He will give a big lecture on Christ. Every verse in the Bible he will tell you. who are fighting for Christ "Chapters, Matthew 2, Verse 2, this is what Christ has said. That you will be calling me Christ, Christ and I will not recognise you telling about himself only So you have to be do not know much about Christ. That we absolutely equipped for it: Now you also have to go to other books to find out who have to know what you will confront in a par- ticular country. For example, when I come to have to go much deeper. We have to prove England, I know I have to confront these that there is Divine power. And you have theologians and the Christ and everything. If seen how Divine power works. What wonders I go to India, I know what have to confront. I have to face it on different lines and different them these are the photographs, can you fronts. You don't have to do that. Just think explain these things. That in the hand you about your wn country. French peopie have see the sun. Show us in Mrs. Thatcher's to think about France, you people have to hand, even a star won't twinkle. These things think about this country and then go ahead with it. You can chalk out a good pro- Tight time. We must do whatever is right at gramme and work it out properly. I am sure, with God's grace, everything will work out. Because when are we going to do it now? Now there could be areas where you can talk of integration, of talking about how we He was. Why did He come on this earth? We there are. You take my photographs. Show to be seen in the right perspective and at the that point. That is the way Sahaja Yoga is. Hit the point when it is to be hit. If you cannot do that way you cannot achieve. So this is the right time for you, there äre 3 I am going away, as I told you to India, months ahead of you, I would like you to see and I don't know when I will be back. You what you can do, because now the sun will wanted to arrange my programme in England, be coming out. you will have a nice summer. but I think I cannot do it because have to ga round to all the places. Europe and al that, holidays during these three months going to finish that. You better do that touring When some beach somewhere. I was not here what touring did you do?- Nothing. You could have toured. Now at least these three months, you will be having people. They have no time to waste. We a nice summer time, I'll be travelling all over Europe, everywhere. You please see that you quarrel among ourselves.. go round England. Visit different places, fight very great enemies. We have no time to arrange programmes, talk to people, find out waste on our families and our children and who are the big Johnnies there. The mayors, this that. Go and talk to them. Tell them We are on a warpath. Very important this is. about this. That is how a new programming should be done and a new dimension should Go ahead. But now just do not fix all your Sahaja Yogis have no time-they are busy are on a warpath-we have no time to We have to our relations and father, mother, sister, brother. So let us now prepare ourselves as Christ stood out of that grave, let us get ouut of this be given to our Sahaja Yoga propaganda. grave of lethargy, of compromising, of com- You have done no propaganda in the right lort, of aur past ideas about life's pleasures. sense, in the sense that you were not so sure This is the new era that has to show it's mani- about it that it we will work out. But But now festation in this country. it is very important. and you all can do it. You have ito be very we will, because people are, there is an Nirmala Yoga 43

 brave, you have to be sensible, wise kind and most important thing that we have to do? If also forthright. But you have to say what you you realise it. I am sure it will work out. have to say. Because it has to be said. And this is the only thing to be said-nothing else is important. Whatever these people talk really 'command you to do that now. about has no meaning. They are not mantras. Some of them are anti-God, some may not be, but they are useless, wasteful, really gar- bages I should say. Why they are given so much importance and not the real thing that going to find out ways and methods for doing is there. With all my blessings, with all my love, I May God bless you, Today, on this day you all should vow, that we are on the warpath and we are these things during these three months. We are You understand that this is the reality rhat going to work it out. Just vow. Just ask for has come into you people. "Actually you have And promise it to Christ that as You did, we felt the reality, actually you know the reality. are going to do. you 'are' in the reality. Then why not talk about it. Why should we not? Is it not the wisdom and the spiritual power That's all. May God bless you. Sahaja Yoga Biggest Blessing of Shri Mataji We Sahaj Yogis have been endowed with ence, perseverence and practice after many such huge blessings far beyond imagination. years of struggle. Our Mother Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi has enabled us to obtain self-realisation through Bible which is the Book of Genesis (Ch. X & awakening of aur Kundalini Shakti. In normal XI), the people in those days wanted to build course this is very difficult to achieve and may be attained by one in a million amongst realisation. The building of this could not true, sincere and fully devoted persons with proceed further after few stories had been much of patience, perseverence and practice. built because there came the language barrier. Our Mother Mataji has enabled us to attain This is known as the Tower of Babel. Referring to the first book in the Holy a tall tower to reach the sky hoping to attain this with utmost ease and comfort. We Removing the barriers of race, religion, langu- age & nation our Mother Shri Mataji has been able to build a great mansion of Sahaj Yoga Referring to Kato Upanished there is a which is stronger, taller and highly sanctified story of Nachi Keta who was a great devoted than any building, tower or structure in the person. Once Lord Yama the Lord of death World. This mansion is not built with bricks. cement steel, wood or stones but with Love, Nachi Keta offer to you half Peace, Harmony, Friendship, Devotion and of my Kingdom". Nachi Keta replied to Yama Dedication of the Sahaj Yogis. This mansion saying-"Oh Lord. I don't wish to have any has many doors, and doors are always open: part of your Kingdom. Give me self-realisa- our Mother Shri Mataji has room for everyone who wish to enter (The doors represents our should consider ourselves as the chosen people of God. met him and being pleased with his devotion tion". This Yama was unable to do. After much search Nachi Keta went to activity centres all over the world). This King Janaka who was a realised soul. King Janaka could not give Nachi Keta self-realisa- for ever & ever. tion straight-away. King Janaka finding Nachi Keta very sincere and devoted, helped Mataji Nirmala Devi Namo Namaha ! him to attain self-realisation with great pati- mansion Shri Mataji has built to stand firm Om twemeva sakshat Adi Shakti Shri -Monohar Khandke 44 Nitmala Yoga

 Christian Tradition and Christ QUESTION: Shri Mataji, in the Christian tra- nothing by Paul, And then he incarnated dition we have heard that the on this earth as Augustin and started this so Holy Spirit is something which called tradition. comes from outside and now You said it is something which is Now you will be surprised there is an Archbishop of Durham who says that all these things are hallucinations of the disci- SHRI MATAJI: It is a controversial thing, ples and that there was no immaculate con- it is Christain tradition itself. Now it has ception and there was no miracles of Christ. inside. come to a crux, so I can tell you about it. There was recently a book written by an Eng- - lishman think, who has challenged the stowed upon him a very great honour, that miracles of Christ, his immaculate conception church was burnt by a great fall of a lightning and all these things And, according to him Paul never talked about it. You seel have to tell Archbishop says that it was God's grace that you the truth. I must tell you the truth, Now this gentleman Mr. Paul. when I saw him in the Bible I was surprised, who is this gentle- man here, He was himself a Jew who tor- tured Christians. He saw that Stephen was tortured. Then suddenly he gets a supra- established when you come to Sahaja Yoga; conscious, some sort of an epileptic fit. in that He is such a great truth that all these that he sees some light and he becomes the false people who try to malign him..And to organizer of Christianity. He had never met challenge Christ is a very dangerous thing. Christ. He was an intellectual and he intel- because you must know He has eleven des- lectualized Christ and he established himself troying powers which are called in Sanskrit in the Bible. How is he there? What he did was to write letters of organizing God and tell the people because he wanted to go to He has all the powers of innocence and who gentiles He faught very much with Peter can challenge Him? Unless and until one has and there was no combination established realization, one can't understand Christ. because Peter was not an intellectual. this Mr. Paul started a religion of his own and surprisingly Khalil Gibran had said the same thing that I am saying. That who is this strange man Mr. Paul? It would be like this epileptic boy talking of Sahaja Yoga. And not anly that, Khalil Gibran also says that people and the Kundalini rises when the Holy Paul is a person who does not know what he Ghost blesses the people; so the Kundalini is talking about. he is not sure about himself. rises because of that. is a fact. But they He said it very clearly in that book The Son of Man". Please read ita complete chap- any way, because they don't know anything So this Peter was completely made into Because intellectuals can't understand these things. Now this churchi where they be within; absolutely burnt on top. So the the walls did not burn. I tell you that not only Christ had imma- culate conception but every miracle he did is a fact. And He is the Truth and can be as Ekādasha Rudra. He is great incarnation of Mahävishnu. He is innocence personified. So So many people are shattered. Their faith is shattered the way these intellectuals have taken over the tradition, so called tradi- tion, of Christianity But it is true, the Holy Spirit can bless don't know. They did not even explain in about it. They don't know, they have no ter. 45 Nirmala Yoga

 knowledge about it. They did not even ex- Kundalini rises in its dignity. That is the gate plain that when the Holy Ghost blessed the He said. disciples what language they were speaking and what they were doing that people tho- ed I'm rather doubiful how the tradition took, ught they were mad. Because the Holy every religion, even Hinduism, it is like that. Ghost blessed them they felt the cool breeze Islam is the same. Any religion you take. the and they started talking the language of the tradition is nothing but the tradition of going centres, as we talk. Not that somebody down, down, down, down. If it was a right started speaking German, somebody started, tradition there would have been no problem. say, speaking Sanskrit. It is only possible Today we have so many churches, so many these things happen when you get possessed. fightings. You see the Vatican in the Matia, But they got their realization and they started the Mafia in the banks. I can't understand. to speak the Divine language of the centres. And when these powers are felt then you adorned on his crown. What kind of crown start moving your hands in the deftness of It these people are wea you know how to use these hands, how to have also now. started another kind of com- raise the Kundalini. The hands start moving petition with your crowns. and that's what people thought. they were making a big umbrella of gold. I must say mad. So now as far as the tradition is concern- But Christ you gave Him the thorn to be ring? In India also, we crown is alright-they are wise, but umbrella is dangerous. They are playing with Divinity, But i mova in a society of another kind they have no sense that God Almighty has as you know and in that I meet many am- bassadors and great intellectuals, and they all religion of Christianity or any religion is the say that these disciples of Christ were all religion of the living God. At different times stupid lools. Because they have not been there were great flowers on the "Tree of to universities. What university did Christ go Life". But we plucked them and said this to? This is how it is a big drift now between is nmine, this is mine" and we are fighting the the people who feel Christ is the embodi- dead. But in Sahaja Yoga you will know the ment of Divinity and those who are intellec- beauty of all these great prophets and you tuals of this kind who are challenging Christ. will be amazed how they have enriched us. But Sahaja Yoga can prove that Christ resides all of them. on this centre of Agnya there at the cross: because when the Kundalini stops at that lot of explanations and thank God I could say point. at the Agnya point, you have to take the name of Our Lord Jesus Chirist. Then the a tremendous wrath for such people, The So now, I think our question-needed a it in Vienna. (Vienna 8th Sept. 1984) Nirmala Yoga 46

 Her Holiness Mataji Nirmala Devi CARDIFF PUBLIC PROGRAMME 8 August 1984 "The Knowledge of the Roots" I bow to all the seekers of truth. It gives the Roots within ourselves and within our me immense pleasure to come to Cardiff society, within human beings as a whole. again for this programme of Sahaja Yoga. They must have explained to you what is Sahaja Yoga. That is, 'Saha" is 'with' and Ja is bornit is born with you and all of us have a birth right to get this spontaneous yoga, that is the union with the Divine. Ascent to the Divine is our birth right. Only don't know where to look, what to see, the Now we have to realise that we have come to this state of human awareness up to a point where we find we are lost. These days in the modern times, we are very much confused because there are so many ideas afloat. All these ideas confuse us and we thing we must reach that state of awareness where we become aware of higher seeking drastically that it is difficult for us to keep up within us. First as a human being we seek food, then protection, house, possessions, money, power-and then we find that all these things even if you have achieved you have not been able to achieve what you all He has to do something about it. It's no wanted-thal is the state of joy, and thus you start seeking furthermore to find out what should be that state in which you Vremain in complete joy. value systems have changed rapidly so and cope with it. Despite all that, it seems that there must be some hope for us: after all God, God who has created this Universe must be worried about this creation. After tise only our worrying about it, or being aware of the shocks, the future shocks that we may receive because of the mistakes we have committed before. It is He who has Many people have no idea as to what to made us and it is He who works out every- expect and also they are quite naive about thing for us. For example, we believe that we the structure or the nature of this tree of life do this and we do that. What we do is the which is built within us. Now what I'm going work of the dead to the dead. We do not do to tell you is the Knowledge of the Roots. any living work. We cannot transform one So far with our developments we only know flower into a fruit. But you see in different the Knowledge of the Tree, but we have to seasons we find different types of flowers, know the Knowledge of the Roots which sustains this tree. If we do not know that every child that is born has something to do Knowledge, it may be one day this great tree with the society, with the parents, with the that we see which seems to be quite secure, country where it is born, it is such a big may completely be destroyed. So it is impor- selection that it is inmpossible to find out who tant for everyone to have that Knowledge of could have done it with such tremendous different types of fruits coming in. we find 47 Nirmała Yoga

 powers of accuracy. A child is conceived in a Mother's womb, is a very big miracle itself Mother Earth, and the seed has a capacity to become the plant and the Mother Earth has to all the medical science because nor- a capacity to sprout it. In the same way, this mally everything that is foreign is thrown happening has to take place. Today that time has come. 7 hat time has come, the time of formed in the body, it is not thrown out, on judgement has come and at this time we the contrary it is preserved, looked after, have to see that we'll be judging ourselves, nourished and thrown out af the time when but not by some sort of a weight or some sort of an authority, but by something which thing that we see everyday, but somehow is within us which we call as the Kundalini, is placed in the triangular bone called as sac- rum. Just see, Greeks knew about it, that's why they called this bone as sacrum. But what is this bone in the biblical understan- out of the body but when the foetus is it is fully matured. This is such a remarkable or other we take everything for granted Human beings if they look at themselves, they'll be amazed how beautifully we are made. This is something special about us. ding-it is the reflection of the Holy Ghost. We know so many things more than the we have to understand that if there is a An animal can pass through a animals do. Father God and a Son-there has to be a Mother. So this is the primordial Mother who is the Holy Ghost and She is reflected within us as the Kundalini. In our heart is reflected dirty lane, he cannot understand any architec- ture, he cannot understand any colours, any beauty, but we human beings have so many ideas and also abstract ideas. But beyond the God Almighty. It is He who is the witness this is a state where you reach into an absolute state-so far still we live in a relative world. Whatever we know is so relative that it is difficult to decide really what is right and what is wrong. Relatively we can say alright, this is little right and this is little wrong. But we cannot absolutely say that this is right and this is wrong. Here then we start thinking-are we really fully evolved? We are not. We are not evolved. And when of whatever we are doing. This power manif- ests everything within us and then resides in a sleeping state in that triangular bone and is said to be residual because it has not yet manifested itself. This is the power of our desire which is true and the only desire we have which is pure, Because all other desires are not true. If they were true, any one of them when satisfied, we would not have desired for anything else. But it is not so- as you know in economics that wants in general are not satiable. So you want to have something today, then we want to have another thing tomorrow. But once the desire of beco- I say this you shauld take it as an hypothesis with a very open mind of a scientist. And then if it is proved you have to accept it as a law, not before that. It is very hard to believe that we can ming one with the Divine manifests then you become the Spirit. This is one of the big don't want anything-you want to give. Like myths of modern times and many a times when I speak about becoming the Spirit people say that-how can you say like that, how can it be that easy-but it is a living Spirit by giving them peace and bliss: Today process of our evolution and if it is done by we talk of peace. But how can we have the power of a living God, then it has to be peace with the people who are so distur- very simple, has to be very easy-like if you bed. We have to have transformation of have to sprout a seed you just put it in the human beings, who should feel peaceful you want to be the Ilight and then you become the Ilight that emits light and emanci- pates others-raises them to the level of their Nirmala Yoga 43

 within themselves and should feel that they are the ones who are part and parcel of the whole But this should not be a conception when She rises, She actually fulfis the need of everyY subtle centre that supplies to your gross centres, because these are the abstract or we can say are the subtle centres which are first fulfilled and they look after your plexuses, that's how you get healed automa- tically, It is you who heal yourself, not me. Fm just a catalyst you can say, like ane enlightened light can enlighten another one. or a mental projection. Because mental pro- jection can disappear in no time. Like you would believe that this particular person is my friend but you discover that he is not and the whole mental projection drops out So all mental projections are artificial, they last for a short time and disappear. But this is a happening that has to take place within us when we become the Spirit. It is the question of you feeling that Spirit on your central nervous system. and once you are enlightened. you can enlighten another person. That is how it is. So there is no obligation. There is no give and take. It's like we are part and parcel of the whole. Now we have, say, a problem on So in our evolutionary pr0- cess whatever happened to us has happened a linger. What do we do? We just rub that to our central nervous system, and that is finger and find that we feel better. But have we any way obliged this finger? Because it is part and parcel of you it just spontaneously has happened and has worked out. In the same way it happens to you also that you get what Christ has exactly said when he said you are to be barn again. He didn't say that you just ask somebody to do an exercise of putting some water on top of your head- 3nd then say now you are baptised. No. There is a true baptism of the real awaken- this Realisation automatically. Now the mass evolution has started and ing of this Kundalini passing through these there are many who have got Realisation six centres above, piercing through your like that. I'm happy to know in England also fontanale bane area and giving you the we have at least two to three thousand of the breeze of the people who are realised very well, who are Holy Ghost coming out of your own head established, but there may be much more who have got Realisation, but then you have to establish yourself like a tree. Once you yourself and you have to seek the truth, and establish Ilike a tree you can give Realisation not something that just satisfies yau for the to others and you can give them peace and the whole thing is such a transformed per- sonality-because the second thing that experience true and this cannot be by just putting water by somebody. It has to happen within time being. That's why even if you profess any religion we find we don't have much transformation happens to you when you become the Spirit within. But here you become the Spirit, the light of the Spirit we can say, on our central nervous system just guides you. Like first of all when this Kundalini rises She passes that you become so powertul that nothing dominates you. There is no habit that can dominate you. No temptation can dominate you and you become very powerlul, But at the same time you are extremely compassionatê, you Nothing dominates you. through these centres on the physical level and you get physical health. Some people are extremely kind, so it is a very compassia- say, Mother, you heal us or cure us-is not true. It is your own Kundalini. It's your own Mother within you. nate power that you develop of the Spirit and you become a new personality, a wonderful personality. We know when we have Christ- mas, when we have Easter, we give eggs to Everybody has an individual Mother, Nirmala Yoga 49

 people. This denotes the Resurrection of cool breeze coming out. But if you want to Christ as our own Resurrection, that an egg find about Hitler, you might get a blister or has to become the bird. It is symbolic of that. That we are like eggs when we are closed, when we have this l'ness within us, and out and gradually you become absolutely then suddenly when this happens to us, this wise in the sense you become absolute and egg becomes the bird and you become com- you understand: pletely free and you know what freedom is. Freedom is no licence but freedom which is absolutely not curbing anybody's freedom nor is giving you any bondages, It is some- thing so great it should happen to all of us. a heat on your hands and you'll feel horrible about it. So that is how you start working it Just now if you look at a person how will you find out who is right and who is wrong? But when this happens to you, you dan't have to know about him. On his centres you know because you become collectively consc- We have had many great saints in this jous, You become, again I say, it is a beco- country, I would like to mention VWilliam ming. you becomie collectively conscious, you Blake who was a great saint and who saw all this happening long time back, two hun- dred years back-and He wrote about it that such and such time will come when men of God will become prophets and these can know about your own centres and you can know about the centres of others. And when you feel the centres of others, you know what the problem is, you don't talk like other people talk, but you talk in the prophets will have powers to make others language of centres. This is exactly what prophets. He has said so many things that happened to the disciples of Christ when time has cone today for England to rise as He has desired and described. That time is they were blessed by the Holy Ghost, the cool breeze came on them, they started here today now at this time you should get speaking in strange languages. And the your Realisation-you'll realise that now you have entered into that Kingdom of God. We have also many people, we can say even Mohammed Sahib has said that At the time of Resurrection your hands will speak. Exactly this happens, that when you get your same thing you'll find with Sahaja Yogis that they speak in a strange language in the sense that they talk in the language of the centres, and they start: using their hands in a way because the hand has got the power flowing, and they use it to bind it up and that looks Realisation, when the Kundalini comes up, very strange and at that time also it looked and She touches the seat of God here imm- very strange so people started saying that they are mad people, they are doing some ediately in your heart the reflection of God starts emitting cool vibrations from your sort of funny actions. hands also, When it starts happening you are amazed that all around you feel the subtle power of God, the power of His love, happen, the time has come, it is the blossom- what we call the all-pervading Brahma, what we call the Chaitanya, that's how you start it was not the blossom time but it was the feeling it and once you start feeling it you are time when there were hardly one or two amazed that how you can find about anything. flowers on the tree of life, but today is You become like a computer. As soon as you different-there are so many seekers all want to find out whether it is right or wrong, aver say you want to ask a question," Is there kinds of things, because as soon as they God?"-Immediately you'll find there will be come to know, the negatives, that God has So all this happens, it's very simple, has to time; at that time I would say, in the early days, the world though misled by all Nirmala Yoga 50

 dacided to work it out, they have come in Forget the past. We are not to think about the the market and they are selling their goods. One must know that you cannot sell God in happen to all of us. the market. Secondly you cannot organise God. But we are so much used to it. paying the knowledge is like an ocean. I cannot in for everything that we can't understand that this short time tell you all about it, would we can get something without paying. But think of a seed which we sow in the lectures in English language which have Mother Earth. What do we do? Do we pay given all over the places, and I would req- anything? Does it understand money? Do living processes understand money? Do you think God understands money? You can't pay for it. If you put this one small little test,-99 per cent of these bogus people will disappear ache, and if I tell you about the electricity, from the scene. But we don't think. we don't the history of the electricity, the connections use our brains, we go headlong into it On of electricity, the sources of electricity. you'll the contrary they will ask thousands of ques- be led up. First of all, let us have the light. tions to me but to these people who have taken thousands of pounds and have finished understand, and you'll have much patience. them off they don't ask äny question. They Sol would request you first to have the light just go headlong into it, ruin their lives, get We can try it, I cannot guarantee, I must say, into epilepsies and all kinds of diseases, then i cannot guarantee to everyone-is something they come to me and I find that they are in a that works out but may not work out also. very bad shape. But doesn't matter. what- As far as possible, we should try and let us ever has happened has happened. Nobody see what happens to us and if it works out should feel guilty about it. That's one condi- tion of Sahaja Yoga is that we should not feel guilty, We have to be in the present. past. And at this present moment this should Now the subject matter is so great and say there must be at least two thousand uest you first of all to get the light within you. Like this room when it is not lighted and if I tell you about this room it will bea head- Once we hava the light it's much easier to that would be really a very great pleasure for me. May God bless you all. FESTIVALS Date (English) Name (Shalivahan) date Navrātri Puja Dassehra 4th October to 12th October 12th October Ashvin Shudda Pratipada to Dashami. (from 1st to 10th day of bright fortnight of Ashvin) Hawan is Performed on the 7th day, that is, on 10th October. Ashvin Paurnima (full moon day in the month of Ashvin) Puja is offered to Shri Lakshmi. In the late night and Bhajans are sung till early hours. Ashvin Amävasyā. (The new moon night of month Ashvin Kärtika Paurnima (the full moon day of Kartika Month) Margasheersh Shuddha Chaturdashi (the fourteenth Day of bright fortnight of the month of Margasheersha) Kojagiri Paurnima 17th October Lakshmi Puja 1st November Birthday of Guru Nanak 16th November Birthday of Shri Dattatray 15th December Birthday of Shri Jesus 25th December Nirmala Yoga 51

 "The Right Heart and the Qualities of Leadership' "The Lord God Almighty is Absolute tenor of his entire life was sarvice and duty. And his brothers served him in this-and in Sovereign of the Universe". Amen. The Movement in the unconscious is always this he was supported by the Shri Ganesha from left to right to centre. The heart chakra tattva-whose motto is also service, duty, in both left and centre represents divine purity, and support. protection and a sense of security, translated in human terms into protection by the parents. Sahaja Yogi and one's right heart catches, In the Right heart; this becomes protection it is not all service and duty and unselfishness of the Father and the King-or Leader in modern terms-And its ruling deity is the not 'we but rather an "I" is keeping in. Right Lord Rama, as Incarnation of the Lord Vishnu, sided negativity always ends up in the Ego: sustainer and pervader of the universe. It is well known that in all his incarnations, and in his unincarnated state the Lord Vishnu greatest. "Akbar"-the comparative form of serves eternally the needs of the universe and his Mother the Shri Adishakti unstintingly absolute the beyond). And both are epithets and unselfishly. One can never find a single attempt at self glorification by the Lord; only unstinting devotion, service, surrender and submission to the Shri Adishakti and the blasphemous in his speech. But he who Lord Absolute. He who is Lord of the power of wealth-the Lakshmi tattva-takes none The relevance of this is that if one is a and devotion, to the Sangha of the collective: *" can do this. "I" am this. Look how great 'am-But really it is the Virata which is Kabir (great)-i.e. greater. (the greatest is the of God as Virata, in the Koran. Hence one who says "I" am great, without any reference to the Virata, is anti-God in his essenceand says, "We are Great" or "I am great only be- cause I am part of the Virata and of God the Almighty-and therefore serve Him taking throughout the universe. In total detachment nothing for myself", is great. For Greatness lies only in the Eyes of God-not of men- and only He can confer this title, otherwise it is futile, empty, imaginary. It is easy now to see what a Right heart catch is, especially in a he regulates the lines of the Universe, without any personal attachment. In the Sahasrara his Sahasrara is the Sahasrara of the Virata, in the Mooladhara likewise. In the Agnya he is Shri Mahavishnu, the Lord Christ, who disposes all things and matters within the Sahaja Yogi if he is a leader. A Sahaja Yogi has to be very pure. There is a story in Medi aeval Europe, that the Lord Christ was like a Pelican, for it was believed, The Lord Rama as king always served, and that the Mother Pelican nurtured her children sought for himself neither wealth, nor glory, by taking blood from her own heart and nor comfort, as Maryada Purushottama-he feeding them. It is a beautiful story, born of Universe. was an example to his people-and conscious the Unconscious, indicating how, at the level of being so-voluntarily, took on the 14 year of Centre Heart, the Omkara takes on the exile in the forest, and the exile of his wife virtues and qualities of his Mother the Shri a form and aspect of the Shri Adi Shakti. He Adishakti, and out of "profoundest', love for surrendered to his children-and through Her, feeds Her children-with the Love and them became the Father of Nations. If one blood of his own Heart. A Sahaja Yogi leader searches the whole Ramayana it would be needs also to be like this-for leadership is not leading but serving-with the blood of Lord became or behaved selfishly-For the the heart-and an impure heart cannot lead, (contd. on Page 37) impossible to find. one example where the Nirmala Yoga 52

 Sahaja in Europe: An overview opean have been spoiled. They have enjoyed in recent years a succession of umentous pujas and public programmes with Shri Bhagavati Mataji. The Void (Europe) as to be somewhat cleared, the Nabhi (right: France/Germany, left: Austria/Italy) and the Heart (left: England) has to be strengthened before Vishuddhi (USA) can mainfest; before the Kundalini (India) can express the full strength of her ascending power. Thus Shri Mataji gave special care and attention to the European organs of the Viratakalki to come. Here are a few recollections. Sahasrara day 1985 in Vienna. Tremendous. The bandhan from Shri Mataji digs a hole in the heavy rain clouds which were hanging over the city. All around: clouds. On Vienna: sunshine and blue sky. In the castle of the born realised Empress Maria-Theresia. Shri Mataji tells us we have to settle down in our own dimension that is nirvikalpa samadhi. Sunshine, sahasrara shine, sun sahasrara. Sahaja Yoga in Austria is: doing well with the fourth ashram soon opening in Vienna and Herbert opening a new center in the city of Graz. In Munich (Germany), Hugo and his group held the fort. Ganesha puja in Rome. A bath of overflowing bhajans and devotion. I missed it, alas, but could escort Shri Mataji in Venice a few days later. where huge crowds had been drawn to Her programme by positive Italian radio and television reporting. In the mean- time, programmes and seminars organized by Yogis in Mailand and Venice have been successful. Guru puja 1985 near Paris witnessed the wrath of the SatgurJ. Awesome. But since then, France, with Patrick as a new leader. has improved a lot. There is also, in the congress house in Versailles, a nice inaugural ceremony for the French new version of "the Advent", Mr. C.P. Shrivastava carries the hall with a confident, forceful statement on Sahaja Yoga's crucial role in today's troubled world. Shri Mataji Rajya Laxshmi is royal as ever. The book which is published commercially, sells well. In the summer, two major pujas take place in England. A Ganesha puja again, in Brighton and the Vishnumaya puja in Wimbledon. Brighton station resounds with the conches, the cheers, the jai jai kar and the songs of hundreds of sahaja yogis. Both the speeches of Shri Mataji must be meditated upon by all of us, again and again. Switzerland had been blessed in 1984 by two pujas in the mountains: Guru puja in Leysin and Ganesha puja at the feet of a titanic Swayambhu Ganesha, the Matterhorn (meaning: "the Mother's top"). the most famous mountain of Europe. In 1985 again, Shri Mataji graces us with a Navratri puja in Weggis, at the geographic and historical core of the country. The Goddess seats on the tiger, holds the swords and...a gun! The Havan is out of the world, higher on the mountain, above a sea of clouds. The Swiss nucleus of sahaja yogis is good but Swiss people are still very slow in opening themselves to Reality. Durga's coming helped to clear out a lot of poisons (Switzerland being the gall-bladder).

 Magistered with the Registrar of Newapapers undet Regd. No 35999(8! and dut ris-and i At last. and again in Italy, Diwali puja takes place near Rome in November 198 festival of light is celebrated with bubbling joy. The meeting at the airport betwee Mataji arriving with a plane full of British sahaja yogis and the European who are waitinuty cannot be described. We will never forget it. Mataji, Mataji, your face shines like é thiousand suns. In Her speech, Shri Mataji says that the sahaja yogis are responsible for keeping their lamps all right no smoke should blacken the face of God! Finally, Mother, during a shopping evening, buys (very cheaply) the same (superb) pair of shoes to Guido. Engelbert and myself. We hard ly dare to walk in it. Caneshi Seminars deserve a special mention as an effective tool for strengthening inner growth and collective developments. The third European seminar near Colmar, in April 1986, is attended by around 400 people from more than ten nations. Great vibrations, great fun. With a puja to Shri Vishnu, this encounter is conceived as a preparation for the sixteenth Sahasrara iday. About 600 yogis and yoginis flocked to this extraordinary ceremony in the Italian alps. near the Swiss border, in a region which had already been graced in September 1984, by an Ekadesha Rudra puja to Shri Mataji. An anticyclone arrived from England, at the same time as Shri Mataji, to blow away eastwards the radioactive cloud which was drifting over Europe after the nuclear catastrophy of Chernobyl in the USSR. When Shri Mataji artives to the place, between two meter high walls of snow all the conches blow triumphantly, the smog clears out and a touch of sunshine lights up fifteen meters golden statue of the Goddess as "Our Lady of Europe" which overlooks the site. This same night, we all enjoy a unique session of bhajans and dances, vibrant with love and intensity, and of a high musical quality. Songs of praises from all the countries, including Algeria and Spain, are offered to the Lotus Feet of the Divine Mother. She is prasanna. And we all beam like... children of God. During Her puja speech. Shri Mataji stresses how important it is for us to drop all the concepts of the Unconscious within. To evolve from self knowledge to self consciousness, we are to be more awake, more alert by activating our witness power. The brain represents the principle of Shri Vishnu, which in the sahasrara of the true yogi. is totally surrenderted to Adi Shakti. Last but not least I have to say a word about our hosts. In presenting a beautiful programme of songs and dance, in decorating the puja hall with exquisite taste, in organiz- ing everything so smoothly, the Italian sahaja yogis deserve our admiration. We really feel that sahaja yoga is on the move in Italy. A TV journalist, a saleswoman in a shop approached Shri Mataji in Mailand asking respectfullyT "Are you la grande Madre" (the great Mother)7 May I please have my realisation?" Indian of the European countries. He loved it. . I told Guido that Italy is the most -Gregoire Edited & Published by Sh. 5.C. Rai 43, Bunglow Road, Delhi-110007 â& Printed at The Central Electric Press, 80-D. Kamia Negar, Dalhi-110007, One saue Rs. 9,00, Annuel Subscription Rs. B1.00 Forelgn (by Aemail £ 7 $ 14)



----------------------

1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Nirmala Yoga
Vol. 5 No. 30
Bi-Monthly
Nov. Dec. 1985
"Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns all the religions and
seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga-THE UNION"
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-1.txt 
 NIRMIALA YOGA
43, Bungalow Road, Delhi-10007 (lndia)
Founder: Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Editorial Board : Dr. S.K, Mathur, Sr A.S. Mishra, Sri R.D. Kulkarni
Representatives
: RAJEN MAHARAJ, 26, Ocean St, Bondi, NSW 2026
Australia
1INGE KELLY, Josef Melichargasse 20, 1210 VIENNA.
LORI & CARY HYNEK, 1540, Taylor Way, West Vancouver, B.C. VIS 1N4.
Austria
Canada
France
M. CERNAY, 175, Av. Ledru Rollin PARIS-75011.
: ANTONIO SARACINO, NIRMALA HOUSE, Localita Pichini s.n.s., 00010
S. Angelo Romano, ROMA
: M.B. RATNANNWAR, 13, Merwan Mansion, Genjewala Lane, Borivali (W)..
BOMBAY-400092.
Italy
India
: JUAN ANTONIO DELGADO, Avenida De Burgos, 30, 1, A, MADRID-28036
: CHARLES & MRS. MAGDA MATHYS, 5, Chemin Des Mouldins,
1256, Troinex (Canton de Geneva).
Spain
Switzerland
U. K.
: GAVIN BROWN, Brown's Geological Information Services Ltd., 134 Great
Portland Street, London WIN 5PH.
IAN BASCOMBE, 32, Hooker Road, Exeter, Devon, England
U.S.A.
:CHRISTINE & MICHAEL PETRUNIA, 270, Jay Street (APT. 1-C),
BROOKLYN, NY-11201,
URSULA SEH LMEYER, 191 Canal ST. #23 SAN RAFAEL, CA-94901.
8ONTENTS
Page
1. Editarial
2. The New Age
3. Shri Ganesh Pooja (1983)
4. Shri Ganesh Pooja (1984)
5. Count your Blessings
6. Doubt and Ego
7. Achieve the Power of Spirit within
8. Appeal to Divine Wisdom
9. In praise of Wisdom
10. Wisdom and Fully contrasted
1
15
20
25
26
27
29
30
31
11. Mooladhara Chakra
33
12. Easter Pooja 1985
13. Sahaja Yoga-the biggest Blessing of Shri Mataji
14. Christian Tradition and Holy Ghost
15. The Knowledge of the Roots
16. The Right heart and the qualities of leadership
17. Sahaja in Europe : An overview
38
44
45
47
52
3rd Cover
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Editorial
We have already considered in the earlier two issues, the first two verses of the hymns of
Shri Dakshinamoorty. It is now proposed to study the poem in its totality in order to
understand Shri Shankaracharya's philosophy. The poem presupposes, basic identity of the
Atma and the Paramatma, that the universe is nothing but the Brahma, for nothing can exist
outside the Brahma. The Brahma is pervading in everything in the universe and the universe
is within the Brahma. The Maya exists and also does not exist at the same time. When a
rope is mistaken for a snake, it is the play of Maya which creates that illusion. In reality
there is no snake, but it is there as long as the idea of snake is attributed to the rope,
The universe is described in the first verse in relation to the Self as reflection of a city
in the mirror. As reflection is inside the mirror the universe is within the Self. Obviously
like the reflection the universe is also unreal. However, it is mistaken as real and outside i.e.
distinct from the Self, and in the process the cause ol the reflection, i.e. the Self. is ignored.
In the verses 5 to 8 the play of Maya is elucidated. Regarding the Atma everyone is
in the state of delusion; the body, sense organs, the Pranas, intellect (or the buddhi) are
considered as the Atma. The universe is mistaken as real and independent of the Atma, in
the course of interaction among various relationships. and the Atma is forgotten. Thus, as
stated by Adi Shankaracharya, the Self is enveloped by Maya as the Sun/Moon are covered
during the period of eclipse. However, it is the Self alone that becomes manifest in every
state, i.e. in sleep or in wakeful state; in childhood or young or old age. The Seif remains
unchanged in every change and is seen to be expressing itself as awareness. In fact, this
entire world of subject-objects of differentiation and transmutation is nothing but the
imagination of Maya (shakti-vilas-kalpita). This illusion is removed by the Grace of Lord
Shri Dakshinamoorthy who is none else but the Atma the changeless principle in every
change.
It is further stated that creation and sustenance of the universe is entirely by the unimped-
ed free will Swechchaya=Swa+iccha of the Paramatma or the Self. Shri Adi Shankara-
Nirmala Yoga
1
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-3.txt 
 charya quotes the analogy of a juggler who creates and maintains his magical spell as long
as he wishes. It is therefore seen that Maya is also the desire of the Paramatma. In
Vivekachoodāmani Shri Adi Shankaracharya has described the Maya: "Avidya or the Maya,
called also the "differentiated" is the power of the Lord. She is without beginning, is
made of the three Gunas and is superior to them and their effects (as their cause). She is to
be inferred by one of clear intellect from the effect She produces. It is She who brings
forth the whole universe". It is also stated in the second verse of the hymn that before its
creation the universe was latent within the Paramatma as tree in the seed. There was only
the Self that had within itself the universe in the form of idea (Atma va idameka evagra
aseet).
The third verse tells us that Paramatma's Sphurana' (the activity, pulsation) is felt from
all that is 'asat' i.e. non-self, meaning illusory. The Sat is the truth. In the process of
negation for identifying 'the Sat' only awareness is left which discards everything else as
non-Self. The awareness is the Chit hence the Self ie. "Sat' manifests itself as the Chit.
The Chit is originated from the Sacchidananda ie, the Atma, i.e. Chaitanya.
The Chaitanya is all pervading in inanimate and animate. in the former it is present as
motion that keeps everything at its proper place and maintains the balance. It is the
Chaitanya that bestows effulgence to the sun and the moon. In the lifteenth chapter of the
Bhagavad Gita, the Lord says, The effulgence inherent in the sun which enlightens the
entire universe and that which exists in the moon as well as in the fire, know it as My
effulgence, and entering the earth it is I who sustain all beings by my powers and becoming
the nectarean moon I nourish all plants". In Her lecture on the Principle' Mother has
advised that by itself the seed cannot sprout nor can it sprout just in the contact of earth or
water or air. It also cannot sprout if any of the three is not there as also the Sun. Each
has its own principle and these principles have a principle. Obviously it is the Chaitanya
that brings about everything.
In the fourth verse it is advised that Shri Dakshinamoorthy makes every visible thing
seen. Indeed the light of the sun and the moon has made everything visible. Awareness
to see and identify the external world is the quality of the Self but for which the world would
have been like non-existent. Apparently to animals the world has no meaning except as a
source instinctively used for survival.
The Chaitanya that is seen in the animal and plant worlds as instinctive activity and
growth becomes more pronounced in human beings through the working of Antahkarana"
the inner organs. This idea is well explained in the fourth verse, with a simile of a power-
ful lamp (Mahadeepa) placed into a pitcher having numerous holes-light of the lamp
shines through the holes. Similarly, knowledge of the Self (or Paramatma) pulsätes
through the instruments like sense organs.
It is thus seen that every stage of evolution brings forth increasing manifestation of the
Self; in human beings, the Sat and the Chit are expressed through the conscious use of
physical and mental faculties. It is done through ego, superego, conditioning, identifica-
tion etc. When human beings become Sahaja Yogis. a step further in the evolutionary
process, their awareness is purified and enlightened and blessed with one more dimension
of collective consciousness.
Nirmala Yoga
2.
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-4.txt 
 It is also stated that the knowledge of the Self pulsates (spandate ). According to
Shiva-sutras Spanda' is the primordial manifestation of conseiousness of Shiva who is all-
pervading Self in Adi Shankaracharya's philosophy. Although the Self shines as awareness
in human beings. the pulsation is felt by Sahaja Yogis in Sahasrara, the Peetha of Self.
With that the light of the Self entightens the attention and awareness and the 'Spanda
the vibrations start flowing. The blissful Spanda of the Self is thus objectively enjoyed by
Sahaja Yogis and is transmitted through their beings. The third attribute of Self viz: the
Anand is thus expressed. The Atma truly shines like Mahadeepa' in Sahaja Yogis.
At the ultimate stage as Shri Adi Shankaracharya says, it is the realisation of Shri Dakshi-
namoorty as all-pervading all-encompassing Self one and not the second (Yah Sakshatku-
rute Prabodha-Samaya Swatmanamevadvayam)-However, in order to be entitled to such
tremendous blessing of the Paramatma Shri Dakshinamoorty, one has to firmly imbibe in the
mind, the transient and illusory nature of the universe, and hence non-involvement in it.
There should be firm conviction, that Shri Dakshinamoorty is manifesting himself in eight
forms viz. the earth, water, fire, air, and ether fi.e. five elements), the sun and the moon.
and one's own Spirit. Shri Dakshinamoorty, is, therefore, to be worshipped in these eight
forms. One can also meditate that these eight forms are within oneself on the chakras
and the Spirit being Shri Shiva, and establish the doubtless state of oneness with Supreme
Being.
This has been described in the ninth verse wherein it is also stated that if medita-
ted in this way. it is experienced that there is nothing beyond Shri Dakshinamoorty. It may
be recalled that 662nd epithet of Shri Adishakti in Shri Lalita Sahasranama, is Ashtamoorty.
(having eight forms)
Secondly, which is most important. is complete surrender. It is stated in the third verse,
that the Lord confers the knowledge (Bodhayati) on those who surrender to Him (Ashritan)
of Tatwamasi i.e. the primordial principle, the oneness of the Self and the Paramatma. To
be the Ashrita, is to take shelter in Him. to have nothing else to look up to. Shri Adi
Shankaracharya tells us that God reveals Himself to his devotees (Bhajatam) through Bhadra
mudra', with right hand raised in assurance of bestowing the complete well-being. Accord-
ing to the scriptures, when great sages like Sanaka and Sanadana were unable to grasp the
ultimate, Shri Shiva assumed the form of a boy of 16 years, and sitting, facing to the south,
by mere deep silence was able to give them the deep ktrowledge. Therefore, all knowledge
emanates from Him. The 725th epithet of Shri Adi Shakti is Shri Dakshinamoorty roopini.
It is She who has assumed the form of Shri Dakshinamoorty.
According to verse 11, Shri Dakshinamoorty, the consciousness condensed (Chidghana).
the Supreme God (Mahesha) of the form of Sachhidananda, resides at the roots of the
Banyan tree. Apparently, the banyan tree represents the tree of Life (Urdhva moolamadhah
Shakham). The origin of life is the lotus feet of Sakshat Shri Dakshinamoorty roopini
Shakshat Adi Shakti. The preceding two verses tell that sitting at the base of the banyan
tree, and imparting the knowledge to all saints and seekers, Shri Dakshinamoorty liberates
them from the sortow of life and death, The Guru Shri Dakshinamoorty, imparts the know-
ledge through silence and the disciples become doubtless. The Guru is young but disciples
are looking old.
The sacred Knowledge is expressed and received, in silence at the highest level of con-
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-5.txt 
 sciousness, in the state of complete oneness of the Guru and the disciples. May be, some
Igreat souls, have attained that level but Sakshat Shri Dakshinamoorty, Sakshat Shri Adi
Shakti, has with limitless compassion descended amongst us. The saints of modern times
assemble at the places of seminar. In Her kindness Sakshat Shri Dakshinamoorty roopini
Sakshat Shri Mataji imparts the subtle Divine Knowledge as understandable knowledge to
them. She raises their attention in the meditations to the level of doubtless awareness,
and the realisation of Tatwamasi, of the primordial principle. Those who are truely the
Ashritas enjoy and fill their pitchers with the Tatwa and become the Tatwa itself. For the
tatwa is nothing but Sakshat Shri Dakshinamoorty roopini. Brahma Vid Brahmo bhavati:
the knower of Brahma becomes the Brahma itself.
Shri Adi Shankaracharya has promised in the tenth verse, that, whereas, the primordial
principle i.e. the Self of everything (Sarvātmatatwa) has been explained in these hymns,
studying, reflecting and meditating on these hymns would lead the seeker to the same pri-
mordial principle. This study of the hymns of Shri Dakshinamoorty is by no means com-
plete. The sarvātmatatwa has always been incomprehensible to common man due to his
inability to achieve that purest state of attention and inner being in which it would manifest.
Great children of Shree Adi Shakti have explained it in lucid and understandable language.
Now Sakshat Shri Dakshinamoorty roopini, Sakshat Shri Mataji, Herself is doing the job.
May all the seekers become Her Ashritas and fill their pitchers with the nectar of primor-
dial principle flowing from Her lotus feet and liberate themselves.
These few lines are dedicated at the lotus feet of Sakshat Shri Dakshinamoorty, Sakshat
Shri Parabrahma. Sakshat Shri Adi Shakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi.
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Shri MatajiNirmala Devi
Plaw Hatch Seminar
England
The New Age
15th Nov. 1980
You can pick out people who are very is never done in any other process, that you
generate the light, on your own, with your
seriously interested in Sahaja Yoga who are
dedicated, who have passion for Sahaja Yoga, will, with your understanding. with your
who feel that it is the most important thing of freedom. For example a tree may give rise
to seeds and seeds might become trees.
seeds do not regenerate, they do not have
a will.-Because here the seeds are human
But
life.
Now, you must have realized, that you are
the people who are the men of God and women beings. Only the human beings have the
of God. And that you have to be prepared, will. Now you've been enlightened with
to take this banner of New Age, of transform-
ing Sahaja Yoga into Mahã Yoga, into a vast
area of spirituality. You are the channels,
and you are going to generate this energy.
If you were just channels, then your responsi-
bility would have been much less.
your will. With your will you can regenerate,
or you would say, you can generate on your
own -Sahaja Yoga to go further. It's a
very subtle understanding. that when a light
comes, into this candle, it cannot regenerate
of it's will any other: somebody else has to
take it to that. So your will is very important
But Sahaja Yoga is a very different type of in Sahaja Yoga. "What do you will". That
a living process. Perhaps you might have
noticed it, that once you receive your realiza-
tion firstly it starts transforming you. Then
it starts transforming others. By your presence
you start transforming them. By your exist-
is very, very important.
Now will does not mean "desire. Will
means 'desire put into action'. So what you
do is to desire and then you put it into
ance, you start transforming the atmosphere, action. You can do it. First of all you have
to know that we must have desire. That is
there no doubt. You are categorically seekers.
the subtler problems of negativity, they all
work out. Like a tree, when it is blossoming.
the fragrance of the blossom creates a diff- I mean you are that category, you are born as
erent type of aura, around itself, that it attracts seekers, you cannot get out of it. You are
all the bees around to gather the honey. In seekers. Whatever may be your problems,
realized, is from whatever source you might have come,
whatever mistakes you may make, commit,-
but you are seekers. Seekers are seekers.
the same wBy, when a person
enlightened, the area spreads and you start
getting people attracted towards you. You
have to remember few points about Sahaja For example in this room if you see how many
Yoga, that you receive the light first, the lights there are? At the most 6.7, 8, 9, 10,
11, you see, in both the rooms put together.
second step is that you generate the light. It
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-7.txt 
 In this room only 5. Everybody is not a light. prayed to God and the divorce did not take
You are the light givers and it is going to place; it is God's help. But this kind of pray-
work out through your 'will'. So how power- ing can have another side, people can say
ful our will should be? How dedicated we
should be about our will? That, one has to
know. you have to fathom out that will within explain that? They have no faith, they are
you. Once you start doing this Sahaja Yoga, actually heathens, they are very successful in
then you recognize how important is Sahaja life. So how do you explain that side?
Yoga that it gives a real meaning to the
whole creation. in the eyes of God and
divine power. That has to work out-that's that were used before. Because people were
the purpose of life. And surprisingly it is
left to your will, not to my will. I've no will, faith, or blind-faith and the real faith. Because
I've no action. So it is your will, which is
going to work it out. So you have to dedi-
cate. And now you have to weigh yourself: that time the faith was sustenance: How to
How much Il'm willed? The seminars help sustaitn yourself? The second was to have
you to see how much yau really will that faith that you will be resurrected, that you
Sahaja Yoga should be successful. This is
the second thing: To make it successful,
what should we do? We must understand
that the people who do not believe in God at
all are quite successful. Then how do you
Sahaja Yoga has another very great thing,
that is, it is revelation of all the great terms
not given realization, one could not talk of
if they do not have their eyes how can you
tell them about the light or the darkness? So
will be your Spirit
Now the third stage is today, to know that
the basics of Sahaja Yoga, and try to see with- realization gives you experiences, and then
in ourselves "do we understand the basics your faith is established. Not blind, but
"open-enlightened faith For example you
come into this house and see for yourself
what it is, And then have faith in that. that
it is so. Believe in that, that you've seen it
now you've seen 'Sakshāt'. To have Säkshāt
means to get the whole thing which you've
first basic of Sahaja Yoga. So far, in 'all' the felt through your organs, five organs of per-
religions, 'all' the great books, even Bible or ception. It's as clear as sunlight to prove
Geetā, it is written that you must have faith. it. So this way is the real thing. no conjec-
You must have faith. "Faith" word was never türe, no just-talking-about-it. So all these
clarified in anyone of these books and mostly words that were used in the scriptures are a
people thought blind'-faith is the only way revelation'. It means in actual life you've
to believe,-is to have blind faith. It should "seen' these things happening. Like I say gt Hā
But it was kept a great and the kundalini goes up, you've seen it many
a times. I say Hã and you start feeling. That
faith. So the people started working it out, only by sayingd (Ha) and (Hoo) and (Hee)
you get the vibrations. It is 'absolutely' there,
now you can see for yourself. There is no
just-'that it would not work out or may work
substantiated that it is God who has helped out, may not work out, may be true, may not
It's
and do we have those qualities by which we
sustain those basics"?
The first basic of Sahaja Yoga is that you
have to become your Spirit, so that your body
emits the powers of Spirit alone. This is the
have been clarified.
term as : faith. They do use: Blind faith, and
for example you are walking on the road and
you say I was thinking of God, and suddenly
I found a gold ring, so that my faith was
be true.All these things are not there.
Or say that there
me to get the gold ring.
was a divorce or something like that and I
true absolutely.
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-8.txt 
 But first and foremost is. "You have to when you say, you want the Spirit to be
become your Spirit." Without knowing the happy, what you are saying is this, that you
Spirit you cannot know God. But the Spirit want your attention to be happy. If you keep
itself is a sensitive thing. It is there no doubt, your attention happy and cheerful, completely
it stays there no doubt, but that it should integrated with your being, not with your ego.
shine in your attention.
that your attention has to be congenial to the So from balancing and integration we go to
Spirit. If the attention is not congenial, then third point, is discretion because you are
the Spirit doesn't shine. Spirit will shine on
an attention which is steady. Steady it by senior students. And now you know how to
balancing, you bring a steady state. Balance be discreet. What to take, what not to
your thoughts, balance your eyes, balance take.
your desires. Try to balance it. Ego and
super-ego, you balance it. Attention is balanced
very much like that.
You have to know This is where the discretion has to be used.
very senior members of Sahaja Yoga, very
It's very easy to criticize others, it's very
easy to say others are wrong, but it should be
the easiest to see what is wrong with you
Now how do you do with your will? First because you cannot correct others, you can
of all you desire and then you act. Where am
I going? What am I doing? I am a seeker. Is
this the thing I have to do as a seeker?
Immediately balance will come.
balancing has to come; foremost thing is to to tell the other man because she is your own.
balance yourself. Any extreme behaviour In the same way it is better to correct yourself
must be balanced. Any extreme attitude than to correct others. It's the easiest thing to
towards life must be brought down. Now, correct yourself if you could look at your ego
here we find that the will acts to oppose and which is stopping it. And who is the gainer?
in an opposite direction. For
become obstinate. They do not want to
accept that we have to balance and they say,
"Ohl I am alright," and they'll give all ex-
planations to show they are alright.
whom are you giving the explanations? You discretion and now with all this trainning in
are fighting with yourseif. Why? Because Sahaja Yoga, you should be able to see even
you are not yet integrated fully within your- rationally the discretian part of it. I've seen
self.
only correct yourself. It's as simple as that!
Like a daughter is married ta another man,
now supposing there is any problem between
So this the two, it's better to tell your daughter than
Who is the person who receives the benedic
tion, and the bliss of Sahaja Yoga?
For example people
So the old habits that are within us which
gives us obstinacy, must be seen with great
For
people who go by a same road all the time
are extremely discreet, they know how to
So the second point is the integration. turn, which turn to miss and which turn to
Integration of your attention. Integration comes take and how to reach. That's the sign of
in when you do some thing, you wish the same your maturity. So you have to be discreet.
thing, you enjoy the same thing. If you want Another thing is that you have your vibrations
something else, then you find integration is there to teach you discretion. But sometimes
also wobbly in your attention. But if you want you may be missing them. So with rationa-
your Spirit, you just want your Spirit to be lity if you discriminate and try to find out
happy. Spirit is always happy. How are you what is wrong, where am I going wrong, you
going to make the Spirit happy? Only thing will very easily understand that this part I am
Nirmala Yoga
7.
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-9.txt 
 doing wrong and better check myself and no-
body else. Because you are driving your own
budhas from all kinds of people. From all
types of Sahaja Yogis coming in, because
car. You can only control your brakes and this is a wide gate where every one has to
come. all sorts. They may have hundred
not the brakes of another person. It's such
a funny situation that people are driving every bhoots or they may have ten thousand.
body else's car but not their own. So with Come along. Whatever type of bhoots there
pre we know how to handle them."-This
discretion you will know how to correct
yourself even rationally. Now your ration- should be the attitude. Because I cannot
ality is absolutely logical. Before, this, ration- give up any. I have to give chance to every-
ality was illogical. But now with integration one. It is you who discriminate between
your rationality becomes logical and it tells these and you throw those people away. I
you "No, this is wrong, this cannot be." You just can't do it. I'm sorry! Some people will
Practically come, shout at me, insult me, trouble me.
know about everything now.
everything. I do not think there is anything Alright doen't matter. They'll be alright. I
requires information for you people. can put them out of circulation, when they
Means you just try to think about something are absolutely useless. But till the end I
will have to try. And it 1 find a slightest im-
that
That's all in
and you will get the answer
your brain. It's opened up, only thing that provement, I'll catch on to them. I may have
to work much harder with them. They may
be much more closer than other peaple are
So then we go If they are lost people I have to look after
from discretion to understanding. that when them. So you must know that it is your res-
we discriminate and find out things, what you ponsibility that you should take your charge
have to do is to find our own fault, correct and look after the other things that Mother
them discreetly. Why tell about others? What has no time to look after. That's what the
are we to do? If you people are of that level, quality you people ara. That quality of people.
that you catch from even a butterfly flying All the Gods and all the Angels bow to you.
around you; and a little leaf falling from the They are in attention to you. You have seen
Even the Sun has come around, in these
But clouds just surrounded by clouds he is there.
I said. develop your discretion. If you are
indiscreet then you must develop it. you must
grow up, you must mațure.
tree. I mean if you were at that level then !
would never have put you into this test.
you are not. You are capable of much bigger Then you have to come up.
test than this and its nice to play with these,
isn't it? Otherwise why should anybody even
do hitch hiking. Leave alone hitch hiking. beginning of Sahaja Yoga. If you do not
why should people swim? I mean better to want to become collective-Sahaja Yoga is
sit on the bank and see everything. Even not meant for individuals. 1his I must have said
why go near the river. You may catch cold.
So better sit in the house. And why even
put on the light. you may see something and Here you are coming to become a collective
you may get frightened. So better to sleep. being because Spirit is the collective being. The
Even why to go to sieep, because you may quality of Spirit is that it is a collective being.
dream. So that situation if it is there, that It is a part of the collective. It is absolutely
touch-me-not business, then I can tell you one with the collective. It is so collective
we cannot count. We are saldiers, and we
have to develop immunities from all kinds of much it is collective. For example yesterday
And a small thing like collectivity, it's the
at least 6 years back, or seven years back in
England and must be ten years back in India.
that you cannot imagine on human level how
Nirmala Yoga
8.
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-10.txt 
 was criticizing Geeta and the vishuddhi was everything on her, we all tried, she could not
opened. Krishna is sitting here and talking be cured. And she vwas only interested in
through me. There is no difference at all of doing that. Then she would write poems for
And I am Krishna, I me and she wanted to read the poems. Mast
am Mataji and I am Christ. So much one embarrassing thing. 1 told her. "Don't read",
that you can't imagine how much oneness because all bhoots used to come out of her
poem. We told her in so many ways. Went
on for a year or so, still she was on and on,
So for Spirit to be absolutely enlivened and she was just creating a problem for all
the Sahaja Yogis. She was just a medium for
we have to know that how do we articulate all these bhoots to come in. And I told her
with others? How do we talk to others? many a times, you better not come here,
Then I told her very frankly. Then I said, "you
get out from here", I went up to that. Second
But of course as I said that there are people year passed. Still she would not listen. Then
about whom you should not bother at all. 1 just told her husband. that if she comes to
They are not interested in Sahaja Yoga. They the programme we are going to report it to
that.
It's just the same.
is there. It's such an unison that exists.
within us, to be absolutely shining within us,
What is our way of judging?
are anti God. They are anti Christ. Forget
the police, So her husband stopped her. But
them. They have started another movement people have such sympathies you know, for
towards hell. You cannot stop them. First start such bhoots, not seeing that she is going
dealing with simpler people. But if anybody against Mother, she is going against Sahaja
comes into my attention then you have to Yoga, she is bringing all kinds of bhoots
accept that person. But on your own you inside, and that why should Mother say all
don't go on wasting your energy with them. the time that she should not come? So when
I do not say that you go to one of these I went away she started coming again. Every
body told her, "Babal you don't come." But
there were some sympathizers with herl "She
But do not waste your energy with people, is a lady, why should you say anything to
as Christ has said: "Don't cast pearls her", this and that. But when she came once
before the swines". Because in the swine all absolutely adamantly, people told her "if you
bhoots" places and you just go and fight with
them, No. If possible, try if it works out.
kinds of parasites live.
don't go away, we'll throw you out". Still
she would not go, she was just sitting down
So in collectivity those who are Sahaja there. So one of them kicked her purse oul-
Yogis those who have joined Sahaja yoga. side.
I mean what's the use of touching her
there should be complete unison and articula- purse also with your hands, you don't contact.
tion. Absolutely. And enjoy each other's And then she got up to catch hold of her
company. Everyone is a beautiful flower. But purse, because if the purse has gone out she
I have seen people are more attached to other could'nt sit there. Since then she stopped,
people who come in. Supposing a possessed coming and went away. And there were letters
person comes in.... We had a very good ex-
ample in India, one of the ladies who used to
come was possessed. She would
from there, you see. "This doesn't look nice
for Sahaja Yogis to behave like this and to
d every time throw away the purse like this, and this
come, sit in front, she would never sit at thhe should not have happened. that should not
back. And as soon as the tape would start have happened."I said this is indiscreet. If
she would go on like this, like that. I tried she is a bhoot you tell her not to come, she
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-11.txt 
 is not wanted there, she cannot be a Sahaja
Yogini, she is not a seeker, she is a medium ledge. Once you realize that, then discrimina-
of bhoots. Still she is troubling. Then who tion will work out much better. That you
is sympathizing? Naturally the people who
are possessed. They sympathize with another anyone.
possessed person, She is not a Sahaja Y
that. You are knowledgeable. You are know
don't put down anyone, you don't discarc
But they are not the
samt
as you are. This principle
know. You are not saying that lower o
ni.
mus
The collectivity has to be with the Sahaja higher or anything. But you are different
Yogis. Not with others. Because it is not they are different. And they have to come anc
there it is a fake thing. It's like "We are join you. They have to become. You canno
brothers and sisters." How are you? You are become like that, but they can become like
not feeling. It's not awakened within you. If
a leaf says I am the flower, does she become? Sahaja Yoga, one of the very great basics for
Leaf is a leaf and a flower is a flower. Among our grawth, is to discriminate. Trust Sahaja
the flowers there should be collectivity. Yogis, do not trust non-Sahaja Yogis. Neve1
Because that's the natural thing that's there-
existing. Not with others. This is one thing Yogi. Sahaja Yogi is your brother or sister, is
which people do not know how to discrimi- companion, is everything. And the others
nate. You are all one together but you'lIl fight all others, they are
among each other, and when as soon as
others come in. "Come along, come along They can come to this side. But they are not
sit down." Surprising! 1 have
happening!
you. So discretion is very important. Ir
trust a non-Sahaja Yogi compared to a Sahaja
another party, you
are another party. They are not your enemies.
seen this the same as you are. This must come into
you. So the collectivity will graw strong.
You should know, by fighting with each other
It's you who are my children. it's you who
speak the same language. It's you who know you are reducing the power of Sahaja Yoga.
everything. You are the people who are cove-
ted. You are Princes.-They still have to be-
come. That's a different point. You sit in your if the channels start fighting with each other,
glory. The idea that all the saints should go to
the feet of every third person. It's not that you
are kings. You live like kings. You have to
maintain distance from others who are com-
By getting angry with each other you are
reducing the power of Sahaja Yoga. Imagine
how are you going to channelize the energy.
So first of all, make your channel alright:
And understand that we all channels put to-
gether are going to do the work better. We
moners. Don't allow your ego to develop, of all have to be together. Togetherness is to be
coursel But know that you wouldn't enjoy
your kingdom unless end until you get more
people into it. You've to get more and more
and more but keep your dignity. You are at
that level. Keep your poise. And then deal and Sahasrara because I am the collectivity
with others in the same manner "that you've of all the Gods. And all the centres are in the
joined together". You are the saints. One brain, in the Sahasrara. And thirdly when it
has to be assuming, assume one's powers. goes beyond a certain level, then you catch
Assume; there is no pride. You are that, so
you are that, so what is there to be proud of? Heart; this combination starts. If Ajnya left or
I mean you are tealized souls; finished. How to right, any one of them joins in. you develop
be conscious of it? You are that. So you are
felt.
When the collectivity is disturbed what is the
centre you catch ? Can you tell ? .. Vishuddhi;
on your Heart. So Vishuddhi. Sahasrara and
Eküdasharudra.
Nirmala Yoga
10
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-12.txt 
 Now how through left vishuddhi and right relationship between right vishuddhi and left
vishuddhi we spoil other people? It's so
evident. Supposing you have right vishuddhi sides of a coin. One side is aggressing, so on
problem. In Japan I went there. Japanese the right hand side when people speak to
people you know have certain ideas, in each other they oppress or aggress, they say
which shyness and shame has no meaning.
And a gentleman, who is the chairman of a very things they say. We have seen people talking
big international company, came to see me in
a hotet. And he had a big thing on his mouth
white some sort of a thing like a Hanumäna. do it. Right-sided spoil the relationships by
And 1 asked him, what's that supposed too much aggression, say for example one:
to be? And he talked to mme and this party man will stand up and say that "I am
thing was on his nose like that. I saw his the one", the another will say "I am the one".
right vishuddhi was very badly caught. Still I The relationships between the political parties
couidn't understand. So he said "I am sorry
for this Madam, but this is there because I've another side is the one, also cannot articulate.
got cold", So they put that thing on, whether
you have to see the Queen or anyone. They it goes down too much, ends up in perverted
will just put on that and then go and see.
Because when you have cold, others catch. you find a friend came to stay and he ran
That's one thing that catches the fastest.
Now you had cold so I have caught. So to
get a cold one learns that if somebody has this kind of a funny relationship when you
cold, he himself says "Today I've got cold donot understand the purity of relationship in
you don't come". If you have to give an
excuse to some one that you don't want to problems. So in relationship right and left
go anywhere, you say "I've got flu." Alright. vishuddhi both of them play a very big part.
It's alright don't come.-Nobody bothers.
vishuddhi is very close, as much as the two
aggressive things. Extremely aggressive
like that.-boastful, aggressive things. Left
sided as I told you are the sly people, so they
are ruined. They cannot articulate. The
Because the relationship in the slyness when
sex life. Then you go to somebody's house,
away with the mother-or some sort of a
nonsense like that. So on the left hand side
social life, that drops down, that creates
Then comes the Sahasrara. You know
Sahasrara what it is. People want to judge
me. They have a right to do it; I mean I can-
not say no. You can judge me. You can do
So this is the right vishuddhi, you can see
it very clearly. But left vishuddhi you cannot
see, but feel. Left vishuddhi creates all kinds
of social problems. Right Vishuddhi creates what ever you like. I mean 1 cannot say that
all kinds of political problems. For example you don't judge me. So we cannot say that
those who have right vishuddhi are speakers. you don't judge me. I cannot say. You go on
They have to talk too much. They may judging me.
create problems with their right vishuddhi have got to judge me? i have such a camou-
by talking too much or by keeping quiet, flage: just a bubble, and such a receding per-
both ways. The left vishuddhi people say sonality. How are you going to judge me? Is
somathing
Now what is the instrument, you
there any way of judging me? You can never
horrible.
sarcastic, something
something nasty, sly. non-aggressive but catch me anywhere! It's a camouflage. Firstly
screwing type. They might create holes into
people you see. They don't believe in killing Where are you going to catch me? On the
directly like that. So they want to do screw- contrary by all these attributes I create a pro-
ing up. Screw the person here and there. The blem for you, that I am a Mahamiya. You
I am prideless. I am egoless, I am actionless.
11
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-13.txt 
 cannot understand a person who does not What's the use of getting crucified, who is
have pride. Because you all can talk to me going to raise the Kundalini? 1 would like
very nicely, you can be very sweet and you
can just sit next to me. And suddenly you would have said, "Keep your cross for a while
come out with a remark which shows you I will have it later on". What's the use, just
are not conscious of to whom you are talking. now, to destroy people? Let's see how many
Suddenly something you do where you are come around, you see. So these powers are
not conscious. Because I go on playing. Tam not required. Today the power of raising the
extremely friendly with you, extremely nice to
you. Absolutely prideless. You see anybody millions & millions of people is required.
who has even this much position in life, he
has a nose like that; mine is bent all the time!
Nothing but humour. And then how are you life. In the sense l am going to get old, as
going to understand my position? You see you're going to. I mean, today 1 should be
there is no outside sign. There are no horns, old, I will be and be just like you! I am not
there is nothing that I could be a cinema star, going to do anything outside. It's like a
| am too simple, too sweet. There is no way
by which you can 'really' feel that I am great.
I âm absolutely mundane, ordinary. But type. And once you realize that, that all is
extraordinary of the ordinary I am. This is a
thing which people do not
It's alright for those who are not realized,
to do it. I mean if
I were at that time I
Kundalini of thousands & thousands and
And I am going to be just like you all my
German car. But it is you, who has to know
the power of the German car. It's the best
deliberately made like that. In the beginning
understand. of course, you cannot even understand it. It
goes on: "how .can it be, how can it be, She
the does this, She does that "it goes on like that.
You do not judge me, because that's not the
But
-excused.
have felt
you
vibrations and got your realization through
must be something. Put your attention way you will understand. Just realize, and
like that to understand. Must be tremendous recognize, that there has to be somet hing
thing inside this body. It cannot be possible tremendous. It was necessary to have soma-
otherwise. It's so obvious otherwise to you
people.
me.
one like that to do this 'tremendous' task.
And it was necessary for you to be born, to
be with me to help. I know those who are
This is to be understood, that so far with me. They ll stand by me throughout. I
Krishna, Christ, Râma, all of the them, nobody may judge them a little here and there, but I
gave Self-realization to people en masse. They know they will come round. You have to
had other powers, like Krishna had Samhār stand by me. Those who want to run away
shakti, he could kill any one like this. I have they Il run away, today or tomorrow. I'l try.
also all these powers with me, but obviously 'I try to get them round, as far as possible.
I am a very simple, ordinary, mundane type of
an Indian lady. And Christ had a power to
get Himself crucified. I too have that. But I
am not going to do all that. I have a power
to Resurrect also. Why these powers are not degenerates.
used? One should understand. Because now
the main attention is to raise the Kundalini, liberate, more vibrations and I feel sick with
and for that these powers are not required. that, because you can't take it. When you
Give realization to any number of people. take vibrations / feel well. But those who
So, we come to collectivity. To understand
that you are cells in my body. And I have
awakened you. If you degenerate, my body
You have seen that all. When
you are sick, I am sick. In the sense I emit,
12
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-14.txt 
 l give
drunk fellovw. l'l
have faith in themselves can only understand being and
this and not those who have superiority con- you a joke of a drunkard. There were
plex, or inferiority complex, .
no faith in yourself. You should have faith went to a hotel. They wanted to
in yourself that you are the chosen ones. You
are really the people, specially 'made for they wanted, they did not know. So they went
this great work. It's a tremendous thing and told the clerk that they would like to
that you are all born. Once you realize and
recognize it you would not bother about understand. "No,
small small things of life. It's the quality bed." So he said, "Alright you want to
in you that has to be nurtured and looked have a room with two beds." So he opened
after, through collectivity. But collectivity a room and said these are the beds for you.
of the 'Sahaja Yogis'. I know those who have So fully clothed as they were, they slept in
proper reactions with things. Some Sahaja
Yogi is coming; they feel very happy: "Oh
he is coming!l" You say," there are five people
who got realization," they feel very happy. my bed." So the first one says, "what should
They will not sham, they'll be happy to go all
out to see a Sahaja Yogi, to meet a Sahaja Yogi, throw them out" And there was a big strug-
to do anything for a Sahaja Yogi. This is the gle and lot of noise in the room, So the tirst
sign of a Sahaja Yogi. A Sahaja Yogi will go one says "I've got him out.
secretly and help a Sahaja Yogi in difficulty. one says, "But he has thrown me out.
Not just on money but anything.
were drunk. They
Complex means two drunkards who
a room for themselves. God knows what
have "two beds with a room". He didn't
with a
rooms
the same bed. So one calls to another.
Says he, "There is somebody in my bed."
Other one says. "I too have someone in:
we do." The second one says, "let's try to
" The second
So
the first one says "Alright you can come and
sleep with me," because he has thrown him
This is a new race that is coming up. The out, so what to do?. This is what they
others are human beings, you are not! You are!
Bre not human beings any more. You are
Sahaja Yogis. It's a different race. All over
the world this race has to come: up So we have of arguing with them and getting angry.
to build up ourselves. In one group, in ane getting into tension,
understanding, Absolute unison. There should
be no secrets, there should be no domination, speed of five hundred miles an hour. That's
Everything should articulate, every one should
talk to each other; every one should know
what is happening with the other. You have
to be 'absolutely" frank-open with each other. digest his drinks. So that is what is the
Absolutely. Tell them your problems. "I catch
on this, what to do? I catch on that, what power, drunk by money. drunk by that, some-
to do? How to clear it out?" Not to feel shy. thing is there. And you are filled with the
We have to enjoy ourselves. Also enjoy our light of God Almighty. That is what it is, the
weaknesses, so that we clear them out. Laugh difference is. If you understand the difference,
it out. Somebody has some habits, laugh it
out. That's the best way to do it.
This is the difference. So what is the use
I mean they are
drunk. If you see a drunkard, run with the
my principle. No use arguing with a mad man
ora drunkard. May be mad man may be alright.
but drunkard,-till three hours he wouldn't
difference. They are drunk. They are drunk by
you will realize that no use fighting with these
people. They are drunk. They are like that.
If you talk to them, what can you say, I mean.
The difference between a human being they don't understand. They just don't
and a Sahaja Yogi is the same as a human
understand. Let's forget it. I will give you
13
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-15.txt 
 such tests and things by which you will given any parallel, because youu are going
come in contact with them, see them and get above human things. So far never such a
out of it. without any harm being done to thing has existed. You are such unique crea-
you. This is necessary: you have to touch tions that there isI cannot compare you with
them. You have to go near them, you have to anything that was below. or1 should say,
be with them. You are outside. | give which was on this level. The level is different.
such tests to people and that should work So when you do everything the 'same way, you
out! I know you can, that's why I give such
tests to only people about whom l'm sure.
that they will come out. This I think we you. That's why you are doing. This transi-
should decide today that. we all are going to
Tive with One heart. and One desire, with That's something I feel, that when you start
One head and with One liver. All of us. giving any analogies and all that, how can
Let's see, how it works out.
are doing it because you are "aware of that
Collectivity of the Primordial Being within
tion is the point which you should catch.
you give an analogy for something that never
existed before? Never. Atula,-which cannot
For example you go to a Hotel-five Sanaja be compared. That's one of the names oft
Yogis. One says "I'll have that" every body the Goddess. So, I cannot give you anologies,
will have that.-That's the sign. No decisions
are needed. Why waste energy on decisions,
arguments? Whether you eat fish and chips Spirit is awakened-in everybody is the Spirit
or chips and fish, is the same. The quartel is
Like that: Sahaja Yogi does not waste his fo ego, superego and all these nonsensical
energies on this. You have seen your Mother, things, which are barriers in the growth of
no choices. Just enjoyment. Where is the
time to argue? It's joy pouring in. Let's
enjoy. May God Bless You.
but I can make you understand that if your
which is a Collective Being,-then you do it
because your Spirit does it. You don't care
"living' collectivity. Now you 'have become
livingly collective' and You'are' that It'sa new
being that is within you. Ii you try to do some-
See, why is the problem? That you have thing else, you will not like it, because this
will. that any thing else does not have the time it's not your ego but your Spirit. As
You have the will. And once you try before this you listened to your ego and were
to bring the will in tune with each other, you happy with it, now you will be happy if you
feel your ego is there, your ego hurts. You listen to your Spirit. Because now you have
don't want to be, you don't want to lose that. become the Spirit. It's a very unique situa-
or think that by doing so, you are becoming tion. You are the Spirit. And when you are
sub-normal. No. You are a realised soul, and a the Spirit, then you become different. What
realised soul is something so unique that analogies can I give?Then the responsibility is
more also to understand. in that, when you
be a parallel. For example I can say, if there say yes, another says yes'. See in saying "yes"
is a wind blowing then all the trees move in you'll feel happy. Supposing you say fish &
the same way. But human beings, if the chips, another says, fish & chips, another will
wind is blowing....Supposing any wind is say fish & chips, everybody will say this. "Let's
oming, somebody will go that way, some- go to the, right", "lets go to the right,""let us
body will go that way, because they have a go to the right,"-everybody will say. Unless
'will'. But Sahaja Yogis, if the wind is blowing, and until there is somebody who knows' the
all of them will put their heads against the wind job and says, "No, no. This is not the way.
and fight it. This is a thing which 'cannot be Right is not, the way, Let usgo left." Everybody
will.
you cannot give a paralle! to it. There can't
cor
(Contd. on page 19)
14
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Shri Ganesh Puja
Tivoli (italy)
11th Sept. 1983
Today we are celebrating the Birthday of how to cure the ills of bad feelings, all that
Shri Ganesha, because it is a very impor- can be cured if you put your right hand to-
tant thing tor all of us that we should celebr- wards me and the left hand to the Mother
ate His Birthday: and yesterday we did the Earth. So, in action you do like that.
Havana. But yesterday we had many new
people so I could not talk to you very clearly
about Shri Ganesha's deeper manifestations. thing' that is material, that has bhava (w)
You know that He resides within us. We that has been creatad. He is the essence of
have a very great asset within us that we everything that has been created. "Through
know about Shri Ganesha, and that we can
excite His powers:
Now as He is the 'essence of every-
Him" everything has been Created. When
you develop that, you develop your sense of
subtle creativity, and the sense of subtle ap-
To manifest Shri Ganesha, we have to do preciation of creativity. Then you develop
certain amount of Tapasya,-Penance. First your discretion of how to behave with others,
we have to say, when we sit for meditation, in a beautiful manner, so that your ego is
that, "1 am going to be worthy of Your appre- controlled. The behaviour should be such
ciation. Make me humble. so that am
appreciated by You, and my only desire is your behaviour. Your Mother is a good
to please You". Then you sit down in com-
plete preparedness, meditating over your
Moolādhara, putting your attention to it with
absolute purity. Now you have my photo- of things, but never show off, nor ever
graph before you and you tell the photograph, assert that I am so knowledgeable. I live
"Mother, You are Shri Ganesha. You give like a very very ordinary person with you, and
me wisdom and discretion". So, attention
at the moolüdhara chakra, which is actually gives you a shock. So, with your intelligence
below the sacrum bone: You put your right or with your other powers-like if you are a
hand towards the photograph, and left hand moneyed man or if you are more efficient, or
on the Mother Earth. Novw this will tell you anything.--you should not try to impress on
that your mind, or your brain which is full of others. But you must deal with it beautifully.
confusion, which has no discretion, which is So the beauty comes when you are efficient
complicated, which does the same mistakes and' you are loving. That is the central
again and again, which does not understand point, that is the result. That you are know-
that there should be no expression of ego in
exampte.
I think you know that I know quite a lot
I do not in any way assert my personality that
Nirmala Yoga
15
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-17.txt 
 ledgeable and you are humble. That you Have you seen a child being nursed by
know everything about everyone but you are mother, how concentrated the child is. Suck-
discreet. So in effect it is a complete per- ing everythingl It doesn't bother who is who,
sonality that can only give that kind of a where he is sitting, what is it, what is catching.
very soothing effect. So the soothing effect it doesn't bother as to who is next to you,
comes as a result of beauty. So to develop it what is your relationship with others. Or it
you have to meditate on your mooladhara
chakra.
doesn't bother, at all, as to the future, as to
what he is to do next.
T have seen many people get fanatic about
Sahaja Yoga also. They think they are the
real Nepoleons or Shivaji ! In Marāthi we call
him Shiväji, but Shivaji was a much better
person than Napoleon, better to call him
Napoleon. Then they start guiding you in 10 days ahead agitated it they have to go
everything-"This is not good, that is not
good. I am a very great Sahaja Yogi IYou going, they have forgotten everything. Because
are like this,"" and all that,-and very hot tem-
pered because they are fanatics. Fanaticism
and temper goes together. There is no love
in fanaticism. If you tell them don't be a
fanatic, they will start crying. So the fanati-
cism of Sahaja Yoga is most blinding. It is
something like, in front of the Temple of God
you beg from other people for money. Sahaja trary I play tricks that everything goes wrong
Yoga is one thing which should not lead you with people like that! And I want them to
to 'any' fanaticism. You have to be prasanna- learn that this is not so important: To keep
chitta, (aafa) which means
be a very happy, joyous personality: and not everything to God. Because you don't know
a tense, abrupt person. But this only achieves that when you are in the present you are in
it's maximum result when everything is done
in complete innocence,
So innocence keeps you in the present.
Innocent man is permanently relaxed. Suppos-
ing I have to go today. Alright, so l'll go at
the time when I have to go, what's the use
of getting agitated about it? People get even
after ten days. And when it really comes to
they are not in the present. So to develop
your innocence also is a very good idea 'to be
in the present'. At the most what's going
to happen? I mean whatever has to happen
will happen in any case. So why worry? I am
one person who is least worried, and nothing
has gone wrong with me so far. On the con
you should
yourself in the present is your job and leave
contact with the Divine power, but when you
get out of the present you are not there
you are under your ego or superego.
But many people confuse innocence with
stupidity. They think, to be stupid is inno-
So for all of you I may try just to show
cent. And a stupid man gets into an ego-
jua3
trip in no time. Innocence is the wisest thing. that I am also playing with you to prepare
you. I am least bothered about anything what-
soever. What is such a disaster you have
seen in your life, just tell me.
the last dissolution of the whole universe.
You 'cannot befool innocence, that's the main
thing. No one can befool me, I am very in-
nocent. Innocence is that which does not
harm anyone, that does not think that it can
solve the problems, but, it leaves everything What can I fear anymore? So when you get
I have seen
upset, think of something very serious that
has happened to you before, and then you
for God to solve. It is just existence itself-
in the blessings of your Mother, as Ganesha
was, just living on the complete blessings of will not be so much worried about the non-
His Mother. It gives you concentration. sensical little things here and there.
Nirmala Yoga
16
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-18.txt 
 So miraculous things will happen, through if somebody does it. He does not mind,
your innocence. The more innocent you are
the more blissful you will be.
because it pleases the other person. But it
does not go to his head or anything. On the
contrary, when you are doting on such
person, you start learning
Now, many people should try this thing :
sitting in a group together, meditating, saying
the mantra of Shri Ganesha, to try to build
up. Those who think too much, they should an expert on massaging the feet. So she said
also try to say "Not this, not this, not this..". "Mother, just you give me one hour one day
Even the superego when it gives you thoughts, and I will come and massage your Feet,
you should say "not this,
this...". So you will develop that state where alright, come such and such day, And when
you stand yourself, and nothing else. So the she started massaging my feet. you see, she
innocence plays, but it is not involved. it said, "What is happening! It is me who is
sees the play. Just sees. It enjoys the play. relaxing".
Just enjoys. So today when we are thinking
of Shri Ganesha, let us desire that, "Within
us His great power of innocence be when you try to pamper the innocence, when
enlightened".
There was somebody like that-this was
not this, not because I have known that art". I said
So, that is the beauty of innocence, that
you try to dote on the innocence. it emits
the beauty. It relaxes If there is a little
And He is, on the other side, the source of child, and you want to kiss the child and you
love. The source of emotional security. He's want to embrace the child and you want to
like a child, a very charming, beautiful child. love the child-it is 'you' who is wanting, not
and people feel extremely..... enchanted. the child. If you do not want it, you are
abnormal. But if you want to dote on some-
enchantment.
Because
motherly
"charming" also is a very funny word. one, then that should relax' that person,-
Because in the west people don't understand the one who does that. But if it is the other
even innocence towards children. So you way round, that the other person gets tensed
have to be childlike, not childish, confusion
must not be there. But some people confuse oriented, then it is all wrong, absolutely it is
it. They think it should be like a big baby, upside down. You get tensed up because
you see; and that you have to be treated you think nothing should displease the
like a big baby all the time, from bottle feeding person, you think the person needs it. You
to nappy changing,-in Marathi it is called
"Motha Bal" And there's no end to it. So
this kind of thing, if it is done to someone, remember that, that 'you need it then why
that really will become a stupid fellow in no should you worry that you should not do this
time.
up and the person whom you dote, gets ego-
try to dote on the child thinking that the child
needs it. It is 'you' who need it. If you
particular thing the person will be displeased.
So just by pleasing yourself you are really
But Ganesha's enchantment has dignity. pleasing the other person.-one has to see it
He may lok like a child, but He is an old that way.
man. He is the eldest of all. And despite
all these years, he has kept His innocence
intact. So sometimes people confuse it with perspective. And that is what should come
overdoting or caring too much,-and the into everyone spontaneously. When that
innocent person doesn't like it much. Even comes in, you become a complete persona-
So this is wisdom : To see things in right
17
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-19.txt 
 So nothing absurd should be done. No-
lity. Ganesha is sufficient to make you com-
plete, because He is complete. And as it is, thing overly should be done. Because there
for you people to do it. it is easier, because
you are already at a point where Ganeshä is ning for nothing at all,-it is useless
pleased. Or we can say that you are pleased
with yourself. So one should not feel that, or
should not feel bad. If someone feels hurt or
something, that means there is something
lacking in that person.
will be remorse and unnecessary heart bur-
Now. in Sahaja Yoga another very impor-
tant pointI have to tell you today. which is
not so much besides Shri Ganesha's point,
regarding which we always make mistakes.
Certainly in India there have been lots of
mistakes like that: Now I give you one
example of Mr. X who is a great Sahaja Yogi.
in the sense that he is a great organiser, he
has done this, he has doe that, and we start
adoring him. Or we may be jealous. One of
the two things happen, either we adore or we
are jealous Now, if you adore that person,
then you should follow his footsteps. And if
you are jealous, then it is more reason that you
comes an fabsolutely left-side character. follow his footsteps so you become like him. I
Supposing before realisation he is running am talking of wisdom. Now, but instead of that
Complete personality is the personality
where we can say that Shri Ganesha is resi-
ding with all His powers. But some people
have the right Ganesha and some people have
the left Ganesha powers. Both the types of
powers much developed. If a man has been
licentious and very fond of the other sex and
all that, he gets such a rebound that he be-
after women, or the girl is running after the
men, all that, gets such a rebound that, he
just doesn't want to do that thing, as a filth,
-he thinks its filth, that is one of the feelings
that come in the mind of a person, when
he doesn't hanker after this kind of nonsense.
Like we have horrible names like heterosexuals
when you adore-even whether you are a boy
or a girl, you will jump on him, you will hug
him and kiss him, you do all kinds of non-
sensical things.-Which is 'not needed' to
expiess that way.
Like it happened with me that I was in
and homosexuals and all sexual sorts. When London for the first time, I'd never known all
you keep a healthy company of "your' type, this, and somebody who was quite hefty just
of your sex,-company-healthy and pure. It is came and hugged me, and I didn't know
very natural. And the another extreme nature what was the word in this langage. So 1
should not be followed. Like, I have seen ". So it is
quite funny. I am not used to kissing at all,
more attached to their daughters than to their at all'. Anybody kisses me. I get a fright
wives. Funny thing. It is absurd. They pay you know. I can kiss a lady or a little boy
more importance to the daughters than to the that is all right. that is done, but not every
wife-it is something very absurd, it is not man, I cannot kiss-it's very funny, isn't it ? So
good. It's again perversion. Or the women, this kind of adoration is not very wise. Ado-
they love their son more than their husband. ration is to be felt in yourheart. Like yesterday
It is absurd. And once it starts working like one of the gentlemen put his hand so strong
that, it can go to any absurd limit, which is on me, that for two minutes I was just trying
not in the 'maryadās in a
told him in marithi "Put me down
among some muslims, a habit, that they are
the boundaries of to put it right. And this shaking hands is
Sahaja Yoga. There has to be very healthy very horrible thing. Sometimes they cannot feel
relationship. Friendship. but not attachment alright unless and until they have taken about
a kilo of meat out. ...And this is how some-
which looks funny and absurd.
Nirmala Yoga
18
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-20.txt 
 dom af Shri Ganesha was that he was
surendered to his Mother, that is all; he is
not bothered. And when you are surendered
then you just understand that you give up
times, there are no maryadas left, even
among ourselves.-So there should be
maryádas.
Now feeling jealousy is another thing. I
have seen that when people feel jealous, they
start coming and complaining against this
person or that person know it is. Jealousy
is the worst curse ever we can have, I think.
because then you can't see anything that is
good. Because you see a person is normal,
you feel jealous of such a person. Then you
feel, you are jealous so you have every right
to do what you like. You just say," I am
jealous of yoU. because you are so good.
So, now I can be very bad." I
it started with people telling that this is
jealousy which is a bad thing; it was all right.
But now the bad thing is taken as blackmail.
you see, you use it for blackmailing others help you to develop your Ganesha Tattva.
that, "Oh, alright! 1 am a bad man, so I am a
bad man. You are a good man, alright, So
what?"Just like that. To use it as a power.
your ego and your superego to your Mother
to bother about it, and you live with your in-
nocence.
And to understand aiso in a very gross
way, we can say, to have Ganesha tattva
(Principle) developed in you, you must eat
things which are emitting Ganesha Principle.
Like the Chana, like, 1 have found out. the
Hazelnut. Then you can see that you should
use a lot of these lemons, is a good idea.
mean at first All these give you a good Ganesha Tattva.
So all these things should be used, and there
are many other things one can see thati which
But the highest of all is to control your
eyes. Not to see anything that is tempting.
So put your eyes on the ground. Just watch
your eyes when another sex arrives, how do
you look at that person, with greed, with
lust. And if you understand that then you will
Like yesterday one madman came, a luna-
tic. Now when this lunatic came, he wanted
to sit in the front. And he just started taking
advantage of his lunacy!-That if he is a start clearing your eyes very well. Another
lunatic, he can behave the way he
Because you are a drunkard you can behave
the way you like. Now, what is the wisdom?
Where is it lost? It is ridiculous.
likes. thing is physically you should try to do one or
two exercises to be able to put yourself flat
on the Mother Earth, because that helps. So
before doing the meditation to Shri Ganesha,
you must first do that exercise, to losen the
muscles so that you should touch the Mother
Earth in a nore flat way. It will help.
So, one has to be wise. When you are
dealing with it, the wisdom is your glory. By
wisdam you will be fair to yourself and fair
to others. Wisdom is like an ocean, one can-
not describe it in one lecture. Just try to
enjoy your wisdom. And the greatest wis May God bless you
So for todayI think I have said sufficiently.
(Contd. from page 14)
should 'know' that he knows the way. So the nourishment of Sahaja Yoga, that will be
"Yes, let's go to the left. ArgumentS will the second half.
fizzle out, because you are in 'unison.
But the first half is the
basics, which I've talked of.
In second half I'l have to tell you about
May God Bless You.
19
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-21.txt 
 SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
Shri Ganesha Puja
RIFFELBERG
SWITZERLANI
2nd Sept. 198
My Joy knows no bounds when we have the Saints of that state that people have tha
come to worship this holy mountain which sensitivity and that kind of a movement.
we have named as GANARAJ, Sometimes
the words are not sufficient to hold the out-
pour of your Joy.
Unfortunately in the west, where Shraddhi
is something very'superficial, anything like thi:
takes them to something very superficial
I come to you as a symbol of your Mother, anything like this takes them to something
but the first son who was created was Shri very dirty, filthy, unholy. Instead of surrender
Ganesh. And then, when the Mother Earth ing to the Sublime, and enjoying the greatness
was created as a symbol of motherhood. She of the Sublime, they take to something very
created many Shri Ganeshas in this universe. In carnal which belongs to the flesh But stil
the cosmos, the star whichis called as Mars, is the people who are living in simple ways in
Shri Ganesha. All these symbols were created
for you the Sahaja Yogis to recognize them.
To recognize all these symbols is easier if you
are a realized soul. But we have had so many
great realized souls in the past. of very high
quality, and they recognized, they found out
the symbols of Shri Ganesha, long time
back.
the villages, in the nature, must have realized
the importance of this holy mountain.
Thousands and thousands, millions of
years back, the Mother Earth started producing
Her Ganesha, It was first a huge ocean where
Himālaya stands. Himalaya gradually started
coming out of that ocean, in a flat way, like a
Shiva-Lingam, which is the expression as the
manifestation of the animals, they have the
India is the microscopic form of the whole
earth, Mother Earth. So, in the trianale of brains which are flat. But when the Himalayas
Maharashtra we have got eight Ganeshas
which are manifesting vibrations, and were
recognized by great Saints of Maharashtra.
But, as you have seen, as a grace of these
great Saints, specially Maharashtra has created
human beings who have SHRADDHA as the way that at certain points it rose up to a point
highest expression of their emotion and mind becoming like Shri Genesha. And it was, to
Because of that lofty vision in the mind begin with, of flat, again the same type.
whenever they see something of this sublime
nature, their thoughts go to God. Thanks to
started coming out of that sea, the Mother
Earth was pushed on sides. And the Mother
Earth started giving folds to Her saree, you
can say. Now, when that movement started.
the saree gave waves of vibrations in such
But then, still more folds started coming
up, much later, when human brain started
20
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-22.txt 
 developing its ego. So the whole of that land
was pushed up and another land joined it in Mother becomes the Father, and so She can
such a manner that it formed an apex. The perform the complete function of a father and
super-ego was pushed in and was brought to a mother. In that state only. Gauri the Daugh-
the climax. That synchronizes with tne human
brain, because the whole universe is respre-
sented in our body as well,
Her head, as snow or as rain. That is how a
ter of the Mountains, conceived Shri Ganesha
without the help of the Father. immaculate,
The purity of the snow is hundred percent,
and that covers the Mother Earth, gives the
Now, the central axis of the Mother Earth formation of Innocence. All the tilth and dirt
acted as the spinal cord. By this happening in that noes into the ocean is clarified by the
the Himalayas, again there was a big push sun, which is also Shri Ganesha. and is
onto all the mountains which were to be brought on top of the hills and mountains to
created as Shri Ganesha and they got into
their final forms. And the apex wa5 created.
cover it. But to Ganesha it is a big problem to
exist in a country which doesn't worship it. It
So the Mother Earth as Gauri created all has no sense of respect. It is always aspired
these Ganeshas! At the other end of these that they should climb over with their very
ranges, must be the highest mountain because egoistical ambitions, of a low level and
it is pushed the most. Mont-Blanc should be outward.
higher than this. You see, when they pushed
it, Himalaya was brought up to a point, up to
a point it went, and then the waves created being would be "O God. 1 can see You in
Ganesha of a certain height, not too much this sublime form, and how will I conquer my
height. So it was pushed on the right hand- ignorance? How will I climb over my moun-
side more, the ego went expressing in Mont- tain of arrogance to look at You?"
Blanc, you see for example. And an the other
side, it was created another Ganesha at the
other end near Darjeeling. So Shri Ganesha the joy of the eyes, and the joy which is really
was expressed even in Darjeeling, and you
get the same kind of redness on that. I have
seen another Shri Ganesha created in Delphi
where they say is the Nabhi of the Mother are higher than you"l We had Himalayas for
Earth.
When you see the mountains like this, the
idea that should come into a good human
To an egoistical mind, the mountain is for
not the Joy. but is a kind of a pleasure for
them to see. Their ego gets challenged and
they want to climb on the mountain. that we
thousands and thousands of years in India :
nobody ever thought of climbing itl When the
Also when Shri Shiva Lingam is created, English came. they started doing it first time.
along with Him always there is a Shri Then the French, Portugese, Spanish, all of
Ganesha created, as in Amarnäth, where a
drop of water falls on a particular area and
creates the lingam. Plus that, another drop Why do they want to climb the mountains ?
falls on another side and creates Shri Ganesha Is better to see them from a distance and
exactly like the face
them all did this and the Indians were looking
at them bewildered," What are they doing ? !
adore them, than to climb over them to die !"
Now the ocean is the Father, and the
Mother Earth is your Mother. But when the in Switzerland it has gone, that they try to ski
Mother Earth becomes a mountain, She is
called as the Father. The reason is : She, at down; they go down in any case! And they
that height, can catch the Father on top of break their legs. I told one Salhaja Yogi who
But this egoistical mind can go further, as
over these mountains. take the slopes to go
21
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-23.txt 
 wanted to come here for skiing, I said," Don't
go there, it's not allowed by Sahaja Yoga.
And he came back with broken legs.
marry, and there was only one fellow who
accapted to marry that woman. And that's how
the marriage took place ! Now this lady, or
So every way the games are also such that perhaps somebody who is like her has spreac
it's just a satisfaction of the ego. 1 can under-
stand small children going over a sleigh. but everybody wanted to marry her, everybody
big old men moving like this for hours toge-
ther, have they no other work to do? That their hands! It's not like that I At all ! When I
shows they have no maturity of any kind, they
are still stupid children playing with the
stories that she was the most beautilul woman,
raised the hands !I never asked people to raise
heard it I was shocked. This woman. nobody
wanted to marry her!
TELT
snow.
There are all kinds of things that you have
By all these doings, what happens is that got from your past, and you must try to get
the holy places become like cemeteries ! Ima-
gine, instead of putting flowers on Shri person who is not innocent cannot worship
Ganesha you are putting dead bodies on His Shri Ganesha. In His right hand He has got
Body. And, while skiing. putting those hard
nails into the body of Shri Ganesha! It's true!
There is no sense of respect Perhaps we don't out your head. like guillotine it is ! Those who
respect ourselves, we are not mature enough. are not innocent. play games, try tricks, gossip.
The first thing that should happen, that one induldge in filth, He cuts them off. Innocence
folds his hands to Shri Ganssha and just sees is a very sharp thing I It does not have any
those things. Just this should happen to all compromise, which you can see in the life of
the Sahaja Yogis.
out of it, otherwise you cannot rise high. A
a "parasha" you must know that, a terrible
instrument you see, with one stroke He takes
Christ. With His trunk He throws people left
and right and throws them out. He sees for a
So the Innocence has to be developed to while, and if people remain still half-baked
have that respect; if you are not innocent, you they are thrown out of Sahaja Yoga.
cannot have respect. And in the Innocence
you don't think you are the wisest of all and
make everybody look like a fool. Nor do you lization, you can be IN the Sahaja Yoga, if you
play games and put people down. But what I
have seen, even coming to Sahaja Yoga. this
is the worst part of it, I have seen people who and He is the one who throws you out of the
play games after coming to Sahaja Yoga! periphery like a tangent you get out of Sahaja
They gossip and say all kinds of wrong things Yoga. And when you get out of Sahaja Yoga,
which I've never said before! There are so
many kinds of things I hear that l'm amazed and then you may develop horrible diseases of
how Sahaja Yogis are such creators of gossips. the mooladhara chakra. Those who are hit by
Is this the way Ganesha would behave towards
the Mother? That thinking yourself to be great be careful! Face yourself. see yourself, note
people you say "Mother said so, and this
happened, and that happened"? Ego is anti-
Innocence, and that's why this kind of a non-
sensical gossip people do. which I can'tunder-
stand. it is so filthy, I just can't understand. who contribute nothing to Sahaja Yoga but
Like there was one lady whom nobody would headaches! If some sane Sahaja Yogi starts
No one should think that you have got Rea-
do not take to Innocence. Innocence gives you
complete sincerity, and Ganesha is the judge,
you start going down and down and down,
Him are the worst: if you have come near Him,
ww.ww
yourself.
Another thing they told me, that some
people think that they are great Sahaja Yogis
22
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-24.txt 
 telling the other Sahaja Yogi about some- juxtaposition to rise higher than the rest of
thing sensible, this fellow puts up his right them to give them a proper lead.
vishuddhi, pessing it hard on him to show
that "you are talking because your right
vishuddhi is catching". very cunning I You are nonsense. because He is fond of forgiving, and
not to play games, because you are harming Vishnu principle tries to play with them and
yourself, I'm telling you now. Those who thịnk punish them or kill them. But Ganesha Tattwa
they can play with the lopholes must know
that there's a loop round their neck! Like the becomes Ekādasha Rudra, and when Christ
fallen angels you will go to the greater heights,
or depths. of mire. So try to be honest to your-
self.
I can tell yOu that Shiva tolerates lot of
has no compromise of any kind, and when this
is going to come in that form, then there will
be no compromise, no "Mataji", no crying, no
argument, nothing: Shri Ganesha Himself will
throw people into hell. So be careful on that!
Today, in the Presence of Shri Ganesha, you
have to take an oath that" Whatever is the past
Any nation has any problem, any sins
they have been committing or have committed of my country, I will get opposite to that!"
before, should not be any more a tag with you!
If a country has been cunning, then you should
be innocent. If you are coming from a foxy-
clan, you have to be innocent. Like you are
Like I would say Indians are not very good
with the money, in money matters they can be
very horrid, and sometimes they create a
coming from a thuggery clan, then Vou bave Problem with money matters: so, one has to
to be extremely astute. If you are coming from
the romantic clan, you have to be extremely only to be something innocent, but it is more
pure! You have to be juxtaposition of whatever that t should be proved, that peaple should
sins we are suffering from,; if you are the light know that you are innacent! Like I asked my
in the darkness, yau have to be brilliant and
not dark, and you have to give light in the
darkness, to the dark, not to take darknessupon this would be honesty, so he answered, "This
yourself ! So. if you really feel that the past of
your country has been such and such, you better not in the essence of honesty."
study it and know far yourself that you have
to be just different. Some are comfort-loving, the essence of it. And the essence of honesty
they should get out of that. Some are pleasure- is Innacence. Essence of sincerity is Innocence.
loving, they should get out of that. Some are
tempted with women and men and drinking Innocence is the one that gives you complete
and all that, you should completely give up
know that we have to be absolutely astute as
far as money is concerned. It is not sufficient
know that you are innocent! Like I asked my
son-in law, he is a very honest man,-whether
may be honesty for outside purpose, but it is
So, that is how you have to be honest, in
Essence of beauty, glory, is Innocence. And
detachment. So, to such a symbol of Innocence
and come out of it.
when we bow, we
must know what we
have done about ourselves: Whatever has been
There are deeper sins we have of cunning- your past. get out of it. Be just the opposite of
ness, of aggressiveness, of slyness, all these thing what has been so bad before. Strongly against
are to be studied and understood that what do all that you were before, in the darkness. That
we have to do for our country is to get out of is the sign of your character, and of your
it completely first of all, like the lotus out of strength, and will show to the world that your
the mire. If your country is racist, then you Spirit which is enlightened within you has
have to become a bsolutely a person completely given you that strength and that new dimen-
integrated. Like that you have to be on the
sion.
Nirmala Yoga
23
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-25.txt 
 So the second oath we have to take befote will they respect. With their ego they want
Shri Ganesha is that "/will be honest to myself. to judge everyone and condemn everyone.
/ will not deceive myself for anybody's sake."
Now the third great thing about Shri Ganesha know anything. I was a stupid fool with my
is that, for Him no Gods existexcept His Mother, ego." Humble down yourself in your heart,
And you know all the stories about Shri
Ganesh. how He adored His Mother. Because
He knows His Motheris the Power, and that He
is the source of your wisdom, He's the embodi-
ment of wisdom, and the greatest wisdom He
has: that it is better to worship the Mother than
anybody else, because She is the Power. Accor- specjally because we have had so many mar-
ding to Him, even the Father, if you have to jages. And now you are going to get children
meet, you have to go through the Mother, and born to you. But don't get ideas that Shri
secondly Father is just the Witness. All His Ganesha is born to you. Some people have
securily, all His powers, all His beauty. In- such foolish ideas, I've seen that.
So, get out of itl And tell yourself:" I don't
open your heart. and love each other. Respect
and love are the two things you have to
promise to Shri Ganesha. If you cannot do
that, your ascent is going to be very difficult.
May God bless you.
Today I have told you about Shri Ganesha.
nocence, come from His Mother.
So with the third oath you have to take th.at
"for us, our Mother is so powerful, why should
be afraid of anything? If She is going to give us
the wisdom, why should we try to seek it any
where else?
You are their Trust, and you have to look
after them. They have to develop into Shri
Ganesha's level first of all. You have to mould
them into that form. And give them more
peace. more attention. What I feel that chil-
dern, in childhood if they are not massaged
fully, they become very restless children.
I appear very innocent sometimes. but My
innocenbe is complete intelligence I think. And
that is the reason, you see, people take time to
accept. But people like Shri Ganesha who are
So it is important to understand how to
give all the comfort to the child, and look after
the child, but not spoil. the child.
the wisest of all, know' the trick!
It is a'great blessing of Shri Ganesha, be-
cause it is He who creates the child within the
mother's womb. He selects the face, the colour
The another oath we have to take today
that we'll respect every Sahaja Yogi from our
heart, because they are made in the form of everything. With His magnetic power He ma-
Shri Ganesha. We"ll not make fun of them,
nages to attract the right type of genes. He
does all such important things for you, All
we'll not laugh at them. As long as they are
in Sahaja Yoga we have to respect. But they the time busy, never rests. So full af joy and
can be thrown away, they can get out of hard-work. Never complains. He is such a
it. But unless and until this happens, do not
put your ego on other people. Don't think
that you understand everything. Don't think
that you know everything. Respect each will be the support of the universe."
support to your Mother. That's why it is said
that it is the support of the Kundalini. Also
when Christ was created, it was said that, "You
and every person, not tor what he has read or
for what he has learnt, but because he is a
You are all my support too. But you have
to be strong supports because I am a massive
person! So to support me you have to be ex-
great soul.
I feel the whole West suffers from one.
one simple disease, that is, they do not know tremely strong, and straight: because I have
how to respect anyone. Whatever doesn't made you in the pattern of Shri Ganesha.
suit their mind they wil never accept, nor
24
May God Bless You.
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-26.txt 
 Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Zermatt. Switzerland
18 September, 1984
Count your Blessings Every
Moment
Only about an hour back I was telling that are identified with me. Unless and until you
perhaps the Sahaja Yogis don't realise, even take up upon yourself the glory of Sahaja
materially, how Divine is looking after them. Yoga,-that that is your job to establish:-and
And what are 'they' doing about it ?
be identified with it.
They have so many, still, many identifica-
tions, and they are not fully identified with
the Divine, that Divine is so much identified identified. They have given lives for just a
with you. This is definitely such a great piece of flag, just imagine ! So many have
Even with a flag people are identified in
this world, to a little piece of cloth, people are
miracle, that should happen. Can you see
this 'clearly now, so many miracles happen thing (Swayambhoo Matterhorn mountain).
to you, but what about our sincerity? The
sincerity of the Divine is there, but are we
sincere, to that Divine? There are so many everything. And w hat are we doing ? You
miracles like this, not one but thousand-and-
one have happened, and in individual life, in
collective life ; one has to write it down, it is
given lives only to climb up this Ganesha's
People have given their lives for silly-stupid
things, given up their families, given up
must think about it.
So, God is very blissful, extremely bliss-
ful.
We should not
"remarkable."
develop "at all' a
feeling, that "we are special people. that
is why God has blessed us, so let
Mother do all the job, and we sit down and
take the blessings." How much the Divine
has worked so far, and is working, so dei-
cately, so choosingly. And how much have
we given ?
But either, sometimes vwe are identified
with ego, sometimes we are identified vwith the
conditionings of the things that we do not
identify, and sometimes we are attached to a
very petty-nonsensical thing,-that'snot pro-
per. And there should not be little bit hint
of any ego to think that "God is so kind to us
so we are something great",-it's very wrong.
We have enjoyed. Alright. we are here
So many people do like that, I have seen. everybody is enjoying; nice. Are we going
Not only in Europe, England, also in India back home and thinking that, that whatever
we have enjoyed, we have to 'give some-
this Mother is doing." or if you tell them thing to Sahaja Yoga. What have we given?
You don't have to give up any thing as money
said, so I did it." It is all w rong. You must and all non-sensical things, but you have to
say that "It is ' who is doing it," then you give your heart to it. Is your heart there or
they do like this, that "this is Mother's job,
something they will say "it is Mother You'
25
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-27.txt 
 So be for Sahaja Yoga. What have i done ?
you have other considerations ?
careful.
Nathing.
Count your blessings
Many people also believe that if you have
become Sahaja Yogis, now you have a right
to enjoy and not to do anything for Sahaja
Yoga. And some of them, if they do some-
thing, they think that now they are above
board, nothing can happen to them.
Even yesterday when I talked to my
husband, I said. "Thanks to Sahaja Yoga, I
am going to Zermatt, otherwise would
never have gone there." My daughter told
me that you don't wear any nylons, what
But every moment you have to remember will happen to you ? In your lifetime you
now they
Turther in your spiritual life. How much time wouldn't be producing silk sarees." I said,
you give for Sahaja Yoga, and how much "Thanks to Sahaja Yoga, I have no problem
that you have to go further and further and will have to wear, because
now
time you give for collective work of Sahaja all my life!"
Yoga should be found out. How much harm
you are doing to Sahaja Yoga also should be
seen. Those who are not fully identified,
So tevery moment caunt your blessings
Count your blessings. That is how you are
can not have joy in life. They are neither going to have the 'Joy of Sahaja Yoga."
Otherwise joy will be lost, even if you have
here nor there.
blessings. the joy wouldn't be there
And the greatest blessing you should feel:
when you realise that you are doing nothing
May God bless you.
Doubt and the Ego
awareness, lost drowned and dissolved-in
the purity of the ocean of it's own existence.
To doubt oneself, is presumptuous, an
arrogant act of the ego-and it's last defence.
"I can accept everything. Shri Mataji. Sahaja The Awareness. the chitta, one's actions
Yoga...but myself?"-And that question mark
reverberates in the void of one's soul. How -they are not the Ocean, as are the gross
silly it all is ! For the ego behaves as if it manifestations of the Creation.
has created itself-and all the Universe: and
sits nursing on it's own handiwork.
-are the waves on the surface of the Ocean
We should sink into the absoluteness of
the Ocean and in the awesome presence of
But the Universe in toto. in all it's entirety the Glorious Majesty of the Almighty be lost
including oneself, is created by God, the in silence there. We are not making our-
Absolute, the Almighty the above; and who selves perfected. fulfilled and realised souls
has the presumption to dare to judge His the Shri Adishakti is doing it all. We have
handiwork or question the perlection and
completion of His creation ?-No one ; not
even the great Deities and Angels on high. and Her handiwork-the Handiwork of the
Then who are we, petty and minor souls, to
question and consider ourselves through our ts just stop it all and become ourselves.
no role to play in this so it is pointless pos-
turing about doubting and judging ourselves
Absolute, the Almighty the Divine. So let
Amen = नमः इति
petty egos.
Sākshat Shri Adishakti Mataji Shri Nirmala
Devi Sunamah Sunamah TETA T arfenie
अगवती माताजी श्री निर्मला देवी सुममः सुनम-
One can only know oneself by immersing
one's Self in one's Self and know there in
the depths and the void that one is created
perfect to be one with the Absolute and to
be lost in that state of existence, in the
मा्षात श्री आदिशाकि
Amen नमः ति
--Dr. Rustam
Nirmala Yaga
26
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-28.txt 
 RAHURI
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
26 February 1984
Achieve the power of Spirit
I hope your journey has been comfortable have to see that you beat up your body,
far and will be comfortable later on, as beat up your mind, beat up your ego, and
so
the source of comfort is your Spirit. And more
you see to the comfort of your Spirit the in such a way that you grow into that
problems of outside comforts drop off. You image for which you are made.
are not bothered as to where you live, where
you sleep, what you eat, what you do. So
allow these gross sensitivities to drop down
so that the inner, subtler sensitivities grow.
That's why you are here, to get over your
time, conditionings..I mean it is a rat-race,
chisel it out so that it is beautifully made,
Regarding other things. like my tours in
your countries: I think, the greatest good is
done to you when you come to 'this' country:
as if you belong to this country and you
were uprooted in some other country. And,
and the rat race has to be somehow or other: when you come here you prosper so well !
And in that country I try so hard, I work so
hard, do all kinds of things, all the time I
spend with you, I do everything, day and
stopped, once and for all, without". So here
we can do it "without", and once you start
meditating, that "within" can also be achieved
night, all the time1 find it's impossible to
and you can achieve that peace which
all human beings should have, if we have to
save this world from complete destruction.
achieve much, that I see happening to you
here. As if here you take absolutely with
great ease the divinity of this place. And I
As you must have realized that now the think this uprootedness has to be given up.
Sahaja Yoga is growing much faster, and is I think as if you had immigrated into those
taking a good speed. And we all have to countries and now you are back in your own!
keep ourselves equipped to be able to be You are not found out by immigration laws,
part and parcel of this great evolutionary and I think !
revolutionary process which is going to stir
up the whole world.
Now, under these circumstances we should
change our tactics and start to establish
our ashrams here, and aur own projects here.
so that you people should come down
and achieve more. You can earn
For that, it is important also to see that
we take ourselves to task and don't get into
mediocre living and mediocre thinking. We here
are people of very great potential. Not only your living there. But you should come
that, but we are blessed by God's Divine here
Power. Try to use that power within yoursell or three months "continuously and est-
and try to be one with it. A little bit, you ablish yourself and grow. Because I don't
and spend some time for
IWO
27
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-29.txt 
 think it can be achieved there that good. snatch your bangles. You can move apout
Because we've tried everything. So this is the way you like and nobody's going to
bother. You won't meet 2 or 3 drunkards
beating each other-nothing of the kind. So
it's a very pure life here. That's a very big
the ultimate outcome of our trips all over.
Despite all kinds of hazardous routes and
hazardous life here, we are doing very well.
I must say wher see you I find you are
all very good and you are very much better
and it's all improved. Like watches, you see,
when you have to make them immuned, you least I personally think that too much moderni-
put them under absurd conditions and they sation won't suit this place. So you should
get alright. Like that, now you are immuned !
They are put into troughs which are shaken makes your body slaves to your own com-
very thoroughly as yesterday you were shaken forts and ideas of enslavement.
in the buses. Then they are made to pass
through water which is running very fast on
them. And all this we are trying here; and I
think your immunity is growing very fast to
outward things, and you are becoming really
solid eternal time pieces, the way you are
created here, and I'm so very happy to see
the development.-That's the main point nopes that you will really grow much faster
which we have achieved here.
achievement.
And the comforts that you want you can
create later on, if you want to have them. At
not give them these useless ideas which
In any case
very good here, but the general clean-
liness has to be taught to these people.
All this giving and taking process will work
out very well, I'm sure. And the way things
are moving within yourself, I have great
personal cieanlines is
if you come to this country and stay here
for some time, in a settled way, and then
go back to your countries. That would be
much better than to have a visit to your
So the attention should be out-away
from money: first of all. That is one of the
biggest problems, Actually nobody can beli- countries, which I feel sometimes is just
eve that affluent countries are much more
money-minded than Indians are, though they
are so developed. You see, the developed
countries are 'much more' money minded.
bombarded by negativity.
The other point which I wanted to tell
you is that you must learn to understand that
than the Indians are-its very surprising! you have come here to gain something. No-
When you see the way they count their D0ay is going to gain anything out of vou,
pennies it is impossible to believe that these
are really developed people. They are worse
than beggarS sometimes So that is what you
should get out of-the money part. Money tound What's that? How is it? This is the
is horrible stuff that people count. I mean-it
Is better to count the names of God than
count the money-horrible coins
So you have to gain something here. You
are students and so you have to learn some-
thing, and try to develop a sense of discipline
Like a disciple who receives all that is
house, that's nice", you see, like that. But if
you go on seeing the thing which is of no
importance and loose talking about things
Then we have other things like gross that do not matter with you. All these have
to be given up. Because you have so much
time there that people sit down and jabber,
can move in the night, anytime. You won't talk, loose talks, ugly talks, useless talks.
meet anybody who will snatch your purse or That's not needed at all. On the contrary
attachment to comfort. I don't think it's a
very comfortable life there. Because here you
Nirmala Yoga
28
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-30.txt 
 listen to all nonsensical talks, and try to keep
it's better to be quiet, and assimilate more
within yourself. Because here the people a good eye on that and be alert. so it
don't have time, so they can't talk, they have help you. On the whole, I must say that this
to work. But while you have time there to
talk, also here, so we start like that; and that's very happy that it has brought forth 'so-
a 'very' wrong thing.
trip and the last trip, I am overjoyed andI am
many possibilities before
potential. /am very happy about it, that
me and your
Another talking is done with yourself somehow, in this year, we have achieved a
also, quite a lot. Like you start analysing, new type of atmosphere among all of you,
criticising and finding faults and all the time which is humble, which is quiet, which is
thinking "Oh. this could have been better- peaceful, which is absorbing the Divine.
I've harmed very much here...that has hap- which is a very, very great. joyous thing
pened", all those things come into your for me.
heads. So this kind of a inner talk also should
be stopped; they are called as "murmuring
souls" by Christ. who said
muring souls". But these murmuring souls
exist within us. So beware of them and don't
So I thank you very much for all that. I
"Beware of mur- hope you keep up your progress this way
May God bless you all.
The following lines are taken from "the Book of Wisdom" in the Old Testament
They were spoken by King Solomon and written around 100 B.C-
THE APPEAL TO DIVINE WISDOM
King Solomon:
"May God grant me to speak as he would wish
and express thoughts worthy of his gifts.,
since he himself is the guide of wisdom,
since he directs the sages.
We are indeed in his hand. we ourselves and our words
with all our understanding. foe, and technical knowledge.
It was he who gave me true knowledge of all that is,
who taught me the structure of the world and the properties of the elements,
the beginning, end and middle of the times,
the alternation of the solstices and the succession of the seasons,
the revolution of the year and the position of the stars,
the natures of animals and the instincts of wild beasts,
the powers of spirits and the mental processes of men,
the varieties of plants and the medical properties of roots.
All that is hidden, all that is plain, I have come to know.
instructed by wisdom who designed them all."
Nirmala Yaga
29
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-31.txt 
 IN PRAISE OF WISDOM
.
"For within Her is a spirit intelligent. holy.
unique, nianifold, subtle,
active, incisive, unsullied.
lucid, invulnerable, benevolent. sharp.
irresistible; beneficient, loving to man,
steadfast, depéndable, unperturbed
almighty, all-surveying.
peneträting all intelligent. pure and most subtle spirits:
for Wisdom is quicker to move than any motion:
She is so pure. She pervades and permeates all things.
She is a breath of the power of God,
pure emanation of the glory of the Almighty:
hence nothing impure can find a way into Her.
She is a reflection of the eternal light,
untarnished mirror of God's active power,
image of his goodness.
Although alone, She can do all;
Herself unchanging, she makes all things new.
In each generation She passes into holy souls.
She makes them friends of God and prophets;
for God loves only the man who lives with Wisdom.
She is indeed more splendid than the sun,
She outshines all the constellations:
compared with light, She takes first place.
for light must yield to night.
but over Wisdom evil can never triumph.
She deploys Her strength from one end of the Earth to the other,
ordering all things for good."
JAI AGYA SOPHIA, HOLY WISDOM SAKSHAT SHRI NIRMALA MA!
Nirmala Yoga
30
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-32.txt 
 Wisdom and Folly Contrasted
In September 1983, in Tivoli near Rome, Shri Ganesha Pooja was celebrated in the Pre-
sence of Sakshat Adi Shakti Shri Nirmala Devi Herself, as Lord Ganesha.
During this ceremony an extract from the New English Bible was read, being the 8th
chapter of Proverbs entitled "Wisdam and Folly contrasted"
Through me princes act like princes,
from me all rules on earth derive their nobility.
Those who love me I love,
those who search for me find me.
In my hands are riches and honour,
boundless wealth and the rewards of virtue.
My harvest is better than gold, find gold,
and my revenue better than pure silver.
Ifollow the course of virtue,
my path is the path of justice;
I endow with riches those who love me
and I will find their treasuries.
"Hear how Wisdom lifts her voice
and Understanding cries out.
She stands at the cross-roads,
by the wayside, at the top of the hill:
beside the gate, at the entrance to the city,
at the entry by the open gate she calls aloud :
Men, it is to you I call,
I appeal to every man:
understand, you simple fools, what it is to be
shrewd;
you stupid people. understand what sense
means.
Listenl For I will speak clearly,
you will have plain speech from me;
for I speak nothing but truth
and my lips detest wicked talk.
All that I say is right,
The Lord created me the beginning of his
works,
before all else that he made, long ago.
Alone, I was fashioned in times long past;
at the beginning, long before earth itself.
When there was yet no ocean I was born,
no springs brimming with water.
Before the mountains were settled in thair
place.
long before the hills I was born,
when as yet he had made neither land nor
not a word is twisted or crooked
All is straightforward to him who can under-
stand,
all is plain to the man who has knowledge.
Accept instruction and not silver,
knowledge rather than pure gold;
for wisdom is better than red coral,
no jewels can match her.
| am Wisdom, I bestow shrewdness
and show the way to knowledge and pru-
lake
nor the first clod of earth.
When he set the heavens in their place I was
there,
when he girdled the ocean with the horizon.
when he fixed the canopy of clouds overhead
and set the springs of oceans firm in their
place.
when he prescribad its limits for the sea
and knit together earth's foundations.
dence.
Pride, presumption, evil courses,
subversive talk, all these I hate.
I have force, I also have ability:
understanding and power are mine.
Through me kings are sovereign
and governoIS make just laws.
Then I was at his side each day,
Nirmala Yoga
31
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-33.txt 
 for through me your days will be muitiplied
and years will be added to your life.
If you are wise, it will be to your own
advantage,
his darling and delight.
playing in his presence continually,
playing on the earth, when he had finished
it.
if you are haughty, you alone are to blame.
The Lady Stupidity is a flighty creature:
the simpleton, she cares for nothing.
She sits at the door of her house,
while my delight was in mankind,
"Now, my sons, listen to me.
listen to instruction and grow wise, do not
reject it.
Happy is the man who keeps to my ways,
happy the man who listens to me,
watching daily at my threshold
with his eyes on the doorway;
for he who find me finds life
and wins favour with the Lord.
while he who finds me not, hurts himself,
anp all who hate me are in love with death.
on a seat in the highest part of the town,
to invite the passers by indoors
as they hurry on their way:
"Come in, you simpletons," she says.
She says also to the food,
"Stolen water is sweet
and bread gor by stealth tastes good.
Little does he know that death lurks
there
Wisdom has built her house,
she has hewn her seven pillars:
she has killed a beast and spiced her wine,
and she has spread her table.
She has sent out her maidens to proclaim
from the highest part of the town,
"Come in, you simpletons.
She says also to the fool,
"Come, dine with me
and taste the wine that I have spiced.
Cease to be silly, and you will live.
you will grow in understanding."
that her guesis are in the depths of Sheol."
Without doubt this is Sri Ganesha describ-
ing his Play, enjoying Himself as the Darling
and Delight of our Lord Shiva, preferring
wisdom to his favourite red coral (verse II: "for
wisdom is better than red coral. no jewels
can match her"). We can almost hear"To
the Essence of the Prayer" in verse 6: "Listen!
For I will speak clearly, you will have plain
speech from me: for speak nothing but
truth".
Yes, oh Lord Ganesha, You who are Wis-
dom and who bestows wisdom on us, we
desire nothing but to listen to you, We know
that the first step towards your Wisdom is to
fear Lord Shiva and to be constantly vigilant
Do not correct the insolent or they will hate in rder to please the Great Goddess, the
Correct an insolent man, and be sneered at
for your pain5,
correct a bad man, and you will put your-
self in the wrong.
Queen of 14 worlds, Who contains all the
universes. The researcher. seeker and, finally
realised soul Carl Gustav Jung (1875-1961)
says, in his book "Psychology and Religion
that among the early Christian gnostics the
teach a righteous man, and his learning ouality of "mother" was an attribute of the
you:
correct a wise man, and he will be your
friend.
Lecture a wise man, and he will
grow
wiser:
will increase.
Holy Spirit who was called "Sophia" meaning
The first step to wisdom is the fear of the wisdom!
lord,
and knowledge of the Holy One is under-
standing;
JAI AGYA SSOPHIA, HOLY WISDOM,
SAKSHAT SHRI NIRMALA MA !
-Ruth
Nirmala Yoga
32
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-34.txt 
 Mooladhara Chakra
Birmingham Seminar
20.4.1985
Today I wanted to talk about Mooladhara
which is a very important subject. I think t
have talked about it many a times. But., in find it difficult to feel myself. The reason is,
the West I must say because of our wrong
attitudes, and acceptance of wrong mental is not so sensitive, I would say. It is not
projections of other people who are very
dominating we have very much ruined our doesn't go near any other Mooladhara.
Mooladhara.
Mother. Ialso only feel your Mooladharas...
To be very frank with you that's one centre 1
have a very, very strong Mooladhara, which
I would say. It is not
bothered. The attention of my Mooladhara
It just recedes back; that's the action it plays
all the time. So t also donot feel it unless
Despite the fact that Kundalini has risen
with whatever weaker power that Mooladhara and until it is very badly off. I mean the person
had and has sustained itself, we must know
that we can aiways fall in a trap to our different
bifurcations which we have created before.
It's a very serious matter, that the Mooladhara immediately I can feel it. So the correction
chakra has been really shattered and ve have
created pathways into which our attention
can go if we are not very careful.
is very close to me. then I feel the Mooladhara
very strongly. But still I cannot. Supposing you
give me something, that thing is used by you.
of Mooladhara entirely depends on you. And
without a strong Moaladhara you cannot rise
high, do what you like.
Now supposing if somebody is a dis-
honest person or a miserly person, or money
oriented, it is very gross and you can see it
so clearly. You see yourself and you get so
shocked: "Why did I say such a thing?
Why did I do such a thing?" But when
it comes to the left side nonsense, sins because it's a damaged one. It's one which
against the Mother, it's a secretive action,
that's only between you and yourself. Nobody on the physical side of the Mooladhara, but
knows what goes on in your mind, excent on the emotional side as we call the "Mana
you. Nobody knows what you are going to
do next moment in your privacy when you
Now for people who are Indians. who
häve respected their Mooladharas, there are
so many methods and ways given how to
raise the power of Mooladhara. But that
won't work out with the Western people.
is a shattered one. and which does not work
the left side.
So, even you may not talk in that way.
but your mind is still in that realm. And you
Nobody can look into you except for your still think on that realm. Even mentally, you
are alone.
Nirmala Yoga
33
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-35.txt 
 are in it. Or you are seeing things, wanting
to see such things, wanting to enjoy such bhoot.
things. That lurking attraction is still there.
Your Mooladhara cannot stand up. And we
means you yourselt are siding with the
You see a person as a Sokshi (in witness
state), that means you see the person but you
do not get a reaction, which is killer of joy.
You yourself can feel yout Mooladharas very
well. You can feel it on your finger tips also.
have to realise, I'm talking to Western people.
I would not say the same to the people from
India,
If you want to be kind
to yourself know that you have to divert your
And be alert about it.
out much har-
to deal with
So now we have to work
der:
To be on the watch-out
yourseif. And it is more a mental activity, attention towards a sane married life. But
"mental", meaning the emotional side.
You
that also should not be too much. Because
what I have learnt now, that in the West
In
have to
watch
your mind.
very funny word "mind“ is. people have devised methods of transferring
that attention from one person to another.
Mental acrobatics of different type they have
devised to destroy their pure attention. Don't
But, "Mana", through which we cater to our
emotional side, to our desires, where is it
going? Where is this movement of our mind?
What is it doing? You have to stand against play onto these.
your mind, stand against your desires, or you
can face it and see for yourself clearly what's
happening.
There are so many other things by which
we express that we are still under the
trap of bad Mooladhara. The way you
dress up, the way you walk, the way you
sit. the way you talk, the way you behave,
to impress other people. I am to be impressed
by other people in Sahaja Yoga itself. The
only impression that should really work is the
height of ascent that ethers have achieved.
You can do it, it's not difficult. When the
Kundalini can rise with alt shattered Moola-
It's for you to decide. Nobody is going
to correct you on this point. 1 know you
people have been confessing to me, I never
read your letters, to be very frank. Whatever
letters you sent, I would not read them.
Whatever confessions you have made, I burnt
all those letters. I haven't got any idea as to
what you wrote. Nor do I want to know
about it. That's not my concern. My concern
is that, now do not dwell upon the same
ideas, on the same level. Or on any level
dharas, I'm sure you can cure your Moola-
dhara completely. But your question is first
of all of strengthening the Mooladhara, for
which I think you all have to go inta a kind of
tapasyā.
whatsoever, we can say.
That's why I say sometimes that the
Western people should take to less of meat,
It is in thoughtless awareness you can
combat the thoughts that come to you from
wrong type of Mooladhara. Maybe some of especially the red meats and beef, and horses
of you have got Bhoots on your Mooladhara. and dogs-and l don't know what else you
And we have some physical treatment for eat.
such bhoots also, which 'll tell to Gavin
sometime which you can ask. But you can-
not always say that "It is a bhoot and I'm so much heat Even fish is very good.
alright. I'm away from the bhoot." You are
not. Whenever you say / have a bhoot,"
Take more to vegetarian food.
saying vegetarianism. you understand that.
Take more to things which do not give you
I'm not
take to a life which is in a way ascetic, but
don't take to these horrible health foods'
Nirmala Yoga
34
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-36.txt 
 you don't mind your chastity being plund-
not meant for human beings, but for animals ered! Everyone looking at you with dirty
I You don't feel insulted I Because ego
and it's horrible. This country store thing I is a dirty stuff. it does not mind. It feels
rook once and I said"had enough of it." happy that people are watching you. They
Country store-the whole country went into are plundering you. they are looting' your
chastity. But Sahaja Yogis are not like that. But
still I must say you must cleanse your hearts,
So for you people where to go? Those cleanse your minds, take yourself out of it.
Tcan't tolérute them I tell you. They re
-
also
think. They churn your stonmach completely eyes
my stomach.
who are suffering from Mooladhara must
know that food does make a difference, in
The minds are very funnily placed and
the powers of Mooladhara. So if you have that's why the biggest complications
They are
it down, it is over-excited, over-excited. Any very confused. Very confused people. Be-
cause there is no wisdom in this kind of life,
woman you lok at..I just don't understand, become just a sex-oriented personality. It is
it's worse than monkeys! You have to soothe actually just the other way round. If you
to get it cured, first of all you have to soothe there are-in the brains of people.
man you touch, any woman you touch, any
you
are money-oriented. you want to preserve
money; if you are possession-oriented you
But it's not so outside that want to preserve it: if you get one little
I can say that "you must respect yourself." It antique piece you want to preserve it; and
why not this property of yours which is the
highest of all, to be preserved, to be adorned,
it down, cool it down, so that Ganesha bes-
tows his blessings upon your Mooladhara.
cannot work out with those words I know.
You have to sit down, do meditation and
to be worshipped?
try to soothe it down. I'll discuss with Gavin
and tell him what things can be done about
it, because I can't tell you in the open like secretiy people are indulging into such things.
this. But still this is all physical. Mentally And they're hypocritical sometimes, they don't
you must be on the watch to see where does mind being hypocritical about it. They are
this mind go-to dirty things. Why does Sahaja Yogis, alright. but in this matter they
it always go to this sensation. See the birds. think they can go about the way they like.
see the flowers, see the nature, see the beau- And sometimes some of them say that Mother
tiful people, just see them.
I'm quite worried on that point, that
has said it's alright. Inever said so! There's
one point can never compramise in this:
Another horrible thing in the West is that You must have a chaste outlook towards your-
the women must expose their body to get self. towards your life, towards your being.
men excited. Men do the same I think. They towards your parsonality. You are saints.
always try to excite each other and live in a
stupid excitement.
And if a saint doesn't have a good character,
I call it the character, the essence of charac-
ter-is not a saint.
You have to expose beautiful things. like
flowers, beautiful ornaments. alright. But
you're not a thing ! It's your private property. "cannot be any compromise on that. You
You don't put all your gold on the streets.
do you? Better try that, sometimes. You works out, in a collective way, nobody cheats
will mind people plundering your gold, And puts
So this purity has to be maintained: there
cannot hit at the roots of everything. If it
but oneself, nobody deceives onself.
Nirmala Yoga
35
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-37.txt 
 the mind into the right track of ascent. Think- crawling up in America before they become
ng about the ascent, how you are going to forty years of age, is because their Moola-
rise, thinking of the moment when you had dharas are out. Most of the diseases which
the joys, thinking of the day where you met are incurable come because of weak Moola-
me first, thinking of all the other beautlful dharas, on the physical side. On the mental
and holy things, your mind can be cleansed. side, most of the mental problems we saw
And whenever such a thought comes in, you there, I would say 90%, are due to weak
Mooladhara. If a person has a strong Moola-
know it's dhaia, powerful Mooladhara, it doesn't get
difficult, but if you can get realisatoin why into trouble. Because you know there's a very
strong hold of the Mooladhara in the back
have to say, "not this, not this". It's more
mental than physical I tell you. /
not this also?
there.
You all have to understand that there is
'no compromise on this. And a day may
come if you continue with it, you will be the brain. It's not the brain, mostly it's the
thrown away completely, just like any other Mooladhara. So for physical safety and for
devil is thrown out. So there is no com-
And when your mind goes off, you blame
your emotional safety also, you have to have
a sane type of attitude towards Mooladhara.
promise. Tell yourself, don't deceive your-
self don't cheat yourself. You cannot ascend That's why I'm very anxious that you all
if there is any lurking thing within you. You should get married, and after marriage, after
will be dragged down, because that's your a few days, you find that your attention starts
weakness, and you will become weaker, and diverting to other problems of married life.
weaker and weaker.
But not if you are not a Sahaja Yogi,
because the sensationalisation has become
Only question is where is your attention.
Divert it. Divert your attention. First you will the main theme of modern life. And you are
need some exercise, some effort. and after- tossed about on the rough sea of all these
wards it will come automatically. You won't deliberate actions of the people. Media,
have to exert, you won't have to worry: on books, ideas, everything, creates this horrible
the contrary. it will become impossible how excitable temperament within you.
to be otherwise. So much conditioning is
there. We have played into the hands of
conditioning, we have ruined ourselves. This
conditioning is the subtlest of all, and the hypocritical. and has a very bad Vishuddhi.
worst of all. Its impossible to combat in So many complications take place with this
Sahaja Yoga, unless and until you 'individu- betore realisation. Forget the past. Whatever
ally take up the responsibility of looking you have done, forget it. Just don't worry.
after it.
Such a person doesn't have any patience,
doesn't have any balance. Actually he's
But remember one thing, that you have
damaged your Mooladhara, so you have to
Mooladhara is one of the most delicate. bring it to normalcy. You have to make it a
and the most powerful chakra. It has so many healthy, balanced centre, so that Shri Ganesha
folds and it has so many dimensions. If your can rule over it.
Mooladhara is not alright your memory will
fail. If your Mooladhara is not alright, to begin vibrations become too much for me.
Talking about Shri Ganesha, you know
with, your wisdom will fail. You will have no
sense of direction. The insanity that is now
We talk of innocence, but to awaken
Nirmala Yoga
36
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-38.txt 
 innocence within ourselves we must be on cussed openly, its a secret, between you and
the full watch, on the full alertness about our yourself. It should not be written down any-
minds. "What is it thinking? Where is it where, it should not be mentioned. Butshould
be worked out by all of you. in such a way that
you enjoy the bliss of Shri Ganesha. Is more
for the ladies, I would say, than for men.
Because men suffer much more than women
going? Where is this thief going? Is he trying
to do some tricks? Is he up to some tricks?
Alright!" You have to be alert. very alert.
I've been thinking of talking about it since
long. But now Ihave to tell you one thing. do. And that's why women must be very
That you'll be exposed! That is another qua-
lity of Mahūmāya. She'll expose you, You'll your brothers. Unless and until you really
be exposed I if you try to play tricks with me.
"With me" means with your Kundalini. If you
try to play tricks with your Kundalini you'll
be exposed. And you'll be ashamed of your- like it if anyone tries to look at them, or tries
selves. So please be careful. very careful
about it. That again make your Mooladhara have killed themselves, burnt themselves up,
very healthy. and powerful.
May God bless you.
careful. Develop very good relationships with
establish your high character, men cannot be
improved.
You have seen in India women do not
to touch them. They dan't like it: Women
thousands of them,-because they thought
some other people may come and touch
their body. It's so related to your Atmä, to
your Spirit. As if it is the body-innocence is
the body of your Spirit. You all can be that.
because you have become Yoginis now. They
So our prayer should be that "Let our
Mooladhara be healthy and strong". That's
all. Let's pray-
There are certain exercises for Mooladhara. were not Yoginis, but they knew one thing-
I will explain to Gavin who is your leader in the power of their chastity. It's more for
England. Thên he will pass it on to you It ladies here, that they should try to generate
should be done verbally. It should not be that feeling of nobility, of chastity, of holiness
written down. The leaders of the ashrams and around them, so that the men themselves
other places should come and see me every
month somstime, and these things should be themselves.
talked. Because it's a secret, not to be dis- Thank you very much.
respect them and develop that feeling within
(contd. from Page 52)
for it is like a machine without its dynamo mana-profound in his devotion. So were
or power. The essence of Sahaja Yoga is the Lords Lakshmana, Bharata and Shatru-
to be an instrument for the transmission of ghna. The subjects of Ayodhya loved them
our profoundly Holy and Divine Mother's
love-to all mankind and the creationand play and intermingling of different forms of
without that all and everything loses its pure love, and the attacks of negativity on
meaning.
and were loved in return:-the whole story is
this.
Above the right heart is right vishuddhi;
and below, the Liver and
that supraconscious negativity loves to attack
Right sided and Supraconscious negativity
has to destroy love,-for it cannot survive
with Love, but is downed, destroyed and
suffocated by it The essence of right-sided these two Chakras-So it is only the Love and
negativity is power, hatred, and control:-all devotion of the right heart, the power of the
anti God activities. Love is the essence of
God the Father the Almighty-and a radiation come this. Let us be aware of this and work
of His Grace throughout all the Universe. It to purify ourselves and the Shri Holy Sangha
is well known, the Lord Rama was profoundly of our Mother's Feet as the Lord Christ
loving throughout all the Universe, as was
the Mother Shri Seeta, and the Lord Hanu-
it is well known
Shiva Tattva in Lord Rama, that can over-
washed the feet of his disciples. Amen
-Dr. Rustom
37
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-39.txt 
 JAI SHRI MATAJI
Easter Puja
London
8-4-85
Happy Easter to you all.
compassion, In the light of the Spirit you can
see what we think as compassion is nothing
but a kind of sympathy which leads you now-
here. But one should learn to see everything
So we celebrate Easter to show Christ
tésurrected Himself. The Spirit that is Christ
has to resurrect out of the material mani-
festation of the Divine Itsell. The matter is time the light of the Spirit? We do not
in the light of the Spirit. But do we use all the
manifested because we ourselves have creat-
ed it. Not that we are born out of matter, our
body, but wE are attached to it, we want it,
we want to have it. Whatever you want, that
sustains itself, by your desire, because now
you are on the stage. If you want to sustain standing in the society, how we relate our-
the matter, if you want to keep the matter as
the first priority, it will remain. It cannot dis-
appear. It has to go out of your mind that world at large, all of them can tie us down
For Christ it was difficult, because He
was the Spirit. But He has shown you the way.
He crucified Himself to show you the way.
All the ideas about sophistication, about our
selves to other dignitaries, or to our country,
to our politics, to our economics and the
matter cannot hold you any further
to that tomb. You belong to another cate-
Christ rose out of the matter, came out of gory. I've told you a hundred times. And a
the tomb which symbolises the matter which category which is the Spirit, which can rise
has enclosed us within, which has to be
opened out with our spiritual power. Throw thing. This way are you conditioned; all absurd
away the stone that is covering this grave. ideas have been accepted, which you cannot
Get out of that and stand outside it. This is explain why you were conditioned like
the message of Christ's resurrection.
above all" the tombs and throw away every-
this.
The tomb that we have created, we have
created ourselves, because we have allowed of England. English are very much conditioned
people to dominate us. We have allowed them people. The others are Americans who are
to make these graves for us, we have allowed abandoned. I mean, you cannot talk to them
them to bury Christ within ourselves, because
we were afraid. But Christ has to rise. So we
create our own matter through our condition- much conditioned people, and when they are
ings, through our fears, through our absolute too much conditioned they build their own
wrong ideas about goodness, kindness and tombs.
Why I talk more of conditioning. because
about anything because they cannot be root-
ed into anything. But the English are too
Nirmala Yoga
38
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-40.txt 
 AIl these ideas are to be seen with a new
dimension of awareness that you have. You sitting on top of it. And now when he gets
are the Spirit. Why should you worry about the heat. the heated words come out of his
anything else but your vibrations. Because moutl. We don't have to do anything; it is all
you are saints. You should just worry about done, already. They are baked and cooked in
the comfart of your Spirit. Whatever is con-
genial to your Spirit, just go on doing that.
abserving that. accumulating that and suck- wrong. That is only possible because yoau
ing within yourself. All conditionings will
tun away because these conditionings you related to the Absolute, if you do every thing
accept because they look comfortable. but
they are not, Christ is a great example and if are related to Christ. how can you do wrong?
He is the one whom you lollow. if He is the That is one of the proofs that they are not
one you have understood and recognised in Christians of any kind, because none of the
the light of your Spirit, then you must knovw Christian organisations have done anything
why did He go into the grave first of all. The good whatsoever except for creating fire for
Man who was so powertul, Who when themselves.
He will come Hell reduce all of them into
ashes-such a great personality like Him
of Ekädash Rudra. Why did Christ allow ing has worked within us because we have
Himself to be crucified and to be buried into been so-called Christians, we have been
that? Because He wanted to stoop down to going to churches, we have been worship-
the level of other peaple, to come down to ping Christ as they told us, the way they told
that level so that people should see that
through His life they are shown that you can mented.
be resurrected. Now the Resurrection has
taken place. Sahaja Yogis are resurrected no
doubt, but still one foot is in the grave! And
the second one I do not know whether it will
be out or in-it is just halfway through! One
foot is of course outside, no doubt, but still
is not yet touching the ground, and the other
cannot be lifted unless you push the ground disadvantage, because Christ has been used
this matter, again, to push it up. If you live
with your Spirit, you should have no fears,
you should have no worry.
under lire, he himsell lit the fire and is now
their own. I So why should we have fear?
But we should know what is right and what is
are with the absolute, That is the Spirit. And
related to it. you are daing the right thing. It you
TEHE
So you can see clearly how this condition-
us we worshipped Himeverything regi-
The One who came to resurrect us from
the bondage of the grave, we used Him to
build our graves. Now you are out of it,
thank God, but take out the other foot, fast.
This is one advantage you have because you
have Christ before you, but also there is a
I5
to set you down in the grave. So change
your concept about Christ. Know Him through
vour vibrations, what He was. mean, as a
child I knew what was going wrong with
See now, I will tell you how God is show- Christians and left and right as a little girl of
ing His ways. here. Like in Durham, the seven I used to give big lectures. Even when
fellow is now under complete fire. he does Iwas baptised, I was horrified the way I was
baptised by some stupid fellow! I did not
Sanskrit is that know what was he up to. And then he put a
Bhoot on my head, I think, or something
not know what to do, and he himself is so
stupid, as the saying in
Vināsh Kāle Viprita buddhi: When your destruc-
tion time comes you think of all perverted which hovered round and we met with a very
things, vipareet buddhi. See to the way he big accident, I fell down. This bhoot must
speaks, I mean,-blasphemous. And he is have put it in the horse, I feel, or somewhere,
39
NIrmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-41.txt 
 another bhoot. This priest. this stupid feilow. may accept him So the Anglicans, the
who belonged to the Lutheran Church. I Anglo-Saxon brain. Iam saying, is going to
don't know what you call that. Lutheran, accept Mr. Durham very well. I can see that.
imagine,-Martin Luther's Church. And that Or else will juist leave and become Commu-
is how they baptised me. I knew all abour it
but I did not know what to do about it- has so many probiems.
must have kicked him quite a lot! But. what-
ever it is, so-called, he baptised me. I had to
accept all foolish stupid things in this life, when you have, I would like you to think
because I had to show I was quite normal.
I mean, accepting stupid is normal these
days, and to tolerate an idiot is even more
normal. So I had to show that. I knew very thing. But what about us, we are so many,
well what sort of a thing it was, this fellow
was up to, and I accepted the nonsense he people sensibly, talk to these Anglicans, find
did and many other things. I accepted just to
show that I am nothing special. But I knew what you have found out. You need not say
all about it. When I saw the way Christ was in the beginning only that
described, I was aghast! I said, what are they
doing to Christ. I mean, nicely second cruci- forter, that Christ has said. But we can start
fixion going on.-You also know about it.
nists. Have nothing to do with this God who
So in the Seminar of yours in Birmingham
over this new thing that has come up in the
heart of the Universe. Everyone knows about
Durham fellow, they know he is blight, every-
let us try to find out how we can talk to these
out about them, and communicate to them
Shakti. or l am the Redeemer and the Com-
talking about it. Find out these people, these
Anglicans, church people, churchgoers who
believe in God, who believe in Christ. 1 mean
Thank God there are so many to whom I can
falk and they understand my language, But they are voting. Can you imagine! They are
the Resurrection will not be complete unless voting whether Christ was true or not. Can
and until you pull out many out of their you vote like that? You feel you are in a
graves. I don't know how you will go about it. lunatic assylum or what. It is terrible! They
Look at this fellow in Durham who is getting are taking votes. can you imagine such a
so much publicity when he is doing atll blas-
phemous things. He is getting all the credit advantage. because they are so much con-
and kudos from people;-what about us, what fused,-to give them a concrete idea as to
are we doing? Why not we write to the news-
papers, why not we talk to them? "Observer"
has given us a clue I think. There is one
gentleman, Mr. Wilson, who wrote quite nice
things-why not write to him, some letters. been said about Christ. Just I can't bear it, it
Get to it. Because, you see, what I am a
little concerned about this matter is, as it is
they are half-hearted creatures, Now, if this through it and see what you can do and tell
Durham fellow speaks like that, that is the
big authority on Christianity, Christ. His
Mother and every body else. Now if this
fellow he goes on like this, those who are
half-baked will fall off to Communism, and
the rest of them who may remain also, they much more sensible people than you are. I
thing like that? At this moment we have an
what is God, what is Christ, what is religion.
One side I feel very hurt and unhappy-I
think these three days I have gone through
real Resurrection myself. The way things have
is too much. You all should be stirred also,
should be concerned, and you must go
them: are you all mad or what? Why don't
you listen to sanity?
As you know, when I went to Australia, it
is a different country altogether. They are
Nirmala Yopa
40
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-42.txt 
 Invite them. Invite these intellectuals. Try
to talk to them, tell them what is it. What do
you call them, those who know about Bible?
think the way they were exiled. they learnt a
lesson and they are better. So I feel the
English have to go into exile or jail for a
while to understand. They are very sensible. Theologians-without logics I Call these Theo-
extremely sensible people. You can talk to logians,-challenge them. Why not put a
them sense. Everyone. The media is sensible, challenge? You are not alone, you are so
the people are sensible. Thousands of them many. And don't tel them that you wear
came. They repeated. First programme we
had once, it was 1600, 2000. Can you imagine understand it, they are not that deep. You can
such people? And out of them .repeats were
600. Now for the last how many years we
are having the same them better. You go with your punky con-
again. What Seminars are we going to do, all
of us sitting and cooking some chicken, that's you, otherwise they are in for trouble. If they
all. Or making some cake for Mother which are that stupid, why not handle them? It is
She doesn't eat Let us take out our satisfac-
tions from these little, little things into some-
thing bigger. Let us talk about it, without clever. Stupid can be stupified very easily.
fear. We have to go and talk and tell people
about it. Take it a big way. There should be have to take it in a big way,-the whole thing
no hindrance on this part. We are a very big what we are going to do. All of you should
group and we can assert and we can talk give some concrete ideas as to what you
and meet people
saris when you come for my Puja! They won't
wear your jeans. Or to convince them more,
you can be punks ! That would appeal to
600people again and
ditions, they will jolly well have to listen to
very easy to handle a stupid person than to
handle a person who is not stupid, or who is
So I think we have to change our course, we
would like to do. And that would be really
the way it will work out. So now in the
Seminar you must discuss more haw to falk
to these people, how to create a platform for
Sahaja Yoge. Find out how they create a
platform out of nothing, like these punks,
The situation has improved a lot because
now I have to go to India as you know. and
in India, for me, the situation is much better.
It is not at all difficult. As you know. I went
to the hills at the foothill of Himalayas. About. and once you do all these things you will be
3000 people came from all over-the little, surprised that they will have to listen. They
little villages that they had. They didn't take will have to listen to you.
even a second to recognise me-they were
singing the praise of the Goddess of the Hills,
Goddess of the Tigers, Goddess of the Lions.
They just started singing my praise. Without ing them I am Adi Shakti-that they will not
any lecture or anything. They were all joyous
that I have been there, and they knew and
they accepted me and finished. And I just had Shakti has to be an English lady. At least,
to put my foot down there and I have done.
Jaipur:-They said. Mother you just put your
foot here. really So for me the situation is anything, but you can say She is the lady who
Now go full ahead. I am giving you all
freedom, do what you want. Except for tell-
be able to digest, that an Indian has now
become the Adi Shakti. They think now Adi
Frenchl So don't mention me, If you want
you can, but don't mention me as Guru or
has shown us the way or something like that
-not referring much to me but to them.
very good in India.
So let's see what you people are going to think you should go ahead with it and work
do with these big big Seminars and lectures. it out because we have now had a lot of
Why not get some outsiders to listen to you. patience and all nonsense going around us.
Nirmala Yoga
41
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-43.txt 
 Better tell them, or are we going to allow all such a tearned book he wrote that in the
of them to go to hell-diret.
light of Gyaneshwara what is Sahaja Yoga.
And he has written it so well that anybody
Message of Easter,-East, comes from who is a theologian or anything like that in
East. I don't know why they call it Easter.
Have you ever thought of it? Why do they call translate that book for you. But it is all the
it a Worcester Sauce- don't know. I don't
know why they call anything! But Easter, Marathi language. He wrote such a nice book
you can't explain. But Easter, it is coming
from the East. The wisdom has to come from
the East. the Resurrection has to come from tiat, I felt. And once it reaches into the hands
the East, whether they like it or not. And that of any of these people. I mean, it will in any
is the message of Easter today. That let us
give them the chance of iēsuriection by talk- some copies, gave it to me. And all the copies
ing to them-all of you. Just make it a point were sold out in that programme-"every
1o talk to people who are in charge of theo- copy was sold for Rs. 2 each
logy, churches. Bibles. Go and talk to them
"What are you doing? Are you mad? Why do
you want to be slave people. You don't
know anything."
India will be impressed by it. I wish I could
stanzas from Gyaneshwara, which is in
on Sahaja Yoga and that is what he gave on
my birthday this time. Something so substan-
case. And he published himself, he brought
So this is what we have to do now, Is to
write, write to different magazines, met
people, tell them we want to come and talk
tO you. First of all yoi must know about
Sahaja Yoga. You should be well equipped.
It is not that you can show my photograph
with a light here. That is not sufficient. What
is the light here, also you have to show.
know anything about Sahaja Yoga. Even in Only a few people know what is Sahaja Yoga
- the rest of you do not know anything. Let
us see what questions we have in our minds.
Let us sit down and find out what are the
Sahaja Yoga, they don't understand what the questions, what questions are we lacking in,
what we have to understand in Sahaja Yoga.
What part we don't know. Let's find out all
those things, all the details. Let us write it
down. "Everyone" of you. Whether it is a
woman, man, child, everyone can do it. Find
out what are the questions which are not yet
answered in Sahaja Yoga. How can we ans-
wer particular questions? Alright. All these
Recently you must be knowing, that there things can be found out if you put your atten-
is a book going to be published by Yogi tion to it you can easily find out what you
need. Everyone has to do it. You must all be
very good book. Of course, most of it I have equipped. If anybody asks you a question
on Sahaja Yoga and you cannot answer, I
mean how can you convince people. You
take one ordinary so-called layman from.
Christianity,-so-called Christianity again,
Another thing I would suggest that we
should have regular classes, to understand
Sahaja Yoga properly. I have seen some
people who are Sahaja Yogis for years, don't
Bombay, people told that some of the ladies
are absolutely zero as far as Sahaja Yoga is
concerned. They don't understand what is
chakras are. They listen to your lecture and
then. just like a bubble, everything disappears
from their minds. 1 don't know who gave
them these ideas, but they were quite shock-
ed. So let us have a class-like thing for
Sahaja Yogis, on different topics and subjects
let us work it out:
Mahajan called 'Gita Enlightened' which is a
helped him, he has been with me and all that,
but doesn't matter, but he has understood
the subiect. The other day they published a
very beautiful book in Marathi. One Suravkar,
42
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-44.txt 
 atmosphere against Christ So we have to fight
and that is how we should become the people
the man is layman and the Christianity is also
lay. He will give a big lecture on Christ.
Every verse in the Bible he will tell you. who are fighting for Christ
"Chapters, Matthew 2, Verse 2, this is what
Christ has said. That you will be calling me
Christ, Christ and I will not recognise you
telling about himself only So you have to be do not know much about Christ. That we
absolutely equipped for it: Now you also have to go to other books to find out who
have to know what you will confront in a par-
ticular country. For example, when I come to have to go much deeper. We have to prove
England, I know I have to confront these that there is Divine power. And you have
theologians and the Christ and everything. If seen how Divine power works. What wonders
I go to India, I know what have to confront.
I have to face it on different lines and different them these are the photographs, can you
fronts. You don't have to do that. Just think explain these things. That in the hand you
about your wn country. French peopie have see the sun. Show us in Mrs. Thatcher's
to think about France, you people have to hand, even a star won't twinkle. These things
think about this country and then go ahead
with it. You can chalk out a good pro- Tight time. We must do whatever is right at
gramme and work it out properly. I am sure,
with God's grace, everything will work out.
Because when are we going to do it now?
Now there could be areas where you can
talk of integration, of talking about how we
He was. Why did He come on this earth? We
there are. You take my photographs. Show
to be seen in the right perspective and at the
that point. That is the way Sahaja Yoga is.
Hit the point when it is to be hit. If you
cannot do that way you cannot achieve. So
this is the right time for you, there äre 3
I am going away, as I told you to India, months ahead of you, I would like you to see
and I don't know when I will be back. You what you can do, because now the sun will
wanted to arrange my programme in England, be coming out. you will have a nice summer.
but I think I cannot do it because have to
ga round to all the places. Europe and al that, holidays during these three months going to
finish that. You better do that touring When some beach somewhere.
I was not here what touring did you do?-
Nothing. You could have toured. Now at
least these three months, you will be having people. They have no time to waste. We
a nice summer time, I'll be travelling all over
Europe, everywhere. You please see that you quarrel among ourselves..
go round England. Visit different places, fight very great enemies. We have no time to
arrange programmes, talk to people, find out waste on our families and our children and
who are the big Johnnies there. The mayors,
this that. Go and talk to them. Tell them We are on a warpath. Very important this is.
about this. That is how a new programming
should be done and a new dimension should
Go ahead. But now just do not fix all your
Sahaja Yogis have no time-they are busy
are on a warpath-we have no time to
We have to
our relations and father, mother, sister, brother.
So let us now prepare ourselves as Christ
stood out of that grave, let us get ouut of this
be given to our Sahaja Yoga propaganda. grave of lethargy, of compromising, of com-
You have done no propaganda in the right lort, of aur past ideas about life's pleasures.
sense, in the sense that you were not so sure This is the new era that has to show it's mani-
about it that it we will work out. But
But now festation in this country. it is very important.
and you all can do it. You have ito be very
we will, because people are, there is an
Nirmala Yoga
43
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-45.txt 
 brave, you have to be sensible, wise kind and most important thing that we have to do? If
also forthright. But you have to say what you you realise it. I am sure it will work out.
have to say. Because it has to be said. And
this is the only thing to be said-nothing else
is important. Whatever these people talk really 'command you to do that now.
about has no meaning. They are not mantras.
Some of them are anti-God, some may not
be, but they are useless, wasteful, really gar-
bages I should say. Why they are given so
much importance and not the real thing that going to find out ways and methods for doing
is there.
With all my blessings, with all my love, I
May God bless you,
Today, on this day you all should vow,
that we are on the warpath and we are
these things during these three months. We are
You understand that this is the reality rhat going to work it out. Just vow. Just ask for
has come into you people. "Actually you have And promise it to Christ that as You did, we
felt the reality, actually you know the reality. are going to do.
you 'are' in the reality. Then why not talk
about it. Why should we not? Is it not the
wisdom and the spiritual power That's all.
May God bless you.
Sahaja Yoga Biggest Blessing of Shri Mataji
We Sahaj Yogis have been endowed with ence, perseverence and practice after many
such huge blessings far beyond imagination. years of struggle.
Our Mother Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi has
enabled us to obtain self-realisation through Bible which is the Book of Genesis (Ch. X &
awakening of aur Kundalini Shakti. In normal XI), the people in those days wanted to build
course this is very difficult to achieve and
may be attained by one in a million amongst realisation. The building of this could not
true, sincere and fully devoted persons with proceed further after few stories had been
much of patience, perseverence and practice. built because there came the language barrier.
Our Mother Mataji has enabled us to attain This is known as the Tower of Babel.
Referring to the first book in the Holy
a tall tower to reach the sky hoping to attain
this with utmost ease and comfort. We
Removing the barriers of race, religion, langu-
age & nation our Mother Shri Mataji has been
able to build a great mansion of Sahaj Yoga
Referring to Kato Upanished there is a which is stronger, taller and highly sanctified
story of Nachi Keta who was a great devoted than any building, tower or structure in the
person. Once Lord Yama the Lord of death World. This mansion is not built with bricks.
cement steel, wood or stones but with Love,
Nachi Keta offer to you half Peace, Harmony, Friendship, Devotion and
of my Kingdom". Nachi Keta replied to Yama Dedication of the Sahaj Yogis. This mansion
saying-"Oh Lord. I don't wish to have any has many doors, and doors are always open:
part of your Kingdom. Give me self-realisa- our Mother Shri Mataji has room for everyone
who wish to enter (The doors represents our
should consider ourselves as the chosen
people of God.
met him and being pleased with his devotion
tion".
This Yama was unable to do.
After much search Nachi Keta went to activity centres all over the world). This
King Janaka who was a realised soul. King
Janaka could not give Nachi Keta self-realisa- for ever & ever.
tion straight-away. King Janaka finding
Nachi Keta very sincere and devoted, helped Mataji Nirmala Devi Namo Namaha !
him to attain self-realisation with great pati-
mansion Shri Mataji has built to stand firm
Om twemeva sakshat Adi Shakti Shri
-Monohar Khandke
44
Nitmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-46.txt 
 Christian Tradition and Christ
QUESTION: Shri Mataji, in the Christian tra- nothing by Paul, And then he incarnated
dition we have heard that the on this earth as Augustin and started this so
Holy Spirit is something which called tradition.
comes from outside and now
You said it is something which is
Now you will be surprised there is an
Archbishop of Durham who says that all
these things are hallucinations of the disci-
SHRI MATAJI: It is a controversial thing, ples and that there was no immaculate con-
it is Christain tradition itself. Now it has ception and there was no miracles of Christ.
inside.
come to a crux, so I can tell you about it.
There was recently a book written by an Eng- -
lishman think, who has challenged the stowed upon him a very great honour, that
miracles of Christ, his immaculate conception church was burnt by a great fall of a lightning
and all these things And, according to him
Paul never talked about it. You seel have to tell Archbishop says that it was God's grace that
you the truth. I must tell you the truth, Now
this gentleman Mr. Paul. when I saw him in
the Bible I was surprised, who is this gentle-
man here, He was himself a Jew who tor-
tured Christians. He saw that Stephen was
tortured. Then suddenly he gets a supra- established when you come to Sahaja Yoga;
conscious, some sort of an epileptic fit. in that He is such a great truth that all these
that he sees some light and he becomes the false people who try to malign him..And to
organizer of Christianity. He had never met challenge Christ is a very dangerous thing.
Christ. He was an intellectual and he intel- because you must know He has eleven des-
lectualized Christ and he established himself troying powers which are called in Sanskrit
in the Bible. How is he there? What he did
was to write letters of organizing God and
tell the people because he wanted to go to He has all the powers of innocence and who
gentiles He faught very much with Peter can challenge Him? Unless and until one has
and there was no combination established realization, one can't understand Christ.
because Peter was not an intellectual.
this Mr. Paul started a religion of his own and
surprisingly Khalil Gibran had said the same
thing that I am saying. That who is this
strange man Mr. Paul? It would be like this
epileptic boy talking of Sahaja Yoga. And
not anly that, Khalil Gibran also says that people and the Kundalini rises when the Holy
Paul is a person who does not know what he Ghost blesses the people; so the Kundalini
is talking about. he is not sure about himself. rises because of that. is a fact. But they
He said it very clearly in that book The Son
of Man". Please read ita complete chap- any way, because they don't know anything
So this Peter was completely made into
Because intellectuals can't understand these
things. Now this churchi where they be
within; absolutely burnt on top. So the
the walls did not burn.
I tell you that not only Christ had imma-
culate conception but every miracle he did
is a fact. And He is the Truth and can be
as Ekādasha Rudra. He is great incarnation
of Mahävishnu. He is innocence personified.
So
So many people are shattered. Their
faith is shattered the way these intellectuals
have taken over the tradition, so called tradi-
tion, of Christianity
But it is true, the Holy Spirit can bless
don't know. They did not even explain in
about it. They don't know, they have no
ter.
45
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-47.txt 
 knowledge about it. They did not even ex- Kundalini rises in its dignity. That is the gate
plain that when the Holy Ghost blessed the He said.
disciples what language they were speaking
and what they were doing that people tho- ed I'm rather doubiful how the tradition took,
ught they were mad. Because the Holy every religion, even Hinduism, it is like that.
Ghost blessed them they felt the cool breeze Islam is the same. Any religion you take. the
and they started talking the language of the tradition is nothing but the tradition of going
centres, as we talk. Not that somebody down, down, down, down. If it was a right
started speaking German, somebody started, tradition there would have been no problem.
say, speaking Sanskrit. It is only possible Today we have so many churches, so many
these things happen when you get possessed. fightings. You see the Vatican in the Matia,
But they got their realization and they started the Mafia in the banks. I can't understand.
to speak the Divine language of the centres.
And when these powers are felt then you adorned on his crown. What kind of crown
start moving your hands in the deftness of It these people are wea
you know how to use these hands, how to have also now. started another kind of com-
raise the Kundalini. The hands start moving petition with your crowns.
and that's what people thought. they were making a big umbrella of gold. I must say
mad.
So now as far as the tradition is concern-
But Christ you gave Him the thorn to be
ring? In India also, we
crown is alright-they are wise, but umbrella
is dangerous. They are playing with Divinity,
But i mova in a society of another kind they have no sense that God Almighty has
as you know and in that I meet many am-
bassadors and great intellectuals, and they all religion of Christianity or any religion is the
say that these disciples of Christ were all religion of the living God. At different times
stupid lools. Because they have not been there were great flowers on the "Tree of
to universities. What university did Christ go Life". But we plucked them and said this
to? This is how it is a big drift now between is nmine, this is mine" and we are fighting the
the people who feel Christ is the embodi- dead. But in Sahaja Yoga you will know the
ment of Divinity and those who are intellec- beauty of all these great prophets and you
tuals of this kind who are challenging Christ. will be amazed how they have enriched us.
But Sahaja Yoga can prove that Christ resides all of them.
on this centre of Agnya there at the cross:
because when the Kundalini stops at that lot of explanations and thank God I could say
point. at the Agnya point, you have to take
the name of Our Lord Jesus Chirist. Then the
a tremendous wrath for such people, The
So now, I think our question-needed a
it in Vienna.
(Vienna 8th Sept. 1984)
Nirmala Yoga
46
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-48.txt 
 Her Holiness Mataji Nirmala Devi
CARDIFF PUBLIC PROGRAMME
8 August 1984
"The Knowledge of the Roots"
I bow to all the seekers of truth. It gives the Roots within ourselves and within our
me immense pleasure to come to Cardiff society, within human beings as a whole.
again for this programme of Sahaja Yoga.
They must have explained to you what is
Sahaja Yoga. That is, 'Saha" is 'with' and Ja
is bornit is born with you and all of us
have a birth right to get this spontaneous
yoga, that is the union with the Divine.
Ascent to the Divine is our birth right. Only don't know where to look, what to see, the
Now we have to realise that we have
come to this state of human awareness up to
a point where we find we are lost. These
days in the modern times, we are very much
confused because there are so many ideas
afloat. All these ideas confuse us and we
thing we must reach that state of awareness
where we become aware of higher seeking drastically that it is difficult for us to keep up
within us. First as a human being we seek
food, then protection, house, possessions,
money, power-and then we find that all
these things even if you have achieved you
have not been able to achieve what you all He has to do something about it. It's no
wanted-thal is the state of joy, and thus
you start seeking furthermore to find out
what should be that state in which you
Vremain in complete joy.
value systems have changed rapidly so
and cope with it. Despite all that, it seems
that there must be some hope for us: after all
God, God who has created this Universe
must be worried about this creation. After
tise only our worrying about it, or being
aware of the shocks, the future shocks that
we may receive because of the mistakes we
have committed before. It is He who has
Many people have no idea as to what to made us and it is He who works out every-
expect and also they are quite naive about thing for us. For example, we believe that we
the structure or the nature of this tree of life do this and we do that. What we do is the
which is built within us. Now what I'm going work of the dead to the dead. We do not do
to tell you is the Knowledge of the Roots. any living work. We cannot transform one
So far with our developments we only know flower into a fruit. But you see in different
the Knowledge of the Tree, but we have to seasons we find different types of flowers,
know the Knowledge of the Roots which
sustains this tree. If we do not know that every child that is born has something to do
Knowledge, it may be one day this great tree with the society, with the parents, with the
that we see which seems to be quite secure, country where it is born, it is such a big
may completely be destroyed. So it is impor- selection that it is inmpossible to find out who
tant for everyone to have that Knowledge of could have done it with such tremendous
different types of fruits coming in. we find
47
Nirmała Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-49.txt 
 powers of accuracy. A child is conceived in
a Mother's womb, is a very big miracle itself
Mother Earth, and the seed has a capacity to
become the plant and the Mother Earth has
to all the medical science because nor- a capacity to sprout it. In the same way, this
mally everything that is foreign is thrown happening has to take place. Today that time
has come. 7 hat time has come, the time of
formed in the body, it is not thrown out, on judgement has come and at this time we
the contrary it is preserved, looked after, have to see that we'll be judging ourselves,
nourished and thrown out af the time when but not by some sort of a weight or some
sort of an authority, but by something which
thing that we see everyday, but somehow is within us which we call as the Kundalini,
is placed in the triangular bone called as sac-
rum. Just see, Greeks knew about it, that's
why they called this bone as sacrum. But
what is this bone in the biblical understan-
out of the body but when the foetus is
it is fully matured. This is such a remarkable
or other we take everything for granted
Human beings if they look at themselves,
they'll be amazed how beautifully we are
made. This is something special about us. ding-it is the reflection of the Holy Ghost.
We know so many things more than the we have to understand that if there is a
An animal can pass through a
animals do.
Father God and a Son-there has to be a
Mother. So this is the primordial Mother who
is the Holy Ghost and She is reflected within
us as the Kundalini. In our heart is reflected
dirty lane, he cannot understand any architec-
ture, he cannot understand any colours, any
beauty, but we human beings have so many
ideas and also abstract ideas. But beyond the God Almighty. It is He who is the witness
this is a state where you reach into an
absolute state-so far still we live in a relative
world. Whatever we know is so relative that
it is difficult to decide really what is right
and what is wrong. Relatively we can say
alright, this is little right and this is little
wrong. But we cannot absolutely say that
this is right and this is wrong. Here then we
start thinking-are we really fully evolved?
We are not. We are not evolved. And when
of whatever we are doing. This power manif-
ests everything within us and then resides
in a sleeping state in that triangular bone and
is said to be residual because it has not yet
manifested itself. This is the power of our
desire which is true and the only desire we
have which is pure, Because all other desires
are not true. If they were true, any one of
them when satisfied, we would not have
desired for anything else. But it is not so-
as you know in economics that wants in
general are not satiable. So you want to have
something today, then we want to have another
thing tomorrow. But once the desire of beco-
I say this you shauld take it as an hypothesis
with a very open mind of a scientist. And
then if it is proved you have to accept it as a
law, not before that.
It is very hard to believe that we can ming one with the Divine manifests then you
become the Spirit. This is one of the big don't want anything-you want to give. Like
myths of modern times and many a times
when I speak about becoming the Spirit
people say that-how can you say like that,
how can it be that easy-but it is a living Spirit by giving them peace and bliss: Today
process of our evolution and if it is done by we talk of peace. But how can we have
the power of a living God, then it has to be peace with the people who are so distur-
very simple, has to be very easy-like if you bed. We have to have transformation of
have to sprout a seed you just put it in the human beings, who should feel peaceful
you want to be the Ilight and then you
become the Ilight that emits light and emanci-
pates others-raises them to the level of their
Nirmala Yoga
43
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-50.txt 
 within themselves and should feel that they
are the ones who are part and parcel of the
whole But this should not be a conception
when She rises, She actually fulfis the need
of everyY subtle centre that supplies to your
gross centres, because these are the abstract
or we can say are the subtle centres which
are first fulfilled and they look after your
plexuses, that's how you get healed automa-
tically, It is you who heal yourself, not me.
Fm just a catalyst you can say, like ane
enlightened light can enlighten another one.
or a mental projection. Because mental pro-
jection can disappear in no time. Like you
would believe that this particular person is my
friend but you discover that he is not and the
whole mental projection drops out
So all mental projections are artificial, they
last for a short time and disappear. But this is
a happening that has to take place within us
when we become the Spirit. It is the question
of you feeling that Spirit on your central
nervous system.
and once you are enlightened. you can
enlighten another person. That is how it is.
So there is no obligation. There is no give
and take. It's like we are part and parcel of
the whole. Now we have, say, a problem on
So in our evolutionary pr0-
cess whatever happened to us has happened a linger. What do we do? We just rub that
to our central nervous system, and that is finger and find that we feel better. But have
we any way obliged this finger? Because it
is part and parcel of you it just spontaneously
has happened and has worked out. In the
same way it happens to you also that you get
what Christ has exactly said when he said
you are to be barn again. He didn't say that
you just ask somebody to do an exercise of
putting some water on top of your head-
3nd then say now you are baptised. No.
There is a true baptism of the real awaken-
this Realisation automatically.
Now the mass evolution has started and
ing of this Kundalini passing through these there are many who have got Realisation
six centres above, piercing through your like that. I'm happy to know in England also
fontanale bane area and giving you the we have at least two to three thousand
of the breeze of the people who are realised very well, who are
Holy Ghost coming out of your own head established, but there may be much more
who have got Realisation, but then you have
to establish yourself like a tree. Once you
yourself and you have to seek the truth, and establish Ilike a tree you can give Realisation
not something that just satisfies yau for the to others and you can give them peace and
the whole thing is such a transformed per-
sonality-because the second thing that
experience
true
and this cannot be by just putting water
by somebody. It has to happen within
time being.
That's why even if you profess any religion
we find we don't have much transformation happens to you when you become the Spirit
within. But here you become the Spirit, the
light of the Spirit we can say, on our central
nervous system just guides you. Like first of
all when this Kundalini rises She passes
that you become so powertul that nothing
dominates you.
There is no habit that can dominate you.
No temptation can dominate you and you
become very powerlul, But at the same
time you are extremely compassionatê, you
Nothing dominates you.
through these centres on the physical level
and you get physical health. Some people are extremely kind, so it is a very compassia-
say, Mother, you heal us or cure us-is not
true. It is your own Kundalini. It's your own
Mother within you.
nate power that you develop of the Spirit and
you become a new personality, a wonderful
personality. We know when we have Christ-
mas, when we have Easter, we give eggs to
Everybody has an individual Mother,
Nirmala Yoga
49
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-51.txt 
 people. This denotes the Resurrection of cool breeze coming out. But if you want to
Christ as our own Resurrection, that an egg find about Hitler, you might get a blister or
has to become the bird. It is symbolic of that.
That we are like eggs when we are closed,
when we have this l'ness within us, and out and gradually you become absolutely
then suddenly when this happens to us, this wise in the sense you become absolute and
egg becomes the bird and you become com- you understand:
pletely free and you know what freedom is.
Freedom is no licence but freedom which is
absolutely not curbing anybody's freedom
nor is giving you any bondages, It is some-
thing so great it should happen to all of us.
a heat on your hands and you'll feel horrible
about it. So that is how you start working it
Just now if you look at a person how will
you find out who is right and who is wrong?
But when this happens to you, you dan't
have to know about him. On his centres you
know because you become collectively consc-
We have had many great saints in this jous, You become, again I say, it is a beco-
country, I would like to mention VWilliam ming. you becomie collectively conscious, you
Blake who was a great saint and who saw
all this happening long time back, two hun-
dred years back-and He wrote about it
that such and such time will come when men
of God will become prophets and these
can know about your own centres and you
can know about the centres of others. And
when you feel the centres of others, you
know what the problem is, you don't talk
like other people talk, but you talk in the
prophets will have powers to make others language of centres. This is exactly what
prophets. He has said so many things that happened to the disciples of Christ when
time has cone today for England to rise as
He has desired and described. That time is
they were blessed by the Holy Ghost, the
cool breeze came on them, they started
here today now at this time you should get speaking in strange languages. And the
your Realisation-you'll realise that now you
have entered into that Kingdom of God. We
have also many people, we can say even
Mohammed Sahib has said that At the
time of Resurrection your hands will speak.
Exactly this happens, that when you get your
same thing you'll find with Sahaja Yogis that
they speak in a strange language in the sense
that they talk in the language of the centres,
and they start: using their hands in a way
because the hand has got the power flowing,
and they use it to bind it up and that looks
Realisation, when the Kundalini comes up, very strange and at that time also it looked
and She touches the seat of God here imm-
very strange so people started saying that
they are mad people, they are doing some
ediately in your heart the reflection of God
starts emitting cool vibrations from your sort of funny actions.
hands also, When it starts happening you
are amazed that all around you feel the
subtle power of God, the power of His love, happen, the time has come, it is the blossom-
what we call the all-pervading Brahma, what
we call the Chaitanya, that's how you start it was not the blossom time but it was the
feeling it and once you start feeling it you are time when there were hardly one or two
amazed that how you can find about anything. flowers on the tree of life, but today is
You become like a computer. As soon as you different-there are so many seekers all
want to find out whether it is right or wrong, aver
say you want to ask a question," Is there kinds of things, because as soon as they
God?"-Immediately you'll find there will be come to know, the negatives, that God has
So all this happens, it's very simple, has to
time; at that time I would say, in the early days,
the world though misled by all
Nirmala Yoga
50
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-52.txt 
 dacided to work it out, they have come in Forget the past. We are not to think about the
the market and they are selling their goods.
One must know that you cannot sell God in happen to all of us.
the market. Secondly you cannot organise
God. But we are so much used to it. paying the knowledge is like an ocean. I cannot in
for everything that we can't understand that this short time tell you all about it, would
we can get something without paying.
But think of a seed which we sow in the lectures in English language which have
Mother Earth. What do we do? Do we pay given all over the places, and I would req-
anything? Does it understand money? Do
living processes understand money? Do you
think God understands money? You can't pay
for it. If you put this one small little test,-99
per cent of these bogus people will disappear ache, and if I tell you about the electricity,
from the scene. But we don't think. we don't the history of the electricity, the connections
use our brains, we go headlong into it On of electricity, the sources of electricity. you'll
the contrary they will ask thousands of ques- be led up. First of all, let us have the light.
tions to me but to these people who have
taken thousands of pounds and have finished understand, and you'll have much patience.
them off they don't ask äny question. They Sol would request you first to have the light
just go headlong into it, ruin their lives, get We can try it, I cannot guarantee, I must say,
into epilepsies and all kinds of diseases, then i cannot guarantee to everyone-is something
they come to me and I find that they are in a that works out but may not work out also.
very bad shape. But doesn't matter. what- As far as possible, we should try and let us
ever has happened has happened. Nobody see what happens to us and if it works out
should feel guilty about it. That's one condi-
tion of Sahaja Yoga is that we should not
feel guilty, We have to be in the present.
past. And at this present moment this should
Now the subject matter is so great and
say there must be at least two thousand
uest you first of all to get the light within
you.
Like this room when it is not lighted and
if I tell you about this room it will bea head-
Once we hava the light it's much easier to
that would be really a very great pleasure for
me.
May God bless you all.
FESTIVALS
Date (English)
Name
(Shalivahan) date
Navrātri
Puja
Dassehra
4th October to
12th October
12th October
Ashvin Shudda Pratipada to Dashami.
(from 1st to 10th day of bright fortnight of
Ashvin) Hawan is Performed on the 7th
day, that is, on 10th October.
Ashvin Paurnima (full moon day in the
month of Ashvin) Puja is offered to Shri
Lakshmi. In the late night and Bhajans are
sung till early hours.
Ashvin Amävasyā. (The new moon night
of month Ashvin
Kärtika Paurnima (the full moon day of
Kartika Month)
Margasheersh Shuddha Chaturdashi (the
fourteenth Day of bright fortnight of the
month of Margasheersha)
Kojagiri Paurnima
17th October
Lakshmi Puja
1st November
Birthday of Guru Nanak
16th November
Birthday of Shri
Dattatray
15th December
Birthday of Shri Jesus
25th December
Nirmala Yoga
51
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-53.txt 
 "The Right Heart and the Qualities of Leadership'
"The Lord God Almighty is Absolute tenor of his entire life was sarvice and duty.
And his brothers served him in this-and in
Sovereign of the Universe". Amen.
The Movement in the unconscious is always this he was supported by the Shri Ganesha
from left to right to centre. The heart chakra tattva-whose motto is also service, duty,
in both left and centre represents divine purity, and support.
protection and a sense of security, translated
in human terms into protection by the parents. Sahaja Yogi and one's right heart catches,
In the Right heart; this becomes protection it is not all service and duty and unselfishness
of the Father and the King-or Leader in
modern terms-And its ruling deity is the not 'we but rather an "I" is keeping in. Right
Lord Rama, as Incarnation of the Lord Vishnu, sided negativity always ends up in the Ego:
sustainer and pervader of the universe.
It is well known that in all his incarnations,
and in his unincarnated state the Lord Vishnu greatest. "Akbar"-the comparative form of
serves eternally the needs of the universe
and his Mother the Shri Adishakti unstintingly absolute the beyond). And both are epithets
and unselfishly. One can never find a single
attempt at self glorification by the Lord; only
unstinting devotion, service, surrender and
submission to the Shri Adishakti and the blasphemous in his speech. But he who
Lord Absolute. He who is Lord of the power
of wealth-the Lakshmi tattva-takes none
The relevance of this is that if one is a
and devotion, to the Sangha of the collective:
*" can do this. "I" am this. Look how great
'am-But really it is the Virata which is
Kabir (great)-i.e. greater. (the greatest is the
of God as Virata, in the Koran. Hence one
who says "I" am great, without any reference
to the Virata, is anti-God in his essenceand
says, "We are Great" or "I am great only be-
cause I am part of the Virata and of God the
Almighty-and therefore serve Him taking
throughout the universe. In total detachment nothing for myself", is great. For Greatness
lies only in the Eyes of God-not of men-
and only He can confer this title, otherwise it is
futile, empty, imaginary. It is easy now to see
what a Right heart catch is, especially in a
he regulates the lines of the Universe, without
any personal attachment. In the Sahasrara
his Sahasrara is the Sahasrara of the Virata,
in the Mooladhara likewise. In the Agnya he
is Shri Mahavishnu, the Lord Christ, who
disposes all things and matters within the
Sahaja Yogi if he is a leader.
A Sahaja Yogi has to be very pure. There
is a story in Medi aeval Europe, that the Lord
Christ was like a Pelican, for it was believed,
The Lord Rama as king always served, and that the Mother Pelican nurtured her children
sought for himself neither wealth, nor glory, by taking blood from her own heart and
nor comfort, as Maryada Purushottama-he feeding them. It is a beautiful story, born of
Universe.
was an example to his people-and conscious
the Unconscious, indicating how, at the level
of being so-voluntarily, took on the 14 year of Centre Heart, the Omkara takes on the
exile in the forest, and the exile of his wife
virtues and qualities of his Mother the Shri
a form and aspect of the Shri Adi Shakti. He Adishakti, and out of "profoundest', love for
surrendered to his children-and through Her, feeds Her children-with the Love and
them became the Father of Nations. If one blood of his own Heart. A Sahaja Yogi leader
searches the whole Ramayana it would be needs also to be like this-for leadership is
not leading but serving-with the blood of
Lord became or behaved selfishly-For the the heart-and an impure heart cannot lead,
(contd. on Page 37)
impossible to find. one example where the
Nirmala Yoga
52
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-54.txt 
 Sahaja in Europe: An overview
opean have been spoiled. They have enjoyed in recent years a succession of
umentous pujas and public programmes with Shri Bhagavati Mataji. The Void (Europe)
as to be somewhat cleared, the Nabhi (right: France/Germany, left: Austria/Italy) and the
Heart (left: England) has to be strengthened before Vishuddhi (USA) can mainfest; before
the Kundalini (India) can express the full strength of her ascending power. Thus Shri
Mataji gave special care and attention to the European organs of the Viratakalki to come.
Here are a few recollections.
Sahasrara day 1985 in Vienna. Tremendous. The bandhan from Shri Mataji digs a
hole in the heavy rain clouds which were hanging over the city. All around: clouds. On
Vienna: sunshine and blue sky. In the castle of the born realised Empress Maria-Theresia.
Shri Mataji tells us we have to settle down in our own dimension that is nirvikalpa
samadhi. Sunshine, sahasrara shine, sun sahasrara. Sahaja Yoga in Austria is: doing
well with the fourth ashram soon opening in Vienna and Herbert opening a new center in
the city of Graz. In Munich (Germany), Hugo and his group held the fort.
Ganesha puja in Rome. A bath of overflowing bhajans and devotion. I missed it,
alas, but could escort Shri Mataji in Venice a few days later. where huge crowds had been
drawn to Her programme by positive Italian radio and television reporting. In the mean-
time, programmes and seminars organized by Yogis in Mailand and Venice have been
successful.
Guru puja 1985 near Paris witnessed the wrath of the SatgurJ. Awesome. But since
then, France, with Patrick as a new leader. has improved a lot. There is also, in the
congress house in Versailles, a nice inaugural ceremony for the French new version of "the
Advent", Mr. C.P. Shrivastava carries the hall with a confident, forceful statement on
Sahaja Yoga's crucial role in today's troubled world. Shri Mataji Rajya Laxshmi is royal as
ever. The book which is published commercially, sells well.
In the summer, two major pujas take place in England. A Ganesha puja again, in
Brighton and the Vishnumaya puja in Wimbledon. Brighton station resounds with the
conches, the cheers, the jai jai kar and the songs of hundreds of sahaja yogis. Both the
speeches of Shri Mataji must be meditated upon by all of us, again and again.
Switzerland had been blessed in 1984 by two pujas in the mountains: Guru puja in
Leysin and Ganesha puja at the feet of a titanic Swayambhu Ganesha, the Matterhorn
(meaning: "the Mother's top"). the most famous mountain of Europe. In 1985 again,
Shri Mataji graces us with a Navratri puja in Weggis, at the geographic and historical core
of the country. The Goddess seats on the tiger, holds the swords and...a gun! The Havan
is out of the world, higher on the mountain, above a sea of clouds. The Swiss nucleus of
sahaja yogis is good but Swiss people are still very slow in opening themselves to Reality.
Durga's coming helped to clear out a lot of poisons (Switzerland being the gall-bladder).
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-55.txt 
 Magistered with the Registrar of Newapapers undet Regd. No 35999(8!
and dut
ris-and i
At last. and again in Italy, Diwali puja takes place near Rome in November 198
festival of light is celebrated with bubbling joy. The meeting at the airport betwee
Mataji arriving with a plane full of British sahaja yogis and the European who are waitinuty
cannot be described. We will never forget it. Mataji, Mataji, your face shines like é
thiousand suns. In Her speech, Shri Mataji says that the sahaja yogis are responsible for
keeping their lamps all right no smoke should blacken the face of God! Finally, Mother,
during a shopping evening, buys (very cheaply) the same (superb) pair of shoes to Guido.
Engelbert and myself. We hard ly dare to walk in it.
Caneshi
Seminars deserve a special mention as an effective tool for strengthening inner growth
and collective developments. The third European seminar near Colmar, in April 1986, is
attended by around 400 people from more than ten nations. Great vibrations, great fun.
With a puja to Shri Vishnu, this encounter is conceived as a preparation for the sixteenth
Sahasrara iday.
About 600 yogis and yoginis flocked to this extraordinary ceremony in the Italian alps.
near the Swiss border, in a region which had already been graced in September 1984, by
an Ekadesha Rudra puja to Shri Mataji. An anticyclone arrived from England, at the same
time as Shri Mataji, to blow away eastwards the radioactive cloud which was drifting over
Europe after the nuclear catastrophy of Chernobyl in the USSR. When Shri Mataji artives to
the place, between two meter high walls of snow all the conches blow triumphantly, the
smog clears out and a touch of sunshine lights up fifteen meters golden statue of the
Goddess as "Our Lady of Europe" which overlooks the site. This same night, we all enjoy
a unique session of bhajans and dances, vibrant with love and intensity, and of a
high
musical quality. Songs of praises from all the countries, including Algeria and Spain, are
offered to the Lotus Feet of the Divine Mother. She is prasanna. And we all beam like...
children of God.
During Her puja speech. Shri Mataji stresses how important it is for us to drop all the
concepts of the Unconscious within. To evolve from self knowledge to self consciousness,
we are to be more awake, more alert by activating our witness power. The brain represents
the principle of Shri Vishnu, which in the sahasrara of the true yogi. is totally surrenderted
to Adi Shakti.
Last but not least I have to say a word about our hosts. In presenting a beautiful
programme of songs and dance, in decorating the puja hall with exquisite taste, in organiz-
ing everything so smoothly, the Italian sahaja yogis deserve our admiration. We really feel
that sahaja yoga is on the move in Italy. A TV journalist, a saleswoman in a shop
approached Shri Mataji in Mailand asking respectfullyT "Are you la grande Madre" (the
great Mother)7 May I please have my realisation?"
Indian of the European countries. He loved it.
. I told Guido that Italy is the most
-Gregoire
Edited & Published by Sh. 5.C. Rai 43, Bunglow Road, Delhi-110007 â& Printed at The Central Electric
Press, 80-D. Kamia Negar, Dalhi-110007, One saue Rs. 9,00, Annuel Subscription Rs. B1.00
Forelgn (by Aemail £ 7 $ 14)
