Shri Mahalakshmi Puja 3rd February 1985 Date : Warnali Place Type Puja Speech Language English CONTENTS | Transcript | 02 - 04 English 05 - 05 Marathi Hindi || Translation English Hindi Marathi

 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT ENGLISH TALK Today is the time when you have to depart and go to the other side of this country to see a very beautiful scenic place. But I'll be going to a Ratnagiri to my program. I hope you are not been torture to much in your tour! After all we have 250 persons something, is too big! But somehow you all have been very considerate & co-operative that you all took all inconveniences with such pleasant faces. One has to understand that when we have love we can adjust ourselves into any circumstances & we can leave with so many people without feeling the inconveniences. But to feel, that love for another person. The love, that is without lust & greed. The love that is pure. You have to with the spirit. The comfortable spirit. Not to comfort outside. So it is such a correlated thing, that first your spirit has to achieve a certain state and there the spirit has to reach a certain understanding of another person to the spirit. Not to the mind, not to the body, not to the circumstances, but through the spirit. When you feel the other spirit, you get the satisfaction of the spirit and not of the body. This is a very subtle point, which sometime we miss. When we start judging others we don't see the spirit. What we see? How he walk, how he talk, how he behaves, but actually that is all outside. The inner being is the spirit and if you can feel the inner being then you will be realize that inner being, ifit is beautiful you enjoy it the most. This time I must say you started on a very high note of understanding of each other and also of Indian's. The subtlety of the spiritual growth is that once start feeling integrate with the truth, with the humanity. The humanity becomes a part & parcel of your being. This is the subtle side of the truth. Then you don't think of the person as outside bad, outside good, but you thought understanding the goodness of a person through your spirit, by which you generate more goodness on that person. But supposing somebody absolutely useless & good for nothing, such a person is thrown out of organization of spiritual growth, which is a living. Like in nature, you will find whatever is not wanted is thrown. A calyx of a flower does not play any role in a making of a fruit, the calyx is thrown out. In the same way, a person who does not play any role in the collective attainment of his own, the useless things are thrown out automatically. All useful things are retain & all wasteful things are thrown. So, one must understand that integrity to oneself is very important. There has been some reporting about people not understanding. For ex. One should not feel that you have come here for a holiday. Then you have to also understand that certain protocols in sahajayoga. For eg. husband & wife. They should understand that they have come here for their individual growth & not together. They should not oppose such a thing when it is ... uncivilized, to disturb others by their behavior. They have not come to spend a holiday but they have come here to achieve something individually. If that is understood then you will not .... that you are .... or so called comforts. Pleasures are temporary ..... into .... But the eternal life is that in which you live without doing anything & in a state of complete possessiveness, complete oneness, with complete concord in the music of God's flute. To deploying yourself of that is stupid & foolish. So, those who object also to such a glow, such an understanding are actually going against themselves. They should not try to disturb us. Is be India has very subtle vibrations. It has very subtle spiritual understanding. It's like you are entering into a deep roots of spirituality. And it is very different type of culture also you should see that. And that only can be understood if you develop your innocence. That why these peoples are so innocent. And if he heard when you tell them we will not have our food today. They think over that you are unhappy or something had got wrong. They can never understand that you are saying no to the food because you are full. That's not done anything. Is a bad manner to say that will not have the food. Can you imagine! Is a regarded very bad manner to say that will not have any food because then

 Original Transcript : English people feel that we must have done something wrong that they are feeling this way. So as a simple thing I would say guideline, when you don't want have your food. It's alright, but you can come there and eat a little bit at least so that they feel you are the ..... Because they feel all the time inside themselves, Oh, God, why didn't he eat? He is without food. He is starving himself. And they feel very heart. Is a system built in within us. So natural to us that if you are angry we don't eat our food. Or supposing we are angry in the house then we start doing some work which we are never done before like we will start washing, or doing cleaning then people know we are angry. That's the sign of anger shown. But it's natural style I think because they are very natural people. But then unnatural styles are different. Suppose somebody comes or a child comes saying, 'Mummy, I am not going to eat the food.' Then the mother will say, alright, it's good. Doesn't matter. But here the mother will ask, why? What's the matter? Why don't you eat? What is the problem? What will you have? I'll do this, I'll give you that. Supposing child comes outside ... all kinds of A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H everything kept there. He can have what only life. No bother. He does feel happy because he has a job. But he is very unhappy inside because nobody bother about him. Then it's become a part & parcel of being personality and don't mind. So many things people do not mind in the west and I am amazed that, How they can 6. you tolerate these things? Where people neglect you. Where people say harsh things. Where people do not even offer a cup of tea to you. But people don't mind in the west. Another thing even if it comes to telling lies, we don't mind to tell people, that we should not heart them. Like supposing I am in the house and there are many people who come to see me know. We don't want to hurt them then there is no sin in telling them that mother is not here. You better go away. Because they won't feel hurt. But if you say She is here, but She will not see. It will hurt. So, this kind of honesty also is lacking here. That everything tells them on their faces. Whether they like it or not. It's jar a human nature. And once you start you start jarring human nature all the delicacies and all the beauties of their character disappears and they become like charcoals. They cannot feel anything. That is sensitive, that is subtle, and that is beautiful. One after .. .shocks starts coming into childhood. Then they become absolutely immune. There is no sankoch, there is no formality, inner don't formality, not outside formality. Sankoch is not formality, but it is an inner formality, that you feel like same things, how can you say to him. Child comes to your house and he spilt some milk or something on your carpet. Immediately somebody will come and clean and it is a presence of the mother. This we will not do. To us carpet is not more important. The more important thing is that mother, she should not feel hurt? These things, material thing should not normally important to western people. Because they are so materially develop that they can always better replacement of their carpet. Doesn't matter. But they don't mind. Hurting another person something material prevail which is absolutely prevail us of no value. The culture of the spirit has to be developed. And the culture of the spirit lying in this country. It was once upon a time in the west also. But you have lost. But there has so many qualities you have which Indian's have to learn. You are very intelligent. You understand Sahaja Yoga is the only way you can save the world. You have so many qualities that I cannot really in one line tell you all those things that the qualities western people have. Only things what is the inner spiritual culture which one has to learn, when you talk, when you speak, when you have the report, like in India if an elder brother told, shouted nobody feels bad at all. This is expected. They never talk to children lots. Children don't like the parents. If somebody elder, leader say something to you they don't think he is bossing. This is important. It is very individualistic culture we have in the west & that's why we have problems. While the collective culture doesn't take this there. Now while be existing once upon a time they had balls & kings, when they had calamities they all to use join together & wok it out. But now there is, at the situation is that there is no collective culture. And today I will request you to develop that culture within yourself, collective culture. And in that collective culture we will see that we will enjoy each other's company much more than anything else on the .... Without having any lust, greed, any impurities just you will enjoy each other's company. 3

 Original Transcript : English That collective culture is to be imbibed and to be brought it within yourself. Nobody mind any discomfort when he didn't love. But that is ...., while you have to have spiritually and that collective culture slowly if all the sahaja yogis of the west can imbibed I tell you can give a great leadership to the whole world. Because that's the only thing lacking in the west. That's the only thing they have to achieve is a collective culture. Complete love & understand, complete integration, possessiveness. This time group has been very, very nice. I was so surprised that 50% have new people but so good. The quality of good people is so very good. They are not mediocre and I could feel a oneness which they are moving. So now we are within forward another very important occasion. And in that we have to see that they have 51 marriages will have to perform. So everybody should learn to enjoy those 51 marriages. May be, there have may be some problems, something, may not be that efficient, of course...... always work out very well, maybe, but try to enjoy every bit of it. Open you heart. Try to enjoy every bit of it the collective marriages of 51 peoples. And individually you will find all of them having a very beautiful expression and very beautiful aspiration & the whole thing will be very beautiful, if you have that collective understanding in yourself. Otherwise, I didn't get this, I didn't get that, last time the marriages were very beautiful. I mean say the jungle I have..., along the seashore behind the huge marriages. Try to enjoy each & try to make it a success. And after marriages also we must remember that if he cannot make two persons live together happily, how are we going to make the whole world live together? So both perfected, the situation has the wife & the husband two different personality of different temperament have to live together to show to the world that is two persons cannot live how can the whole world live? And these two persons make symbolic expressions of that unity about which I say. You being all realized soul. You should bring have a very nice time after your marriage. But too much of everything is bad. Must keep a control. Should not go too much.... Must keep a kind of control. And if you keep a kind of control then you will enjoy the marriage in his fullness. So we are looking forward to that great occasion of 51 marriages. I hope it going to 51, that's how we have 49 people. I must say that Warren has then a good job out of this. Actually he wants to buy me a present for the wedding; I think he should have it, instead of me. He has really done wonderful thing and I shoot of like a stars from here to there and I find out person one from Asia, another from Timbuktu and hejust accept it and it works out. It works out. So, I hope we will try to co-operate, made co-operate with the spirit. Co-operate with this great moment of the whole world. In this to know your responsibility that this marriage you are doing for sahaja yoga. For the emancipation of the whole humanity & that's how if you understand your responsibility you will understand that marriage is not for yourself, for your own comforts or anything. It is further comfort for the whole world. May God Bless You! 4

 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT MARATHI TALK आता मराठीत काय सांगायचे, की ह्या इतक्या सुरम्य स्थानी तुम्ही आलात आणि इथे जगताप साहेबांनी आपली इतकी सुंदर व्यवस्था केली आहे. त्यांना कितीही धन्यवाद दिले तरी पूरे पडणार नाहीत. इतकं प्रेमाने सगळ्यांना दिले आणि केले. त्याबद्दल हे सगळे सहजयोगी इतके आश्चर्यचकित झाले, की आपल्या देशात असा असेल तर किती होऊ शकेल! एवढे प्रेमाने वागून, सगळ्यांची प्रेमाने व्यवस्था करणे हे फार जर एकतरी मनुष्य मोठे काम आहे. हे ह्यांनी साधलेले आहे. त्याची ह्यांना कमाल वाटते. तसेच तुम्ही लोकांनी इतकी मेहनत केली, सगळ्यांनी ब्रह्मपुरीलाही येऊन इतकी सुंदर व्यवस्था केली. जंगलामध्ये. नंतर इथेही सगळ्यांची इतकी व्यवस्था केली. खूप मेहनत घेतलीत. आम्ही तुम्हाला काय देणार? काय विशेष देणार आहोत ? इतके तुम्ही रात्रंदिवस आटोकाट प्रयत्न करता. इथे एक पाटील साहेब आहेत. ते सहजयोगी नव्हते, पण त्यांनी एवढी मदत केली आहे. ह्या लोकांची तुम्ही केवढी सेवा केलेली आहे. त्याबद्दल मी तुमची ऋणी आहे. फार ऋणी आहे. अनेकदा सांगितलं तुम्ही, की माताजी, तुम्ही ह्याचा उल्लेख करावा. आम्हाला ह्यांच्याबद्दल फार आदर वाटतो. आम्हाला वाटते फार मोठे ह्या लोकांनी केलेले आहे. किती त्यागी लोकं आहेत ! आम्ही इतके करू शकत नाही. तेव्हा आज आपला शेवटचा दिवसच म्हटला पाहिजे टूरचा. कारण ही मंडळी निघालेली आहेत ह्या सर्वांच्या वतीने मी आपले फार फार आभार मानते. सगळ्यांचेच. एकएकाचे नाव सांगण्यासारखे नाही. पण मोदी साहेबांचे तुम्ही विशेषकरून आभार मानले पाहिजेत. 5



----------------------

19850203_Shri Mahalakshmi Puja_Warnali.pdf-page0.txt 
 Shri Mahalakshmi Puja
3rd February 1985
Date
:
Warnali
Place
Type
Puja
Speech
Language
English
CONTENTS
| Transcript
|
02 - 04
English
05 - 05
Marathi
Hindi
|| Translation
English
Hindi
Marathi
 19850203_Shri Mahalakshmi Puja_Warnali.pdf-page1.txt 
 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT
ENGLISH TALK
Today is the time when you have to depart and go to the other side of this country to see a very
beautiful scenic place. But I'll be going to a Ratnagiri to my program. I hope you are not been torture to
much in your tour! After all we have 250 persons something, is too big! But somehow you all have
been very considerate & co-operative that you all took all inconveniences with such pleasant faces.
One has to understand that when we have love we can adjust ourselves into any circumstances & we
can leave with so many people without feeling the inconveniences. But to feel, that love for another
person. The love, that is without lust & greed. The love that is pure. You have to with the spirit. The
comfortable spirit. Not to comfort outside.
So it is such a correlated thing, that first your spirit has to achieve a certain state and there the
spirit has to reach a certain understanding of another person to the spirit. Not to the mind, not to the
body, not to the circumstances, but through the spirit. When you feel the other spirit, you get the
satisfaction of the spirit and not of the body. This is a very subtle point, which sometime we miss.
When we start judging others we don't see the spirit. What we see? How he walk, how he talk, how he
behaves, but actually that is all outside. The inner being is the spirit and if you can feel the inner being
then you will be realize that inner being, ifit is beautiful you enjoy it the most.
This time I must say you started on a very high note of understanding of each other and also of
Indian's. The subtlety of the spiritual growth is that once start feeling integrate with the truth, with the
humanity. The humanity becomes a part & parcel of your being. This is the subtle side of the truth.
Then you don't think of the person as outside bad, outside good, but you thought understanding the
goodness of a person through your spirit, by which you generate more goodness on that person. But
supposing somebody absolutely useless & good for nothing, such a person is thrown out of
organization of spiritual growth, which is a living. Like in nature, you will find whatever is not wanted
is thrown. A calyx of a flower does not play any role in a making of a fruit, the calyx is thrown out. In
the same way, a person who does not play any role in the collective attainment of his own, the useless
things are thrown out automatically. All useful things are retain & all wasteful things are thrown.
So, one must understand that integrity to oneself is very important. There has been some
reporting about people not understanding. For ex. One should not feel that you have come here for a
holiday. Then you have to also understand that certain protocols in sahajayoga. For eg. husband &
wife. They should understand that they have come here for their individual growth & not together.
They should not oppose such a thing when it is ...
uncivilized, to disturb others by their behavior. They have not come to spend a holiday but they have
come here to achieve something individually. If that is understood then you will not .... that you are
.... or so called comforts. Pleasures are temporary ..... into .... But the eternal life is that in which
you live without doing anything & in a state of complete possessiveness, complete oneness, with
complete concord in the music of God's flute. To deploying yourself of that is stupid & foolish. So,
those who object also to such a glow, such an understanding are actually going against themselves.
They should not try to disturb us. Is be
India has very subtle vibrations. It has very subtle spiritual understanding. It's like you are
entering into a deep roots of spirituality. And it is very different type of culture also you should see
that. And that only can be understood if you develop your innocence. That why these peoples are so
innocent. And if he heard when you tell them we will not have our food today. They think over that you
are unhappy or something had got wrong. They can never understand that you are saying no to the
food because you are full. That's not done anything. Is a bad manner to say that will not have the food.
Can you imagine! Is a regarded very bad manner to say that will not have any food because then
 19850203_Shri Mahalakshmi Puja_Warnali.pdf-page2.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
people feel that we must have done something wrong that they are feeling this way. So as a simple
thing I would say guideline, when you don't want have your food. It's alright, but you can come there
and eat a little bit at least so that they feel you are the ..... Because they feel all the time inside
themselves, Oh, God, why didn't he eat? He is without food. He is starving himself. And they feel very
heart.
Is a system built in within us. So natural to us that if you are angry we don't eat our food. Or
supposing we are angry in the house then we start doing some work which we are never done before
like we will start washing, or doing cleaning then people know we are angry. That's the sign of anger
shown. But it's natural style I think because they are very natural people. But then unnatural styles are
different. Suppose somebody comes or a child comes saying, 'Mummy, I am not going to eat the food.'
Then the mother will say, alright, it's good. Doesn't matter. But here the mother will ask, why? What's
the matter? Why don't you eat? What is the problem? What will you have? I'll do this, I'll give you
that. Supposing child comes outside ... all kinds of A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H everything kept there. He
can have what only life. No bother. He does feel happy because he has a job. But he is very unhappy
inside because nobody bother about him. Then it's become a part & parcel of being personality and
don't mind. So many things people do not mind in the west and I am amazed that, How they can
6.
you
tolerate these things? Where people neglect you. Where people say harsh things. Where people do not
even offer a cup of tea to you. But people don't mind in the west.
Another thing even if it comes to telling lies, we don't mind to tell people, that we should not heart
them. Like supposing I am in the house and there are many people who come to see me know. We don't
want to hurt them then there is no sin in telling them that mother is not here. You better go away.
Because they won't feel hurt. But if you say She is here, but She will not see. It will hurt. So, this kind
of honesty also is lacking here. That everything tells them on their faces. Whether they like it or not.
It's jar a human nature. And once you start you start jarring human nature all the delicacies and all the
beauties of their character disappears and they become like charcoals. They cannot feel anything.
That is sensitive, that is subtle, and that is beautiful. One after .. .shocks starts coming into
childhood. Then they become absolutely immune. There is no sankoch, there is no formality, inner
don't
formality, not outside formality. Sankoch is not formality, but it is an inner formality, that
you
feel like same things, how can you say to him. Child comes to your house and he spilt some milk or
something on your carpet. Immediately somebody will come and clean and it is a presence of the
mother. This we will not do. To us carpet is not more important. The more important thing is that
mother, she should not feel hurt? These things, material thing should not normally important to
western people. Because they are so materially develop that they can always better replacement of
their carpet. Doesn't matter. But they don't mind. Hurting another person something material prevail
which is absolutely prevail us of no value. The culture of the spirit has to be developed. And the
culture of the spirit lying in this country. It was once upon a time in the west also. But you have lost.
But there has so many qualities you have which Indian's have to learn. You are very intelligent.
You understand Sahaja Yoga is the only way you can save the world. You have so many qualities that I
cannot really in one line tell you all those things that the qualities western people have. Only things
what is the inner spiritual culture which one has to learn, when you talk, when you speak, when you
have the report, like in India if an elder brother told, shouted nobody feels bad at all. This is expected.
They never talk to children lots. Children don't like the parents. If somebody elder, leader say
something to you they don't think he is bossing. This is important. It is very individualistic culture we
have in the west & that's why we have problems. While the collective culture doesn't take this there.
Now while be existing once upon a time they had balls & kings, when they had calamities they all
to use join together & wok it out. But now there is, at the situation is that there is no collective culture.
And today I will request you to develop that culture within yourself, collective culture. And in that
collective culture we will see that we will enjoy each other's company much more than anything else
on the .... Without having any lust, greed, any impurities just you will enjoy each other's company.
3
 19850203_Shri Mahalakshmi Puja_Warnali.pdf-page3.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
That collective culture is to be imbibed and to be brought it within yourself. Nobody mind any
discomfort when he didn't love. But that is ...., while you have to have spiritually and that collective
culture slowly if all the sahaja yogis of the west can imbibed I tell you can give a great leadership to the
whole world. Because that's the only thing lacking in the west. That's the only thing they have to
achieve is a collective culture. Complete love & understand, complete integration, possessiveness.
This time group has been very, very nice. I was so surprised that 50% have new people but so
good. The quality of good people is so very good. They are not mediocre and I could feel a oneness
which they are moving. So now we are within forward another very important occasion. And in that
we have to see that they have 51 marriages will have to perform. So everybody should learn to enjoy
those 51 marriages. May be, there have may be some problems, something, may not be that efficient,
of course...... always work out very well, maybe, but try to enjoy every bit of it. Open you heart. Try
to enjoy every bit of it the collective marriages of 51 peoples. And individually you will find all of
them having a very beautiful expression and very beautiful aspiration & the whole thing will be very
beautiful, if you have that collective understanding in yourself. Otherwise, I didn't get this, I didn't get
that, last time the marriages were very beautiful. I mean say the jungle I have..., along the seashore
behind the huge marriages. Try to enjoy each & try to make it a success. And after marriages also we
must remember that if he cannot make two persons live together happily, how are we going to make
the whole world live together? So both perfected, the situation has the wife & the husband two
different personality of different temperament have to live together to show to the world that is two
persons cannot live how can the whole world live? And these two persons make symbolic expressions
of that unity about which I say.
You being all realized soul. You should bring have a very nice time after your marriage. But too
much of everything is bad. Must keep a control. Should not go too much.... Must keep a kind of
control. And if you keep a kind of control then you will enjoy the marriage in his fullness. So we are
looking forward to that great occasion of 51 marriages. I hope it going to 51, that's how we have 49
people. I must say that Warren has then a good job out of this. Actually he wants to buy me a present
for the wedding; I think he should have it, instead of me. He has really done wonderful thing and I
shoot of like a stars from here to there and I find out person one from Asia, another from Timbuktu and
hejust accept it and it works out. It works out.
So, I hope we will try to co-operate, made co-operate with the spirit. Co-operate with this great
moment of the whole world. In this to know your responsibility that this marriage you are doing for
sahaja yoga. For the emancipation of the whole humanity & that's how if you understand your
responsibility you will understand that marriage is not for yourself, for your own comforts or
anything. It is further comfort for the whole world.
May God Bless You!
4
 19850203_Shri Mahalakshmi Puja_Warnali.pdf-page4.txt 
 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT
MARATHI TALK
आता मराठीत काय सांगायचे, की ह्या इतक्या सुरम्य स्थानी तुम्ही आलात आणि इथे जगताप साहेबांनी
आपली इतकी सुंदर व्यवस्था केली आहे. त्यांना कितीही धन्यवाद दिले तरी पूरे पडणार नाहीत. इतकं प्रेमाने
सगळ्यांना दिले आणि केले. त्याबद्दल हे सगळे सहजयोगी इतके आश्चर्यचकित झाले, की आपल्या देशात असा
असेल तर किती होऊ शकेल! एवढे प्रेमाने वागून, सगळ्यांची प्रेमाने व्यवस्था करणे हे फार
जर एकतरी
मनुष्य
मोठे काम आहे. हे ह्यांनी साधलेले आहे. त्याची ह्यांना कमाल वाटते. तसेच तुम्ही लोकांनी इतकी मेहनत केली,
सगळ्यांनी ब्रह्मपुरीलाही येऊन इतकी सुंदर व्यवस्था केली. जंगलामध्ये. नंतर इथेही सगळ्यांची इतकी व्यवस्था
केली. खूप मेहनत घेतलीत. आम्ही तुम्हाला काय देणार? काय विशेष देणार आहोत ? इतके तुम्ही रात्रंदिवस
आटोकाट प्रयत्न करता. इथे एक पाटील साहेब आहेत. ते सहजयोगी नव्हते, पण त्यांनी एवढी मदत केली आहे.
ह्या लोकांची तुम्ही केवढी सेवा केलेली आहे. त्याबद्दल मी तुमची ऋणी आहे. फार ऋणी आहे. अनेकदा
सांगितलं तुम्ही, की माताजी, तुम्ही ह्याचा उल्लेख करावा. आम्हाला ह्यांच्याबद्दल फार आदर वाटतो. आम्हाला
वाटते फार मोठे ह्या लोकांनी केलेले आहे. किती त्यागी लोकं आहेत ! आम्ही इतके करू शकत नाही.
तेव्हा आज आपला शेवटचा दिवसच म्हटला पाहिजे टूरचा. कारण ही मंडळी निघालेली आहेत ह्या सर्वांच्या
वतीने मी आपले फार फार आभार मानते. सगळ्यांचेच. एकएकाचे नाव सांगण्यासारखे नाही. पण मोदी साहेबांचे
तुम्ही विशेषकरून आभार मानले पाहिजेत.
5
