Nirmala Yoga July-August 1985 Bi-Monthly Vol. 5 No. 28 "Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns all the religions and seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga-THE UNION"

 NIRM ALA YOGA 43, Bungalow Road, Delhi-10007 (India) Founder : Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Editorial Board : Dr. S.K. Mathur, Sri A.S. Mishra, Sri R.D. Kulkarni Representatives RAJEN MAHARAJ, 26, Ocean St., Bondi, NSW 2026 Australia : INGE KELLY, Josef Melichargasse 20, 1210 VIENNA. : LORI & CARY HYNEK, 1540, Taylor Way, West Vancouver, B.C. VIS 1N4. : M. CERNAY, 175, Av. Ledru Rollin PARIS-75011. ANTONIO SARACINO, NIRMALA HOUSE, Localita Pichini s.n.s. 00010 S. Angelo Romano, ROMA : M.B. RATNANNWAR, 13, Merwan Mansion, Genjewala Lane, Borivali (W). BOMBAY-400092. Austria Canada France Italy India : JUAN ANTONIO DELGADO, Avenida De Burgos, 30, 1. A, MADRID-28036 Spain Switzerland : CHARLES & MRS. MAGDA MATHYS, 5, Chemin Des Mouldins, 1256, Troinex (Canton de Geneva). U. K. : GAVIN BROWN, Brown's Geological Information Services Ltd., 134 Great Portland Street, London WIN 5PH. IAN BASCOMBE, 32, Hooker Road, Exeter, Devon, England : CHRISTINE & MICHAEL PETRUNIA, 270, Jay Street (APT. 1-C). BROOKLYN, NY-11201. URSULA SEHLMEYER, 191 Canal ST. #23 SAN RAFAEL, CA-94901. U.S.A. CONT ENTS Page 1. Editorial 1 2. The importance of Dedication & Devotion 3. Ekadasha Rudra Puja 21 4. The Mother (Heart chakra) 27 5. Meditation (the individual journey towards collectivity & bliss) 6. Descent of the Ganga and the Shuddha Iccha 39 (Pure Desire) of the Universe ma back cover Front Cover : Shri Mataji (London, 6-8-82)

 Editorial In the first verse of the Hymns of Shri Dakshinamoorti, Adi-Shankaracharya has told us that the univarse is within the Self like the reflection of a city in mirror, but appears outside as dream seen in the sleep. In the second verse he tells, where the universe has originated from जगदिदं प्राहनिर्विकल्पंपुन, वैचिज्यचित्रीकृतम । बीजस्यान्तरिवांकूरो रमायाकल्पित देशकाल कलना मायावीव विजृम्भ यत्यपि महायोगीव यः स्वेच्छया, तस्मै इदं श्री दक्षिणामूर्तये ।। श्रीगुरुमूत्तय नम Beejasyäntari vankuro jagadidam Prank-nirvi kalpam-puna, Māryākalpita deshakäla kalanā vaichijya chitree krtam I Māyāveeva vijrumbha yatyapi Mahäyogeeva yah swechchhaya Tasmai Shri Gurumoortaye nama idam Shri Dakshinämoortaye II As seed contains the sprout, the universe was present in undifferentiated form before its creation. It becomes manifest in the differentiated form due to imagination of varied space-time relationship by the Maya. Salutations to that Guru Shri Dakshinamoorti who creates the universe just by his will as a juggler or Mahäyogi makes imaginary objects through his power. It is an observed fact. although an unsolved mystery, that the tree grows out of a tiny seed. If the seed is broken. the tree is not found in it but the tree is latent in the seed. Obviously seed is the origin of the tree. Shri Adi-Shankaracharya applies the same analogy to the universe of subjects-objects, seen to our eyes. Various scientific theories are well known regarding origin of the universe and the organic evolution from unicellular organism to the highest level of Homo-sapiens. There are Nirmala Yoga

 many theories found in the scriptures which broadly correspond to the scientific theories. According to Taitariya upanishad: from the ultimate reality, the Paramatma, came the Akash (The ether or space), the Vayu (Air) came from the Akash, the Agni (Fire) from Vayu, whence followed water and the earth. Therefrom arose plant and animal life which leads to consciousness and the ultimate reality. The Vedantic philosophy contends that with the Brahman as the basis the Maya created various objects of the world, just as variety of pictures are drawn on a wall by the use of different colours. At first it is Akash, followed by air, fire, water and the earth, each having its own specific properties distinct from its predecessor and each one forming a tenth part of its predecessor. its P According to another theory, manifestations of the union of the consciousness the chit, Shiva, and his power the Shakti, who are one like the moon and its light, is the seed from which the universe sprouts and comes into existence, Shakti is the creatrix, from whom emerges the universal sound. From the universal sound manifest alphabets of letters that represent the elements ether, air, fire, water and the earth. The universe from atom to cosmos is derived from these categories. The Pratyabhijna Shastra tells us that, the supreme Self Sadishiva the changeless principle of every change, is 'Prakāsh-Vimarsha-Maya'. Prikash is the eternal light, the ' aspect of Shiva without which nothing can appear. Vimarsha, is the Shakti, swabhäva, the consciousness of Shiva by which Shiva knows himself, In this state of Sadashiva, Prakāsh and Vimarsha are one. It is Shiva only who becomes the Shakti in his creative aspect. यथा-न्यग्रोध बीजस्थ: शक्तिरूपो महाद्रुमः । तथा हृदय बीजस्थं विश्वमेतच्चरा चरम ।। Yathā nyagrodh beejasthah shaktriroopo - Mahadrumah ! Tatha hrdaya beejastham vishwametachcharā charam I!! As the great banyan tree lies only in the form of potency in the seed, even so the entire universe with all the mobile and immobile beings, lies in the heart of the supreme. The universe is nothing but the opening out (the unmesh) or expansion (prasara) of the Shakti, who is nothing but Shiva. The Shakti is also known as Parāshakti or Parāvāk, The Parashakti becomes Ichcha (will power) of Shiva when He wants to create. She then becomes Janāna Shakti, the power of knowledge, and Kriya Shakti, the power of creation. When She assumes the aspect of Mother, She is divided in two ways, nine ways, and becomes a wearer of a garland of fifty letters. Then She becomes known as the Mātrkā meaning the collective whole of all letters and entire universe of subjects-objects. The word for I in Sanskrit is "Aham'. A() and Ham () between themselves include all letters of Sanskrit. Each one of these letters is symbolic of the creation of either an objective or subjective element, meaning that 'Aham' or the consciousness of supreme 2. Nirmala Yoga

 Self is creative of entire universe of subjects and objects. A (a) represents Prakāsha or Shiva, Ha () represents, Vimarsha or Shakti. The dot on h (in the word a Aham) represents the fact that though Shiva is manifested right upto the earth through Shakti, He is not divided thereby, He remains integrally the same. From the above it is clear that initially there was Parabrahma. Then came the desire to create in the Parabrahma. That acted to create. Hence came the Ishwara of Vedantins or the Shakti, to become the power of creation. The Supreme is present everywhere and still beyond the whole creation. According to Purush Sukta, "The supreme Self having a thousand heads, a thousand eyes, a thousand feet. pervaded the whole world and rose ten steps higher. It is He alone who is all that has been and all that will be. Entire creation is only a quarter of the Brahman". Once Mr. Gregoire de Kalbermatten asked Mother. where the universe goes at the end. She said "It becomes a part of My Chakra". Thus the supreme Goddess, Shri Dakshinamoorti roopini Sakshat Shri Mataji has unimpeded free will to create, sustain and destroy the universe, Unmesha Nimishotpanna-Vipanna-bhuvanawali' one who has created and destroyed the series of universes just with opening and closing of eyes. सृष्टि स्थिति विनाशानां शक्तिभूते सनातनि । गुणाश्रये गुणमये निर्मला देवी नमस्तुते ।| Srshti sthiti vināshanām shaktibhoote sanātani ! Gunāshraye Gunamaye Nirmala Devi Namastute I! Salutations to Shri Nirmala Devi, who is the power behind the creation, sustentation and destruction of the creation, who is the shelter of the Gunas and is present in them. Various theories apart. a self-realized soul is no longer, mentally involved in the affairs of the world. The universe ceases to be of any relevance to him, as illusory nature of the magic is known once its spell is withdrawn by the juggler. The universe is illusory in relation to the spirit. Our beloved Mother has brought us to this stage just by Her Sankalpa' but we are not able to stabilize, owing to Shaktichakrasandhäne vishwa samhārah (ufer a a grc) "There is disappearance of the universe, with the union of shakti and the chakras, i.e. when the Kundalini Shakti passes though the chakras". Hasn't Mother made the most difficult thing very simple for us? Can Sahaja Yogis not always keep their Kundalinis in the Sahasrara? our inability to control the attention. Nirmala Yoga

 Her Holiness Mataji Nirmala Devi The Importance of Dedication & Devotion NIRMALA PALACE, LONDON 6 Aug. 1982 Today I'Il talk to you about the importance were saying you have to seek, also you of Dedication in Sahaja Yoga, and the Devo- felt you have to seek, but you never thought that this will materialize Iike this, tion that one should have. that you will get your realization. Actually when we are close to a mountain, we can not see much of it, and that's why we don't realise the volume that is so close to us, the greatness that is facing us. This is dropped into the ocean and you don't know one of the illusions that works out, for people what is the dimension of this ocean. "How far who do not realize it mentally what they are in for, where are they, what have they found, we? What is our purpose?"-To add up to all what is Self-realization, what is it's magni- the mess, we become thoughtless tude, how far they have to go, why are they cannot even find out as to rationally what it is. chosen, what is their purpose of life, how far they have come up, how far they can understand?-All these things are beyond the grasp, and one gets stunned. One does not be realized through your understanding. Try to know what has happened to him when he think what have you got. Can you measure got realization actually. Then after getting realization, you could not feel "what it was". As if you have been you have gone into it? What is it? Where are ! So you So the immensity of this experience, the glory of your Mother's coming, or the preci- ous gift of your Self-realization, nothing can it, with your understanding? Can you under- That's why, to understand this is only stand what has happened? No, you cannot.- possible if you can understand how to ded- icate yourself, how to devote yourself. Because rationality cannot give you the dimensions into which you have fallen now. The rationality is actually broken up. There is no rationality left now anymore to even com- If you want to analyse anything on the basis of your rationality, you are too stunned. municate as to what you have been seeking It's too beyond you, it's fantastic, it is too much. It's 'really' beyond you. and where have you landed. So the only method you have got now, or only way is left to you, for a drop which Now think of it: "You have got realiza- tion ". can you believe it ? That you can, in has become an ocean, is to dissolve more in your life time...if somebody had told you this, you would never have believed it, that And to communicate with other drops in such how can you get your realization in this birth? Of course, you were seeking, because people of them. the ocean, so that you feel the ocean at least. a way that you know the Whole through all Nirmala Yoga

 So first is : a Complete Devotion. It is very important. In this incarnation only it is'so very' important, because you have got realization. people? Or do you want more proofs? Now If you did not have realization, "Alright; it is proved that Mother sees much beyond murmuring souls, alright. Haif-baked people. alright. Little bit misbehaving, alright. This can be forgiven, that can be forgiven, every- thing is forgiven"; to look at it, every body thinks that Mother is forgiving us. But that's not the point. In Sahaja Yoga, whatever I see, you cannot see. This is proved or not, to you us, and whatever She sees, happens. So anybody who tries to play tricks with Mother, is actually playing tricks with him- self. 'Any' tricks you try to play with me, or you think that Mother is very forgiving, so She will forgive us,-is 'really' you are tortu- ring yourself, you are,-it is detrimental to I am forgiving because of my own nature. But 'you' do not take it for granted. You are harming yourself by accepting that forgive- ness. If you think all the time. "O Mother you are so forgiving, please forgive me", You are aiready forgiven, as it is. Once you call me Mother. I have forgiven. But what's the advantage? You don't have any advantage out of it. You are a loser. And this point at least 'rationally' if you understand, then you will understand what is Devotion. you. Many people are there who will say that, "It is my left Swadhishthäna". Some will say, "I was possessed, there was bhoot". Some- body will blame something else. Whatever you are blaming, actually who is asking you the explanation? It is only you asking your- self. You are not facing your self. So the devotion to me means actually facing to yourself. You face your self first of So in Devotion of Sahaja Yoga, one has to realize that the things that are in Sahaja Yoga, that you have seen in Sahaja Yoga, are beyond your mind;-first thing. Definitely enemy. Your Mother is not, definitely. She is they are beyond human conception. So on human level you do not discuss them, and you do not talk about it. But on the collective do not allow them, they cannot be there. level you can talk. all, and see for yourself what are you doing. a You are your own enemy. Nobody is your not your enemy by any chance. And no bhoots are your enemies, in the way, if you No evil person is your enemy, because he cannot be effective if you are spiritually equipped. So you are your own enemy, is And when you come to the collective level, then you have to understand that rela- tionship with me is more established, better established, if you establish 'your" relation- ships with others, in a very collective and homogeneous way. decided. The only way to get rid of that enemy of yours, you have to Dedicate. Supposing you say that I have faith in As I told you, the drop becomes the Mother, or in God, so you are holding on to Ocean, and the drop has to become the Ocean something, isn't it? And you are discarding by dissolving all its drop-ness with other something. But this hold has to be "very drops. And all the drops dropping their drop- strong. Rationally if you-at that time when ness become the Ocean ultimately. you are sinking, will you rationalize whether. "I should hold the hand of this person who ged. One is to each other. and one is to your is saving, is correct or not." No, your grip So we see that Devotion is double wed- Mother. will be very strong. It will be extremely Nirmala Yoga

 strong and you will grip it with 'full' force, Mother". This is typically somewhere read in the book-"because of insecurity somebody does that". Actually now we have seen in Sahaja Yoga, that most of the so-called in- secured are the 'most aggressive people. They with full faith:-that somehow or the other And that kind of a feeling should be within us, that, "I am a person who is sinking play tricks with others, spoil their lives, and because of myself. And if I am to be saved, , I have to be Absolutely Completely' submer- ged in Sahaja Yoga. 'Absolutely' I have to be enjoy it. They are the greatest sadists ever born. You have seen these people. And that is how they play tricks with themselves. Then only I can be saved." one with it Now once you understand that you are not to play tricks with yourself. Why do you want to play tricks with your self ? You have to be your Self, that's all, We should not be our own enemies. Are we? Because at this level, where you are reali- zed souls of a higher leval, now for a next jump-as I was saying to you-is Devotion. Anything else has to be secondary, under the circumstances. If it is primary and your atten tion is still on that, then you cannot have this second jump. So once you start facing your Self, you will like your Self. You vwould not feel dis- gusted. Because that-is your Self I am talking about-is glorious, is beautiful, is 'without' any Kalanaka FT (blemish) on that. is absolutely' detached. First jump you have already had, you have got your realization. But from first jump to second jump, you have worked hard, you have come to the second jump. in the second jump you have to face it up You should not feel disgusted with yourself, nor it, that "This detachment is my life. I am a dejected with yourself, nothing. But treat yourself as a separate entity. But first of all your attention has to accept different personality. Detachment is my nourishment". Detach yourself. And Dedication is actually turning back to yourself and looking forward towards the house. I had a very beautiful lamp, and he Divine personality in you Once there is liked it. I said, "You (can) have it." He was so Divine personality in you, there's no problem amazed, you see. His wife telephoned to me, of Devotion. You will just become one with it, you start enjoying it. One gentleman came to see me in my "How could it be? How could you give away such a there? Am I going to carry it with me when I die? Is it going to go with me? Just see rationally. If he has liked it, let him have it. I have so many lamps in the house, if he takes one what does it matter?" She said, "But you see, I asked my husband, will you give this lamp like this, if you have, to her?- he said, no, I would not. I really would not, he said". He was very honest, he said 1 would not. But still I cannot understand, why not? So, you know till the last end we are holding on to something 'very little, there. nice lamp ?"I said, "What is But this rationality is the worst thing, that plays tricks with you, which deviates you from understanding that whatever life you have led so far has been a very material, gross life. You came out of it, you have grown out of it, you have come up. ow, to blossom, to become fragrant, you have to give-up rationality. That is a binding. Try to avoid rationality, try to avoid argu- ments. Try to avoid giving reasons. Even now I find sometimes Sahaja Yogis give an expla- nation of psychology: "She might be insecure, Nirmala Yoga

 case, so-called lies. They are 'never lies. If I say to somebody he is a bad man, apparently to you, "Oh Mother, he is such a fine man! How can you say such a thing about him?". We had one Mr. Michael like that. "Oh, he is such a loving person, Mother!" Somebody said, Mother are you jealous of him ?"- If this, even a little bit is holding the saree, you know that, that can hold the whole saree. Even a little bit is attaching to this saree, the saree can be held back. The whole thing you can hold it, with one little pin. All these small pins that are there-the hangs-up, are to be denied, to be seen going further. Look at yourself. "Oh that's Mr. Ego. Upto that extent you know! But when he alright. Now let me see how do you go back"-To see all those things. You see, as a play you should see yourself. And then play tricks with your ego and super ego Actually they are playing tricks with you. absolutely fix yourself on the truth. And the showed his real teeth, you see, then people (understood). So to develop that kind of understanding about the truth, first of all you should once you are a master, you play tricks with them. truth is "That you are the instrument of God, that you have got realization, that you have So many times I have seen. I have said so got a special awareness which people do not have." Stand on that. And proclaim it. You. are not to be afraid of it. You have got realization, no doubt. You have felt it. Say it, Nthing doing, know I am realised soul." Firm on that. many things, and then again after sometime, people start talking about it. Within one or two months after that, it comes as a scientific proof or things like that, you have seen that, many a times it has happened. "I have got realization. I Now when I say something I am sure about it, what I say, / never say anything but the Truth. I know that I am saying only the truth. But I do not go inside and find out, whether In this expression of truth, you have to be like the light. The light asserts. It not only asserts, but it shɔws others also that it shines. It shows others: that "I am the light". That, it is truth or not. I do not read a book to find "You walk in my light. And if you don't try out. I do not ask you. I have faith in myself, to do it. I may burn you", They have that, I say is the what you call, that "téjasvita" (afeer): téjas of light. That Téjasvitā is there, sharpness of light. That is the proof of "full faith" in myself. Whatever truth, I know for definite that whatever I say sharpness comes out truth. But that is not your case. That is not your your truth. You are not afraid of any Prime case, that whatever you say is the truth. So Minister or any Minister, or any king, or anyone. thing. I know. I am a realized soul, I am the truth." If you say," I am the Truth," whatever you will say will be the truth, no doubt about it. Whatever you will do will be the truth. But say," I am the truth." say will be the truth. Now how do you do it? The tongue should be such, that what- ever you say should be the truth. Ultimately it will come out as truth. And that is why the Dedication should be there. But for that a real purification is needed about facing yourself fully, in Dedication. Means, you are holding on to your Mother, you are holding on to Sahaja Yoga, you are Even if I tell lies, it will come truth, in my holding on to that truth which you have What Dedication : "Why should I tell lies?"..There is no need to tell lies. Nirmala Yoga

 Supposing there is no oil in this (lamp), Without that you can not do it, your source is it will all go of. It has to have oil. It will You are standing on the truth. And go off. So the Dedication part is the oil in you, is the attachment, Complete attach- ment to your source. That's the Dedication. But that Dedication should not give you any other ideas but of a light which shines, which corrects others, guides the path of other found out.-And here you are facing others. that. that is such a power, such a strength. All of them if you see-Christ had that power, Mohammad had that power, alI these great people had that power: 7To say the Truth, with full courage, with that assertion that people will accept it. And they would even suffer for that, they would not mind. But whetever is the truth has to be said. people. If that is not so, then the source that you are tapping is not coming to you fully, and That's the first point one should know that your light is not burning properly. about Dedication.-That you are dedicated fully, that you are not afraid of anyone. You are not worried about your losses. So, into Dedication when you go, you must not think that it is any surrendering,- the so-called surrendering, that you become Some people have lost their heads, also, like a cabbage. That is the idea people have, completely cut their heads. tortured them. Some people had all their become 'dynamic.' You become real power: money taken away, have been tortured in every way, but they thought this was the for destruction you do not need much power. truth, they stood by it. Some of them were Only for construction you need power. For stupid tools, they stood for something that destruction how much do you need ?-Very was not truth; they did. Rut 'now' you know that you are standing People have that you become like cabbage, But you not of destruction, but of construction. I mean, little. You can destroy the whole thing in no time. But, for the construction you really require 'great power. And that power. on the truth, and for that you should be willing to sacrifice. the truth What you sustained power, flowing power has to be there. For that, Dedication is needed. sacrifice anything.-so calied Because you are not sacrificing are sacrificing is Holding on to your source of power, you have to stand firm Courageously, 'withouť untruth. For that you require people of strength any fear. That is the truth. That is the truth courage, and not these half-baked you have to achieve. That's very important. and people. You asking for forgiveness from Mother. What is That's not sufficient. Just being the truth, the it ? What is there to ask for forgiveness, aspect of one side is there. But the other because I am forgiving you every moment. But what are you doing yourself? What sort see, morning till evening But this is only one side of the story. side of it is, that when this source comes to you, you become the Compassion. The Truth and the Compassion are one thing. You would not believe, but it is so. Like, the of a person you are? You think about it, that you have to stand on the truth. For that you have to be wick and the oil combine to form the light. a strong, courageous person with that sharp- It is the buring of the oil gives you the light. ness, with that tejasvitā within you of the light, of the beacon. But at the same time you have to have complete Dedication. In the same way the Compassion gives you the Truth. There is no difference whatsoever, only the state is different. That you can not Nirmala Yoga 8.

 see the light which is oil, and oil which is are collecting money for them, and we are burning. trying to send money to Viet Nam". And here among Ashramites.-fighting. This is not Compassion by any chance. So Compassion is the one which is the source as well as your store. So from the source of Compassion, you get your Compas- sion. Sahaja Yogis among themselves are a dilferent race, and they have to support each You see, I have seen people who want to other 'all the time, and look after them. When have Compassion from me; they want that I should love them. But, reflect it back, do I find Sahaja Yogis criticizing Sahaja Yogis, I am amazed ! I am really amazed I Because you are part and parcel of the same How can you criticize? One eye criticizing another, I understand. I can criticize, they love others like that ?I have known people, say, for one person says harsh things to other, and comes and says to me, "Mother just cannot forgive me", or does something harsh just for alright, but why should you? Why should you the whim of the mind; "Mother forgive me". criticize each other ? Only thing you have to But when you ask for that I would like to know, have you given Compassion to an- other person ? Even after getting forgiveness it 108 times already that," you have to love do is to love each other. Christ has said it thrice, I must have said each other, that is the only way you are expressing Compassion." If I have given you any love any time, you have to have patience with others, love for others. I some- source of Compassion, have you given compas- sian to others? Have you been Compassionate to others ? You see, it should not be one- sided. If you are taking the advantage of my Compassion, it should not be one-sided that times try to coax people, and I find that you use it for your own benefit and forget people immediately come out with some sort about it. Then you will never grow. You of criticism of others or something like that. will never grow. Now the basic thing is, that our Compas- sion, if that is flowing, then only can we get If you have to grow, then you must store that compassion within. Whatever Compassion Compassion from Mother. There I have given you, Love I have given you, you place anymore, I have done too must store within you. And give that back to compassion business, and what I find that others. Otherwise you will be finished, you will be nowhere. Is the growth which is give you Compassion? I mean there is no sustained only-not only by sucking from one side but by giving to others. Otherwise you empty yourself a will be stagnated. There has to be outflow. is no much now unless and until you flow it, how am i to space left for it now. Better give it away, little bit, thenI can give you more Compassion. It's simple business. In this respact one has to understand, that the source 'can not flow unless and until it But that is a very hard thing, because people are very good at taking Compassion expandsthe flow of it. from Mother. Or even if they are Compas- sionate, they will be mostly compassionate to people who are, say, in Viet Nam. not in the Ashram. They are more worried about little stream from seven streams,-little-little, Viet Nam people, you know, "Oh Mother! we are worried about Viet Nam people, we it has become the river Thames. Supposing it Like the river Thames. We want to see the place from where it starts. It is a small- "very' little-little-we can say trickling down- Nirmala Yoga

 does not widen that will stop at the begin- should have separate place, we should live ning only. It can not come out, it you must have flow. It is not because it is angry or upset or little privacy as married people, I am not anything like that, but because of the nature of it's flow only it cannot flow, what to do? can not separately",-it is alright. saying that. But as far as Compassion is concerned, as married people, you have to be "much more compassionate. But you will So that is what it is, that one has to give only worry about your 'own children, about Compassion to others. It should not be formal Compassion, or the affected one, but it should be a natural one, very natural, spontaneous. 'Feeling from within. It is not all collective. When you bring sweets for an expression of your ego, super-ego or over-sentimentality, but is a kind of an understanding that he is a Sahaja Yogi, you family has to move with the same waves. I are a Sahaja Yogi, you are brothers. Not the way the brothers have been, but a different separate food arrangements, separate this type of brothers who are 'spiritual' brothers. You are spiritual people. your own husband, about your 'own' wife. In Sahaja Yoga, there is no place for such people. It is comfort, about your own' your own child, bring for other children in the Ashram, You are one Family and all the have told you before that we cannot have and separate that. In the same way, we cannot have separate standards of living for So this Compassion has to be there, and different people. unless and until you develop that Compas- sionate fartherly or motherly 'feeling for by all of us. That should be so. And that others..I mean I am the mother of a person who is about a hundred and eight years of emotional level any marriage which is absurd, age. You have to 'really' mother others, and which makes everyone unhappy is useless. have that feeling of Compassion and Love for But marriages are made to make everyone others. You don't have to think about your happy. So before you decide to marry, think, own comfort, you don't have to think about that you are not playing tricks. Playing tricks your advantages, but you have to think äbout in Sahaja Yoga is very-very dangerous. You the comfort of others. You have to think, "what you can do to make others camforta- ble", than to see what will make "you thinking that Mother would forgive you and We all have to enjoy whatever is enjoyed should be achieved on material level. On are not playing tricks with your marriages, you are not trying to involve somebody else, comfortable. will forgive. But 'your ascent is difficult. So do not try to play tricks with all that. I So this flow of Compassion when it starts, the Dedication is complete. Because "whatever anything that you have been doing before, we got from You, Mother, we are giving it to but change yourself completely, transform others". That is the Dedication. So the flow yourself completely. of Dedication is not one-sided. It is double sided. You stick on to something, you get connected with something, to get something out of it, and you give it to others. And already. If you try to be the other person, ultimately it reaches the collective being, flwer, now you cannot become suddenly means it reaches the source. It is in this light we have to understand. Now you change your attitude towards life. You can, because it "is' changed you cannot be. Now you have become a the leaf. Now you are a flower, and you have to live like a flower. And that is what Exclusiveness, or "we are now married, we you have to remember, that Compassion is Nirmala Yoga 10

 such an outflow, is such a natural thing for there, they just get frightened. "You better a Sahaja Yagi. It is not natural for anybody go there and do this."-they get frightened. else. Other people who talk of Compassion You are a plant which can not only go and or this and that are actually not at all prosper in any place, but, you will give the necessary nourishment to other plants. That they are doing for position, they are doing for is what you are ! So do not stick on to one place. If you stick on, then think that there passion because you have to have it, jolly must be something wrong with the place: well. It is flowing, the Compassion, because Like a glue if you are sticking on to one place, it is very dangerous. And be sure, that you must run away from such a place you. That does not mean that as people are here, they never stay in the house, all the time running out. It does not mean that. Again I have to strike that point. Because otherwise the people are here, are all the time running away from their houses. compassionate, They are doing it for money, ego satisfaction. But you are having com- it has to flow. And you are doing compas- Sion because of compassion. There is 'no other' purpose behind it. Only this will give which glues you. you something that is of permanent nature, of a "Sthāyi" (Egrit) nature. You have seen people,-as I was telling in the morning, who have gone to an organi- sation, made a beautiful organisation out of it. And once they leave, the organisation is finished. Because they do not give anything substantial to that organisation. And what to anything, and not be afraid of leaving any is to be given, is a large heart of Compassion If you do not give it that. once you go away You have joined the Ocean, and Ocean can from that, the rest of them are again barren. take you anywhere. It is not growth. Like if you bring water, plant things and give water to that area then it becomes very beautiful, and you can say it is place, because you have to take this Com a very lush growth. But as soon as that passion everywhere and to prosper. In the water source is removed, it gets again dried kingdom of God you have to serve Him That is not the point. The point is that you should not be glued place, because now you are Sahaja Yogis. So just prepare yourself to move into any And this service is only possible if you know that you are here for a 'very great universal up. But Sahaja Yoga is different. In Sahaja task-Not only for England. for India or for Yoga you not only grow as a plant, but also, America but you are here for a global task as the source of the plant. If this plant is removed from here put somewhere else, it will give water to other plants. Do you know this new dimension that you have within chosen for that. And so don't divert your yourself?-That once this plant is uprooted attention to anything that is not fulfilling your from here and taken out, it will not die ! Not at all. It will grow, but it will make others grow. This is another type of a growth that tion is your Compassion, your Love. we have. And it is a very different position we are in, and that is what now I want, that all of you, 'even' if you are uprooted and put Whatever I have said to you is just into any other place.... I've seen, when i ask people that you better shift from here to start sucking the vibrations as well as which is the epitome of our evolution: This is the highest thing we have to do for our creation and for our creator. And you are own manifestation. Discard all that Do not waste your energy. And your manifesta- But still it should not remain rational. to put you into a condition where you 11 Nirmala Yoga

 But if the anger is because of your nature or a tendency or out of control, then it is a giving the vibrations. It is an action, it is a happening that should take płace, within you. It is not rationality, it is not thinking bad thing. If it is out of control, then it is a about it. Only by saying these things really stun your thinking, You should allow it is out of control then it is a bad thing. this to happen to you. bad thing. If you get into a temper because can get very' angry but 1 am 'completely under control, I know why I am angry. Just with the vibratory awareness you where the bhoot is, how he is running away. should judge yourself, "Am I the one who is giving vibrations to the others ? Am l the one who has stored these vibrations or am I for you to get angry or show temper. I can see that. you can't see anything. But you can't see the bhoot, So there is no need getting ruined ? But if you have an anger, say for example which makes you uncontrollable, then there is a mantra for that : Shanti. "Ya Devi Sarva- bhootéshu, Shānti roopéna samsthitä", you must ask for that Bliss, for that peace. This is the mantra for you, for controlling your tem- All this will give you a great meaning, and an employment, as I said, "employed by God." If you have any questions, ask me. per, you have to tell yourself "Ya Dévi Sarva bhootéshu Shänti, Roopéna Samsthită". So Shänti is the point, the axis point is that, Q. When we get angry, is our anger just our tendency to react like this ? Shri Mataji: You see, if you get angry from where you witness everything. You are within yourself, and if you are sure that you are not doing anything wrong; for a Sahaja Yogi there is no need to say outside you are angry. There is no need. That anger itself the power, and the power is taking charge. is a power. And you should do your Bandhan and anything that you want to do. But you should not show that you are angry. You should be absolutely silent, because you can be, you are on the axis, you are not on the periphery. Actually the anger is just to see your anger, and use that anger for that pur- pose. And once you start doing that, that anger will itself work-out. That anger will Never call cowardice as peace. A itself work-out the person. And you will be who is peaceful is 'never' coward, because amazed, how. But you must learn to see your anger that is working. All these things power it. It is "never, never' possible that are important. in Shänti, you are in complete peace... You are not in a turmoil even if you are angry. You are not in a turmoil. Whatever is angry is But unless and until that is achieved, what you have to do, is to put yourself in a position that you are peaceful. So I think that's a 'very good mantra, is to say Ya Dévi Sarva bhootéshu Shānti roopéna sams- thită. So the Shanti is your fort. But peacefulness never means cowardice. person nothing can transgress it, nothing can over- cowardice and peace can go together. You have seen that sometimes only shou- ting at the bhoots they go away, and many you don't show your power of your anger mad people have been cured like that. outside. But just a 'little anger with any- But you do not do all that, that's for me. You must be always decent, with decorum and all that. But your power is inside, not outside. So body, you will see it will work out. But first establish that position within you where you are the axis, where you do not allow anger Nirmala Yoga 12

 Q: Some Sahaja Yogis use their devotion to you to oppress others. to sit on your head. That is the growth. That's the growth, that you are at peace, SHRI MATAJl: Then again the same thing. Both ways you should know, that one is the anger that is detached, is perfectly alright. It's the same thing. It is, you have to do it- Anger which involves you, work it out. So All those who are doing that way. I am just Good pointing out to all those. li you are using, say, your devotion to me for the oppressing of others, alright ? So it is for you to see, judge yourself, as to what it is. question. Q :- What are your plans ? There is nobody who can be oppressed, SHRI MATAJI: What are my plans. I don't because your Spirit cannot be oppressed. pian. You see, I don't plan, because l don't know how far my instruments are ready, you First, now my only plan, if I have any, wilL he oppress ? He cant oppress his Spirit, is to really prepare my weapons airight. Once they are done, then we will fix them up. Say, there is X and Y. Now Y is a person who is trying to oppress X, alright ? What can he ?-First point, clear. Now, this feliow, if he has to have attach- You see, unless and until you know how far your bomb can fall, how can you plan it. So, first of all I must measure-up the power of my children, how powerful they are. That's what I'm trying to do now, is to make them aware of their powers, to use. ment to me, nobody can stop him. You all have direct relationship with me, not through anyone. If you want to accept somebody's agency, then I can't help you. But otherwise you all have a direct access to me. You all can know your Spirits, 'nobody' can dominate you. Everyone has "complete' freedom to you. Like Hanumâna when he was born, and know their Spirit And the Spirit is some- when he grew up, he forgot that time, he forgot his powers. So he was to be reminded thing, 'cannot be dominated by anyone. that "you are such and such powerful person, you don't know what your powers are, you ate off the whole of Surya. This you did in They'll say, "Alright. we'll not have this your childhood, you are born with this power. But now after growing you have rather sort- of forgotten it, and also you were afraid of using them, and it sort-of looks like in a dormant position. But it is there. If you just try to remember them, it will come." Now supposing somebody tries to oppress you. What will he oppress you, in which way? carpet, we'll have this carpet". Now have it! Somebody will say. "I'll jump in the sea". Jump! Just now you jump !-What will they oppress you in ? Just see that. Not in your spiritual growth, can they ? And that's how the problem starts. You see, in material things-say, in an Ashram They have 'tremendous people have, tremendous powers. But they now, somebody says, have to assume, and stand on that. If they like to have a photograph of Mother put do not do it ....You see, if I tell them, "Now go to this house". "Oh Mother, there may be bhoot there sitting ".... A person it here or there makes no difference. My comes possessed in the Ashram. They all photograph is going to work it out. shut their doors : "Oh God ! this bhoot has come", or something, then what's the use ? ' power these there. Then the other will say, "No, we're going to have it there."-Whether you put Even' in pooja matters I've seen pedople 5. 13 Nirmala Yoga

 will say that, "No, Mother is sitting there, don't put your feet towards the Mother." that, the fight is on. But that does not help It's a common thing, evarybody knows one anyway, there also. should not put it. But still they'll say, "No. We want to put it". Alright, let them put it. Next time they will not, because they will know it is wrong. They'll find out! person, "You should not correct me." Like But in Sahaja Yoga it will 'never" help. The other person can only win over by his dignity, by his quiet methods, by approaching a person properly, That's how the leaders will come up. They would not come up by one. I'm here to correct. Once you understand shooting the other person down. Not at all that you are not perfect, the other is not by any chance ! That's not possible ! Is not perfect, we are all pefecting ourselves, we good leadership. Good leadership is judged are all coming up, Mother is there to look the way you handle the situation. Not the So, you see, 'nobody' can oppress any- after us,-then we will 'never' think like that. way you fight the other man down. Now, I have also seen people will say that there are two Sahaja Yogis talking to quiet. It works out. Not necessary, that you other Sahaja Yogis. Now one is very oppres- sive one, the other one is upset to see that this one is oppressive. Now, for that purpose, if you are quiet, silent, you will always domi- nate him. Paople will listen to you, not to him. But if even you start saying, "Oh, you do not say like that and this.," they will think these are fighting cocks. Then, at that time, your wiser behaviour will even give him a chance to understand. So many times you have seen, I just keep should at that moment shout. There is no need. And that creates a very bad impression, and very bad leadership. First of all, you cannot be dominated, this is one fact, is a truth. You can grow in your spirituality, whatever people may try to dominate in the worldly things. Thank God we don't have any organisa- tion, thank God we do not have secretaries, assistant secretaries, under secretaries. vice secretaries, upper secretaries, lower secreta- ries,..we do not have any nonsense. Other- wise even that would have been dominating to people. Then they would have fought that. But what happens, one person dominates, the other tries to dominate him by outward things, and the whole show is over. There is 'no need to dominate another person by outward things. he will settle down by him- So we do not have that problem. We do not self, if you show your dignity of your silence have any money problem, because we don't and of yaur understanding of Sahaja Yoga. . have these nonsensical ideas. I have solved There is no need just now to say, "You shut all these problems by having no institutions, up, you sit down, you do not dol-Absolu- tely wrong. They do it; I have seen it ! In 'my' presence, I have seen it ! no positions. Every body has position. But the greatest position is of your Spirit, which you establish. The attention is not there. It is more ego oriented. The whole Because we still live half way there and half-way here. The way we solve the problem, stuff is ego-oriented. You can not fight ego say, you have to do some business. There with ego. You cannot. You can only fight are two people doing the business. One person says something, and the other one says, "Why did you say like that? You should not say. ego or super-ego with Spirit. How much do I dominate you? I absorb all your aggression also, and how much do Then this person says to that 14 Nirmala Yoga

 I' dominate you? If I have to correct you, I go " forward and do it and tell you that I am among yourselves. correcting you, whether you like it or not. And you see the result, it is alright. But if you have that capacity, do it. Then there is SHRI MATAJI lacking in you that you cannot do it, then be prepared not to at leasl spoil the show of fight it, it will sit more on your head. That is Sahaja Yoga. you have to argue with others, not argue, Q. How to tight the ego ? How to fight the ego. You see, you should never fight ego. If you try to not the way to fight it. That there is ego, and One person is talking too much, alright, You fight your ego, "Oh t am going to box the others will say, He is good for nothing, You, then it will grow more, you see. The but another one is a sensible one." But if more you box it, the more it will grow. Never both are fighting, then I do not know,-that Tight your ego. Only way is to see it. does not show any wisdom or growth, isn't it? Does it ? Those who think that by dominating in small-small things, you are going to achieve anything, are wrong! Actually I have seen, my right size; ego, if it's overgrown, you just grandchildren are realised souls, they are not bothered ab out these things: They do not do the mirrar and you say. "Oh Mr ego I How do this. This kind of a fight they do not have, that where to keep this, what to do,-this they fight it. Just to be seen. don't have. Nothing. At the most they might fight for a chociate or something at the most But in spiritual matters they never fight. In spiritual matters they never fight. That is are uneducated, you are egoistical, because the place one should 'not' fight. One should You must try to show that you are something. not argue. That is the point not to be argued, All sorts of egos are there. because truth is one. What is there to argue?. Your attention is very important. Your attention is now enlightened. Whatever you see, it comes to it's right size. It comes to its watch your ego. Best is to watch yourself in you do?" Then it will come down. But do not All kinds of egos could be there. If you are over-educated, you are egoistical. If you So best thing is to see for yourself. That's why I say," Face your Self." Your Self, means your Spirit. You have seen all these saints, you see, those who have talked about me. What do they say? Every body says the same thing about me. There "cannot be any fight bet- ed. You should just say," Get out! I can see ween saints, can there be? If the truth is one, how can there be fight? -..For super ego also, not to be frighten- you very clearly, you are there. You get out from here. How dare you frighten melI am the Spirit ! 1 am the Spirit. How dare you do that."-That is how. But because one is inadequate, another is dominating, both must achieve that state. But the best is to behave more dignified, You see, ego makes you idiotic, absolu- Makes an idiot tely, ego makes you idiotic. more People will definitely take to you, because you will become the leader. grown-up. more patronising. out of you, absolutely. And the super-ego makes you a coward. It makes you a coward. Now how to fight it: I am not going to be an idiot," if you say that, ego will go away. If you want to be an idiot, then he will be arguing among yourselves. If you have to there, to help you, If you want to be an idiot, Arguments are not going to lead you anywhere, I can tell you this much. No use 15 Nirmala Yoga

 alright. call Mr Ego. you will become an idiot other in such proportion, that they cannot straightforward. It is the easiest way. budge from their ideal positions. If you want to become an idiot, the simple thing is to call the Ego, "You come Mr. Ego and settle down in me"-and immediately.. This is a very simple composition. And these things that you have produced are themselves perfect. If they are im- perfect, there will be a problem. It is like that. If you understand this very simple And super ego-if you are a coward then thing about relations and attitudes, you will it sits on your head. Say," I am not going to *Ham" Ksham as I told you the never have problem. Наm Your relationship with the Sahaja Yogis mantra on the Agnya. Either you have to say, has to be absolutely ideal relationship. Other- / am". The other is. "/ forgive you". wise some screw is lose. Try to make it (To another question about our ideal ideal. Say, there is one person. You find the relationships Shri Mataji replied as given person is too egoistical or something. Try to see what's wrong with you, first of all. "Am I perfect. Am I alright? Or am I equally dom- below :) SHRI MATAJI: ...that relationship with yourseif should be tyrannical. You should inating? Am I equally egoistical? Alright, if 1 lash it up. You should 'absolutely make it am, then I better correct myself. But if I arm clear to yourself that 1 have to perfect not: it I am a good person, that way I am not myself, if I have to give this, my being, to God. It has to be perfect. dominating, thenI should try to bring down his ego. by making sweet things to him, making nice relationship with him." Try to be Secondly, if you have to have relationship kind to him, so that his ego comes down. with otners, it has to be rideal relationship. Sahaja Yogi with Sahaja Yogi, means some- relationship. It is absolutely simple.I mean thing great. The greatest relationship is that. Ido not understand what have I to tell in this With your sister, with your brother, it should thing, you know everything; that it has to be be ideal. 'And' in collectivity we have to be proper. pragmatic. In collectivity we can change our course, we will take the way we like, the way it moves, we will manage it. But otherwise- Manage, somehow or other. to establish ideal Now see, the relationship between that (flame) and me has to be proper, so that it does not burn me, isn't it ? It is absolutely in You see, for example, take a plane. It has life-time also, we have to do the same thing. the same thing. Plane, when it is in the air, That relationship with each other 'has to be ideal', to create the best results. It is so that are fixed in the plane, are ideally fixed. practical; I do not know what is there to tell They can not just start Like a pilot seat does in this thing. And you have to be perfect. not go to the back, and the back does not because you are the unit. And the whole come to the front. You see, the relation is thing can be pragmatic, then only it can be. it can go wherever it likes. But the screws maintained. Alright? But here,-just the other way round. The screws are pragmatic, the relationship is thing that is made, is perfect. But the aerop- imperfect, and the collectivity is absolutely And the screws which are made, or any- Doesn't move. plane is fixed. Aeroplane can go southward, The collectivity- northward, anywhere it wants to. Only the "After all we are collective, bound to each other. How can we move, Mother ? We are static. things that are in it are correlated with each Nirmala Yoga 16

 static now. We are bound to each other, we can not move, you see." Just like Rock of 'tremendoust Gibralter. then the inspiration you will get, will be ... See, it is working out. Working out. Q: Shri Mataji could you say something Try to watch. about maintaining our attention so that it stays where it should. And it has such a tremendous memory, if you know how to watch. Imean, to me, if ! see something.-I mean, to me it is just like practical question is "to keep the attention a film in my mind. If I have seen this room, now I know what's this, the design, every- thing I know. How you are sitting, what pose you have taken, how. you were, what was it 'everything' is like a design You see it comes to me, just like a picture-absolu- SHRI MATAJI: Rustom has asked a very where it should be." You see, for everything you have to do some exercise, abhyasa (R). Not before realisation; after realisation. The best is to learn, "how to watch your- tely. Not of this life, but of 'lives' 1 self." Just now, sitting here, you just put yourself into a position from where you watch yourself. "Now what am I doing?" -This is records best. If there are thoughts it is like the abhyäsa, this is the study, Apart from something in between. You see, now he is mantras, apart from anything, the abhyāsa, is the practice. Practise of becoming a wit- ness. And the witness is the Spirit state. Then attention will not go. I mean you will see everything, it is there, but attention will be through, you are recording everything that is inside. Try to practise this : "Am I a witness?" Vour Because that is a recording system, that ,– trying to record me on this film, and if there is something in-between moving, nothing But when there is will come in it. IS nothing in-between and you are just seeling important. Moreover you will be amazed, you do not record unimportant things. Like tor people now, they go to a village, or any place: They will be recording, "Oh God, it was very dirty, and this happened and we went there and there was cement to sleep, for example. And Now, say, some people say," Oh God!I had a 'horrible' time, Mother. This happened, that happened." You see, you are not a witness! How can 'you' have the horrible time if you are the Spirit. You only have a horrible time when you are not the Spirit IF then we went inside, and there was no you can watch the whole thing as a drama that is played, then you are not having a horrible time, but this outside of you is having horrible time, which you are watching. proper chair to sit down. And the chair was so hard, and my back started aching. -All these things they will remember. And then what happened ? "Oh God II could not get realisation." -Everything that is bad. That is how the attention can be fixed very You see, just like newspaper; all bad news. well if you practise,-abhyäsa,-practise all the time to be a witness. Say, you go out, you see something. Just try to see it, not to think about it. Be a witness of the whole But to a person who is a realised soul in a real way, does not see,-I mean, you do not smell anything dirty. You always smell thing. The joy will be complete, and also something good. You never smell, you never think of anything dirty. Everywhere you go, attention will be completely enlightened, And it is beautiful. Even if you see just the sand, you will become absolutely peaceful. Your 17 Nirmala Yoga

 you see the pattern. Even if you see a barren hill.. attention is on ugliness...People tell me, There, this was ugly." I said, "I didn't see. yjust saw the way the elephant was standing, you see. The way he had pulled up his leg, and he was raising the trunk, I never saw I saw some people who had gone I said look at the beauty of these hills, in Mahārās- htra. They said, "Mother, what is the beauty? the dirt part of it. Where was it 7"-"At the It is not covered with trees." I said, that's hack of it." | said, I never went at the the beauty, just see,-the patterns. They could not see the patterns that I was seeing- But if you ask me, "What is this hill", I also know that. Because know the patterns tion of a of all the hills, how it has moved, how it has he. All his little funny points will come to made patterns and things like that. back. If your attention is on .. even the descrip- person. I asked a person, how is your head. Even the photographers I have seen. They will only take a photograph when you are in a funny way. See, when your face is a little turned round. Because they do not see that. You see, they cannot see the beauty. Because they isa little turned round. I mean it's a seeking are looking out for defects. Or telatively, after ugliness, seeking after mistakes, seeking you see, "English trees are better than say, X, Y, Z trees. So this is not better". The relative' they start. But you are at absolute point, you are everything. Everything is your own. What is there to judge?. after something wrong. 'All' the time if you do like this. you cannot be a happy person. All the time trying to find the defects and faults and mistakes and dirt and ugliness. I mean you are in for trouble ! You are asking for it! getting the absolute of Q: Mother, perhaps you can see beauty because you are the artist. Like a person was saying, there are three-four ditches in this place. I said, did you SHRI MATAJI : I am the artist and I am the jump into one of them? Better jump in, so art. But what about you? Who are you? that once for all you do not see any other You are the one who is created, and you can ditchi. You do not see the plain grounds, create, and you can become the artist. you are just seeing the ditches. For what ?. That is what I am saying. That you are not only the light, but the light that will give who is of that kind of an attitude who wants light to others. And also you will sustain that light which you have given light. This is the difference now, between you and other people. Not that only you will be the artist, but you'll enjoy the art of the artist. The same thing can look ugly to a person to see "everything' ugly. Change your attitudes. Try to see good in others. Try to see. l am not saying for other people, but I am saying at least for Sahaja Yogis you can do it. Try to see good in them. "What good they have done to Sahaja yoga. What you owe to them. How to get along with them." Why not see the good of them? By giving them encouragement by being good to them you are helping Sahaja Yoga. This is what you have got, you do not know, you are not aware of your powers. It is a dynamic thing which has happend to you, which you should take to. But our attention is on: from where the dirt is coming,. where the filth is coming, you know; where the ugliness is there. If your But you want to help your ego. Because Nirmala Yoga 18

 you are very wise. So then only, by apprecia- ting another person only, you have better relationship. This is a very simple fact. you are not going to cure it, you are yourself going to get bad. If you can cure it, nothing like it, but you cannot- You see any film; there the two people are talking to each other as if they are barking do that !" But you would do something else at each other. What does it take to be kind, that the ather person would not do. to be gentle, to say pleasant things. As soon as they will see a person, "Oh God! You have become 'very ugly." This is the best compli- Because with what are you judging?-With ment That is human nature : To see to the fault of others, to see to the wrong things of very' common failing, which should not be others. You see, they will find out in anything. Somebody is very tidy, then that person is bad. Somebody is very untidy, that person is bad,-every sort of thing. Also, always persons say, "T would not When judging others, one has to know one should judge 'oneself first of all. your ego or super-ego. have seen it is Now you are realised souls, you are Saints. And the saints -Though olden saints might be doing whatever they did. Forget them.-But you people are not going to see the faults of each other, but to the But why not 'you' do something about yourself? That there is something inside you that is not tidy. And it is inside you that is very upsetting. good points of everyone. Simple things I have seen. Somebody says a wrong English word, or a Sanskrit word, or a wrong this, immediately you will catch on that. But he gives a big lecture, it's me it alright, that nobody listens. Your mind is makes no difference. To what bathroom I go; working: "What wrong he is going to say". I do not even remember all those things. The attention should be on what he said, so To me it makes no difference, you have seen it. It mnakes no difference. If you say, will sleep here. sleep on the grass there. If you say, I will What is there to remember in a bathroom and this and that?-All nonsense it is. I have no beautiful And then you will develop an attitude, as mine is; you will never see to the defects of others. Never. Never know them. You will have no eyes to see. memory for all this thing. Even if you want me to know l'll not remember. If you ask me, "How did you go to that bathroom?"- Which one?. "That one",-It is alright I have 100 I mean my condition is like that, I tell you. It will be like that. It's very difficult. Like somebody says, "You come and play those cards with stakes." I never remember. and what food it was, and all sorts of things always lose. so I said what's the use of people go an thinking about. What is the playing. I don't remember. See, everybody use? The whole food is just going to be says, "You have so many brains otherwise, been there. Then faod. What sort of a taste it was. digested in the same stomach. What is there now can't you remember these three cards?" to be 'so much' worried about all this ? We I can't. I can't, just my brain goes off are wasting our energy. automatically. I don't know. 1 look like a | do not waste my energy. I have no stupid fool when I play that game. So why energy for wasting. In the same way, why should I play? Anything like that, I am do you waste your energy? Why not see to the better side of man. By seeing bad side, thing people know, that she's useless. forget if you can cure it, well and good. But if her. So it's a absolutely good for nothing. Nirmala Yoga 19

 It should become automatic with you other people should say if there is col a so. Then it's so enjoyable, how beautiful breeze coming. Because a person who is not we are that everything is so beauitiful around realised may not feel it. us, to see such beauty exists around us, and we do not see ! Such tremendous joyl Every feel it, then he is realised, only thing, his bliss is there, flowing within us. And we don't Chakras are to be cleared out. know, we don't notice it. Such a happy thing, it's such a beautiful thing! Oh God! Such a source of joy was just standing next Kundalini has not risen, they are still Sahaja to me I never knew. And I just turned round Yogis like that. May be, I do not know if Supposing he does not feel it, and you It is a different-different category of people. Then there are some people whose and saw that source. Turned aroundI there are unmarried for long, they are very difficult, because they never feel the cool breeze in the hand, quite a lot. like that. But you see it is not so; they are realised souls. In any case. they may not feel it, but they are realised souls, a kind of a balance, is developed after marriage which is not there. And that is how some people do not feel. any. Those people who are Turn your back. All conditiongs of yours, the ideas that you have. Do not pass judgement, first thing. Great art critics and all that. please, I beg of you, that do not pass remarks at anything all the time. It's ego playing the trick. Just watch it. How it is making you feel that you are something very great. Be careful. Q: Mother, some Sahaja Yogis have been in Sahaja Yoga for a long time, but don't feel cool breeze, they don't feel any catches. There are various reasons. Some people who are ego oriented, more, they should turn their left to the right many a times. They should find out, from the hands, you see. One hand is bigger, one hand is smaller,-if the left hand is smaller that means you have to raise left to the right. You see, from the For the nervous system, best size of the hands and all that you can se. SHRI MATAJI: To begin with, it has something to do with your nerves. So if your nervous system is disturbed, you may not feel, at all. thing is to do message. Somebody shouid massage their back, hands, also 1 have told many times that you rub your hands with vibrated olive oil quite a lot, and rub these things so they become sensitive. Could be with insensitivity. But if they can feel the catches in the body, that means they are alright. only their vishuddhi is not alright. develop the left Vishuddhi, then it is a 'very Rub the thing on the Vishuddhi. Work on Vishuddhi, clear it out. And for Vishuddhi, if you can use, say, butter, to rub on the Vishuddhi chakra front & back and rub all give you a complete lecture on one day, these muscles with that, all these things will complete, as to see what permutations and work out for your hands. Putting one hand towards the photograph and the other hand outside. Work it out in so many ways. Because you have permuta- tions and combinations of certain mistakes.- But that does not mean you develop this left Vishuddhi by any chance. Because that is the worst thing that can happen. If you difficult situation. Now, for this kind of a thing I think I'll combinations of different chakras can be created. Alright ? But supposing there is no cool breeze coming out of the head, what is it due to? are mostly outside. From a personality you Then realisation is not yet established. Se, But symptoms are outside. Symptoms can see what it is he is catching. 20 Nirmala Yoga

 сомо, ITALY 6th Sept., 1984 Her Holiness Shri Mataji Ekadasha Rudra Puja Today, we are doing a special type of like Self realization, still they do wrong things pooja which is performed in the glory of, then he is much more wrathful. So, in the "Ekādasha Rudra. balance the forgiveness starts reducing and the wrathfulness starts increasing. Rudra is the destructive power of Shiva, of the Spirit. Now, one power which is His nature, is forgiveness. He forgives because we are human beings, we commit mistakes, we do wrong things, we get tempted; our gives you tremendous capacity to forgive attention is disturbed; so he forgives us. He also forgives us when we spoil our chastity. your lust, He pacifies your greed. Like beau we do immoral things, we do thieving, and we do things that are against God, ta!k being and we become really beautiful flowers. against Him. He also forgives our superficia- And we start shining in the sunshine of His lities, jealousies, our lust, our anger. Also He blessings. forgives our attachments, petty jealousies, vanities and also possessiveness. He forgives our egoistical behaviour and also our subor- dination to wrong things. But when He forgives and as a result of that forgiveness you feel the gratitude, then His blessings start flowing towards you. He others. He pacifies your anger, He pacifies tiful dew-drops His blessings come on our Now He uses His wrath or His destructive power to destroy all that tries to trouble us. He protects realized souls at every point, in every way. Negative forces try to attack a reaction, and Sahaja Yogi but they are all neutralized by But every action has a when He forgives, He thinks that he has His tremendous power of protection. Through given you reaction builds up wrath against those who are forgiven and try to do greater mistakes. Specially, is my Shepherd" Is all described how he after realization, because such a big blessing looks after you as a shepherd. there is of the realization; you have got the light and in the light if you are holding onto your plate then His wrath goes up because, people. He destroys them. Those who enter he sees how stupid you have been, WhatI into Sahaja Yoga and are still carrying on am saying is that after realization specially He with their evil nature are destroyed. Those is much mora sensitive that people who are forgiven and have been given such a big thing tate and do not rise are destroyed or they a big grace-mark, and that his vibratary awareness we are guided into right path. All the beautiful blessings of His are described in the Psalm 23...." The Lord within Him, as But He does not look after these evil who come to Sahaja Yoga and do not medi- Nirmala Yoga 21

 are thrown out of Sahaja Yoga. Those who gled. murmur against God and live in a way that is forces. Like I know of Maurine who was not behoving a Sahaja Yogi, He removes with me, and her parents and parents-in-law them. So by one force, He protects, by ano- ther force, He throws away. But his destruc tive forces when they are built up too much, then we call it "now the 'Ekādasha Rudra' is not that way stand up to that, and she took Or some of them yield to others' said that the child must be baptized. I rold her, you cannot get this child baptized because it is a realized soul. But she could the child for baptism; and the child became very funny. It was doing like a mad child. active." Now, this Ekādasha Rudra will be expres- So, now then she gave up all that and so sed when the Kalki itself will start acting, she has saved. But supposing she had means the destructive power which will another child and she would have done the destroy all that is negative on this earth and save all that is positive. So it is very neces- sary for Sahaja Yogis to expedite their ascent, not to be satisfied with the social life or married life ar with all the blessings that God that anybody who comes to Sahaia Yoga has bestowed upon you. We always see, what God has done for us, how He has been miraculous to us, but we have to see what sensitivity, or you should feel it in your body, we have done for ourselves, what äre we doing about our own ascent and our growth. same thing, the second child would have been something very very bad. Now, the trouble with Sahaja Yogis is programme thinks he is a Sahaja Yogi. It is not so. Either you should have very strong or with your intelligence you should under- stand what is Sahaja Yoga. A person who is still negative always gets attracted towards other one who is very powerfully negative Now, out of the eleven...the Ekädashas, means eleven,-the five come from the right and does not understand that the other side of your void, and five from the left side of your void. The first five on the left impressed. Under such circumstances, such hand side come from,-if you have bowed yourself to wrong Gurus, or if you have read wrong books, or if you have been in the company of wrong people, or if you have been sympathetic towards people who have been following wrong paths, or you have mad, whether been yourself one of the agent or guru of with him, whether he is your relation, these wrong people. Now these five problems or anything. No sympathy of any kind, on can be solved, if we completely give up the contrary a kind of anger should be there whatever wrong we have been doing. As for that person, a kind of a detachment. Mohammad Sähab has said that you have And this angry detachment is the only time, to beat the Shaitan, means the satan, with shoes; but that has to be done not mechani- cally but from your heart. Like many people Sahaja Yogis but not for their own husbands who come to Sahaja Yoga will tell me, "My or wives who are extremely negative. father is following this Guru; that father is following that Guru." and get involved with their father, sister, this, that and try to take them out from those Gurus,-also get entan- person is so powerfully negative; but gets a person is hit by that negativa person and Shiva cannot protect. One should not have sympathy with anyone who is negative, whether he is there is something wrong when you have to be angry. But I have seen people who have anger for very good So when the Ekādasha Rudra starts acting on these five sides on the right we should say, it moves to the right side, because it comes Nirmala Yoga 22

 from the left and moves to the tight side,- inauspiciousness will hurt anyone to any extent; so better keep out of such persons. then a person starts becoming negative but acting with his ego. Such a person may take up a situation into hands and say that "I am such and such sahaja yogi and I am so. we When these ten Ekādashas are developed within a person, then definitely such a person should do like this and we should behave gets diseases like cancer and incurable horrible like this", and start dictating; people can do diseases. Specially, when the eleventh one anything. And some mediocre. and some which is actually here which is the Virāta's half baked sahaja yogis may try to understand, chakra, which is the collectivity: when it is but most will know that "this fellow is going effected as well, then such a person cannot get out of this disease. But if, out of these these things lead to this left side develop- even five are combined,-with Mooladhara ment, or we can call it on the head,-on the or with Agnyă, then they get into serious right hand side of your Medha, this plate, typas of dirty disease. That's why, always brain-plate is called Medha in sanskrit say that bạ careful about your Agnya chakra. Because that is one of the worst things, that once it starts getting combined with these Ekādashas, part of the Ekädashas, then any- out, now he is on his way out." So, all language. Now, the right sided one, comes from the idea people have that, 1 am myself a big things can happen to a person, he can meet Guru." They start preaching about Sahaja Yoga also, as if they have become great gurus. We have known some people who give big lectures in any programmes and who hhas got the right Agnya and also any never allow my tape to be played or anything They think they have now become experts. # they combine with Agnya Chakra, the Then some of them say that now we have become so great that we need not do any protective powers of God are minimum. So, foot-soaking or anything, there is no need to do meditation; there are some like that also. And then there are some who say that sin can never touch us, now we are Sahaja Yoois, and the Agnya chakra is soothed down. Don't we are very great evolved souls. But the pay attention here and there all the time. worst of all are those who just take my name saying that "Mother has said so and I am telling you because Mother has said":-when I have never said such a thing: it's all false- such a manner that you don't have to worry hood. Now there are some people who use Sahaja Yoga money and exploit Sahaja Yoga in such a way, exploit them,-Sahaja Yogis- also sometimes. And such people become touch you, that is your fortress. By meditation, very inauspicious. Anyone who tries such one must establish thoughtless awareness, things will go out of Sahaja Yoga with that is the sign that you are rising higher. disgrace. But one should never go near such Many people do meditation and say, "Alright, a person, have nothing to do with such a person, have no sympathies. Because this with a horrible accident. he can suddenly be hit by someone, could be murdered by some- one, anything can happen to such a person one of the Ekādashas, right or left. That means, the five of these, any one of the five; to keep your Agnya chakra alright,-say now I am speaking, you should watch me continu- ously so that there is thoughtless awareness Then you will find that, gradually your atten- tion will neutralize into thoughtless aware- ness. And your attention would be fixed in about anything. In thoughtless awareness nobody can Mother we are doing." Mechanically, they do and say, "I did this, I did this, and I did this, 23 Nirmala Yoga

 But did you achieve your thoughtless aware- ness, minimum of minimum? Have you felt is the personification of Aumkära, he is the your cool breeze coming out of your head? personification of vibrations. So when He gets Otherwise, if you are doing something mech- angry then the whole universe starts brea- anically, it is not going to help; help you or king. As He personifies the power of the help anyone. He is the support of the whole universe. He Mother which is penetrating into every aätom, into every molecule, into every human being, So, after realization, as you are very into every thing that is living and non-living, well protected, you have all the blessings once it gets disturbed the whole thing gets and a great future, you also have a great into jeopardy. So the pleasing of Christ is possibility of complete annihilation. I would very important. say, to give an analogy; you are clim- have to be like small children-that is, the bing, and everybody is supporting you to innocence. The purity of the heart is the climb, holding your hand, and there are so many things by which you are protected to be taken upward, there is no posibility of falling off by mistake also, but if you try to developed their brains too much, they try to remove your bondages with truth and love and all the time try to hit the people who are trying to support you, then you fall from a great height, greater height. I mean, the greater height you rise, the greater you fall. And with a greater force also, much more deeper. But is a very good Sahaja Yogi. Such people are every effort is made by the Divine, every support is given to you, every care is taken. they are egoistical, but they are very cunning Despite that, if you want to fall. then trom clever people and they are quite aware, as to Now, Christ has said, "You best way you can please Him. As in the West specially, people have play about with words and think that nobody knows what they are doiig. All such people must know that everything you do is known to God. If you are not clean in your heart, it is very dangerous for anybody to pose as if he not possessed, nor they are conditioned, nor that height, is very dangerous. what they are doing. But, there are people who But Ekādasha Rudra, at that time, at such get possessed also and then they, in that, they a time when somebody tries to harm the try to destroy themselves or cry and weep and cause of Sahaja Yoga, after being in Sahaja do all kinds of things. There are some who Yoga, then hits you so badly that the whole think that if they hurt themselves or do some sort of an extreme thing then God will be family can be protected if there are few people happy,-are sadly mistaken. If you cannot of that family doing Sahaja Yoga work- enjoy in Sahaja Yoga, then you should If atteck is very widespread. But the whole could be protected. But in case the family know that something is wrong with you. that is against all the time of Sahaja Yogis you cannot feel happy in Sahaja Yoga then and try to trouble them, can be completely you must know that there is something defi- nitely wrong with you. If you cannot enjoy the company of Sahaja Yogis, then it's sure Now these Ekadasha Rurdras come out of, something is wrong with you. f you cannot as I told you, from the Void, So, we can say laugh and appreciate the greatness of God. that the destruction part of it comes from the then something wrong with you. If you are still worried about negative people and their are given in one person that is the "Maha- problems then know that there's something vishnu', that is 'Lord Jesüs Christ', because wrong with you., If you have sympathies destroyed, very badly. Void mainly. But these are the powers, all Nirmala Yoga 24

 with negative people, then also there's some- thing wrong with you. But if you have anger for negative and all that is negative that is agairist Sahaja Yoga, then you are total destructive power is Ekädasha Rudra. It is extremely powerful, explosive, but it is not blind. It is very discriminative and extremely delicately woven. It avoids all the good points and attacks the wrong things. there. When this thing gets matured then you And it hits at the right time, at the right point, become the power of 'Ekadasha Rudra your- direct, without hitting anything that is good in self. Anybody who will try to insult you or to do any harm, will collapse. It has happe- falls upon someone, say,-and there is some- ned with many people who tried to be thing in-between which is Divine or which insulting to me or tried to harm me or any- is a positive thing, it penetrates through way.... sometimes I am quite worried about positive, without harming the them. So one has to be in such a way that and hits the negative. they become the Ekädasha. Nobody can touch such people. But such a person is full of com- passion and forgiveness. As a result, Ekadasha acts much faster. The more comnpassion- ate you are the more powerful Ekādasha becomes. The more collective you become cutting the neck in one shot, it goes on between. Now the glance of Ekādasha Rudra positive It cools down somebody (not freezing) and burns another. So that is how it works with such care and such delicacy. And it is tremendously sharp also. And it is very painful. It is not like the more Ekādasha acts. Many people have slowly. All the horrible tortures that you a habit of receding back into their exclusion have learnt or heard about are expressions of and saying that we better be at home and it's Ekādasha Rudra. For example, take the alright; but thay don't know what they are missing. Whatever may be your experience is removed, the tongue is removed, then the with others. you should stick-on together, gullet is removed, then everything goes one always attend pragrammes, take leadership, after other, is removed with terrible pain, you go ahead with it, work it out and you will be see. Take leprosy for example, the lepers blessed thousand-folds. case of cancer. In the cancer thing, the nose cannot feel their fingers, they can not feel it, so any rat or anything eats their fingers they can't feel it, so they start losing their fingers, Ekādasha Rudra have all the powers, I would say. of destruction, together. It is that is how Ekädasha eats up i.e. devours destructive power of Shri Ganesha. destructive power Mahesha. It is the destructive power of the Mother, It is the destructive power of the very gentle and could be very sweet, when it Ganesha and four of these are Bhairava and comes to His own children. The story is Hanumâna, Kärttikéya and Ganesha. Also about the Mother. Once She got very angry, the powers of Sadāshiva and of the Adishakti. All the destructive powers of all the incarna- angry, She wanted to destroy the whole tions are Ekādashas. not the least, is the destructive power of tried to destroy the whole world. When She Hiranyagarbha' which is collective Brahma- deva. And this power when it acts, every atom that She is being a bit too much angry. So explodes, the whole atomic energy goes into when She started destroying, as She was a destructive power. So, thus the complete going right and left, He did not know what It is people. of Brahma, Vishnu, But this wrathfulness of the Father can be - the Primordial Mother.-and She was so Now the last but world with Her Ekådasha power and She went into that mood, the Father Himself felt Nirmala Yoga 25

 to do. So He took Her child, that means Pooja 'And it is for all kinds of false religious representing Sahaja Yogi, you can say, rep- resenting Christ or representing anyone of which are followed in the name of God, or these great children of Her's, that he put the any religion that does not say about Self child under Her feet. So, when She was realization and does not achieve Self realiza- stamping, suddenly She saw Her own child tion and does not get connected with God, under Her feet and Her such a big tongue Is false. So any such thing that is just faith came out. She just stopped;-balancing. But and talks of God but has no connection with this has happened only once. sects and false gurus and false religions, God cannot be a true religion. Of course, it So, after the Ekādasha Rudra, ultimately gives a balance to people, but in giving that the complete destruction comes through the balance, if people live on that money and try to enjoy a wealth out of that money, then it is not even at the very lower level is religion. Like a balance, you, see, religion has to give So thus we have seen how Ekädasha a balance to begin with, but in that balanc- Rudra acts and how Sahaja Yogis have to ing when they tell," you have to be balanced, but give me money for that, you must give me money, give me all your purse, give me everything," then that cannot be balanced, it does not even have a slightest thing or the blessings of God. Or any religion that makes you bow to anybody else but incarnation, is not a religion, that is another one which is anger of Sadashiva; when the final total destruction takes place. becoma themselves 'Ekādasha Rudra". Now to develop this power one has to develop a tremendous power of detachment, power of detachment-detachment from nega- tive. For example, negativity can come from very near people like brother, mother, sister; could come from relatives. it could come from a country, it could come from your political ideas, economic ideas, anything like that. Any misidentification can destroy your and will always talk about the ascent. But power of Ekādasha Rudra. So it is not only they will not ask for money or make one man sufficient to say that " am surrendered to something great as venerated. Thus, we Sahaja Yoga and I am a Sahaja Yogi," but you should learn to discriminate between false- must know mentally also what is Sahaja hood, negative things and real things. Once Yoga. So that intelligently you understand what is Sahaja Yoga. Because in the west specially people are over-intelligent, and if gence, you are in the control of yourself. the light of Sahaja Yoga does not enter into And then you become that power of Ekadas- their intelligence you can never overcome your attachments. That does not mean you talk too much about Sahaja Yoga or you give lectures on that, but mentally you should the power of Ekādasha Rudra and you deve- also understand what is Sahaja Yoga. absolutely false, The real religion will give you a balance you develop that discrimination through vibratory awareness, or through your intelli- ha, when you establish your maturity. Today, I bless you all, that you all become lop that sincerity which takes you to that state, Today is a special day when it has been asked that we should have 'Ekādasha Rudra May God Bless you. 26 Nirmala Yoga

 Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi HEART CHAKRA DELHI 1st February 1983 The Mother The Chakra of the Goddess lies behind the sternum bone in the spinal chord. This Chakra is placed above the Bhavasāgara, above the life when the child goes to the school or he void, as we call it in Sahaja Yoga. And the tries to work out something for the future, bridge that has to be crossed by the bhaktas, by the seekers, is guarded by Her. She is the parents, teachers and outside people. So it is one, She helps Her children to come through very important to understand child ren who that passage when there are negative forces are growing. trying to attack on a seeker. Tiumber and this centre being so weak, the person feels extremely insecure. Later on in then also his confidenice can be shaken by In the west they analyse everything and This chakra is placed at the back of the try to put human beings into compartments. sternum bone as I told you. In childhood, the antibodies are formed in the sternum bone. no innocence, and he is extremely selfish. They are the warriors or the Sainikes of the Second part is adolescence, which they think Devi. And till the age of 12 years they grow and multiply, and ultimately they all get do not know that there it something like distributed all over the body. and a human adolescence. Now these adolescent people being is made able to face any outside inva- form a group, and they start criticizing or sion on him. how to fight. They are extremely confident. age it starts. First they make fun of the And they know who are their enemies. They teachers, then of the parents, then of all the have all these messages built in themselves. So when the anti-God element enters into becoming extremely active in their brains the being through any process, say through because they see too many televisions and food, through words, through action, through things like that, and then they start behaving devilish people, or black magic, these anti- bodies combine together. collectively fight that one cannot imagine. First the child, according to them, child has is a very arbitrary, moody stuff. In India, we . These anti-bodies know making fun of all the elders. At a very young people who are senior to them. They start at a very young age in such violent ways the invaders. I used to live about 25 miles away from Those who do not have their central London, And every time 1 would go to heart properly developed suffer from tremen- London, I would find some children doing dous insecurity all their lives. When they are some sort of a mischief somewhere. One day children, you try to control them by frighten- some of them entered into my compartment, ing; these children later on become extremely and they started pulling out all the covers, insecure. They are afraid of darkness, they thrusting their knives into the seats, opening out all the upholstery. I was just sitting and of everything. Because the antibodies that watching. So I said, "Now are you tired? are built in the body are not sufficient in Please sit down. What is the problem?" They are afraid of night. Some of them are afraid Nirmala Yoge 27

 But they are. They are frightened of each said, "We are all very angry". I said, "For what? Why are you angry?" They said, "we other, they are frightened of themselves. The are just angry." "But you have to be angry for reason is, the centre heart is absolutely weak. something". They were children going to good schools definitely. wearing verY good insecurities. The child does not know, when clothes. And then I had to.-when the train stopped, I called the ticket collector and told him that these boys have been doing all this mother would be there or she would be gone. hooliganism in the compartment and you better look at it. And he came in, and he said from the husbands and smile and show no this is a common thing. And then somehow signs of their agony to their children. But the or the other he took them out. I told you the first reason, the family he comes back from school, whether his They do not have mothers who can bear a lot mothers in that country, 1 have seen, always try to use their children for all kinds of emo- But the only thing I felt about them is, tional blackmail, you can call it. They try that all of them had their centre heart catch- ing. On the Kundalini, they were catching their husband is doing to them and whatever is the centre heart. But when they saw me, they problem they are facing with the husbands. sat down. Thay were quiet, they listened to So the child is not secured by the mother. me. I them said "We are angry with our mother." "But why?""Because our brothers are angry". "But why your brothers are angry ?"...Then ! tive and left-sided. He feels that he is born in discovered that Freud has given these funny a place full of hatred, insecurity, and fear. ideas against the mother. Mother itself, can you imaginel What a anti-God activity it is. to torture the child by telling all the things the ELS But on the contrary, child starts giving secur- ity to mother there. At a very young age it starts, and the child becames extremely nega- settled their centre heart. And most of When the Bhaktas are born in those coun- tries, they are also the same way. Because To an Indian, Mother is the primal thing. they have to go to a Guru, the Guru, as Any Indian. Because his sense of security lies known so far, tortures them or extracts all the in the mother. Even if the father is hot-tem- pered, is angry, still they depend on the and sometimes leaves them high and dry on mother. Because Mother knows when to get the streets. angry and when not to get angry. She has the discrimination. And She is the one who money, takes their pareekshā (sar), tests, But in our country the Goddese has täken incarnation many a times. Thousands of times She has taken here Her birth, whenever The idea of Mother is completlely blasted the Bhaktas called Her, when they were pes- in the west, and this is the reason why the tered by the negative forces, She came on this children of that country feel so insecure, and earth to save them. These things used to be when they grow, they are extremely insecu- just accepted by people, but never they really red. You would not believe that all the time accepted in their hearts. People thought these are some sorts of mythological stories that the but not even a rät enters their house. And if Goddess came on this earth and She tried to they have to taik to someone, they will make save the people. They could not believe that there could be a Shakti (Power) who could Specially in London because they are literally be born. who could fight these horrible rak- frightened, Nobody will believe, the British shasas, and kill them, and save Her children. who ruled us, are such frightened people. Her bhaktās, from agony. It was too much. protects them. they are polishing, they are cleaning their house, the person stand outside, and talk from inside. Nirmala Yoga 28

 But today in Sahaja Yoga, you have seen that when Kundalini rises and stops at the centre heart you have to say the mantra of "Jagadamba", and the Kuncalini rises. That means, She resides in the central heart, and when She is being worshipped, the Kundalini ask them, they will say," What's wrong?" A rises. This centre has got twelve petals, But the Goddess has thousand hands and thou- sand eyes.She has 16,000 nādis (T, he wants to have a keep, let him have it". In channels) to work out Her different aspects India, no woman would tolerate such a situa- of enlightenment. But the first thing She has to do, through her generosity and kindness and compassion and patience, She has to suck-in the sins-Papavimochini (safarii rat). The sins of human beings. up some sort of insecurities, which are of no actual existence. But such fears are very much more in the West. Because the life in the West has no mooring, has no explanation. Whatever you husband will say what's wrong in having a keep. And the wife will also say, "Alright if tion. She would starve, she would do every- thing, but she will never touch a man who has a keep. So the basis of the strength of Indian women is their "sense of chastity". The sense of chastity in the Indian women is so of fear is sin." Or you can put it the other way great that nothing can deter them as long as round, the wages of sin is fear." If you have they are chaste. But if they are not chaste, then fear settles in them 'very' fast.. Chastity self and against God. Because, if Mother is is the strength of women. And that is why, Almighty, and She 'can' solve all your prob- those women who have fear, mostly, have a lems, you are under Her protection, then why problem of their chastity being challenged. should you have any fear? That means you do A woman who is frightened that her chastity not believe that She is that' powerful. When a may be disturbed, also can develop a problem person is frightened, this centre starts brea- with the heart chakra. Such women can thing fast, giving rhythmic instructions to all develop breast cancer, breathing troubles, and other kind of frightening diseases on the One of the sentences in Bible was" wages fear, you are committing a sin against your the antibodies. With that you feel you are getting a palpitation in the heart. This palpi- tation is nothing but a signal to all the anti- bodies to fight the emergency of an attack. emotional level also. This chakra is ruined in women when they lose their only child; beceuse their mother- But when some body builds-up insecurity hood is finished, they feel. And that is the later on in life, it becomes a physical problem, worst thing that can happen to a woman If they have insecurities earlier, it is an emo- But if she is not a woman, she doesn't feel tional problem. But later on in life, when one much, and she just behaves in a very manly develops a insecurity of any kind, like a wife, way. And that is what I have seen in the if she is insecure about her husband; husband west, that women really don't much care is a loafer or a bad man, and carrying on with when their children die. But it is because other women, so the motherhood of the wife they are not women. If you are a woman is challenged. And when her motherhood is you definitely feel for your children, their challenged, she may get the weakening of death. But after some time, such a woman this centre, by which she may suffer quite a comes back again and she accepts the tife as lot and may have even breast cancer. These it is, for the sake of her husband, or may be if insecurities can be also self-made, imaginary. she has more relations or other children. She People can just think about it and build becomes extremely powerful as a reaction to 29 Nirmala Yoga

 what has happened to her. That is only did not love their mothers, or perhaps, may be possible if your centre of heart is alright. that they did not understand the value of Such women do not grudge, do not complain, virginity in women. are extremely serene, and can bear up lots of things. They are extremely tolerant, and can go to any extent to help their children; but they are never spoiling their children. They to have lusty eyes, can also develop this 'never' spoil their children, because they understand spoiling is much worse than bea- ting the child. They never spoil the children, nor even pamper them, and never get domin- ated by their children. They know, "I have to guide the child, and have to look after the child". So, they look after all the ideals and negligence in life. Like some people have a righteousness and the virtues of the child. And if he tries to get out of it, they go 'all So those men, who try to look at every woman who passes by, tho se men who try centre very badly. And lots of problems can come through this centre. One of the problems that comes through this could be lung cancer. this centre is very badly affected also by certain But I have seen habit of having a 'very hot bath, and then coming out of that hot bath and entering into some cool place. Such peo ple will catch this centre very badly and they will have a problem. Then there is another thing which looks very simple, but many people have a habit, specially in summers, to wear a one single kurta or a out' to win him over back to virtue and to better life. But those people, those women, who do not care for actual growth of child, may just avoid it and escape it. In the men, this chakra is caught up if they single shirt and not the under-shirt. This is have lost their mother very early, if their also not proper. mother by chance is a very cruel woman. something under his shirt, otherwise when it Also this chakra can be caught up by men, if starts perspiring, he can get trouble into this they had been to wars, and if they have heart centre. seen frightful things in the war. Such people could be extremely emotional and could be easily befooled by people who try to win over emotional problems their emotions. A man must always have This heart centre is caught up by various in human beings. Husband and wife, if they all the time quarrel, there is always quarrelling in the house, What is to be done to improve this chakra7 specially if the mother is very dominating, the In Sahaja Yoga we have many techniques child develops this centre. And if the father by which we can improve this chakra, and get is very dominating, the child develops this- our confidence back. As Patrick has said. the heart itself. So it is very important that husband and wife should never quarrel in the that he never used to speak. And I have seen many actors who act very well and when they presence of their children. came to my programme, they said "Mother please do not ask us to speak because we just do not know how to speak. We can Now there resides in this centre, the incarnation of the Goddess, who came on act, but we cannot speak to people." And this earth thousands of times, and She resides there for your protection. But first of all you have to be worthy of Her protection. When sat down,I found out all of them had this She came on this earth many a times, you chakra very badly damaged. Perhaps they know, Her body was made by various lacked the love of their mothers, perhaps they forces, as if She was like a bubble and the I tried once or twice and they ended up with two-three sentences, mumbled down and Nirmala Yoga 30

 bubble was covered by so many things added it started moving. And we came back then to on to that. And that is how She got lots of Bombay." So. on the way they started things from various Gods,-like Her hair She asking. "There must be some saint got from Yama, the God of death : Her nose She got from the God of wealth, Kubera; and Only a saint can protect us like this." And Her ears She got from the Pawana, that is air. Like that, Her body was made specially by "this is Mataji's disciple." They all started essences of these great deities, who donated falling at her feet, saying, "Oh! you have saved their essences to the Goddess, to be equi- pped to do these multifarious activities: sitting here, otherwise how can we be protected ? she was wearing my ring. "Oh!", they said, us.you have saved us. So, there are many miracles that take Now the tirst activity, as I told you, of the place in your life. When you see an accident Goddess is to save Her children from the taking place, suddenly you find the accident negative forces. mild, sweet but She can be 'extremely' vio- journalist called Marāthé. lent,-in the sense, She can kill or crush another journalist, were coming from Lonāvlä anyone who tries to overpower Her children. down, and it is a very big slopy road, ghät, Atisaumya-Atiraudra (afarr, a )-these and their brakes failed. And the driver said, two temperaments exist only in the Goddess, now the brakes have failed and you take God's because She is the Mother; and at any cost She wants to save Her child. Also towards the child when he goes beyond a point of understanding, when he shows no sense of discipline, then also Goddess can pull him God knows what happened-they opened the down by certain methods that She adopts. So She looks extremely is over, There was one fellow, who was a . He and his friends, name." And they started remembering their Mother. And suddenly they saw a big truck coming ahead. They were about to bang on to that, they closed their eyes. And eyes and saw the truck was going upward and Now first of all is, that She gives all that is they were moving forward without any needed to remove the fear from the mind of Sādhakas. Secondly, She 'cures' this centre by giving birth to additional antibodies in the body. And, by vibrating the tired antibodies to act in a way that they can fight back again. difficulties. And they were amazed how it has happened, as if somebody has lifted their car and put before the truck, and they have been saved. And the driver also closed his eyes and took the name of the Mother. It is possible I It has happened with so many Even in day-to-day life, She may establish people that they do not know how it works Her existence by showing lots of miracles to Her children. We had a lady coming to see me and she was rather late. And when she came back I asked her what was the problem. Mother within ourselves, in our heart, and if She said "No, there was no problem, but my bus fell down about 20-30 feet down, and out. So one has to believe, that we have the She is awakened, She is going to look after us. She is going to give 'all the protection US. the thing rolled down and fell on the ground that is needed. And there is 'nothing' to be with all the four legs intact. And all of us frightened of, anything. in the bus were saved. But the driver got upset and he ran away. So somebody who was in the bus, who knew how to drive, came clearly, that they were quite frightened, and 1 down and he switched on the engine, and But you can imagine, as Patrick has said know they are. Even English language is like Nirmala Yoga 31

 All the time they will say. "I am you have clerks and this, and that, and that. And you are nothing else but that. So because What is there to be afraid of, if you have to you are that, you must have these horns, and 1 am afraid, if I am you must shout at people, otherwise nobody ....."-they are all the time jittery like that. is going to believe that you are something. that. afraid.. .. "I am afraid I have to go." go ? You better go. "I And so jittery and when they talk. you know they are so frightened that sometimes you So it is such an identification that deve- feel nervous with them, that you do not know lops into human beings, that too, because of this heart not being developed properly. Because if your heart is developed properly. then you are a human being. Because you know your Mother has given you the birth and you are a human being. There is no need to have any fear from andther human being, how to approach them, the way they are nervous. And one of the reasons why they are nervous is that, because they plan too much, think too much, analyse oo much and their ego settles down into their brains, and ultima- tely the heart. Because their ego covers their who is also a child of your Mother. So there heart, they get a fright happens that if you become ego-oriented you start seeing yourself through. Because when start wearing anything; supposing they wear you are at a level, you can even see your ego a suit, immediately they will start speaking in very clearly, and then you get frightened of English. As soon as they wear Pyjämās, they other people because you think that they too must be having the same type of ego, and you are really frightened of them. has to be no fear about it. Actually it so But the trouble is that when human beings start speaking in Hindi language-or say Dhoti, Hindi language, and say Pyjāmās, they might start giving gålis (abusing). So it is a kind of a very superficial identification human It is very common aiso, in the East. Now in India I should say, that supposing you have beings develop, because there is no depth in to go to a government office, be careful. Any- body, even a chaprāsi (peon) can shout at mooring in the heart, then they would not you for nothing at all. They develop a system develop these superficial things. And as a of barking all the time, just go on barking. The reason is they bark at you because they they know they are superficial, others are themselves are insecure. A Chaprāsi is inse- cure of his boss, his boss is insecure of "his boss, his boss is insecure of his boss, ultimately might pull my beard as well. Such a fear the minister is afraid of the voters, and the voters are afraid of the minister. it is such a vicious circle So the whole system works out into such a terrible insecurity that you do not understand what is there to bark at ? What is there to shout at ? And then a kind of a identification with the falsehood is built up so much, that you are no more a human You will remain always the child of the being: you are either a secretary or you are an under secretary or a joint secretary, I do other child, in the eyes of Mother ? You not know who is higher who is lower. And then you have some other secretaries and then such tricks, the Mother will punish you. If they had that depth, that the heart. result of that, they are frightened. Because superficial, they have got beard, we have got beard. So if I am going to pull his beard, he And then, exists among human beings. another thing, another step comes into the minds of the people, that, why not pull his legs to go up ? This is the third category of debasement. If you are the child of the same Mother, how can you go higher than anybody else ? Mother. How can you be higher than any cannot. On the contrary, if you try to do Nirmala Yoga 32

 And this is the second thing that Mother If She is like any other gurus, the Gurus, does, is to punish Her children. Yes, She Satgurus also,-they used to beat their punishes ! In very sweet ways first of all. For disciples ! They used to hang them by a example, if the child is not eating and troubl- string I You don't know how the Gurus treat ! Some of them take lots of their disciples ing, She says", Alright, you don't want to eat, alright, don't eat today." That is a very simple money from their disciples, and some of them way of punishing children. But then She take lots of things from their disciples. They want complete surrendering, and they would make them subservient. They really torture the lives of their disciples ! But the Mother does not want to do that. So She plays here and there, and iries to says", Alright you want to have the way you want to have, go ahead". Like i tell them not to do such and such thing, it is not good. For example, I told them little tricks that don't take the flats just from the begin- ning, and let all the Sahaja Yogis stay with other Sahaja Yogis. But the organisers thought, better to take the flats.-whatever whom I met about five-six years back. He correct the children. Now I will give you an example of a Guru, may be the reasons. Because they are very wise organisers ! But you see, Mother says came from Amarnāth to a small village, small district place near Bombay, where a Sahaja something very simple, but it has a meaning, Yogini was staying. And he sent his. disciple, one must know. Arnd, they arranged it who was staying in that place, to see that that way. So, half of the people just pro- Sahaja Yogini. And he went and he told that tested, "No we want to stay with some Sahaja Yogis, we want to be with them". So they were accomodated. The others were,-British, you know now-a-days are on the other side of the mood. They are very-very tolerant. And they said," Alright, if we are not ärran- "you see, my Guru is coming, and he wants to see Mataji. And he has told me that only Adi Shakti will clear out my Agnya chakra." So she could not understand, she said, what is your Guru doing? "Oh God I don't talk about him," he held his ears. "Don't take his name. ged, we will stay in the flats." So they stayed ohl you cannot know what sort of a person in the flats. But what happened?-It rained, he is." She said," But why does not he open and rained and rained and rained, and they your Agnyā Chakra7 Mother will be coming could not errarge their food even under the of course, but why shouldn't he do that?" He roof they had built. So they had to shift all said, "No, no no l he said that only She of them to other places, and all of them had should open, nobody else should open it. And to stay with other Sahaja Yogis, as told by he sent me to this place about five years Mother. If they had listened to the Mother, back, saying that in the sixth year Adishakti they would have saved some money, as well as they would have saved some trouble, and there would have been no problem at all. That is how little tricks here and there are played by Mother just to convince the children that you have been stupid. will be coming, and She will open your Agnya Chakra." Now can you believe it ! Poor fellow suffering from that horrid Agnya Chakra, was suffering when this Guru had come. So he came to see me and he told me, "Mother, my Guru has come and he wants to see you". So Now, there are so many things like that I went to see him. And this guru was sitting which Mother can play, and Her playfulness down there with a big temper you see, the is very important in life. Because if She is nose was all bloating. Of course, when I went severe with the children, they will run away. there he touched my feet and everything: and Nirmala Yoga 33

 then he called one very bad name to this you, they trouble you so much, they try to be thing, "Did he touch your Feet 7 Wes he funny with you. Still you don't say anything alright? Was he behaving airight?" I said, he was alright, but I can't understand why did how to correct them." you not open his Agnya chakra ! He said, "Let him go to hell now! I am not going to open his Ägnya Chakra, Agnya chakra ? Why should I open his Ägnya chakra ?" So I said, this is not good. I should open.".."Yes, yes, you will, because you are a Mother. I am not a Mother." So he went inside, and the disciole completely secure about it, and She does not told me, "Motherl he hanged me by legs on the disciple will misbehave or anything, bec- top of this well I For three days I was hanging there." I said, for what? Why did he hang you there? He said," Don't ask any one," Then he (guru) came in, "Yes, yes, I hanged him ! Yes, I will ! Againl" So I said, why did you explaining to me, "Mother, you do not know. hang him ? ""He was smoking, Because he this thing happened .."I said, "I do not know was smoking. I hanged him there. I said, anything, is'nt it? You think I do not know now smoke, and I was putting him down, up anything. He said, Yes Mother, how could and down. I said I am smoking you."-And you?" I told him that he used to play cricket he tortured him like this I to them." I said, "I don't have to say. I know So this is the quality of the Mother, who can correct people. She knows who doubts them, She knows who thinks wrong about Her. She knows who thinks rightly about Her. She knows everything. If She knows every- thing, She does not have to worry. She is who opened 'my' have the insecurity of the guru, that one day ause She knows haw to correct. The other day I met one gentleman, a Sahaja Yogi, and he came to me and started in his younger days. Then he accepted, "Alright you know Mother all about me, I do not know how you know." 1 said, "but why should you do such a horrible thing?" He says "Otherwise how will you discipline? I am not a Mother. don't know how to discipline. This is the only way is the one who sees everything. She knows, I can discipline him." And he said," You go somehow or the other, She knows. How on spoiling him, but I am going to discipline She knows, that can not be explained at this him like that." Alright, 1 said, you shut up stage. But She knows 'each and everything' now, just now, do not talk, let me put his what you are doing, if She wants to know. ågnyā right. And to put his Agnya right. I said his ägnya is alright now. promise you that he will not smoke?. I said, will be just like you. And you would But She is avalokiteshvari (अबसोकितेश्वरी). She I took about two minutes And the third quality of the Mother is, that She is a Mahāmäyā. Sha talks like you, sits Then he said, "Did he lika you, she will behave like you, everything said, "he did not." So he said, "You better ask him to promise, otherwise I will not allow him to eat his food for three days." I said, Baba! This is a horrible Guru! God save this discipie such a beautiful way that you cannot make not be able to make out the depth of this woman, who is a Mahā māyā because She plays such tricks on you and such things in from this Guru! it out. You think that you are alright, you go But, you see, what he was meaning, that to a person and you tell anything you feel there should be a discipline in a disciple. like about Mother, you try to do anything and There has to be a complete understanding that 'ultimately you discover that everything She he is the Guru. But he said," Look at these knows. And when you discover that, gradual- people, How are they? They take liberties with ly you start understanding that when She 34 Nirmala Yoga

 knows everything about me, I better be alright. Now you must know that Mother has And how does She know?-Because She saved people from that Bhavasägara, with resides in your centre heart. She knows such great difficulty. It is not easy to do that, 'everything' what you have been doing, what it is a tremendaus task. Sometimes, to raise you are doing, what you are thinking of the Kundalini of thousands of people, I feel doing. So what does She do ? Sankalpa vika- like a big mountain/ have to raise. It is whatever terrible. But people on the whole, who are sankalpas you are making, she will make it not yet corrected, think they are obliging me Realisation. This is a very Ipa karot) (संकल्प विकत्प करोति), taking by fail. If you say. "Now I have decided Mother, to do this, and I am "going to do it."-it common feeling with human beings. AndI will fail. You have to judge yourself as a feel like laughing at the stupidity of the ego!-that they are obliging me by taking this Realisation. And the way they talk is all on this terminology, I came, I was sitting there for three days, I never got realisation." As if real son of your Mother. As in Bombay or any place we tried to get some larid, nobody could get it. We tried, tried, tried you see; they say black market money, bribery, curruption. I said nothing doing, I am not going to do any of these thing s. So they said, "Then Mother, how are we to achieve it?" I said you will achieve it, don't you worry. Then they started saying, She is not practical, She is this, She is that. And everybody who said, turned out to be "very impractical. Ultimately', I said, when you will be ready for Sahaja Yoga, then you will get the land and the Ashram. Because once you start an Ashram and have some money there, you will find 'all' kinds of bhoots such an attitude is developed, it is much will join together and will make fun with the money that has been collected, there would not be 'any' proper anangement, no proper discipline. Inty I have done some criminal act. So the whole attitude of a person gradual- ly changes towards the Mother, and he starts thinking that "She is here for my well being. And my well being is Her only concern about me. "Somehow She will achieve my realization She is working very hard, and I must co-operate. I must learn to co-operate, It is for 'my hita (fra), for 'my' good She is doing it. And I should try to understand that it is for my good." When easier to establish a disciple. But this disciple is different from a son or a daughter. Because Mother is a Guru, no doubt, Mother is a Guru from the very begin- ning you are born. But for a Mother, it is And that is why the time has to be given very difficult to be as harsh as these Gurus are. for children to learn through making errors, Not at all, nowhere near them. One cannot through making mistakes, and understanding beat them in the harshness. But it is for you, what mistakes we are making and how we in your own wisdom, to understand "how to behave, how to ask for relisation, how to ding it, then it is very easy, very easy to change your attitude." Because if you think communicate to them what they are supposed too much of yourself, and you try to show off to do, what they have done is wrong, and She'll say, "Yes, yes, you are very great, how to correct it. But as long as they think really you are very very great," you know,- that they are very wise, as long as they think till you suddenly discover that you have they are extremely nice people, and that they developed two big horns your head and now. are on their own, Mother says "Alright, go you are good for nothing. Then, She will say, "Alright, now come along, you have have to correct it. Once they start understan- ahead, does not matter Nirmala Yoga 35

 developed this disease, I will put you right." So better not do all those things. Like yesterday we had some patient here. And some people felt the compassion, you know, for that. And they all got caught up. There was no need to feel compassion. Have On one side She is willing to go 'all-out' to save you from all troubles. Like, supposing you have some heart trouble, if you have you got more compassion than I have ? What some any other trouble,-She will go all-out' to save you. It is not easy to cure anybody's So there is no need to bring any patients to was the need to bring the patient here? There was no need. But they both got caught up. heart. People think that Mother has cured us, so it is alright; take it for granted. It is not so. When you get Sahaja Yoga, you will be surprised that when 'you' try to cure one person, you will fall sick for three days: it is not easy to cure. And those people who cure, sometimes do it through bhoots, also. Those who have bhoots can also cure. me. That is nat the way to behave. Never bring any patient. If there is a patient, leave them alone Tell them, "Mother wil look after you. We have nothing to say. There is a photograph, you must use the photograph, get your treatment done with the photograph. and you get cured." 50 Otherwise, first thing that will happen to Because they themselves are bhoots, what can happen to the bhoots ? They cure people you, that you will catch on your centre heart. but put one bhoot into the patient in such a way that that patient becomes a slave. And do that. It you try to do it, actually it is such bhootish people can be cured,-or faith your ego sometimes that makes you think healers, or anything, like supraconscious:- that you should cure a person; sometimes. all sorts of people, but when they cure any And when you try to do through your ego, person, be "sure' they are putting another You get into trouble Not that you can not serious, more serious problem into them. They do not cure really. They are actually level, when you try to cura a person you do puttings some diseases into you, or into the patients. It is very risky game. Because that is not your job. You are not to You can. But you have to be of that cure. not become a supraconscious personality, means you do not become ego-oriênted. But they do, ultimately, 'all' of them. Those who But a Sahaja Yogi. if he tries to cure have tried to cure others, and do like that, somebody-because he cannot put some they have gone out of Sahaja Yoga completely. body else in that vacuum-he gets a problem becoming just mediums. They have become himself. He is sucked in. So, my advice is mediums, horrible people. When they talk always for every Sahaja Yogi, that you should not cure anyone. There is no need for you poison into my ears. They are 'so" horrid, that to cure by touching. You should use my you cannot imagine. photograph, you can distribute my photo- graph. Tell people how to cure themselves. But don't cure anybody because you will realisation 'not to indulge into any curing have on the phone, 1 feel somebody is pouring So, it is important for people who get because they will develop this centre heart problems. Because you are not a bhoot. And your will be hit hard. So be Very much. careful about it, do not try to cure anyone. THT Centre heart can be developed in countries Only use the photograph. By using the where there is all fear, people are frightened. photograph, the shraddha (aT) will be there, It can be developed by other things by which the person will be steady, and you will be people are frightened. Reading books of alright. bad gurus, and reading books about shocking 36 Nirmala Yog a

 things, like many people who Kundalini's boak have got centre heart. fatherhood is not alright, you get this trouble because they are so frightened about the of asthma, and for that one has to ask the Kundalini ! Anything that frightens you if you questions to the Sädhakas, what sort of a read, can make your heart very very weak father you have. As one gentleman came and dangerous, read the understanding of the father, or 'your own and asked me, "Why everbody is asking me, what sort of a father you have? Everybody Now we have two other sides to this asked me, what about your father, what about centre heart-is the Mother's heart-iS Her vour father ? What has my father to do with own brother, Is Vishnu, takes incarnation as me?" Actually everybody feels the right Shri Rama on the right heart Who, we think is the Father who is looking after His children. So that is the Father, and this is the Mother. Though here the Father and the Mother are in two aspects, that the Mother is the sister fatherhood, then you get this problem and of the Father. And Father is the Mamā (Maternal uncle) of the māmā is a greater father than a father, as you all know. And so this Uncle who is the incarnation of Shri Näräyana, looks after the protected disciples of the Mother. that Father's understanding to the children. Because at this stage, the Almightly, is not known, who is Shiva. So this uncle looks after the children till they are grown-up enough to meet their Father. And lack in that discipline that the father gives. that is how we can say that Pārvati, or Umā, Or could be, such people could take to a very or Dévi, She comes to Her Mother's place, remorseful and unhappy life. Or they could Māykā, (aruFT), and resides in this centre be very hard on their children, or could be heart. And there Her brother protects Her "extremely kind and spoil the children. It children. When She gives realisation to children, or gives them second brith, then tions, either too much of love-giving or too this Mäma looks after the sister's children much of strictness. It can be anything. Or a and helps them to build up the security of a person could be of this kind, may be 'very father. heart, and they have to ask about the father. Because, father resides in the right heart, and the principle of fatherhood, if it is spoilt, if there is a problem with the principle of many other problems which I do not want to discuss now at length. Sädhakas. The But you can understand a person who has no father, how diffident he is, and how he He gives behaves, and also such people, those who have not known father, can become very wayward, licentious or permissive, or could be very much secretly licentious. The people who lose their father do not have that, they Father, God could be any way. So it has both the reac- strict in childhood, and could be extremely lavish in old age. It is a very imbalanced personality. So the right side of every human being represents the fatherhood, the Fatherhood. And the Fatherhood of a man is very impor- tant. If this centre is spoilt, or if something wrang with it, then you get Asthma, So the person who has no father has to there is know that his father is Shri Rama. He should not worry about anything. He is the one, with one arrow He can kill any number of people. So he should have no fear, at all, about father not being there or father being dead or something happening like that. On the contrary, if the father is dead, it is as a disease. Asthma is only caused by this centre being spoilt or some other combinations, with this centre. Asthma is very common among giris and boys. And the relationship with the father, or the Nirmala Yoga 37

 Even when I am talking, now I am open- better to tell him not to worry about you and that you are alright, so that you leave your ing your heart centre. I am working it. Even father in peace and ask him to take his birth, I am talking, also I am opening. It is working. than to bind him to this earth. This is the right heart. You will see your heart chakra is open by the time I finish my lecture. It is so, because I know how to do it. When I talk am just And the left heart is the mother. actually watching where the chakras are catching. your own mother, whosoever it is. That is the watching where the chakras are catehing motherhood, in the sense, that if your mother has been extremely unkind and extremely funny, or your relationship with mother is bad, then know that there is something wrong when you talk it should be kryänvit (mani- on the left hand which is indicated in you. what is happening, I am catching all these points and touching it and trying to open it. And that is how it should be, that even festing). Even when you are quiet and raising your hands it should be kāryānvit. Whatever So these two points are very important in you do, you should be káryānvit, Even if you human beings: If a Sahaja Yogi just deci- glance at anyone it should be käryänvit. It des that I have a father and a mother, God should not be just a kind of a jabbering that Almighty is my Father and my Mother, then these problems can be easily solved. But in Sahaja Yoga, it is not what you think that works out. It does not-like in the car if they think they have done lois of mistakes, you sit down and think that Iam going to Connaught Place, you would not move. You can never get realization, they will be doo- have to move your hands. In the same way med, they will be going to hell. This is not in Sahaja Yoga you have to move your hands. true, at all true. No body is going to go to Clear your chakras, move them higher and hell, if they do not want to go. If you want to put them up. It is not 'what you think' is important in Sahaja Yoga, Not at all. You may think that 1 am doing very well in Sahaja ever'. Yoga, I am very good, but it is not so. It is what you actually achieve, your ascent is the point. So, as in the car, as I told you, you can not just sit down and think and do the job. that you should understand the importance of In the same way, you have to run this machi- confidence, but not by saying " am confi- ne, and you have to see that you get all this dent." Because when you say outwardly you we do sometimes about Sahaja Yoga. The greatest fear human beings have that and these mistakes are too many, and they stop it, you can stop it. The time has come. You are going to be blessed and blessed for So may God bless you. Today's lecture I have given you in a way are actually egoistical. But when you say in There should be gati (ufa mo- movement. vement) in you. Otherwise, there is no sense your vibrations, then you are confident. just talking about Sahaja Yoga, thinking about Sahaja Yaga, and convincing yourself that you are a great Sahaja Yogi. It is "how you manifest" is the point-Which very few shouldn't disobey. Once I have said it. what people understand. Very, very few people is there? Obedience, why is it difficut. Just understand that it has to be manifesting, it try and obey. And you will find, obedience has to be kāryānvit (Traifaa). It is not just gives you the real confidence just obedi- talk, talk, talk, talk. talk, talk morning till evening. May God bless you all. Those who do not obey suffer. You ence. Just try. Just try to obey. It's very simple. Nirmala Yoga 38

 POOJA IN SYDNEY Shri Matajl Nirmala Devi 14 March 1983 MEDITATION -the Individual journey towards Collectivity and Bliss Now you all have realized by this time that within us lies the peace, the beauty, the glory you reach that inner being. And this inner of our being. There's an ocean of all that. We being is the vast ocean of bliss which exists cannot seek it outside. We have to go 'within' -what they call "in state" you seek it, you enjoy it. Like, when approach it, you have to go 'within yourself, you are thirsty, you go to a river, or you go -by denying things which are against it. to an ocean, and try to quench your thirst. against your movement. But even the ocean cannot give you sweet water. So, how can anything that is spread strong for you to not understand that the autside give you that deep thing that is alory of God is within-But turn back. Every within you. You are trying to find it outside, where it does not lie. It is within us, absolutely within us. It is so simple, you forget the ideas of your outer glories. because it is your own. It is within your reach. Just there. Whatever you have been doing-going out to find the joy, is so-called thinks that if he makes lot of money he has joy, is so-called happiness, so-called glory of achieved joy. But he has not. He is the most worldly powers and worldly possessions. unhappy person, if you go and see him. He You have to reverse it back-the whole thing. is worried about small, small things of the life. You have to project 'within' yourself. It was not wrong that you went out. It was not correct that you went out. You shouldn't very miserly, they are worried about a needle feel sorry for what you have done so far. here and there. It was not the correct way to get to the real joy of life, the 'real glory' of your being. Try to meditäte. Meditate more, so that in every one of us. Is that vast flood of light, that floods everybody's inner beauty. So to the meditative Sometimes the wind can be very very that your movement has to be inward. When you move inward, moment remember, A person vwho is of a very base nature And you must have heard that people who are very rich are kleptomaniacs. They are A little thing missing-they get upset. They have so many habits, they can't live without it. So riches have brought always a curse on human beings. So those It has worked in so many people, that you who seek only the riches cannot enjoy them. have entered into that subtler understanding. Then there are some better people who Some people are only at a mental level, think that by ruling others, by getting power, may be, doesn't matter. May be some are we can achieve a very great position in life. only at a physical level that they can feel it. They too, as you know, fail. You have seen Doesn't matter. But you are on the correct lines-you are moving correctly. what happens to them. People don't even want to talk about them. Nirmala Yoga 39

 Now there are people who get attached paid as such, but all your heart is to be to someone, to one person, or to the family, to poured into it. If you cannot pour your their children, to relations,--very common in heart into it, you cannot achieve that. India. That's also not the way you can get to God. That's also so limited ; keeps you han- ging round them and wasting your energy completely. But if you enter into your being, impress them, control them. Such people are fully, then all these things have such meaning. Every thing has a meaning then, In the sense, you possess anything, and if you are that that people see you as their protector, as their kind of a person who is supposed to be help, as their support, as their friend, than possessive-he never possesses-so detached. somebody who is a dominating personality. He's never possessive-he's so detached You have to be a fatherhead and not a about it. But he can play around, because demonic-destructive force which is always he's so detached. He can create a drama out threatening everyone. Such people will be of it. He can play with the possessions, and thrown out of Sahaja Yoga in no time They teach lots of lessons to people. He's so detached, so generous, he enjoys his genero- sity. Same about power. Some people think that they can even overpower Sahaja Yogis, thrown out of Sahaja Yoga,-completely. You have to enioy the power of love,- are found out. Have no sympathies with such people.-Never. That will bring you down. In 'no way. Keep yourself aloof with them, otherwise when they are thrown away as tangents from Sahaja Yoga, you The whole thing becomes so different, too, so dynamic. All the beauty that is created by human beings as possession is might get out with them. So be careful. exposed before you. And you start enjoying all those things, without possessing them. You understand the myth of possession. Then those people who waste all their time just thinking about their family, this thing...or those who hava never thought of their family, also come to Sahaja Yoga. Same with your powers that people have This is a very subtler ground on which they over other people. Those who try to make money out of Sahaja Yoga, or want to have a kind of a privilege over Sahaja Yoga. It can be very subtle. This can go very far. This subtlety goes to this extent that I have seen people try to save money on account of Sahaja Yoga. That is also-the attention is on money. To make money or to save money, to make a business out of Sahaja Yoga-is all absurd. But if you say so, I say: "Alright, go ahead for a while.-Try." You'll thing to God In the beginning in Sahaja find that Sahaja Yoga is no business, Of Yoga, everybody says: "My husband is like course, Sahaja Yogis can work together, can do some business, but Sahaja Yoga is no busines. where you have to give 'everything' that you have. Not to be attached to any thing. Not to be attached. There's no moniey to be can lose their attention to their Spirit. They spoil their children. They spoil their husbands. They spoil their wives The whole attention goes in a wrong way. And it becomes a very important issue with them how the marriages are successful,-how the chiidren are this thing, that thing. they don't leave it to God. They have to leave it to God. You are all saints. You have to leave "every- that.. my wife is like that. my brother is like that, my children are like this-Mother, look after them."Alright, in the beginning, it's alright. But when you grow, you must get It is business of God, u out of it. It is an individual journey towards God, 40 Nirmala Yoga

 when you meditate. And when you reach you know, one gentleman called as Varick there, then you become collective. Before in Bombay. He is an old man, and is so deep. that its an 'absolute individual journey within. Its absolutely individual journey! You should be able to see this; that in this journey nobody is your relation. Nobody on meditation. But, whatever time you spend, is your brother. Nobody is your friend. You whatever you gain, has to be visible outside. are absolutely alone. -How you radiate it have to move alone within yourself. Don't to others. hate anyone. Don't be irresponsible, but in meditative maod you are alone. No one to be. Unless and until you become deeper, exists there. You alone. And ance you enter into that ocean then the whole world becomes cannot save thote who are not Sahaja Yogis. your family. The whole world is your own You have to rise higher and higher to pull the manifestation All the children become 'your whole curtain up. Those who try to fise children. And you treat all people with equal higher pull the whole thing upward, and they understanding. The whole expansion takes place when them. you enter inside 'your' Spirit, and start see- ing through eyes of the Spirit. There's such calm, such peace, such bliss within you. You have to be ready for that journey. That journey is alone in your meditative- deal with possessions, or worry about them, He radiates. People depend on him. He radiates' tove. He's so meditative. You don't have to spend too much time and how you give Absolutely alone." You That's the quality of the saints you have we cannot save other Sahaja Yogis. And we give a pull to 'everyone who ascend with So. just try to keep your aim clear-ct. You must try to understand what is your aim in life as Sahaja Yagis. Now you are changed people. You are no more people who have to about mundane things, about your livelihoods. ness. And the more you find something in your You are no more people who have to worry too meditation, the more you want to go and distribute it to others. That has to be, if that personal lives. You are not to worry, also. does not come into you then it has not wor- ked out; there's no purity: there's some sort of a bias. In that individual pursuit, whatever your family-children, husband, wife, and you find, you want to enjoy it with others, you want to give it to others. This is the sign of a person who has been really medi- yourself is the love of God. where you can tative. The one who is meditative and has really get the great, restful, blissful feeling of not been able to distribute what he has found His complete protection. is cheating himself and cheating others as well Because that joy that you receive in your meditation has to be distributed. Has to be given. Has to be shown. It should flow in your being as the light radiates from every first you must assume your positions as you illumined lamp. You don't have to take a much about your healths and things, or your about your jobs so much. That's not impor- tant. And last of all, not to worry about find a pocket for you to hide into it. Because the only thing where you can really hide Sydney has done very well before, and is progressing better, but the pace is not as it should be. So we have to think of new ways and methods, how we can spread this. But are. You must assume that you are all saints, vow to say that this is an enlightened light. hat you have to do great work. Not the ego In the same way a Saint should not have to be certified that he is a Saint. The depth you part of it but the manifestation of it. "Everyone' of you has to decide for one- achieve within yourself, spreads 'all over. It self. I'm sure it is going to work out, and this is such a action and reaction The deeper you time my visit is going to help you a lot by become, the radiation is much more. The simple person, very ordinary person, light all over. uneducated person, can be like that. We have understanding what is the best to spread this May God Bless you. Nirmala Yoga 41

 Registered with the Registrat of Newspapers under Regd, No. 36999 81 The Descent of the Ganga and the 'Shuddha- iccha' (Pure desire) of the Universe What is the Shri Gangã. She is the elder expectation and conditioning in the Ida nidi, sister of Shri Pärvati, the Daughter of Himav- which hinder one's liberation and ascent. at. the Lord of the Mountains and the These can be of any sort eternal virgin, for as she expedited the mar- riage of her younger sister she took a vow of the ida nādi can dissoive them away and chastity. And that gives one a clue. For wherever the primordial Mother manifests. she does so as virgin,-as Athena, as Vesta, as Gauri etc What does this "virginity" Towards one's ascent But it takes a certain mean? it means that in spite of creating, one remains untouched, uninvolved,-untainted by the Creation: eternally pure or "Nitya Nirmala". as such one gains the power to The Shuddha Iccha which also flows in fiberate one on the left side, so that all one's desires, expectations and actions will tend degree of evolution to realise this is neces- sary. It takes an even greater degrée of evolu- tion to bear the descent of the Shuddha Iccha purify whatever one touches. Know that the into one's life, for it dissolves and bears away Kundalini has this power and that when fully all one's illusians and misidentifications. To witness this, one needs surrender and identiti- one of the important siddhis of a truly cation with one's Spirit of a very high order. realised (as opposed to self-styled realised) To be infact like the Lord Shiva-with the Shri Shiva Sadashiva tittva fully awakened, so that one is in pure defachment, and totally above everything. If one is in this state, one can bear the descent of the Gangā or Shuddha- owakened in ane, grants one this power- soul. The Kundalini represents the shuddha iccha (Pure Desire) of the universe, as does the holy Ganga. And both represent the deepest iccha without-disintegrating. If not, all sorts power of the Shri Mahakäli Shakti. of reactions occur, through fear, misidentifi- cation, bitterness, wrong expectations etc., which lead to a disintegration of the person- Now consider. what does it mean: that "the Ganga tlowed in heaven, and had to be brought down by the efforts of Shri Bhägira- tha to liberate his ancestors". ality, and it takes the presence of a realised soul of a very high order to allow this to happen. If however one can. like the Lord Shiva, bear the descent of the Ganga into It means, that while mankind is develo- ping and evolving according to Karma and one's life, then one truly helps all Mankind. free will, the Shuddha lechä remains in heaven and does not interfere in the actions of men, capricious-knowing only its own desire-it is in spite of the misery they bring on them- eternally pure,-and totally uncompromising. selves. But sometimes great souls see the and this can be a devastating force to enter need for the Shuddha iccha to sort out their fett sided problems-(the past, one's ances- tors). Why? Because of one's uncontrolled actions derived from and based on free will, one builds up arbitiay patterns of desire, For, the Gangā as the Shuddha-lccha is the life of the unready. So, one should pray eternally for the power to beat the Shuddha- Icchi in one's life. Dr. Rustom Dilhi:110007 & Printed at The Central Electric Edited & Published by Sh. S.C. Rel 43, Bungiow Road, Presa 80-D, Kamla Nagar, Delhi 110007, One issue Rs. 9.00. Annual Subscription Ra. 51.00 Preio, Formign (by Airmail 7814)



----------------------

1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Nirmala Yoga
July-August 1985
Bi-Monthly
Vol. 5 No. 28
"Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns all the religions and
seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga-THE UNION"
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-1.txt 
 NIRM ALA YOGA
43, Bungalow Road, Delhi-10007 (India)
Founder : Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Editorial Board : Dr. S.K. Mathur, Sri A.S. Mishra, Sri R.D. Kulkarni
Representatives
RAJEN MAHARAJ, 26, Ocean St., Bondi, NSW 2026
Australia
: INGE KELLY, Josef Melichargasse 20, 1210 VIENNA.
: LORI & CARY HYNEK, 1540, Taylor Way, West Vancouver, B.C. VIS 1N4.
: M. CERNAY, 175, Av. Ledru Rollin PARIS-75011.
ANTONIO SARACINO, NIRMALA HOUSE, Localita Pichini s.n.s. 00010
S. Angelo Romano, ROMA
: M.B. RATNANNWAR, 13, Merwan Mansion, Genjewala Lane, Borivali (W).
BOMBAY-400092.
Austria
Canada
France
Italy
India
: JUAN ANTONIO DELGADO, Avenida De Burgos, 30, 1. A, MADRID-28036
Spain
Switzerland : CHARLES & MRS. MAGDA MATHYS, 5, Chemin Des Mouldins,
1256, Troinex (Canton de Geneva).
U. K.
: GAVIN BROWN, Brown's Geological Information Services Ltd., 134 Great
Portland Street, London WIN 5PH.
IAN BASCOMBE, 32, Hooker Road, Exeter, Devon, England
: CHRISTINE & MICHAEL PETRUNIA, 270, Jay Street (APT. 1-C).
BROOKLYN, NY-11201.
URSULA SEHLMEYER, 191 Canal ST. #23 SAN RAFAEL, CA-94901.
U.S.A.
CONT ENTS
Page
1. Editorial
1
2. The importance of Dedication & Devotion
3. Ekadasha Rudra Puja
21
4. The Mother (Heart chakra)
27
5. Meditation (the individual journey towards
collectivity & bliss)
6. Descent of the Ganga and the Shuddha Iccha
39
(Pure Desire) of the Universe
ma back cover
Front Cover : Shri Mataji (London, 6-8-82)
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Editorial
In the first verse of the Hymns of Shri Dakshinamoorti, Adi-Shankaracharya has told
us that the univarse is within the Self like the reflection of a city in mirror, but appears
outside as dream seen in the sleep. In the second verse he tells, where the universe has
originated from
जगदिदं प्राहनिर्विकल्पंपुन,
वैचिज्यचित्रीकृतम ।
बीजस्यान्तरिवांकूरो
रमायाकल्पित देशकाल कलना
मायावीव विजृम्भ यत्यपि महायोगीव यः स्वेच्छया,
तस्मै इदं श्री दक्षिणामूर्तये ।।
श्रीगुरुमूत्तय नम
Beejasyäntari vankuro jagadidam Prank-nirvi kalpam-puna,
Māryākalpita deshakäla kalanā vaichijya chitree krtam I
Māyāveeva vijrumbha yatyapi Mahäyogeeva yah swechchhaya
Tasmai Shri Gurumoortaye nama idam Shri Dakshinämoortaye II
As seed contains the sprout, the universe was present in undifferentiated form before
its creation. It becomes manifest in the differentiated form due to imagination of varied
space-time relationship by the Maya. Salutations to that Guru Shri Dakshinamoorti who
creates the universe just by his will as a juggler or Mahäyogi makes imaginary objects
through his power.
It is an observed fact. although an unsolved mystery, that the tree grows out of a tiny
seed. If the seed is broken. the tree is not found in it but the tree is latent in the seed.
Obviously seed is the origin of the tree. Shri Adi-Shankaracharya applies the same analogy
to the universe of subjects-objects, seen to our eyes.
Various scientific theories are well known regarding origin of the universe and the
organic evolution from unicellular organism to the highest level of Homo-sapiens. There are
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-3.txt 
 many theories found in the scriptures which broadly correspond to the scientific
theories.
According to Taitariya upanishad: from the ultimate reality, the Paramatma, came the
Akash (The ether or space), the Vayu (Air) came from the Akash, the Agni (Fire) from Vayu,
whence followed water and the earth. Therefrom arose plant and animal life which leads
to consciousness and the ultimate reality.
The Vedantic philosophy contends that with the Brahman as the basis the Maya created
various objects of the world, just as variety of pictures are drawn on a wall by the use of
different colours. At first it is Akash, followed by air, fire, water and the earth, each having
its own specific properties distinct from its predecessor and each one forming a tenth part of
its predecessor.
its P
According to another theory, manifestations of the union of the consciousness the
chit, Shiva, and his power the Shakti, who are one like the moon and its light, is the seed
from which the universe sprouts and comes into existence, Shakti is the creatrix, from whom
emerges the universal sound. From the universal sound manifest alphabets of letters that
represent the elements ether, air, fire, water and the earth. The universe from atom to cosmos
is derived from these categories.
The Pratyabhijna Shastra tells us that, the supreme Self Sadishiva the changeless principle
of every change, is 'Prakāsh-Vimarsha-Maya'. Prikash is the eternal light, the ' aspect of
Shiva without which nothing can appear. Vimarsha, is the Shakti, swabhäva, the
consciousness of Shiva by which Shiva knows himself, In this state of Sadashiva, Prakāsh
and Vimarsha are one. It is Shiva only who becomes the Shakti in his creative aspect.
यथा-न्यग्रोध बीजस्थ: शक्तिरूपो
महाद्रुमः ।
तथा हृदय बीजस्थं विश्वमेतच्चरा चरम ।।
Yathā nyagrodh beejasthah shaktriroopo
-
Mahadrumah
!
Tatha hrdaya beejastham vishwametachcharā charam I!!
As the great banyan tree lies only in the form of potency in the seed, even so the
entire universe with all the mobile and immobile beings, lies in the heart of the supreme.
The universe is nothing but the opening out (the unmesh) or expansion (prasara) of
the Shakti, who is nothing but Shiva. The Shakti is also known as Parāshakti or Parāvāk,
The Parashakti becomes Ichcha (will power) of Shiva when He wants to create. She then
becomes Janāna Shakti, the power of knowledge, and Kriya Shakti, the power of creation.
When She assumes the aspect of Mother, She is divided in two ways, nine ways, and
becomes a wearer of a garland of fifty letters. Then She becomes known as the Mātrkā
meaning the collective whole of all letters and entire universe of subjects-objects. The
word for I in Sanskrit is "Aham'. A() and Ham () between themselves include
all letters of Sanskrit. Each one of these letters is symbolic of the creation of either
an objective or subjective element, meaning that 'Aham' or the consciousness of supreme
2.
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Self is creative of entire universe of subjects and objects. A (a) represents Prakāsha
or Shiva, Ha () represents, Vimarsha or Shakti. The dot on h (in the word a
Aham) represents the fact that though Shiva is manifested right upto the earth through
Shakti, He is not divided thereby, He remains integrally the same.
From the above it is clear that initially there was Parabrahma. Then came the desire to
create in the Parabrahma. That acted to create. Hence came the Ishwara of Vedantins or
the Shakti, to become the power of creation.
The Supreme is present everywhere and still beyond the whole creation. According to
Purush Sukta, "The supreme Self having a thousand heads, a thousand eyes, a thousand
feet. pervaded the whole world and rose ten steps higher. It is He alone who is all that
has been and all that will be. Entire creation is only a quarter of the Brahman". Once
Mr. Gregoire de Kalbermatten asked Mother. where the universe goes at the end. She said
"It becomes a part of My Chakra". Thus the supreme Goddess, Shri Dakshinamoorti
roopini Sakshat Shri Mataji has unimpeded free will to create, sustain and destroy the
universe, Unmesha Nimishotpanna-Vipanna-bhuvanawali' one who has created and
destroyed the series of universes just with opening and closing of eyes.
सृष्टि स्थिति विनाशानां शक्तिभूते सनातनि ।
गुणाश्रये गुणमये निर्मला देवी
नमस्तुते ।|
Srshti sthiti vināshanām shaktibhoote sanātani !
Gunāshraye Gunamaye Nirmala Devi Namastute I!
Salutations to Shri Nirmala Devi, who is the power behind the creation, sustentation and
destruction of the creation, who is the shelter of the Gunas and is present in them.
Various theories apart. a self-realized soul is no longer, mentally involved in the
affairs of the world. The universe ceases to be of any relevance to him, as illusory nature of
the magic is known once its spell is withdrawn by the juggler. The universe is illusory in
relation to the spirit. Our beloved Mother has brought us to this stage just by Her Sankalpa'
but we are not able to stabilize, owing to
Shaktichakrasandhäne vishwa samhārah (ufer a a grc) "There is disappearance of
the universe, with the union of shakti and the chakras, i.e. when the Kundalini Shakti passes
though the chakras". Hasn't Mother made the most difficult thing very simple for us? Can
Sahaja Yogis not always keep their Kundalinis in the Sahasrara?
our inability to control the attention.
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Her Holiness Mataji Nirmala Devi
The Importance of Dedication &
Devotion
NIRMALA PALACE, LONDON
6 Aug. 1982
Today I'Il talk to you about the importance were saying you have to seek, also you
of Dedication in Sahaja Yoga, and the Devo- felt you have to seek, but you never
thought that this will materialize Iike this,
tion that one should have.
that you will get your realization.
Actually when we are close to a mountain,
we can not see much of it, and that's why
we don't realise the volume that is so close
to us, the greatness that is facing us. This is dropped into the ocean and you don't know
one of the illusions that works out, for people what is the dimension of this ocean. "How far
who do not realize it mentally what they are
in for, where are they, what have they found, we? What is our purpose?"-To add up to all
what is Self-realization, what is it's magni- the mess, we become thoughtless
tude, how far they have to go, why are they cannot even find out as to rationally what it is.
chosen, what is their purpose of life, how
far they have come up, how far they can
understand?-All these things are beyond the
grasp, and one gets stunned. One does not be realized through your understanding. Try to
know what has happened to him when he think what have you got. Can you measure
got realization actually.
Then after getting realization, you could
not feel "what it was". As if you have been
you have gone into it? What is it? Where are
! So you
So the immensity of this experience, the
glory of your Mother's coming, or the preci-
ous gift of your Self-realization, nothing can
it, with your understanding? Can you under-
That's why, to understand this is only stand what has happened? No, you cannot.-
possible if you can understand how to ded-
icate yourself, how to devote yourself.
Because rationality cannot give you the
dimensions into which you have fallen now.
The rationality is actually broken up. There is
no rationality left now anymore to even com-
If you want to analyse anything on the
basis of your rationality, you are too stunned. municate as to what you have been seeking
It's too beyond you, it's fantastic, it is too
much. It's 'really' beyond you.
and where have you landed.
So the only method you have got now,
or only way is left to you, for a drop which
Now think of it: "You have got realiza-
tion
". can you believe it ? That you can, in has become an ocean, is to dissolve more in
your life time...if somebody had told you
this, you would never have believed it, that And to communicate with other drops in such
how can you get your realization in this birth?
Of course, you were seeking, because people of them.
the ocean, so that you feel the ocean at least.
a way that you know the Whole through all
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-6.txt 
 So first is : a Complete Devotion. It is very
important. In this incarnation only it is'so very'
important, because you have got realization. people? Or do you want more proofs? Now
If you did not have realization, "Alright; it is proved that Mother sees much beyond
murmuring souls, alright. Haif-baked people.
alright. Little bit misbehaving, alright. This
can be forgiven, that can be forgiven, every-
thing is forgiven"; to look at it, every body
thinks that Mother is forgiving us. But that's
not the point.
In Sahaja Yoga, whatever I see, you
cannot see. This is proved or not, to you
us, and whatever She sees, happens.
So anybody who tries to play tricks with
Mother, is actually playing tricks with him-
self. 'Any' tricks you try to play with me, or
you think that Mother is very forgiving, so
She will forgive us,-is 'really' you are tortu-
ring yourself, you are,-it is detrimental to
I am forgiving because of my own nature.
But 'you' do not take it for granted. You are
harming yourself by accepting that forgive-
ness. If you think all the time. "O Mother you
are so forgiving, please forgive me", You are
aiready forgiven, as it is. Once you call me
Mother. I have forgiven. But what's the
advantage? You don't have any advantage
out of it. You are a loser. And this point at
least 'rationally' if you understand, then you
will understand what is Devotion.
you.
Many people are there who will say that,
"It is my left Swadhishthäna". Some will say,
"I was possessed, there was bhoot". Some-
body will blame something else. Whatever
you are blaming, actually who is asking you
the explanation? It is only you asking your-
self. You are not facing your self.
So the devotion to me means actually
facing to yourself. You face your self first of
So in Devotion of Sahaja Yoga, one has
to realize that the things that are in Sahaja
Yoga, that you have seen in Sahaja Yoga,
are beyond your mind;-first thing. Definitely enemy. Your Mother is not, definitely. She is
they are beyond human conception. So on
human level you do not discuss them, and
you do not talk about it. But on the collective do not allow them, they cannot be there.
level you can talk.
all, and see for yourself what are you doing.
a
You are your own enemy. Nobody is your
not your enemy by any chance. And no
bhoots are your enemies, in the way, if you
No evil person is your enemy, because he
cannot be effective if you are spiritually
equipped. So you are your own enemy, is
And when you come to the collective
level, then you have to understand that rela-
tionship with me is more established, better
established, if you establish 'your" relation-
ships with others, in a very collective and
homogeneous way.
decided.
The only way to get rid of that enemy of
yours, you have to Dedicate.
Supposing you say that I have faith in
As I told you, the drop becomes the
Mother, or in God, so you are holding on to
Ocean, and the drop has to become the Ocean something, isn't it? And you are discarding
by dissolving all its drop-ness with other
something. But this hold has to be "very
drops. And all the drops dropping their drop- strong. Rationally if you-at that time when
ness become the Ocean ultimately.
you are sinking, will you rationalize whether.
"I should hold the hand of this person who
ged. One is to each other. and one is to your is saving, is correct or not." No, your grip
So we see that Devotion is double wed-
Mother.
will be very strong. It will be extremely
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-7.txt 
 strong and you will grip it with 'full' force, Mother". This is typically somewhere read in
the book-"because of insecurity somebody
does that". Actually now we have seen in
Sahaja Yoga, that most of the so-called in-
secured are the 'most aggressive people. They
with full faith:-that somehow or the other
And that kind of a feeling should be
within us, that, "I am a person who is sinking
play tricks with others, spoil their lives, and
because of myself. And if I am to be saved,
, I
have to be Absolutely Completely' submer-
ged in Sahaja Yoga. 'Absolutely' I have to be
enjoy it. They are the greatest sadists ever
born. You have seen these people. And that is
how they play tricks with themselves.
Then only I can be saved."
one with it
Now once you understand that you are
not to play tricks with yourself. Why do you
want to play tricks with your self ? You have
to be your Self, that's all, We should not be
our own enemies. Are we?
Because at this level, where you are reali-
zed souls of a higher leval, now for a next
jump-as I was saying to you-is Devotion.
Anything else has to be secondary, under the
circumstances. If it is primary and your atten
tion is still on that, then you cannot have this
second jump.
So once you start facing your Self, you
will like your Self. You vwould not feel dis-
gusted. Because that-is your Self I am
talking about-is glorious, is beautiful, is
'without' any Kalanaka FT (blemish) on that.
is absolutely' detached.
First jump you have already had, you
have got your realization. But from first
jump to second jump, you have worked hard,
you have come to the second jump. in the
second jump you have to face it up You
should not feel disgusted with yourself, nor it, that "This detachment is my life. I am a
dejected with yourself, nothing. But treat
yourself as a separate entity.
But first of all your attention has to accept
different personality. Detachment is my
nourishment". Detach yourself.
And Dedication is actually turning back to
yourself and looking forward towards the house. I had a very beautiful lamp, and he
Divine personality in you Once there is liked it. I said, "You (can) have it." He was so
Divine personality in you, there's no problem amazed, you see. His wife telephoned to me,
of Devotion. You will just become one with
it, you start enjoying it.
One gentleman came to see me in my
"How could it be? How could you give
away such a
there? Am I going to carry it with me when
I die? Is it going to go with me? Just see
rationally. If he has liked it, let him have it.
I have so many lamps in the house, if he
takes one what does it matter?" She said,
"But you see, I asked my husband, will you
give this lamp like this, if you have, to her?-
he said, no, I would not. I really would
not, he said". He was very honest, he said
1 would not. But still I cannot understand,
why not? So, you know till the last end we
are holding on to something 'very little,
there.
nice lamp ?"I said, "What is
But this rationality is the worst thing,
that plays tricks with you, which deviates you
from understanding that whatever life you
have led so far has been a very material,
gross life. You came out of it, you have
grown out of it, you have come up. ow, to
blossom, to become fragrant, you have to
give-up rationality. That is a binding.
Try to avoid rationality, try to avoid argu-
ments. Try to avoid giving reasons. Even now
I find sometimes Sahaja Yogis give an expla-
nation of psychology: "She might be insecure,
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-8.txt 
 case, so-called lies. They are 'never lies. If I
say to somebody he is a bad man, apparently
to you, "Oh Mother, he is such a fine man!
How can you say such a thing about him?".
We had one Mr. Michael like that. "Oh, he is
such a loving person, Mother!" Somebody
said, Mother are you jealous of him ?"-
If this, even a little bit is holding the saree,
you know that, that can hold the whole saree.
Even a little bit is attaching to this saree, the
saree can be held back. The whole thing you
can hold it, with one little pin.
All these small pins that are there-the
hangs-up, are to be denied, to be seen going
further. Look at yourself. "Oh that's Mr. Ego. Upto that extent you know! But when he
alright. Now let me see how do you go
back"-To see all those things. You see,
as a play you should see yourself. And then
play tricks with your ego and super ego
Actually they are playing tricks with you. absolutely fix yourself on the truth. And the
showed his real teeth, you see, then people
(understood).
So to develop that kind of understanding
about the truth, first of all you should
once you are a master, you play tricks with
them.
truth is "That you are the instrument of God,
that you have got realization, that you have
So many times I have seen. I have said so got a special awareness which people do not
have." Stand on that. And proclaim it. You.
are not to be afraid of it. You have got
realization, no doubt. You have felt it. Say it,
Nthing doing,
know I am realised soul." Firm on that.
many things, and then again after sometime,
people start talking about it. Within one or
two months after that, it comes as a scientific
proof or things like that, you have seen that,
many a times it has happened.
"I have got realization.
I
Now when I say something I am sure about
it, what I say, / never say anything but the
Truth. I know that I am saying only the truth.
But I do not go inside and find out, whether
In this expression of truth, you have to be
like the light. The light asserts. It not only
asserts, but it shɔws others also that it shines.
It shows others: that "I am the light". That,
it is truth or not. I do not read a book to find "You walk in my light. And if you don't try
out. I do not ask you. I have faith in myself, to do it. I may burn you", They have that,
I say is the what you call, that "téjasvita" (afeer): téjas
of light. That Téjasvitā is there,
sharpness of light. That is the proof of
"full faith" in myself. Whatever
truth, I know for definite that whatever I say sharpness
comes out truth.
But that is not your case. That is not your your truth. You are not afraid of any Prime
case, that whatever you say is the truth. So Minister or any Minister, or any king, or
anyone.
thing. I know. I am a realized soul, I am the
truth." If you say," I am the Truth," whatever
you will say will be the truth, no doubt about
it. Whatever you will do will be the truth. But
say," I am the truth."
say will be the truth.
Now how do you do it?
The tongue should be such, that what-
ever you say should be the truth. Ultimately
it will come out as truth. And that is why the
Dedication should be there.
But for that a real purification is needed
about facing yourself fully, in Dedication.
Means, you are holding on to your Mother,
you are holding on to Sahaja Yoga, you are
Even if I tell lies, it will come truth, in my holding on to that truth which you have
What Dedication : "Why should I tell
lies?"..There is no need to tell lies.
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Supposing there is no oil in this (lamp),
Without that you can not do it, your source is it will all go of. It has to have oil. It will
You are standing on the truth. And go off. So the Dedication part is the oil in
you, is the attachment, Complete attach-
ment to your source. That's the Dedication.
But that Dedication should not give you any
other ideas but of a light which shines, which
corrects others, guides the path of other
found out.-And here you are facing others.
that.
that is such a power, such a strength.
All of them if you see-Christ had that
power, Mohammad had that power, alI these
great people had that power: 7To say the
Truth, with full courage, with that assertion
that people will accept it. And they would
even suffer for that, they would not mind.
But whetever is the truth has to be said.
people.
If that is not so, then the source that you
are tapping is not coming to you fully, and
That's the first point one should know that your light is not burning properly.
about Dedication.-That you are dedicated
fully, that you are not afraid of anyone. You
are not worried about your losses.
So, into Dedication when you go, you
must not think that it is any surrendering,-
the so-called surrendering, that you become
Some people have lost their heads, also, like a cabbage. That is the idea people have,
completely cut their heads.
tortured them. Some people had all their become 'dynamic.' You become real power:
money taken away, have been tortured in
every way, but they thought this was the for destruction you do not need much power.
truth, they stood by it. Some of them were Only for construction you need power. For
stupid tools, they stood for something that destruction how much do you need ?-Very
was not truth; they did.
Rut 'now' you know that you are standing
People have that you become like cabbage, But you
not of destruction, but of construction. I mean,
little. You can destroy the whole thing in no
time. But, for the construction you really
require 'great power. And
that
power.
on the truth, and for that you should be
willing to
sacrifice.
the truth What you
sustained power, flowing power has to be
there. For that, Dedication is needed.
sacrifice anything.-so calied
Because you are not sacrificing
are sacrificing is
Holding on to your source of power, you
have to stand firm Courageously, 'withouť
untruth.
For that you require people of strength any fear. That is the truth. That is the truth
courage, and not these half-baked
you have to achieve. That's very important.
and
people. You
asking for forgiveness from Mother. What is That's not sufficient. Just being the truth, the
it ? What is there to ask for forgiveness, aspect of one side is there. But the other
because I am forgiving you every moment.
But what are you doing yourself? What sort
see, morning till evening
But this is only one side of the story.
side of it is, that when this source comes to
you, you become the Compassion. The
Truth and the Compassion are one thing. You
would not believe, but it is so. Like, the
of a person you are?
You think about it, that you have to
stand on the truth. For that you have to be wick and the oil combine to form the light.
a strong, courageous person with that sharp- It is the buring of the oil gives you the light.
ness, with that tejasvitā within you of the
light, of the beacon. But at the same time
you have to have complete Dedication.
In the same way the Compassion gives you
the Truth. There is no difference whatsoever,
only the state is different. That you can not
Nirmala Yoga
8.
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-10.txt 
 see the light which is oil, and oil which is are collecting money for them, and we are
burning.
trying to send money to Viet Nam". And
here among Ashramites.-fighting. This is not
Compassion by any chance.
So Compassion is the one which is the
source as well as your store. So from the
source of Compassion, you get your Compas-
sion.
Sahaja Yogis among themselves are a
dilferent race, and they have to support each
You see, I have seen people who want to other 'all the time, and look after them. When
have Compassion from me; they want that I
should love them. But, reflect it back, do
I find Sahaja Yogis criticizing Sahaja Yogis, I
am amazed ! I am really amazed I Because
you are part and parcel of the same How can
you criticize? One eye criticizing another, I
understand. I can criticize,
they love others like that ?I have known
people, say, for one person says harsh things
to other, and comes and says to me, "Mother just cannot
forgive me", or does something harsh just for alright, but why should you? Why should you
the whim of the mind; "Mother forgive me". criticize each other ? Only thing you have to
But when you ask for that I would like to
know, have you given Compassion to an-
other person ? Even after getting forgiveness it 108 times already that," you have to love
do is to love each other.
Christ has said it thrice, I must have said
each other, that is the only way you are
expressing Compassion." If I have given
you any love any time, you have to have
patience with others, love for others. I some-
source of Compassion, have you given compas-
sian to others? Have you been Compassionate
to others ? You see, it should not be one-
sided. If you are taking the advantage of my
Compassion, it should not be one-sided that times try to coax people, and I find that
you use it for your own benefit and forget people immediately come out with some sort
about it. Then you will never grow. You of criticism of others or something like that.
will never grow.
Now the basic thing is, that our Compas-
sion, if that is flowing, then only can we get
If you have to grow, then you must store
that compassion within. Whatever Compassion Compassion from Mother. There
I have given you, Love I have given you, you place anymore, I have done too
must store within you. And give that back to compassion business, and what I find that
others. Otherwise you will be finished, you
will be nowhere. Is the growth which is give you Compassion? I mean there is no
sustained only-not only by sucking from one
side but by giving to others. Otherwise you empty yourself a
will be stagnated. There has to be outflow.
is no
much
now unless and until you flow it, how am i to
space left for it now. Better give it away,
little bit, thenI can give you
more Compassion. It's simple business. In
this respact one has to understand, that the
source 'can not flow unless and until it
But that is a very hard thing, because
people are very good at taking Compassion expandsthe flow of it.
from Mother. Or even if they are Compas-
sionate, they will be mostly compassionate
to people who are, say, in Viet Nam. not
in the Ashram. They are more worried about little stream from seven streams,-little-little,
Viet Nam people, you know, "Oh Mother!
we are worried about Viet Nam people, we it has become the river Thames. Supposing it
Like the river Thames. We want to see
the place from where it starts. It is a small-
"very' little-little-we can say trickling down-
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-11.txt 
 does not widen that will stop at the begin- should have separate place, we should live
ning only. It can not come out, it you must have
flow. It is not because it is angry or upset or little privacy as married people, I am not
anything like that, but because of the nature
of it's flow only it cannot flow, what to do?
can not separately",-it is alright.
saying that. But as far as Compassion is
concerned, as married people, you have to be
"much more compassionate. But you will
So that is what it is, that one has to give only worry about your 'own children, about
Compassion to others. It should not be
formal Compassion, or the affected one, but
it should be a natural one, very natural,
spontaneous. 'Feeling from within. It is not all collective. When you bring sweets for
an expression of your ego, super-ego or
over-sentimentality, but is a kind of an
understanding that he is a Sahaja Yogi, you family has to move with the same waves. I
are a Sahaja Yogi, you are brothers. Not the
way the brothers have been, but a different separate food arrangements, separate this
type of brothers who are 'spiritual' brothers.
You are spiritual people.
your own
husband, about your 'own' wife. In Sahaja
Yoga, there is no place for such people. It is
comfort, about your own'
your own child, bring for other children in the
Ashram, You are one Family and all the
have told you before that we cannot have
and separate that. In the same way, we
cannot have separate standards of living for
So this Compassion has to be there, and different people.
unless and until you develop that Compas-
sionate fartherly or motherly 'feeling for by all of us. That should be so. And that
others..I mean I am the mother of a person
who is about a hundred and eight years of emotional level any marriage which is absurd,
age. You have to 'really' mother others, and which makes everyone unhappy is useless.
have that feeling of Compassion and Love for But marriages are made to make everyone
others. You don't have to think about your happy. So before you decide to marry, think,
own comfort, you don't have to think about that you are not playing tricks. Playing tricks
your advantages, but you have to think äbout in Sahaja Yoga is very-very dangerous. You
the comfort of others. You have to think,
"what you can do to make others camforta-
ble", than to see what will make "you thinking that Mother would forgive you and
We all have to enjoy whatever is enjoyed
should be achieved on material level. On
are not playing tricks with your marriages, you
are not trying to involve somebody else,
comfortable.
will forgive. But 'your ascent
is difficult. So do not try to play tricks with
all that. I
So this flow of Compassion when it starts,
the Dedication is complete. Because "whatever anything that you have been doing before,
we got from You, Mother, we are giving it to but change yourself completely, transform
others". That is the Dedication. So the flow yourself completely.
of Dedication is not one-sided. It is double
sided. You stick on to something, you get
connected with something, to get something
out of it, and you give it to others. And already. If you try to be the other person,
ultimately it reaches the collective being, flwer, now you cannot become suddenly
means it reaches the source. It is in this
light we have to understand.
Now you change your attitude towards
life. You can, because it "is' changed
you cannot be. Now you have become a
the leaf. Now you are a flower, and you
have to live like a flower. And that is what
Exclusiveness, or "we are now married, we you have to remember, that Compassion is
Nirmala Yoga
10
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-12.txt 
 such an outflow, is such a natural thing for there, they just get frightened. "You better
a Sahaja Yagi. It is not natural for anybody go there and do this."-they get frightened.
else. Other people who talk of Compassion You are a plant which can not only go and
or this and that are actually not at all prosper in any place, but, you will give the
necessary nourishment to other plants. That
they are doing for position, they are doing for is what you are ! So do not stick on to one
place. If you stick on, then think that there
passion because you have to have it, jolly must be something wrong with the place:
well. It is flowing, the Compassion, because Like a glue if you are sticking on to one
place, it is very dangerous. And be sure,
that you must run away from such a place
you. That does not mean that
as people are here, they never stay in the
house, all the time running out. It does not
mean that. Again I have to strike that point.
Because otherwise the people are here, are
all the time running away from their houses.
compassionate, They are doing it for money,
ego satisfaction. But you are having com-
it has to flow. And you are doing compas-
Sion because of compassion. There is 'no
other' purpose behind it. Only this will give which glues you.
you something that is of permanent nature,
of a "Sthāyi" (Egrit) nature.
You have seen people,-as I was telling
in the morning, who have gone to an organi-
sation, made a beautiful organisation out of
it. And once they leave, the organisation is
finished. Because they do not give anything
substantial to that organisation. And what to anything, and not be afraid of leaving any
is to be given, is a large heart of Compassion
If you do not give it that. once you go away You have joined the Ocean, and Ocean can
from that, the rest of them are again barren. take you anywhere.
It is not growth. Like if you bring water, plant
things and give water to that area then it
becomes very beautiful, and you can say it is place, because you have to take this Com
a very lush growth. But as soon as that passion everywhere and to prosper. In the
water source is removed, it gets again dried kingdom of God you have to serve Him
That is not the point.
The point is that you should not be glued
place, because now you are Sahaja Yogis.
So just prepare yourself to move into any
And this service is only possible if you know
that you are here for a 'very great universal
up.
But Sahaja Yoga is different. In Sahaja task-Not only for England. for India or for
Yoga you not only grow as a plant, but also, America but you are here for a global task
as the source of the plant. If this plant is
removed from here put somewhere else, it will
give water to other plants. Do you know
this new dimension that you have within chosen for that. And so don't divert your
yourself?-That once this plant is uprooted attention to anything that is not fulfilling your
from here and taken out, it will not die !
Not at all. It will grow, but it will make others
grow. This is another type of a growth that tion is your Compassion, your Love.
we have. And it is a very different position
we are in, and that is what now I want, that
all of you, 'even' if you are uprooted and put Whatever I have said to you is just
into any other place.... I've seen, when i
ask people that you better shift from here to start sucking the vibrations as well as
which is the epitome of our evolution: This
is the highest thing we have to do for our
creation and for our creator. And you are
own manifestation. Discard all that Do
not waste your energy. And your manifesta-
But still it should not remain rational.
to put you into a condition where you
11
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-13.txt 
 But if the anger is because of your nature
or a tendency or out of control, then it is a
giving the vibrations. It is an action, it is
a happening that should take płace, within
you. It is not rationality, it is not thinking bad thing. If it is out of control, then it is a
about it. Only by saying these things
really stun your thinking, You should allow it is out of control then it is a bad thing.
this to happen to you.
bad thing.
If you get into a temper because
can get very' angry but 1 am 'completely
under control, I know why I am angry.
Just with the vibratory awareness you where the bhoot is, how he is running away.
should judge yourself, "Am I the one who
is giving vibrations to the others ? Am l the
one who has stored these vibrations or am I for you to get angry or show temper.
I can see that.
you can't see anything.
But you can't see the bhoot,
So there is no need
getting ruined ?
But if you have an anger, say for example
which makes you uncontrollable, then there is
a mantra for that : Shanti. "Ya Devi Sarva-
bhootéshu, Shānti roopéna samsthitä", you
must ask for that Bliss, for that peace. This is
the mantra for you, for controlling your tem-
All this will give you a great meaning, and
an employment, as I said, "employed by
God."
If you have any questions, ask me.
per, you have to tell yourself "Ya Dévi Sarva
bhootéshu Shänti, Roopéna Samsthită". So
Shänti is the point, the axis point is that,
Q. When we get angry, is our anger just
our tendency to react like this ?
Shri Mataji: You see, if you get angry from where you witness everything. You are
within yourself, and if you are sure that you
are not doing anything wrong; for a Sahaja
Yogi there is no need to say outside you are
angry. There is no need. That anger itself the power, and the power is taking charge.
is a power. And you should do your Bandhan
and anything that you want to do. But you
should not show that you are angry. You
should be absolutely silent, because you can
be, you are on the axis, you are not on the
periphery. Actually the anger is just to see
your anger, and use that anger for that pur-
pose. And once you start doing that, that
anger will itself work-out. That anger will Never call cowardice as peace. A
itself work-out the person. And you will be who is peaceful is 'never' coward, because
amazed, how. But you must learn to see
your anger that is working. All these things power it. It is "never, never' possible that
are important.
in Shänti, you are in complete peace... You
are not in a turmoil even if you are angry.
You are not in a turmoil. Whatever is angry is
But unless and until that is achieved,
what you have to do, is to put yourself in a
position that you are peaceful. So I think
that's a 'very good mantra, is to say Ya
Dévi Sarva bhootéshu Shānti roopéna sams-
thită. So the Shanti is your fort.
But peacefulness never means cowardice.
person
nothing can transgress it, nothing can over-
cowardice and peace can go together.
You have seen that sometimes only shou-
ting at the bhoots they go away, and many you don't show your power of your anger
mad people have been cured like that. outside. But just a 'little anger with any-
But you do not do all that, that's for me.
You must be always decent, with decorum
and all that.
But your power is inside, not outside. So
body, you will see it will work out. But first
establish that position within you where you
are the axis, where you do not allow anger
Nirmala Yoga
12
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Q: Some Sahaja Yogis use their devotion
to you to oppress others.
to sit on your head. That is the growth.
That's the growth, that you are at peace,
SHRI MATAJl: Then again the same thing.
Both ways you should know, that one is
the anger that is detached, is perfectly alright. It's the same thing. It is, you have to do it-
Anger which involves you, work it out. So All those who are doing that way. I am just
Good pointing out to all those. li you are using,
say, your devotion to me for the oppressing
of others, alright ? So it is for you to see,
judge yourself, as to what it is.
question.
Q :- What are your plans ?
There is nobody who can be oppressed,
SHRI MATAJI: What are my plans. I don't because your Spirit cannot be oppressed.
pian. You see, I don't plan, because l don't
know how far my instruments are ready, you
First, now my only plan, if I have any, wilL he oppress ? He cant oppress his Spirit,
is to really prepare my weapons airight. Once
they are done, then we will fix them up.
Say, there is X and Y. Now Y is a person
who is trying to oppress X, alright ? What
can he ?-First point, clear.
Now, this feliow, if he has to have attach-
You see, unless and until you know how
far your bomb can fall, how can you plan it.
So, first of all I must measure-up the power
of my children, how powerful they are. That's
what I'm trying to do now, is to make them
aware of their powers, to use.
ment to me, nobody can stop him. You all
have direct relationship with me, not through
anyone. If you want to accept somebody's
agency, then I can't help you. But otherwise
you all have a direct access to me. You all
can know your Spirits, 'nobody' can dominate
you. Everyone has "complete' freedom to
you.
Like Hanumâna when he was born, and
know their Spirit And the Spirit is some-
when he grew up, he forgot that time, he
forgot his powers. So he was to be reminded thing, 'cannot be dominated by anyone.
that "you are such and such powerful person,
you don't know what your powers are, you
ate off the whole of Surya. This you did in They'll say, "Alright. we'll not have this
your childhood, you are born with this power.
But now after growing you have rather sort-
of forgotten it, and also you were afraid of
using them, and it sort-of looks like in a
dormant position. But it is there. If you
just try to remember them, it will come."
Now supposing somebody tries to oppress
you. What will he oppress you, in which way?
carpet, we'll have this carpet". Now have
it! Somebody will say. "I'll jump in the
sea". Jump! Just now you jump !-What
will they oppress you in ? Just see that.
Not in your spiritual growth, can they ?
And that's how the problem starts. You
see, in material things-say, in an Ashram
They have 'tremendous
people have, tremendous powers. But they now, somebody says,
have to assume, and stand on that. If they like to have a photograph of Mother put
do not do it ....You see, if I tell them, "Now
go to this house". "Oh Mother, there may
be bhoot there sitting ".... A person it here or there makes no difference. My
comes possessed in the Ashram. They all photograph is going to work it out.
shut their doors : "Oh God ! this bhoot has
come", or something, then what's the use ?
' power these
there. Then the other will say, "No, we're
going to have it there."-Whether you put
Even' in pooja matters I've seen pedople
5.
13
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-15.txt 
 will say that, "No, Mother is sitting there,
don't put your feet towards the Mother." that, the fight is on. But that does not help
It's a common thing, evarybody knows one anyway, there also.
should not put it. But still they'll say, "No.
We want to put it". Alright, let them put it.
Next time they will not, because they will
know it is wrong. They'll find out!
person, "You should not correct me." Like
But in Sahaja Yoga it will 'never" help.
The other person can only win over by his
dignity, by his quiet methods, by approaching
a person properly, That's how the leaders
will come up. They would not come up by
one. I'm here to correct. Once you understand shooting the other person down. Not at all
that you are not perfect, the other is not by any chance ! That's not possible ! Is not
perfect, we are all pefecting ourselves, we good leadership. Good leadership is judged
are all coming up, Mother is there to look the way you handle the situation. Not the
So, you see, 'nobody' can oppress any-
after us,-then we will 'never' think like that.
way you fight the other man down.
Now, I have also seen people will say
that there are two Sahaja Yogis talking to quiet. It works out. Not necessary, that you
other Sahaja Yogis. Now one is very oppres-
sive one, the other one is upset to see that
this one is oppressive. Now, for that purpose,
if you are quiet, silent, you will always domi-
nate him. Paople will listen to you, not to
him. But if even you start saying, "Oh, you
do not say like that and this.," they will think
these are fighting cocks. Then, at that time,
your wiser behaviour will even give him a
chance to understand.
So many times you have seen, I just keep
should at that moment shout. There is no
need. And that creates a very bad impression,
and very bad leadership.
First of all, you cannot be dominated,
this is one fact, is a truth. You can grow in
your spirituality, whatever people may try to
dominate in the worldly things.
Thank God we don't have any organisa-
tion, thank God we do not have secretaries,
assistant secretaries, under secretaries. vice
secretaries, upper secretaries, lower secreta-
ries,..we do not have any nonsense. Other-
wise even that would have been dominating
to people. Then they would have fought that.
But what happens, one person dominates,
the other tries to dominate him by outward
things, and the whole show is over. There is
'no need to dominate another person by
outward things. he will settle down by him- So we do not have that problem. We do not
self, if you show your dignity of your silence have any money problem, because we don't
and of yaur understanding of Sahaja Yoga.
. have these nonsensical ideas. I have solved
There is no need just now to say, "You shut all these problems by having no institutions,
up, you sit down, you do not dol-Absolu-
tely wrong. They do it; I have seen it ! In 'my'
presence, I have seen it !
no positions. Every body has position.
But the greatest position is of your Spirit,
which you establish. The attention is not
there. It is more ego oriented. The whole
Because we still live half way there and
half-way here. The way we solve the problem, stuff is ego-oriented. You can not fight ego
say, you have to do some business. There with ego. You cannot. You can only fight
are two people doing the business. One
person says something, and the other one
says, "Why did you say like that? You should
not say.
ego or super-ego with Spirit.
How much do I dominate you? I absorb
all your aggression also, and how much do
Then this person says to that
14
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-16.txt 
 I' dominate you? If I have to correct you, I go
"
forward and do it and tell you that I am among yourselves.
correcting you, whether you like it or not.
And you see the result, it is alright. But if
you have that capacity, do it. Then there is SHRI MATAJI
lacking in you that you cannot do it, then be
prepared not to at leasl spoil the show of fight it, it will sit more on your head. That is
Sahaja Yoga.
you have to argue with others, not
argue,
Q. How to tight the ego ?
How to fight the ego. You
see, you should never fight ego. If you try to
not the way to fight it. That there is ego, and
One person is talking too much, alright, You fight your ego, "Oh t am going to box
the others will say, He is good for nothing, You, then it will grow more, you see. The
but another one is a sensible one." But if
more you box it, the more it will grow. Never
both are fighting, then I do not know,-that Tight your ego. Only way is to see it.
does not show any wisdom or growth, isn't it?
Does it ? Those who think that by dominating
in small-small things, you are going to achieve
anything, are wrong! Actually I have seen, my right size; ego, if it's overgrown, you just
grandchildren are realised souls, they are not
bothered ab out these things: They do not do the mirrar and you say. "Oh Mr ego I How do
this. This kind of a fight they do not have, that
where to keep this, what to do,-this they fight it. Just to be seen.
don't have. Nothing. At the most they might
fight for a chociate or something at the most
But in spiritual matters they never fight. In
spiritual matters they never fight. That is are uneducated, you are egoistical, because
the place one should 'not' fight. One should You must try to show that you are something.
not argue. That is the point not to be argued, All sorts of egos are there.
because truth is one. What is there to
argue?.
Your attention is very important. Your
attention is now enlightened. Whatever you
see, it comes to it's right size. It comes to its
watch your ego. Best is to watch yourself in
you do?" Then it will come down. But do not
All kinds of egos could be there. If you
are over-educated, you are egoistical. If you
So best thing is to see for yourself. That's
why I say," Face your Self." Your Self, means
your Spirit.
You have seen all these saints, you see,
those who have talked about me. What do
they say? Every body says the same thing
about me. There "cannot be any fight bet- ed. You should just say," Get out! I can see
ween saints, can there be? If the truth is one,
how can there be fight?
-..For super ego also, not to be frighten-
you very clearly, you are there. You get out
from here. How dare you frighten melI am
the Spirit ! 1 am the Spirit. How dare you do
that."-That is how.
But because one is inadequate, another
is dominating, both must achieve that state.
But the best is to behave more dignified,
You see, ego makes you idiotic, absolu-
Makes an idiot
tely, ego makes you idiotic.
more People
will definitely take to you, because you will
become the leader.
grown-up. more patronising.
out of you, absolutely. And the super-ego
makes you a coward. It makes you a coward.
Now how to fight it: I am not going to be
an idiot," if you say that, ego will go away.
If you want to be an idiot, then he will be
arguing among yourselves. If you have to there, to help you, If you want to be an idiot,
Arguments are not going to lead you
anywhere, I can tell you this much. No use
15
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-17.txt 
 alright. call Mr Ego. you will become an idiot other in such proportion, that they cannot
straightforward. It is the easiest way. budge from their ideal positions.
If you want to become an idiot, the simple
thing is to call the Ego, "You come Mr. Ego
and settle down in me"-and immediately..
This is a very simple composition.
And these things that you have produced
are themselves perfect. If they are im-
perfect, there will be a problem. It is like
that. If you understand this very simple
And super ego-if you are a coward then thing about relations and attitudes, you will
it sits on your head. Say," I am not going to
*Ham" Ksham as I told you the
never have problem.
Наm
Your relationship with the Sahaja Yogis
mantra on the Agnya. Either you have to say, has to be absolutely ideal relationship. Other-
/ am". The other is. "/ forgive you".
wise some screw is lose. Try to make it
(To another question about our ideal ideal. Say, there is one person. You find the
relationships Shri Mataji replied as given person is too egoistical or something. Try to
see what's wrong with you, first of all. "Am
I perfect. Am I alright? Or am I equally dom-
below :)
SHRI MATAJI: ...that relationship with
yourseif should be tyrannical. You should inating? Am I equally egoistical? Alright, if 1
lash it up. You should 'absolutely make it am, then I better correct myself. But if I arm
clear to yourself that 1 have to perfect not: it I am a good person, that way I am not
myself, if I have to give this, my being, to
God. It has to be perfect.
dominating, thenI should try to bring down
his ego. by making sweet things to him,
making nice relationship with him." Try to be
Secondly, if you have to have relationship kind to him, so that his ego comes down.
with otners, it has to be rideal relationship.
Sahaja Yogi with Sahaja Yogi, means some- relationship. It is absolutely simple.I mean
thing great. The greatest relationship is that. Ido not understand what have I to tell in this
With your sister, with your brother, it should thing, you know everything; that it has to be
be ideal. 'And' in collectivity we have to be proper.
pragmatic. In collectivity we can change our
course, we will take the way we like, the way
it moves, we will manage it. But otherwise-
Manage, somehow or other. to establish ideal
Now see, the relationship between that
(flame) and me has to be proper, so that it
does not burn me, isn't it ? It is absolutely in
You see, for example, take a plane. It has life-time also, we have to do the same thing.
the same thing. Plane, when it is in the air, That relationship with each other 'has to be
ideal', to create the best results. It is so
that are fixed in the plane, are ideally fixed. practical; I do not know what is there to tell
They can not just start Like a pilot seat does in this thing. And you have to be perfect.
not go to the back, and the back does not because you are the unit. And the whole
come to the front. You see, the relation is thing can be pragmatic, then only it can be.
it can go wherever it likes. But the screws
maintained. Alright?
But here,-just the other way round. The
screws are pragmatic, the relationship is
thing that is made, is perfect. But the aerop- imperfect, and the collectivity is absolutely
And the screws which are made, or any-
Doesn't move.
plane is fixed. Aeroplane can go southward,
The collectivity-
northward, anywhere it wants to. Only the "After all we are collective, bound to each
other. How can we move, Mother ? We are
static.
things that are in it are correlated with each
Nirmala Yoga
16
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-18.txt 
 static now. We are bound to each other, we
can not move, you see." Just like Rock of 'tremendoust
Gibralter.
then the inspiration you will get, will be
... See, it is working out. Working out.
Q: Shri Mataji could you say something Try to watch.
about maintaining our attention so that it
stays where it should.
And it has such a tremendous memory, if
you know how to watch. Imean, to me, if !
see something.-I mean, to me it is just like
practical question is "to keep the attention a film in my mind. If I have seen this room,
now I know what's this, the design, every-
thing I know. How you are sitting, what
pose you have taken, how. you were, what
was it 'everything' is like a design You see
it comes to me, just like a picture-absolu-
SHRI MATAJI: Rustom has asked a very
where it should be."
You see, for everything you have to do
some exercise, abhyasa (R). Not before
realisation; after realisation.
The best is to learn, "how to watch your- tely. Not of this life, but of 'lives' 1
self." Just now, sitting here, you just put
yourself into a position from where you watch
yourself. "Now what am I doing?" -This is records best. If there are thoughts it is like
the abhyäsa, this is the study, Apart from something in between. You see, now he is
mantras, apart from anything, the abhyāsa,
is the practice. Practise of becoming a wit-
ness. And the witness is the Spirit state. Then
attention will not go. I mean you will see
everything, it is there, but attention will be through, you are recording everything that is
inside. Try to practise this : "Am I a
witness?"
Vour
Because that is a recording system, that
,– trying to record me on this film, and if there
is something in-between moving, nothing
But when there is
will
come in it.
IS
nothing in-between and you are just seeling
important.
Moreover you will be amazed, you do not
record unimportant things. Like tor people
now, they go to a village, or any place: They
will be recording, "Oh God, it was very dirty,
and this happened and we went there and
there was cement to sleep, for example. And
Now, say, some people say," Oh God!I
had a 'horrible' time, Mother. This happened,
that happened." You see, you are not a
witness! How can 'you' have the horrible
time if you are the Spirit. You only have a
horrible time when you are not the Spirit IF then we went inside, and there was no
you can watch the whole thing as a drama
that is played, then you are not having a
horrible time, but this outside of you is having
horrible time, which you are watching.
proper chair to sit down. And the chair was
so hard, and my back started aching.
-All these things they will remember. And
then what happened ? "Oh God II could not
get realisation." -Everything that is bad.
That is how the attention can be fixed very You see, just like newspaper; all bad news.
well if you practise,-abhyäsa,-practise all
the time to be a witness. Say, you go out,
you see something. Just try to see it, not to
think about it. Be a witness of the whole
But to a person who is a realised soul in a
real way, does not see,-I mean, you do not
smell anything dirty. You always smell
thing. The joy will be complete, and also something good. You never smell, you never
think of anything dirty. Everywhere you go,
attention will be completely enlightened, And it is beautiful. Even if you see just the sand,
you will become absolutely peaceful. Your
17
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-19.txt 
 you see the pattern. Even if you see a
barren hill..
attention is on ugliness...People tell me,
There, this was ugly." I said, "I didn't see.
yjust saw the way the elephant was standing,
you see. The way he had pulled up his leg,
and he was raising the trunk, I never saw
I saw some people who had gone I said
look at the beauty of these hills, in Mahārās-
htra. They said, "Mother, what is the beauty? the dirt part of it. Where was it 7"-"At the
It is not covered with trees." I said, that's hack of it." | said, I never went at the
the beauty, just see,-the patterns. They
could not see the patterns that I was seeing-
But if you ask me, "What is this hill", I also
know that. Because know the patterns tion of a
of all the hills, how it has moved, how it has he. All his little funny points will come to
made patterns and things like that.
back.
If your attention is on .. even the descrip-
person. I asked a person, how is
your head. Even the photographers I have
seen. They will only take a photograph when
you are in a funny way. See, when your face
is a little turned round.
Because they do not see that. You see,
they cannot see the beauty. Because they isa little turned round. I mean it's a seeking
are looking out for defects. Or telatively, after ugliness, seeking after mistakes, seeking
you see, "English trees are better than say,
X, Y, Z trees. So this is not better". The
relative' they start. But you are at absolute
point, you are
everything. Everything is your own. What is
there to judge?.
after something wrong. 'All' the time if you
do like this. you cannot be a happy person.
All the time trying to find the defects and
faults and mistakes and dirt and ugliness. I
mean you are in for trouble ! You are asking
for it!
getting the absolute of
Q: Mother, perhaps you can see
beauty because you are the artist.
Like a person was saying, there are
three-four ditches in this place. I said, did you
SHRI MATAJI : I am the artist and I am the jump into one of them? Better jump in, so
art. But what about you? Who are you? that once for all you do not see any other
You are the one who is created, and you can ditchi. You do not see the plain grounds,
create, and you can become the artist.
you are just seeing the ditches. For what ?.
That is what I am saying. That you are
not only the light, but the light that will give who is of that kind of an attitude who wants
light to others. And also you will sustain
that light which you have given light. This
is the difference now, between you and
other people. Not that only you will be the
artist, but you'll enjoy the art of the artist.
The same thing can look ugly to a person
to see "everything' ugly.
Change your attitudes. Try to see good
in others. Try to see. l am not saying for
other people, but I am saying at least for
Sahaja Yogis you can do it. Try to see good
in them. "What good they have done to
Sahaja yoga. What you owe to them. How
to get along with them." Why not see the
good of them? By giving them encouragement
by being good to them you are helping
Sahaja Yoga.
This is what you have got, you do not
know, you are not aware of your powers. It
is a dynamic thing which has happend to you,
which you should take to.
But our attention is on: from where the
dirt is coming,. where the filth is coming, you
know; where the ugliness is there. If your
But you want to help your ego. Because
Nirmala Yoga
18
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-20.txt 
 you are very wise. So then only, by apprecia-
ting another person only, you have better
relationship. This is a very simple fact.
you are not going to cure it, you are yourself
going to get bad. If you can cure it, nothing
like it, but you cannot-
You see any film; there the two people
are talking to each other as if they are barking do that !" But you would do something else
at each other. What does it take to be kind, that the ather person would not do.
to be gentle, to say pleasant things. As soon
as they will see a person, "Oh God! You have
become 'very ugly." This is the best compli- Because with what are you judging?-With
ment That is human nature : To see to the
fault of others, to see to the wrong things of very' common failing, which should not be
others. You see, they will find out in
anything. Somebody is very tidy, then that
person is bad. Somebody is very untidy, that
person is bad,-every sort of thing.
Also, always persons say, "T would not
When judging others, one has to know
one should judge 'oneself first of all.
your ego or super-ego. have seen it is
Now you are realised souls, you are
Saints. And the saints -Though olden
saints might be doing whatever they did.
Forget them.-But you people are not going
to see the faults of each other, but to the
But why not 'you' do something about
yourself? That there is something inside you
that is not tidy. And it is inside you that is
very upsetting.
good points of everyone.
Simple things I have seen. Somebody
says a wrong English word, or a Sanskrit
word, or a wrong this, immediately you will
catch on that. But he gives a big lecture, it's
me it alright, that nobody listens. Your mind is
makes no difference. To what bathroom I go; working: "What wrong he is going to say".
I do not even remember all those things. The attention should be on what he said, so
To me it makes no difference, you have
seen it. It mnakes no difference. If you say,
will sleep here.
sleep on the grass there.
If you say, I will
What is there to remember in a bathroom and
this and that?-All nonsense it is. I have no
beautiful And then you will develop an
attitude, as mine is; you will never see to the
defects of others. Never. Never know them.
You will have no eyes to see.
memory for all this thing. Even if you want
me to know l'll not remember. If you ask
me, "How did you go to that bathroom?"-
Which one?. "That one",-It is alright I have
100
I mean my condition is like that, I tell
you. It will be like that. It's very difficult.
Like somebody says, "You come and play
those cards with stakes." I never remember.
and what food it was, and all sorts of things always lose. so I said what's the use of
people go an thinking about. What is the playing. I don't remember. See, everybody
use? The whole food is just going to be says, "You have so many brains otherwise,
been there.
Then faod. What sort of a taste it was.
digested in the same stomach.
What is there
now can't you remember these three cards?"
to be 'so much' worried about all this ? We I can't. I can't, just my brain goes off
are wasting our energy.
automatically. I
don't know. 1 look like a
| do not waste my energy. I have no stupid fool when I play that game. So why
energy for wasting. In the same way, why should I play? Anything like that, I am
do you waste your energy? Why not see to
the better side of man. By seeing bad side, thing people know, that she's useless. forget
if you can cure it, well and good. But if her.
So it's a
absolutely good for nothing.
Nirmala Yoga
19
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-21.txt 
 It should become automatic with you other people should say if there is col
a so. Then it's so enjoyable, how beautiful breeze coming. Because a person who is not
we are that everything is so beauitiful around realised may not feel it.
us, to see such beauty exists around us, and
we do not see ! Such tremendous joyl Every feel it, then he is realised, only thing, his
bliss is there, flowing within us. And we don't Chakras are to be cleared out.
know, we don't notice it. Such a happy
thing, it's such a beautiful thing! Oh God!
Such a source of joy was just standing next Kundalini has not risen, they are still Sahaja
to me I never knew. And I just turned round Yogis like that. May be, I do not know if
Supposing he does not feel it, and you
It is a different-different category of
people. Then there are some people whose
and saw that source. Turned aroundI
there are
unmarried for long, they are very difficult,
because they never feel the cool breeze in
the hand, quite a lot. like that. But you see it
is not so; they are realised souls. In any case.
they may not feel it, but they are realised
souls,
a kind of a balance, is developed after
marriage which is not there. And that is how
some people do not feel.
any. Those people who are
Turn your back. All conditiongs of yours,
the ideas that you have. Do not pass
judgement, first thing. Great art critics and
all that. please, I beg of you, that do not
pass remarks at anything all the time. It's ego
playing the trick. Just watch it. How it is
making you feel that you are something very
great. Be careful.
Q: Mother, some Sahaja Yogis have been
in Sahaja Yoga for a long time, but don't feel
cool breeze, they don't feel any catches.
There are various reasons. Some people
who are ego oriented, more, they should turn
their left to the right many a times. They
should find out, from the hands, you see.
One hand is bigger, one hand is smaller,-if
the left hand is smaller that means you have
to raise left to the right. You see, from the
For the nervous system, best size of the hands and all that you can se.
SHRI MATAJI: To begin with, it has
something to do with your nerves. So if
your nervous system is disturbed, you may
not feel, at all.
thing is to do message. Somebody shouid
massage their back, hands, also 1 have told
many times that you rub your hands with
vibrated olive oil quite a lot, and rub these
things so they become sensitive. Could be
with insensitivity. But if they can feel the
catches in the body, that means they are
alright. only their vishuddhi is not alright. develop the left Vishuddhi, then it is a 'very
Rub the thing on the Vishuddhi. Work on
Vishuddhi, clear it out. And for Vishuddhi, if
you can use, say, butter, to rub on the
Vishuddhi chakra front & back and rub all give you a complete lecture on one day,
these muscles with that, all these things will complete, as to see what permutations and
work out for your hands.
Putting one hand towards the photograph
and the other hand outside. Work it out in
so many ways. Because you have permuta-
tions and combinations of certain mistakes.-
But that does not mean you develop this left
Vishuddhi by any chance. Because that is
the worst thing that can happen. If you
difficult situation.
Now, for this kind of a thing I think I'll
combinations of different chakras can be
created. Alright ?
But supposing there is no cool breeze
coming out of the head, what is it due to? are mostly outside. From a personality you
Then realisation is not yet established. Se,
But symptoms are outside. Symptoms
can see what it is he is catching.
20
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-22.txt 
 сомо, ITALY
6th Sept., 1984
Her Holiness Shri Mataji
Ekadasha Rudra Puja
Today, we are doing a special type of like Self realization, still they do wrong things
pooja which is performed in the glory of, then he is much more wrathful. So, in the
"Ekādasha Rudra.
balance the forgiveness starts reducing and
the wrathfulness starts increasing.
Rudra is the destructive power of Shiva,
of the Spirit. Now, one power which is His
nature, is forgiveness. He forgives because
we are human beings, we commit mistakes,
we do wrong things, we get tempted; our gives you tremendous capacity to forgive
attention is disturbed; so he forgives us. He
also forgives us when we spoil our chastity. your lust, He pacifies your greed. Like beau
we do immoral things, we do thieving, and
we do things that are against God, ta!k being and we become really beautiful flowers.
against Him. He also forgives our superficia- And we start shining in the sunshine of His
lities, jealousies, our lust, our anger. Also He blessings.
forgives our attachments, petty jealousies,
vanities and also possessiveness. He forgives
our egoistical behaviour and also our subor-
dination to wrong things.
But when He forgives and as a result of
that forgiveness you feel the gratitude, then
His blessings start flowing towards you. He
others. He pacifies your anger, He pacifies
tiful dew-drops His blessings come on our
Now He uses His wrath or His destructive
power to destroy all that tries to trouble us.
He protects realized souls at every point, in
every way. Negative forces try to attack a
reaction, and Sahaja Yogi but they are all neutralized by
But every action has a
when He forgives, He thinks that he has His tremendous power of protection. Through
given you
reaction builds up
wrath against those who are forgiven
and try to do greater mistakes. Specially, is my Shepherd" Is all described how he
after realization, because such a big blessing looks after you as a shepherd.
there is of the realization; you have got the
light and in the light if you are holding onto
your plate then His wrath goes up because, people. He destroys them. Those who enter
he sees how stupid you have been, WhatI into Sahaja Yoga and are still carrying on
am saying is that after realization specially He with their evil nature are destroyed. Those
is much mora sensitive that people who are
forgiven and have been given such a big thing tate and do not rise are destroyed or they
a big grace-mark, and that his vibratary awareness we are guided into
right path. All the beautiful blessings of His
are described in the Psalm 23...." The Lord
within Him,
as
But He does not look after these evil
who come to Sahaja Yoga and do not medi-
Nirmala Yoga
21
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-23.txt 
 are thrown out of Sahaja Yoga. Those who gled.
murmur against God and live in a way that is forces. Like I know of Maurine who was
not behoving a Sahaja Yogi, He removes with me, and her parents and parents-in-law
them. So by one force, He protects, by ano-
ther force, He throws away. But his destruc
tive forces when they are built up too much,
then we call it "now the 'Ekādasha Rudra' is not that way stand up to that, and she took
Or some of them yield to others'
said that the child must be baptized. I rold
her, you cannot get this child baptized
because it is a realized soul. But she could
the child for baptism; and the child became
very funny. It was doing like a mad child.
active."
Now, this Ekādasha Rudra will be expres- So, now then she gave up all that and so
sed when the Kalki itself will start acting, she has saved. But supposing she had
means the destructive power which will another child and she would have done the
destroy all that is negative on this earth and
save all that is positive. So it is very neces-
sary for Sahaja Yogis to expedite their ascent,
not to be satisfied with the social life or
married life ar with all the blessings that God that anybody who comes to Sahaia Yoga
has bestowed upon you. We always see,
what God has done for us, how He has been
miraculous to us, but we have to see what sensitivity, or you should feel it in your body,
we have done for ourselves, what äre we
doing about our own ascent and our growth.
same thing, the second child would have
been something very very bad.
Now, the trouble with Sahaja Yogis is
programme thinks he is a Sahaja Yogi. It is
not so. Either you should have very strong
or with your intelligence you should under-
stand what is Sahaja Yoga. A person who
is still negative always gets attracted towards
other one who is very powerfully negative
Now, out of the eleven...the Ekädashas,
means eleven,-the five come from the right and does not understand that the other
side of your void, and five from the left
side of your void. The first five on the left impressed. Under such circumstances, such
hand side come from,-if you have bowed
yourself to wrong Gurus, or if you have read
wrong books, or if you have been in the
company of wrong people, or if you have
been sympathetic towards people who have
been following wrong paths, or you have mad, whether
been yourself one of the agent or guru of with him, whether he is your relation,
these wrong people. Now these five problems or anything. No sympathy of any kind, on
can be solved, if we completely give up the contrary a kind of anger should be there
whatever wrong we have been doing. As for that person, a kind of a detachment.
Mohammad Sähab has said that you have And this angry detachment is the only time,
to beat the Shaitan, means the satan, with
shoes; but that has to be done not mechani-
cally but from your heart. Like many people Sahaja Yogis but not for their own husbands
who come to Sahaja Yoga will tell me, "My or wives who are extremely negative.
father is following this Guru; that father is
following that Guru." and get involved with
their father, sister, this, that and try to take
them out from those Gurus,-also get entan-
person is so powerfully negative; but gets
a person is hit by that negativa person and
Shiva cannot protect.
One should not have sympathy with
anyone who is negative, whether he is
there is something wrong
when you have to be angry. But I have seen
people who have anger for very good
So when the Ekādasha Rudra starts acting on
these five sides on the right we should say,
it moves to the right side, because it comes
Nirmala Yoga
22
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-24.txt 
 from the left and moves to the tight side,- inauspiciousness will hurt anyone to any
extent; so better keep out of such persons.
then a person starts becoming negative but
acting with his ego. Such a person may take
up a situation into hands and say that "I am
such and such sahaja yogi and I am so. we
When these ten Ekādashas are developed
within a person, then definitely such a person
should do like this and we should behave gets diseases like cancer and incurable horrible
like this", and start dictating; people can do diseases. Specially, when the eleventh one
anything. And some mediocre. and some which is actually here which is the Virāta's
half baked sahaja yogis may try to understand, chakra, which is the collectivity: when it is
but most will know that "this fellow is going effected as well, then such a person cannot
get out of this disease. But if, out of these
these things lead to this left side develop- even five are combined,-with Mooladhara
ment, or we can call it on the head,-on the or with Agnyă, then they get into serious
right hand side of your Medha, this plate, typas of dirty disease. That's why, always
brain-plate is called Medha in sanskrit say that bạ careful about your Agnya chakra.
Because that is one of the worst things, that
once it starts getting combined with these
Ekādashas, part of the Ekädashas, then any-
out, now he is on his way out." So, all
language.
Now, the right sided one, comes from the
idea people have that, 1 am myself a big things can happen to a person, he can meet
Guru." They start preaching about Sahaja
Yoga also, as if they have become great
gurus. We have known some people who
give big lectures in any programmes and who hhas got the right Agnya and also any
never allow my tape to be played or anything
They think they have now become experts. # they combine with Agnya Chakra, the
Then some of them say that now we have
become so great that we need not do any protective powers of God are minimum. So,
foot-soaking or anything, there is no need to
do meditation; there are some like that also.
And then there are some who say that sin can
never touch us, now we are Sahaja Yoois, and the Agnya chakra is soothed down. Don't
we are very great evolved souls. But the pay attention here and there all the time.
worst of all are those who just take my name
saying that "Mother has said so and I am
telling you because Mother has said":-when
I have never said such a thing: it's all false- such a manner that you don't have to worry
hood. Now there are some people who use
Sahaja Yoga money and exploit Sahaja Yoga
in such a way, exploit them,-Sahaja Yogis-
also sometimes. And such people become touch you, that is your fortress. By meditation,
very inauspicious. Anyone who tries such one must establish thoughtless awareness,
things will go out of Sahaja Yoga with that is the sign that you are rising higher.
disgrace. But one should never go near such Many people do meditation and say, "Alright,
a person, have nothing to do with such a
person, have no sympathies. Because this
with a horrible accident. he can suddenly be
hit by someone, could be murdered by some-
one, anything can happen to such a person
one of the Ekādashas, right or left. That
means, the five of these, any one of the five;
to keep your Agnya chakra alright,-say now
I am speaking, you should watch me continu-
ously so that there is thoughtless awareness
Then you will find that, gradually your atten-
tion will neutralize into thoughtless aware-
ness. And your attention would be fixed in
about anything.
In thoughtless awareness nobody can
Mother we are doing." Mechanically, they do
and say, "I did this, I did this, and I did this,
23
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-25.txt 
 But did you achieve your thoughtless aware-
ness, minimum of minimum? Have you felt is the personification of Aumkära, he is the
your cool breeze coming out of your head? personification of vibrations. So when He gets
Otherwise, if you are doing something mech- angry then the whole universe starts brea-
anically, it is not going to help; help you or king. As He personifies the power of the
help anyone.
He is the support of the whole universe. He
Mother which is penetrating into every aätom,
into every molecule, into every human being,
So, after realization, as you are very into every thing that is living and non-living,
well protected, you have all the blessings once it gets disturbed the whole thing gets
and a great future, you also have a great into jeopardy. So the pleasing of Christ is
possibility of complete annihilation. I would very important.
say, to give an analogy; you are clim- have to be like small children-that is, the
bing, and everybody is supporting you to innocence. The purity of the heart is the
climb, holding your hand, and there are so
many things by which you are protected to
be taken upward, there is no posibility of
falling off by mistake also, but if you try to developed their brains too much, they try to
remove your bondages with truth and love
and all the time try to hit the people who are
trying to support you, then you fall from a
great height, greater height. I mean, the greater
height you rise, the greater you fall. And with
a greater force also, much more deeper. But is a very good Sahaja Yogi. Such people are
every effort is made by the Divine, every
support is given to you, every care is taken. they are egoistical, but they are very cunning
Despite that, if you want to fall. then trom clever people and they are quite aware, as to
Now, Christ has said, "You
best way you can please Him.
As in the West specially, people have
play about with words and think that nobody
knows what they are doiig. All such people
must know that everything you do is known
to God. If you are not clean in your heart, it is
very dangerous for anybody to pose as if he
not possessed, nor they are conditioned, nor
that height, is very dangerous.
what they are doing. But, there are people who
But Ekādasha Rudra, at that time, at such get possessed also and then they, in that, they
a time when somebody tries to harm the try to destroy themselves or cry and weep and
cause of Sahaja Yoga, after being in Sahaja do all kinds of things. There are some who
Yoga, then hits you so badly that the whole think that if they hurt themselves or do some
sort of an extreme thing then God will be
family can be protected if there are few people happy,-are sadly mistaken. If you cannot
of that family doing Sahaja Yoga work- enjoy in Sahaja Yoga, then you should
If
atteck is very widespread. But the whole
could be protected. But in case the family know that something is wrong with you.
that is against all the time of Sahaja Yogis you cannot feel happy in Sahaja Yoga then
and try to trouble them, can be completely you must know that there is something defi-
nitely wrong with you. If you cannot enjoy
the company of Sahaja Yogis, then it's sure
Now these Ekadasha Rurdras come out of, something is wrong with you. f you cannot
as I told you, from the Void, So, we can say laugh and appreciate the greatness of God.
that the destruction part of it comes from the then something wrong with you. If you are
still worried about negative people and their
are given in one person that is the "Maha- problems then know that there's something
vishnu', that is 'Lord Jesüs Christ', because wrong with you., If you have sympathies
destroyed, very badly.
Void mainly. But these are the powers, all
Nirmala Yoga
24
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-26.txt 
 with negative people, then also there's some-
thing wrong with you. But if you have
anger for negative and all that is negative
that is agairist Sahaja Yoga, then you are
total destructive power is Ekädasha Rudra.
It is extremely powerful, explosive, but it
is not blind. It is very discriminative and
extremely delicately woven. It avoids all the
good points and attacks the wrong things.
there.
When this thing gets matured then you And it hits at the right time, at the right point,
become the power of 'Ekadasha Rudra your- direct, without hitting anything that is good in
self. Anybody who will try to insult you or
to do any harm, will collapse. It has happe- falls upon someone, say,-and there is some-
ned with many people who tried to be thing in-between which is Divine or which
insulting to me or tried to harm me or any- is a positive thing, it penetrates through
way.... sometimes I am quite worried about positive, without harming the
them. So one has to be in such a way that and hits the negative.
they become the Ekädasha. Nobody can touch
such people. But such a person is full of com-
passion and forgiveness. As a result, Ekadasha
acts much faster. The more comnpassion-
ate you are the more powerful Ekādasha
becomes. The more collective you become cutting the neck in one shot, it goes on
between. Now the glance of Ekādasha Rudra
positive
It cools down
somebody (not freezing) and burns another.
So that is how it works with such care and
such delicacy. And it is tremendously sharp
also. And it is very painful. It is not like
the more Ekādasha acts.
Many people have slowly. All the horrible tortures that you
a habit of receding back into their exclusion have learnt or heard about are expressions of
and saying that we better be at home and it's Ekādasha Rudra. For example, take the
alright; but thay don't know what they are
missing. Whatever may be your experience is removed, the tongue is removed, then the
with others. you should stick-on together, gullet is removed, then everything goes one
always attend pragrammes, take leadership, after other, is removed with terrible pain, you
go ahead with it, work it out and you will be see. Take leprosy for example, the lepers
blessed thousand-folds.
case of cancer. In the cancer thing, the nose
cannot feel their fingers, they can not feel it,
so any rat or anything eats their fingers they
can't feel it, so they start losing their fingers,
Ekādasha Rudra have all the powers, I
would say. of destruction, together. It is that is how Ekädasha eats up i.e. devours
destructive power of Shri Ganesha.
destructive power
Mahesha. It is the destructive power of the
Mother, It is the destructive power of the very gentle and could be very sweet, when it
Ganesha and four of these are Bhairava and comes to His own children. The story is
Hanumâna, Kärttikéya and Ganesha. Also about the Mother. Once She got very angry,
the powers of Sadāshiva and of the Adishakti.
All the destructive powers of all the incarna- angry, She wanted to destroy the whole
tions are Ekādashas.
not the least, is the destructive power of tried to destroy the whole world. When She
Hiranyagarbha' which is collective Brahma-
deva. And this power when it acts, every atom that She is being a bit too much angry. So
explodes, the whole atomic energy goes into when She started destroying, as She was
a destructive power. So, thus the complete going right and left, He did not know what
It is
people.
of Brahma,
Vishnu,
But this wrathfulness of the Father can be
- the Primordial Mother.-and She was so
Now the last but world with Her Ekådasha power and She
went into that mood, the Father Himself felt
Nirmala Yoga
25
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-27.txt 
 to do. So He took Her child, that means Pooja 'And it is for all kinds of false religious
representing Sahaja Yogi, you can say, rep-
resenting Christ or representing anyone of which are followed in the name of God, or
these great children of Her's, that he put the any religion that does not say about Self
child under Her feet. So, when She was realization and does not achieve Self realiza-
stamping, suddenly She saw Her own child tion and does not get connected with God,
under Her feet and Her such a big tongue Is false. So any such thing that is just faith
came out. She just stopped;-balancing. But and talks of God but has no connection with
this has happened only once.
sects and false gurus and false religions,
God cannot be a true religion. Of course, it
So, after the Ekādasha Rudra, ultimately gives a balance to people, but in giving that
the complete destruction comes through the balance, if people live on that money and try
to enjoy a wealth out of that money, then it
is not even at the very lower level is religion.
Like a balance, you, see, religion has to give
So thus we have seen how Ekädasha a balance to begin with, but in that balanc-
Rudra acts and how Sahaja Yogis have to ing when they tell," you have to be balanced,
but give me money for that, you must give
me money, give me all your purse, give me
everything," then that cannot be balanced, it
does not even have a slightest thing or the
blessings of God. Or any religion that makes
you bow to anybody else but incarnation, is
not a religion, that is another one which is
anger of Sadashiva; when the final total
destruction takes place.
becoma themselves 'Ekādasha Rudra".
Now to develop this power one has to
develop a tremendous power of detachment,
power of detachment-detachment from nega-
tive. For example, negativity can come from
very near people like brother, mother, sister;
could come from relatives. it could come
from a country, it could come from your
political ideas, economic ideas, anything like
that. Any misidentification can destroy your and will always talk about the ascent. But
power of Ekādasha Rudra. So it is not only they will not ask for money or make one man
sufficient to say that " am surrendered to something great as venerated. Thus, we
Sahaja Yoga and I am a Sahaja Yogi," but you should learn to discriminate between false-
must know mentally also what is Sahaja hood, negative things and real things. Once
Yoga. So that intelligently you understand
what is Sahaja Yoga. Because in the west
specially people are over-intelligent, and if gence, you are in the control of yourself.
the light of Sahaja Yoga does not enter into And then you become that power of Ekadas-
their intelligence you can never overcome
your attachments. That does not mean you
talk too much about Sahaja Yoga or you give
lectures on that, but mentally you should the power of Ekādasha Rudra and you deve-
also understand what is Sahaja Yoga.
absolutely false,
The real religion will give you a balance
you develop that discrimination through
vibratory awareness, or through your intelli-
ha, when you establish your maturity.
Today, I bless you all, that you all become
lop that sincerity which takes you to that
state,
Today is a special day when it has been
asked that we should have 'Ekādasha Rudra
May God Bless you.
26
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-28.txt 
 Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
HEART CHAKRA
DELHI
1st February 1983
The Mother
The Chakra of the Goddess lies behind the
sternum bone in the spinal chord. This Chakra
is placed above the Bhavasāgara, above the life when the child goes to the school or he
void, as we call it in Sahaja Yoga. And the tries to work out something for the future,
bridge that has to be crossed by the bhaktas,
by the seekers, is guarded by Her. She is the parents, teachers and outside people. So it is
one, She helps Her children to come through very important to understand child ren who
that passage when there are negative forces are growing.
trying to attack on a seeker.
Tiumber and this centre being so weak, the
person feels extremely insecure. Later on in
then also his confidenice can be shaken by
In the west they analyse everything and
This chakra is placed at the back of the try to put human beings into compartments.
sternum bone as I told you. In childhood, the
antibodies are formed in the sternum bone. no innocence, and he is extremely selfish.
They are the warriors or the Sainikes of the Second part is adolescence, which they think
Devi. And till the age of 12 years they grow
and multiply, and ultimately they all get do not know that there it something like
distributed all over the body. and a human adolescence. Now these adolescent people
being is made able to face any outside inva- form a group, and they start criticizing or
sion on him.
how to fight. They are extremely confident. age it starts. First they make fun of the
And they know who are their enemies. They teachers, then of the parents, then of all the
have all these messages built in themselves.
So when the anti-God element enters into becoming extremely active in their brains
the being through any process, say through because they see too many televisions and
food, through words, through action, through things like that, and then they start behaving
devilish people, or black magic, these anti-
bodies combine together. collectively fight that one cannot imagine.
First the child, according to them, child has
is a very arbitrary, moody stuff. In India, we
. These anti-bodies
know
making fun of all the elders. At a very young
people who are senior to them. They start
at a very young age in such violent ways
the invaders.
I used to live about 25 miles away from
Those who do not have their central London, And every time 1 would go to
heart properly developed suffer from tremen- London, I would find some children doing
dous insecurity all their lives. When they are some sort of a mischief somewhere. One day
children, you try to control them by frighten- some of them entered into my compartment,
ing; these children later on become extremely and they started pulling out all the covers,
insecure. They are afraid of darkness, they thrusting their knives into the seats, opening
out all the upholstery. I was just sitting and
of everything. Because the antibodies that watching. So I said, "Now are you tired?
are built in the body are not sufficient in Please sit down. What is the problem?" They
are afraid of night. Some of them are afraid
Nirmala Yoge
27
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-29.txt 
 But they are. They are frightened of each
said, "We are all very angry". I said, "For
what? Why are you angry?" They said, "we other, they are frightened of themselves. The
are just angry." "But you have to be angry for reason is, the centre heart is absolutely weak.
something". They were children going to
good schools definitely. wearing verY good insecurities. The child does not know, when
clothes. And then I had to.-when the train
stopped, I called the ticket collector and told
him that these boys have been doing all this mother would be there or she would be gone.
hooliganism in the compartment and you
better look at it. And he came in, and he said from the husbands and smile and show no
this is a common thing. And then somehow signs of their agony to their children. But the
or the other he took them out.
I told you the first reason, the family
he comes back from school, whether his
They do not have mothers who can bear a lot
mothers in that country, 1 have seen, always
try to use their children for all kinds of emo-
But the only thing I felt about them is, tional blackmail, you can call it. They try
that all of them had their centre heart catch-
ing. On the Kundalini, they were catching their husband is doing to them and whatever is the
centre heart. But when they saw me, they problem they are facing with the husbands.
sat down. Thay were quiet, they listened to So the child is not secured by the mother.
me. I
them said "We are angry with our mother."
"But why?""Because our brothers are angry".
"But why your brothers are angry ?"...Then ! tive and left-sided. He feels that he is born in
discovered that Freud has given these funny a place full of hatred, insecurity, and fear.
ideas against the mother. Mother itself, can
you imaginel What a anti-God activity it is.
to torture the child by telling all the things the
ELS
But on the contrary, child starts giving secur-
ity to mother there. At a very young age it
starts, and the child becames extremely nega-
settled their centre heart. And most of
When the Bhaktas are born in those coun-
tries, they are also the same way. Because
To an Indian, Mother is the primal thing. they have to go to a Guru, the Guru, as
Any Indian. Because his sense of security lies known so far, tortures them or extracts all the
in the mother. Even if the father is hot-tem-
pered, is angry, still they depend on the and sometimes leaves them high and dry on
mother. Because Mother knows when to get the streets.
angry and when not to get angry. She has
the discrimination. And She is the one who
money, takes their pareekshā (sar), tests,
But in our country the Goddese has täken
incarnation many a times. Thousands of
times She has taken here Her birth, whenever
The idea of Mother is completlely blasted the Bhaktas called Her, when they were pes-
in the west, and this is the reason why the tered by the negative forces, She came on this
children of that country feel so insecure, and earth to save them. These things used to be
when they grow, they are extremely insecu- just accepted by people, but never they really
red. You would not believe that all the time accepted in their hearts. People thought these
are some sorts of mythological stories that the
but not even a rät enters their house. And if Goddess came on this earth and She tried to
they have to taik to someone, they will make save the people. They could not believe that
there could be a Shakti (Power) who could
Specially in London because they are literally be born. who could fight these horrible rak-
frightened, Nobody will believe, the British shasas, and kill them, and save Her children.
who ruled us, are such frightened people. Her bhaktās, from agony. It was too much.
protects them.
they are polishing, they are cleaning their house,
the person stand outside, and talk from inside.
Nirmala Yoga
28
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-30.txt 
 But today in Sahaja Yoga, you have seen
that when Kundalini rises and stops at the
centre heart you have to say the mantra of
"Jagadamba", and the Kuncalini rises. That
means, She resides in the central heart, and
when She is being worshipped, the Kundalini ask them, they will say," What's wrong?" A
rises. This centre has got twelve petals, But
the Goddess has thousand hands and thou-
sand eyes.She has 16,000 nādis (T, he wants to have a keep, let him have it". In
channels) to work out Her different aspects India, no woman would tolerate such a situa-
of enlightenment. But the first thing She has
to do, through her generosity and kindness
and compassion and patience, She has to
suck-in the sins-Papavimochini (safarii rat).
The sins of human beings.
up some sort of insecurities, which are of no
actual existence.
But such fears are very much more in the
West. Because the life in the West has no
mooring, has no explanation. Whatever you
husband will say what's wrong in having a
keep. And the wife will also say, "Alright if
tion. She would starve, she would do every-
thing, but she will never touch a man who
has a keep.
So the basis of the strength of Indian
women is their "sense of chastity". The
sense of chastity in the Indian women is so
of fear is sin." Or you can put it the other way great that nothing can deter them as long as
round, the wages of sin is fear." If you have they are chaste. But if they are not chaste,
then fear settles in them 'very' fast.. Chastity
self and against God. Because, if Mother is is the strength of women. And that is why,
Almighty, and She 'can' solve all your prob- those women who have fear, mostly, have a
lems, you are under Her protection, then why problem of their chastity being challenged.
should you have any fear? That means you do A woman who is frightened that her chastity
not believe that She is that' powerful. When a may be disturbed, also can develop a problem
person is frightened, this centre starts brea- with the heart chakra. Such women can
thing fast, giving rhythmic instructions to all develop breast cancer, breathing troubles, and
other kind of frightening diseases on the
One of the sentences in Bible was" wages
fear, you are committing a sin against your
the antibodies. With that you feel you are
getting a palpitation in the heart. This palpi-
tation is nothing but a signal to all the anti-
bodies to fight the emergency of an attack.
emotional level also.
This chakra is ruined in women when they
lose their only child; beceuse their mother-
But when some body builds-up insecurity hood is finished, they feel. And that is the
later on in life, it becomes a physical problem, worst thing that can happen to a woman
If they have insecurities earlier, it is an emo- But if she is not a woman, she doesn't feel
tional problem. But later on in life, when one much, and she just behaves in a very manly
develops a insecurity of any kind, like a wife, way. And that is what I have seen in the
if she is insecure about her husband; husband west, that women really don't much care
is a loafer or a bad man, and carrying on with when their children die. But it is because
other women, so the motherhood of the wife they are not women. If you are a woman
is challenged. And when her motherhood is you definitely feel for your children, their
challenged, she may get the weakening of death. But after some time, such a woman
this centre, by which she may suffer quite a comes back again and she accepts the tife as
lot and may have even breast cancer. These it is, for the sake of her husband, or may be if
insecurities can be also self-made, imaginary. she has more relations or other children. She
People can just think about it and build becomes extremely powerful as a reaction to
29
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-31.txt 
 what has happened to her. That is only did not love their mothers, or perhaps, may be
possible if your centre of heart is alright. that they did not understand the value of
Such women do not grudge, do not complain, virginity in women.
are extremely serene, and can bear up lots of
things. They are extremely tolerant, and can
go to any extent to help their children; but
they are never spoiling their children. They to have lusty eyes, can also develop this
'never' spoil their children, because they
understand spoiling is much worse than bea-
ting the child. They never spoil the children,
nor even pamper them, and never get domin-
ated by their children. They know, "I have
to guide the child, and have to look after the
child". So, they look after all the ideals and negligence in life. Like some people have a
righteousness and the virtues of the child.
And if he tries to get out of it, they go 'all
So those men, who try to look at every
woman who passes by, tho se men who try
centre very badly. And lots of problems can
come through this centre.
One of the problems that comes through
this could be lung cancer.
this centre is very badly affected also by certain
But I have seen
habit of having a 'very hot bath, and then
coming out of that hot bath and entering into
some cool place. Such peo ple will catch this
centre very badly and they will have a problem.
Then there is another thing which looks very
simple, but many people have a habit, specially
in summers, to wear a one single kurta or a
out' to win him over back to virtue and to
better life. But those people, those women,
who do not care for actual growth of child,
may just avoid it and escape it.
In the men, this chakra is caught up if they single shirt and not the under-shirt. This is
have lost their mother very early, if their also not proper.
mother by chance is a very cruel woman. something under his shirt, otherwise when it
Also this chakra can be caught up by men, if starts perspiring, he can get trouble into this
they had been to wars, and if they have heart centre.
seen frightful things in the war. Such people
could be extremely emotional and could be
easily befooled by people who try to win over emotional problems
their emotions.
A man must always have
This heart centre is caught up by various
in human beings.
Husband and wife, if they all the time quarrel,
there is always quarrelling in the house,
What is to be done to improve this chakra7
specially if the mother is very dominating, the
In Sahaja Yoga we have many techniques child develops this centre. And if the father
by which we can improve this chakra, and get is very dominating, the child develops this-
our confidence back. As Patrick has said. the heart itself. So it is very important that
husband and wife should never quarrel in the
that he never used to speak. And I have seen
many actors who act very well and when they presence of their children.
came to my programme, they said "Mother
please do not ask us to speak because
we just do not know how to speak. We can
Now there resides in this centre, the
incarnation of the Goddess, who came on
act, but we cannot speak to people." And this earth thousands of times, and She resides
there for your protection. But first of all you
have to be worthy of Her protection. When
sat down,I found out all of them had this She came on this earth many a times, you
chakra very badly damaged. Perhaps they know, Her body was made by various
lacked the love of their mothers, perhaps they forces, as if She was like a bubble and the
I tried once or twice and they ended up with
two-three sentences, mumbled down and
Nirmala Yoga
30
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-32.txt 
 bubble was covered by so many things added it started moving. And we came back then to
on to that. And that is how She got lots of Bombay." So. on the way they started
things from various Gods,-like Her hair She asking. "There must be some saint
got from Yama, the God of death : Her nose
She got from the God of wealth, Kubera; and Only a saint can protect us like this." And
Her ears She got from the Pawana, that is air.
Like that, Her body was made specially by "this is Mataji's disciple." They all started
essences of these great deities, who donated falling at her feet, saying, "Oh! you have saved
their essences to the Goddess, to be equi-
pped to do these multifarious activities:
sitting
here, otherwise how can we be protected ?
she was wearing my ring. "Oh!", they said,
us.you have saved us.
So, there are many miracles that take
Now the tirst activity, as I told you, of the place in your life. When you see an accident
Goddess is to save Her children from the taking place, suddenly you find the accident
negative forces.
mild, sweet but She can be 'extremely' vio- journalist called Marāthé.
lent,-in the sense, She can kill or crush another journalist, were coming from Lonāvlä
anyone who tries to overpower Her children. down, and it is a very big slopy road, ghät,
Atisaumya-Atiraudra (afarr, a )-these and their brakes failed. And the driver said,
two temperaments exist only in the Goddess, now the brakes have failed and you take God's
because She is the Mother; and at any cost
She wants to save Her child. Also towards
the child when he goes beyond a point of
understanding, when he shows no sense of
discipline, then also Goddess can pull him God knows what happened-they opened the
down by certain methods that She adopts.
So She looks extremely is over, There was one fellow, who was a
. He and his friends,
name." And they started remembering their
Mother. And suddenly they saw a big truck
coming ahead. They were about to bang
on to that, they closed their eyes. And
eyes and saw the truck was going upward and
Now first of all is, that She gives all that is they were moving forward without any
needed to remove the fear from the mind of
Sādhakas. Secondly, She 'cures' this centre
by giving birth to additional antibodies in the
body. And, by vibrating the tired antibodies
to act in a way that they can fight back again.
difficulties. And they were amazed how it
has happened, as if somebody has lifted their
car and put before the truck, and they have
been saved. And the driver also closed his
eyes and took the name of the Mother. It
is possible I It has happened with so many
Even in day-to-day life, She may establish people that they do not know how it works
Her existence by showing lots of miracles to
Her children. We had a lady coming to see
me and she was rather late. And when she
came back I asked her what was the problem. Mother within ourselves, in our heart, and if
She said "No, there was no problem, but my
bus fell down about 20-30 feet down, and
out.
So one has to believe, that we have the
She is awakened, She is going to look after
us. She is going to give 'all the protection
US.
the thing rolled down and fell on the ground that is needed. And there is 'nothing' to be
with all the four legs intact. And all of us frightened of, anything.
in the bus were saved. But the driver got
upset and he ran away. So somebody who
was in the bus, who knew how to drive, came clearly, that they were quite frightened, and 1
down and he switched on the engine, and
But you can imagine, as Patrick has said
know they are. Even English language is like
Nirmala Yoga
31
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-33.txt 
 All the time they will say. "I am you have clerks and this, and that, and that.
And you are nothing else but that. So because
What is there to be afraid of, if you have to you are that, you must have these horns, and
1 am afraid, if I am you must shout at people, otherwise nobody
....."-they are all the time jittery like that. is going to believe that you are something.
that.
afraid.. .. "I am afraid I have to go."
go ? You better go. "I
And so jittery and when they talk. you know
they are so frightened that sometimes you
So it is such an identification that deve-
feel nervous with them, that you do not know lops into human beings, that too, because of
this heart not being developed properly.
Because if your heart is developed properly.
then you are a human being. Because you
know your Mother has given you the birth
and you are a human being. There is no need
to have any fear from andther human being,
how to approach them, the way they are
nervous.
And one of the reasons why they are
nervous is that, because they plan too much,
think too much, analyse oo much and their
ego settles down into their brains, and ultima-
tely the heart. Because their ego covers their who is also a child of your Mother. So there
heart, they get a fright
happens that if you become ego-oriented you
start seeing yourself through. Because when start wearing anything; supposing they wear
you are at a level, you can even see your ego a suit, immediately they will start speaking in
very clearly, and then you get frightened of English. As soon as they wear Pyjämās, they
other people because you think that they too
must be having the same type of ego, and
you are really frightened of them.
has to be no fear about it.
Actually it so
But the trouble is that when human beings
start speaking in Hindi language-or say Dhoti,
Hindi language, and say Pyjāmās, they might
start giving gålis (abusing). So it is a kind
of a very superficial identification human
It is very common aiso, in the East. Now
in India I should say, that supposing you have beings develop, because there is no depth in
to go to a government office, be careful. Any-
body, even a chaprāsi (peon) can shout at mooring in the heart, then they would not
you for nothing at all. They develop a system develop these superficial things. And as a
of barking all the time, just go on barking.
The reason is they bark at you because they they know they are superficial, others are
themselves are insecure. A Chaprāsi is inse-
cure of his boss, his boss is insecure of "his
boss, his boss is insecure of his boss, ultimately might pull my beard as well. Such a fear
the minister is afraid of the voters, and the
voters are afraid of the minister. it is such a
vicious circle So the whole system works out
into such a terrible insecurity that you do not
understand what is there to bark at ? What
is there to shout at ? And then a kind of a
identification with the falsehood is built up
so much, that you are no more a human You will remain always the child of the
being: you are either a secretary or you are
an under secretary or a joint secretary, I do other child, in the eyes of Mother ? You
not know who is higher who is lower. And
then you have some other secretaries and then such tricks, the Mother will punish you.
If they had that depth, that
the heart.
result of that, they are frightened. Because
superficial, they have got beard, we have got
beard. So if I am going to pull his beard, he
And then,
exists among human beings.
another thing, another step comes into the
minds of the people, that, why not pull his
legs to go up ? This is the third category of
debasement.
If you are the child of the same Mother,
how can you go higher than anybody else ?
Mother. How can you be higher than any
cannot. On the contrary, if you try to do
Nirmala Yoga
32
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-34.txt 
 And this is the second thing that Mother If She is like any other gurus, the Gurus,
does, is to punish Her children. Yes, She Satgurus also,-they used to beat their
punishes ! In very sweet ways first of all. For disciples ! They used to hang them by a
example, if the child is not eating and troubl- string I You don't know how the Gurus treat
! Some of them take lots of
their disciples
ing, She says", Alright, you don't want to eat,
alright, don't eat today." That is a very simple money from their disciples, and some of them
way of punishing children. But then She take lots of things from their disciples. They
want complete surrendering, and they would
make them subservient. They really torture
the lives of their disciples ! But the Mother
does not want to do that. So She plays
here and there, and iries to
says", Alright you want to have the way you
want to have, go ahead".
Like i tell them not to do such and such
thing, it is not good. For example, I told them little tricks
that don't take the flats just from the begin-
ning, and let all the Sahaja Yogis stay with
other Sahaja Yogis. But the organisers
thought, better to take the flats.-whatever whom I met about five-six years back. He
correct the children.
Now I will give you an example of a Guru,
may be the reasons. Because they are very
wise organisers ! But you see, Mother says
came from Amarnāth to a small village, small
district place near Bombay, where a Sahaja
something very simple, but it has a meaning, Yogini was staying. And he sent his. disciple,
one must know. Arnd, they arranged it
who was staying in that place, to see that
that way. So, half of the people just pro- Sahaja Yogini. And he went and he told that
tested, "No we want to stay with some Sahaja
Yogis, we want to be with them". So they
were accomodated. The others were,-British,
you know now-a-days are on the other side
of the mood. They are very-very tolerant.
And they said," Alright, if we are not ärran-
"you see, my Guru is coming, and he wants
to see Mataji. And he has told me that only
Adi Shakti will clear out my Agnya chakra." So
she could not understand, she said, what is
your Guru doing? "Oh God I don't talk about
him," he held his ears. "Don't take his name.
ged, we will stay in the flats." So they stayed ohl you cannot know what sort of a person
in the flats. But what happened?-It rained,
he is." She said," But why does not he open
and rained and rained and rained, and they your Agnyā Chakra7 Mother will be coming
could not errarge their food even under the
of course, but why shouldn't he do that?"
He
roof they had built. So they had to shift all said, "No, no no l he said that only She
of them to other places, and all of them had should open, nobody else should open it. And
to stay with other Sahaja Yogis, as told by he sent me to this place about five years
Mother. If they had listened to the Mother, back, saying that in the sixth year Adishakti
they would have saved some money, as well
as they would have saved some trouble, and
there would have been no problem at all.
That is how little tricks here and there are
played by Mother just to convince the children
that you have been stupid.
will be coming, and She will open your Agnya
Chakra." Now can you believe it ! Poor fellow
suffering from that horrid Agnya Chakra, was
suffering when this Guru had come. So he
came to see me and he told me, "Mother, my
Guru has come and he wants to see you". So
Now, there are so many things like that I went to see him. And this guru was sitting
which Mother can play, and Her playfulness down there with a big temper you see, the
is very important in life. Because if She is nose was all bloating. Of course, when I went
severe with the children, they will run away. there he touched my feet and everything: and
Nirmala Yoga
33
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-35.txt 
 then he called one very bad name to this you, they trouble you so much, they try to be
thing, "Did he touch your Feet 7 Wes he funny with you. Still you don't say anything
alright? Was he behaving airight?" I said, he
was alright, but I can't understand why did how to correct them."
you not open his Agnya chakra ! He said, "Let
him go to hell now! I am not going to open
his Ägnya Chakra,
Agnya chakra ? Why should I open his
Ägnya chakra ?" So I said, this is not
good. I should open.".."Yes, yes, you will,
because you are a Mother. I am not a
Mother." So he went inside, and the disciole completely secure about it, and She does not
told me, "Motherl he hanged me by legs on the disciple will misbehave or anything, bec-
top of this well I For three days I was hanging
there." I said, for what? Why did he hang you
there? He said," Don't ask any one," Then
he (guru) came in, "Yes, yes, I hanged him !
Yes, I will ! Againl" So I said, why did you explaining to me, "Mother, you do not know.
hang him ? ""He was smoking, Because he this thing happened .."I said, "I do not know
was smoking. I hanged him there. I said, anything, is'nt it? You think I do not know
now smoke, and I was putting him down, up anything. He said, Yes Mother, how could
and down. I said I am smoking you."-And you?" I told him that he used to play cricket
he tortured him like this I
to them." I said, "I don't have to say. I know
So this is the quality of the Mother, who
can correct people. She knows who doubts
them, She knows who thinks wrong about
Her. She knows who thinks rightly about Her.
She knows everything. If She knows every-
thing, She does not have to worry. She is
who opened 'my'
have the insecurity of the guru, that one day
ause She knows haw to correct.
The other day I met one gentleman, a
Sahaja Yogi, and he came to me and started
in his younger days. Then he accepted,
"Alright you know Mother all about me, I
do not know how you know."
1 said, "but why should you do such a
horrible thing?" He says "Otherwise how will
you discipline? I am not a Mother. don't
know how to discipline. This is the only way is the one who sees everything. She knows,
I can discipline him." And he said," You go somehow or the other, She knows. How
on spoiling him, but I am going to discipline She knows, that can not be explained at this
him like that." Alright, 1 said, you shut up stage. But She knows 'each and everything'
now, just now, do not talk, let me put his what you are doing, if She wants to know.
ågnyā right. And
to put his Agnya right. I said his ägnya
is alright now.
promise you that he will not smoke?. I said, will be just like you. And you would
But She is avalokiteshvari (अबसोकितेश्वरी). She
I took about two minutes
And the third quality of the Mother is, that
She is a Mahāmäyā. Sha talks like you, sits
Then he said, "Did he lika you, she will behave like you, everything
said,
"he did not." So he said, "You better ask
him to promise, otherwise I will not allow him
to eat his food for three days." I said, Baba!
This is a horrible Guru! God save this discipie such a beautiful way that you cannot make
not be able to make out the depth of this
woman, who is a Mahā māyā because She
plays such tricks on you and such things in
from this Guru!
it out. You think that you are alright, you go
But, you see, what he was meaning, that to a person and you tell anything you feel
there should be a discipline in a disciple. like about Mother, you try to do anything and
There has to be a complete understanding that 'ultimately you discover that everything She
he is the Guru. But he said," Look at these knows. And when you discover that, gradual-
people, How are they? They take liberties with ly you start understanding that when She
34
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-36.txt 
 knows everything about me, I better be alright.
Now you must know that Mother has
And how does She know?-Because She saved people from that Bhavasägara, with
resides in your centre heart. She knows such great difficulty. It is not easy to do that,
'everything' what you have been doing, what it is a tremendaus task. Sometimes, to raise
you are doing, what you are thinking of the Kundalini of thousands of people, I feel
doing. So what does She do ? Sankalpa vika- like a big mountain/ have to raise. It is
whatever terrible. But people on the whole, who are
sankalpas you are making, she will make it not yet corrected, think they are obliging me
Realisation. This is a very
Ipa karot) (संकल्प विकत्प करोति),
taking
by
fail. If you say. "Now I have decided Mother,
to do this, and I am "going to do it."-it common feeling with human beings. AndI
will fail. You have to judge yourself as a feel like laughing at the stupidity of the
ego!-that they are obliging me by taking this
Realisation. And the way they talk is all on
this terminology, I came, I was sitting there
for three days, I never got realisation." As if
real son of your Mother.
As in Bombay or any place we tried to
get some larid, nobody could get it. We tried,
tried, tried you see; they say black market
money, bribery, curruption. I said nothing
doing, I am not going to do any of these
thing s. So they said, "Then Mother, how are
we to achieve it?" I said you will achieve it,
don't you worry. Then they started saying,
She is not practical, She is this, She is that.
And everybody who said, turned out to be
"very impractical. Ultimately', I said, when
you will be ready for Sahaja Yoga, then you
will get the land and the Ashram. Because
once you start an Ashram and have some
money there, you will find 'all' kinds of bhoots such an attitude is developed, it is much
will join together and will make fun with the
money that has been collected, there would
not be 'any' proper anangement, no proper
discipline.
Inty
I have done some criminal act.
So the whole attitude of a person gradual-
ly changes towards the Mother, and he
starts thinking that "She is here for my well
being. And my well being is Her only
concern about me. "Somehow She will
achieve my realization She is working very
hard, and I must co-operate. I must learn
to co-operate, It is for 'my hita (fra), for
'my' good She is doing it. And I should try
to understand that it is for my good." When
easier to establish a disciple.
But this disciple is different from a son or
a daughter. Because Mother is a Guru, no
doubt, Mother is a Guru from the very begin-
ning you are born. But for a Mother, it is
And that is why the time has to be given very difficult to be as harsh as these Gurus are.
for children to learn through making errors, Not at all, nowhere near them. One cannot
through making mistakes, and understanding beat them in the harshness. But it is for you,
what mistakes we are making and how we in your own wisdom, to understand "how to
behave, how to ask for relisation, how to
ding it, then it is very easy, very easy to change your attitude." Because if you think
communicate to them what they are supposed too much of yourself, and you try to show off
to do, what they have done is wrong, and She'll say, "Yes, yes, you are very great,
how to correct it. But as long as they think really you are very very great," you know,-
that they are very wise, as long as they think till you suddenly discover that you have
they are extremely nice people, and that they developed two big horns your head and now.
are on their own, Mother says "Alright, go you are good for nothing. Then, She will
say, "Alright, now come along, you have
have to correct it. Once they start understan-
ahead, does not matter
Nirmala Yoga
35
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-37.txt 
 developed this disease, I will put you right."
So better not do all those things.
Like yesterday we had some patient here.
And some people felt the compassion, you
know, for that. And they all got caught up.
There was no need to feel compassion. Have
On one side She is willing to go 'all-out'
to save you from all troubles. Like, supposing
you have some heart trouble, if you have you got more compassion than I have ? What
some any other trouble,-She will go all-out'
to save you. It is not easy to cure anybody's So there is no need to bring any patients to
was the need to bring the patient here? There
was no need. But they both got caught up.
heart. People think that Mother has cured us,
so it is alright; take it for granted. It is not
so. When you get Sahaja Yoga, you will be
surprised that when 'you' try to cure one
person, you will fall sick for three days: it is
not easy to cure. And those people who
cure, sometimes do it through bhoots, also.
Those who have bhoots can also cure.
me. That is nat the way to behave. Never
bring any patient. If there is a patient, leave
them alone Tell them, "Mother wil look
after you. We have nothing to say. There is
a photograph, you must use the photograph,
get your treatment done with the photograph.
and you get cured."
50
Otherwise, first thing that will happen to
Because they themselves are bhoots, what
can happen to the bhoots ? They cure people you, that you will catch on your centre heart.
but put one bhoot into the patient in such a
way that that patient becomes a slave. And do that. It you try to do it, actually it is
such bhootish people can be cured,-or faith your ego sometimes that makes you think
healers, or anything, like supraconscious:- that you should cure a person; sometimes.
all sorts of people, but when they cure any And when you try to do through your ego,
person, be "sure' they are putting another You get into trouble Not that you can not
serious, more serious problem into them.
They do not cure really. They are actually level, when you try to cura a person you do
puttings some diseases into you, or into the
patients. It is very risky game.
Because that is not your job. You are not to
You can. But you have to be of that
cure.
not become a supraconscious personality,
means you do not become ego-oriênted. But
they do, ultimately, 'all' of them. Those who
But a Sahaja Yogi. if he tries to cure have tried to cure others, and do like that,
somebody-because he cannot put some they have gone out of Sahaja Yoga completely.
body else in that vacuum-he gets a problem becoming just mediums. They have become
himself. He is sucked in. So, my advice is mediums, horrible people. When they talk
always for every Sahaja Yogi, that you should
not cure anyone. There is no need for you poison into my ears. They are 'so" horrid, that
to cure by touching. You should use my you cannot imagine.
photograph, you can distribute my photo-
graph. Tell people how to cure themselves.
But don't cure anybody because you will realisation 'not to indulge into any curing
have
on the phone, 1 feel somebody is pouring
So, it is important for people who get
because they will develop this centre heart
problems. Because you are not a
bhoot. And your will be hit hard. So be Very much.
careful about it, do not try to cure anyone.
THT
Centre heart can be developed in countries
Only use the photograph. By using the where there is all fear, people are frightened.
photograph, the shraddha (aT) will be there, It can be developed by other things by which
the person will be steady, and you will be people are frightened. Reading books of
alright.
bad gurus, and reading books about shocking
36
Nirmala Yog a
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-38.txt 
 things, like many people who
Kundalini's boak have got centre heart. fatherhood is not alright, you get this trouble
because they are so frightened about the of asthma, and for that one has to ask the
Kundalini ! Anything that frightens you if you questions to the Sädhakas, what sort of a
read, can make your heart very very weak father you have. As one gentleman came
and dangerous,
read the understanding of the father, or 'your own
and asked me, "Why everbody is asking me,
what sort of a father you have? Everybody
Now we have two other sides to this asked me, what about your father, what about
centre heart-is the Mother's heart-iS Her vour father ? What has my father to do with
own brother, Is Vishnu, takes incarnation as me?" Actually everybody feels the right
Shri Rama on the right heart Who, we think
is the Father who is looking after His children.
So that is the Father, and this is the Mother.
Though here the Father and the Mother are
in two aspects, that the Mother is the sister fatherhood, then you get this problem and
of the Father. And Father is the Mamā
(Maternal uncle) of the
māmā is a greater father than a father, as you
all know. And so this Uncle who is the
incarnation of Shri Näräyana, looks after the
protected disciples of the Mother.
that Father's understanding to the children.
Because at this stage, the
Almightly, is not known, who is Shiva. So
this uncle looks after the children till they are
grown-up enough to meet their Father. And lack in that discipline that the father gives.
that is how we can say that Pārvati, or Umā, Or could be, such people could take to a very
or Dévi, She comes to Her Mother's place, remorseful and unhappy life. Or they could
Māykā, (aruFT), and resides in this centre be very hard on their children, or could be
heart. And there Her brother protects Her "extremely kind and spoil the children. It
children. When She gives realisation to
children, or gives them second brith, then tions, either too much of love-giving or too
this Mäma looks after the sister's children much of strictness. It can be anything. Or a
and helps them to build up the security of a person could be of this kind, may be 'very
father.
heart, and they have to ask about the father.
Because, father resides in the right heart, and
the principle of fatherhood, if it is spoilt, if
there is a problem with the principle of
many other problems which I do not want to
discuss now at length.
Sädhakas. The
But you can understand a person who has
no father, how diffident he is, and how he
He gives behaves, and also such people, those who
have not known father, can become very
wayward, licentious or permissive, or could
be very much secretly licentious. The people
who lose their father do not have that, they
Father, God
could be any way. So it has both the reac-
strict in childhood, and could be extremely
lavish in old age. It is a very imbalanced
personality.
So the right side of every human being
represents the fatherhood, the Fatherhood.
And the Fatherhood of a man is very impor-
tant. If this centre is spoilt, or if
something wrang with it, then you get
Asthma,
So the person who has no father has to
there is know that his father is Shri Rama. He should
not worry about anything. He is the one, with
one arrow He can kill any number of people.
So he should have no fear, at all, about
father not being there or father being
dead or something happening like that.
On the contrary, if the father is dead, it is
as a disease. Asthma is only
caused by this centre being spoilt or some
other combinations, with this centre. Asthma
is very common among giris and boys. And
the relationship with the father,
or the
Nirmala Yoga
37
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-39.txt 
 Even when I am talking, now I am open-
better to tell him not to worry about you and
that you are alright, so that you leave your ing your heart centre. I am working it. Even
father in peace and ask him to take his birth, I am talking, also I am opening. It is working.
than to bind him to this earth. This is the
right heart.
You will see your heart chakra is open by the
time I finish my lecture. It is so, because I
know how to do it. When I talk am just
And the left heart is the mother. actually watching where the chakras are catching.
your own mother, whosoever it is. That is the watching where the chakras are catehing
motherhood, in the sense, that if your mother
has been extremely unkind and extremely
funny, or your relationship with mother is
bad, then know that there is something wrong when you talk it should be kryänvit (mani-
on the left hand which is indicated in you.
what is happening, I am catching all these
points and touching it and trying to open it.
And that is how it should be, that even
festing). Even when you are quiet and raising
your hands it should be kāryānvit. Whatever
So these two points are very important in you do, you should be káryānvit, Even if you
human beings: If a Sahaja Yogi just deci- glance at anyone it should be käryänvit. It
des that I have a father and a mother, God should not be just a kind of a jabbering that
Almighty is my Father and my Mother, then
these problems can be easily solved. But
in Sahaja Yoga, it is not what you think
that works out. It does not-like in the car if they think they have done lois of mistakes,
you sit down and think that Iam going to
Connaught Place, you would not move. You can never get realization, they will be doo-
have to move your hands. In the same way med, they will be going to hell. This is not
in Sahaja Yoga you have to move your hands. true, at all true. No body is going to go to
Clear your chakras, move them higher and hell, if they do not want to go. If you want to
put them up. It is not 'what you think' is
important in Sahaja Yoga, Not at all. You may
think that 1 am doing very well in Sahaja ever'.
Yoga, I am very good, but it is not so. It is
what you actually achieve, your ascent is the
point. So, as in the car, as I told you, you can
not just sit down and think and do the job. that you should understand the importance of
In the same way, you have to run this machi- confidence, but not by saying " am confi-
ne, and you have to see that you get all this dent." Because when you say outwardly you
we do sometimes about Sahaja Yoga.
The greatest fear human beings have that
and these mistakes are too many, and they
stop it, you can stop it. The time has come.
You are going to be blessed and blessed for
So may God bless you.
Today's lecture I have given you in a way
are actually egoistical.
But when you say in
There should be gati (ufa mo-
movement.
vement) in you. Otherwise, there is no sense your vibrations, then you are confident.
just talking about Sahaja Yoga, thinking
about Sahaja Yaga, and convincing yourself
that you are a great Sahaja Yogi. It is "how
you manifest" is the point-Which very few shouldn't disobey. Once I have said it. what
people understand. Very, very few people is there? Obedience, why is it difficut. Just
understand that it has to be manifesting, it try and obey. And you will find, obedience
has to be kāryānvit (Traifaa). It is not just gives you the real confidence just obedi-
talk, talk, talk, talk. talk, talk morning till
evening.
May God bless you all.
Those who do not obey suffer. You
ence. Just try. Just try to obey. It's very
simple.
Nirmala Yoga
38
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-40.txt 
 POOJA IN SYDNEY
Shri Matajl Nirmala Devi
14 March 1983
MEDITATION
-the Individual journey towards
Collectivity and Bliss
Now you all have realized by this time that
within us lies the peace, the beauty, the glory you reach that inner being. And this inner
of our being. There's an ocean of all that. We being is the vast ocean of bliss which exists
cannot seek it outside. We have to go 'within'
-what they call "in
state" you seek it, you enjoy it. Like, when approach it, you have to go 'within yourself,
you are thirsty, you go to a river, or you go -by denying things which are against it.
to an ocean, and try to quench your thirst. against your movement.
But even the ocean cannot give you sweet
water. So, how can anything that is spread strong for you to not understand that the
autside give you that deep thing that is alory of God is within-But turn back. Every
within you. You are trying to find it
outside, where it does not lie. It is within
us, absolutely within us. It is so simple, you forget the ideas of your outer glories.
because it is your own. It is within your
reach. Just there. Whatever you have been
doing-going out to find the joy, is so-called thinks that if he makes lot of money he has
joy, is so-called happiness, so-called glory of achieved joy. But he has not. He is the most
worldly powers and worldly possessions. unhappy person, if you go and see him. He
You have to reverse it back-the whole thing. is worried about small, small things of the life.
You have to project 'within' yourself. It was
not wrong that you went out. It was not
correct that you went out. You shouldn't very miserly, they are worried about a needle
feel sorry for what you have done so far. here and there.
It was not the correct way to get to the real
joy of life, the 'real glory' of your being.
Try to meditäte. Meditate more, so that
in every one of us. Is that vast flood of light,
that floods everybody's inner beauty. So to
the
meditative
Sometimes the wind can be very very
that your movement
has to be inward. When you move inward,
moment remember,
A person vwho is of a very base nature
And you must have heard that people who
are very rich are kleptomaniacs. They are
A little thing missing-they
get upset. They have so many habits, they
can't live without it. So riches have brought
always a curse on human beings. So those
It has worked in so many people, that you who seek only the riches cannot enjoy them.
have entered into that subtler understanding.
Then there are some better people who
Some people are only at a mental level, think that by ruling others, by getting power,
may be, doesn't matter. May be some are we can achieve a very great position in life.
only at a physical level that they can feel it. They too, as you know, fail. You have seen
Doesn't matter. But you are on the correct
lines-you are moving correctly.
what happens to them. People don't even
want to talk about them.
Nirmala Yoga
39
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-41.txt 
 Now there are people who get attached paid as such, but all your heart is to be
to someone, to one person, or to the family, to poured into it. If you cannot pour your
their children, to relations,--very common in heart into it, you cannot achieve that.
India. That's also not the way you can get to
God. That's also so limited ; keeps you han-
ging round them and wasting your energy
completely. But if you enter into your being, impress them, control them. Such people are
fully, then all these things have such meaning.
Every thing has a meaning then, In the sense,
you possess anything, and if you are that that people see you as their protector, as their
kind of a person who is supposed to be help, as their support, as their friend, than
possessive-he never possesses-so detached. somebody who is a dominating personality.
He's never possessive-he's so detached You have to be a fatherhead and not a
about it. But he can play around, because demonic-destructive force which is always
he's so detached. He can create a drama out threatening everyone. Such people will be
of it. He can play with the possessions, and thrown out of Sahaja Yoga in no time They
teach lots of lessons to people. He's so
detached, so generous, he enjoys his genero-
sity.
Same about power. Some people think
that they can even overpower Sahaja Yogis,
thrown out of Sahaja Yoga,-completely.
You have to enioy the power of love,-
are found out. Have no sympathies with
such people.-Never. That will bring you
down. In 'no way. Keep yourself aloof
with them, otherwise when they are thrown
away as tangents from Sahaja Yoga, you
The whole thing becomes so different,
too, so dynamic. All the beauty that is
created by human beings as possession is might get out with them. So be careful.
exposed before you. And you start enjoying
all those things, without possessing them.
You understand the myth of possession.
Then those people who waste all their
time just thinking about their family, this
thing...or those who hava never thought
of their family, also come to Sahaja Yoga.
Same with your powers that people have This is a very subtler ground on which they
over other people. Those who try to make
money out of Sahaja Yoga, or want to have a
kind of a privilege over Sahaja Yoga. It can
be very subtle. This can go very far. This
subtlety goes to this extent that I have seen
people try to save money on account of
Sahaja Yoga. That is also-the attention is
on money. To make money or to save
money, to make a business out of Sahaja
Yoga-is all absurd. But if you say so, I say:
"Alright, go ahead for a while.-Try." You'll thing to God In the beginning in Sahaja
find that Sahaja Yoga is no business, Of Yoga, everybody says: "My husband is like
course, Sahaja Yogis can work together, can
do some business, but Sahaja Yoga is
no busines.
where you have to give 'everything' that you
have. Not to be attached to any thing. Not
to be attached. There's no moniey to be
can lose their attention to their Spirit.
They spoil their children. They spoil
their husbands. They spoil their wives The
whole attention goes in a wrong way. And
it becomes a very important issue with them
how the marriages are successful,-how the
chiidren are this thing, that thing. they don't
leave it to God. They have to leave it to God.
You are all saints. You have to leave "every-
that.. my wife is like that. my brother is like
that, my children are like this-Mother, look
after them."Alright, in the beginning, it's
alright. But when you grow, you must get
It is business of God,
u
out of it.
It is an individual journey towards God,
40
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-42.txt 
 when you meditate. And when you reach you know, one gentleman called as Varick
there, then you become collective. Before in Bombay. He is an old man, and is so deep.
that its an 'absolute individual journey within.
Its absolutely individual journey!
You should be able to see this; that in
this journey nobody is your relation. Nobody on meditation. But, whatever time you spend,
is your brother. Nobody is your friend. You whatever you gain, has to be visible outside.
are absolutely alone. -How you radiate it
have to move alone within yourself. Don't to others.
hate anyone. Don't be irresponsible, but in
meditative maod you are alone. No one to be. Unless and until you become deeper,
exists there. You alone. And ance you enter
into that ocean then the whole world becomes cannot save thote who are not Sahaja Yogis.
your family. The whole world is your own You have to rise higher and higher to pull the
manifestation All the children become 'your whole curtain up. Those who try to fise
children. And you treat all people with equal higher pull the whole thing upward, and they
understanding.
The whole expansion takes place when them.
you enter inside 'your' Spirit, and start see-
ing through eyes of the Spirit. There's such
calm, such peace, such bliss within you.
You have to be ready for that journey.
That journey is alone in your meditative- deal with possessions, or worry about them,
He radiates. People depend on him. He
radiates' tove. He's so meditative.
You don't have to spend too much time
and how you give
Absolutely alone." You
That's the quality of the saints you have
we cannot save other Sahaja Yogis. And we
give a pull to 'everyone who ascend with
So. just try to keep your aim clear-ct.
You must try to understand what is your aim
in life as Sahaja Yagis. Now you are changed
people. You are no more people who have to
about mundane things, about your livelihoods.
ness.
And the more you find something in your You are no more people who have to worry too
meditation, the more you want to go and
distribute it to others. That has to be, if that personal lives. You are not to worry, also.
does not come into you then it has not wor-
ked out; there's no purity: there's some sort
of a bias. In that individual pursuit, whatever your family-children, husband, wife, and
you find, you want to enjoy it with others,
you want to give it to others. This is the
sign of a person who has been really medi- yourself is the love of God. where you can
tative. The one who is meditative and has really get the great, restful, blissful feeling of
not been able to distribute what he has found His complete protection.
is cheating himself and cheating others as
well Because that joy that you receive in
your meditation has to be distributed. Has to
be given. Has to be shown. It should flow
in your being as the light radiates from every first you must assume your positions as you
illumined lamp. You don't have to take a
much about your healths and things, or your
about your jobs so much. That's not impor-
tant. And last of all, not to worry about
find a pocket for you to hide into it. Because
the only thing where you can really hide
Sydney has done very well before, and is
progressing better, but the pace is not as it
should be. So we have to think of new ways
and methods, how we can spread this. But
are. You must assume that you are all saints,
vow to say that this is an enlightened light. hat you have to do great work. Not the ego
In the same way a Saint should not have to
be certified that he is a Saint. The depth you
part of it but the manifestation of it.
"Everyone' of you has to decide for one-
achieve within yourself, spreads 'all over. It self. I'm sure it is going to work out, and this
is such a action and reaction The deeper you time my visit is going to help you a lot by
become, the radiation is much more.
The simple person, very ordinary person, light all over.
uneducated person, can be like that. We have
understanding what is the best to spread this
May God Bless you.
Nirmala Yoga
41
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-43.txt 
 Registered with the Registrat of Newspapers under Regd, No. 36999 81
The Descent of the Ganga and the 'Shuddha-
iccha' (Pure desire) of the Universe
What is the Shri Gangã. She is the elder expectation and conditioning in the Ida nidi,
sister of Shri Pärvati, the Daughter of Himav- which hinder one's liberation and ascent.
at. the Lord of the Mountains and the These can be of any sort
eternal virgin, for as she expedited the mar-
riage of her younger sister she took a vow of the ida nādi can dissoive them away and
chastity. And that gives one a clue. For
wherever the primordial Mother manifests.
she does so as virgin,-as Athena, as Vesta,
as Gauri etc What does this "virginity" Towards one's ascent But it takes a certain
mean? it means that in spite of creating, one
remains untouched, uninvolved,-untainted
by the Creation: eternally pure or "Nitya
Nirmala". as such one gains the power to
The Shuddha Iccha which also flows in
fiberate one on the left side, so that all one's
desires, expectations and actions will tend
degree of evolution to realise this is neces-
sary.
It takes an even greater degrée of evolu-
tion to bear the descent of the Shuddha Iccha
purify whatever one touches. Know that the into one's life, for it dissolves and bears away
Kundalini has this power and that when fully all one's illusians and misidentifications. To
witness this, one needs surrender and identiti-
one of the important siddhis of a truly cation with one's Spirit of a very high order.
realised (as opposed to self-styled realised) To be infact like the Lord Shiva-with the Shri
Shiva Sadashiva tittva fully awakened, so that
one is in pure defachment, and totally above
everything. If one is in this state, one can
bear the descent of the Gangā or Shuddha-
owakened in ane, grants one this power-
soul.
The Kundalini represents the shuddha iccha
(Pure Desire) of the universe, as does the
holy Ganga. And both represent the deepest iccha without-disintegrating. If not, all sorts
power of the Shri Mahakäli Shakti.
of reactions occur, through fear, misidentifi-
cation, bitterness, wrong expectations etc.,
which lead to a disintegration of the person-
Now consider. what does it mean: that
"the Ganga tlowed in heaven, and had to be
brought down by the efforts of Shri Bhägira-
tha to liberate his ancestors".
ality, and it takes the presence of a realised
soul of a very high order to allow this to
happen. If however one can. like the Lord
Shiva, bear the descent of the Ganga into
It means, that while mankind is develo-
ping and evolving according to Karma and one's life, then one truly helps all Mankind.
free will, the Shuddha lechä remains in heaven
and does not interfere in the actions of men, capricious-knowing only its own desire-it is
in spite of the misery they bring on them- eternally pure,-and totally uncompromising.
selves. But sometimes great souls see the and this can be a devastating force to enter
need for the Shuddha iccha to sort out their
fett sided problems-(the past, one's ances-
tors). Why? Because of one's uncontrolled
actions derived from and based on free will,
one builds up arbitiay patterns of desire,
For, the Gangā as the Shuddha-lccha is
the life of the unready. So, one should pray
eternally for the power to beat the Shuddha-
Icchi in one's life.
Dr. Rustom
Dilhi:110007 & Printed at The Central Electric
Edited & Published by Sh. S.C. Rel 43, Bungiow Road,
Presa 80-D, Kamla Nagar, Delhi 110007, One issue Rs. 9.00. Annual Subscription Ra. 51.00
Preio,
Formign (by Airmail 7814)
