Nirmala Yoga January-February 1985 Vol. 5 No. 26 Bi Monthly "Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns all the religions and seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga-THE UNION %23

 NIRMIALA YOGA 43, Bungalow Road, Delhi-110007 (India) Founder: Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Editorial Board : Dr. S.K. Mathur, Sri A.S. Mishra, Sri R.D. Kulkarni Representatives CHERYL REBEIRO. 1267, Burke Road, KEW 3101. VICTORIA, INGE KELLY, Gartnergasse 17/10, 1030 VIENNA :LORI & CARY HYNEK, 3151, Heather Street, Vancouver, B.C. V5Z 3K2. ALEXANDRE PICOVSCHI, 175. Av. Ledru Rollin PARIS-75011. ANTONIO SARACINO, PIAZZA E. MILLO 9 e/2. 00 122-109, OSTIA LIDO. Australia Austria Canada France Italy ROMA. : M.B. RATNANNWAR, 13, Merwan Mansion, Genjewala Lane, Borivali (W).. BOMBAY-400092. India :JUAN ANTONIO DELGADO, Avenida De Burgos, 30, 1, A, MADRID-28036 Spain :CHARLES & MRS. MAGDA MATHYS. 5, Chemin Des Mouldins. 1256. Troinex (Canton de Geneva). : GAVIN BROWN, Brown's Geological Information Services Ltd., 134 Great Portland Street, London WIN 5PH. ALAN NAPPER, 9A Stonehill, Street, Somerset tel. Street 45940. JOHN NOYCE, 71 Richmond St Brighton. BNI 8GR. :CHRISTINE & MICHAEL PETRUNIA, 270. Jay Street (APT. 1-C), BROOKLYN, NY-11201. URSULA SEHLMEYER, 191 Canal ST. #23 SAN RAFAEL. CA-94901. Switzerland U. K. U.S.A. CONTENTS Page 1. 1. Editorial 2. From Shri Rāmadasa's 'Dasbodha 4. Sahaja Yoga works only by keeping the Mother pleased 5. Discipline & Devotion for the fight within 10 16 6. Shri Blake's poem: The Seven eyes of God 7. Sickness and its Cure 17 8. All is so beautifully made 9. Speech of Dr. (Mrs.) S. Swāmināthan 29 36 10. We Pray (Poem) 38 11. William Blake- 39 41 12. William Blake-Il 45 13. Shri Mataji's Advice 48 14. Woman Power 15. Poojäs to Shri Mataji in 1985 16. Festivals 49 4th Cover Front Cover: Shri Mataji, during the weddings at Bordi, 15th February 1984

 Editorial In the last issue, under this column, 2 verses from the twellth chapter of the Geatá were considered, wherein the Lord has described the qualities that make ā devotee dear to Him. It is desired to discuss another two verses from the same chapter यस्मान्नोद्विजते लोको लोकान्नोद्विजते च हर्षामर्षभयोद्वेगैर्मुक्तो यः अनपेक्षः सर्वारम्भपरित्यागी यो मद्भक्तः स मे प्रियः।॥ १६॥ प्रियः ॥१५ ॥। 119211 गतव्यथः ।। शुचिदंक्ष उदासीनो Yasmanno dvijaté loko lokānna dvijaté cha yah Harsha-marsha bhayodvé-gair mukto yah sa cha mé priyah. 15 Anapékshah shuchirdakshah udaseeno gatavyathah Savā-rambha parityāges yo madbhaktah sa mé priyah. 16 "He who is not the cause of annoyance to the world and who never feels offended with the world, who is free from delight and anger, perturbation and fear, he is dear to me. He who craves for nothing, is pure within and without, is alert and uneffected by any distraction and who renounces all undertakings at the very beginning, that devotee is dear to me. Interaction with the world causes conflicts of interests, which generate emotional reactions. Disregarding others' interests in furtherence of one's own, makes the person a source of annoyance to the world. with the world. In the opposite case, the person is offended Succass in achieving what is desired brings delight, whereas the possibility of losing the possession causes fear. Aggressiveness may emanate from the fear of losing what ane is already possessing, or from the possibility of others acquiring what one likes to have. The delight of getting a desired object can be followed by the fear of losing it. Interests originate from attachments. Attachments are for the objects that give pleasure to sense-organs, which in turn are supposed to satisfy the desires arising in the mind. The mind functions in conjunction with the organs of knowledge. Desires arise as thoughts, from the impressions of gross pleasures enjoyed in the past which are stored up in the left-side. Enjoying

 the satisfaction of fulfilment of, a desire, becomes the further cause of another desire and the mind is the enjoyer. Desires should not be suppressed as that would cause overactivity of right side. At the same time enslavement to them has to be avoided. One should therefore evolve into the state of the desireless mind. Catches on the chakras may activate past impressions into desires, as also identification of the chitta with an external object of gross pleasure would awaken corresponding dorment impressions. It appears that the process may cause attention to project out and vice versa. No desires would arise in the still or calm mind which is actually the state of balance of sympathetic N.S., which is also the state of thoughtless awareness and wherein the chakras would be cleared of all catches. In this condition, one rises above all the feelings of cravings, fear, perturbation, delight, sorrow etc. Sustaining and growing in this state is of utmost importance, wherein, with the attention fixed within, one is the witness to all happenings and has no distractions This is the state of purity and would last so long as one's attention is not disturbed. Disturbances may come from within due to movement of attention to left or right sympathetic or from outside. Also there are distractions (as described by Pätänjali), which would obstruct the meditation, such as mental laziness, doubt, lethargy, false perceptions, clinging to sense enjoyments, non-attain- ment or non-retention of concentration ete. We thank our beloved Mother for teaching us various Sahaja remedies to overcome these obstructions. Nevertheless, alertness to apply the Sahaja methods is essential. It is therefore important to fix the goal viz. to improve the state of meditation and prolong it as much as possible. Thereafter, every act can be viewed as conducive or otherwise to the attainment of the goal and efforts can be made to get over temptations for comfort and sense enjoyment, the movements of attention can be watched, to quieten the complaining mind etc. Outsida the state of maditation alertness is required for correcting the imbalance of sympathetic, clearing the chakras, and for negating every desire and thought, or every object to which the attention is attracted, as false and non-existent. Altertness is necessary to avoid mental aberrations, such as anger, dasire for sensual-pleasure, attachment, temptations. conceit, jealousy-known Nirmala Yoga, No. 20, March 84 pp. 04.) One may have inherited these to some extent from previous life and hence these would form a . These reside in the company of mind and ego and are strong when the attention identifies itself with the body. The mind which may become calm in the meditation, may get disturbed as various thoughts and desires come to surface. One should therefore discriminate, through the intellect (the buddhi) that only the Atman is real and rest everything including body mind, ego, intellect is unreal, and the reality becomes manifest only in the state of thought- less awareness. However in the moment of complacency identifications take place unnoticed. For every such mistake, it is advisable, to pray for forgiveness of Mother and for giving strength and alertness to control the attention. It is felt that attention could be engaged in maintaining the thoughtless awareness. The feeling of doership of actions would induce reactions corresponding to expecta- tions. Negating the results at the very beginning of an action would save one from its possible effects. It has therefore been suggested that all undertakings should be renounced at the very beginning. This could also be achieved by dedicating them to God and also through a firm conviction regarding one's role-which should be of an instrument employed as 'shad-ripus' (six enemies). (Please see Birthday Puja, SI part of oe's nature. Nirmala Yoga

 by the Supreme. Bread-winners for families should know that God-Almighty is competent to feed any number of mouths and they should feel humbly thankful to Him for entrusting them with the job: Even in Sahaja Yoga, expectations do arise in the minds, unnoticed, about possible appreciation by Mother of good vibratory condition: or good remarks from other Sahaja Yogis for a job done. In such moments the buddhi (intellect) should remind that good vibratory condition is Mother's gift and that She is the real doer of the job, and anybody else could also have been employed by Her. Hence the prayer: कायन वाचा मनसेंद्रियोर्वा । बुद्धयात्मना वा प्रकृति स्वभावात ।। करोमि यद्यत सकलं परस्म्य । आदि शक्रय इति समपंथामि । Käyéna vāchā manaséndriyorvä Budh yatmana vă prakrti svabhävät Karomi yadyat sakalam parasmai Adi shaktyai iti samarpayümi Whatever I do with body, speech, mind, and other senses knowingly or unknowing by or through nature, directly or indirectly, I dedicate it to Adi Shakti. Let us all tell ourselves that every moment that goes outside the thoughtless awareness, with attention involved in the Avidya (ignorance) is away from the Lotus Feet of Adi-Shakti. According to Adi Shankarãchärya, the proximate worship of Mother's Feet is not possible for the fickle-minded. But Mother has granted that to us out of limitless love and compassion for us. for which sages of ancient yore had to perform so much penance. Let us now perform our penance in the form of meditating upon Her Lotus feet which the Param Parameshwari having Her infinite forms beyond human understanding has made very easy for Lis by assuming the all loving and Compassionate form of our Mother Shri Mataji. FROM SAMARTH RAMADASA'S DASBODHA * If you think that you are the doer of works, you will be put to great trouble. Instead, if you really believe that Rama (God) alone is the doer of all works, you will be successful in your undertakings, become powerful and win fame. Meditate and invoke the Grace of Raghunātha (God) and directly experience that the Divine Power removes all obstacles, fulfilling all your wants * None can change the complexion of one's body for it is innate. But if you wish to lead the spiritual life, you shall have to cultivate the moral values. Fill the box of life with the pearls of experience of blessings of God, and when you joyfully offer this to HIM, you go on deriving undiminishing Divine Bliss. Nirmala Yoga 3.

 SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI VAITARNA Sahaja Yoga Works only by keeping the Mother Pleased 18th January 1983 So now we are coming to the end of our first half tour. Now we have to look back upon ourselves and try to find out what have and they think that they have become primi- tive: You do not become primitive by any means, because you are so overdeveloped that you cannot become primitive. So by just doing something mentally, we do not become we achieved out of this. We must understand that. Sahaja Yoga is not done through brain activities. Like many people think, that if you just tell yourself: "You have to be like this", it will work out. If you have to, all the time, inform yourself you might feel that by knowing some of the that "Oh, you must get rid of a particular Aratis (arat) and things by heart. you will problem", it will be alright. Or some people achieve weight, is not true also, because that that. Now this mental level can go even fur- ther, in a subtler way, into people. Some of think that if they tell somebody that: "This is wrong with you and you should get wWeil, it thing within you, then they become a 'Man- will be alright. It is not 30. because Sahaja Yoga does not work on mental level. It works of all you must achieve a certain standard to on spiritual level, which is a much higher have that power to create the Mantras, Also level, than the mental level. is also just words. But if that is an awakened tra and then you can work it outL But first when you say some 'ärati, it is not necessarily So what you have to do, is to understand. possible that it will work out. Let us face the how to correct your chakras, and you must things as they are and not to be conditioned understand, how to work out your machines. by anything else. You have to achieve Perhaps people stil live on mental level and certain depth within yourself to 'even" enligh- try to solve problems on mental level. And that's why all the problems start coming up. Now if you have a problem with any chakras or there is anything catching, or you find that tions, minimum of minimum. If you have cert- there is samething wrong, no use working it ain chakras catching, then try to improve your on any other level, but spiritual level. Some people believe that if they have dressed up like something, or if they outwardly behave photograph which is going to work it out, like something, they become that. That is nothing else,-or if / am there. But once if not true. Like we have hippies in the west ten the mantra, First of all you should have clear-cut vibra- photograph: with all the due respect to the photograph. It's only the chakras with the you have achieved a certain state of enlighte- Nirmala Yaga

 not know what was the situation there. just said, "don't come". Finished, because I knew what was going to happen. So this clear-cut idea comes to you when your heart is clear. But first of all people donot under- stand that you have to work it through your heart and not through your brain. When we have to work out things through our brain, we try to develop our brain, isn't it, by memoris- nment, then you can use mantras otherwise also, it will help you. But first of all your heart must be clear. I have found out in general, there are two chakras, overwhelmingly, not working alright in most of the western people. First is the heart. That means, heart is not clear, that heart is not clean, that in the heart, you still are a small person; in the heart you have not placed ing. by practicing something, teaching our your Mother. You have to purify your heart, by looking at the photograph and putting all way, We try to train our brain. loving feelings about your Mother, understan- ding Her work and putting Her into your heart. If the heart is not clear, then every- brain how to think, how to go this way, that Now we have to train our heart in Sahaja Yoga, and to train our heart in Sahaja Yoga one has to know first of all that it is ernveloped either by thing has no meaning, because it is a dark ego or by super ego. The limbic area actually heart which is doing al these things. The heart has to be clean, absolutely surtendered and must try to put Me before everything else. I can tell you because we are all Sahaja Yogis. is only mental projection, and you will feel I cannot say this to people who are not Saha- ja Yogis. represents the heart. And if there is ego, heart will always be 'so called heart. It will not be the real heart that will be working but it that I am doing it from my heart. That's not so. SO. Now then supposing what should we do, if we have weak heart. You might say, you should try to sort of tell. yourseif that, that's not good and this is not good, this and that and all kinds of mental suggestions or auto Now we alweys try to relate Sahaja Yoga from our own terms, not from the terms that belong to God. God is what He is. He cannot change Himself: you have to change. So what- ever we think about God, we want to put on that. For example if someone thinks that he tries to be nice or good to me, or if he is close to me, 'so called' and if he thinks that he is organizing better or he is doing this work or that work or anything else like that, where he feels that he is important because he is doing have to just work it out wvith your hands. this job or that job, then one must know that Your hands are working it out and not your all this is mental. Actually you are doing brain. So use your hands, and the methods nothing. Whenever you try to do something, of Sahaja Yoga. you really confuse yourself and confuse Me also. We have seen yesterday's example.1 was sure that they had to go next day, but in the water everyday. That's important. nobody would listen to me and they rushed Every' morning you 'must' do your meditation, suggestions or this the way psychiatrists and all that give you suggestions. That's again mental. So that's not the way it is going to work out. We must understand that, what we have to do is to raise the left side and put it to the right side. There is no other way. You Now every one must have a regular sitting away and they found that the tickets were bought for the next day. This knowledge been with Mother, alright. This exposure is comes to you, if you are clear hearted. As alright. You came, you saw. how Indians yesterday, 1 said, you better not come: I did because on mental level, we feel, we have pIp are and how they are light on their feet and 51 Nirmala Yoga

 how they are good for Sahaja Yoga. But after chakras. Now the left sided people should seeing all that, you have to know that Sahaja Yoga is to be worked out, is not to be thought to correct their left side, Also in food, such out. You just cannot think about it. Whatever people should take more to nitrogenous, you may try to do through your thought, you means, proteins and foods like that. They cannot achieve any results in Sahaja Yoga. should take more proteins. You have to use your hands, you have to use your feet. you have to soak your feet in the water, because water is the ocean. All these five chakras or say six chakras which are.-I say five because the one is the moolädhära to it carefully. Pure desire That means all chakra, which is the first, and the seventh and other desires are impure. There is only one the topmost is the brain. So in-between five pure desire and that is to be one with the chakras, which are there, are to be handled divine, one with the Brahma, one with God. fully, with the idea that they are basically That's the 'only pure desire. All other desires made of matter, and these five elements con- stitute the body of these chakras. Now these achieve that desire as the main thing. If you chakras, if they are to be corrected, we have train your mind in that fashion then you can to correct them by taking out all the problems develop pure desire, so all other desires will of these chakras into the elements from which negate, gradually. Alright. Now this desire, to they have come. For example a person, who be one with the divine, is the purest and the is a very right sided person, so he has to give highest. and to achieve that, what have we to a balance by the left side. Of course raising do? TO ACHIEVE THAT YOU HAVE TO with a hand is alright, but what about the KEEP YOUR MOTHER PLEASED, VERY element? Right sided person has all the ele- SIMPLE. Adishankaracharya has said that ments which give heat, we can say the light, you don't bother about anything, just keep we can say the fire. So for people, who are right sided the light is not going to help simple person: not try to be cunning with much. Like if you put the light before the Me or clever with Me. I know everyona photograph and thase who are ego oriented well. So try to tell yourself that. "I should people, if you just use the light, it is not say things, 1 should behave in a manner gaing to work out. So what is going to that will please my Mother". Supposing work out is the mother-earth and the water you are in Sahaja Yoga, and you element which is cooling. Even ice is very help- doing wrong things, it is not going to please ful to people who are right sided. So all cool- Me at a!l. "So how to please mother?"-that, ing effects should be used for correcting your you should try to see for yourself. What kind right sidedness. So that you cool it down. of a thing pleases me the best. I am also a Same about food. In food, those who are right sided people, should take to foods which ted person-who is simple hearted. For exam- are left sided, that is carbohydrates, means ple, a person who tries to show off too much, they should become partly vegetarians or tries to be always the first, or tries to be quite a lot of vegetarians, and should eat always the, sort of a cinema star, I don't like things at the most like chickens but not fishes, not sea food because they are all hot. That's extremely shy about showing off yourself. Do how you treat your material side of your use again the 'deepa-is the light. or the fire Now as far as Sahaja Yoga is concerned, the basic thing is Kundalini, and the Kundalini as I told you is the pure desire. Again listen are impure. So train your mind gradually to You have to be your Mother pleased. are very simple person, so I want a simple hear- such person. You have to be very quiet and I show off that I am Adishakti ? I donot. I live MEE Nirmala Yoga

 like you, absolutely like you. Do try to have a good heart, clean heart cannot under- show aft ? Then why should you try to show stand this. They cannot understand this, off to me ? So that kind of a person is no very difficult. So you keep your heart clean towards your Mother. Whatever I do for you, is just a blessing, always a blessing for you. pood Secondly you should not be tense with Whatever / do for you is a blessing, remember me. There is no need to be tense. If t find that. something wrong with you, if I scold you also. it is for your good. If I say a good word it is for your good. My Sahaja Yoga works caught up with most of you is your NABHI this way. I have no malice against anyone in the whole word, no malice at all, and no anger for anyone in this world. I have nathing but COMPASSION. But in compa- ssion sometimes I same compassion I have to speak in a very just there to please each other, specially to compassionate manner. Now another chakra, which is horribly Chakra, suggesting that you are still very very materialistic. In small smali things also we are materialistic. It becomes subtler and subtler and subtler. So try to understand that matter is not so important. Matter is have to scold and in the please your Mother. It has no other value So both ways it helps you. It helps you both way s. So thank whatsoever. So you should not try to be God that you have somebody, who will materialistic in the sense that, you see, for a correct you at the right time, for your good. little thing. you have to do this, for a little because you are saints, and you have come you have to do that. Nothing is important on this earth to establish God's kingdom. if it works out, well and good and if it does not work out well and good. So you see Nabhi chakra is very individualistic, very That's what you have to do. And if you are the people who are not respected, who are not sensible, who haven't got the dignity, who individualistic . It is everybody's personal behave in a cheapish way, how can people thing. If your desire is only upto Lakshmi point, that you want to have more money, or accept you ? you care for: little things. hare and there, So this Heart Chakra is to be first lopked without any spiritual value to it, then your after, that with your heart, desire that you will keep your Mother pleased. Even if I an angry with you, don't feel bad about it. That's ane of the signs that Sahaja Yoga has not yet developed. If 1 scold you, it is be- tattva, what you have to do is to use all cause there is something in you, which has to go away and which I must scold, so it will in such way that you please Me. That is very go away. So accept it just as a correcting important. So you should not do something point that is good for you. Some sort of a thorn is withinyou, which has to be taken out by another thorn and Mother has taken it out. ONCE you start understanding the compas- sion of your Mother you will not mind My all-like dishevelled hair-at all. That might saying anything to you, my correcting you or be a fashion, or whatever but I don't like it. my telling you that this is wrong, because I Always must be properly combed. properly have to do that. Those people who donot Lakshmi tattva, at the most might be awake- ned. But this Lakshmi tattva has to become Mahālakshmi tattva. That is for your ascent. And just to get into that, Mahalakshmi your material things and your material being that will not please Me. That is 'very impor- tant'. Everybody must understand. I want you to understand that when you dress up also, certain things I don't like at done hair. These modern things you should Nirmala Yoga

 wise just don't buy, because all kinds of non- give up, of dishevelled hair, because this is a sign of pucca (real) Bhoots coming in. If you sensical bhoots will be in your house and have dishevelled hair, the Bhoots, recognize you will be troubled. So whatever you want that person and they get into such a person, who has dishevelled hair, So try to make If you cannot understand, ask somebody else, your hair in a proper way. See now Indians, a Sahaja Yogi, to help you. how they make their hair. Look at them. They all make their hair properly, because I have nothing to do with your hair. lam not B hair stylist person or any thing, but it you do and if it is not so. finish it. It's nothing impor- not have your hair properly combed and done tant "I must buy this, I have to go to Bombay then definitely you are in for trouble. So to buy this," that's a wrong idea. take heed to these things. to buy you must see on vibratory awareness. buying things just because you think, they are cheap, or they are nice or good. So try, to buy things which vibration-wise are alright Now attention has to be inward, all the Then some people have a habit of being time.I have seen that our attention is out- untidily dressed. That's also not a good thing. You have to be tidily dressed; clean and tidily dressed, not because it is material, tion is inside you 'will not' buy anything that but it is very important that if it is not so, that kind of a material will attract all the būdhūs something, you will just throw it away. But the into it. You must keep yourself clean and attention is outside and because of that you neat because these badhis should not enter. just don't know how to judge a thing. Nabhi All these ideas that have come to the west chakra has to be attended to: For that you have come from some satanic force. does nor look beautiful, In any way it does See Which side of Nabhi is catching. If the right not look good for any spiritual person. We have to change our styłes that will be Sugar represents many things. Sugar means appealing to the divine and not to the bhoots. We donot want any bhoot to come on us. If you understand this simple fact, then you may start dressing up in a way, that may not be modern, may not be ancient, whatever absolutely a meek person. You have to be it is. is neat, clean, spick and span. Otherwise also if you see to the matter point more and We must learn how to talk sweetly to each more, no use accumulating thousand and one things, which are plastic in temperament and nature. You should have few things which have a spiritual value, not all extraordinary things that we try to have, because they have no spiritual value. So try not to accumulate all these nonsensical things to you. Gradually suggested. For the left sided people-salt. you will find, you will reduce. You go on Left sided people should take salt more: and reducing. You will have simpler lives, better with salt they can solve many problems, things and spiritual things. Whataver you buy, see the vibrations and then buy, other- posure by which they can express themselves ward. Because of that, what we see outside is not good for vibrations. But if your atten- is not good for vibrations or you will not own donot have to think, you have to work it out. it side is catching, for you the sugar is the best. also your tongue should be sweet. You should talk sweetly. People think if you talk sweetly to someone then people will start thinking that you are good for nothing or you are meek. We have to be meek and humble. other. And if you don't understand how to speak, then take more sugar, vibrated sugar. That will make your tongue sweeter and sweeter and your ideas will be sweeter about other person than harsh or criticising. So for the right sided people sugar is because salt gives them a personality, a com- Nirmala Yoga

 in a way, which is dignified and also not very lethargic, So the speed of your talks or Supposing somebody says that, "Alright behaviour or everything should be in the centre, It should not be lethargic, nor should be too quick and fast and hectic. But you cannot go from autside, inside. Mother, I have combed my hair very well so I am alright." It's not so. Not necessarily. Even if you have combed your hair, you might be possessed by a bhoot. But at least there So you will understand Sahaja Yoga is is less chances. So one has to understand # central point of everything. Everything that it has to be worked out. / think this must be really screwed into your head that If you talk Sahaja Yoga is to be worked out. You can- too much and jabber t0o much, and if you not just tell yourself. "Oh 1 am very happy in the centre, one sheuld try to do, not one extreme to another extreme are fast, try to reduce your speed by 'alertly because it pampers your ego. or very looking at it. You have to be alert: see"my unhappy' because it is troubling through your speed is going up. super-ego. I am not very happy. I a nat Au, There is na need for me to talk. Let me stop." But those who do not very unhappy, that's not the way, Yau have talk at all, also not good. So those who to be in joy. And these things can work ot talk or those who do not talk have to under- stand only one thing that whatever we talk, we talk in the centre. Once you understand You should have patience with yourself, love for yourself and dignity that you are Sahaja EVERY INDIVIDUAL HAS Yogis. TO that, your responses to things will be absolu- WORK IT OUT FOR HIMSELF SO THE tely central, balanced and beautiful. Now WHOLE CAN BE ALRIGHT. There could this is all I can say at this time because the be some pegple who are only worried time is short also for us. about others. Worry about yourself and see the good paints of others. Not the bad We have all enjoyed our stay all over, I points, but good points of others, and also if think so. You all have been happy all över somebody has to tell you that you must and we have worked it out very well, and it has been quite a lesson to all of us and also We have to be like that we have to be very a very great experience of enjoyment. So not quick. We have to do so much work in this to feel guilty about anything, because feeling world we have no time to waste. We have no guilty you do not get over it. is an escape. You must face it. You must face we have to be very prompt and healthy it and see, correct yourself and be one with it. That is a much better way, than to just to go on feeling guilty or aggressive. That's not the way, because as I said it's all mental. organise, go fast and all that, not to feel bad. Feeling guilty time to wvaste. Ons has to be very quick and about it. As you know that in this trip you have seen that how much work I have been doing compared to you, and I am so much older compared to you people. Alright, you So if you understand these few points on these two chakras, is Nabhi and your Heart. can say that Mother you are Adishakti. It's If you understand these two points clearly. alright. But I am your ideal. In any case that you must keep it clear, and the expression of that will show in your behaviour, in your dress, in your walk, gait, talking and every- thing outside. if somebody is your ideal, try to become like that person, try to imbibe those qualities in you. May God Bless You. Nirmala Yoga

 SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI 'Discipline and Devotion for the Fight within' Ashtami Puja MUEDON. PARIS 30th Sept. 1984. Today is the eighth day of Navarātri, but intelligent, and may be you do not know you it is a great day for Sahaja Yogis because it are using it that way. And thať is what one is the most important period. That is, the has to know that these forces are acting seventh centre we have crossed and we are within us. They act through aur intelligence, on the eighth centre. We need not think of they act through our emations, and they act the Goddess what She did on the eighth day, through our physical being. So we have to we have to think today what we have to do be very careful. within ourselves. When you ascend into Sahaja Yoga, we After crossing the seventh day, after have to be very careful with our intelligence, crossing the seventh chakra-that is the real because intelligence has capacity to cheat ascent in your spiritual ascent. What are we itself. And it will cheat us, nobody else. It is against us, against our own powers. So we have to be alert and see for ourselves. So as soon as you enter onto the eighth step you to do on the eighth one? It's so Sahaja that today should be Ash- tami, because that is the day the Goddess should start seeing at yourself. killed so many evil doers, and demons and Räkshasas. She did it on Her own, alone. Now these evil forces are manifesting in human beings. They have spread out. They intelligence comes forward to render its are within us. So we all have to fight those services-freely. "Oh ! I am my own Guru, forces within us. The war is within ourselves, why should is not without. First when you ascend the I listen to any leader? Why should I listen seventh chakra, when you are on the eighth to anyone who is elder, who understands step, you have to remember first you have to Sahaja Yoga better ? I am my own Guru! fight those forces within ourselves. Now, for example ,when I say the mantra is "I am my own Guru", immediately the I listen to anyone? Why should It is the other way. Straightforward thing is: I am my own Guru, I have to correct myself. I have to use this instrument of light to correct myself. You are all very intelligent people; bit too intelligent sometimes. So whatever I say you may twist it, and may try to use it in your own intelligence. But it is not in your well-being. It is not for your hita' (fgn), for your good. You want to use it because you think you are Now the intelligence cheats again: "Mother said that if you feel vibrations then it's afright: and I'm feeling the vibrations, 10 Nirmala Yoga

 I'm alright"Again cheating. cheating yourself I What is the reason? You are always do it in such a way that it is absolute- ly Asahaja. (non-Sahaja) The reason is very interesting. I've seen that ordinary human beings-in the West suffering from left-side problems. So I told specially-are vary much against themselves: him that you have to light a lamp and then Like, I'll give you an example: You tell some- body that if you have to go to the station. had a big drum of oil in the house.-He did take this road and you'l go straight to the station. But immediately he'll say, "But the problem is that how can back is towards the station. If I walk straight burnt all the curtains ! When 1 came back I'll go in the opposite direction". Such stupid after eight days, things! But they say it, all the time. There was a fellow in my house who was take out all your bådhās every night. And we not eat any food, he did not sleep. He burnt all that oil in one week's time. He made all go straight ? My the blankets black, all the walls black, and I said what have you been doing 7-And he looked like He said "I was driving out the bhoots". I said now this is the limit! So he said. "Mother you told me".I said, "Thank God you did not take a beacon light to burn the whole housel" a real bhoot! Now if you tell them that you can sell your car better if you go to Germany, for example; but they say, "There's a problem, may be the Germans may start their war again. May be there is Hitler waiting for me, to kill me".-Any fantastic problem, that you can't think of, can come out of this modern with you. Whenever tell you one thing, I brain. And you are amazed how this man is against himself all the time! So I have to be very careful when I talk w this tell you the other side immediately, because I don't want-ifI tell you this side, you go to the other side, to the other extreme. So all this kind of this crazy madness, stupidness The whole built-up is like that because before realization you are absolutely disinte- grated. Your heart is against your brain, and your brain is against your liver. This is the reason they have three types of wives; one about discipline, I must tell you "Discipline is a love affair, one is a physical life and one has to be Sahaja". is a wife. They are so disintegrated that mean 7- That is, first of all face yourself". every cell can have a wife or can have a vwhat I find, the western mind, because of husband. The nose will want another thing. its ego cannot discipline itself. If you tell and the hands will do something else and tongue will say something else. I've seen. And today when I'm going to talk to you Now what does that them you have to discipline, they think I'm creating a military out of you. In a way it 'is' a fight. It is a fight with yourself. But how will you fight if you have no discipline? When I met the western people, I had to consult many dictionaries to why they behave in such a funny manner. They are all the time against themselves. Now if I say, you have to get up in the morning, take your bath, and sit down for meditation; in a Sahaja way you have to tell yourself plainly, "Come along, now you have So after realization this habit becomes even subtler. So now they use Sahaja Yoga to get up in the morning". In a Sahaja way; to act against Sahaja Yoga itself. Sahaja is the way you turn your wheals in your car. simple, is straight forward.. But they don't want to have it in that way. They must So what you do, is to, I think, the whole Nirmala Yoga 11

 night you don't sleep. May be, this could be or three days, and the rest of the time what Đne extreme, is not to sleep. And get up at 2 0'clock, disturb the whole house-hold, fll your tub, and fill the whole house with water! And sit down in that water, and you get cold and sick. It is absurd! Why?-Because So many ladies I'm told don't take jobs once you want to show-off. Or may be you want they marry. They say "let the husband do to hurt yourself. Both things are wrong. job". Its very wrong. If you have the child, Whatever has to be done, has to be done in it's alright, for the time being. You all must the most pleasurable way. Either you will not wash the dirt, or you will wash it such that all the cloth will be torn. do they do? They say we meditate. Means what ?-They sleep and snore, that's what. You don't need 24 hours to meditate. You 'must' have jobs, all of you. Regular jobs. work every day. There is no day for us when we can rest, really. God created this world in six days and seventh day He rested. But the eighth day what did He da?-He started giving realization But today as I see the people-of France specially, the French Sahaja Yogis,- think the discipline is lacking. I'm quite surpri5ed relentlessly. Working hard. Could you beli- at it. The first thing it hits at is that you eve at this age of mine, within last 2 months within a limited amount, how much i have travelled ? Every night 4 mean money-wise. t hits you at the sleeping at about 2 O'clock, getting up at cannot manage money point. Like in the room there's light, nobody will see that it is put off; there's from there, then throughout England, the also a switch to be put off-is a practical E went to America. came back 5 O'clock. whole monthI was traveling-from north to south, east to west. Next month out to thing. I mean one must know. And the bill is going up for nothing at all. Is an irrespon- Switzerland, to Zermatt. Then to Austria, sibility, complete irresponsibility. That it is the money that will be spent, is just a waste; Italy. Back to London. Had a Puja there. and for us it is important that we live within Again back to France. Again back to London. sensible means.-First l'Il be dealing with I've to change my house, pack up all the gross discipline.-Now what happens, when things, go back to India, go to Hongkong, go somebody says why the light is on, immedia- tely they become very abstract, they say "I'm the light". Then you should not have lights And then to America... That's the thing your at all, there's no need to have any light! Save all the electricity, all the light. You are the slept at 3.30. But then they told us it's one sun, so you need not have any heating! Munich. Then back to London. Then to to China, come back. Then look after your Ashrams in India. Six days. Again come back. Mother is doing at this age. Läst night we hour earlier. So we said alright one hour earlier. So we slept at 2.30 I But you have to make your body ike thạt, so that it can stand all kinds of discomforts. That is the way things are funny. One must understand that on the gross points we have to be disciplined first...We are living in "France', not on Himälayas. So when you live in France, we have to correct ourselves living in France. You know in Sahaja Yoga unamployment is not allowed; to take this money from the Government is not allowed. You'll be surpri- Now the second gross point is that there zed; in England we have maximum unemploy- are many who are not working at all. Is a hippy style life. Or they work for two days Sahaja Yogi who is unemployed. Now you ment in the whole world, but there is no Nirmala Yoga 12

 must all earn sufficiently to pay for your stay. Nobady should be a parasite. or today-let's say. today-when get up. What should / say? What would give peace to others?"-But not so. Never. The mind thinks, now, in the morning I'm going to cated, who have no other job than that start with a big spoon, hitting everyone, "Get Now the young people who are not edu- of a labour class-or we call it as the garbage up, get up, get up". cleaners-must take to some sort of a speci- alization, to some kind of a mastery, other- wise people think that Sahaja Yoga is a yourself. group of beggars. Beggars and unemployed and miserable people. The discipline has to come from "within Nobody has to tell you. And when somebody tells, you feel hurt. So I don't But, you see, when you become your know how to tell all this that it goes in the own Guru, you think that all the Gurus don't heart and doesnt remain somewhere in the work, their disciples have to do all the work. air. The discipline of within is like fragrance The Guru sits down in one place, you see, of flower it gives you complete freedom. and the disciples look after.-But not your and it gives freedom to others. Guru ! Your Guru has to work very hard. So you have to be in the same pattern as your Guru is. See, I would say, I have certain bad habits or good habits. Supposing I have a key, which is very gross thing : Key. At any cost And to hear that "nobody listens, you tell I will not put it here and there, I"ll put it at them anything they don't do any work, they the right place. So, if the key is missing I'm are lazy-lumps"-is very sad. Some people sure it is lost by somebody else and not by sometimes say that these are the set of lotus-eaters or some sort of a set of beggars very well. I cannot put it anywhere else. or lepers who are suffering from some horrible diseases.-Then I feel 'extremely' insulted, you know. You are my children. How people are going to have respect for you, or for me, if you have no discipline? me. I'm sure' about it, because I know myself Are you sure about yourself ? Because you are not disciplined, you are not sure. Like I asked somebody "How are you"? Confused. Now, what is that? They've Are you realised or not?. been very kind, you see, to me, they think. For French I should say, they should take to Mauna' () means silence. Once they open out their lips, they just go on like a bird, I've seen: all the time chuck chuck chuck Now the time is so short and you are chuck..You should exchange with English. going like this: What should I feel ? So who never talk, they need a bump on the head to talk. You ask them ten questions, and they the sword to kill all the enemies, would not say anything, they'll just 'stare'. These two extremes I can't understand, today is the day when your Mother took out and you have to kill the greatest enemy within your- self-is indiscipline and irresponsibility. Now, it's better to keep quiet, or it is difficult for us to say something pleasant to stupidity and their indiscipline. I know of others. So the first mantra should "Mother teach us some nice things to say to others". "What should I say nice tomorrow, Funny ideas people use to justify their be, Sahaja Yogi who would never take a bath, -for a year at least. And he was reported to me. And when I asked him, why don't you Nirmala Yoga 13

 take bath, he said, "I'm detached". So Yoga. They do not create rifts and groups. said you go and live in Himälayas with this They don't use Sahaja Yoga for fulfilling detachment, you see others are feeling their ego... attached. Others are feeling impossible to live with you. So today on this day of Ashtami, which is a very powerful day, you assume that power within yourself that I 'can' fight all these You have to be kind to others. You have to be neat and clean, is a very simple thing horrible diseases within mysef And for that I have to tell you now. All these are the signs of inner clear.liness. others I will have Compassion and Love- I will have, not others. This is the point we miss always. They think, "Mother is givirg lecture to others, not to me."- So we come to the subtler side. And the subtler side of Sahaja Yoga is "exteremely Is Compassion. Is Forgiveness simple'. Is Love But the greatest of all is the Service beauty of Sahaja Yoga. to God. We are doing the work of God. How can we be tired ? The dynamic is flowing through us, that Compassion is so fulfilling. cannot cross them. If you cross them. I that love is so beautifying that how can we not do it? We should run to do it. But we have to know that this love has a 'tremend- burn", I can't help you. Whatever are divine ous' urge within itself. And that Compassion will bring forth the There are certain divine laws. And you cannot help you at all. Now if you say, "Now I put chillies in my eyes. they should not laws you must follow them. Like in France if you drive on the right side, you'll jump in the . So here if For example, if you love someone, if you river. You drive right ?I se. have a child, how worried you are about that you drive left, I will be in trouble, I must say! child, how much you work for that child. If Because I don't understand human laws so the Compassion is manifested, you will see the whole world is created out of that. God another law, in America another law. Funny has created this universe, this world, and people. you people out of this Compassion only. just His Compassion, well I Like in England different law, in France But in God's realm,-everywhere the same law. Whether you are in France, or England, or India, same law. Whether on this earth or on the moon, or on the Jupiter, same laws. Whether in human beings, animals or nature, same law. But you know the law. the driver, so you have to be careful. If the driver does not know driving laws, God save the passengers. Somebody asked me one day, "Why did you take this headache upon yourself?" This hedache is so nice, is such a beautiful burden, because there are so many possibilities. So one has to be optimistic. You are But you will realize when you are opti- mistic, you give lectures to others but not to yourself that, " have to be optimistic of improving myself. Optimistic in my own love. of the divine, that we have to live with self- It's so rewarding, its so joy-giving". Such people come up very fast, their Kundalini have to have dignity, that we cannot steal rises very fast. They become 'beautiful money and steal things and be parasites. people. They do constructive work in Sahaja That we cannot kill others and we cannot beat So one must know that these are the laws respect, that we have to be chaste, that we Nirmala Yoga 14

 that's why. You have to attend collectively. others and say harsh things,-they are just the same. And that we have respect, the respect You have to be more collective, the body has for all that is sublime. Respect for all the saints that are Sahaja Yogis. And the respect you are not a collective person then some- for the leaders who represent your Mother. With all this, we are very different people. We are a different race: We are virtuous, we are righteous and we are proud to be that way. collective, you should meet more people, take We are sure of everything. We know about more interest. You see, the body of your's everything. Compassion, of Love of God. That's what until you use it. we are. We are not ordinary people. to be more collective. The thing is that if times you'll feel them on the legs. sometimes on the hand, sometimes in the head. That's not a good thing. You should try to be more And we are personification of would not work out efficiently unless and Bacause individually if you work out, it I asked a child, "Who is your friend?" will not develop collectively, because where She said, "Only one". I said, Why? "Because she is a Sahaja Yogini, the rest are all ordinary self to give it to others. And if you don't people". What about the teacher? "Very give it, if you do not work it out in a collec- ardinary". And what about your headmist- tive way, there's no circulation. ress? "She is absolutely ordinaryl" Then I showed her the photograph of the Prime Minister. She looked at it and she was quite it out of a tree, and you mature it outside. surprised. She said, "This is even more ordinary than my head mistress". She said with great disgust, "Mother why do you keep itself giving a proper identity to itself and to such photographs with you?" are you using it ? You are correcting your- For example, there's a fruit, and you take But it will decay very soon. But if it is connected with the tree, it will mature by the tree. And taste would be better. And those who would come under that tree will a fruit receive the fruits of that tree. But which is separated will be lost after some- time. That is how one has to be very That's what we are. The children under- stand more than us, is it ? Because our brain is against us some- times ; over déveloped brain. So yesterday I saw many people having Ekädasha,I was surprised. So I told them just say, "Mother Mother ? you be in my head". Because I have no intelligence, l'am too simple. You should all become simple like me. Absolutely simple person. That's very effective ! collective. Q. How to develop our discrimination, Shri Mataji: Discrimination comes through Hamsä chakra. And Hamsa is very simple thing, is to put some ghee in the nose, -is the physical thing. On the emotional Or Now I think 1 have covered most of the side, one should not cry too much. women specially have too much crying business. I also sometimes feel like crying, points. But if you have any question, you can ask them today. but seldom. So sometimes men must cry also. Q.: "Shri Mother, we feel the same chakras, more on the legs than on the fingers. Now spiritually, to develop discrimination is by vibratory awareness. When your Shri Mataji : The integration is not there, is 15 Nirmala Yoga

 calculated, nothing. I just said it. And by big calculation, it was 379, according to him, but I gave him one pound more ! So. it was 380. and then you'll be amazed what a computer It's a fact !-And that's how you become a computer. All mathematics comes through vibrations ate developed. then you automati- cally discriminate. You are such a computer. t has to work in its full way, you are. your brain. it's so dynamic. I'll give you an example of Warren now. Pat's husband Prole, was measuring my But first of all you have to have concent- devotion. Such a person house for certain purpose, while Warren was sleeping. Poor David was working. Warren ration of your devotion. was sleeping. And in his dream, he dreamt that he had finished with the last measure- ment. And in his half-sleep he got up and he told him that this house measures.. achieves that. THERE ARE SO MANY BLESSINGS WAITING FOR YOU, TO BE MANIFESTED. JUST YOU HAVE TO CONCENTRATE YOUR EFFORTS IN DEVOTION, AND DEDICA- TION. how much?... hundred and sixteen square feet.And "exactly that's what David Prole had writen ! Poor David had worked so hard measuring Everything He chair ! Three thousand nine May God Bless You. actually fell from his Already the vibrations are so much, I don't Like today I told Guido that I think I spent know after puja what will happen to me. three hundred and eighty pounds. And he Already the flowers have started growing in said, no it was three hundred. I never size. You know, they are becoming big ! The Seven Eyes of God Said "Let the Human Organs be kept in their perfect Integrity, "At will contracting into Worms or Expanding into Gods, "And then, behold I What are these Ulto Visions of Chastity? "Then as the moss upon the tree, or dust upon the plow, "Or as the sweat upon the labouring shoulder, or as the chaff "Of the wheat-floor or as the dregs of the sweet wine press; "Such are these Ulto Visions, for tho' we sit down within "The plowed furrow, list'ing to the weeping clods till we "Contract or Expand Space at will, or if we raise ourselves "Upon the chariots of the morning, Contracting or Expanding Time, "Everyone knows we are One Family, One Man blessed forever" William Blake. Nirmala Yoga 16

 Her Holiness Shri Mataji 9 February, 1983, Jangpura, New Delhi SICKNESS AND IT'S CURE I wanted first of all to tell you something types of relations they establish with God. That is called as Bhakti Relationship, we can about the sickness of the people which perhaps I have not elaborately told you about, say, and they dwell upon it, and all the how to cure people and how people suffer time weep and cry and say," O God, when from different sicknesses. will I meet you." Such people are the ones who take domination from others, sulfer, sacrifice and lead a life of great suffering. But in their expression, in their achieving God, they start doing Bhakti. And they think, As we are now on the principle of the being, we must understand that sickness also comes if there is something wrong in the principle that builds up the human beings. that through Bhakti they will come to God. So now basically there are two principles But with Bhakti, God comes to them. Because which effect the body, and the third principle of their Bhakti, God comes to them and He effects the evolution. incarnates for the Bhaktas, the ones who cry for God, He incarnates. So there is So the first principle of the left sided "iccha Shakti, (T af) or the desire power nothing wrong with those people. is if in danger we develop lots of diseases due to lethargic organs. Left side is the tāmasic (amf) side, is the side where ced food as tar as proteins are concerned darkness is effecting people. Those people And in proteins, they are so weak that they who live in too much darkness, or in the might suffer from all lethargic muscles, in past, or in a sly way, in a hidden way, who every way. So you can see that these people are introverts, we can say in short, who spend suffer from cold, they sufter from diarrhoeas, their life mostly in a very closed waters, or live with people who are extremely cautious the food and the whole food will pass out as and afraid of others, all people who do not diarrhoea. They will have lethargic hearts by talk much or who avoid meeting people, who which they will get a heart which will not shun people -all such people are left sided, pump the blood. Swellings in the body. have got in 'tamas. Such people, in their Also they might get this gout and these spiritual awareness or spiritual ascent, try to troubles of the joints. They also get the take to Bhakti. (nfea, Devotion) They take lethargic liver which gives them allergies. All to Bhakti more. They worship God from kinds of allergies come to these people their heart, from their emotions. They work through their lethargic liver. So now you through emotions. There are twenty four have to base all these troubles of lethargic Now these peaple eat extremely imbalan- because the muscles are weak, they will eat 17 Nirmala Yoga

 For organs, of any kind, on the left side. For example a person whose eyes are open but because they say that in Gita it is written- he cannot see, is also suffering from the they said so, do not know.-that tämasic same type of disease. Many people come and argue with me people eat lot of meat.-t is not true. Is not true. Tāmasic people are the people,-they are not bad people by any chance, they are one type,-are the people who eat too much These people are effected by the sub- conscious and the collective subconscious. From where the spirits attack them and they of carbohydrates, Because left side is hydro- becomes involved into the spirits and they gen, and carbon comes from Ganesha on the have a very bad sympathetic attitude towards themselves. They are themselves miserable and make everyone miserable. Because they get their ideas from these miserable sly people, and they cannot see anyone happy very-very overactive, extremely overactive nor do they keep happy themsives. They personality. Such a right sided person is will make a big fuss out of their so-called eating too much of proteins. All the tims troubles and sickness and problems, and try meats, this, that. And he becomos an over- to create as much problems as possible for active person, and such an overactive person others. But the problems are not aggressive- receives a blessing of their ego, and a big looking. It is more by appealing to the ego develops. Such a man aggressively des- sympathy, appealing to the weaknesses of troys others, the images of others, pulls them others. And a person who stays with such down, criticises others, jumps on them, can people can also get effected if he tries to show sympathies with these people. left hand side. So it is more carbohydrates, no question of eating too much of meat. But the right sided people now, have a be very hot tempered, can be absolutely demonic. As 1 said before, Hitler is the example. Cancer and muscular discrepencies and weaknesses in which the muscles become Now this type of people who eat too much extremely weak gradually and Osteo myelitis, of meat, and too much of heavy food and polio myelitis,-all these lethargic things that develop muscular capačities too much, more makes your even lungs lethargic. If your than a human being, should 1 say, they lungs are lethargic, then you get diseases become like horses. Then they start behaving like T.B., tuberculosis. Tuberculosis comes like horses, worse than horses also. And that is why a person should not take to too much of anything, you should keep to the from the left side. Now those who are strict vegetarians. centre. who do not eat any even garlic, or don't eat even onions and all that are very vulnerable to left sided business. On top of that if they Due to overactive organs, they develop a are going to a Guru who is left sided, they very bad heart, which is overactive. In which are even worse. So one need not lead an abnormal life. One has to be a normal In lungs he develops asthma. In his intes- person, eating right proportion of proteins, tines, he develops constipation, he develops carbohydrates and fats. So this is one side a very-very bad liver and a very unhealthy of Sahaja Yoga in which you see that left- sided people have to be very-very careful and not to just assert themselves on that side. All such people have over-active organs. the heart pumps fast, palpitations take place. skin. The skin is extremely sallow. And such a person is very-very quarrelsome and aggre- ssive. Nirmala Yoga 18

 A person who leads a very ascetic life that such people may have very bad time with and of martyrdom: for example, many their children, may have bad time with their government servants think that they are parents, and may have very bad time with their doing a very great work of martyrdom for wives, At the level of right nâbhi they will have their country. But such people also become problems of digestion. They may have money. so conscious of that, that they are hot bricks. You just can't go near them. They are extre- mely hot tempered. Or any person who leads a life of asceticism of a severe type like oriented. The ego can go to that level, that Vishvämitra, Durväsā, all these people, they, they can develop paralysis. all become so hot-tempered that you cannot possible in both the cases. Even the laft sids talk to them. They are very snappy and their language is very sharp, And when they talk, you can feel that it is not a person who has any balance in him. brilliant and consider themsevles to be very But they can never enjoy that money or can never think of living a life which is complete. At the level of the brain they become ego- Paralysis is person can get it or the right side person can get it. But mainly people get the paralysis on the right side. It comes from left side but effects the right side of the body. But they look very So there are two types of paralysis. One intelligent, but they are actually stupid people. Because thev do all kinds of stupid Is the paralysis caused by too much of ego another by super ego. Those who have lethargic temperament develop clots in their blood, and low blood pressure. And these clots cause the paralysis also on the left- hand side. The another one on the righit hand side is caused by the damage to the brain things. They do such stupid things that any- body who is wise can see that they have no sense of proportion in doing anything that is against the whole. Such people are vulnerable to many diseases, like as I said, the heart, liver, cirrho- by the over development of Mr.Ego within sis of the liver. Also diabetes, leukaemia you. kidney trouble, high blood pressure, uterus troubles. Such people can become barren women, they may not have children at all, such women cannot have children. Specially women who are very-very flirtatious type and who think they are very beautiful, and also they are having a very active life,-can be- come completely barren. become something good-for-nothing people, if they overdo things. If their attention is spent all the time in fulfilling their ambitions, confidence, he will be running away from they can become like that. So those people public. And also then, he becomes schizo- also who indulge too much into life and so- called enjoy life, and waste their time in house, becomes like a cabbage. You can drinking and being with women and all that. They can be ruined not only by money, but also by their very bad health. That is how we can summarise cn the whole, that the diseases of the physical side are caused by these too imbalances. Apart from that we have the mental troubles with people. Like a left sided per- son will have a mental problem, like he will be a sly person, he will be a frightened person, he would not be talking to others, he would be nervous, he would not have self- Also men can phrenic that he hibernates sort of thing in the say like that. That kind of a lunatic he be- comes. Another side, of the right side, is that such a person, becomes Now on the level of right heart, you know very hot Nirmala Yoga 19

 their ideas, they are trying to plan something. tempered and obnoxious person absolu- tely. Such a person can be so cruel, and that is hovw the plan goes out. Every- he can be so troublesome that he would where, where the administrator becomes much be a really a challenge to the whole family, more than what he should be, then his to the whole society, and he would be behaviour itself is so idiotic and so much away very disturbing. So this is the second pro- from reality that everyone has to suffer, if blem, also is a mental case. Now such a such an administrator is asserting itself in the person may not look mentally upset,-the planning of any programme of a country or right sided person. But when they grow old, of a nation. The worst and worst are the they just talk. They will go on talking so much that nobody can talk to them. You cannot even open mouth before them. They Shakti, the primordial Mother. It's such a go on fret f aeE They go on stupidity, is the greatest stupidity that they jabbering all the time, everything they are indulge into ! telling you. And quite relevently they will talk of God, of Atmā, this that. But just they are talking, because they are so egoistical that they just go on talking, do not allow anybody to speak. And such horrible characters, if there is even one, you are in for trouble. Because you get headaches from them and stupid person ever born on this earth. Like one you get other problems, that you don't know how to manage them, how to keep them ne is not there, but he was Prime Minister of decently in their proper places. So they are Uganda. Now he was a real idiot. I mean, also in a way mental cases because they are not normal. rākshasas (zraa, demons) who are so egoistical that they think of capturing even the Adi So, stupid man is very big problem to the whole society-though he never realises. He thinks I have managed the show, I am the most successful person. But when the history is over, people talk about him as the greatest Mr. Idi Amin who is supposed to benow you could see the way he used to talk and all that, he was an idiot. And he said that, "the people of my country should be called So on mental side also we have problems from my name, because, you see, I am the one of people who are egoistical or who are who represents this country." So somebody from others and suggested that, "It is alright, but how should becoming sly. Sly people are good at spoil- we call them? Like from Cyprus people are ing their relations of each other by saying called as Cypriotic. So if we call your name, people refused to accept this solution, though he was so dominating, There was another one who made shoes out of pearls, you se Now, ego oriented person has another horrible non-sense-for his marriage. I don't accepting domination something, by carrying stories, by being sly. it will become Idioticl" So the And so both of these kinds, extreme type are very injurious to a proper social life. very big problem, that he asserts his idea about everything else. So always such a know which was the number of that mar- riage. But he wanted to make shoes of man, because he is stupid and idiotic, the pearls-All sorts of idiotic things they do. idiotic ideas survive. And because of idiotic I mean these people who are such extre- ideas, every planning that is done by such people is a failure. That is the reason, our mely ego-oriented surprisingly become very Planning in India has failed. Everywhere it miserly. Extremely. They are so money fails. Because the idiotic people, they are stupid, they are ego oriented, just to assert spend all that money on themselves. But SO oriented that they are extremely miserly. They Nirmala Yoga 20

 You will be surprised, if I tell the Indians, none on others.-That they will try to save. Any good work has to be done, they will. that I have seen in the West, sometimes you go to a Hotel with other people. I have never seen anybody offering to pay except for my the best things. For: themselves. But for husband or me. They start looking this side, others they have no money. Even where it is that side. If somebody can pay, very good. their due, they will try to save money. They It is most surprising. Even in countries like Sweden and Switzerland. Switzerland is an- other. The greatest miserly country you could ever think of is Switzerland. Europeans are 'extremely" miserly people. Most surprising keep back their money. But on themselves they will buy the best wines, they will buy will not pay where it is due. Which we see among so many people, even in Sahaja Yoga. That they have to pay something which is their due, for something it is. how miserly they are. And Indians in which is very important, but they will not pay. They want even free sometimes the books, sometimes-whatever it is, for which people just come for food free. I mean, am I suppo- are paying. For example this pandal is raised now. It needs money. Who is going to pay food, pay for your taxis. Tomorrow, you for it? I payed for at least 3 to 4 years my- might even say. "Pay for our house rents". self from my own pocket and my brother helped me to do all this work. And they wanted me to go on with it all the time. Imagine I For your Self-Realisation, I have to pay. I travelled on my own, I had my own things done. They would not even pay for what is done. I mean, it is required that proper thing, they have no money, most the people who are organising this program- me should put-up the pandal. I am supposed to give you the realisation free, but not to pay for your pandal. Tomorrow, you will say "Mother, also pay for us for coming here and going back, our fare." 1 am not surprised, you see. Such people are 'extremely miserly. Every pie they pay, you see, they think that we must get the money back. And if anything is done extra for them, that is not counted. Only thing, because whatever you can get, you should get. But while giving they are zero. And these money oriented people are horrifyingly surprisingly are rich. One cannot understand how are they rich. Because there is people, but never have they taken a single pie nothing like generosity in them, no priorities, nor proprieties, as to where you have to spend the money, And there is no self- respect about it. There's no self-respect. It is very surprising. Delhi are, Sahaja Yogis, are very funny. I must say. I'was surprised to hear that people sed to pay for your food also? Pay for your It is absurd. All this comes from ego, which does not allow you to see the propriety of things. It is very surprising. They will spend money on themselves, buy this, buy that. But to do the surprising thing is. Every time, I come, 1 find Mr. Verma or somebody tells me that, "Look at this Mother, this is the money they have given." So every time I have to pay out of my pocket to fill-up the gap, all these things. Every time. May be this year also. Now I have told him this time, I am going to give you my Kară. (er golden bangle). You sell it and .This is the situation in this Delhi, where the Sahaja Sahaja yogis are so wretched that they do not want to pay even two hundred Don't learn things from rupees per year. European yogis. They have to learn from Maharashtrian Sahaja Yogis. They are poor from me, They say," Mother, it is sufficient you are doing so much for us". Other Gurus take their money, extract all the money. Here the Guru has to spend the money all the time. Can you imagine Sahaja. 21 Nirmala Yoga

 Yoga of this kind? Have you heard of such a Guru anywhere? That the Guru is spending you see, a kanjoosa has no sense of shame. the money for Sahaja Yoga. I have been spending, not this year, twelve years I have understand been coming to Delhi. I think till last year I surprising sometimes. have been spending my own pocket money. And I don't know how to answer my hus- save Me ! Whatever you may do for them, No sense of shame left in him. He does not what he is doing. It is so You cannot save money where it con- . He said cerns self-realisation organising. It is most band. Hejust cannot understand. what is this Sahaja Yoga that you have to surprising that these people when they pay for the disciples. I said," Thank God. behave like that, all these countries one by they don't ask for their house rents !" It is a very shameful situation. I must say it is a very shameful situation. That, where the money is needed, they have no money. There is no budgeting at all, of a priority. You are Sahaja Yogis, you are Saints. What are your ands I have spent out of my own pocket so priorities? one are becoming poorer and poorer. The more you are worried about money, the worse it becomes. Of course, I don't need any money. You know already I don't know how many thous- far. But the problem lies that nobody But in Maharashtra you must come and understands that it is a shameful thing that learn. They are poor people. They have not got so many riches. You wouldn't see many cars in Maharashtra. There are hardly one or two people who have cars in Maha- talk to the Sahaja Yogis of Delhi. I was rashtra. But never such a problem comes up ashamed absolutely to hear that Sahaja Yogis there, whether you go to villages or to the here cannot even give eighteen rupees per cities. Nobody makes up an account because month! Eighteen Rupees; per month. Those the whole account is, you have to pay for this who cannot afford, it is alright. Those who electricity, this, that. All has to be paid through my pockets. That is why, I am talking to Sahaja Yogis today. a Guru has to spend for you. Now that is why I said today I want to are retired is alright, children is alright. But you cannot even give eighteen rupees per month. It is not even eighteen, less than that. I don't know. This is the minimum you can pay. We have to run an Ashram, we have to run these things. you want to So European Sahaja Yogis also I have to tell them. That they have to behave them- selves a little better. This is not the way to have a place where to go. How can that be? behave towards money. It is a shameful way I just can not believe it ! With Sahaja Yoga if that I have heard that European Sahaja Yogis, you do not even have this much of generosity, some of them, are behaving in a very shame- it is better you give up Sahaja Yoga. Better ful way. It is not correct. It is not a good give up. You are not the one who can go on thing. with Sahaja Yoga. So this is the right sided stupidity. You know, any 'kanjoosa" (miser) man you meet, you just laugh at him, isn' it ? They are so many stories of Kanjoosas. So the kanjoosa free. I was working. Whole day, I have been and the lazy, which one would you prefer? I going doing this, doing that. Even for buying do not mind a lazy man. But a kanzoosa-God things for you, all the Sahaja yogis. How Look at your Mother how generous She is. I give you realisation, work 'morning till evening'. Today, I didn't have a single minute 22 Nirmala Yoga

 far I go. 1 work so hard, and you cannot in the centre. The people who have their even give eighteen rupees. I it 11 heard about the Sahaja Yogis.-Now their wisdon. These people are 'extremely you are sitting under the pandal, who is going to pay for it ? should pay 7 And . Take any one, take any one, take these carpets, I should pay ? Is this the way to behave? Next time, if anybody does not Tukārăma; his children asked him, "you get pay like that, I am not coming to Delhi, I'm telling you next time I'm not coming to Delhi. I cannot afford it now any more. Coming to Delhi means I have to shell out my own money, every time. Those who have not paid home and all the children started asking "give the money please pay, otherwise 1 will not come to Delhi, Tam telling you. I don't like everything. He came home, he had no sugar- this kind of thing, that you cannot even pay cane for his children -They suffer from eighteen rupees to maintain that Ashram, to maintain all these things. This is too much. cannot believe proper understanding and who have got generous. You take any Guru, Sadguru सद्गुरु. Nānaka. take Kabeera or take Tukāräma. us some sugarcane". So he was walking and one gentleman, who was his master, who's field of sugarcane he was looking-after, gave him lots of sugarcanes. So he was coming me one sugarcane, one sugarcane." He gave overgenerosity. They are so generous, you can't imagine. You should ask people who have known me in that aspect. Now will you please try to understand that you have to be of a calibre to be a Sahaja Yogi. You cannot be just a raddad ( person from the road, who can become also: All your material wealth, and every- Adi Shakti's son, can you? I do not want thing has no meaning unless and until you beggars to be my children. Will you please, show generosity for the people. But it now all of you, decide today, that no more of should be quiet and it should be absolutely this talk, 1 will have to do. This is the last silent. I have seen that it is nice to oblige time I am telling you. It is a shameful thing somebody who comes to your house. Indians and in the History it will go down, that are very good at it : please have your food, Mother stopped coming to Delhi because everytime She went there, She had to shell they will take out some work from that out money from Her pocket. The History of person, or something. But there is no genui- Sahaja Yoga will be written in Golden letters and remember that every body's name I am help, doesn't matter. Any great cause, what going to put-down there. And those who can be the greater cause than this work of do not pay, please give me their names. That is it. I want to know who are these you people behave like this. Now where are culprits, Generosity is the only way you can express your love to others. I have told you before this, that. Because just to impress.-Later on neness about it. Anybody who comes, just God that am doing ? And thereI find you going to spend your money ? So the centre people are extremely generous to begin with. They cannot retain food if they have it at somebody's house. Either they vomit or they will have diarrhoea. If they eat at a place where they should not So now we come to the Centre, the have eaten, if it is not properly vibrated, if the Central path of Sushumnā. The Central food is not good, they will not eat the food. Even if they eat the food, they will vomit it. और जो लोग कंजरी करेंगे, उनके साथ भगवान भी कजूसी कर सकता है । (And those who are miserly, with them God can also be very miserly.) path of Sushumnā is for the people who are Nirmala Yoga 23

 They are extremely kind and generous. They But with the full confidence that what they do not suddenly jump on people and say, "Oh ! you have a food that has got this and joy. that", fit is so they try to avoid, not to eat. But sometimes they are crucified. Al- right, does not matter. They think, "Alright on the fatter side, I should say, because I will eat and throw it away". They are extremely wise and tactful, Tactful", They Prāna Shakti, (ST ),-is in the centre in kr.ow how to deal with people. They are extremely diplomatically-gifted, to please the gaseous body. The gaseous body is not others and somehow or the other bring them heavy, its very light. They walk very fast, they to the temple of God. The whole attitude of are active. But, to look at, they look plump. such people is to clean themselves, to keep Normally. If they are not. they try to be them clean, to keep them alright, to get more plump. They want to be plump, they want and more people to this great work of reali- sation. They never show off. I never see them before. They don't stick on. They don't on the plump side. show off. They are not in front. They do not want to show their faces. They are quiet. 1 know who they are. But they are dynamic their all kinds of vomitting and all that. and they work it out. Only when they have to consult something important, they will come and see me and talk. I know the way they to immediately go and vacate it. work out. Extremely silent and beautiful, their problem. gracious people they are. And they also know how to handle others. They can sometimes get into temper which is necessary, if they if they have taken too much vibrations, they have to protect the protocol of their Mother. may develop a swelling on their body. Under or could be protocol of Sahaja Yoga, and of these circumstances, first of all they should are doing is the greatest happiness and And their health-wise, they are more they have gas in their body, lot of gas, the the Pränă-onters into Sushumnā. That creates to find out what is wrong with their liver, so that they could be plump. They are rather Their main disease is their excretion, and For example, a person who eats a wrong type of food or a wrong type of liquid has This is Another prob!lem they may develop that God. find out if they are in the neighbourhood of somebody who is anti-God. Because such swellings are developed when the vibrations are fighting an anti-God activities of the person who is with you. Say your wife is Normally they are very quiet and silent people. Their presence is blissful. What- ever house they enter, it is auspicious. Whatever shop they enter, prospers. What- ever person they talk to, is benefitted. They negative. Then such a person might develop are auspicious. They are blissful. They give a swelling because his vibrations are fighting blessings; automatically, They do not have to say," I bless you." If they are there, they fighting. But he must know how to correct bless you. He should not mind that the woman. the woman. He must know how to put her right. Or the man who is like that, the They never think of making money out of woman might develop an anti-devil force God's work-never. Not a single pie. They within her which will give her that swelling. are so truthful. Not because they are afraid that if we make money thief will come and with the vibrations jetting out with a great take away all our things. Not with the fear. speed. Different types of swellings might appear, They might develop arthritis. if Nirmala Yoga 24

 they do not give vibrations. Or pain in the joints. then you might feel the pressure on this brain plate. At that time they should try to bring the Grace on top of all the sympathetic systems, bring it down, stand on Mother The other problem they may have, is of very low breathing, low blood pressure- Earth. Ask Her to suck it. So the Kundalini's because of para-sympathetic activity. And when they are fighting with the anti God acti- vities they might feel tired also sometimes. But pressure is reduced because when the Grace comes on the body, then all the chakras open up and also Agya opens up. If they again they recoup and they feel alright. At have problem with their Agyā, they should every centre, if the vibrations start flowing too much, then all these people may develop may develop,I am saying use a candle at the back, if their eye sight is getting weak or short sighted. If their Agya a kind of a is too much here (front) there are mantras suction or emission of vibrations, depending which are to be used like I forgive every on the quality of the person who is facing one", and all that. On the subtler way. you them. And when such a thing happens, know all the mantras that are to be said. they can easily correct it by giving a band- han. And in case they find the vibrations are too much, then they can ask another If a Sahaja Yogi finds his Sahasrära Sahaja Yogi to take out the vibrations from catching, then he should take a bath in the sea, I think, I don't know where he should take a bath. Because Sahasrāra is my place, as you know. And to catch the Sahasrāra is a very seriaus thing for a Sahaja Yogi. He a particular chakra and give it to the atmos- phere. They may suffer from the throat-trouble. Also may suffer from the drying up of the liquid in might develop a Ekádasha with that and, he the body if they have to fight the anti-God will be in trouble. And then he will come and tell me that"Mother, though I was a elements very much. So a kind of a dryness can develop in their peritoneum or may be in Sahaja Yogi, I was praying on Your photo- That is graph and all that, still I got this trouble The reason is, when you are a Sahaja Yogi their tracts which are covering them. why it is nice for them to eat some ghee or butter. They must rub their fingers and the you have to recognise Me. That is the con- dition. So far you have never recognised any one, but now you 'have to recognise Me. It you don't recognise me, you will develop this Ekādasha, and I tell you that if you try to do like this, then it is not possible to allow the Kundalini to come up. So Sahaja Yogis who are very doubtful and still like this very much caught up on the Agya, on the should not be called as Sahaja Yogis. They right side. It is important at this time to give should be kept out, as far as possible. Let them learn that they are not worthy. Let them know that this realisation has been given by Me and by nobody else. Like once Venugo- palan told me that "Krishna did not give me realisation. Rāma never gave me realisation, Ganesha never gave nme, Shiva ever gave me, Pārvati never gave me, Adishakti did not hands and all these places with ghee or butter to soothe it down. Because the heat from other people can also make them dried up. At the Agya level, they may sometimes develop a headache with people who are a bandhan to yourself and to other person who is very egoistical; and don't listen to them. Just close your ears and the person will stop talkıng, Also they might develop some pressures on both the sides of the head. Sometimes when the Kundalini cannot rush upward, there is an obstruction on the Agyā 25 Nirmala Yoga

 give me, it was Mataji Nirmla Devi who has always say that "keep the Devi prasanna. given me realisation know." Unless and until So She is the one I Yesterday the music was on, I was very pra- you understand sanna, you should have been happy that this, all-Räma, Shiva and Brahmadeva, Vishnu, music was on, Mother is Prasanna, that is all. "everyone" is going to get angry with you. Because they will not understand. Because you have got your realisation, still you are denying me, that means something wrong not going to be alright. If you are a big admi- with you, And the whole plate can be covered nistrator anything, that is in the office. Not and you might develop Ekädasha. That is here. Here I am the one. You have to leave the beginning of the end. But no, you wanted it to be your way. You hurry Me up. You say come along now, we have to go. That is all. Then your ascent is things into my hands. Beçause Don't try to play tricks with me. Taking too much advantage of me is also like that. Too much sticking on to me also apart from My Mother's heart, there are many you might get this Ekädasha. You must keep other Ganas, you see, many other Deities, out Too much pressurising me you will get many other great things which are waiting, it. Answering me, not listening to me. When and they may try to trouble you. So as I say. I want to do this, you will say,"No. no let us do this,"-You catch. Sahaja Yogis I have to warn you. New people wouldn't understand this. For them it will look like egoistical and all that. They wouldn't I know what to do, when to do, where to understand, forget it. But there are very few do. I know that. I know when I should reach a place, when I should raise the Kundalini, Sahaja Yogis and teliing them the truth. where it will work out, 1 know everything, Because so far I have had no chance to tell you have to leave it to me. And if you start challenging me, you will catch on Sahasrära, As Sahaja Yogis you are saints. And you And then don't blame me, new people, that is why I am talking to: So it does not matter. them all these things. "must have that dignity of a Saint, and that generosity of a Saint, and a sense of Only in Sahaja Yoga if you could rise and priority and propriety. I hope Delhi Sahaja ascend and try to recognise me, I will have Yogis will begin from tomorrow a new life in no problem, you will have no problem. If their behaviour. there is anyone say your wite, or husband and anything, who talks against Sahaja Yoga, भानरण में लाथ । बाते करने से कुछ नहों होने वाला। आवरण में close your ears, close your eyes. You are not IST to hear any nindā (frer criticism) of Me at least. If you don't understand, you don't nothing is going to be achieved. Bring it in understand because after all you are not Me. But know that I have given you realisation. And you should not try to challenge Me, because God himself will be against you. begin with. This is very ungrateful of you to behave like (Bring it into practise. By talking about it- to practise) And try to be good Sahaja Yogis, to You cannot compromise on certain things. In Sahaja Yoga, you will be amazed it is 'such So first thing you must do is not to trouble a great science, 'even one line here and there me much by any chance. You have to keep -they are finished. The other day a gentle Me prasanna ( , pleased). This is what we man came and he told Me that I don't that. Nirmala Yoga 26

 believe in such and such Saint. muslim may say that I don't believe in Guru Nänaka. Immediately his vibrations must go down. Finished. But much worse when you very much respected, if you behave like a say about Me or think about Me. 1f there Saint. Saint has to be Saintly within and is even a goes. Because Guru NAnaka is a person within you, but he did not give you realisa- great Saint has come." tion. He and Me are one, there is no become a very wealthy person for that. You difference at all. But what He feels when He don't have to be a big politician or a big has become Me and given you realisation. minister; nothing. An ordinary person can You do not want to recognise Me, then al- manifest the whole thing. right-He is the one who will be angry, not Me. You have always seen people who worship Shiva, in the hand they keep them. would be that all of you should take up They catch in the heart, its the Shiva's place. responsibilities. Because Shiva himself is angry. Say, a and until, there is a purpose or some sort of a reason, I would 'hate" to take it. You know that. So I should be your ideal. You will be thought coming, see that it without. One person who behaves like that. shines, and everybody knows, "Oh here a You don't have to So i think one way of improving this You should try to travel around. Now some people should travel around. Go, establish some centre, look Sahaja Yoga is a very dynamic thing. And after that. Then go somewhere else, establish for that we do not need these people who are that centre and look after. Now establish a good for nothing. Kanjoosas (misers) are out. Absolutely. You should be extremely punctual come, bring in, distribute some handbills in and anxious-atur (r)-to do the need- ful for Sahaja Yoga's work. It's a 'tremendous work. While we have people who are so anxious. They are willing to stay here, they are willing to go anywhere, they are willing whole. So nowI have to tell you, today to do any work in Canada, want to go to again I have to go somewhere, so you have America, work it out. And here we have people. Itis surprising ! In the Yoga Bhoomi. that I wouldn't allow, it wouldn't be possible This is Jangpurä--Just imagine this is Jang- to make you touch my feet. It is alright. pură. May be here the Jang (n battle) I don't There is no need to touch my feet at all. know of who, which people took place. In Hastinäpur a great jang took place long time back, where evil forces were fought. But Centre in Jangpura or some place. Try to the market places. Get some people, estab- lish it. There are hardly few numbers of people who are organising, it is not the way. Every one of you is part and parcel of the to excuse me. I hope you don't mind today I will tell you a very sweet story of Shri Krishna and Rüdhā and then I well go away. was there anybody like the people we have Once it happened that the ladies who were here ? Can you hold the Sword of Right- married to Shri Krishna got very jealous of eousness in your hand when you do not have any righteousness in your behaviour ? We cannot be like these ordinary politicians and these business people. Rādhāji. And they told Shri Krishna that you don't love us. On top of that Shri Nãrada came to put more oil on the fire. That he said, "He really, I believe, He 'never cares for you, He just likes Radhaji, He is not So Shri Krishna, as diplomatic as He was, He started saying, "Oh God ! I have terrible pain in My stomach, now what to do 7" So they said, now what to do ? We are Saints! Understand you are Saints. bothered." You cannot behave like them, cheapish way. Dnever take anything free from you, It is very difficult to give me something. Unless 27 Nirmala Yoga

 He said, "It is very simple. You know any you give Him the dust of your feet, then al one who is my Bhakta (devotee), if you can give the dust of your feet for Me to eat, then I playing some trick, you know. Just don't try will be alright." life, you see. As it is if I tell you anything, better take it." But he said, "what about your you just want to give your solutions every- punyas and papas." She said, "I know one time. Nobody listens to Me. If 1 say go thing, it is He, who looks after My pāpas and here. "No, no, it is better to go that way. Come here "No, no, this way is better. Every body has a brain wave about it. absolutely yellow like a saffron or like a Does not matter. So there they had brain pollen of the flower. And he went and gave waves. They said you see why don't you it to Shri Krishna. Shri Krishna said. I take some medicine? Then somebody said, we knew Shri Radha will send, now let me will call the Vaidya. He said, "No, I know for definite that I cannot be cured by anything to answer the question that Shri Rädhä ha else but one thing, that you have to get the said, that you look after Her päpas and pun- dust of one of my Bhaktas, and i will eat." So every body started looking at each other, does that mean ? That you know what is you see. As some of the Sahaja Yogis do punya and papas are, and She is not bothered when it comes to paying ! They never heard about it. She has not to worry about Her it. Some of them. Never heard. Better. You papas and punyas." He said, "Alright, now see, it is very tricky nature. So they said now what to do. If we do not cure Shri Krishna, medicine and He said I better sleep. And He is just wailing, and what to do? Shri Krishna said." Have some pity on Me, give opened and in the Heart was the lotus of me some dust of your feet." Nārada that you go and ask Rädha to send dust of Her feet. So he went to Shri Rādhã. rubbing against the pollen of that lotus and Shri Rādhāji was in Vrindiävan, and the soil of that place is yellowish in colour like tre (Keshara), like saffron. So he went and told that Shri Krishna is very sick, He has Her Feet, what does it matter if She gives got a terrible pain in His stomach. So She got a fright. She said, "Really ! how can that be. I cannot beljeve it. So what does His heart, what does it matter ? And that is He says? What treatment can He take?" He how they realised that Shri Rādha's love was says anyone of his disciplies, anybody his Bhakta, if they send a little of the dust of their Dharma-Adharma, but just to be at the com- feet, He will be alright. He has to take that mand of Her Lord, She acted, and that is how as medicine. So She said alright, take the She had a place in the Heart of Shri Krishna. dust of My feet. He was amazed ! He said "What ara you doing? You understand, if your punyas (merits) will be lost. He is this thing." She said, "Nothing doing, you So they got a fright of their She said, "l know one punyas. I have not to think about it." So he took the dust of Her feet which was eat it " He said, "You can eat, but you have yas. How is it ? How can it be ? What let me take the medicine." He took the Shri Närada saw the heart of Shri Krishna a very beautiful pink colour. On that lotus was lying Shri Rädhaji. And Her feet were So He said to the yellow of the Vrindãvan clay was the same colour as that. And then he realised that when She is touching that lotus with the dust of Her feet to Shri Krishna to take. She is in His heart. When Her feet are in so great that for Her She did not think of May God bless you. Nirmala Yoga 28

 22nd July 1982 Her Holiness Shri Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi ALL IS SO BEAUTIFULLY MADE Public Programme, HAMPSTEAD, U.K. of Man can be ruined by him; it's only he can do it. The trees cannot ruin themselves, can So to continue with the same topic we had: about the infrastructure of the human being; about which I told you that God has they? They stand up like witnesses they made this infrastructure very beautiful. Even just give, they just give; even when they die if you see anything that is living, say a tree, they give their wood, when they live they give if you look at this tree you'll be amazed how the different channels that take the sap give their beauty, they're giving. giving,. upwards are so beautifully placed that there is giving all the time; and the one who takes is no problem for water to rise. The suction in this great epitome of creation: the Human the water takes place because the sun shines Being. He's the recipient of all that. Then their flowers, they give their shade, they he has got intelligence to receive everything from that and to use it for one's own purpose. and the water is sucked in. The Nature is so nicely built up, absolutely That's how we're exploiting. I would say: harmonious,-when it is winter time the leaves exploiting the blessings of Nature. That's drop out because the Mother Earth requires good. That's what God wanted; that we nutrition and the leaves are not getting so should really have the blessings of Nature. much of sunshine so there should be less surface exposed. The same nutrition is taken up again and again in the Spring you find again the beautiful leaves breaking through. It's so beautifully worked out, the whole his Infrastructure which he can ruin, The situation, the whole Universe is so beautifully problem is only the Man can ruin that; not made and the Infrastructure is so made that only that but also the outerstructure which is it receives all the blessings of the Divine the atmosphere. You send one man to without any difficulty. It rains and the Nature forest and it's all right; if you send two receives it. If you have ever been to a forest, hundred tigers to a forest it's all right but if that you could think of, you'll be amazed of you send ten men to a forest: finished! all the how clean it is; the fragrance of that place is beauty is finished. so clean-nothing stagnates. How it opera- tes? How it works out through sunshine, through rain, through wind. That You are the Monarchs of this Universe. So everything stands in attention for your needs. Why Man on his own goes mad with his extreme behaviour? He doesn't think of On one side, the sense oaf beauty only human beings have got. The sense of under- standing cleanliness only human beings have got. So they are the only enjoyers, they are created, which is a problem. The Infrastructure the only enjoyers of all; they are supposed to In this whole Universe now Man is Nirmala Yoga 29

 enjoy all this but there is something lacking aeroplane then you want to have some sort of in them which doesn't give the full enjoyment. -anything. There's no end to it. So it proves When you look at a tree-today Cherry that the joy that you get out of material Blossom everywhere-and the thought starts things also are not satisfying because at the coming: How much they must have paid for this tree?, How many years it must have enjoy. They cannot enjoy anything though taken? All these mundane type of questions they are supposed to enjoy everything: come into your mind. But supposing by any chance if no thoughts come into your mind, anjoy. But there's something lacking in them you just see, witness, could witness, then by which they cannot enjoy anything and the jay that they are trying to give you what is that quality? what is that state? would express, would be complete within yourself. state at which human beings are, they cannot because they only have the capacity to Because the connection for extracting joy has to ba with the Spirit. That state we have not yet achieved; always we have thoughts, thoughts which are all artificial. Thoughts that make you some sort of an imaginary person or if you don't go to the subtler side, a very gross person. It's not Reality, imagination is not Reality and also the grossness is not. Like a poat might say that what a flower is there, emits so much beauty Spirit is the connection which emits joy. There's no other way to enjoy a life without remorse. To be connected first with Spirit is the only way that we enjoy because that doesn't have double side. Like people go for, l'd say, for a ball-room dancing. They are supposed to be enjoying. They come home and a big tioaht starts God knows what they've enjoyed and that and all sort of stories they may have Tight built up about a flower and a person who is for. The enjoyment of life is only possible it not imaginary might say: ""1 don't know how much it will cost, how to put it down, what connection to the Spirit is only possible if you is the use of this, how it can be economic " Sprout into that: you become the Spirit as Poetry of course, touches subtler side of Christ has said in simple words that you have life no doubt Thank God Hampstead have got many great poets; but still it is imaginary simple, but how? You are to be baptizad, but for other people. What you look at and you think may not be true for others. For example: a person like Blake wrote all poetry, nobody have got the right to baptize. Now to any understood him. To understand him also you intelligent man doesn't appeal that way, can have to have Realization, otherwise you can't it be possible? Baptism, if it is a living process understand him at all. we could get connected to the Spirit and that to be born again. Very simple, looks very how? Say I go to a theosophical college or some sort of a college; they say: now you in which you have to get connected, con- nected with the Spirit then what do you do So, whatever is surrendered on gross level about it? That means you have to achieve a or on imaginary level by the nature cannot be enjoyad by human beings to its full extent. That connection has to be established. If Cannot be. We think so. Look at the economic laws, they are that "wants in cannot be twice-born by certifying yourself. general are not satiable," means that's not I've seen many people they said: "Mother, satisfying at all. I mean it says, it confesses. Today you vwant to have a car, then you want to have an aeroplane; alright you have an state of mind where you become the Spirit. that connection is not established then you I'm twice born". I said: "How do you say you are twice-born"? What is the certificate you have got of being twice-born? You Nirmala Yoga 30

 cannot just certify yourself. This is not a It's logical that life has no meaning without self certification. Supposing a dog says: "I'm a human being". Will you accept? No, I mean it can go about; and say that: "I am a human being". He doesn't become, it's a state, it's a quality which is in evolution- evolutionary which has to become a tortoise has to become a tortoise. She can't just say that "Ohl I am a tortoise, oh! I it, you see, You make a candle. you put a wick in that and do everything with it and when there is darkness you say: what are we to do now? Enlighten that light! It's so simple. The whole existence itself will have no meaning it we do not become the Spirit. We all have to become the Spirit, otherwise we are useless, we're good for nothing, our life has no mmeaning. has to be shown it's an quality. A fish am a tortoise", Now, when somebody says like that, I This is where human ego comes in; by could be another, hypocrite? Or could be what you call them false, fake guru, I could be like that myself, telling you big stories: could be possible, alright? Anybody could be like that. But why cheat yourself? It's the point Let anybody try to cheat you but you don't cheat yourself! saying something you do not beccme. And this is one of the basic things we must know: that we have to become, in actuality, in reality, we have to face up to it and not believing in something because it is said Anybody can say anything-what does it matter? Say what you like. What does You accept one simple point that you have to write a book? You take a it take to become the Spirit. In all humility, and that printer, you give him something to write; yau is one wish a Seeker should have. I've known can write any trash, any thing so called, He can write about God, this, that and talk big sermons, have big organizations but it's gentleman had a very bad Agnya centre and nothing of the kind. Even supposing you have some animals, like dogs especially, and now, you make them dress up like little babies, and who's written some books on the Third Eve. make them dance and in a circus you might and Fm going to operate and my third eye find them they've become a little bit like human beings, you know? They might carry letters or may bring your children from the after böoks on this". I said, "Really? And school. I mean they can do lots of such things but will you call them human belnas operating here if you get the third eye" and by any chance? I'm not saying the difference is so much but one has to understand one itself was ruined. I said what's the fellow, Не Seekers, they try all kinds of things. Like a I asked him: "What have you been doing?" He said, "There's a Rampa Shampa man is going to come out " I said: "What? Who's told you that? He said,"There are books how dare this fellow do that thing by he was doing all kinds of nonsensical things believing in that man and this, centre thing: that we have not yet become the Spirit. what is he doing himself, you see? That's the best part of it. See?, God has given us not In all humility let us accept this fact, that only brains but wisdom. God has given us become that Spirit. Now, wisdom and we should use that wisdom and supposing that is the only source of joy, judge these people on these lines to see if that is your real property within you, if what they're telling Us. Most of them are that is the thing you have to achieve, ruining your Infrastructure. I would not care for anyone of them if they were just smug- we have to THE supposing for that you have become a human being, then must you not all do that? gling money or making you poor, doesn't Nirmala Yoga 31

 matter. Alright? if they want money give them money, finished. There are many smugglers, thugs and robbers and swindlers. All sorts of people are in this world, see? There are a thousand and one words to descibe them but woven such a net that to get out of it is not There's only one way to get out. Once as a child I had read a story about some birds. A net was cast end so possible. birds theie were caught in the they are spoiling your Infrastructure and when net. And they discovered that: "we are they spoil that Infrastructure, then this happen- misled, misguided." ing of Kundalini awakening takes time, that's grains and they were misguided. So, how the problem. People develop diseases, they develop emotional problems, mental problems, It's an impossibility. One person cannot get all kinds of problems with all these things. They saw some to get out of the net was impossible for them. out, one person tries to get out others get more entangled and he gets even worse. So, what to do? The whole said: "Why not we all fly out with the net itself? And then with our beaks we'll cut out this net and we'll be Actually, you must know that if you are a Seeker and if you seek, you have to be- come absolutely a normal person. All your abnormalities must drop out; if they don't freed, but first get out from here. Put our drop out then you should know that you still have some horns coming out. But people And that's what they did They spread their don't understand that being abnormal is wings all of them put together and took off going down. Anybody who thinks he.can paint his hair or wear a funny dress, walk about, he'll achieve God. I don't know how to tell them that this is not the way. Or anybody who thinks that he behaves in a ble. If one person has to do it, it's an impo- funny manner or shouts and screams and says ssibility. He energy together all of us and let's fly out. and off they went and they were freed. Today Sahaja Yoga is that kind of a trick. One person cannot work it out. It's impossi- has to go and live in a cave permanently. Any one person, even does all these shows, will go to God, is not endowed with powers like Christ, comes on the prayers very loudly in the street and possible, this Earth is crucified, finished. Three years; then was crucified. Nobody understood him. So we have to have many more to get out of this net which is created through the efforts of the pseudo-people, through our stupidity, Only way is to keep your wisdom intact: your steadfast faith that you are the Spirit and God is compassion and He will make you the Spirit. This is the only thing that is needed in a Seeker. But without wisdom we can say, our wrong doings, misguidances, when you try anyone of these things, then all kinds of proslems which are against you have to go a very round circle to come to the same point but completely bruised, wounded and sometimes absolutely sick to evolution. One has to become a whole group to lift up the society higher so that you can really get rid of the shackles of this bondage. Could be there are some gurus in India who are good gurus who are realized death. The problem today is very complex, Your souls who have taken many lives to be reali- infrastructure is spoiled not only by these zed. They are very clean people: all that is pseudo-people, also by so many other things there no doubt but they're very few and they which we have taken to. The society, the all live in the forest hiding in the caves and family life, the addictions, the habits and so many things have crawled into us and have even I told them: why don't you come down from your hidings ? They said: "it's Nirmala Yoga 32

 belter we're safe here". Their legs are bro- think, that they're wasting their energy and ken, hands are broken or some, people your energy. Why don't they accept that have naver tolerated, according to them, for years together they have been doing After twelve years, I think during all my stay all this nonsense and they have achieved in England perhaps. they'll be better off to nothing ? My main cancern is that why come down. People won't hurt them so don't they see it ? Why are they so mass much. One fellow was beaten up so much minded ? Why don't they see it clearly that that all his backbone was finished. these people haven't achieved anything and what are they going to achieve ? What my So, real gurus are just hiding and the fake father did, my grandfather did, my great- ones are out, are just money-making proposi- grandfather did I am doing the same thing tions, a simple thing as that. Because they i have not achieved anything as they have know how to pamper your ego to play upon your weaknesses to make you more imbedded into that net, into that mire, and take full advantage of you, that's why they are there. think like that. Every religious person should People don't like it, people get identified with think that this religion, if it has any meaning, that kind of cheat but that's not feedom. not achieved anything.-why not? Every scientific minded person should is not giving any fruits, what is written in them ? In the Islam-if you read, I don't Freedom is when you really get your own know if you people have read the Koran-but powers which are withinyou. You have got it's written that there'll be a day of resurrec- your own powers, you have got to become tion. That resurrection has to take place has your own guru. You must reach that point from where you guide yourself in such a way about that ? nobody wants to talk. They'll that the guiding lines become part and parcel only talk about the day of the doom because of you. That means in your Central Nervous then they can have nice money, you see ? System, in your conscious mind. you must Frightening you. The day of the doom is feel the existence of the Spirit. been said by everyone of them: but what coming, better give money. As if God under- stands your bank accounts. You haven't paid any money. to become human being so far. This is what is the evolutionary process; this is what you have to achieve and all other Every such artificial type of thing is accepted talks are absolutely of no value. Let us face by reasonably wise, sensible, educated, mature it. There's no flowery talk needed for it, people and they find it impossible to get out nothing of the kind : it's a doing. Supposing of. This is the clubbing, this is a mass state. I tell you: alright you have to make such and such cake, you mix this mix that; it's alright. But, when you mix that you find think for yourself. God has made you an a person is created out of that. Another per- individual. You are like an egg which is an son can say: alright, I'll mix this, I'll mix that individual-we can say. You have to think and you will have the cake and there's no about it to judge about it to find out; and cake, nothing I Then what do you eat? So all then, you become the collective and that these talks and all these organization and everything has no meaning of anykind. It Aware. Collectivity doesn't empower you to be the Spirit. I'm reaction. Like ten people start dancing-oh, not here to denounce anybody or to make that's a very good cult, you know? What do anybody look low or anything. But what I they do ? They just stand up and dance. I No, youare an individual just now but means you become aware of your collectivity. doesn't mean mass 33 Nirmala Yoga

 mean for that, how much do you have to pay? between Optic Chaisma and how the Sahas- Only ten pounds that's all. You just go there, take out your clothes and dance, finished: thing the Light of Spirit has to come to you get to God. Very simple matter and peo- enlighten all that. that's all, nothing more ple believe in it. I tell you, people believe needed. You have to just choose that sensi- in it. They believe in all these tall stories. tāra is made so beautifully. Is amazing. Only biy, that you have to become the Spirit. You cannot force on the organization of The simplest thing they have to see: have we become our Spirit? A simple question we should ask ourselves: Is it for our Spirit? Is there any rapport established with the Divine Power. Have we felt the Divine Power any- where? And when we are not keeping our minds steady on this point, we can be ruined. This whole, the structure, gets spoiled which gentle, so kind, so compassionate, that you is a very delicately made, beautifully made, would hate to change that organization, but God has made it the best of all, better than all the trees put together, all the animals put who think that that is the ultimate you have together: everything is the epitome of His to seek, it's all arranged to enter into the Creation-is Man. Except for one thing: that Kingdom of God. The time has come. This is he has been given freedom to choose; it had to go, that had to be done. If you don't give freedom at this stage, people who deny and the other day one book how can you anter into complete freedom? was saying that He never resurrected himself; If you do not know how to use your freedom, these human beings I must say 1 They scienti- supposing a man who doesn't know how to fically get proof, scientifically 1 Can you ima- use his freedom, he goes about with daggers; gine ? Now, how can you prove scientifically, killing this, killing that, killing that person God anything. He is on his own, His organiz- ation is on his own. Only thing you can do is to enter into His Kingdom and become a part and pracel of that blissful domain. You would never like to change it either. It is so wonder- ful. It is so protective, it's so loving, is so we dol We try to organize God. For people the Day of Resurrection. These are the days of resurrection. What Christ did-there are many 1 don't understand. According to them He was, He didn't die; of course He cannot, He's be an eternal being, I know, that part is correct. But He never died. He died the way a Divine killing himself, it can starts or both ways. There are some who start killing others or start killing themselves. Will you give him freedom? Even in the normal way has to die, but He resurrected himself as a we don't give him freedom to go about killing Divine has to resurrect. He definitely resur- others or killing himself. So he is to have rected himself. But the scientists were not that idea of using his freedom towards him- there to see. Then He descended again, that's self and towards others; and that freedom we a different point altogether but He definitely resurrected His Divine body; but He had such a beautiful confident personality after that, have to use and if we have used it properly, wisely, then there's no problem that wherever He went He left a great im- Because he's made so beautifully. I told print on people. And this is the trouble that you how Kundalini is placed. How She's they're trying to prove everything scientifical- placed at the safest spot and how She's coiled ly. You cannot prove Christ's resurrection and how the centres are kept so subtly within scientifically, that's why you cannot deny it your Medula Oblongata in your spinal cord. How it is protected and how this Agnya Cha- kra is placed between Pituitary and Pineal either. What He did on the gross level, at that time, it has to happen in a subtle level within you. That he has done-that's why Nirmala Yoga 34

 ourselves, because it is our loss. nobody they say: "you have to pass through Him". He has done that for us. He has really done alse's, that so far we have not achieved that it and we have to see that happening within state of Spirit and that in all humility we are us. Not by saying that now we follow going to achieve it. We have to achieve it, we Christ, alright you have one big flag, colours have to accept that this should happen to us, of Christ. you see. You are all Christian soldi- ers walking and "we believe in Christ and we ral. It's just in the event that at this time it sre all resurrected." No, you're not:-you're had to happen. It's very simple thing. There's not-At the most if you're a good Christian, or a good Hindu, or a good Muslim, good; again yourself much. But even if you have, the | say. then you're well balanced for your resurrection. But, if you are not even that. and work it out. This is the blessing of the then it's problem for me, problem for you. But Đivine where you become the Spirit and then if you had been a good Jew or a good you reach your absolute form where there's Christian or a good Hindu in the sense that you have kept your sustenance all tight, you have been a normal person, you have gone through the Central Path and you have kept that you just start feeling a cool breeze to the Central Path of Life, you're not an extremist, not a person who does anything and then you ask a question: is there God? abnormal, normal person, then you're very And the breeze is much more. If you ask good for Realizaion; it's as simple as that. This is so simple. It's so simple and so natu- no complication if you have not complicated Divine Power knows how to dişentangle you no doubt about it. If you want to know what happens is flowing into your hands or from your hands; about a thug: Is he a good man? It stops. The rapport is established with your Spirit. It But the way people have carried this speaks to you as a cool breeze in the hands. This cool breeze in the hand is the energy of simple method of organizing people into better life into something so absurd-like hating each the Spirit fiowing by which your disease get other, killing each other or all sorts of things. cured, you can cure the diseases of others. you know. I mean it has nothing to do with you can raise the Kundalini of others and give them Realization and you can enjoy the beauty of Nature; not thinking about it or God. And: "we are the chosen ones, and we are the best, and we are the selected", this is self-certificate, You see if I say I'm the aradu- grossly valueing it but just enjoying it in a ate of the Cambridge University, how long full way. This is the short and sweet but it's can I befool myself and others, which l'm such a long story taught a thousands of years not. In the same way we have to be really. back and today it is just reaching its climax. get our certificate from ourselves that we are reborn, not from anybody else. the blossom time has come for this story and if the Seekers cooprate l'm sure it will work So, we boil down to this point that we out, have all the hapes. have to be really really very honest with May God bless you all. Nirmala Yoga 35

 The Speech of Dr. (Mrs.) S. Swaminathan (Shri Matajis sister) Honourable guests, who have graced the Nirootāi was most zealous about accepting occasion of my elder sister's 60th birthday, this change. my younger brothers and sisters and Sahaja Yogi brothers and sisters. This evening, I consider myself fortunate for getting this meetings of the then Congress, and Iremember oppartunity of saying a few words about that Nirootai held similar meetings at home Nirootai. We call her Nirootäi whom you for us and imitating the laders she delivered know as Mataji Nirmala Devi. Our mother had to take all of us in the car whenever she and father had to attend the speeches from the "Home-Stage". We sang Nirootai and myself, we both grew up to- the song "Charkha chala chala ké Léngé gether and hence I had the privilege of being closely acquainted with her virtues and the by turning the spinning wheel). We accom- dynamism of her personality. We were born panied our mother for picketing the wine- when India was a slave country, yot, being shops. But most important were our proces- born in an affluent and well-to-do family we did not suffer from any want or other problems "Vänar-séna" (Army of the monkeys) especially of life. Our childhood days were spent happily for the children. With the tri-colour flag of and merrily. We were born at Chhindwära Congress in her hands Nirootäi led these i.e. my elder brother Mr. Narendrakumar Salve,-who must be known to you all where we stayed. because today he is the Minister for Steel and Mines,-Nirootai, myself and my younger understanding and purpose of achieving brother Mr. Balasaheb Salve, we four were something in life and not merely to satisfy born at Chhindwära; and the younger three one's ego, was evident in Nirootái, right from brothers and sisters were born at Nagpur, her childhood. Swarājya Lênge" (we shall win our freedom sions. Bapu (Gandhiji) had introduced a processions which went round the locality Thus "leadership" and that too with full because our tather shifted to Nagpur in the year 1928. In the year 1930, which is supposed to be the most crucial year in the Started, Nirootäi participated very actively. I struggle for the Independece of our Nation, do not know if she has told you of an incident, our life-style underwent a total change, Our of this period, that she had to be rusticated father renounced his title of "Rao-Sahib" to join the Freedom movement. We were too young to understand the significance of the refused to co-operate with the movement. change that was coming in our way of life i.e. our clothes, our activities etc. but perhaps received by the Principal of the college, he, due to an inborn love for freedom, we wel- being a close friend of our father. proceeded on comed the change and never opposed it. All leave. The Vice-Principal came to our home of us accepted the change but, amongst us, and met our mother. Father was already in jail In 1942, when "Quit-India" movement from the college, for presenting bangles to the son of the Director of Public Instructions-who When the orders of the rustication were This is the Enlish iranslation of the speech in Marathi delivered on the occasion of the 6lth Birthday Celebra- tions of Shri Mataji at Bombay on 22nd March 1983. *Tai-this word is suffixed to the name of an elder sister, in Marathi, to show respect for her. Nirmala Yoga 36

 and hence he requested our mother that she right-values, importance of an ethical life and should withdraw Nirootäi's name from the spirituality, laid by our parents in our child- college otharwise her educational career would hood. be ruined. Mother discussed the whole issue with Nirootäi, who fearlessly told mother and the Vice-Principal that she would never allow her nama to be withdrawn, She would much Every evening, after returning from the court, our father played the organ and taught us Bhajans (devotional-hymns) of all religions.. We are Christians but I do not remember any special preference for Christian hymns alone. Being fond of music I was specially interested in learning these Bhajans. The first Bhajan rather accept the punishment (of the British Govt.). What a sacrifice! A girl taking such a bold decision at the age of 15 or 16 was not a trifling matter. Such decisions can be prompted only by some inner inspiration, taught was "Bande Jap Man Har Giridhari They cannot be forced and hence these inspi- (0 mind remember Har (Shiva) and Giridhari le. rations coming from within like the "Word of Divine can lift a person to very high and lofty levels. We were very lucky in having very understanding parents who never suppres- sed our inner urges. Ihave already men- bed in us right from our childhood and with tioned that our father was already in jail. this background, I am not in the least sur- Correspondence with the family was not allo- prised that "Sahaja-Yoga" has become the Shri Krishna) in Räg (melody) Darbari Känarā, He even made us sing these Bhajans indi- vidually, Thus reverence for all religions was imbi- do not know if you are aware of the "life-mission" of Nirootai. wed. hardships of the families of the freedom- fighters bafore independence, because today you are sitting here in a free India and many motherly love for all. We are much impres- of you may have been born in Independent sed and moved by the deep faith and the India. We received a letter which our father genuins devotion that all of you have for her. had put in the pocket of the coat which he I have been obsarving since yesterday how had sent for the laundry-wash, He had written earnestly and tenderly you want to look after "1 have read in the papers, Heartiest Congra- her. I remarked jokingly that I cannot be tulations to Nirmala". Thus, even then all of certain that even my daughters-in-law would us were proud of her. Just the other day some persons who are writing the biography of a freedom-fighter had enquired about Nirootai's contributions to freedom struggle, loving considerations and pure-affection is a because she and a friend of her's had dared to travel about with this freedom fighter as his if we are asked to be selfish, to distrust each daughters only to save him from being other and to be violent and destructive. But Har another distinguished quality is her look after me so well! Therefore in a world like this, to come across such deep faith, genuine devotion, rare experience. We shall collect by thousands arrested. we shall hesitate to come forward if we are asked to love each other, care for others as our own, and respect a human-being just because he or she is a human being. Even after her marriage Nirootāi did not change and only because of her such unequivo- cal qualities she has béen able to collect a big family of so many of you. According to me she has been attracted by "Sahaja Yoga" challenge-a challenge not only on the national mainly because of the solid founda'ion, of level but also on international level, and for Therefore Nirootai has accepted a real Nirmala Yoga 37

 I am grateful to you all for giving me an this we, brothers and sisters are very proud of her. She has given ma an idea of her work opportunity for expressing my thoughts before and the people who have become her disci- you and on behalf of our family members I ples. Why not ? Because I firmly believe that pray to God that Nirootai should be blessed "goodness" is the essential quality of a human-being and therefore whatever tempta- contribute in our way in her mission of "Sahaja tions may come his way he ultimately chooses Yoga". I am sure all of yau will also co- the right path and comes to realise that operate with her. And in the end, besee- spiritual-life and God are not myths but are ching the Lord to help her. I conolude my with a very very long life. We shall try to speech. Real! WE PRAY "Poetic Genius" did Blake inspire, A Higher light, the coolest fire, Did rend the callous curtain hung, Ignorance gone ! thy knell is rung- So too, sweet luminescent Chime Speak forth in me the truth though rhyme. That that, Etheric translucent thing. Might take form through pen and bring, Her light and love more into play. And hasten forth that Dawning Day- Shri Durga Ma, with Hands untold, let forth thy drama, now. unfold. And whatever help that wwe might be, Let us be that, Shri Mataji. -Pavan Keetley (Sydney) Nirmala Yoga 38

 SHRI WILLIAM BLAKE-I "AND DID THOSE FEET..." One evening Shri Mataji brought some Sahaja Yogis together at Her home in London. There were a number of Italians who sang William Blake was the Archangel Michael come to this world out of Pure Love, for us. He exists inside each one of us, we can approach him through meditation to reveal very beautifully to Shri Mother. Afterwards his qualities of compassion. He is often She asked the English to sing Jerusalem, portrayed as slaying Satan. But Blake pain- ted the Archangel Michael binding Satan. In recalled how the building of Her house was this picture Satan is shown as one who described by Blake, and revealed that he was has reverted to reptile nature, the lowest Shri Bhairava. Much of what he has written animal drive in human nature. Shri Michael is is as seen from left-side, the workings of not slaying but binding the reptile. Thus time and space as he has tried to explain inside us He is the power by which we over- them to us. Shri Mother described how come the base aspect of our human selves on time acts as a curve, and while you are one left side. Blake's great Hymn. Then Shri Mother with it you cannot see what is ahead waiting for you. If one ascends above it, which may be achieved by one's growth in Sahaja Yoga, In his writing also Blake describes these things, how Satan personifies the Sensationalism in humanity. human nervous system is like a vast living one may see past and future quite clearly, if coral reet-a giant Polyp. Satan is its dark one chooses to. So it is with Shri Mataji, so it potential. Shri Michael is who deals with this was with Shri Blake. Rebel Nature not with weapons but with compassion, sad that anyone should fall from their state of grace. Michael weeping at the conflict in Heaven, cular, but also other parts of the world. not and the lack of repentance of those who have as they appeared in his day. or may still come against the Divine order. Then the appear to us today. But as they were in two are shown locked together in a fixed their innocence and will be again in the new space-left side as opposing forces. The whole In his works therefore, Shri Blake describes many parts of London and England in parti- Blake describes Shri Jerusalem, Nature. He often says that all things had their beginning on Albion's Rocky shores and this being their Primordial Through these revelations of Blake's, we can understand that the left-side can be will end there. Traditionally we associate enlightened by compassion for others and for Albion with England, or Britain as a whole. ourselves, the understanding that the key to the doors of heavens is forgiveness-When on left side we recognize our wrong deeds Mother's residence is, were the most ancient and ask to be forgiven. This must also be parts of the city where God and Man dwelt done to correct our relationship to the collec- together. To look at them now, one may not tive. Until we recognize our mistakes we realise their Holiness, yet the earth on which cannot assume our place within the assembly Selfridge's and Park Lane are built is most of Saints. All this is described most fully and sacred and has felt the touch of lord clearly in the opening passages of "Milton". Ganesha's Lotus Feet in Ancient times, as it It may be aimed at English people especial!y does again today through the incarnation of where laft-side is most attacked and weakest. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi. He describes how the area of Hyde Park, Oxford Street and Kensington, where Shri 39 Nirmala Yoga

 Blake combines past and future as oné change. As the people of Britain awaken to huge Tapestry woven in space by the Holy their own role in the Divine plans, no doubt Mother. Only when the tapestry is completed Blake's work will also come to fruition as part will the plough and harrow be passed across of that self-discovery, the whole story is the nations. He describes how in other there of how the new Jerusalem will be raised realms the preparations are progressing furi- ously for the Harvest to come. That was in his day. Now through Nirmala Vidya and the advent of Shri Mataji we know the harvest has begun. He describes the Eager- ness of the celestial beings to purge the earth of Bādhā and how they are restrained so that the humans may have a chance to grow show us. As Sahaja Yogis we can learn to maturity. Elsewhere he states that the most through meditation and thoughtless time allocated to Satan in which he may avoid judgement is 6000 years-the period of intellectual machinery when we read Blake's Kali Yuga, from the time Shri Krishna left the earth. Now this t00, as we know through and humility we would assume before any Shri Mother's Grace, is at an end. on the site of the old, beginning with the foundations in Lambeth where the first permanent Sahaja Yoga Centre in Britain was established. This introduction to Blake has covered a few essential points of all that he has tried to That means laying aside our awareness. poems and approaching them with the respect other sacred writing. There is a short anecdote from Blake's Another passage especially worth men- tioning here is where he describes Mother life with which we might round off the article. Mary weeping,. Her tears flow throughout the earth and wherever they touch people are Catherine. Critics have read in this the material transformed. This is the Chaitanya by Shri poverty of the Blakes but to Sahaja Yogis it Mahalakshmi's Grace. It concerns a statement made by his wife will be an indication of something quite different. This is it: A visitor to their home. So it is that in our heritage in England we seemingly not a very polite visitor, remarked have a great divine personality. hava struggled to understand his writings for Scholars upon the absence of soap. Catherine, a simple woman, replied "Mr. Blake's skin don't Dirt. over a century now, and he has come to be regarded as a problematic figure in literature. So his work has not reached a wide public though in recent years this has begun to Om Tvameva Sākshāt Shri Mahā Bhairava Sākshāt Shri Adi Shakti Shri Nirmala Devi Namo Namah. Thou percievest the Flowers put forth their precious odours! And none can tell how from so small a center comes such sweets. Forgetting that within that Center Eternity Expands. William Blake Nirmala Yoga 40

 Shri William Blake-Il "Milton" and other Works...... One day some Sahaja Yogis were sitting at Shri Mataji's Feet in Her apartment which large areas of Mother Earth and calling them was on the top floor of a London building. "British' colonies and dependencies. Into this Shri Mataji was sitting in front of a window darkness came the blinding light of Blake's and from where Her children sat. Our Divine poetry and paintings. Blake's contemporaries Mother's form was silhouetted against the could not, in general, appreciate him either as cloudless blue sky. Shri Mataji broke the a poet or a painter. His poems were engraved silence and told us that Her physical form is on etching plates and the writing was accom- like a photograph, while what lies behind it pained by illustrations which bring aut the is vastness itseif. As She spoke, we could meaning of the text. Naturally they have see behind Her the vastness of the limpid wonderful vibrations as well! sky. were wantonly and egotistically annexing It is not surprising that no one understood William blake's writings are like this; Blake in his time, because his inspiration especially his prophetic works, which are long comes from Pure Spirit, and he wrote at a sagas in blank verse, and are considered time when men were mostly floundering in a obscure and incomprehensible by the "Ex- mire of materialism, ignorance or crippling perts" who study and intellectualise about poverty.. Some of his writings are sensitive, Blake. Blake was an incarnation of Shri moving and powerful poems in the conventio- Bhairava, When we read "Milton", or nal sense, but for Sahaja Yogis the most c relevent as guides to our present growth and are the prophetic works. Shri Mataji has revealed that "Milton" tells every- Jerusalem". two of the longest prophetic. works, we can pick out a line or two here and evolution, there which 'makes sense", and through the grace of Shri Mataji have an understanding thing about Sahaja Yoga and also that all the of the overall theme of resurrection, judg- prophetic works deal directly with Shri Adi ment, salvation and the establishment of the Kingdom of the Spirit on earth. But all this is like a group of photographs-they give a series of glimpses but not the complete of Milton: reality. Only when we are totally surrendered to Shri Maaji, and the Spirit is totally established in us both individually and col- the furnace..." lectively, will we fully understand and grasp the vastness and depth of William Blake's writings. Shakti's incarnation on this earth at this time. Take this one line from plate (or page) 6 "The Surrey hills glow like the clinkers of When Shri Mataji first came to England, She lived in Oxted in the Surrey hills south of London. At night the oranage street lights in the broad Valley of central London glowed the darkest time of the industrial revolution, like clinkers & when Our Divine Mother look- the Age of Reason and of faith in scientific ed out in that direction they reminded Her of this. The lights diffused an orange glow into Willian Blake was born in England during discovery. and at a period when the British Nirmala Yoga 41

 the Lamb, and the Lamb is Lord Jesus, the Lamb of God. Jerusalem means 'place of the Spirit i.e. the Kingdom of Shri Mataji, of the the heavens so the town and sky looked like a vast furnace. Many places in London are mentioned in Sahasrara come on earth. The oak is the tree Blake's poetry and most of these have close connections with Sahaja Yoga. Here are some which is the tree of life within each one of examples from "Milton". of England-strong and firm like the Kundaini us. The first temple constructed to a living deity was in Lambeth, and rose from the ruins of a tumbledown house there. While the Saha- ja Yogis from many nations laboured and built, "Hampstead's breadths..." There is a very active group of Sahaja Yogis in Hamp- stead. North London, Shri Mataji has explai ned that in the Spiritual Body of this Mother Shri Mataji simultaneously repaired their Earth, Hampstead is the muscle of the heart ruined Kundalinis and made strong Oak which actually makes it beat. Groves' of them. This temple is Shri Ganesha's house, Shri Mataji has said, and where She "To Stratford and Old Bow... These laid the foundation stone of the New Jeru- districts are in the East End of London, and salem. Shri Ganesha came on earth as Lord the home of another strong group of Sahaja Jesus, the Lamb of God, to open the way for us to follow Him to 'Jerusalem'. When Shri Mataji was asked whether the building "Across to the Gardens of Kensington. work by the Sahaji Yogis at Lambeth and at This refers to Shri Shri Mataji's house at Brompton Square were Mataji house at Brompton Square, Knights- indeed symbolic of the rebuilding of our bridge. The house is very near the Kensington Kundalinis by our Divine Mother, She replied Gardens, and the Tyburn Brook. (now that at last we were beginning to look at dammed up to become the Serpentine Lake) everything about this from the right angle, Yogis. "On Tyburn's Brook... the Knight's the correct standpoint. was the stream over which Bridge led the road. Here is another passage which refers to one of the former London Aahrams, at Night- So this is one side of Blake, a fascinating puzzle of names and places. But like the words of Shri Mataji, his writings are relevant ingale Lane, also in Lambeth, where the love on many levels simultaneously. For example, and collectivity really began to flow. The passage also refers to the rising of the Kun- dalini, which of course enlightens and give rebirth to each one of us, and which collec- tively became much stronger there. The Lark what does this passage mean? "Lambeth's vale, where Jerusalems, foun- ations began, where they were laid in ruins, Where they were laid in ruins from every in the following lines is an English bird which Nation, and Oak Groves rooted .. lives in the cornfields and at dawn rises vertically up into the sky where it hovers When shall Jerusalem return and over- motionless and sings a beautiful song high above the meadows. It is like the Kundalini spread all the nations? Return, return to Lambeth's vale, O buil- which rises from the Mooladhära, (earth element) into the heavens, the Sahasrāra. And this is what Lord Ganesha has shown Lambeth is a large borough of South us. He was created of Maha Virata, the most London. The word Lambeth means city of gross matter, and through His devotion to ding of human souls !" Nirmala Yoga 42

 His Mother, who is pure Spirit, is transformed why this is necessary: into that which is the finest, the pure Aum- kara or vibrations. This transfiguration is the basic theme of Blake, and here is the "All that can be annihilated must be an- nihilated That the Children of Jerusalem may be saved from slavery". passage: He later describes what we would define "Thou hearest the Nightingale begin the Song of Spring. The Lark sitting upon his earthy bed, just as the morn as the conditioning and false concepts of the t Super Ego and Ego etc. as; "This is a false Body, an Incrustation over my Immortal Spirit, A Selfhood which must be put off and annihiliated away." But the end of the poem is optimistic even though the assertion and affirmation that the Last Judgment is at hand is obvious... It reads thus; Appears, listens sifent; then springing from the waving Cornfield, loud He leads the Choir Day: trill, trill, trill tril, Mounting upon the wings of light into the Great Expanse: Reechoing against the lovely blue and shining Heavenly Shell. His. little throat labours with inspiration: *Rintrah and Palambron view the Human Harvest beneath. every feather On throat and breast and wings vibrates with rhe effluence Divine." Their Wine-presses and Barns stand open, the Ovens are prepared. The wagons ready: territic Lions and Tygers sport and play. All animals upon the Earth are prepared in all their strength To go forth to the Great Harvest and Vintage of the Nations," In the poem' Milton' the personality Milton represents the seeker, who is originally created by the Divine and at the beginning of the poem is found in the heavens. then, descends into matter and ignorance and ultimately is again raised up to a state of realisation3B If an ordinary human reads Blake, it is both an uplifting and sobering experience, "What moved Milton, who walked about If a Sahaja Yogi reads what he or she knows in Eternity to be the words of Shri Bhairava the effect is very profound indeed. The message is loud and clear on every page: Shri Kalki, the second coming of Christ is imminent, so either trans- One hundred years.. ..to go into the deep, her to redeem and himself to perish?" "her" is the Spirit, and "himself" is that which is not form or be destroyed. We must become totally surrendered instruments of love and compas- the Spirit, that which must be transformed sion, and then the Kingdom of heaven is there. and left behind. Like all true seekers, for But on NO ACCOUNT must we sympathise this end Milton will undergo all the tests and with Satan (negativity) in any way whatsoever purifications on the path. He will: or: "He who will not defend Truth, may be "Bathe in the Waters of Life" (the chaita- nya, the vibrations,) and he will even go to Eternal Death". by which Blake means the death of all that is not Spirit. Blake explains compelled to Defend a Lie, that he may be snared and caught and taken. 43 Nirmala Yoga

 Blake describes violent and cataclysmic what great blessings we have been given, events within the collective nature of Man what an honour it is to witness and be actors and without in the material world and we in this episode of the drama of creation, and must accept as truth. given the identity of the writer. However, as Sahaja Yogis we all who has given us such a change to be known that deep down all we seek is the purity of the Spirit. and that She is our com- of the Divine at this time long foreseen by our assionate Mother who will nurture and protect wise forefather such as Blake. this spark of eternity within us. Consequently we need only know inner joy, despite the possibility of external change and transfor- mation all around. how endless is the compassion of Shri Mataji, transformed into instruments and servants On the back of the last plate of "Milton" was written in pencil by the poeti "Father and Mother. I return now from flames of fire tried and pure and white". The Father and Mother teferred to must be Lord Sadashiva and Shri Adi Shakti. In the last plate of "Milton", the Virgin says to Milton: In the second verse of the hymn we call Jerusalem', (actually the opening lines of the poem "Milton,) are the following lines: "I will not cease from mental fight, Nor shall my sword sleep in my hand Till we have built Jerusalem "Thou goest to Eternal Death and all must go with thee". So let us the Sahaja Yogis offer this prayer to Shri Mataji that we too may return to Her and rise above Blake's "Furnaces of aftliction", "the dreadful thunde:ings" and "the mortal and perishing delights" and all the other rich and evocative descriptions of In England's green and pleasant land." (The writer begs forgiveness if the next sentence is not an exact quotation of our Divine Mother). After hearing the hymn, Shri Mataji laughed gently & said to us: "How can I put swords in your hands if the world today as Shri Mataji has given your hands are shaking? That was three years ago now, and some of us present were still very unsteady at that time. Perhaps now we are beginning to see a little of the titanic battle that our Beloved Mother is fighting for Bhairava sakshat. Shri Adi Shakti Shri Mataji us. After reading Blake, let us remember Shri Nirmala Devi namo namah. us realisation and taken us to the Kingdom of Jerusalem, and Sahaja Yoga. Om twameva sakshat, Shri Mahakali, Shri FROM WILLIAM BLAKE He who binds to himself a joy. Doth the winged life destroy, But he who kisses the joy as it flies Lives in Eternity's sunrise. If you trap the moment before its ripe The tears of repentance you'll certainly wipe But if once you let the ripe moment go, You can never wipe off the tears of woe. Nirmala Yoga 44

 Shri Mataji's advice Try to understand thus: As you enter youth, leaving behind the childhood, you have the interests of young age ie. your I told you, in Sahaja Yoga. how you go into the state of thoughtless awareness. After the unison with the Spirit (Tadatmya) one can attain the stage of vicinity with God service, business, family etc; you take interest (Samipya) and the God realization (Salokya). But on achieving the unity with the Spirit, person's interest itself changes. and ail other childhood only in these interests drop off. old experiences fade away and your attention goes towards new ex- periences. Or try to understand this way Just by achieving the state of unison with Say, a person is not interested in music, and somehow he has become interested-he is the Spirit, with it's experience, a person does not wish to go into the state of Salokya and interested in classical music-then he is not Samipya. That means, when vibrations start going to enjoy any other music, let there be lowing into your hands and when you feel any concert of non-classical music. other's Kundalini and can raise other's Kunda- Your condition in Sahaja Yoga should also be similar. As regards your ether habits and lini, your chitta (attention) goes towards watching other's Kundalini and understanding likings, the fact is that they were gradually your own. You want to be alert about your and intentionally cultivated and hence those chakras and understand other's chakras. interests are deeply imbibed in you. Sahaja Yoga has brought atout a complete trans- formation within you,-you have come into a state of new awareness, you can now feel If you look at the sky, you may see--even though there are clouds-you will see many types of Kundalinis. Because, now that your attention has gone to Kundalini, whatever the vibrations and other's Kundalini, you can you want to know about Kundalini, whatever give realization to many people, you have you want to see, whatever desires you have, cured many people, you have entered into these will be revealed to you. Your interest in Kundalini grows and all other interests a new power and you are charged with it. But in doing all this there is only one shortcoming, and that is "you have not made are lost. This is based on Shri Mataji's advice given at Bombay on 27th May 1976. published in NIRMALA YOGA (Hindi) vol. VI, (March-April 1983). Full Hindi version bas been 45 Nirmala Yoga

 ảny effort and everything has happened by itself, effortlessly". Perhaps that's the reason should light a lamp before the photograph, why although many people receive vibrations apply sindur (vermilion), dip their feet in in Sahaja Yoga and also rise to a level, even salted water and sit in this fashion opening then their attention never stabilizes on Para- mātmä, Atmä, Kundalini; and repeatedly it yau do this. more than half of your problems goes to wrong things. at least for five minutes. All Sahaja Yogis, out both palms towards the photograph. If would be solved automatically. However You had asked, "What to do after getting busy you may be, it is not difficult the realization". After receiving you must to spare five minutes. All should sit like this give. It is absolutely necessary to give after Detore retiring. That will stop more than receiving, otherwise receiving has no mean- ing. And while giving. ane point-only one small point, must be kept in mind, "That the tendencies. There are many dark tendencies body, the (buddhi),-that means the "whole personality tivities. They try strongly to influence. with which you are giving such an incom- be undar their control is being under satan's parable thing, that itself should be very control. You can become Satan if you want, beautiful; your being should be very clean." There should be no disease in it. If you have different thing if you want to become Satan. any sickness-perhaps there may be some Sahaja yogis having diseases. Before coming to Sahaja Yoga you must be getting worried save yourselves from being the Satan. and wishing that the disease should be somehow cured. But thereafter the attention would not be on the sickness and you would dangers on your left and right sides. Specially be saying, "It will be alright, does matter." But it is wrong half of your catching. Within ourselves there exist many bad mind (mänas), the intellect only within ourselves, which are called nega- To or you can become God if you want. it is a I am not the Guru for that. Vou have to become God. I am the Guru if But, you should First thing to note is that on the night of new-moon and full-moon, always there are not on these two days, that is, the nights of new moon and full moon, you should sleep early. your problem, even minor, you can cure your- After your meals, bow before the photograph, self by placing your hand on that spot, you meditate, and putting attention in Sahasrāra, Whatever may be can keep yaur physical side very clean. sleep after getting into the bandhan. That means you go into the unconscious the very moment your attention goes to Sahasrāra. However, for you I have told you one remedy. As it is said, everyone must go to bathroom and clean oneself after getting up There, do yourself the bandhan and you are in the morning. Similarly, for Sahaja Yogis, it is extremely necessary to have foot-soaking treatment, at least for five minutes, before going to bed. However highly evalved you may be and you may not be getting caught-but it and surrender yourself to Him. On the night does not matter. You must do foot-soaking for at least five minutes, Even I take this treatment sometimes, (although it is not necessary for me) so that my Sahaja Yogis will also take to it. It is a very good habit. saved. During these two nights particularly. The night of new moon, you should medi- tate on Shri Shiva. You should sleep after meditating on Shri Shiva-that is the Spirit- of full moon, you should meditate on Shri Rāma and surrender yourself to Him for pro- tection. The meaning of the word Rāma- chandra is"creativity". You should completely dedicate your creative powers to Him. Thus you have to take special care of yourself on these two days. All Sahaja Yogis must do the foot-soaking 46 Nirmala Yoga

 However on the seventh and ninth days Mataji. You must be carelul about the heart of Lunar fortnights (according to the Indian chakra. May be sometimes one may get a Calendar "saptami" and "navami") you have problem on the heart chakra. You must clear my special blessings. you are getting specially these blessings from Me on these two days. Make some special arrangements so thát you can have are very dry personalities. And you cannot good meditation on these days: This is how do anything for such persons even if you you should protect yourself. Do remember that the heart chakra. But many people have no heart ! They wish to. However, if they request you, advise them to leave Hatha Yoga, relieve And whenever you are leaving your themselves of the burden of different jobs, house give yourself the bandhan; always be in and learn to love others; to love at least the pets first, if they cannot love a human being. the bandhan. You should also love everyone. If you come across someone having a catch on Agya, get into the bandhan, even with attention. Never argue with a person who's children. caught on Agya; it is a foolishness. Can you anyone. Never harm anyone. Nobody should ever argue with a bhoot? Love th children. Never be unjust to In fact you should not be unjust to beat the children. Also do not argue with a person who is caught on Vishuddhi. Never raise your hand to beat, never get angry with anyone. Particularly, Sahaja Yogis should never be angry. VWithout getting anno- Never approach the person caught on yed, they should improve everything tactfully Sahasrara ! Have no contact with him. him to improve his Sahasrăra first. There should be no objection in telling him, "Your Sahasrara is caught. Put it right." Sahasrāra keep your own instruments clean. And should be kept clean. If anyone has started catching on Sahasråra, that person should if your aims are high and if you want to rise. immediately request other Sahaja Yogis, "Do something and clear my Sahasrära". If some- one caught on Sahasrāra talks to you, you should tell him that he is your enemy. Never place. Everywhere. You may go anywhere. talk to him as long as he is caught. Tell and intelligently. Never get angry. have told you all this so that you can always keep high ideals. You will rise only Never look down. I am with you at evury step, at every At every place I am with you,; completely, in person, by mind and in every respect. When- As regards a person caught on Heart, you ever you will remember me I will be by your should help the person having catch on the Heart. As far as possible, put bandhan on his heart, let him put one hand on his heart them down. Hence be careful and look and take him to the photograph of Shri upwards. side with all my powers. It is my promise. Those who want to go to hell, I am pulling 47 Nirmala Yoga

 THE WOMAN-POWER Woman-Saviour now we muster To await they advent sure, In the cluster of thy lustre, Come and leave the earth no more? Then before thy gentle look, Swords shall quail and warriors fail, And the spear, a shepherd's crook, Shall adorn the daisied dale. Woman-power! Incarnate Love! Human Goddess come and be, If the Bridegroom's tears can move, Bride unto Humanity. Thou alone of all can Save us Let us be what thou would have us! Between 1750 and 1850 there were a series of prophecies of a Female Messiah This poem was written in 1841 by Goodwyn Barmby, the self-styled Pontiffarch, or leader, of the Communist Church, an obscure Christian sect which existed in Britain between 1841 and 1849. To place Barmby in context, he was of the generation after William Blake, and was at the end of an extraordinary period in British history. By Communist', Barmby meant commune-ist', emphasising the community of fellow-believers. A concept similar to our own "Collectivity, Barmby had an interesting concept, the 'equilibriated being'. He viewed the important issue facing humanity in his time (1840s) as beings "not of woman nor of man, but gentleness and of force" which he wished to see "united in every human individual, without relation to sex". Thus, to be a true communist or Socialist. of "the man must possess the woman-power as well as the man-power, and the woman must possess the manpower as well as the woman power. Both must be equilibriated beings", An interesting view of balance! His wife, Catherine, wrote: "We have the priest, wa therefore demand the priestess, the Woman teacher of the word, the woman apostle of God's lawl" This could merely have been a call for women Christian ministers. However, it could be a prophecy of out Divine Mother's Coming, as could the following comment by Goodwyn Barmby in a letter to a friend: "But the Free Woman who shall give the womanly tone to the entire globe is not yet manifested". The Barmbys were treated with contempt and derision by their contemporaries. After the collapse of their church in 1849, the Barmbys continued their Christian faith, though in a a less controversial manner. There have been many prophecies of a Female Messiah throughout history. This is just one. Perhaps others could be written about in the pages of Nirmala Yoga? For instance, the Joachite Reign of the Holy Ghost (Europe, 13th century AD). John Noyce, Brighton, (U.K.) Nirmala Yoga 48

 International Poojas to Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi in 1985 Date according to Indian Calender (Shālivāhān Shaka) Date according to English Calender Pooja Place 1.14th January 1985 Bombay Month-Pausha Makar-Sankrānti Fortnight- Krishna Paksha Tithi -Ashtami (8th day) 2. 17th February Month-Magh Shukla Paksha Panchami (5th day) Maha Shivarātri Delhi The Pooja of Shri Shiva. Shiva-tattva was established on the earth on this day 3. 21st March Shri Mataji's Birthday An Equinox Bombay 4. 22nd March Gudhi Pādvā. New Year day Bombay of Shälivähan Shaka Month-Chaitra Shukla Paksha Pratipada (1st day) 5. 8th April Easter London 6. 5th May Vaisakh Krishna Paksha Mahā Sahasrāra Day Vienna Ashtami 7. 2nd July Ashādh Shukla Paksha Poornima (Full-moon) Guru Pooja Paris 8. 7th September New York Shrāvana Janmāshtami Krishna Paksha Shri Krishna's Birthday Ashtami 9. 18th September Bhādrapada Shri Ganesha's Birthday Rome Shukla Paksha Chaturthi (4th day) 10. 20th October Pooja of Shri Adi Shakti and Havan on 7th day of Nav- Ashwin Geneva* Shukla Paksha Saptami (7th day) ratri. 11.3rd November Divali Pooja London 12. 25th December Christmas, Jesus Christ's birthday. Bombay* *Suggested locations, yet to be confirned. Nirmala Yoga 49

 Registered with the Registrar of Newspapers under Regd, No, 36989 OTHER FESTIVALS Date according to Indian Calender (Shalivähan Shäka) Date according to English Calender Name of the Festival Remarks 1. Vasant Panchami 26th Jan 1985 Pooja of Mother Earth Month-Magh Fortnight-Shukla Paksha, Tithi-Panchmi 15th day) Philgun Shukla Paksha Poornima (Full Moon day) a) Colour Festival Shri Krishna played colours with His 7th March 1985 2 Holi powers b) Demoness Holika was burnt. Hence fires are lit on the preceding day The pooja of Adi Shakti 3 Navaratri Pooja from 22nd March 85 Chaitra to 30th March 85 Shukla Paksha From Pratipada (1st Day) To Ashtami (8th day) Navami (9th day) 4. Shri Rama's Birth day 5 Shri Mahaveera's 3rd April 1985 Birth day 6. Shri Hazrat Ali's Birth day 31st March 1985 Chaitra, Shukla Paksha. Trayodashi (13th day) Chaturdashi (14th day) 4th April 1985 Chaitra, Shukla Paksha Coincides with Good Poornima (Full Moon day) 7. Shri Hanumana's 5th April 1985 Birth day Friday Vaishakha, Shukla Paksha Panchami (5th day) 8. Sh. Shankaracharya's 25th April 1985 Birth day 9. Shri Buddha's Birthday Vaishakha. Shukla Paksha, Poornima (Full Moon day) 4th May 1985 NOTE According to the Inainn Calender a month having thirty days is divided into two fortnights n coresponding ta waxing and waning of the maon.The first fortnight ends on Full Moon day and is knowwn as the Shukla Paksha im Bright Fortnight The other half beginning from the next day, ends on nevw moan day tin called as Krishno Pakshae dark fortnight- Tithi is the date which ate lifteen in each fortnight PUE DUXEM DI tupuodssutis alter full Moon in dark Pratrpada-The lst day after New Moon in bright fortnight or tst day fortnight tespectively. Dwitiva The 2nd Day The 14th Day Full Moon DaV TEth Day in bright foitnight) New Moon Day Th# Bth Day Ashitami Chalurdashi The Sth Day The 10th Day The 111h Dav Poomima The 3rd Day Navami Trtiya Chaturthi The 4th Day Dashmi Ekadashi Dwadashi Trayodashi The Sth Day The ath Day The 7th Diry Panchmi Shashthi The 12th Day Amivasya The 13th Day (15th Day in dark fortnight) Saptami Edited & Published by Sh. S.C. Rai 43, Bunglow Road, Delhi-110007 & Printed at The Central Electric Press, 80-D, Kamia Nagar, Dethi-110007, One issue Rs. 9.00, Annual Subscription Rs. 51.00 Foreign (by Airmail £ 7$14)



----------------------

1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Nirmala Yoga
January-February 1985
Vol. 5 No. 26
Bi Monthly
"Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns all the religions and
seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga-THE UNION
%23
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-1.txt 
 NIRMIALA YOGA
43, Bungalow Road, Delhi-110007 (India)
Founder: Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Editorial Board : Dr. S.K. Mathur, Sri A.S. Mishra, Sri R.D. Kulkarni
Representatives
CHERYL REBEIRO. 1267, Burke Road, KEW 3101. VICTORIA,
INGE KELLY, Gartnergasse 17/10, 1030 VIENNA
:LORI & CARY HYNEK, 3151, Heather Street, Vancouver, B.C. V5Z 3K2.
ALEXANDRE PICOVSCHI, 175. Av. Ledru Rollin PARIS-75011.
ANTONIO SARACINO, PIAZZA E. MILLO 9 e/2. 00 122-109, OSTIA LIDO.
Australia
Austria
Canada
France
Italy
ROMA.
: M.B. RATNANNWAR, 13, Merwan Mansion, Genjewala Lane, Borivali (W)..
BOMBAY-400092.
India
:JUAN ANTONIO DELGADO, Avenida De Burgos, 30, 1, A, MADRID-28036
Spain
:CHARLES & MRS. MAGDA MATHYS. 5, Chemin Des Mouldins.
1256. Troinex (Canton de Geneva).
: GAVIN BROWN, Brown's Geological Information Services Ltd., 134 Great
Portland Street, London WIN 5PH.
ALAN NAPPER, 9A Stonehill, Street, Somerset tel. Street 45940.
JOHN NOYCE, 71 Richmond St Brighton. BNI 8GR.
:CHRISTINE & MICHAEL PETRUNIA, 270. Jay Street (APT. 1-C),
BROOKLYN, NY-11201.
URSULA SEHLMEYER, 191 Canal ST. #23 SAN RAFAEL. CA-94901.
Switzerland
U. K.
U.S.A.
CONTENTS
Page
1.
1. Editorial
2. From Shri Rāmadasa's 'Dasbodha
4. Sahaja Yoga works only by keeping the Mother pleased
5. Discipline & Devotion for the fight within
10
16
6. Shri Blake's poem: The Seven eyes of God
7. Sickness and its Cure
17
8. All is so beautifully made
9. Speech of Dr. (Mrs.) S. Swāmināthan
29
36
10. We Pray (Poem)
38
11. William Blake-
39
41
12. William Blake-Il
45
13. Shri Mataji's Advice
48
14. Woman Power
15. Poojäs to Shri Mataji in 1985
16. Festivals
49
4th Cover
Front Cover: Shri Mataji, during the weddings at Bordi, 15th February 1984
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Editorial
In the last issue, under this column, 2 verses from the twellth chapter of the Geatá
were considered, wherein the Lord has described the qualities that make ā devotee dear to
Him. It is desired to discuss another two verses from the same chapter
यस्मान्नोद्विजते लोको लोकान्नोद्विजते च
हर्षामर्षभयोद्वेगैर्मुक्तो यः
अनपेक्षः
सर्वारम्भपरित्यागी यो मद्भक्तः स मे प्रियः।॥ १६॥
प्रियः ॥१५ ॥।
119211
गतव्यथः ।।
शुचिदंक्ष
उदासीनो
Yasmanno dvijaté loko lokānna dvijaté cha yah
Harsha-marsha bhayodvé-gair mukto yah sa cha mé priyah. 15
Anapékshah shuchirdakshah udaseeno gatavyathah
Savā-rambha parityāges yo madbhaktah sa mé priyah. 16
"He who is not the cause of annoyance to the world and who never feels offended with
the world, who is free from delight and anger, perturbation and fear, he is dear to me.
He who craves for nothing, is pure within and without, is alert and uneffected by any
distraction and who renounces all undertakings at the very beginning, that devotee is
dear to me.
Interaction with the world causes conflicts of interests, which generate emotional
reactions. Disregarding others' interests in furtherence of one's own, makes the person
a source of annoyance to the world.
with the world.
In the opposite case, the person is offended
Succass in achieving what is desired brings delight, whereas the
possibility of losing the possession causes fear. Aggressiveness may emanate from the fear
of losing what ane is already possessing, or from the possibility of others acquiring what one
likes to have. The delight of getting a desired object can be followed by the fear of
losing it.
Interests originate from attachments. Attachments are for the objects that give pleasure
to sense-organs, which in turn are supposed to satisfy the desires arising in the mind. The mind
functions in conjunction with the organs of knowledge. Desires arise as thoughts, from the
impressions of gross pleasures enjoyed in the past which are stored up in the left-side. Enjoying
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-3.txt 
 the satisfaction of fulfilment of, a desire, becomes the further cause of another desire and the
mind is the enjoyer. Desires should not be suppressed as that would cause overactivity of
right side. At the same time enslavement to them has to be avoided. One should
therefore evolve into the state of the desireless mind. Catches on the chakras may activate
past impressions into desires, as also identification of the chitta with an external object of
gross pleasure would awaken corresponding dorment impressions. It appears that the
process may cause attention to project out and vice versa.
No desires would arise in the still or calm mind which is actually the state of balance
of sympathetic N.S., which is also the state of thoughtless awareness and wherein the chakras
would be cleared of all catches. In this condition, one rises above all the feelings of cravings,
fear, perturbation, delight, sorrow etc.
Sustaining and growing in this state is of utmost importance, wherein, with the attention
fixed within, one is the witness to all happenings and has no distractions This is the state of
purity and would last so long as one's attention is not disturbed. Disturbances may come from
within due to movement of attention to left or right sympathetic or from outside. Also there
are distractions (as described by Pätänjali), which would obstruct the meditation, such as
mental laziness, doubt, lethargy, false perceptions, clinging to sense enjoyments, non-attain-
ment or non-retention of concentration ete. We thank our beloved Mother for teaching
us various Sahaja remedies to overcome these obstructions. Nevertheless, alertness
to apply the Sahaja methods is essential. It is therefore important to fix the goal viz. to
improve the state of meditation and prolong it as much as possible. Thereafter, every act
can be viewed as conducive or otherwise to the attainment of the goal and efforts can be
made to get over temptations for comfort and sense enjoyment, the movements of attention
can be watched, to quieten the complaining mind etc.
Outsida the state of maditation alertness is required for correcting the imbalance of
sympathetic, clearing the chakras, and for negating every desire and thought, or every object
to which the attention is attracted, as false and non-existent. Altertness is necessary to avoid
mental aberrations, such as anger, dasire for sensual-pleasure, attachment, temptations.
conceit, jealousy-known
Nirmala Yoga, No. 20, March 84 pp. 04.) One may have inherited these to some
extent from previous life and hence these would form a . These
reside in the company of mind and ego and are strong when the attention identifies itself
with the body. The mind which may become calm in the meditation, may get disturbed as
various thoughts and desires come to surface. One should therefore discriminate, through
the intellect (the buddhi) that only the Atman is real and rest everything including body
mind, ego, intellect is unreal, and the reality becomes manifest only in the state of thought-
less awareness. However in the moment of complacency identifications take place unnoticed.
For every such mistake, it is advisable, to pray for forgiveness of Mother and for giving
strength and alertness to control the attention. It is felt that attention could be engaged in
maintaining the thoughtless awareness.
The feeling of doership of actions would induce reactions corresponding to expecta-
tions. Negating the results at the very beginning of an action would save one from its
possible effects. It has therefore been suggested that all undertakings should be renounced
at the very beginning. This could also be achieved by dedicating them to God and also
through a firm conviction regarding one's role-which should be of an instrument employed
as 'shad-ripus' (six enemies). (Please see Birthday Puja,
SI
part of oe's nature.
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-4.txt 
 by the Supreme. Bread-winners for families should know that God-Almighty is competent to
feed any number of mouths and they should feel humbly thankful to Him for entrusting
them with the job:
Even in Sahaja Yoga, expectations do arise in the minds, unnoticed, about possible
appreciation by Mother of good vibratory condition: or good remarks from other Sahaja
Yogis for a job done. In such moments the buddhi (intellect) should remind that good
vibratory condition is Mother's gift and that She is the real doer of the job, and anybody else
could also have been employed by Her. Hence the prayer:
कायन वाचा मनसेंद्रियोर्वा । बुद्धयात्मना वा प्रकृति स्वभावात ।।
करोमि यद्यत सकलं परस्म्य । आदि शक्रय इति समपंथामि ।
Käyéna vāchā manaséndriyorvä
Budh yatmana vă prakrti svabhävät
Karomi yadyat sakalam parasmai
Adi shaktyai iti samarpayümi
Whatever I do with body, speech, mind, and other senses knowingly or unknowing by
or through nature, directly or indirectly, I dedicate it to Adi Shakti.
Let us all tell ourselves that every moment that goes outside the thoughtless awareness,
with attention involved in the Avidya (ignorance) is away from the Lotus Feet of Adi-Shakti.
According to Adi Shankarãchärya, the proximate worship of Mother's Feet is not possible for
the fickle-minded. But Mother has granted that to us out of limitless love and compassion
for us. for which sages of ancient yore had to perform so much penance. Let us now
perform our penance in the form of meditating upon Her Lotus feet which the Param
Parameshwari having Her infinite forms beyond human understanding has made very easy for
Lis by assuming the all loving and Compassionate form of our Mother Shri Mataji.
FROM SAMARTH RAMADASA'S DASBODHA
* If you think that you are the doer of works, you will be put to great trouble. Instead,
if you really believe that Rama (God) alone is the doer of all works, you will be successful
in your undertakings, become powerful and win fame.
Meditate and invoke the Grace of Raghunātha (God) and directly experience that the
Divine Power removes all obstacles, fulfilling all your wants
* None can change the complexion of one's body for it is innate. But if you wish to
lead the spiritual life, you shall have to cultivate the moral values.
Fill the box of life with the pearls of experience of blessings of God, and when you
joyfully offer this to HIM, you go on deriving undiminishing Divine Bliss.
Nirmala Yoga
3.
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-5.txt 
 SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
VAITARNA
Sahaja Yoga Works only by
keeping the Mother Pleased
18th January 1983
So now we are coming to the end of our
first half tour. Now we have to look back
upon ourselves and try to find out what have
and they think that they have become primi-
tive: You do not become primitive by any
means, because you are so overdeveloped
that you cannot become primitive. So by just
doing something mentally, we do not become
we achieved out of this.
We must understand that. Sahaja Yoga is
not done through brain activities. Like many
people think, that if you just tell yourself:
"You have to be like this", it will work out.
If you have to, all the time, inform yourself you might feel that by knowing some of the
that "Oh, you must get rid of a particular Aratis (arat) and things by heart. you will
problem", it will be alright. Or some people achieve weight, is not true also, because that
that.
Now this mental level can go even fur-
ther, in a subtler way, into people. Some of
think that if they tell somebody that: "This is
wrong with you and you should get wWeil, it thing within you, then they become a 'Man-
will be alright. It is not 30. because Sahaja
Yoga does not work on mental level. It works of all you must achieve a certain standard to
on spiritual level, which is a much higher have that power to create the Mantras, Also
level, than the mental level.
is also just words. But if that is an awakened
tra and then you can work it outL But first
when you say some 'ärati, it is not necessarily
So what you have to do, is to understand. possible that it will work out. Let us face the
how to correct your chakras, and you must things as they are and not to be conditioned
understand, how to work out your machines. by anything else. You have to achieve
Perhaps people stil live on mental level and certain depth within yourself to 'even" enligh-
try to solve problems on mental level. And
that's why all the problems start coming up.
Now if you have a problem with any chakras
or there is anything catching, or you find that tions, minimum of minimum. If you have cert-
there is samething wrong, no use working it ain chakras catching, then try to improve your
on any other level, but spiritual level. Some
people believe that if they have dressed up
like something, or if they outwardly behave photograph which is going to work it out,
like something, they become that. That is nothing else,-or if / am there. But once if
not true. Like we have hippies in the west
ten the mantra,
First of all you should have clear-cut vibra-
photograph: with all the
due respect to the photograph. It's only the
chakras with the
you have achieved a certain state of enlighte-
Nirmala Yaga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-6.txt 
 not know what was the situation there.
just said, "don't come". Finished, because I
knew what was going to happen. So this
clear-cut idea comes to you when your heart
is clear. But first of all people donot under-
stand that you have to work it through your
heart and not through your brain. When we
have to work out things through our brain, we
try to develop our brain, isn't it, by memoris-
nment, then you can use mantras otherwise
also, it will help you.
But first of all your heart must be clear.
I have found out in general, there are two
chakras, overwhelmingly, not working alright
in most of the western people. First is the
heart. That means, heart is not clear, that heart
is not clean, that in the heart, you still are a
small person; in the heart you have not placed ing. by practicing something, teaching our
your Mother. You have to purify your heart,
by looking at the photograph and putting all way, We try to train our brain.
loving feelings about your Mother, understan-
ding Her work and putting Her into your
heart. If the heart is not clear, then every-
brain how to think, how to go this way, that
Now we
have to train our heart in Sahaja Yoga, and
to train our heart in Sahaja Yoga one has to
know first of all that it is ernveloped either by
thing has no meaning, because it is a dark ego or by super ego. The limbic area actually
heart which is doing al these things. The
heart has to be clean, absolutely surtendered
and must try to put Me before everything else.
I can tell you because we are all Sahaja Yogis. is only mental projection, and you will feel
I cannot say this to people who are not Saha-
ja Yogis.
represents the heart. And if there is ego, heart
will always be 'so called heart. It will not
be the real heart that will be working but it
that I am doing it from my heart. That's not
so.
SO.
Now then supposing what should we do,
if we have weak heart. You might say, you
should try to sort of tell. yourseif that, that's
not good and this is not good, this and that
and all kinds of mental suggestions or auto
Now we alweys try to relate Sahaja Yoga
from our own terms, not from the terms that
belong to God. God is what He is. He cannot
change Himself: you have to change. So what-
ever we think about God, we want to put on
that. For example if someone thinks that he
tries to be nice or good to me, or if he is close
to me, 'so called' and if he thinks that he is
organizing better or he is doing this work or
that work or anything else like that, where he
feels that he is important because he is doing have to just work it out wvith your hands.
this job or that job, then one must know that Your hands are working it out and not your
all this is mental. Actually you are doing brain. So use your hands, and the methods
nothing. Whenever you try to do something, of Sahaja Yoga.
you really confuse yourself and confuse Me
also. We have seen yesterday's example.1
was sure that they had to go next day, but in the water everyday. That's important.
nobody would listen to me and they rushed Every' morning you 'must' do your meditation,
suggestions or this the way psychiatrists and
all that give you suggestions. That's again
mental. So that's not the way it is going to
work out. We must understand that, what we
have to do is to raise the left side and put it
to the right side. There is no other way. You
Now every one must have a regular sitting
away and they found that the tickets were
bought for the next day. This knowledge been with Mother, alright. This exposure is
comes to you, if you are clear hearted. As alright. You came, you saw. how Indians
yesterday, 1 said, you better not come: I did
because on mental level, we feel, we have
pIp
are and how they are light on their feet and
51
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-7.txt 
 how they are good for Sahaja Yoga. But after chakras. Now the left sided people should
seeing all that, you have to know that Sahaja
Yoga is to be worked out, is not to be thought to correct their left side, Also in food, such
out. You just cannot think about it. Whatever people should take more to nitrogenous,
you may try to do through your thought, you means, proteins and foods like that. They
cannot achieve any results in Sahaja Yoga. should take more proteins.
You have to use your hands, you have to use
your feet. you have to soak your feet in the
water, because water is the ocean. All these
five chakras or say six chakras which are.-I
say five because the one is the moolädhära to it carefully. Pure desire That means all
chakra, which is the first, and the seventh and other desires are impure. There is only one
the topmost is the brain. So in-between five pure desire and that is to be one with the
chakras, which are there, are to be handled divine, one with the Brahma, one with God.
fully, with the idea that they are basically That's the 'only pure desire. All other desires
made of matter, and these five elements con-
stitute the body of these chakras. Now these achieve that desire as the main thing. If you
chakras, if they are to be corrected, we have train your mind in that fashion then you can
to correct them by taking out all the problems develop pure desire, so all other desires will
of these chakras into the elements from which negate, gradually. Alright. Now this desire, to
they have come. For example a person, who be one with the divine, is the purest and the
is a very right sided person, so he has to give highest. and to achieve that, what have we to
a balance by the left side. Of course raising do? TO ACHIEVE THAT YOU HAVE TO
with a hand is alright, but what about the KEEP YOUR MOTHER PLEASED, VERY
element? Right sided person has all the ele- SIMPLE. Adishankaracharya has said that
ments which give heat, we can say the light, you don't bother about anything, just keep
we can say the fire. So for people, who are
right sided the light is not going to help simple person: not try to be cunning with
much. Like if you put the light before the Me or clever with Me. I know everyona
photograph and thase who are ego oriented well. So try to tell yourself that. "I should
people, if you just use the light, it is not say things, 1 should behave in a manner
gaing to work out. So what is going to that will please my Mother". Supposing
work out is the mother-earth and the water you are in Sahaja Yoga, and you
element which is cooling. Even ice is very help- doing wrong things, it is not going to please
ful to people who are right sided. So all cool- Me at a!l. "So how to please mother?"-that,
ing effects should be used for correcting your you should try to see for yourself. What kind
right sidedness. So that you cool it down. of a thing pleases me the best. I am also a
Same about food. In food, those who are
right sided people, should take to foods which ted person-who is simple hearted. For exam-
are left sided, that is carbohydrates, means ple, a person who tries to show off too much,
they should become partly vegetarians or tries to be always the first, or tries to be
quite a lot of vegetarians, and should eat always the, sort of a cinema star, I don't like
things at the most like chickens but not fishes,
not sea food because they are all hot. That's extremely shy about showing off yourself. Do
how you treat your material side of your
use again the 'deepa-is the light. or the fire
Now as far as Sahaja Yoga is concerned,
the basic thing is Kundalini, and the Kundalini
as I told you is the pure desire. Again listen
are impure. So train your mind gradually to
You have to be
your Mother pleased.
are
very simple person, so I want a simple hear-
such person. You have to be very quiet and
I show off that I am Adishakti ? I donot. I live
MEE
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-8.txt 
 like you, absolutely like you. Do try to have a good heart, clean heart cannot under-
show aft ? Then why should you try to show stand this. They cannot understand this,
off to me ? So that kind of a person is no
very difficult. So you keep your heart clean
towards your Mother. Whatever I do for you,
is just a blessing, always a blessing for you.
pood
Secondly you should not be tense with Whatever / do for you is a blessing, remember
me. There is no need to be tense. If t find that.
something wrong with you, if I scold you also.
it is for your good. If I say a good word it is
for your good. My Sahaja Yoga works caught up with most of you is your NABHI
this way. I have no malice against anyone
in the whole word, no malice at all, and no
anger for anyone in this world. I have
nathing but COMPASSION. But in compa-
ssion sometimes I
same compassion I have to speak in a very just there to please each other, specially to
compassionate manner.
Now another chakra, which is horribly
Chakra, suggesting that you are still very very
materialistic. In small smali things also we
are materialistic. It becomes subtler and
subtler and subtler. So try to understand
that matter is not so important. Matter is
have to scold and in the
please your Mother. It has no other value
So both ways it
helps you. It helps you both way s. So thank whatsoever. So you should not try to be
God that you have somebody, who will materialistic in the sense that, you see, for a
correct you at the right time, for your good. little thing. you have to do this, for a little
because you are saints, and you have come you have to do that. Nothing is important
on this earth to establish God's kingdom. if it works out, well and good and if it does
not work out well and good. So you see
Nabhi chakra is very individualistic, very
That's what you have to do. And if you are
the people who are not respected, who are not
sensible, who haven't got the dignity, who
individualistic
. It is everybody's personal
behave in a cheapish way, how can people thing. If your desire is only upto Lakshmi
point, that you want to have more money, or
accept you ?
you care for: little things. hare and there,
So this Heart Chakra is to be first lopked without any spiritual value to it, then your
after, that with your heart, desire that you
will keep your Mother pleased. Even if I an
angry with you, don't feel bad about it.
That's ane of the signs that Sahaja Yoga has
not yet developed. If 1 scold you, it is be- tattva, what you have to do is to use all
cause there is something in you, which has
to go away and which I must scold, so it will in such way that you please Me. That is very
go away. So accept it just as a correcting important. So you should not do something
point that is good for you. Some sort of a
thorn is withinyou, which has to be taken out
by another thorn and Mother has taken it out.
ONCE you start understanding the compas-
sion of your Mother you will not mind My all-like dishevelled hair-at all. That might
saying anything to you, my correcting you or be a fashion, or whatever but I don't like it.
my telling you that this is wrong, because I Always must be properly combed. properly
have to do that. Those people who donot
Lakshmi tattva, at the most might be awake-
ned. But this Lakshmi tattva has to become
Mahālakshmi tattva. That is for your ascent.
And just to get into that, Mahalakshmi
your material things and your material being
that will not please Me. That is 'very impor-
tant'. Everybody must understand.
I want you to understand that when you
dress up also, certain things I don't like at
done hair. These modern things you should
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-9.txt 
 wise just don't buy, because all kinds of non-
give up, of dishevelled hair, because this is a
sign of pucca (real) Bhoots coming in. If you sensical bhoots will be in your house and
have dishevelled hair, the Bhoots, recognize you will be troubled. So whatever you want
that person and they get into such a person,
who has dishevelled hair, So try to make If you cannot understand, ask somebody else,
your hair in a proper way. See now Indians, a Sahaja Yogi, to help you.
how they make their hair. Look at them.
They all make their hair properly, because I
have nothing to do with your hair. lam not
B hair stylist person or any thing, but it you do and if it is not so. finish it. It's nothing impor-
not have your hair properly combed and done tant "I must buy this, I have to go to Bombay
then definitely you are in for trouble. So to buy this," that's a wrong idea.
take heed to these things.
to buy you must see on vibratory awareness.
buying things just because you think, they
are cheap, or they are nice or good. So try,
to buy things which vibration-wise are alright
Now attention has to be inward, all the
Then some people have a habit of being time.I have seen that our attention is out-
untidily dressed. That's also not a good
thing. You have to be tidily dressed; clean
and tidily dressed, not because it is material, tion is inside you 'will not' buy anything that
but it is very important that if it is not so, that
kind of a material will attract all the būdhūs something, you will just throw it away. But the
into it. You must keep yourself clean and attention is outside and because of that you
neat because these badhis should not enter. just don't know how to judge a thing. Nabhi
All these ideas that have come to the west chakra has to be attended to: For that you
have come from some satanic force.
does nor look beautiful, In any way it does See Which side of Nabhi is catching. If the right
not look good for any spiritual person.
We have to change our styłes that will be Sugar represents many things. Sugar means
appealing to the divine and not to the bhoots.
We donot want any bhoot to come on us.
If you understand this simple fact, then you
may start dressing up in a way, that may not
be modern, may not be ancient, whatever absolutely a meek person. You have to be
it is. is neat, clean, spick and span. Otherwise
also if you see to the matter point more and We must learn how to talk sweetly to each
more, no use accumulating thousand and one
things, which are plastic in temperament and
nature. You should have few things which
have a spiritual value, not all extraordinary
things that we try to have, because they have
no spiritual value. So try not to accumulate
all these nonsensical things to you. Gradually suggested. For the left sided people-salt.
you will find, you will reduce. You go on Left sided people should take salt more: and
reducing. You will have simpler lives, better with salt they can solve many problems,
things and spiritual things. Whataver you
buy, see the vibrations and then buy, other- posure by which they can express themselves
ward. Because of that, what we see outside
is not good for vibrations. But if your atten-
is not good for vibrations or you will not own
donot have to think, you have to work it out.
it
side is catching, for you the sugar is the best.
also your tongue should be sweet. You should
talk sweetly. People think if you talk sweetly
to someone then people will start thinking
that you are good for nothing or you are
meek. We have to be meek and humble.
other. And if you don't understand how to
speak, then take more sugar, vibrated sugar.
That will make your tongue sweeter and
sweeter and your ideas will be sweeter about
other person than harsh or criticising.
So for the right sided people sugar is
because salt gives them a personality, a com-
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-10.txt 
 in a way, which is dignified and also not very
lethargic, So the speed of your talks or Supposing somebody says that, "Alright
behaviour or everything should be in the
centre, It should not be lethargic, nor should
be too quick and fast and hectic.
But you cannot go from autside, inside.
Mother, I have combed my hair very well so
I am alright." It's not so. Not necessarily.
Even if you have combed your hair, you might
be possessed by a bhoot. But at least there
So you will understand Sahaja Yoga is is less chances. So one has to understand
# central point of everything. Everything
that it has to be worked out. / think this
must be really screwed into your head that
If you talk Sahaja Yoga is to be worked out. You can-
too much and jabber t0o much, and if you not just tell yourself. "Oh 1 am very happy
in the centre, one sheuld try to do, not
one extreme to another extreme
are fast, try to reduce your speed by 'alertly
because it pampers your ego. or very
looking at it. You have to be alert: see"my unhappy' because it is troubling through your
speed is going up. super-ego. I am not very happy. I a nat
Au,
There is na need for me
to talk. Let me stop." But those who do not
very unhappy, that's not the way, Yau have
talk at all, also not good. So those who to be in joy. And these things can work ot
talk or those who do not talk have to under-
stand only one thing that whatever we talk,
we talk in the centre. Once you understand
You should have patience with yourself, love
for yourself and dignity that you are Sahaja
EVERY INDIVIDUAL HAS
Yogis.
TO
that, your responses to things will be absolu- WORK IT OUT FOR HIMSELF SO THE
tely central, balanced and beautiful. Now WHOLE CAN BE ALRIGHT.
There could
this is all I can say at this time because the be some pegple who are only worried
time is short also for us.
about others. Worry about yourself and see
the good paints of others.
Not the bad
We have all enjoyed our stay all over, I points, but good points of others, and also if
think so. You all have been happy all över somebody has to tell you that you must
and we have worked it out very well, and it
has been quite a lesson to all of us and also We have to be like that we have to be very
a very great experience of enjoyment. So not quick. We have to do so much work in this
to feel guilty about anything, because feeling world we have no time to waste. We have no
guilty you do not get over it.
is an escape. You must face it. You must face we have to be very prompt and healthy
it and see, correct yourself and be one with it.
That is a much better way, than to just to go
on feeling guilty or aggressive. That's not the
way, because as I said it's all mental.
organise, go fast and all that, not to feel bad.
Feeling guilty time to wvaste. Ons has to be very quick and
about it.
As you know that in this trip you have
seen that how much work I have been
doing compared to you, and I am so much
older compared to you people. Alright, you
So if you understand these few points on
these two chakras, is Nabhi and your Heart. can say that Mother you are Adishakti. It's
If you understand these two points clearly. alright. But I am your ideal. In any case
that you must keep it clear, and the expression
of that will show in your behaviour, in your
dress, in your walk, gait, talking and every-
thing outside.
if somebody is your ideal, try to become
like that person, try to imbibe those qualities
in you.
May God Bless You.
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-11.txt 
 SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
'Discipline and Devotion
for the Fight within'
Ashtami Puja
MUEDON. PARIS
30th Sept. 1984.
Today is the eighth day of Navarātri, but intelligent, and may be you do not know you
it is a great day for Sahaja Yogis because it are using it that way. And thať is what one
is the most important period. That is, the has to know that these forces are acting
seventh centre we have crossed and we are within us. They act through aur intelligence,
on the eighth centre. We need not think of they act through our emations, and they act
the Goddess what She did on the eighth day, through our physical being. So we have to
we have to think today what we have to do be very careful.
within ourselves.
When you ascend into Sahaja Yoga, we
After crossing the seventh day, after have to be very careful with our intelligence,
crossing the seventh chakra-that is the real because intelligence has capacity to cheat
ascent in your spiritual ascent. What are we itself. And it will cheat us, nobody else. It is
against us, against our own powers. So we
have to be alert and see for ourselves. So as
soon as you enter onto the eighth step you
to do on the eighth one?
It's so Sahaja that today should be Ash-
tami, because that is the day the Goddess should start seeing at yourself.
killed so many evil doers, and demons and
Räkshasas. She did it on Her own, alone.
Now these evil forces are manifesting in
human beings. They have spread out. They intelligence comes forward to render its
are within us. So we all have to fight those services-freely. "Oh ! I am my own Guru,
forces within us. The war is within ourselves, why should
is not without. First when you ascend the I listen to any leader? Why should I listen
seventh chakra, when you are on the eighth to anyone who is elder, who understands
step, you have to remember first you have to Sahaja Yoga better ? I am my own Guru!
fight those forces within ourselves.
Now, for example ,when I say the mantra
is "I am my own Guru", immediately the
I listen to anyone? Why should
It is the other way. Straightforward thing is:
I am my own Guru, I have to correct myself.
I have to use this instrument of light to correct
myself.
You are all very intelligent people; bit too
intelligent sometimes. So whatever I say you
may twist it, and may try to use it in your own
intelligence. But it is not in your well-being.
It is not for your hita' (fgn), for your good.
You want to use it because you think you are
Now the intelligence cheats again:
"Mother said that if you feel vibrations then
it's afright: and I'm feeling the vibrations,
10
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-12.txt 
 I'm alright"Again cheating.
cheating yourself I What is the reason?
You are always do it in such a way that it is absolute-
ly Asahaja. (non-Sahaja)
The reason is very interesting. I've seen
that ordinary human beings-in the West suffering from left-side problems. So I told
specially-are vary much against themselves: him that you have to light a lamp and then
Like, I'll give you an example: You tell some-
body that if you have to go to the station. had a big drum of oil in the house.-He did
take this road and you'l go straight to the
station. But immediately he'll say, "But the
problem is that how can
back is towards the station. If I walk straight burnt all the curtains ! When 1 came back
I'll go in the opposite direction". Such stupid after eight days,
things! But they say it, all the time.
There was a fellow in my house who was
take out all your bådhās every night. And we
not eat any food, he did not sleep. He burnt
all that oil in one week's time. He made all
go straight ? My the blankets black, all the walls black, and
I said what have you been
doing 7-And he looked like
He said "I was driving out the bhoots". I
said now this is the limit! So he said. "Mother
you told me".I said, "Thank God you did not
take a beacon light to burn the whole
housel"
a real bhoot!
Now if you tell them that you can sell
your car better if you go to Germany, for
example; but they say, "There's a problem,
may be the Germans may start their war
again. May be there is Hitler waiting for me,
to kill me".-Any fantastic problem, that you
can't think of, can come out of this modern with you. Whenever tell you one thing, I
brain. And you are amazed how this man is
against himself all the time!
So I have to be very careful when I talk
w this
tell you the other side immediately, because
I don't want-ifI tell you this side, you go to
the other side, to the other extreme. So all
this kind of this crazy madness, stupidness
The whole built-up is like that because
before realization you are absolutely disinte-
grated. Your heart is against your brain, and
your brain is against your liver. This is the
reason they have three types of wives; one about discipline, I must tell you "Discipline
is a love affair, one is a physical life and one has to be Sahaja".
is a wife. They are so disintegrated that mean 7- That is, first of all face yourself".
every cell can have a wife or can have a vwhat I find, the western mind, because of
husband. The nose will want another thing. its ego cannot discipline itself. If you tell
and the hands will do something else and
tongue will say something else.
I've seen.
And today when I'm going to talk to you
Now what does that
them you have to discipline, they think I'm
creating a military out of you. In a way it 'is'
a fight. It is a fight with yourself. But how
will you fight if you have no discipline?
When I met the western people, I had to
consult many dictionaries to
why they behave in such a funny manner.
They are all the time against themselves.
Now if I say, you have to get up in the
morning, take your bath, and sit down for
meditation; in a Sahaja way you have to tell
yourself plainly, "Come along, now you have
So after realization this habit becomes
even subtler. So now they use Sahaja Yoga to get up in the morning". In a Sahaja way;
to act against Sahaja Yoga itself. Sahaja is the way you turn your wheals in your car.
simple, is straight forward.. But they don't
want to have it in that way. They must
So what you do, is to, I think, the whole
Nirmala Yoga
11
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-13.txt 
 night you don't sleep. May be, this could be or three days, and the rest of the time what
Đne extreme, is not to sleep. And get up at
2 0'clock, disturb the whole house-hold, fll
your tub, and fill the whole house with
water! And sit down in that water, and you
get cold and sick. It is absurd! Why?-Because So many ladies I'm told don't take jobs once
you want to show-off. Or may be you want they marry. They say "let the husband do
to hurt yourself. Both things are wrong. job". Its very wrong. If you have the child,
Whatever has to be done, has to be done in it's alright, for the time being. You all must
the most pleasurable way. Either you will
not wash the dirt, or you will wash it such
that all the cloth will be torn.
do they do? They say we meditate. Means
what ?-They sleep and snore, that's what.
You don't need 24 hours to meditate. You
'must' have jobs, all of you. Regular jobs.
work every day. There is no day for us when
we can rest, really.
God created this world in six days and
seventh day He rested. But the eighth day
what did He da?-He started giving realization
But today as I see the people-of France
specially, the French Sahaja Yogis,- think
the discipline is lacking. I'm quite surpri5ed relentlessly. Working hard. Could you beli-
at it. The first thing it hits at is that you
eve at this age of mine, within last 2 months
within a limited amount, how much i have travelled ? Every night
4 mean money-wise. t hits you at the sleeping at about 2 O'clock, getting up at
cannot manage
money point. Like in the room there's
light, nobody will see that it is put off; there's from there, then throughout England, the
also a switch to be put off-is a practical
E went to America. came back
5 O'clock.
whole monthI was traveling-from north to
south, east to west. Next month out to
thing. I mean one must know. And the bill
is going up for nothing at all. Is an irrespon- Switzerland, to Zermatt. Then to Austria,
sibility, complete irresponsibility. That it is
the money that will be spent, is just a waste; Italy. Back to London. Had a Puja there.
and for us it is important that we live within Again back to France. Again back to London.
sensible means.-First l'Il be dealing with I've to change my house, pack up all the
gross discipline.-Now what happens, when things, go back to India, go to Hongkong, go
somebody says why the light is on, immedia-
tely they become very abstract, they say "I'm
the light". Then you should not have lights And then to America... That's the thing your
at all, there's no need to have any light! Save
all the electricity, all the light. You are the slept at 3.30. But then they told us it's one
sun, so you need not have any heating!
Munich. Then back to London. Then to
to China, come back. Then look after your
Ashrams in India. Six days. Again come back.
Mother is doing at this age. Läst night we
hour earlier. So we said alright one hour
earlier. So we slept at 2.30 I But you have to
make your body ike thạt, so that it can
stand all kinds of discomforts.
That is the way things are funny. One
must understand that on the gross points we
have to be disciplined first...We are living in
"France', not on Himälayas. So when you
live in France, we have to correct ourselves
living in France.
You know in Sahaja Yoga unamployment is
not allowed; to take this money from the
Government is not allowed. You'll be surpri-
Now the second gross point is that there zed; in England we have maximum unemploy-
are many who are not working at all. Is a
hippy style life. Or they work for two days Sahaja Yogi who is unemployed. Now you
ment in the whole world, but there is no
Nirmala Yoga
12
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-14.txt 
 must all earn sufficiently to pay for your stay.
Nobady should be a parasite.
or today-let's say. today-when get up.
What should / say? What would give peace
to others?"-But not so. Never. The mind
thinks, now, in the morning I'm going to
cated, who have no other job than that start with a big spoon, hitting everyone, "Get
Now the young people who are not edu-
of a labour class-or we call it as the garbage
up, get up, get up".
cleaners-must take to some sort of a speci-
alization, to some kind of a mastery, other-
wise people think that Sahaja Yoga is a yourself.
group of beggars. Beggars and unemployed
and miserable people.
The discipline has to come from "within
Nobody has to tell you. And when
somebody tells, you feel hurt. So I don't
But, you see, when you become your know how to tell all this that it goes in the
own Guru, you think that all the Gurus don't heart and doesnt remain somewhere in the
work, their disciples have to do all the work. air. The discipline of within is like fragrance
The Guru sits down in one place, you see, of flower it gives you complete freedom.
and the disciples look after.-But not your and it gives freedom to others.
Guru ! Your Guru has to work very hard. So
you have to be in the same pattern as your
Guru is.
See, I would say, I have certain bad habits
or good habits. Supposing I have a key,
which is very gross thing : Key. At any cost
And to hear that "nobody listens, you tell I will not put it here and there, I"ll put it at
them anything they don't do any work, they the right place. So, if the key is missing I'm
are lazy-lumps"-is very sad. Some people sure it is lost by somebody else and not by
sometimes say that these are the set of
lotus-eaters or some sort of a set of beggars very well. I cannot put it anywhere else.
or lepers who are suffering from some
horrible diseases.-Then I feel 'extremely'
insulted, you know. You are my children.
How people are going to have respect for you,
or for me, if you have no discipline?
me. I'm sure' about it, because I know myself
Are you sure about yourself ? Because you
are not disciplined, you are not sure.
Like I asked somebody "How are you"?
Confused. Now, what is that?
They've
Are you realised or not?.
been very kind, you see, to me, they think.
For French I should say, they should take
to Mauna' () means silence. Once they
open out their lips, they just go on like a bird,
I've seen: all the time chuck chuck chuck
Now the time is so short and you are
chuck..You should exchange with English. going like this: What should I feel ? So
who never talk, they need a bump on the head
to talk. You ask them ten questions, and they the sword to kill all the enemies,
would not say anything, they'll just 'stare'.
These two extremes I can't understand,
today is the day when your Mother took out
and you
have to kill the greatest enemy within your-
self-is indiscipline and irresponsibility.
Now, it's better to keep quiet, or it is
difficult for us to say something pleasant to stupidity and their indiscipline. I know of
others. So the first mantra should
"Mother teach us some nice things to say to
others". "What should I say nice tomorrow,
Funny ideas people use to justify their
be, Sahaja Yogi who would never take a bath,
-for a year at least. And he was reported to
me. And when I asked him, why don't you
Nirmala Yoga
13
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-15.txt 
 take bath, he said, "I'm detached". So Yoga. They do not create rifts and groups.
said you go and live in Himälayas with this They don't use Sahaja Yoga for fulfilling
detachment, you see others are feeling their ego...
attached. Others are feeling impossible to
live with you.
So today on this day of Ashtami, which is
a very powerful day, you assume that power
within yourself that I 'can' fight all these
You have to be kind to others. You have
to be neat and clean, is a very simple thing horrible diseases within mysef And for
that I have to tell you now. All these are the
signs of inner clear.liness.
others I will have Compassion and Love-
I will have, not others. This is the point
we miss always. They think, "Mother is
givirg lecture to others, not to me."-
So we come to the subtler side. And the
subtler side of Sahaja Yoga is "exteremely
Is Compassion. Is Forgiveness
simple'.
Is Love But the greatest of all is the Service beauty of Sahaja Yoga.
to God. We are doing the work of God. How
can we be tired ? The dynamic is flowing
through us, that Compassion is so fulfilling. cannot cross them. If you cross them. I
that love is so beautifying that how can we
not do it? We should run to do it. But we
have to know that this love has a 'tremend- burn", I can't help you. Whatever are divine
ous' urge within itself.
And that Compassion will bring forth the
There are certain divine laws. And you
cannot help you at all. Now if you say, "Now
I put chillies in my eyes. they should not
laws you must follow them. Like in France if
you drive on the right side, you'll jump in the
. So here if
For example, if you love someone, if you river. You drive right ?I se.
have a child, how worried you are about that you drive left, I will be in trouble, I must say!
child, how much you work for that child. If Because I don't understand human laws so
the Compassion is manifested, you will see
the whole world is created out of that. God another law, in America another law. Funny
has created this universe, this world, and people.
you people out of this Compassion only.
just His Compassion,
well I Like in England different law, in France
But in God's realm,-everywhere the same
law. Whether you are in France, or England,
or India, same law. Whether on this earth or
on the moon, or on the Jupiter, same laws.
Whether in human beings, animals or nature,
same law. But you know the law.
the driver, so you have to be careful. If the
driver does not know driving laws, God save
the passengers.
Somebody asked me one day, "Why did
you take this headache upon yourself?" This
hedache is so nice, is such a beautiful burden,
because there are so many possibilities. So
one has to be optimistic.
You are
But you will realize when you are opti-
mistic, you give lectures to others but not to
yourself that, " have to be optimistic of
improving myself. Optimistic in my own love. of the divine, that we have to live with self-
It's so rewarding, its so joy-giving". Such
people come up very fast, their Kundalini have to have dignity, that we cannot steal
rises very fast. They become 'beautiful money and steal things and be parasites.
people. They do constructive work in Sahaja That we cannot kill others and we cannot beat
So one must know that these are the laws
respect, that we have to be chaste, that we
Nirmala Yoga
14
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-16.txt 
 that's why. You have to attend collectively.
others and say harsh things,-they are just the
same. And that we have respect, the respect You have to be more collective, the body has
for all that is sublime. Respect for all the
saints that are Sahaja Yogis. And the respect you are not a collective person then some-
for the leaders who represent your Mother.
With all this, we are very different people. We
are a different race: We are virtuous, we are
righteous and we are proud to be that way. collective, you should meet more people, take
We are sure of everything. We know about more interest. You see, the body of your's
everything.
Compassion, of Love of God. That's what until you use it.
we are. We are not ordinary people.
to be more collective. The thing is that if
times you'll feel them on the legs. sometimes
on the hand, sometimes in the head. That's
not a good thing. You should try to be more
And we are personification of would not work out efficiently unless and
Bacause individually if you work out, it
I asked a child, "Who is your friend?" will not develop collectively, because where
She said, "Only one". I said, Why? "Because
she is a Sahaja Yogini, the rest are all ordinary self to give it to others. And if you don't
people". What about the teacher? "Very give it, if you do not work it out in a collec-
ardinary". And what about your headmist- tive way, there's no circulation.
ress? "She is absolutely ordinaryl" Then I
showed her the photograph of the Prime
Minister. She looked at it and she was quite it out of a tree, and you mature it outside.
surprised. She said, "This is even more
ordinary than my head mistress". She said
with great disgust, "Mother why do you keep itself giving a proper identity to itself and to
such photographs with you?"
are you using it ? You are correcting your-
For example, there's a fruit, and you take
But it will decay very soon. But if it is
connected with the tree, it will mature by
the tree. And taste would be better. And
those who would come under that tree will
a fruit
receive the fruits of that tree. But
which is separated will be lost after some-
time. That is how one has to be very
That's what we are. The children under-
stand more than us, is it ?
Because our brain is against us some-
times ; over déveloped brain. So yesterday
I saw many people having Ekädasha,I was
surprised. So I told them just say, "Mother Mother ?
you be in my head". Because I have no
intelligence, l'am too simple. You should
all become simple like me. Absolutely simple
person. That's very effective !
collective.
Q. How to develop our discrimination,
Shri Mataji: Discrimination comes through
Hamsä chakra. And Hamsa is very simple
thing, is to put some ghee in the nose,
-is the physical thing. On the emotional
Or
Now I think 1 have covered most of the side, one should not cry too much.
women specially have too much crying
business. I also sometimes feel like crying,
points. But if you have any question, you
can ask them today.
but seldom. So sometimes men must cry
also.
Q.: "Shri Mother, we feel the same
chakras, more on the legs than on the fingers.
Now spiritually, to develop discrimination
is by vibratory awareness. When your
Shri Mataji : The integration is not there,
is
15
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-17.txt 
 calculated, nothing. I just said it. And by
big calculation, it was 379, according to him, but
I gave him one pound more ! So. it was 380.
and then you'll be amazed what a computer It's a fact !-And that's how you become a
computer. All mathematics comes through
vibrations ate developed. then you automati-
cally discriminate. You are such a
computer. t has to work in its full way,
you are.
your brain. it's so dynamic.
I'll give you an example of Warren now.
Pat's husband Prole, was measuring my
But first of all you have to have concent-
devotion. Such a person
house for certain purpose, while Warren was
sleeping. Poor David was working. Warren ration of your devotion.
was sleeping. And in his dream, he dreamt
that he had finished with the last measure-
ment. And in his half-sleep he got up and
he told him that this house measures..
achieves that.
THERE ARE SO MANY BLESSINGS
WAITING FOR YOU, TO BE MANIFESTED.
JUST YOU HAVE TO CONCENTRATE YOUR
EFFORTS IN DEVOTION, AND DEDICA-
TION.
how much?...
hundred and sixteen square feet.And
"exactly that's what David Prole had writen !
Poor David had worked so hard measuring
Everything He
chair !
Three thousand nine
May God Bless You.
actually fell from his
Already the vibrations are so much, I don't
Like today I told Guido that I think I spent know after puja what will happen to me.
three hundred and eighty pounds. And he Already the flowers have started growing in
said, no it was three hundred.
I never size. You know, they are becoming big !
The Seven Eyes of God Said
"Let the Human Organs be kept in their perfect Integrity,
"At will contracting into Worms or Expanding into Gods,
"And then, behold I What are these Ulto Visions of Chastity?
"Then as the moss upon the tree, or dust upon the plow,
"Or as the sweat upon the labouring shoulder, or as the chaff
"Of the wheat-floor or as the dregs of the sweet wine press;
"Such are these Ulto Visions, for tho' we sit down within
"The plowed furrow, list'ing to the weeping clods till we
"Contract or Expand Space at will, or if we raise ourselves
"Upon the chariots of the morning, Contracting or Expanding Time,
"Everyone knows we are One Family, One Man blessed forever"
William Blake.
Nirmala Yoga
16
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-18.txt 
 Her Holiness Shri Mataji
9 February, 1983,
Jangpura, New Delhi
SICKNESS AND
IT'S CURE
I wanted first of all to tell you something types of relations they establish with God.
That is called as Bhakti Relationship, we can
about the sickness of the people which
perhaps I have not elaborately told you about, say, and they dwell upon it, and all the
how to cure people and how people suffer time weep and cry and say," O God, when
from different sicknesses.
will I meet you." Such people are the ones
who take domination from others, sulfer,
sacrifice and lead a life of great suffering.
But in their expression, in their achieving
God, they start doing Bhakti. And they think,
As we are now on the principle of the
being, we must understand that sickness also
comes if there is something wrong in the
principle that builds up the human beings. that through Bhakti they will come to God.
So now basically there are two principles But with Bhakti, God comes to them. Because
which effect the body, and the third principle of their Bhakti, God comes to them and He
effects the evolution.
incarnates for the Bhaktas, the ones who
cry for God, He incarnates. So there is
So the first principle of the left sided
"iccha Shakti, (T af) or the desire power nothing wrong with those people.
is if in danger we develop lots of diseases
due to lethargic organs. Left side is the
tāmasic (amf) side, is the side where ced food as tar as proteins are concerned
darkness is effecting people. Those people And in proteins, they are so weak that they
who live in too much darkness, or in the might suffer from all lethargic muscles, in
past, or in a sly way, in a hidden way, who every way. So you can see that these people
are introverts, we can say in short, who spend suffer from cold, they sufter from diarrhoeas,
their life mostly in a very closed waters, or
live with people who are extremely cautious the food and the whole food will pass out as
and afraid of others, all people who do not diarrhoea. They will have lethargic hearts by
talk much or who avoid meeting people, who which they will get a heart which will not
shun people -all such people are left sided, pump the blood. Swellings in the body.
have got in 'tamas. Such people, in their Also they might get this gout and these
spiritual awareness or spiritual ascent, try to troubles of the joints. They also get the
take to Bhakti. (nfea, Devotion) They take lethargic liver which gives them allergies. All
to Bhakti more. They worship God from kinds of allergies come to these people
their heart, from their emotions. They work through their lethargic liver. So now you
through emotions. There are twenty four have to base all these troubles of lethargic
Now these peaple eat extremely imbalan-
because the muscles are weak, they will eat
17
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-19.txt 
 For
organs, of any kind, on the left side. For
example a person whose eyes are open but because they say that in Gita it is written-
he cannot see, is also suffering from the they said so, do not know.-that tämasic
same type of disease.
Many people come and argue with me
people eat lot of meat.-t is not true. Is not
true. Tāmasic people are the people,-they
are not bad people by any chance, they are
one type,-are the people who eat too much
These people are effected by the sub-
conscious and the collective subconscious.
From where the spirits attack them and they of carbohydrates, Because left side is hydro-
becomes involved into the spirits and they gen, and carbon comes from Ganesha on the
have a very bad sympathetic attitude towards
themselves. They are themselves miserable
and make everyone miserable. Because they
get their ideas from these miserable sly
people, and they cannot see anyone happy very-very overactive, extremely overactive
nor do they keep happy themsives. They personality. Such a right sided person is
will make a big fuss out of their so-called eating too much of proteins. All the tims
troubles and sickness and problems, and try meats, this, that. And he becomos an over-
to create as much problems as possible for active person, and such an overactive person
others. But the problems are not aggressive- receives a blessing of their ego, and a big
looking. It is more by appealing to the ego develops. Such a man aggressively des-
sympathy, appealing to the weaknesses of troys others, the images of others, pulls them
others. And a person who stays with such down, criticises others, jumps on them, can
people can also get effected if he tries to
show sympathies with these people.
left hand side. So it is more carbohydrates,
no question of eating too much of meat.
But the right sided people now, have a
be very hot tempered, can be absolutely
demonic. As 1 said before, Hitler is the
example.
Cancer and muscular discrepencies and
weaknesses in which the muscles become
Now this type of people who eat too much
extremely weak gradually and Osteo myelitis, of meat, and too much of heavy food and
polio myelitis,-all these lethargic things that develop muscular capačities too much, more
makes your even lungs lethargic. If your than a human being, should 1 say, they
lungs are lethargic, then you get diseases become like horses. Then they start behaving
like T.B., tuberculosis. Tuberculosis comes like horses, worse than horses also. And
that is why a person should not take to too
much of anything, you should keep to the
from the left side.
Now those who are strict vegetarians. centre.
who do not eat any even garlic, or don't eat
even onions and all that are very vulnerable
to left sided business. On top of that if they Due to overactive organs, they develop a
are going to a Guru who is left sided, they very bad heart, which is overactive. In which
are even worse. So one need not lead an
abnormal life. One has to be a normal In lungs he develops asthma. In his intes-
person, eating right proportion of proteins, tines, he develops constipation, he develops
carbohydrates and fats. So this is one side a very-very bad liver and a very unhealthy
of Sahaja Yoga in which you see that left-
sided people have to be very-very careful and
not to just assert themselves on that side.
All such people have over-active organs.
the heart pumps fast, palpitations take place.
skin. The skin is extremely sallow. And such
a person is very-very quarrelsome and aggre-
ssive.
Nirmala Yoga
18
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-20.txt 
 A person who leads a very ascetic life that such people may have very bad time with
and of martyrdom: for example, many their children, may have bad time with their
government servants think that they are parents, and may have very bad time with their
doing a very great work of martyrdom for wives, At the level of right nâbhi they will have
their country. But such people also become problems of digestion. They may have money.
so conscious of that, that they are hot bricks.
You just can't go near them. They are extre-
mely hot tempered. Or any person who leads
a life of asceticism of a severe type like oriented. The ego can go to that level, that
Vishvämitra, Durväsā, all these people, they, they can develop paralysis.
all become so hot-tempered that you cannot possible in both the cases. Even the laft sids
talk to them. They are very snappy and their
language is very sharp, And when they talk,
you can feel that it is not a person who has
any balance in him.
brilliant and consider themsevles to be very
But they can never enjoy that money or can
never think of living a life which is complete.
At the level of the brain they become ego-
Paralysis is
person can get it or the right side person can
get it. But mainly people get the paralysis
on the right side. It comes from left side
but effects the right side of the body.
But they look very
So there are two types of paralysis. One
intelligent, but they are actually stupid
people. Because thev do all kinds of stupid Is the paralysis caused by too much of ego
another by super ego. Those who have
lethargic temperament develop clots in their
blood, and low blood pressure. And these
clots cause the paralysis also on the left-
hand side. The another one on the righit hand
side is caused by the damage to the brain
things. They do such stupid things that any-
body who is wise can see that they have no
sense of proportion in doing anything that is
against the whole.
Such people are vulnerable to many
diseases, like as I said, the heart, liver, cirrho- by the over development of Mr.Ego within
sis of the liver. Also diabetes, leukaemia you.
kidney trouble, high blood pressure, uterus
troubles. Such people can become barren
women, they may not have children at all,
such women cannot have children. Specially
women who are very-very flirtatious type and
who think they are very beautiful, and also
they are having a very active life,-can be-
come completely barren.
become something good-for-nothing people,
if they overdo things. If their attention is
spent all the time in fulfilling their ambitions, confidence, he will be running away from
they can become like that. So those people public. And also then, he becomes schizo-
also who indulge too much into life and so-
called enjoy life, and waste their time in house, becomes like a cabbage. You can
drinking and being with women and all that.
They can be ruined not only by money, but
also by their very bad health.
That is how we can summarise cn the
whole, that the diseases of the physical side
are caused by these too imbalances.
Apart from that we have the mental
troubles with people. Like a left sided per-
son will have a mental problem, like he will
be a sly person, he will be a frightened
person, he would not be talking to others, he
would be nervous, he would not have self-
Also men can
phrenic that he hibernates sort of thing in the
say like that. That kind of a lunatic he be-
comes.
Another side, of the right side, is that
such a person, becomes
Now on the level of right heart, you know
very hot
Nirmala Yoga
19
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-21.txt 
 their ideas, they are trying to plan something.
tempered and obnoxious person absolu-
tely. Such a person can be so cruel, and that is hovw the plan goes out. Every-
he can be so troublesome that he would where, where the administrator becomes much
be a really a challenge to the whole family, more than what he should be, then his
to the whole society, and he would be behaviour itself is so idiotic and so much away
very disturbing. So this is the second pro- from reality that everyone has to suffer, if
blem, also is a mental case. Now such a
such an administrator is asserting itself in the
person may not look mentally upset,-the planning of any programme of a country or
right sided person. But when they grow old, of a nation. The worst and worst are the
they just talk. They will go on talking so
much that nobody can talk to them. You
cannot even open mouth before them. They Shakti, the primordial Mother. It's such a
go on fret f aeE They go on stupidity, is the greatest stupidity that they
jabbering all the time, everything they are indulge into !
telling you. And quite relevently they will talk
of God, of Atmā, this that. But just they are
talking, because they are so egoistical that
they just go on talking, do not allow anybody
to speak. And such horrible characters, if
there is even one, you are in for trouble.
Because you get headaches from them and stupid person ever born on this earth. Like one
you get other problems, that you don't know
how to manage them, how to keep them ne is not there, but he was Prime Minister of
decently in their proper places. So they are Uganda. Now he was a real idiot. I mean,
also in a way mental cases because they are
not normal.
rākshasas (zraa, demons) who are so egoistical
that they think of capturing even the Adi
So, stupid man is very big problem to the
whole society-though he never realises. He
thinks I have managed the show, I am the
most successful person. But when the history
is over, people talk about him as the greatest
Mr. Idi Amin who is supposed to benow
you could see the way he used to talk and
all that, he was an idiot. And he said that,
"the people of my country should be called
So on mental side also we have problems from my name, because, you see, I am the one
of people who are egoistical or who are who represents this country." So somebody
from others and suggested that, "It is alright, but how should
becoming sly. Sly people are good at spoil- we call them? Like from Cyprus people are
ing their relations of each other by saying called as Cypriotic. So if we call your name,
people
refused to accept this solution, though he
was so dominating, There was another one
who made shoes out of pearls, you se
Now, ego oriented person has another horrible non-sense-for his marriage. I don't
accepting domination
something, by carrying stories, by being sly. it will become Idioticl" So the
And so both of these kinds, extreme type are
very injurious to a proper social life.
very big problem, that he asserts his idea
about everything else. So always such a
know which was the number of that mar-
riage. But he wanted to make shoes of
man, because he is stupid and idiotic, the pearls-All sorts of idiotic things they do.
idiotic ideas survive. And because of idiotic
I mean these people who are such extre-
ideas, every planning that is done by such
people is a failure. That is the reason, our mely ego-oriented surprisingly become very
Planning in India has failed. Everywhere it miserly. Extremely. They are so money
fails. Because the idiotic people, they are
stupid, they are ego oriented, just to assert spend all that money on themselves. But
SO
oriented that they are extremely miserly. They
Nirmala Yoga
20
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-22.txt 
 You will be surprised, if I tell the Indians,
none on others.-That they will try to save.
Any good work has to be done, they will. that I have seen in the West, sometimes you
go to a Hotel with other people. I have never
seen anybody offering to pay except for my
the best things. For: themselves. But for husband or me. They start looking this side,
others they have no money. Even where it is that side. If somebody can pay, very good.
their due, they will try to save money. They It is most surprising. Even in countries like
Sweden and Switzerland. Switzerland is an-
other. The greatest miserly country you could
ever think of is Switzerland. Europeans are
'extremely" miserly people. Most surprising
keep back their money. But on themselves
they will buy the best wines, they will buy
will not pay where it is due.
Which we see among so many people,
even in Sahaja Yoga. That they have to pay
something which is their due, for something it is. how miserly they are. And Indians in
which is very important, but they will not
pay. They want even free sometimes the books,
sometimes-whatever it is, for which people just come for food free. I mean, am I suppo-
are paying. For example this pandal is raised
now. It needs money. Who is going to pay food, pay for your taxis. Tomorrow, you
for it? I payed for at least 3 to 4 years my- might even say. "Pay for our house rents".
self from my own pocket and my brother
helped me to do all this work. And they
wanted me to go on with it all the time.
Imagine I For your Self-Realisation, I have
to pay. I travelled on my own, I had my
own things done. They would not even pay
for what is done. I mean, it is required that proper thing, they have no money, most
the people who are organising this program-
me should put-up the pandal. I am supposed
to give you the realisation free, but not to pay
for your pandal. Tomorrow, you will say
"Mother, also pay for us for coming here and
going back, our fare." 1 am not surprised, you
see. Such people are 'extremely miserly. Every
pie they pay, you see, they think that we
must get the money back. And if anything
is done extra for them, that is not counted.
Only thing, because whatever you can get,
you should get. But while giving they are
zero. And these money oriented people are
horrifyingly surprisingly are rich. One cannot
understand how are they rich. Because there is people, but never have they taken a single pie
nothing like generosity in them, no priorities,
nor proprieties, as to where you have to
spend the money, And there is no self-
respect about it. There's no self-respect. It is
very surprising.
Delhi are, Sahaja Yogis, are very funny. I
must say. I'was surprised to hear that people
sed to pay for your food also? Pay for your
It is absurd.
All this comes from ego, which does not
allow you to see the propriety of things. It is
very surprising. They will spend money on
themselves, buy this, buy that. But to do the
surprising thing is. Every time, I come, 1 find
Mr. Verma or somebody tells me that, "Look
at this Mother, this is the money they have
given." So every time I have to pay out of
my pocket to fill-up the gap, all these things.
Every time. May be this year also. Now I
have told him this time, I am going to give
you my Kară. (er golden bangle). You sell it
and .This is the situation in this Delhi, where
the Sahaja Sahaja yogis are so wretched that
they do not want to pay even two hundred
Don't learn things from
rupees per year.
European yogis. They have to learn from
Maharashtrian Sahaja Yogis. They are poor
from me, They say," Mother, it is sufficient
you are doing so much for us".
Other Gurus take their money, extract all
the money. Here the Guru has to spend the
money all the time. Can you imagine Sahaja.
21
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-23.txt 
 Yoga of this kind? Have you heard of such a
Guru anywhere? That the Guru is spending you see, a kanjoosa has no sense of shame.
the money for Sahaja Yoga. I have been
spending, not this year, twelve years I have understand
been coming to Delhi. I think till last year I surprising sometimes.
have been spending my own pocket money.
And I don't know how to answer my hus-
save Me ! Whatever you may do for them,
No sense of shame left in him. He does not
what he is doing. It is so
You cannot save money where it con-
. He said cerns self-realisation organising. It is most
band. Hejust cannot understand.
what is this Sahaja Yoga that you have to surprising that these people when they
pay for the disciples. I said," Thank God. behave like that, all these countries one by
they don't ask for their house rents !" It is a
very shameful situation. I must say it is a
very shameful situation. That, where the
money is needed, they have no money. There
is no budgeting at all, of a priority. You are
Sahaja Yogis, you are Saints. What are your ands I have spent out of my own pocket so
priorities?
one are becoming poorer and poorer. The
more you are worried about money, the worse
it becomes.
Of course, I don't need any money. You
know already I don't know how many thous-
far. But the problem lies that nobody
But in Maharashtra you must come and understands that it is a shameful thing that
learn. They are poor people. They have
not got so many riches. You wouldn't see
many cars in Maharashtra. There are hardly
one or two people who have cars in Maha- talk to the Sahaja Yogis of Delhi. I was
rashtra. But never such a problem comes up ashamed absolutely to hear that Sahaja Yogis
there, whether you go to villages or to the here cannot even give eighteen rupees per
cities. Nobody makes up an account because month! Eighteen Rupees; per month. Those
the whole account is, you have to pay for this who cannot afford, it is alright. Those who
electricity, this, that. All has to be paid
through my pockets. That is why, I am
talking to Sahaja Yogis today.
a Guru has to spend for you.
Now that is why I said today I want to
are retired is alright, children is alright. But
you cannot even give eighteen rupees per
month. It is not even eighteen, less than
that. I don't know. This is the minimum
you can pay. We have to run an Ashram,
we have to run these things. you want to
So European Sahaja Yogis also I have to
tell them. That they have to behave them-
selves a little better. This is not the way to have a place where to go. How can that be?
behave towards money. It is a shameful way I just can not believe it ! With Sahaja Yoga if
that I have heard that European Sahaja Yogis, you do not even have this much of generosity,
some of them, are behaving in a very shame- it is better you give up Sahaja Yoga. Better
ful way. It is not correct. It is not a good give up. You are not the one who can go on
thing.
with Sahaja Yoga.
So this is the right sided stupidity. You
know, any 'kanjoosa" (miser) man you meet,
you just laugh at him, isn' it ? They are so
many stories of Kanjoosas. So the kanjoosa free. I was working. Whole day, I have been
and the lazy, which one would you prefer? I going doing this, doing that. Even for buying
do not mind a lazy man. But a kanzoosa-God things for you, all the Sahaja yogis. How
Look at your Mother how generous She
is. I give you realisation, work 'morning till
evening'. Today, I didn't have a single minute
22
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-24.txt 
 far I go. 1 work so hard, and you cannot in the centre. The people who have their
even give eighteen rupees. I
it 11 heard about the Sahaja Yogis.-Now their wisdon. These people are 'extremely
you are sitting under the pandal, who is
going to pay for it ? should pay 7 And . Take any one, take any one, take
these carpets, I should pay ? Is this the way
to behave? Next time, if anybody does not Tukārăma; his children asked him, "you get
pay like that, I am not coming to Delhi, I'm
telling you next time I'm not coming to Delhi.
I cannot afford it now any more. Coming to
Delhi means I have to shell out my own
money, every time. Those who have not paid home and all the children started asking "give
the money please pay, otherwise 1 will not
come to Delhi, Tam telling you. I don't like everything. He came home, he had no sugar-
this kind of thing, that you cannot even pay cane for his children -They suffer from
eighteen rupees to maintain that Ashram, to
maintain all these things. This is too much.
cannot believe proper understanding and who have got
generous. You take any Guru, Sadguru
सद्गुरु.
Nānaka. take Kabeera
or take Tukāräma.
us some sugarcane". So he was walking and
one gentleman, who was his master, who's
field of sugarcane he was looking-after, gave
him lots of sugarcanes. So he was coming
me one sugarcane, one sugarcane." He gave
overgenerosity. They are so generous, you
can't imagine. You should ask people who
have known me in that aspect.
Now will you please try to understand
that you have to be of a calibre to be a
Sahaja Yogi. You cannot be just a raddad
( person from the road, who can become also: All your material wealth, and every-
Adi Shakti's son, can you? I do not want thing has no meaning unless and until you
beggars to be my children. Will you please, show generosity for the people. But it
now all of you, decide today, that no more of should be quiet and it should be absolutely
this talk, 1 will have to do. This is the last silent. I have seen that it is nice to oblige
time I am telling you. It is a shameful thing somebody who comes to your house. Indians
and in the History it will go down, that are very good at it : please have your food,
Mother stopped coming to Delhi because
everytime She went there, She had to shell they will take out some work from that
out money from Her pocket. The History of person, or something. But there is no genui-
Sahaja Yoga will be written in Golden letters
and remember that every body's name I am help, doesn't matter. Any great cause, what
going to put-down there. And those who can be the greater cause than this work of
do not pay, please give me their names.
That is it. I want to know who are these you people behave like this. Now where are
culprits,
Generosity is the only way you can express
your love to others. I have told you before
this, that. Because just to impress.-Later on
neness about it. Anybody who comes, just
God that am doing ? And thereI find
you going to spend your money ?
So the centre people are extremely
generous to begin with. They cannot retain
food if they have it at somebody's house.
Either they vomit or they will have diarrhoea.
If they eat at a place where they should not
So now we come to the Centre, the have eaten, if it is not properly vibrated, if the
Central path of Sushumnā. The Central food is not good, they will not eat the food.
Even if they eat the food, they will vomit it.
और जो लोग कंजरी करेंगे, उनके साथ भगवान भी कजूसी कर
सकता है ।
(And those who are miserly, with them
God can also be very miserly.)
path of Sushumnā is for the people who are
Nirmala Yoga
23
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-25.txt 
 They are extremely kind and generous. They But with the full confidence that what they
do not suddenly jump on people and say,
"Oh ! you have a food that has got this and joy.
that", fit is so they try to avoid, not to
eat. But sometimes they are crucified. Al-
right, does not matter. They think, "Alright on the fatter side, I should say, because
I will eat and throw it away". They are
extremely wise and tactful, Tactful", They Prāna Shakti, (ST ),-is in the centre in
kr.ow how to deal with people. They are
extremely diplomatically-gifted, to please the gaseous body. The gaseous body is not
others and somehow or the other bring them heavy, its very light. They walk very fast, they
to the temple of God. The whole attitude of are active. But, to look at, they look plump.
such people is to clean themselves, to keep Normally. If they are not. they try to be
them clean, to keep them alright, to get more plump. They want to be plump, they want
and more people to this great work of reali-
sation. They never show off. I never see
them before. They don't stick on. They don't on the plump side.
show off. They are not in front. They do not
want to show their faces. They are quiet. 1
know who they are. But they are dynamic their all kinds of vomitting and all that.
and they work it out. Only when they have to
consult something important, they will come
and see me and talk. I know the way they to immediately go and vacate it.
work out. Extremely silent and beautiful, their problem.
gracious people they are. And they also know
how to handle others. They can sometimes
get into temper which is necessary, if they if they have taken too much vibrations, they
have to protect the protocol of their Mother. may develop a swelling on their body. Under
or could be protocol of Sahaja Yoga, and of these circumstances, first of all they should
are doing is the greatest happiness and
And their health-wise, they are
more
they have gas in their body, lot of gas, the
the Pränă-onters into Sushumnā. That creates
to find out what is wrong with their liver, so
that they could be plump. They are rather
Their main disease is their excretion, and
For example, a person who eats a wrong
type of food or a wrong type of liquid has
This is
Another prob!lem they may develop that
God.
find out if they are in the neighbourhood of
somebody who is anti-God. Because such
swellings are developed when the vibrations
are fighting an anti-God activities of the
person who is with you. Say your wife is
Normally they are very quiet and silent
people. Their presence is blissful. What-
ever house they enter, it is auspicious.
Whatever shop they enter, prospers. What-
ever person they talk to, is benefitted. They negative. Then such a person might develop
are auspicious. They are blissful. They give a swelling because his vibrations are fighting
blessings; automatically, They do not have
to say," I bless you." If they are there, they fighting. But he must know how to correct
bless you.
He should not mind that
the woman.
the woman. He must know how to put her
right. Or the man who is like that, the
They never think of making money out of woman might develop an anti-devil force
God's work-never. Not a single pie. They within her which will give her that swelling.
are so truthful. Not because they are afraid
that if we make money thief will come and with the vibrations jetting out with a great
take away all our things. Not with the fear. speed.
Different types of swellings might appear,
They might develop arthritis. if
Nirmala Yoga
24
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-26.txt 
 they do not give vibrations. Or pain in
the joints.
then you might feel the pressure on this
brain plate. At that time they should try to
bring the Grace on top of all the sympathetic
systems, bring it down, stand on Mother
The other problem they may have, is of
very low breathing, low blood pressure- Earth. Ask Her to suck it. So the Kundalini's
because of para-sympathetic activity. And
when they are fighting with the anti God acti-
vities they might feel tired also sometimes. But
pressure is reduced because when the Grace
comes on the body, then all the chakras
open up and also Agya opens up. If they
again they recoup and they feel alright. At have problem with their Agyā, they should
every centre, if the vibrations start flowing
too much, then all these people may develop
may develop,I am saying
use a candle at the back, if their eye sight is
getting weak or short sighted. If their Agya
a kind of a is too much here (front) there are mantras
suction or emission of vibrations, depending which are to be used like I forgive every
on the quality of the person who is facing one", and all that. On the subtler way. you
them. And when such a thing happens, know all the mantras that are to be said.
they can easily correct it by giving a band-
han. And in case they find the vibrations
are too much, then they can ask another
If a Sahaja Yogi finds his Sahasrära
Sahaja Yogi to take out the vibrations from catching, then he should take a bath in the
sea, I think, I don't know where he should
take a bath. Because Sahasrāra is my place,
as you know. And to catch the Sahasrāra is
a very seriaus thing for a Sahaja Yogi. He
a particular chakra and give it to the atmos-
phere.
They may suffer from the throat-trouble. Also
may suffer from the drying up of the liquid in might develop a Ekádasha with that and, he
the body if they have to fight the anti-God will be in trouble. And then he will come
and tell me that"Mother, though I was a
elements very much. So a kind of a dryness
can develop in their peritoneum or may be in Sahaja Yogi, I was praying on Your photo-
That is graph and all that, still I got this trouble
The reason is, when you are a Sahaja Yogi
their tracts which are covering them.
why it is nice for them to eat some ghee or
butter. They must rub their fingers and the you have to recognise Me. That is the con-
dition. So far you have never recognised
any one, but now you 'have to recognise Me.
It you don't recognise me, you will develop
this Ekādasha, and I tell you that if you try to
do like this, then it is not possible to allow
the Kundalini to come up. So Sahaja Yogis
who are very doubtful and still like this
very much caught up on the Agya, on the should not be called as Sahaja Yogis. They
right side. It is important at this time to give should be kept out, as far as possible. Let
them learn that they are not worthy. Let them
know that this realisation has been given by
Me and by nobody else. Like once Venugo-
palan told me that "Krishna did not give me
realisation. Rāma never gave me realisation,
Ganesha never gave nme, Shiva ever gave
me, Pārvati never gave me, Adishakti did not
hands and all these places with ghee or
butter to soothe it down. Because the heat
from other people can also make them dried
up.
At the Agya level, they may sometimes
develop a headache with people who are
a bandhan to yourself and to other person
who is very egoistical; and don't listen to
them. Just close your ears and the person
will stop talkıng, Also they might develop
some pressures on both the sides of the head.
Sometimes when the Kundalini cannot rush
upward, there is an obstruction on the Agyā
25
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-27.txt 
 give me, it was Mataji Nirmla Devi who has always say that "keep the Devi prasanna.
given me realisation
know." Unless and until
So She is the one I Yesterday the music was on, I was very pra-
you understand sanna, you should have been happy that
this, all-Räma, Shiva and Brahmadeva, Vishnu, music was on, Mother is Prasanna, that is all.
"everyone" is going to get angry with you.
Because they will not understand. Because
you have got your realisation, still you are
denying me, that means something wrong not going to be alright. If you are a big admi-
with you, And the whole plate can be covered nistrator anything, that is in the office. Not
and you might develop Ekädasha. That is here. Here I am the one. You have to leave
the beginning of the end.
But no, you wanted it to be your way. You
hurry Me up. You say come along now, we
have to go. That is all. Then your ascent is
things into my hands.
Beçause
Don't try to play tricks with me.
Taking too much advantage of me is also
like that. Too much sticking on to me also apart from My Mother's heart, there are many
you might get this Ekädasha. You must keep other Ganas, you see, many other Deities,
out Too much pressurising me you will get many other great things which are waiting,
it. Answering me, not listening to me. When and they may try to trouble you. So as
I say. I want to do this, you will say,"No. no
let us do this,"-You catch.
Sahaja Yogis I have to warn you. New people
wouldn't understand this. For them it will
look like egoistical and all that. They wouldn't
I know what to do, when to do, where to understand, forget it. But there are very few
do. I know that. I know when I should reach
a place, when I should raise the Kundalini, Sahaja Yogis and teliing them the truth.
where it will work out, 1 know everything, Because so far I have had no chance to tell
you have to leave it to me. And if you start
challenging me, you will catch on Sahasrära, As Sahaja Yogis you are saints. And you
And then don't blame me,
new people, that is why I am talking to:
So it does not matter.
them all these things.
"must have that dignity of a Saint, and
that generosity of a Saint, and a sense of
Only in Sahaja Yoga if you could rise and priority and propriety. I hope Delhi Sahaja
ascend and try to recognise me, I will have Yogis will begin from tomorrow a new life in
no problem, you will have no problem. If their behaviour.
there is anyone say your wite, or husband
and anything, who talks against Sahaja Yoga, भानरण में लाथ । बाते करने से कुछ नहों होने वाला। आवरण में
close your ears, close your eyes. You are not IST
to hear any nindā (frer criticism) of Me at
least. If you don't understand, you don't nothing is going to be achieved. Bring it in
understand because after all you are not Me.
But know that I have given you realisation.
And you should not try to challenge Me,
because God himself will be against you. begin with.
This is very ungrateful of you to behave like
(Bring it into practise. By talking about it-
to practise)
And try to be good Sahaja Yogis, to
You cannot compromise on certain things.
In Sahaja Yoga, you will be amazed it is 'such
So first thing you must do is not to trouble a great science, 'even one line here and there
me much by any chance. You have to keep -they are finished. The other day a gentle
Me prasanna ( , pleased). This is what we man came and he told Me that I don't
that.
Nirmala Yoga
26
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-28.txt 
 believe in such and such Saint.
muslim may say that I don't believe in Guru
Nänaka. Immediately his vibrations must go
down. Finished. But much worse when you very much respected, if you behave like a
say about Me or think about Me. 1f there Saint. Saint has to be Saintly within and
is even a
goes. Because Guru NAnaka is a person
within you, but he did not give you realisa- great Saint has come."
tion. He and Me are one, there is no become a very wealthy person for that. You
difference at all. But what He feels when He don't have to be a big politician or a big
has become Me and given you realisation. minister; nothing. An ordinary person can
You do not want to recognise Me, then al- manifest the whole thing.
right-He is the one who will be angry, not
Me. You have always seen people who
worship Shiva, in the hand they keep them. would be that all of you should take up
They catch in the heart, its the Shiva's place. responsibilities.
Because Shiva himself is angry.
Say, a and until, there is a purpose or some sort of
a reason, I would 'hate" to take it. You know
that. So I should be your ideal. You will be
thought coming, see that it without. One person who behaves like that.
shines, and everybody knows, "Oh here a
You don't have to
So i think one way of improving this
You should try to travel
around. Now some people should travel
around. Go, establish some centre, look
Sahaja Yoga is a very dynamic thing. And after that. Then go somewhere else, establish
for that we do not need these people who are that centre and look after. Now establish a
good for nothing. Kanjoosas (misers) are out.
Absolutely. You should be extremely punctual come, bring in, distribute some handbills in
and anxious-atur (r)-to do the need-
ful for Sahaja Yoga's work. It's a 'tremendous
work. While we have people who are so
anxious. They are willing to stay here, they
are willing to go anywhere, they are willing whole. So nowI have to tell you, today
to do any work in Canada, want to go to again I have to go somewhere, so you have
America, work it out. And here we have
people. Itis surprising ! In the Yoga Bhoomi. that I wouldn't allow, it wouldn't be possible
This is Jangpurä--Just imagine this is Jang- to make you touch my feet. It is alright.
pură. May be here the Jang (n battle) I don't There is no need to touch my feet at all.
know of who, which people took place. In
Hastinäpur a great jang took place long time
back, where evil forces were fought. But
Centre in Jangpura or some place. Try to
the market places. Get some people, estab-
lish it.
There are hardly few numbers of
people who are organising, it is not the way.
Every one of you is part and parcel of the
to excuse me.
I hope you don't mind today
I will tell you a very sweet story of Shri
Krishna and Rüdhā and then I well go away.
was there anybody like the people we have Once it happened that the ladies who were
here ? Can you hold the Sword of Right- married to Shri Krishna got very jealous of
eousness in your hand when you do not
have any righteousness in your behaviour ?
We cannot be like these ordinary politicians
and these business people.
Rādhāji. And they told Shri Krishna that you
don't love us. On top of that Shri Nãrada
came to put more oil on the fire. That he
said, "He really, I believe, He 'never cares
for you, He just likes Radhaji,
He is not
So Shri Krishna, as diplomatic as
He was, He started saying, "Oh God ! I have
terrible pain in My stomach, now what
to do 7" So they said, now what to do ?
We are Saints! Understand you are Saints. bothered."
You cannot behave like them, cheapish way.
Dnever take anything free from you, It is
very difficult to give me something. Unless
27
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-29.txt 
 He said, "It is very simple. You know any you give Him the dust of your feet, then al
one who is my Bhakta (devotee), if you can
give the dust of your feet for Me to eat, then I playing some trick, you know. Just don't try
will be alright."
life, you see. As it is if I tell you anything, better take it." But he said, "what about your
you just want to give your solutions every- punyas and papas." She said, "I know one
time. Nobody listens to Me. If 1 say go thing, it is He, who looks after My pāpas and
here. "No, no, it is better to go that way.
Come here "No, no, this way is better.
Every body has a brain wave about it. absolutely yellow like a saffron or like a
Does not matter. So there they had brain pollen of the flower. And he went and gave
waves. They said you see why don't you it to Shri Krishna. Shri Krishna said. I
take some medicine? Then somebody said, we knew Shri Radha will send, now let me
will call the Vaidya. He said, "No, I know for
definite that I cannot be cured by anything to answer the question that Shri Rädhä ha
else but one thing, that you have to get the said, that you look after Her päpas and pun-
dust of one of my Bhaktas, and i will eat."
So every body started looking at each other, does that mean ? That you know what is
you see. As some of the Sahaja Yogis do punya and papas are, and She is not bothered
when it comes to paying ! They never heard about it. She has not to worry about Her
it. Some of them. Never heard. Better. You papas and punyas." He said, "Alright, now
see, it is very tricky nature. So they said now
what to do. If we do not cure Shri Krishna, medicine and He said I better sleep. And
He is just wailing, and what to do? Shri
Krishna said." Have some pity on Me, give opened and in the Heart was the lotus of
me some dust of your feet."
Nārada that you go and ask Rädha to send
dust of Her feet. So he went to Shri Rādhã. rubbing against the pollen of that lotus and
Shri Rādhāji was in Vrindiävan, and the soil
of that place is yellowish in colour like tre
(Keshara), like saffron. So he went and
told that Shri Krishna is very sick, He has Her Feet, what does it matter if She gives
got a terrible pain in His stomach. So She
got a fright. She said, "Really ! how can
that be. I cannot beljeve it. So what does His heart, what does it matter ? And that is
He says? What treatment can He take?" He how they realised that Shri Rādha's love was
says anyone of his disciplies, anybody his
Bhakta, if they send a little of the dust of their Dharma-Adharma, but just to be at the com-
feet, He will be alright. He has to take that mand of Her Lord, She acted, and that is how
as medicine. So She said alright, take the She had a place in the Heart of Shri Krishna.
dust of My feet. He was amazed ! He said
"What ara you doing? You understand, if
your punyas (merits) will be lost. He is
this thing." She said, "Nothing doing, you
So they got a fright of their
She said, "l know one
punyas. I have not to think about it." So
he took the dust of Her feet which was
eat it " He said, "You can eat, but you have
yas. How is it ? How can it be ? What
let me take the medicine." He took the
Shri Närada saw the heart of Shri Krishna
a very beautiful pink colour. On that lotus
was lying Shri Rädhaji. And Her feet were
So He said to
the yellow of the Vrindãvan clay was the
same colour as that. And then he realised
that when She is touching that lotus with
the dust of Her feet to Shri Krishna to take.
She is in His heart. When Her feet are in
so great that for Her She did not think of
May God bless you.
Nirmala Yoga
28
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-30.txt 
 22nd July 1982
Her Holiness Shri Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
ALL IS SO BEAUTIFULLY MADE
Public Programme,
HAMPSTEAD, U.K.
of Man can be ruined by him; it's only he can
do it. The trees cannot ruin themselves, can
So to continue with the same topic we
had: about the infrastructure of the human
being; about which I told you that God has they? They stand up like witnesses they
made this infrastructure very beautiful. Even just give, they just give; even when they die
if you see anything that is living, say a tree, they give their wood, when they live they give
if you look at this tree you'll be amazed how
the different channels that take the sap give their beauty, they're giving. giving,.
upwards are so beautifully placed that there is giving all the time; and the one who takes is
no problem for water to rise. The suction in this great epitome of creation: the Human
the water takes place because the sun shines Being. He's the recipient of all that. Then
their flowers, they give their shade, they
he has got intelligence to receive everything
from that and to use it for one's own purpose.
and the water is sucked in.
The Nature is so nicely built up, absolutely That's how we're exploiting. I would say:
harmonious,-when it is winter time the leaves exploiting the blessings of Nature. That's
drop out because the Mother Earth requires good. That's what God wanted; that we
nutrition and the leaves are not getting so should really have the blessings of Nature.
much of sunshine so there should be less
surface exposed. The same nutrition is taken
up again and again in the Spring you find
again the beautiful leaves breaking through.
It's so beautifully worked out, the whole his Infrastructure which he can ruin, The
situation, the whole Universe is so beautifully problem is only the Man can ruin that; not
made and the Infrastructure is so made that only that but also the outerstructure which is
it receives all the blessings of the Divine the atmosphere. You send one man to
without any difficulty. It rains and the Nature forest and it's all right; if you send two
receives it. If you have ever been to a forest, hundred tigers to a forest it's all right but if
that you could think of, you'll be amazed of you send ten men to a forest: finished! all the
how clean it is; the fragrance of that place is beauty is finished.
so clean-nothing stagnates. How it opera-
tes? How it works out through sunshine,
through rain, through wind.
That You are the Monarchs of this Universe.
So everything stands in attention for your
needs. Why Man on his own goes mad with
his extreme behaviour? He doesn't think of
On one side, the sense oaf beauty only
human beings have got. The sense of under-
standing cleanliness only human beings have
got. So they are the only enjoyers, they are
created, which is a problem. The Infrastructure the only enjoyers of all; they are supposed to
In this whole Universe now Man is
Nirmala Yoga
29
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-31.txt 
 enjoy all this but there is something lacking aeroplane then you want to have some sort of
in them which doesn't give the full enjoyment. -anything. There's no end to it. So it proves
When you look at a tree-today Cherry that the joy that you get out of material
Blossom everywhere-and the thought starts things also are not satisfying because at the
coming: How much they must have paid for
this tree?, How many years it must have enjoy. They cannot enjoy anything though
taken? All these mundane type of questions they are supposed to enjoy everything:
come into your mind. But supposing by any
chance if no thoughts come into your mind, anjoy. But there's something lacking in them
you just see, witness, could witness, then by which they cannot enjoy anything and
the jay that they are trying to give you what is that quality? what is that state?
would express, would be complete within
yourself.
state at which human beings are, they cannot
because they only have the capacity to
Because the connection for extracting joy has
to ba with the Spirit.
That state we have not yet achieved;
always we have thoughts, thoughts which are
all artificial. Thoughts that make you some
sort of an imaginary person or if you don't go
to the subtler side, a very gross person. It's
not Reality, imagination is not Reality and also
the grossness is not. Like a poat might say
that what a flower is there, emits so much beauty
Spirit is the connection which emits joy.
There's no other way to enjoy a life without
remorse. To be connected first with Spirit is
the only way that we enjoy because that doesn't
have double side. Like people go for, l'd say,
for a ball-room dancing. They are supposed
to be enjoying. They come home and a big
tioaht starts God knows what they've enjoyed
and that and all sort of stories they may have Tight
built up about a flower and a person who is for. The enjoyment of life is only possible it
not imaginary might say: ""1 don't know how
much it will cost, how to put it down, what connection to the Spirit is only possible if you
is the use of this, how it can be economic " Sprout into that: you become the Spirit as
Poetry of course, touches subtler side of Christ has said in simple words that you have
life no doubt Thank God Hampstead have
got many great poets; but still it is imaginary simple, but how? You are to be baptizad, but
for other people. What you look at and you
think may not be true for others. For example:
a person like Blake wrote all poetry, nobody have got the right to baptize. Now to any
understood him. To understand him also you intelligent man doesn't appeal that way, can
have to have Realization, otherwise you can't it be possible? Baptism, if it is a living process
understand him at all.
we could get connected to the Spirit and that
to be born again. Very simple, looks very
how? Say I go to a theosophical college or
some sort of a college; they say: now you
in which you have to get connected, con-
nected with the Spirit then what do you do
So, whatever is surrendered on gross level about it? That means you have to achieve a
or on imaginary level by the nature cannot
be enjoyad by human beings to its full extent. That connection has to be established. If
Cannot be. We think so. Look at the
economic laws, they are that "wants in cannot be twice-born by certifying yourself.
general are not satiable," means that's not I've seen many people they said: "Mother,
satisfying at all. I mean it says, it confesses.
Today you vwant to have a car, then you want
to have an aeroplane; alright you have an
state of mind where you become the Spirit.
that connection is not established then you
I'm twice born". I said: "How do you say
you are twice-born"? What is the certificate
you have got of being twice-born? You
Nirmala Yoga
30
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-32.txt 
 cannot just certify yourself. This is not a It's logical that life has no meaning without
self certification. Supposing a dog says: "I'm
a human being". Will you accept? No, I
mean it can go about; and say that: "I am
a human being". He doesn't become, it's
a state, it's a quality which is in evolution-
evolutionary
which has to become
a tortoise has to become a tortoise. She
can't just say that "Ohl I am a tortoise, oh! I
it, you see, You make a candle. you put a
wick in that and do everything with it and
when there is darkness you say: what are we
to do now? Enlighten that light! It's so
simple. The whole existence itself will have
no meaning it we do not become the Spirit.
We all have to become the Spirit, otherwise
we are useless, we're good for nothing, our
life has no mmeaning.
has to be
shown it's
an
quality. A fish
am a tortoise",
Now, when somebody says like that, I
This is where human ego comes in; by could be another, hypocrite? Or could be
what you call them false, fake guru, I could
be like that myself, telling you big stories:
could be possible, alright? Anybody could
be like that. But why cheat yourself? It's
the point Let anybody try to cheat you but
you don't cheat yourself!
saying something you do not beccme. And
this is one of the basic things we must know:
that we have to become, in actuality, in
reality, we have to face up to it and not
believing in something because it is said
Anybody can say anything-what does it
matter? Say what you like. What does
You accept one simple point that you have
to write a book? You take a
it take
to become the Spirit. In all humility, and that
printer, you give him something to write; yau is one wish a Seeker should have. I've known
can write any trash, any thing so called, He
can write about God, this, that and talk big
sermons, have big organizations but it's gentleman had a very bad Agnya centre and
nothing of the kind. Even supposing you have
some animals, like dogs especially, and now,
you make them dress up like little babies, and who's written some books on the Third Eve.
make them dance and in a circus you might and Fm going to operate and my third eye
find them they've become a little bit like
human beings, you know? They might carry
letters or may bring your children from the after böoks on this". I said, "Really? And
school. I mean they can do lots of such
things but will you call them human belnas operating here if you get the third eye" and
by any chance? I'm not saying the difference
is so much but one has to understand one itself was ruined. I said what's the fellow,
Не
Seekers, they try all kinds of things. Like a
I asked him: "What have you been doing?"
He said, "There's a Rampa Shampa man
is going to come out " I said: "What? Who's
told you that? He said,"There are books
how dare this fellow do that thing by
he was doing all kinds of nonsensical things
believing in that man and this, centre
thing: that we have not yet become the
Spirit.
what is he doing himself, you see? That's the
best part of it. See?, God has given us not
In all humility let us accept this fact, that only brains but wisdom. God has given us
become that Spirit. Now, wisdom and we should use that wisdom and
supposing that is the only source of joy, judge these people on these lines to see
if that is your real property within you, if what they're telling Us. Most of them are
that is the thing you have to achieve, ruining your Infrastructure. I would not care
for anyone of them if they were just smug-
we
have to
THE
supposing for that you have become a
human being, then must you not all do that? gling money or making you poor, doesn't
Nirmala Yoga
31
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-33.txt 
 matter. Alright? if they want money give them
money, finished. There are many smugglers,
thugs and robbers and swindlers. All sorts of
people are in this world, see? There are a
thousand and one words to descibe them but
woven such
a net that to get out of it is not
There's only one way to get
out. Once as a child I had read a story
about some birds. A net was cast end so
possible.
birds theie were caught in the
they are spoiling your Infrastructure and when net. And they discovered that: "we are
they spoil that Infrastructure, then this happen- misled, misguided."
ing of Kundalini awakening takes time, that's grains and they were misguided. So, how
the problem. People develop diseases, they
develop emotional problems, mental problems, It's an impossibility. One person cannot get
all kinds of problems with all these things.
They
saw
some
to get out of the net was impossible for them.
out, one person tries to get out others get
more entangled and he gets even worse. So,
what to do? The whole said: "Why not we
all fly out with the net itself? And then with
our beaks we'll cut out this net and we'll be
Actually, you must know that if you are
a Seeker and if you seek, you have to be-
come absolutely a normal person. All your
abnormalities must drop out; if they don't freed, but first get out from here. Put our
drop out then you should know that you
still have some horns coming out. But people And that's what they did They spread their
don't understand that being abnormal is wings all of them put together and took off
going down. Anybody who thinks he.can
paint his hair or wear a funny dress, walk
about, he'll achieve God. I don't know
how to tell them that this is not the way. Or
anybody who thinks that he behaves in a ble. If one person has to do it, it's an impo-
funny manner or shouts and screams and says ssibility. He
energy together all of us and let's fly out.
and off they went and they were freed.
Today Sahaja Yoga is that kind of a trick.
One person cannot work it out. It's impossi-
has to go and live in a
cave permanently. Any one person, even
does all these shows, will go to God, is not endowed with powers like Christ, comes on
the prayers very loudly in the street and
possible,
this Earth is crucified, finished. Three years;
then was crucified. Nobody understood him.
So we have to have many more to get out of
this net which is created through the efforts
of the pseudo-people, through our stupidity,
Only way is to keep your wisdom intact:
your steadfast faith that you are the Spirit
and God is compassion and He will make you
the Spirit. This is the only thing that is
needed in a Seeker. But without wisdom
we can say, our wrong doings, misguidances,
when you try anyone of these things, then all kinds of proslems which are against
you have to go a very round circle to come
to the same point but completely bruised,
wounded and sometimes absolutely sick to
evolution. One has to become a whole
group to lift up the society higher so that you
can really get rid of the shackles of this
bondage. Could be there are some gurus
in India who are good gurus who are realized
death.
The problem today is very complex, Your souls who have taken many lives to be reali-
infrastructure is spoiled not only by these zed. They are very clean people: all that is
pseudo-people, also by so many other things there no doubt but they're very few and they
which we have taken to. The society, the all live in the forest hiding in the caves and
family life, the addictions, the habits and so
many things have crawled into us and have
even I told them: why don't you come
down from your hidings ? They said: "it's
Nirmala Yoga
32
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-34.txt 
 belter we're safe here". Their legs are bro- think, that they're wasting their energy and
ken, hands are broken or some, people your energy. Why don't they accept that
have naver tolerated, according to them, for years together they have been doing
After twelve years, I think during all my stay all this nonsense and they have achieved
in England perhaps. they'll be better off to nothing ? My main cancern is that why
come down. People won't hurt them so don't they see it ? Why are they so mass
much. One fellow was beaten up so much minded ? Why don't they see it clearly that
that all his backbone was finished.
these people haven't achieved anything and
what are they going to achieve ? What my
So, real gurus are just hiding and the fake father did, my grandfather did, my great-
ones are out, are just money-making proposi- grandfather did I am doing the same thing
tions, a simple thing as that. Because they i have not achieved anything as they have
know how to pamper your ego to play upon
your weaknesses to make you more imbedded
into that net, into that mire, and take full
advantage of you, that's why they are there. think like that. Every religious person should
People don't like it, people get identified with think that this religion, if it has any meaning,
that kind of cheat but that's not feedom.
not achieved anything.-why not?
Every scientific minded person should
is not giving any fruits, what is written in
them ? In the Islam-if you read, I don't
Freedom is when you really get your own know if you people have read the Koran-but
powers which are withinyou. You have got it's written that there'll be a day of resurrec-
your own powers, you have got to become tion. That resurrection has to take place has
your own guru. You must reach that point
from where you guide yourself in such a way about that ? nobody wants to talk. They'll
that the guiding lines become part and parcel only talk about the day of the doom because
of you. That means in your Central Nervous then they can have nice money, you see ?
System, in your conscious mind. you must Frightening you. The day of the doom is
feel the existence of the Spirit.
been said by everyone of them: but what
coming, better give money. As if God under-
stands your bank accounts. You haven't paid
any money. to become human being so far.
This is what is the evolutionary process;
this is what you have to achieve and all other Every such artificial type of thing is accepted
talks are absolutely of no value. Let us face by reasonably wise, sensible, educated, mature
it. There's no flowery talk needed for it, people and they find it impossible to get out
nothing of the kind : it's a doing. Supposing of. This is the clubbing, this is a mass state.
I tell you: alright you have to make such
and such cake, you mix this mix that; it's
alright. But, when you mix that you find think for yourself. God has made you an
a person is created out of that. Another per- individual. You are like an egg which is an
son can say: alright, I'll mix this, I'll mix that individual-we can say. You have to think
and you will have the cake and there's no about it to judge about it to find out; and
cake, nothing I Then what do you eat? So all then, you become the collective and that
these talks and all these organization and
everything has no meaning of anykind. It Aware. Collectivity
doesn't empower you to be the Spirit. I'm reaction. Like ten people start dancing-oh,
not here to denounce anybody or to make that's a very good cult, you know? What do
anybody look low or anything. But what I they do ? They just stand up and dance. I
No, youare an individual just now but
means you become aware of your collectivity.
doesn't mean
mass
33
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-35.txt 
 mean for that, how much do you have to pay? between Optic Chaisma and how the Sahas-
Only ten pounds that's all. You just go there,
take out your clothes and dance, finished: thing the Light of Spirit has to come to
you get to God. Very simple matter and peo- enlighten all that. that's all, nothing more
ple believe in it. I tell you, people believe needed. You have to just choose that sensi-
in it. They believe in all these tall stories.
tāra is made so beautifully. Is amazing. Only
biy, that you have to become the Spirit.
You cannot force on the organization of
The simplest thing they have to see: have
we become our Spirit? A simple question we
should ask ourselves: Is it for our Spirit? Is
there any rapport established with the Divine
Power. Have we felt the Divine Power any-
where? And when we are not keeping our
minds steady on this point, we can be ruined.
This whole, the structure, gets spoiled which gentle, so kind, so compassionate, that you
is a very delicately made, beautifully made, would hate to change that organization, but
God has made it the best of all, better than
all the trees put together, all the animals put who think that that is the ultimate you have
together: everything is the epitome of His to seek, it's all arranged to enter into the
Creation-is Man. Except for one thing: that Kingdom of God. The time has come. This is
he has been given freedom to choose; it had
to go, that had to be done.
If you don't give freedom at this stage, people who deny and the other day one book
how can you anter into complete freedom? was saying that He never resurrected himself;
If you do not know how to use your freedom, these human beings I must say 1 They scienti-
supposing a man who doesn't know how to fically get proof, scientifically 1 Can you ima-
use his freedom, he goes about with daggers; gine ? Now, how can you prove scientifically,
killing this, killing that, killing that person
God anything. He is on his own, His organiz-
ation is on his own. Only thing you can do is
to enter into His Kingdom and become a part
and pracel of that blissful domain. You would
never like to change it either. It is so wonder-
ful. It is so protective, it's so loving, is so
we dol We try to organize God. For people
the Day of Resurrection. These are the days of
resurrection. What Christ did-there are many
1 don't understand. According to them He
was, He didn't die; of course He cannot, He's
be
an eternal being, I know, that part is correct.
But He never died. He died the way a Divine
killing himself, it
can
starts
or
both ways. There are some who start killing
others or start killing themselves. Will you
give him freedom? Even in the normal way has to die, but He resurrected himself as a
we don't give him freedom to go about killing Divine has to resurrect. He definitely resur-
others or killing himself. So he is to have rected himself. But the scientists were not
that idea of using his freedom towards him- there to see. Then He descended again, that's
self and towards others; and that freedom we
a different point altogether but He definitely
resurrected His Divine body; but He had such
a beautiful confident personality after that,
have to use and if we have used it properly,
wisely, then there's no problem
that wherever He went He left a great im-
Because he's made so beautifully. I told print on people. And this is the trouble that
you how Kundalini is placed. How She's they're trying to prove everything scientifical-
placed at the safest spot and how She's coiled ly. You cannot prove Christ's resurrection
and how the centres are kept so subtly within scientifically, that's why you cannot deny it
your Medula Oblongata in your spinal cord.
How it is protected and how this Agnya Cha-
kra is placed between Pituitary and Pineal
either. What He did on the gross level, at
that time, it has to happen in a subtle level
within you. That he has done-that's why
Nirmala Yoga
34
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-36.txt 
 ourselves, because it is our loss. nobody
they say: "you have to pass through Him".
He has done that for us. He has really done alse's, that so far we have not achieved that
it and we have to see that happening within state of Spirit and that in all humility we are
us. Not by saying that now we follow going to achieve it. We have to achieve it, we
Christ, alright you have one big flag, colours have to accept that this should happen to us,
of Christ. you see. You are all Christian soldi-
ers walking and "we believe in Christ and we ral. It's just in the event that at this time it
sre all resurrected." No, you're not:-you're had to happen. It's very simple thing. There's
not-At the most if you're a good Christian, or
a good Hindu, or a good Muslim, good; again yourself much. But even if you have, the
| say. then you're well balanced for your
resurrection. But, if you are not even that. and work it out. This is the blessing of the
then it's problem for me, problem for you. But Đivine where you become the Spirit and then
if you had been a good Jew or a good you reach your absolute form where there's
Christian or a good Hindu in the sense that
you have kept your sustenance all tight, you
have been a normal person, you have gone
through the Central Path and you have kept that you just start feeling a cool breeze
to the Central Path of Life, you're not an
extremist, not a person who does anything and then you ask a question: is there God?
abnormal, normal person, then you're very And the breeze is much more. If you ask
good for Realizaion; it's as simple as that.
This is so simple. It's so simple and so natu-
no complication if you have not complicated
Divine Power knows how to dişentangle you
no doubt about it.
If you want to know what happens is
flowing into your hands or from your hands;
about a thug: Is he a good man? It stops.
The rapport is established with your Spirit. It
But the way people have carried this speaks to you as a cool breeze in the hands.
This cool breeze in the hand is the energy of
simple method of organizing people into better
life into something so absurd-like hating each the Spirit fiowing by which your disease get
other, killing each other or all sorts of things. cured, you can cure the diseases of others.
you know. I mean it has nothing to do with you can raise the Kundalini of others and
give them Realization and you can enjoy the
beauty of Nature; not thinking about it or
God. And: "we are the chosen ones, and we
are the best, and we are the selected", this is
self-certificate, You see if I say I'm the aradu- grossly valueing it but just enjoying it in a
ate of the Cambridge University, how long full way. This is the short and sweet but it's
can I befool myself and others, which l'm such a long story taught a thousands of years
not. In the same way we have to be really. back and today it is just reaching its climax.
get our certificate from ourselves that we are
reborn, not from anybody else.
the blossom time has come for this story and
if the Seekers cooprate l'm sure it will work
So, we boil down to this point that we out, have all the hapes.
have to be really really very honest with
May God bless you all.
Nirmala Yoga
35
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-37.txt 
 The Speech of Dr. (Mrs.) S. Swaminathan
(Shri Matajis sister)
Honourable guests, who have graced the Nirootāi was most zealous about accepting
occasion of my elder sister's 60th birthday, this change.
my younger brothers and sisters and Sahaja
Yogi brothers and sisters. This evening, I
consider myself fortunate for getting this meetings of the then Congress, and Iremember
oppartunity of saying a few words about that Nirootai held similar meetings at home
Nirootai. We call her Nirootäi whom you for us and imitating the laders she delivered
know as Mataji Nirmala Devi.
Our mother had to take all of us in the car
whenever she and father had to attend the
speeches from the "Home-Stage". We sang
Nirootai and myself, we both grew up to- the song "Charkha chala chala ké Léngé
gether and hence I had the privilege of being
closely acquainted with her virtues and the by turning the spinning wheel). We accom-
dynamism of her personality. We were born panied our mother for picketing the wine-
when India was a slave country, yot, being shops. But most important were our proces-
born in an affluent and well-to-do family we
did not suffer from any want or other problems "Vänar-séna" (Army of the monkeys) especially
of life. Our childhood days were spent happily for the children. With the tri-colour flag of
and merrily. We were born at Chhindwära Congress in her hands Nirootäi led these
i.e. my elder brother Mr. Narendrakumar
Salve,-who must be known to you all where we stayed.
because today he is the Minister for Steel and
Mines,-Nirootai, myself and my younger understanding and purpose of achieving
brother Mr. Balasaheb Salve, we four were something in life and not merely to satisfy
born at Chhindwära; and the younger three one's ego, was evident in Nirootái, right from
brothers and sisters were born at Nagpur, her childhood.
Swarājya Lênge" (we shall win our freedom
sions. Bapu (Gandhiji) had introduced a
processions which went round the locality
Thus "leadership" and that too with full
because our tather shifted to Nagpur in
the year 1928. In the year 1930, which
is supposed to be the most crucial year in the Started, Nirootäi participated very actively. I
struggle for the Independece of our Nation, do not know if she has told you of an incident,
our life-style underwent a total change, Our of this period, that she had to be rusticated
father renounced his title of "Rao-Sahib" to
join the Freedom movement. We were too
young to understand the significance of the refused to co-operate with the movement.
change that was coming in our way of life
i.e. our clothes, our activities etc. but perhaps received by the Principal of the college, he,
due to an inborn love for freedom, we wel- being a close friend of our father. proceeded on
comed the change and never opposed it. All leave. The Vice-Principal came to our home
of us accepted the change but, amongst us, and met our mother. Father was already in jail
In 1942, when "Quit-India" movement
from the college, for presenting bangles to the
son of the Director of Public Instructions-who
When the orders of the rustication were
This is the Enlish iranslation of the speech in Marathi delivered on the occasion of the 6lth Birthday Celebra-
tions of Shri Mataji at Bombay on 22nd March 1983.
*Tai-this word is suffixed to the name of an elder sister, in Marathi, to show respect for her.
Nirmala Yoga
36
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-38.txt 
 and hence he requested our mother that she right-values, importance of an ethical life and
should withdraw Nirootäi's name from the spirituality, laid by our parents in our child-
college otharwise her educational career would hood.
be ruined. Mother discussed the whole issue
with Nirootäi, who fearlessly told mother and
the Vice-Principal that she would never allow
her nama to be withdrawn, She would much
Every evening, after returning from the
court, our father played the organ and taught
us Bhajans (devotional-hymns) of all religions..
We are Christians but I do not remember any
special preference for Christian hymns alone.
Being fond of music I was specially interested
in learning these Bhajans. The first Bhajan
rather accept the punishment (of the British
Govt.). What a sacrifice! A girl taking such a
bold decision at the age of 15 or 16 was not
a trifling matter.
Such decisions can be
prompted only by some inner inspiration, taught was "Bande Jap Man Har Giridhari
They cannot be forced and hence these inspi- (0 mind remember Har (Shiva) and Giridhari le.
rations coming from within like the "Word of
Divine can lift a person to very high and
lofty levels. We were very lucky in having
very understanding parents who never suppres-
sed our inner urges. Ihave already men- bed in us right from our childhood and with
tioned that our father was already in jail. this background, I am not in the least sur-
Correspondence with the family was not allo- prised that "Sahaja-Yoga" has become the
Shri Krishna) in Räg (melody) Darbari Känarā,
He even made us sing these Bhajans indi-
vidually,
Thus reverence for all religions was imbi-
do not know if you are aware of the "life-mission" of Nirootai.
wed.
hardships of the families of the freedom-
fighters bafore independence, because today
you are sitting here in a free India and many motherly love for all. We are much impres-
of you may have been born in Independent sed and moved by the deep faith and the
India. We received a letter which our father genuins devotion that all of you have for her.
had put in the pocket of the coat which he I have been obsarving since yesterday how
had sent for the laundry-wash, He had written earnestly and tenderly you want to look after
"1 have read in the papers, Heartiest Congra- her. I remarked jokingly that I cannot be
tulations to Nirmala". Thus, even then all of certain that even my daughters-in-law would
us were proud of her. Just the other day
some persons who are writing the biography
of a freedom-fighter had enquired about
Nirootai's contributions to freedom struggle, loving considerations and pure-affection is a
because she and a friend of her's had dared
to travel about with this freedom fighter as his if we are asked to be selfish, to distrust each
daughters only to save him from being other and to be violent and destructive. But
Har another distinguished quality is her
look after me so well!
Therefore in a world like this, to come
across such deep faith, genuine devotion,
rare experience. We shall collect by thousands
arrested.
we shall hesitate to come forward if we are
asked to love each other, care for others as
our own, and respect a human-being just
because he or she is a human being.
Even after her marriage Nirootāi did not
change and only because of her such unequivo-
cal qualities she has béen able to collect a big
family of so many of you. According to me
she has been attracted by "Sahaja Yoga" challenge-a challenge not only on the national
mainly because of the solid founda'ion, of level but also on international level, and for
Therefore Nirootai has accepted a real
Nirmala Yoga
37
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-39.txt 
 I am grateful to you all for giving me an
this we, brothers and sisters are very proud of
her. She has given ma an idea of her work opportunity for expressing my thoughts before
and the people who have become her disci- you and on behalf of our family members I
ples. Why not ? Because I firmly believe that pray to God that Nirootai should be blessed
"goodness" is the essential quality of a
human-being and therefore whatever tempta- contribute in our way in her mission of "Sahaja
tions may come his way he ultimately chooses Yoga". I am sure all of yau will also co-
the right path and comes to realise that operate with her. And in the end, besee-
spiritual-life and God are not myths but are ching the Lord to help her. I conolude my
with a very very long life. We shall try to
speech.
Real!
WE PRAY
"Poetic Genius" did Blake inspire,
A Higher light, the coolest fire,
Did rend the callous curtain hung,
Ignorance gone ! thy knell is rung-
So too, sweet luminescent Chime
Speak forth in me the truth though rhyme.
That that, Etheric translucent thing.
Might take form through pen and bring,
Her light and love more into play.
And hasten forth that Dawning Day-
Shri Durga Ma, with Hands untold,
let forth thy drama, now. unfold.
And whatever help that wwe might be,
Let us be that, Shri Mataji.
-Pavan Keetley (Sydney)
Nirmala Yoga
38
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-40.txt 
 SHRI WILLIAM BLAKE-I
"AND DID THOSE FEET..."
One evening Shri Mataji brought some
Sahaja Yogis together at Her home in London.
There were a number of Italians who sang
William Blake was the Archangel Michael
come to this world out of Pure Love, for us.
He exists inside each one of us, we can
approach him through meditation to reveal very beautifully to Shri Mother. Afterwards
his qualities of compassion. He is often She asked the English to sing Jerusalem,
portrayed as slaying Satan. But Blake pain-
ted the Archangel Michael binding Satan. In recalled how the building of Her house was
this picture Satan is shown as one who described by Blake, and revealed that he was
has reverted to reptile nature, the lowest Shri Bhairava. Much of what he has written
animal drive in human nature. Shri Michael is is as seen from left-side, the workings of
not slaying but binding the reptile. Thus time and space as he has tried to explain
inside us He is the power by which we over- them to us. Shri Mother described how
come the base aspect of our human selves on time acts as a curve, and while you are one
left side.
Blake's great Hymn.
Then Shri Mother
with it you cannot see what is ahead waiting
for you. If one ascends above it, which may
be achieved by one's growth in Sahaja Yoga,
In his writing also Blake describes
these things, how Satan personifies the
Sensationalism in humanity.
human nervous system is like a vast living one may see past and future quite clearly, if
coral reet-a giant Polyp. Satan is its dark one chooses to. So it is with Shri Mataji, so it
potential. Shri Michael is who deals with this was with Shri Blake.
Rebel Nature not with weapons but with
compassion, sad that anyone should fall from
their state of grace.
Michael weeping at the conflict in Heaven, cular, but also other parts of the world. not
and the lack of repentance of those who have as they appeared in his day. or may still
come against the Divine order. Then the appear to us today. But as they were in
two are shown locked together in a fixed their innocence and will be again in the new
space-left side as opposing forces.
The whole
In his works therefore, Shri Blake describes
many parts of London and England in parti-
Blake describes Shri
Jerusalem,
Nature. He often says that all things had
their beginning on Albion's Rocky shores and
this being
their Primordial
Through these revelations of Blake's, we
can understand that the left-side can be will end there. Traditionally we associate
enlightened by compassion for others and for Albion with England, or Britain as a whole.
ourselves, the understanding that the key to
the doors of heavens is forgiveness-When
on left side we recognize our wrong deeds Mother's residence is, were the most ancient
and ask to be forgiven. This must also be parts of the city where God and Man dwelt
done to correct our relationship to the collec- together. To look at them now, one may not
tive. Until we recognize our mistakes we realise their Holiness, yet the earth on which
cannot assume our place within the assembly Selfridge's and Park Lane are built is most
of Saints. All this is described most fully and sacred and has felt the touch of lord
clearly in the opening passages of "Milton". Ganesha's Lotus Feet in Ancient times, as it
It may be aimed at English people especial!y does again today through the incarnation of
where laft-side is most attacked and weakest. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi.
He describes how the area of Hyde Park,
Oxford Street and Kensington, where Shri
39
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-41.txt 
 Blake combines past and future as oné change. As the people of Britain awaken to
huge Tapestry woven in space by the Holy their own role in the Divine plans, no doubt
Mother. Only when the tapestry is completed Blake's work will also come to fruition as part
will the plough and harrow be passed across of that self-discovery, the whole story is
the nations. He describes how in other there of how the new Jerusalem will be raised
realms the preparations are progressing furi-
ously for the Harvest to come. That was
in his day. Now through Nirmala Vidya and
the advent of Shri Mataji we know the
harvest has begun. He describes the Eager-
ness of the celestial beings to purge the earth
of Bādhā and how they are restrained so
that the humans may have a chance to grow show us. As Sahaja Yogis we can learn
to maturity. Elsewhere he states that the most through meditation and thoughtless
time allocated to Satan in which he may
avoid judgement is 6000 years-the period of intellectual machinery when we read Blake's
Kali Yuga, from the time Shri Krishna left the
earth. Now this t00, as we know through and humility we would assume before any
Shri Mother's Grace, is at an end.
on the site of the old, beginning with the
foundations in Lambeth where the first
permanent Sahaja Yoga Centre in Britain was
established.
This introduction to Blake has covered a
few essential points of all that he has tried to
That means laying aside our
awareness.
poems and approaching them with the respect
other sacred writing.
There is a short anecdote from Blake's
Another passage especially worth men-
tioning here is where he describes Mother life with which we might round off the article.
Mary weeping,. Her tears flow throughout the
earth and wherever they touch people are Catherine. Critics have read in this the material
transformed. This is the Chaitanya by Shri poverty of the Blakes but to Sahaja Yogis it
Mahalakshmi's Grace.
It concerns a statement made by his wife
will be an indication of something quite
different. This is it: A visitor to their home.
So it is that in our heritage in England we seemingly not a very polite visitor, remarked
have a great divine personality.
hava struggled to understand his writings for
Scholars
upon the absence of soap. Catherine, a simple
woman, replied "Mr. Blake's skin don't Dirt.
over a century now, and he has come to be
regarded as a problematic figure in literature.
So his work has not reached a wide public
though in recent years this has begun to
Om Tvameva Sākshāt Shri Mahā Bhairava
Sākshāt Shri Adi Shakti Shri Nirmala Devi
Namo Namah.
Thou percievest the Flowers put forth their precious odours!
And none can tell how from so small a center comes such sweets.
Forgetting that within that Center Eternity Expands.
William Blake
Nirmala Yoga
40
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-42.txt 
 Shri William Blake-Il
"Milton" and other Works......
One day some Sahaja Yogis were sitting
at Shri Mataji's Feet in Her apartment which large areas of Mother Earth and calling them
was on the top floor of a London building. "British' colonies and dependencies. Into this
Shri Mataji was sitting in front of a window darkness came the blinding light of Blake's
and from where Her children sat. Our Divine poetry and paintings. Blake's contemporaries
Mother's form was silhouetted against the could not, in general, appreciate him either as
cloudless blue sky. Shri Mataji broke the a poet or a painter. His poems were engraved
silence and told us that Her physical form is on etching plates and the writing was accom-
like a photograph, while what lies behind it pained by illustrations which bring aut the
is vastness itseif. As She spoke, we could meaning of the text. Naturally they have
see behind Her the vastness of the limpid wonderful vibrations as well!
sky.
were wantonly and egotistically annexing
It is not surprising that no one understood
William blake's writings are like this; Blake in his time, because his inspiration
especially his prophetic works, which are long comes from Pure Spirit, and he wrote at a
sagas in blank verse, and are considered time when men were mostly floundering in a
obscure and incomprehensible by the "Ex- mire of materialism, ignorance or crippling
perts" who study and intellectualise about poverty.. Some of his writings are sensitive,
Blake. Blake was an incarnation of Shri moving and powerful poems in the conventio-
Bhairava, When we read "Milton",
or nal sense, but for Sahaja Yogis the most
c relevent as guides to our present growth and
are the prophetic works. Shri
Mataji has revealed that "Milton" tells every-
Jerusalem". two of the longest prophetic.
works, we can pick out a line or two here and evolution,
there which 'makes sense", and through the
grace of Shri Mataji have an understanding thing about Sahaja Yoga and also that all the
of the overall theme of resurrection, judg- prophetic works deal directly with Shri Adi
ment, salvation and the establishment of the
Kingdom of the Spirit on earth. But all this
is like a group of photographs-they give a
series of glimpses but not the complete of Milton:
reality. Only when we are totally surrendered
to Shri Maaji, and the Spirit is totally
established in us both individually and col- the furnace..."
lectively, will we fully understand and grasp
the vastness and depth of William Blake's
writings.
Shakti's incarnation on this earth at this time.
Take this one line from plate (or page) 6
"The Surrey hills glow like the clinkers of
When Shri Mataji first came to England,
She lived in Oxted in the Surrey hills south of
London. At night the oranage street lights in
the broad Valley of central London glowed
the darkest time of the industrial revolution, like clinkers & when Our Divine Mother look-
the Age of Reason and of faith in scientific ed out in that direction they reminded Her of
this. The lights diffused an orange glow into
Willian Blake was born in England during
discovery. and at a period when the British
Nirmala Yoga
41
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-43.txt 
 the Lamb, and the Lamb is Lord Jesus, the
Lamb of God. Jerusalem means 'place of the
Spirit i.e. the Kingdom of Shri Mataji, of the
the heavens so the town and sky looked like a
vast furnace.
Many places in London are mentioned in Sahasrara come on earth. The oak is the tree
Blake's poetry and most of these have close
connections with Sahaja Yoga. Here are some which is the tree of life within each one of
examples from "Milton".
of England-strong and firm like the Kundaini
us. The first temple constructed to a living
deity was in Lambeth, and rose from the ruins
of a tumbledown house there. While the Saha-
ja Yogis from many nations laboured and built,
"Hampstead's breadths..." There is a
very active group of Sahaja Yogis in Hamp-
stead. North London, Shri Mataji has explai
ned that in the Spiritual Body of this Mother Shri Mataji simultaneously repaired their
Earth, Hampstead is the muscle of the heart ruined Kundalinis and made strong Oak
which actually makes it beat.
Groves' of them. This temple is Shri Ganesha's
house, Shri Mataji has said, and where She
"To Stratford and Old Bow... These laid the foundation stone of the New Jeru-
districts are in the East End of London, and salem. Shri Ganesha came on earth as Lord
the home of another strong group of Sahaja Jesus, the Lamb of God, to open the way
for us to follow Him to 'Jerusalem'. When
Shri Mataji was asked whether the building
"Across to the Gardens of Kensington. work by the Sahaji Yogis at Lambeth and at
This refers to Shri Shri Mataji's house at Brompton Square were
Mataji house at Brompton Square, Knights- indeed symbolic of the rebuilding of our
bridge. The house is very near the Kensington Kundalinis by our Divine Mother, She replied
Gardens, and the Tyburn Brook. (now that at last we were beginning to look at
dammed up to become the Serpentine Lake) everything about this from the right angle,
Yogis.
"On Tyburn's Brook...
the Knight's the correct standpoint.
was the stream over which
Bridge led the road.
Here is another passage which refers to
one of the former London Aahrams, at Night-
So this is one side of Blake, a fascinating
puzzle of names and places. But like the
words of Shri Mataji, his writings are relevant ingale Lane, also in Lambeth, where the love
on many levels simultaneously. For example, and collectivity really began to flow. The
passage also refers to the rising of the Kun-
dalini, which of course enlightens and give
rebirth to each one of us, and which collec-
tively became much stronger there. The Lark
what does this passage mean?
"Lambeth's vale, where Jerusalems, foun-
ations began, where they were laid in ruins,
Where they were laid in ruins from every in the following lines is an English bird which
Nation, and Oak Groves rooted ..
lives in the cornfields and at dawn rises
vertically up into the sky where it hovers
When shall Jerusalem return and over- motionless and sings a beautiful song high
above the meadows. It is like the Kundalini
spread all the nations?
Return, return to Lambeth's vale, O buil- which rises from the Mooladhära, (earth
element) into the heavens, the Sahasrāra.
And this is what Lord Ganesha has shown
Lambeth is a large borough of South us. He was created of Maha Virata, the most
London. The word Lambeth means city of gross matter, and through His devotion to
ding of human souls !"
Nirmala Yoga
42
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-44.txt 
 His Mother, who is pure Spirit, is transformed why this is necessary:
into that which is the finest, the pure Aum-
kara or vibrations. This transfiguration is
the basic theme of Blake, and here is the
"All that can be annihilated must be an-
nihilated
That the Children of Jerusalem may be
saved from slavery".
passage:
He later describes what we would define
"Thou hearest the Nightingale begin the
Song of Spring.
The Lark sitting upon his earthy bed, just
as the morn
as the conditioning and false concepts of the
t Super Ego and Ego etc. as;
"This is a false Body, an Incrustation over
my Immortal Spirit,
A Selfhood which must be put off and
annihiliated away."
But the end of the poem is optimistic
even though the assertion and affirmation
that the Last Judgment is at hand is
obvious... It reads thus;
Appears, listens sifent; then springing from
the waving Cornfield, loud
He leads the Choir Day: trill, trill, trill tril,
Mounting upon the wings of light into the
Great Expanse:
Reechoing against the lovely blue and
shining Heavenly Shell.
His. little throat labours with inspiration:
*Rintrah and Palambron view the Human
Harvest beneath.
every feather
On throat and breast and wings vibrates
with rhe effluence Divine."
Their Wine-presses and Barns stand open,
the Ovens are prepared.
The wagons ready: territic Lions and Tygers
sport and play.
All animals upon the Earth are prepared in
all their strength
To go forth to the Great Harvest and
Vintage of the Nations,"
In the poem' Milton' the personality Milton
represents the seeker, who is originally created
by the Divine and at the beginning of the
poem is found in the heavens. then, descends
into matter and ignorance and ultimately is
again raised up to a state of realisation3B
If an ordinary human reads Blake, it is
both an uplifting and sobering experience,
"What moved Milton, who walked about If a Sahaja Yogi reads what he or she knows
in Eternity
to be the words of Shri Bhairava the effect
is very profound indeed. The message is loud
and clear on every page: Shri Kalki, the second
coming of Christ is imminent, so either trans-
One hundred years..
..to go into the deep,
her to redeem and himself to perish?" "her" is
the Spirit, and "himself" is that which is not
form or be destroyed. We must become totally
surrendered instruments of love and compas-
the Spirit, that which must be transformed sion, and then the Kingdom of heaven is there.
and left behind. Like all true seekers, for
But on NO ACCOUNT must we sympathise
this end Milton will undergo all the tests and with Satan (negativity) in any way whatsoever
purifications on the path. He will:
or:
"He who will not defend Truth, may be
"Bathe in the Waters of Life" (the chaita-
nya, the vibrations,) and he will even go to
Eternal Death". by which Blake means the
death of all that is not Spirit. Blake explains
compelled to
Defend a Lie, that he may be snared and
caught and taken.
43
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-45.txt 
 Blake describes violent and cataclysmic what great blessings we have been given,
events within the collective nature of Man what an honour it is to witness and be actors
and without in the material world and we in this episode of the drama of creation, and
must accept as truth. given the identity of the
writer. However, as Sahaja Yogis we all who has given us such a change to be
known that deep down all we seek is the
purity of the Spirit. and that She is our com- of the Divine at this time long foreseen by our
assionate Mother who will nurture and protect wise forefather such as Blake.
this spark of eternity within us. Consequently
we need only know inner joy, despite the
possibility of external change and transfor-
mation all around.
how endless is the compassion of Shri Mataji,
transformed into instruments and servants
On the back of the last plate of "Milton"
was written in pencil by the poeti
"Father and Mother. I return now from
flames of fire tried and pure and white". The
Father and Mother teferred to must be Lord
Sadashiva and Shri Adi Shakti. In the last
plate of "Milton", the Virgin says to Milton:
In the second verse of the hymn we call
Jerusalem', (actually the opening lines of the
poem "Milton,) are the following lines:
"I will not cease from mental fight,
Nor shall my sword sleep in my hand
Till we have built Jerusalem
"Thou goest to Eternal Death and all must
go with thee". So let us the Sahaja Yogis
offer this prayer to Shri Mataji that we too may
return to Her and rise above Blake's "Furnaces
of aftliction", "the dreadful thunde:ings" and
"the mortal and perishing delights" and all
the other rich and evocative descriptions of
In England's green and pleasant land."
(The writer begs forgiveness if the next
sentence is not an exact quotation of our
Divine Mother). After hearing the hymn, Shri
Mataji laughed gently & said to us:
"How can I put swords in your hands if the world today as Shri Mataji has given
your hands are shaking? That was three
years ago now, and some of us present were
still very unsteady at that time. Perhaps now
we are beginning to see a little of the titanic
battle that our Beloved Mother is fighting for Bhairava sakshat. Shri Adi Shakti Shri Mataji
us. After reading Blake, let us remember Shri Nirmala Devi namo namah.
us realisation and taken us to the Kingdom
of Jerusalem, and Sahaja Yoga.
Om twameva sakshat, Shri Mahakali, Shri
FROM WILLIAM BLAKE
He who binds to himself a joy.
Doth the winged life destroy,
But he who kisses the joy as it flies
Lives in Eternity's sunrise.
If you trap the moment before its ripe
The tears of repentance you'll certainly wipe
But if once you let the ripe moment go,
You can never wipe off the tears of woe.
Nirmala Yoga
44
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-46.txt 
 Shri Mataji's advice
Try to understand thus: As you enter
youth, leaving behind the childhood, you
have the interests of young age ie. your
I told you, in Sahaja Yoga. how you go
into the state of thoughtless awareness.
After the unison with the Spirit (Tadatmya)
one can attain the stage of vicinity with God service, business, family etc; you take interest
(Samipya) and the God realization (Salokya).
But on achieving the unity with the Spirit,
person's interest itself changes.
and ail other childhood
only in these
interests drop off. old experiences fade away
and your attention goes towards new ex-
periences. Or try to understand this way
Just by achieving the state of unison with Say, a person is not interested in music, and
somehow he has become interested-he is
the Spirit, with it's experience, a person does
not wish to go into the state of Salokya and interested in classical music-then he is not
Samipya. That means, when vibrations start going to enjoy any other music, let there be
lowing into your hands and when you feel any concert of non-classical music.
other's Kundalini and can raise other's Kunda-
Your condition in Sahaja Yoga should also
be similar. As regards your ether habits and
lini, your chitta (attention) goes towards
watching other's Kundalini and understanding likings, the fact is that they were gradually
your own. You want to be alert about your and intentionally cultivated and hence those
chakras and understand other's chakras.
interests are deeply imbibed in you. Sahaja
Yoga has brought atout a complete trans-
formation within you,-you have come into
a state of new awareness, you can now feel
If you look at the sky, you may see--even
though there are clouds-you will see many
types of Kundalinis. Because, now that your
attention has gone to Kundalini, whatever the vibrations and other's Kundalini, you can
you want to know about Kundalini, whatever give realization to many people, you have
you want to see, whatever desires you have, cured many people, you have entered into
these will be revealed to you. Your interest
in Kundalini grows and all other interests
a new power and you are charged with it.
But in doing all this there is only one
shortcoming, and that is "you have not made
are lost.
This is based on Shri Mataji's advice given at Bombay on 27th May 1976.
published in NIRMALA YOGA (Hindi) vol. VI, (March-April 1983).
Full Hindi version bas been
45
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-47.txt 
 ảny effort and everything has happened by
itself, effortlessly". Perhaps that's the reason should light a lamp before the photograph,
why although many people receive vibrations apply sindur (vermilion), dip their feet in
in Sahaja Yoga and also rise to a level, even salted water and sit in this fashion opening
then their attention never stabilizes on Para-
mātmä, Atmä, Kundalini; and repeatedly it yau do this. more than half of your problems
goes to wrong things.
at least for five minutes. All Sahaja Yogis,
out both palms towards the photograph. If
would be solved automatically. However
You had asked, "What to do after getting busy you may be, it is not difficult
the realization". After receiving you must
to
spare five minutes. All should sit like this
give. It is absolutely necessary to give after Detore retiring. That will stop more than
receiving, otherwise receiving has no mean-
ing. And while giving. ane point-only one
small point, must be kept in mind, "That the tendencies. There are many dark tendencies
body, the
(buddhi),-that means the "whole personality tivities. They try strongly to influence.
with which you are giving such an incom- be undar their control is being under satan's
parable thing, that itself should be very control. You can become Satan if you want,
beautiful; your being should be very clean."
There should be no disease in it. If you have different thing if you want to become Satan.
any sickness-perhaps there may be some
Sahaja yogis having diseases. Before coming to
Sahaja Yoga you must be getting worried save yourselves from being the Satan.
and wishing that the disease should be
somehow cured. But thereafter the attention
would not be on the sickness and you would dangers on your left and right sides. Specially
be saying, "It will be alright, does
matter." But it is wrong
half of your catching.
Within ourselves there exist many bad
mind (mänas), the intellect only within ourselves, which are called nega-
To
or you can become God if you want.
it is a
I am not the Guru for that.
Vou have to become God.
I am the Guru if
But, you should
First thing to note is that on the night of
new-moon and full-moon, always there are
not
on these two days, that is, the nights of new
moon and full moon, you should sleep early.
your problem, even minor, you can cure your- After your meals, bow before the photograph,
self by placing your hand on that spot, you meditate, and putting attention in Sahasrāra,
Whatever may be
can keep yaur physical side very clean.
sleep after getting into the bandhan. That
means you go into the unconscious the very
moment your attention goes to Sahasrāra.
However, for you I have told you one
remedy. As it is said, everyone must go to
bathroom and clean oneself after getting up There, do yourself the bandhan and you are
in the morning. Similarly, for Sahaja Yogis,
it is extremely necessary to have foot-soaking
treatment, at least for five minutes, before
going to bed. However highly evalved you may
be and you may not be getting caught-but it and surrender yourself to Him. On the night
does not matter. You must do foot-soaking for
at least five minutes, Even I take this treatment
sometimes, (although it is not necessary for
me) so that my Sahaja Yogis will also take to
it. It is a very good habit.
saved. During these two nights particularly.
The night of new moon, you should medi-
tate on Shri Shiva. You should sleep after
meditating on Shri Shiva-that is the Spirit-
of full moon, you should meditate on Shri
Rāma and surrender yourself to Him for pro-
tection. The meaning of the word Rāma-
chandra is"creativity". You should completely
dedicate your creative powers to Him. Thus
you have to take special care of yourself on
these two days.
All Sahaja Yogis must do the foot-soaking
46
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-48.txt 
 However on the seventh and ninth days Mataji. You must be carelul about the heart
of Lunar fortnights (according to the Indian chakra. May be sometimes one may get a
Calendar "saptami" and "navami") you have problem on the heart chakra. You must clear
my special blessings.
you are getting specially these blessings
from Me on these two days. Make some
special arrangements so thát you can have are very dry personalities. And you cannot
good meditation on these days: This is how do anything for such persons even if you
you should protect yourself.
Do remember that the heart chakra.
But many people have no heart ! They
wish to. However, if they request you,
advise them to leave Hatha Yoga, relieve
And whenever you are leaving your themselves of the burden of different jobs,
house give yourself the bandhan; always be in and learn to love others; to love at least the
pets first, if they cannot love a human being.
the bandhan.
You should also love everyone.
If you come across someone having a
catch on Agya, get into the bandhan, even with
attention. Never argue with a person who's children.
caught on Agya; it is a foolishness. Can you anyone. Never harm anyone. Nobody should
ever argue with a bhoot?
Love th children. Never be unjust to
In fact you should not be unjust to
beat the children.
Also do not argue with a person who is
caught on Vishuddhi.
Never raise your hand to beat, never get
angry with anyone. Particularly, Sahaja Yogis
should never be angry. VWithout getting anno-
Never approach the person caught on yed, they should improve everything tactfully
Sahasrara ! Have no contact with him.
him to improve his Sahasrăra first. There
should be no objection in telling him, "Your
Sahasrara is caught. Put it right." Sahasrāra keep your own instruments clean. And
should be kept clean. If anyone has started
catching on Sahasråra, that person should if your aims are high and if you want to rise.
immediately request other Sahaja Yogis, "Do
something and clear my Sahasrära". If some-
one caught on Sahasrāra talks to you, you
should tell him that he is your enemy. Never place. Everywhere. You may go anywhere.
talk to him as long as he is caught.
Tell
and intelligently. Never get angry.
have told you all this so that you can
always keep high ideals. You will rise only
Never look down.
I am with you at evury step, at every
At every place I am with you,; completely, in
person, by mind and in every respect. When-
As regards a person caught on Heart, you ever you will remember me I will be by your
should help the person having catch on the
Heart. As far as possible, put bandhan on
his heart, let him put one hand on his heart them down. Hence be careful and look
and take him to the photograph of Shri upwards.
side with all my powers. It is my promise.
Those who want to go to hell, I am pulling
47
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-49.txt 
 THE WOMAN-POWER
Woman-Saviour now we muster
To await they advent sure,
In the cluster of thy lustre,
Come and leave the earth no more?
Then before thy gentle look,
Swords shall quail and warriors fail,
And the spear, a shepherd's crook,
Shall adorn the daisied dale.
Woman-power! Incarnate Love!
Human Goddess come and be,
If the Bridegroom's tears can move,
Bride unto Humanity.
Thou alone of all can Save us
Let us be what thou would have us!
Between 1750 and 1850 there were a series of prophecies of a Female Messiah
This poem was written in 1841 by Goodwyn Barmby, the self-styled Pontiffarch, or
leader, of the Communist Church, an obscure Christian sect which existed in Britain between
1841 and 1849. To place Barmby in context, he was of the generation after William Blake,
and was at the end of an extraordinary period in British history.
By Communist', Barmby meant commune-ist', emphasising the community of
fellow-believers. A concept similar to our own "Collectivity,
Barmby had an interesting concept, the 'equilibriated being'. He viewed the important
issue facing humanity in his time (1840s) as beings "not of woman nor of man, but
gentleness and of force" which he wished to see "united in every human individual,
without relation to sex". Thus, to be a true communist or Socialist.
of
"the man must possess the woman-power as well as the man-power, and the woman
must possess the manpower as well as the woman power. Both must be equilibriated
beings",
An interesting view of balance!
His wife, Catherine, wrote:
"We have the priest, wa therefore demand the priestess, the Woman teacher of the
word, the woman apostle of God's lawl"
This could merely have been a call for women Christian ministers. However, it could be a
prophecy of out Divine Mother's Coming, as could the following comment by Goodwyn
Barmby in a letter to a friend:
"But the Free Woman who shall give the womanly tone to the entire globe is not yet
manifested".
The Barmbys were treated with contempt and derision by their contemporaries. After the
collapse of their church in 1849, the Barmbys continued their Christian faith, though in a
a less controversial manner.
There have been many prophecies of a Female Messiah throughout history. This is just one.
Perhaps others could be written about in the pages of Nirmala Yoga? For instance, the
Joachite Reign of the Holy Ghost (Europe, 13th century AD).
John Noyce, Brighton, (U.K.)
Nirmala Yoga
48
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-50.txt 
 International Poojas to Her Holiness
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi in 1985
Date according to Indian
Calender (Shālivāhān
Shaka)
Date according to
English Calender
Pooja
Place
1.14th January 1985
Bombay
Month-Pausha
Makar-Sankrānti
Fortnight-
Krishna Paksha
Tithi -Ashtami (8th day)
2. 17th February
Month-Magh
Shukla Paksha
Panchami (5th day)
Maha Shivarātri
Delhi
The Pooja of Shri Shiva.
Shiva-tattva was established
on the earth on this day
3. 21st March
Shri Mataji's Birthday
An Equinox
Bombay
4. 22nd March
Gudhi Pādvā. New Year day Bombay
of Shälivähan Shaka
Month-Chaitra
Shukla Paksha
Pratipada (1st day)
5. 8th April
Easter
London
6. 5th May
Vaisakh
Krishna Paksha
Mahā Sahasrāra Day
Vienna
Ashtami
7. 2nd July
Ashādh
Shukla Paksha
Poornima (Full-moon)
Guru Pooja
Paris
8. 7th September
New York
Shrāvana
Janmāshtami
Krishna Paksha
Shri Krishna's Birthday
Ashtami
9. 18th September
Bhādrapada
Shri Ganesha's Birthday
Rome
Shukla Paksha
Chaturthi (4th day)
10. 20th October
Pooja of Shri Adi Shakti and
Havan on 7th day of Nav-
Ashwin
Geneva*
Shukla Paksha
Saptami (7th day)
ratri.
11.3rd November
Divali Pooja
London
12. 25th December
Christmas, Jesus Christ's
birthday.
Bombay*
*Suggested locations, yet to be confirned.
Nirmala Yoga
49
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-51.txt 
 Registered with the Registrar of Newspapers under Regd, No, 36989
OTHER FESTIVALS
Date according to
Indian Calender
(Shalivähan Shäka)
Date according to
English Calender
Name of the
Festival
Remarks
1. Vasant Panchami
26th Jan 1985
Pooja of Mother Earth
Month-Magh
Fortnight-Shukla Paksha,
Tithi-Panchmi
15th day)
Philgun
Shukla Paksha
Poornima
(Full Moon day)
a) Colour Festival
Shri Krishna played
colours with His
7th March 1985
2 Holi
powers
b) Demoness Holika
was burnt. Hence
fires are lit on the
preceding day
The pooja of Adi Shakti
3 Navaratri Pooja
from 22nd March 85 Chaitra
to 30th March 85
Shukla Paksha
From Pratipada (1st Day)
To Ashtami (8th day)
Navami (9th day)
4. Shri Rama's
Birth day
5 Shri Mahaveera's 3rd April 1985
Birth day
6. Shri Hazrat Ali's
Birth day
31st March 1985
Chaitra, Shukla Paksha.
Trayodashi (13th day)
Chaturdashi (14th day)
4th April 1985
Chaitra, Shukla Paksha Coincides with Good
Poornima (Full
Moon day)
7. Shri Hanumana's 5th April 1985
Birth day
Friday
Vaishakha, Shukla Paksha
Panchami (5th day)
8. Sh. Shankaracharya's 25th April 1985
Birth day
9. Shri Buddha's
Birthday
Vaishakha. Shukla Paksha,
Poornima
(Full Moon day)
4th May 1985
NOTE According to the Inainn Calender a month having
thirty days is divided into two fortnights
n
coresponding ta waxing and waning of the maon.The first fortnight ends on Full Moon
day and is knowwn as the Shukla Paksha im Bright Fortnight The other half beginning from
the next day, ends on nevw moan day tin called as Krishno Pakshae dark fortnight-
Tithi is the date which ate lifteen in each fortnight
PUE DUXEM DI tupuodssutis
alter full Moon in dark
Pratrpada-The lst day after New Moon in bright fortnight or tst day
fortnight tespectively.
Dwitiva
The 2nd Day
The 14th Day
Full Moon DaV
TEth Day in
bright foitnight)
New Moon Day
Th# Bth Day
Ashitami
Chalurdashi
The Sth Day
The 10th Day
The 111h Dav
Poomima
The 3rd Day
Navami
Trtiya
Chaturthi
The 4th Day
Dashmi
Ekadashi
Dwadashi
Trayodashi
The Sth Day
The ath Day
The 7th Diry
Panchmi
Shashthi
The 12th Day
Amivasya
The 13th Day
(15th Day in dark
fortnight)
Saptami
Edited & Published by Sh. S.C. Rai 43, Bunglow Road, Delhi-110007 & Printed at The Central Electric
Press, 80-D, Kamia Nagar, Dethi-110007, One issue Rs. 9.00, Annual Subscription Rs. 51.00
Foreign (by Airmail £ 7$14)
