Nirmala Yoga Bi-Monthly Vol. 5 No, 29 Sept.-Oct. 1985 "Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns al the religions and seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga-THE UNION"

 YOGA NIRM ALA 43, Bungalow Road, Delhi-10007 (India) Founder : Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Editorial Board : Dr. S.K. Mathur, Sri A.S. Mishra, Sri R.D. Kulkarni Representatives Australia RAJEN MAHARAJ, 26, Ocean St, Bondi, NSW 2026 : INGE KELLY, Josef Melichargasse 20, 1210 VIENNA. : LORI & CARY HYNEK, 1540, Taylor Way, West Vancouver, B.C. VIS 1N4. : M. CERNAY, 175, Av. Ledru Rollin PARIS-75011. Austria Canada France : ANTONIO SARACINO, NIRMALA HOUSE, Localita Pichini s.n.s., 00010 S. Angelo Romano, ROMA M.B. RATNANNWAR, 13, Merwan Mansion, Genjewala Lane, Borivali (W), BOMBAY-400092. Italy India JUAN ANTONIO DELGADO, Avenida De Burgos, 30, 1, A, MADRID-28036 :CHARLES & MRS. MAGDA MATHYS, 5, Chemin Des Mouldins. 1256, Troinax (Canton de Geneva). Spain Switzerland U. K. : GAVIN BROWN, Brown's Geological Information Services Ltd., 134 Great Portland Street, London WIN 5PH. IAN BASCOMBE, 32, Hooker Road, Exeter, Devon, England : CHRISTINE & MICHAEL PETRUNIA, 270, Jay Street (APT. 1-C), BROOKLYN, NY-11201. URSULA SEHLMEYER, 191 Canal ST. #23 SAN RAFAEL, CA-94901. U.S.A. CONT ENTS Page 1. Editorial 1 2. Nirvikalpa (Austria, 1985) 3. False modesty and Sahaja Yogi 4. Sahasrara Day Pooja (Austria, 1985) 5. Guru Pooja (France, 1985) 6.108 Names of Shri Adi Guru 7. Our Goal is to be the Spirit, nothing but the Spirit (Delhi, 1983) 8. Sayings of Shri Matají 7. 8. 11 18 24 36 Front Cover: Shri Mataji at Guru Pooja, Lodge Hill, England (July 1983)

 Editorial What is the Essence of Religion? The essence of Religion is to know God the Almighty. And one can never know the Almighty unless one knows the Spirit-for it is His reflection in man. And only through it can one know Him:-when it awakens to assume its seat in the Sahasrāra of the Cosmos, one becomes One with Him. It is the goal of all ascent, and without it ascent has no meaning, is sterile and deprived of essence. For we should know we are by His desire created, and made to become and remain One -part and parcel with Him. To deny the unity of the Creator and His Creation is an escape of the ego-and of those possessed by it. It is an escape of the individual and a denial of the Advaita (ia) nature of the creation. Contemporary with the great Shri Adi Guru prophet Shri Mohammad Dattätreya, another great soul Shri Adi Shankarāchārya took birth to reveal to Mankind the essence of the Advaita Philosophy-and as a rejoicing, it is said. was taken by Shri Adi Guru Dattåtreya Himself, from the seat of the Devi, Nanda Devi Parvat (in Himalayas), to the Feet of Shri Sadāshiva in Mount Kailasha-where the Saundarya Lahari was revealed to him. Any religion which does not reveal to man his unity with the Absolute through the grace and glory of the gift of the Atma within him-is not a religion. And any individual who denies the unity of God with His creation-or it's fulfilment,-denies the Love, Mercy and Compassion of God,-and the Love which is the essence of His creation. This fulfilment of God's love, is the incarnation and work of Shri Adi Shakti, Shri Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi-and it's fruit. Sahaja Yoga and Sahaja Yogis. There is nothing else of either meaning or significance-and this is the Nirmala Yoga and Nirmala Vidyā of the Universe. All else is mire. Sākshāt Shri Sahaja Yoga Pradāyani Sākshāt Shri Adi Shakti Bhagavati Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Namo Namah ॐ साक्षात् श्री सहज योग प्रदायनी साक्षात् श्री आदिशक्ति भगवती माताजी श्री निमंला देवी नमो नमः

 May 4, 1985 VIENNA Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Nirvikalpa It is gratifying to see so many Sahaja say to ourselves "What are you doing? Yogis have come to celebrate the Sahasrara What is surrendering? It is enjoyment. it Day. Without breaking the Sahasrara, we could not have achieved the ascent en masse. But the Sahasrara which is the brain has gone is just enjoyment. Then why 1 cannot surrender? What is lacking in me? Am 1 a very low level person? Am I the one inta too much complications in the west. who was just saying I'm a seeker but I'm And the thoughts are very much twisted, one upon the other. To keep Sehasrara surrender? If so, what am open should be very easy if the Western Myself? If that is the situation, then why am brains could understand and be aware I so much enamoured by my tgo?" about your Mother. When your Mother is the Deity of Sahasrara, the only waY to be has to dissolve into the Ocean to become the able to keep the Sahasrara open nas to Ocean, and a drop cannot be greater than the not. Am dishonest person that I cannot I proud of? What do you have to surrender? A drop be complete surrendering. Ocean, can it be? So what is the surren- For that many ask me, How do we do it ? dering? Surrendering of our conditionings, It's a very funny question. It is irrelevant. If of our ego and the artificial barriers we have your Sahasrara has been opened out by built around us. someone, and luckily that is the Deity before you, it should be the easiest thing to approach emotionally and also physically we surrender. But it is not. It is difficult because the attention that has come up through the ourselves through mantras, through seeing cells of the brain expressing itself through the ourselves, through knowing ourselves. But cells of the brain is polluted. It is impure, It is destructive. It's poisonous and when the test opportunity for you, not for the Divine. It nerves are spoiled, the light of the Spirit does vou are not available the Divine can find its not shine on the nerves, And you feel the inability to surrender. Normally, it should be expression. Even to understand how immense the easiest thing to do. One can approach mentally. one can can approach ourselves. We can approach one should know this is the greatest of grea- own ways of fulfilling its last culmination of the task is, you need a surendering heart. have to mentally approach So we ourselves. We have to talk to ourselves and arrive, you develop a petty ego that you are Only through mental approach when you Evening before Sahasrara Day Pooja Nirmala Yoga

 big thing. They are the people who deserve. It's not what you dress and what you eat and doing a great work. Like i telephoned to America saying that I'Il be coming. There's a very big scientist in Los Angeles who is an what you have. t's what you can give and Indian Maharashtrian fellow. He missed his give up. The tags of mundane life are to be Nobel prize, such a great scientist. telephoned to me immediately saying "Mother gress of people like slaves tied up to chains, I am coming to New York to receive you. I'm taking leave for fifteen days. When you are here I want to be with you. What else is suddenly the ego coming up automatically. to be done? As it is I am doing Sahaja Yoga On the contrary, to surrender to fill up your by-the-way at my own convenience, when- vessel with the bliss, the bliss of Divinity, so ever I get time. That's what l'm doing, isn't that when you go to others you pour on them it? But I would like to travel with you to the beauty and love of God. It is for you to Europe to all the different places with you to understand yourself very well and not.others. spend some time, otherwise, what am I doing Don't blame anyone. here?" dn anb cut off. You must understand. It's a pro- He chains of desires, of complacentness, chains of lethargy, chains... When I say this, I find It's so precious that no words can describe But what have heard, that people are the greatness of these moments which we arriving at different times for Sahasrara Day. I was amazed. It's typical western mind. By within yourself, the assignment that is given the way, Sahaja Yoga is to be done, mostly to you through your own Spirit, through your by-the-way. It should be convenient. It should be a weekend. When just by-the-way But lack of faith in yourself cannot give you for a holiday, we can go to Vienna. There, surrendering powers. Surrender is the opening of course, by-the-way, we'Il have a puja and of Sahasrara, keeping it completely open so by-the-way Mother will raise the Kundalini. that Nirvikalpa state is established within us. She will awaken our Deities and then by-the- There should be a regular progress of impro- way we'll be enjoying the blessings. No sacrifice can be done for God. No time, they you ever seen any lotus or any flower that have no time. Everything is by-the-way. It's blooms, blooms, and in between again does rather amazing, for war people give up their lives, for destruction they work so hard, day then blooms. Have you ever seen such a non- and night. But for construction of humanity sensical phenomenon in the nature ? You for the ultimate goal of Divinity, in the West, how many there are who really surrender? If it suits, then we'il be there. Sahaja, this is that comes up, again goes inside the mud, Sahaja style. We should reach Saheja. heard about this many a times. There are mud, blaming other people. Have you seen still many who take that kind of an attitude towards Sahaja Yoga. It is sometimes becomes a dwarf, again it grows, again it surprising for me. are spending together. You have to feel ir own state. You can fulfill the assignment. vement, regular progress of the opening. Have not bloom and then blooms then collapses come up, again you go down, again you come up, you go down. Have you ever seen a tree I again it comes up, again it goes back into the any animal which started growing, then it becomes a dwarf. Even these huge palaces which have been Do you see that If I go to a village, people take leave for fifteen days, one month. In Rahuri people built so beautifully for us. take leave for one month to prepare for my they become small suddenly and then coming. One day leave for them is a very collapse and then again they blow up, Only 3. Nirmala Yoga

 balloons of ego and super-ego does that. down, he should know he is still not up to And when you are identified with that. you. too become very peculiar personalities. The and tell himself or herself that "No, I have to lotus of your Sahasrara is open now. It must open more and more and more and should down". not suddenly collapse, again open, again collapse. It's a very complicated phenamenon. You can see in the west and you can be very. much surprised sometimes. To sometimes very shocking to see. Suddenly saved. They will be punished. May not be someone will come ""Oh, I'm very nervous about this thing, I'm very nervous about that. Another person will come and tell me "I want to leave Sahaja Yoga now". Another one comes and tells me "Oh, it's too much. I any circumstance. Do not blame your father, cannot go any further with it". So we must atmosphere, this, that. realize that there is something very peculiar There's no need to blame anyone, "Because within us, something absurd within us, that's somebody came we were influenced". What why it happens. We go forward, backwards, forward, backwards, all the time: What is influenced by me. How are you influenced this pendulum? That cannot be Sahasrara. by somebody who is so stupid obviously, so Sahasrara is not a pendulum. It is a lotus. So the pendulum is the chitta, is the atten- tion. the point and he should face up to himself be into Nirvikalpa where I do not come The people who are not in the Nirvikalpa state are not going to be saved. I am very 5orry to say that. They are not going to be me it's the same way (as) those who are not realized souls, but they will not ocupy the seats in the realm of God Almighty. At least you must reach the state of Nirvikalpa: Do not blame mother, brother, is the matter with you? /'m here, you are not dominating? That means what is your level ? So tomorrow I have decided to tell you how to be at the state of Nirvikalpa. As l said, we can approach mentally. But mentally I say you take this medicine and you do not take the medicine; that is just a mental thing. The attention that moves trom left to right, right to left, goes on like that all the time. But the area of Sahasrara is the realm of The medicine is kept on the cupboard. You God, When the Brahmarandhra opens fully. then the heavens open within yourself. The Kundalini which has risen up and given you realization creates that subtle opening, by have decided that you have to be at the which the Diivine starts pouting all its sub- Nirvikalpa state. You can say this Sahasrara tleties inside your brain. But if you're day is a very big day because never threw pressing it from both sides with these balloons, sometimes opening, sometimes closing, sometimes opening, the Divine recedes its attention. You must know that. religions where, after the deaths of the The attention is receded back and if it is done incarnation, people started the religion and many a times, the Divine doesn't bother. So did whatever they wanted to do with that. it is you who has to achieve that state and in our living time we are going to make all of us can achieve that state of Nirvikalpa. ourselves that instrument which will represent In that there is just Nirvikalpa you somebody is still going up and down, up and them by all our mistakes. Doesn't matter. are just the same and then you say "Mother, yes we listened to your lecture". So the keynote of tomorrow's pooja as I such an ultimatum before. Because now we are established as Vishva Dharma, as the Universal Religion. We are not like other progression. After the Vishva Dharma. We have to have strong cannot come down. If Deities vwithin ourselves. We have weakened Nirmala Yoga

 T hey are weak because traditionally we end of our journey to left and right. Because haven't got the strength. Doesn't matter. "my husband is like that"-"my wife is like that"-because my child is like this"=you We cannot have black spots any more. We've are not going to be excused. Whom are you telling-your own Spirit ? Tell your Spirit. Does it understand? It takes away your vibrations, it takes away your joy, it takes to dilly-dally. Thase who will be left behind away your position. Nirvichāra is very easy to establish. But that also some people have not. What about Nirvikalpa? You have to But now this Religion has been established. done all the choosing, the training. every thing. And you all have to jump into the boat now. Thare's no more time left for us will be lef behind. It's a very intense period now. you must understand. The intensity of the period is not by-the-way. It's take it up very seriously. not any more Sehaja Yoga. it is Maha Yaga now. And you have to become Maha, you celebrating in Europe, maybe, I don't know. have to become great, otherwise you cannot be thare. You have to jump out of all these things. This may be the last Sahasrara day we are It's not that Mother is only happy if there are people of higher qualification or higher calibre. It's not that. I have very great concern for Tomorrow I'l try whatever is possible on thase who are lost, who are left out. But my side. I'll work it out: There is a serious sometimes through my experience I think matter. I must tell you that once I've esta- such people get spoilt.My love is not for blished the Religion I don't want to have any spoiling you, is not ruining you. It is for your holes in it. I avoided it because I was not emancipation. is for you to enjoy the beauty of God's blessings on you. Even now if sure. Now / know for sure that there are many who could be called as Nirmalites. there are people who are not righteous who Because no more black spots on the beautiful are not truthful, who are not virtuous at the sari of your Mother. It has to be absolutely dharma stage, then what can I talk to them? highest quality Gradually we used to drop And then if they are not even the Spirit, then people, gradually worked out this. There's what am I to do with them? no time left now. As I have told you I'm going back to India. Tomorrow l'll be able to tell you" how gradually you have got up to your Sahasrara and to get to Nirvikalpa you have to really dedicate yourself fully. The ideologies, the talking, the discussion and arguments do not lead you there. No It's meditation. What is meditation? is actually facing yourself and correcting yourself with the full understanding as to what you are. We have to create ideal to Sahaja Yoga. It's a Sahasrara Day. You human beings. That is what is the Vishva have to cross the Himälayas. If you read the Dharma, otherwise we have many adharmas lives of the people who tried to travel up to going on. So many religious activities in the Kailāsha, you will know what hardships they name of all the great incarnations, which are they do not. It's not a matter of convenience to come have gone through. 've taken you very sweetly, delicately up to that point, but don't opposite of it. get spoiled by that. You'Il all fizzle out into thin air unless and until you are in the Nirvikalpa state. nowhere near the incarnation, just the This Nirvikalpa state has to be established once and for all, so I don't have to then struggle with you. The group of people who'll attend tomorrow's Sahasrara should be able to establish that state-otherwise they I'm sorry I have to say that here, in Austria. This is the place which should demarcate the • Please see Sahasrara Day Paaja, pp. 8. 5. Nirmala Yoga

 are just like the people who are newcomers. They are coming for the first time, or ten times, or eleven times, or hundred times. What difference does it make? To me it is that "See, you are Adi Shakti clear cut. I have short time, becauss the you have spoilt your children, you have instrument has to be alright. If you have to not done full justice to them, They take expedite the growth of the instrument in a everything so easy and mundane." proper way so that the God of Love, God's Love flows and the God of that Love feels happy about it. We have to create such beautiful flowers that He appreciates, that He are important. It has to be living action of does not destroy. The spectator of this play your being. That should prove it, that should has to be satisfied so that He postpones His destruction. That's why / said the time is And the effects of that you will feel in your short, time is very short. know if you are praising me. I do not feel the praise because I myself I am not myself. I see myself as separate and then I tell myself alright, but So you have to tomorrow take a vow Within your heart. It's not the words that convince you that we are fully surrendered. own personality, in your own being, in your own manifestation If we want our children to grow into the realm of God, they are great saints who are born, if you want to give them a full chance of the enjoyment, then let us first of all become proper parents and not people who just live with illusions. Everything in Sahaja some still who are possessed, there are some Yoga cannot be explained. I cannot explain. I cannot because you don't have those With so many Saints, why should I have any worry of spreading of Sahaja Yoga? Because there are some who drag you down, there are some adamant people and there are who are murmuring souls. Just don't pay any attention to them. They'll be all lost. Doesn't matter. powers to understand. Like a girl said "Mother I want to have the sun." Because people told her "The weekend will be terrible. There won't be any sun." Within fifteen minutes, the sun was We have to create the great day for us to be proud that we belong to this great Religion of truth. There has been no religion so far which is the Religion of Truth. It practices shining. Within fifteen minutes. The wind started blowing, all the clouds settled around something and preaches something and it Vienna, beautifully like the Sahasrara and the sky opened as I want your Sahasrara to be open. All the nature is so anxious to work it out. But you must learn to cooperate with your Spirit. It's not a cooperation that is just by the way. It is to be the Spirit, the becom- ing of the Spirit fully. is very important. Nothing should stop that. has nothing to do with the incarnation. You have to do something that people should say we can see our Mother in this person. Today is the day when I want to bless some children. I've blessed many children. I would like to bless all the parents also to understand that they have to contribute a lot for the up-bringing, of the children. There 1 hope today's announcement will help have been some very good tapes they have made in England, how to help the children to grow properly in this crazy western life.. And the one who has been the greatest enemy love. It's nice to praise me for whatever has of yours worked in this place, He's the one all of us to have that understanding of our responsibilities towards ourselves and towards our Creator. It's nice to praise me for my happened, but to be very frank, I do not who has ruined you and you had to commit 6. Nirmala Yoga

 Sin against your near. It's the Ocean of all the rivers. All sin against the Holy Ghost. Mother. Now at this time in this place we the rivers flow to this great Ocean of Vishva have to turn our face to hope it will work Dharma. out. So we have to mould ourselves to fit But just think in your mind what have we into the new pattern, the new rhythm, the sacrificed so far? No sacrifice is sufficient. But have we sacrificed anything? That will until that happens, I do not think that make you understand that your Mother has western people have much chance. If you given you your second birth without any difficulties. She has taken up all the fabour Tomorrow I would like ta work out as much pains upon Herself. Now you are grown up as possible. and you have to understand that now you are grown up people and you can't behave like children. That is over now. Now you minute I waste. And in the same way I hope are grown up people, you have to become you will dedicate your 24 hours for your responsible for this Maha Yoga and for this emancipation and the emancipation of the great Dharma that we have established. The whole universe. Dharma that integrates all the Dharmas. The Dharma that purifies anybody who comes new music of Divine flute. Unless and have come for Sahasrara, be prepared. I'm working 24 hours. Not a single May God bless you all. "False Modesty and the Sahaja Yogi" It is very common for Sahaja Yogis who have done something great, to become all coy and unassuming and to say "No I didn't do it, You did it", etc. Stating the obvious. how it was so great, said." i don't know-He just puts me to His lips and blows and beautiful music comes out l". A Sahaja Yogi who says we' and "Thou" accepts his actions without being falsely modest or over-reacting to them. He accepts them with detachment-for he Why is it necessary to state the obvious ? Because somewhere at the back of his mind, reconizes their inevitability. They are like it is not obvious.. Somewhere he is still say- the sweat of his body-unimportant. The ing I', I did it". And to compensate for nis only thing that is important is the Feet of the ego-which like a disgraceful relative is not Power of the Almighty that allows them to allowed in Sahaja Yoga circles, but kept in become manifest. and he keeps his attention the bedroom, he invites his more acceptable, Super-ego relative to have tea with his friends, fixed securely on those Feet, seeing nothing else-not even the consequences of his actions,-for then it is all "Thou",-Tü hi', A Sahaja Yogi has only one reason to Ta hi', and not I' 1, as the great poet Kabir exist. to be the surrendered instrument and sang. devotee of God the Almighty and His Divine Shakti. If he is truly a hollow instrument of the Divine and a devotee of the Lord, he can- Amen = नमः इति सकात श्री आदिशस्ति भगवती माताजी श्री निर्मंता देवी मुनम : not help doing Great things, after all it is in : Sakshat Shri Adishakti Bhagavati Mataji the nature of the Divine to do great things. Shri Nirmala Devi Sunamah Sunamah. Amen like Lord Krishna's flute, who, when asked fa नमः इति -Dr. Rustom Nirmala Yoga

 5th May 1985 Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Sahasrara Day Pooja 16th Sahasrara Day Laxenburg, Vienna, Austria It is a very privileged place for you to enter into the Sahasrara of the Virāta, to that are the human dharmas-human dharma is that his attention gets attracted either with reside in the brain as cells of that Sahasrära. lust, greed, at something, and then he cannot Let us see what is the quality of the cells of pull out his attention. But riow the attention Sahasrāra. These are specially created cells becomes dharmāteet-means the attention through the working of the Swadhisthana. loses its dharma. 7The dharma of the attention Passing through all the chakras, when they are such that we have to put the dharmas arrive at Sahasrāra they are equipped to taught by the prophets to control them, handle the brain's activity without getting Because we are coming from the lowest level. So these dharmas exist in our being and start showing, and when they attack us, involved with the other cells-human beings, then we have to have some measures to control it. So we build up our dharmas, our own self-regulation, and control them, the dharmas which have cone to us from lower conditioning. This is the greatriess of human involved into other elements in the body. In the same way the Sahaja Yogis are not to be of the body of this universe. The first thing that happens to a Sahaja Yogi at the Sahasrara level that he becomes- beyond"ateet". So many things he transc- ends: "Kāläteet"-he goes beyond time. Time beings, that they have made their own is his slave. If you have to go somewhere dharmas, established on top of the lower then suddenly you discover that everything dharmas. Like carbon has, say, four valencies, is working about the same time when you are able to do it. Like you are, say, to Catch ding to the four valencies, it cannot make it a train and you arrive late at the station, you find the train is late for you. Things work out in such a way that you feel they are all active for your complete convenience. So you go beyond time-"kālāteet". it has to be in four valencies, it acts accor- six. But human beings can make those valencies established which are supposed to be representing the human dharma, the "Manudharma". But with the Sahasrara ascent the attention loses that quality. means, you don't have need, there is no need, to put dharmas, restrictions upon yourself. You don't Then you go beyond dharma-"dharmāte- et". Means, dharma becomes part and parcel have to discipline, but you get disciplined of your being, Nobody has to tell you, you automatically. That is the first sign of a do this or you do that-you just don't do it. Whatever you have to do it, you do it. person who is belonging to Nirmal Religion. That is pure. Attention doesn't get attached or attacked by anything whatsoever, it is so When you go beyond all these dharmas, Nirmala Yoga 8.

 pure, Like the Lotus leaf, the water doesn't a person cannot be described. You cannot say stay on it. So you become küläteet, You why Socrates agreed to take the poison. Why become dharmāteet. You become gunateet. Means, the three moods in which you are human comprehension. That's how you born, left, right and centre, you go beyond behave beyond human comprehension and them. The laft one is the oane by which you you are not to take certificates from human have emotional attachments of your attention. beings. Your certificates come from God The second one is the physical and the Almighty and not from these human beings mental attachments. And the third one, the who are at a lower level. It would be like a attachment to the dharma. Attachment to be dog writing about human beings righteous and making others righteous, of disciplining others and disciplining yourself, which is Sāttvika. Where a person tries to control all his enemies of lust, anger, pride, out"-without. So such a person is without vanity. attachments and greed. All these thought, he doesn't think. Such a person restrictions on the attention get lost and you is without greed, such a person is without become a free person of complete wisdom. lust- devoid of. Such Your attention itself becomes dharmic. So to be "ashesha-out of which nothing you lose all your gunas and you become is left out. Like when you want to make a Satgunis", means virtuous, but not by vacuum, you go on creating the vacuum, discipline, but spontaneously. You become reach any point and the vacuum cannot be righteaus spontaneously. Sometimes such people puzzle you: like Christ took a hunter time where you find some part of it has to be in his hand and beat people who were remained. You cannot have a complete vacu- selling things in the presence of God, in the Um. But such a person has a complete sense, in front of the temples. According to Vacuum-vacuum of all the negative, aggres laws, we should not have temper, but this sive qualities, it doesn't exist, complete. temper is a temper of a Gunāteet and such a temper is a spontaneous happening, which is can kill, nobody can harm, nobody can hurt. not to be analysed, has to happen. The temper of the Devi on the rākshasas, the killing of the rākshasas, Krishna's samhäras, Krishna telling Arjuna that you have to kill disturbed by insults or non -insults. He is not all these people, they are all dead already.the capacity to enjoy the boons of the ego. Christ agreed to get crucified. That's beyond So you reach a state where it can be described with the word a", means "with- a person is said complete because it reaches a point all the Such a person is eternal being, nobody The anger of anyone or respect of anyone does not touch such a person. He is not They all get explained because you go bey- the ond. So in the "Ateet beyond conditions arise. Only the one who can control is gets the blessing of the word "Nihi"-Nihi is beyond. The ane who is in it cannot control the first word of my name, but in Sanskrit, it. If you have to pull out a ship you have to when you combine it with "Mala be on the shore, The one who has gone beyond can only do that. So you go beyond, that is in ateet. But, when it comes to the knowledge about such a person, you cannot "sheer". Or when an "i" is added fo it, but think, because such a person is beyond the first Nihi means without-devoid and thinking. You cannot describe because such "Nira" means sheer. Like when you say So the third state where he reaches, he becomes "Nirmala". But the word is 'nihi'. Ni which shakes a little-Ni-i. That means Nirmala Yoga

 Nirānanda, Nirätma sheer atma, sheer joy. the satisfaction of the ego. But the state has Kevalam, the only, there is nothing but joy. But this word is used, nira or nihi, used in nda. Then what is the question of fear? two forms as I told you. One for say, without What is the question of talking about it ? or devoid of. Then another form is: the only, You cannot talk, because how will you absolute. The absolute. So here the joy relate it? I cannot say it is like this, it is like becomes Nirānanda, absolute joy, nothing that. There are no words for absolute to des- but joy. It's complete freedom. now to be established within us is of Nirâna- cribe. Only by negation, "not this, not this". what remains is absolute. So you reach the state of absolute and that is the state a com- So you have all kinds of joys, as I you before, you have Swänanda-the joy of plete communication is established and in the Spirit. Then you have got Brahmānanda- the joy of well-being. You've got Leelananda. but the Absolute within you: Krishnänanda-where you have the joy of the play. But when you reach the state of Sahasrāra it is Nirānanda-means, sheer abso- for. That is the level to which you should lute joy. Though the name "Nira" is my aspire. That should be the ascent. We should name, it means absolute. So when you put be established within ourselves. We don't such an adjective before anything else It have to go to Himalayas, we don't have to do becomes absolute. Thus you become absolute. anything drastic. Remaining in this world we And when you are at that state of absolute have to become the Absolute. The only. then there is no place for anything else to be there but yourself. told that communication you have nabody else That is the Sahasrāra Poojā you are here *Kevalam. There is nothing like "how'" for it, you just become. You just become, like a flower becomes the fruit. It's all built in, within you. Allow it to work out. absolute. But let us see what is US That no relative qualities. Absolute cannot be compared, "atulniya", it cannot be compared. It cannot be related to anything, it is absolute. It cannot be comprehended because it cannot ness. It is absolute be related to anything else through which compassion, it is absolute power. The words we can comprehend. It is absolute. What- ever way you try to know it you go away the absolute and feel your absoluteness from absolute. Wherever you try to analyse through it with that oneness. If somebody is the absolute you are away from it. So this is not with you, you don't worry. There is no what at Sahasrāra you get-Nirānanda. means it is not relative, it has Just by surrendering you become. Surren- der it and you'll be surprised you will be at the state where you will enjoy your adsolute- absolute love, it is absolute stop, the description stops. You just become company needed. You're alone, enjoying the absolute. There only you can enjoy the absolute in others also, in the best form. In different stages of Sahaja Yoga we had to start from Shreeananda, means the Without seeing anything else but the ananda of the body, manasānanda-the joy absolute. of the manasa-is the psyche. Then you can say Ahamkarānanda, where you have to have May God bless you. Nirmala Yoga 10

 Her Holiness Mataji Nirmala Devi Chateau-de-Chamarande, PARIS, FRANCE Guru Pooja 29 June 1985 I believe you say all these things (mantras), fore, first time I see such a horrible thing. In and you listen: to it, and say it from your my living time if you are doing like this, after heart. Only the ones who are united with my death so many gurus will rise, to mislead God can worship Shri Ganesha. And Shri you. Are you going to accept all that ? Ganesha worships your Mother. All the Deities refused to do this. They First of all one must understand that there tortured my life, they would not accept to is a combination of a Mother and a Guru. allow you to have this pooja.-Absolutely, Because Guru is a very hard task master. He nothing doing.-Because they love me, they does not allow any liberties to be taken. respect me. They have the proper protocol. And Mother is very kindly. But you don't They don't want to become gurus themselves, have feelings for the Mother, do you ? You and misbehave in this manner. did all a lip-service that you listen, goes into your head, and you think you have become the surrendered Sahaja Yogis. Like all Islam strong, with the French. I've told so many people believe they are surrendered to God, like Christians believe they are surrendered And you should fall a trap-something like to God. It's just a lip-service that you are this, you are that. Or do you know it, what supra- conscious. And arrogant. is said is a fact. Have you not seen the Sun in my hand 7 What more proof do you want? Anybody who misleads you is of course sin- ful no doubt. but to fall a trap to such a Last time when I came I was really' very times that French is the Hell of the Universe. that. It's very supra-conscious, extremely I've never known of such a Guru Pooja. Never. Indians had only one Guru pooja, and they are praying that they should have at least one more Guru pooja. With all these Guru poojas if you have achieved this kind of person.. If you had told a child that the Mother is surrendering, it's better you donot have any coming, he would have fought, "I'm going". more Guru poojas at all ! Don't deserve it I You cannot become Gurus, I can see that He would have cried and wept. clearly. Without surrender how will you ? What about your vibrations ? You don't use your vibrations I You have come all the way for Guru Pooja here, who is your Guru ? showered upon you. And what have you Whom are you going to worship ? Anybody given back ? Such ego! That you act to comes from anywhere becomes suddenly important. How ? It was never done be- a very bad example. You have to wash the All the Blessings of the Divine have been somebody because he has greater egol It is 11 Nirmala Yoga

 feet of the Indians and drink that water. May should not have happened," they aiways tell be then you might realise where you are;- may be very developed and all that. And plaints and complaints I And for this kind of the Indians who are of your type, all of them have to do that. Why didn't you see your You are all ego-oriented people and you like vibrations ? When the blind gets liis eyes, he egoistical supraconscious nonsense. That's doesn't close his eyes to see things, does he? what it is. You have all come for Guru pooja me. Complaints and complaints and com- a nonsense, they have no protest, nothing! or for what have you come for? And what has happened to your leaders also ? All of them put together could not say that we will not have this nonsense at this time ! Just coming to the airport so l'm talking to you as a Mother. "Is this the many people have risen higher in life. What way to respect Her?" will you do here 7 You should have pro- the last Guru pooja you'll be having, the This I'm talking to you as a Mother, and not as a Guru. As a Guru l'll do what I'll do. I had told you, this is tested. "last' pooja you will be having, may be. It's shocking ! would like to know how many wanted to go to the airport and asked for it. Raise your hands. Honestly. Honestly... These to your Guru. It is said that the Guru is the are the only people who love me... May Param Chaitanya ( a), but it is: the God Bless you. You have to respect your Guru. Surrender Param Chaitanya is your Guru, "Agati Param Tomorrow somebody tells you to insult Chaitanyam, Dhanyoham Tava Dharshanāt me, will you do that ? (आगता परम चैतन्यम धन्पोहम् तब द्शनात) -When the Param Chaitanya itself will come on this You know that if a king arrives from a earth I will feel myself so gratified to see the - small-little place somewhere, minister from a very small island.-from Lakshadweep and Maldive islands the prime minister came, and the prime minister of England had to go and receive him. And it Krishna could be punished by His Mother. darshan of that.... or a prime- In what world are you living ? Where are you ? Taking for grantedI I know Mother has a right to punish you, very well. Even your Guru has come, all the gurus have to come and receive me, or to listen to some- thing non-sensical here ? I felt like going back from the airport only, the kind of vibra- tions I felt. But l'm not interested. The children who want to disrespect me, and insult me, I have nothing to do with them. They have no love for me, I have nothing to do. Only those who protested and wanted to go to the airport should come forward to do my pooja. How do you get into this kind of a mire ? How you join hands ? Except for few.... Your quality will be known (by) "how much you are surrendered to'Me. *" said that. And today I say to you that. You should be ashamed of yourself. You have insulted your Mother, who has given Christ has On all other things Sahaja Yogis will Selflessly I've been working day in and day protest. "This was not good, that was not good, this was done..." Against each other, out, neglecting my own children, my own femily, my grand children,-for you! against everything they will protest, "Sahaja Yogi took this much money from us, this Only those people who wanted to go to Nirmala Yoga 12

 the airport and said, and did not go, please come forward....Those who were here and tell you how to behave. No protocol-sense of protocol, even. It's like beggars. did not come, should understand that you are living in the Kingdom of God. And when the Goddess of the Kingdom arrives, you have to be there. I'm sorry I've to do that, this is the promise I had to give to the Deities. Today you have to resolve, and ask (the forgiveness of all the Deities, that you are going to use your vibrations all the time. Resolve. And that no more such a thing we are going to repeat again. This is the last, never like this.. Know that you have to have ascent, you have to work hard, you have to meditate. Shows, that there is no discipline.. One man can save and one man can destroy. Your lea- der is alright till it comes to Mother's part, but when it comes to that point, then you have to protest against your leader. All the rest with some people, those who have love for should go at the back, just go at the back. Please go back. All others. go back', and this ring to Guido. sit down there. I had to promise this. I had to promise this to the Deities. They would not accept, they would not accept! ..Many people have not seen me for months together. Whether you have seen me or not As I'm angry with you, also I'm pleased me. And as a symbol of that I want to give What surprises me, the gurus who lynch. - the one who wanted the Rolls Royce :- they starved themselves tor one year; bought a Rolls Royce, and went to receive him, and You must know there are Deities and Ganas and every one is sitting here. They came such a crowd that people could not get to forward before me, to France. y the airport. That sort of a guru you need, 24 hours they are working, you know that very well. You *know' it, it's not a story, you 'know that. They are working for you, in every way, sol- ving all your problems, don't they? who'll take you to Hell ! You don't want to go to heaven, you don't want to be the citizen of God's world. Now whatever mantra you say please listen, put it in your head what you are talking, what you are saying from you lips, listen', put it in your heart what you are saying. Don't be hypocrite. Otherwise they protest for everything, No explanation is needed-"I've been to a every day I'm receiving letters from people. guru, I've done this, I've done that,"-nothing of the kind. Even if at this stage, after so many days, if you have not realised that right to criticize everyone. French have been whatever we believe into should be part and stupid in the past, and they are stupid even parcel of ourselves. Imean these wretched now. That's what they are. Think no end people like Christians and other people, these Hindus and Muslims and all that, they've not upon a time, very aggressive, but in Sahaja seen God, they've not got realisation, nothing but to them it becomes a faith, they fight for how to respect. You've had no good training. it. And for you people who have seen the Very bad breeding,-that's what God is going Reality it is not, what's wrong with mel People to say about you. I've done my level best to are afraid of the police, afraid of this.-You ...All the leaders who did not protest should also go back. Those who have not protested... What courage is needed for that kind of a thing ?... "This is not good, that is not working out, this is not happening...", Every body has a of themselves. Spanish people were, once Yoga they are not like that. You must learn Nirmala Yoga 13

 have entered into the Kingdom of God, you have seen what has happened with people on this earth. Only for those who are my children I co Not for those who are no who have tried to trouble me. Aren't you l've nothing to do with them. I did try 1 save you, as a prodigal son has to be save that's different. That's very different. B don't take liberties with me, I must tell yo afraid of that ? Don't become frivolous: "What was there to go to the airport, after all doesn't matter". All the Ganas are there, with me. They have all noted down, and they are here too. I am so cautiousily taking you out. because you don't see them. But you'll see them very soon.-It's not easy to control them also, you must know./ do not cantrol you.-neither I and warn you. (The heat is just drying up everything.) You feel like a Mother who is insulte abused, ill-treated by her own children. Yc can take insult from others, not from your ov children. You cannot It's a different thin control them. So now, I don't want to be unkind to people who have been desiring to come and see me, who love me so much. And I want to forgive you all-all of you, because this was the first mistake. If you donot understand any protoci because you are so naive, you have nev known anything, you don't know how respect; then you better learn it. There is i Shraddha, because it was never there. Yi Nobody should tix my programme without don't know how to respect anything. asking me. Nobody should take such liberty. only have respect for yourself,-perhaps m From next time l'Il not allow anything of the kind, I'm telling you very clearly! You fix my programme, and l'II let you down ! Without asking me you are not to fix me any where! Without taking my permission- written permission. If you ever try to do not be that even. Today is a day of a very great event. A "Guru" as I told you, comes from the wo "Gravity." The gravity. And the gravity, tha what I felt-that I have no gravity to attri such tricks with me, I'll put you right. You you people. Or you people have no weight know I have all the powers to correct you. all in you that I should gravitate you. Don't take liberties with me anymore, I'm thing that has weight. gravitates, automat telling you and warning you. Try to under- ally. It does not gravitate towards itself, bu stand, you are facing Someone Who has all gravitates. There's also gravity between 1 the Powers. You know that; know well, matter. But what it has towards Mother Ea within yourself. is incomparable. You throw any stone o it comes back. It's impossible to fight 1 It's not even like Mohammad. Mohammad just talked. He never gave realization. He gravity. And that gravity is the integration warned. None of them, none of them,-but your Shraddha, of your Dedication, and y after seeing, none of them have photographs Surrender. Without that gravity you cani as you have seen of mine. What more proof you want to know what I am. nourish yourself: you cannot grow. Have they ? Just imagine, the roots go towards t gravity. And when they are nourished, th Now behave yourself. I'm warning youl only the tree rises above. If your roots Mahāmäya-the other side of it, is horrible. not deep, if your roots are so flimsy, y cannot go down. Unless and until you Be careful. 14 Nirmala Yo

 How does the tree grow 7-It does not It grows in the morning, early in the morning, you never see that. How are these roots going to grow into the head ?-Into your brain, into that Jada (. gross). You have to meditate. That's the only way you have to do it. Those who do not meditate wilI become superficial. So the only way one can ascend in Sahaja They ll not achieve anything, they'll create If they are right sided, they'll become supra-conscious, they'll become bhoots. If they are left-sided, they'll become seen many Sahaja Yogis who talk big about left sided they will be thrown out ! You've seen it, in the Sistine Chapel, you see Christ write things.-The other day I saw somebody throwing them out one by one. And then writing a big pamphlet about Sahaja Yoga, you should not blame me. Just listening to nothing inside the person ! That's not the me is not sufficient: It must grow, actuali- A Sahaja Yogi has to zation of the growth of the thing is needed. down in that gravity, you cannot come up. You cannot nourish yourself. grow in the day time. Now my talk should not be a waste again. Please listen to me. I'm addressing to you, all of you.. not think that I'm addressing to somebody else. It is to you all. Remember that. Do Yoga is through putting the roots down. problems. Allow the roots to grow. Unless and until roots grow, the tree cannot grow. 1 have Sahaja Yoga, they can write books. they can sign of a Sahaja Yogi. to gravitate inside. Do you follow me ? You've read all kinds of non-sensical things before. All kinds of horrid things, I How do we do it? In the year 1982 I told you the eight- know what you have read. You have had in fold ways of doing it, andI said I will tell you later, and I 'was' about to tell you-but sadists, like Sade,-or whatever you call it. not now-the other eight ways by which you can rise. Because, you are not yet grounded horrible books for you, which you have read. in Sahaja Yoga, you are not yet grounded. I thought you would be grounded, but you're many Sahaja Yogis who have not yet read not. You have to nourish-the other way "Advent." But only reading is not going to round, the roots are in the head,-by be- help, it must go into your 'brains'. And brain coming thoughtless, by not making the cells to think. By resting them, by peace within. System. Brain doesn't mean-in the thinking. It's not a show of peace, or just-some Into your central nervous system, into the people look very peaceful for a show. You celis of your central nervous system. That have to work it out here in your head. The light has to come into the cells. You have ground ing : it has to go into your head. How 7-Meditation. this horrible French country all kinds of And there were many like this, who wrote But they have not read "Advent." There are means what 7-Into your Central Nervous to grow and grow and grow ! There's only way left out to you to go to There's no discipline I'm told. Hounslow, Himalayas, and not to any Ashram or any I'm told, there's no discipline of any kind. place. And settle down somewhere where you I'm surprised Hounslow people have no dis- don't eat anything or do anything, and take cipline of getting up early in the morning another birth. That's the only way I think. and doing meditation. What are you doing? How are you going to grow ? We 'can' work it out, not difficult. If you Please See NIRMALA YOGA No. 24 (Nov-Dec, 1984) pp. 12, 15 Nirmala Yoga

 you? What have you got, to become Guru? What can you give? have the seeking within your heart. and if you have understanding, sense, intelligence to understand that you have achieved some- thing in life, you' can do it. You all can do it. All the Saints have spent their o! money, all-over the world any where it is. We don't forgive others, we forgive our- spread Sahaja Yoga how much money ha selves. This is the 'worst' thing that we do. We all the time try to forgive the others, that's the best way to work it out. But no, we try to forgive ourselves all the time and not to forgive others. Everything you do the other you spent? Of your own. How much mon have you spent of your own to spread Sah. Yoga ? They used to starve themselves. I have spent thousands, you know t very well. You know for definite how ma thousands ! have spent on you people. Ev the pooja money I get, you know eve money I used it for buying some silver thin for you, It should not be for you, it is for I should say, but I do it. 'Every Saint used spend money. Christ had to spend money -His dog. And do you know what spread His Christianity.-He never sprei way round. We are Sahaja Yogis. We're Yogis- "Saints". So, you have to be the Guru. I'm a Guru myself, and what's the con- veyance of Guru? What is the animal he keeps?- a dog is, do you know the qualities of a dog? -He loves his master. He'll give his life for his Master. He'll not sleep till he sees his Whatever they had, they used that mone Christianity-His own message. Tukārăn had to do it. Gyaneshwara had to do master return back. Any time! whatever they had, to spread Sahaja Yoga. We had a dog and 'everytime' I went out, everytime he would come and sit at the door waiting for me. And some people tried notice, everybody is so blessed. They has very hard thing on him-some vegetarians- and he was about to die. We put him in the everything so well done. They are so blesser hospital. When I went there, I sat before him. He just pulled all his body, put his head on my feet, and died peacefully....it's a dog,- animal. When I went away, say, out of my house, he would not eat food tilI I came back. To any other country I went, he would not eat food for all these days, he would not eat his food,-till I came back. He would not disturb me, but would sleep outside waiting for me to get home. And in Sahaja Yoga, the greatest thing nice houses, nice Ashrams all convenience God looks after them, all their problem get solved. good marriages are done, everythin is done well. Everything gets sorted out. They want marriages, Only blessings are there, no duties. "Hoi much money have you spent for Sahaja Yoga' first of all you must ask a question. "Hov much time I have given for Sahaja Yoga? Hov many people I have given realisation to? Hov much righteous and virtuous / have been That's a disciple. Unless and until you What have I done to bring the good name t become good disciples how are you going Sahaja Yoga? What about my personal beha to become the Gurus? What's the use of my viour, how I have livad?" Arneau has spent lo telling you anything about it? You don't of money. I know : he and his wife. I knov have any discipline of your own, how are you about everyone. You have to give time money-everything, your job,-everything you self are tempted into all kinds of things, how have to give up. Peopla have given up jobs are you going to make others understand 've told you the story how people have going to give discipline to others? You your- Nirmala Yoga 16

 sacrificed for ordinary things like freedom like a dog which is amuck, which has got rabies. After realization you have' to be disciplined people. Discipline yourself. This is what I said in '82, again I'm repeating it. But now, the second half of it which I said. P'll tell in India, which I hope they will send fighting and all that. So today, as I told you, you have to resolve that: We are going to have the growth within ourselves through our Shraddha, and through our Surrender. Only through Medita- tion you can do it. "We are all going to grow Mother, into this, "-this you have to promise me as I stand before you as a Guru. Alright? it over to you. ..When you give everything, after that you have to put a Tulasi (gent) leaf, and put the water on it, that is "we surrender everything to you." 'Everything-All our health, all our wealth, everything that we have, we surren- der everything to you-ls symbolic. Every- talk to me; smile, giggle, clap,-in the prog- thing:-our body, our mana ()-our mind -our speech, our talk, our thinking, 'every- there is a bhoot of-a-pope sitting. you keep thing we surrender to you. All our work, our quiet. No breeding at all, ill-mannered, badly job, responsibilities, everything we surrender to you. All our mistakes, our wealth, our you know. But such dogs are killed. They money, everything we surrender to you. All our relations, all our connections, all our friends, all our nations,-the whole world we surrender to you. All aur education, al our We'll have the Guru pooja now, the Mother's pooja I don't feel like having. ..When I say something. you smile and ramme also. In the church you keep quiet. If brought up. It's like a dog becomes mad, are not kept in the public.... See now Italians have brought such beautiful dogs for you to see. (Sahaja Yogi: Those are the dogs chosen by Shri Mataji). rea ding, all our books, all that we have done so far everything we surrender to you. Shri Mataji: I chose you also. I've chosen you also...But look at them how sweet they are. So pleasure giving, so joy-giving, They your head again. Meditate on this point-to are so timely they'll absorb all the anger of surrender everything: "Nothing belongs to the Deities l'm sure, sitting down here like Deities. Beautifully. So sweet they are. I hope you have heard it and put it in us." US Now the symbol of this is like this-you must understand the symbol. That is just a Beautiful. Do not forgive yourself, forgive others. leaf. The last thing left with us is this leaf. you will become Gurus. Then Of course, Tulasi represents the left Vishuddhi, Your life should be such, that those who come in close but also an attachment. So when you have it contact with you are so disciplined, very disciplined.I've seen this. My husband is put water to see that it goes away, even its coming, tomorrow, you'll be having prog- smell, everything goes away from the hand. ramme. And I've seen one thing about his It is significant of that.. life, one thing which I have to tell you, which has made him such a great man; ""He's an extremely disciplined disciplined. on the hand it sticks, it doesn't fall. So you (The following observations were made by Shri Mataji while 108 names of the Guru were being said.) Extremely n". man The one who does not have discipline, is These are all my qualifications, and not Nirmala Yoga 17

 your's so far. They have to be your qualifica- tions... In your Who is the beauty-is the Guru... attention, who is the ornament ...Now this is all the description of the Guru who on human level is like this. What- Gunas): Now think of it, that if you are in th ever I am, I am on the Divine level, It's much Gunas how can you do that ? If you are o more than this. But on human level you have the right or on the left, in the supraconsciou to have all this. These are the signs of a Guru who is a human-being. Do you follow You have to be beyond it yourself, then onl that point? This is not the Divine Mother they you can remove it.. are describing. Is the Guru who is a human being, If I am that, it's nothing great, because I'm much more than that. But you have to (who causes one to become attached t become that, that's the point. Gunāntakāya, (griae) (Remover of th or the subconscious, how can you do tha (घरपाहार नियोजकाम ) Pratyāhāraniyojakāya withdrawal of senses), Through Pratyahai you develop your discipline. And the on Chitkirtibhooshanäya. (fraiy ) That's who himself is not disciplined, how can h the ornament of the attention, is the Guru. do it? 108 Names of Shri Adi Guru Dattatreya SATTVĀYA Salutations to the one who is Sattv सदवान SATTVA BHRTANGATAYE Salutations to the one who sustair Sattva. सत्त्वभृतांगतये KAMALĀLAYĀYA Salutations to the one who is the aboc of Lotuses कमलालयाय HIRANYA GARBHAYA Salutations to the Golden Egg c Brahma, the Subtle body of the Virata. हिरय्पग्माग Salutations to the one who is th collective shelter of awakening. BODHA SAMĀSHRAYAYA बोधसमाधयाय NĀBHĀVINE Salutations to him who lives in or is th াभाविने possessor of the Navel or Nabhi Chakra DEHA SHUNYÂYA Salutations to the one who is the Voi of the body. देहुशूरयाय Salutations to the one who can see th PARAMĀRTHA DRSHE परमार्यटमे Supreme Goal. Salutations to the knower of yantras. में तविदे YANTRAVIDE DHARA DHARAYA Salutations to घराधराय the support of a supports. SANĀTANAYA सनातनाम Salutations to the Seed of Mantras. CHITKIRTI BHUSHANÄYA चिल्क्रीतिमूषगाय० Salutations to the one who is adorne in the glory of attention and awarenes 18 Nirmala Yag

 wit CHANDRASURYAGNILOCHANAYA Salutations to the one who is not excited or agitated. ANTAH PORNĀYA Salutations to him who is completely fulfilled within. अंतःपूर्षाय Salutations to him who is completely fulfilled without. BAHIH PURNĀYA बहिःपुर्णांम Salutations to him who is the Self of full- ness and fulfilment. PURNĀTMANE पुर्णत्मते Salutations to the one who is self- KHAGARBHAYA खगर्भाम contained. Salutations to the immortal one honoured and respected. AMARĀRCHITĀYA अमरानिताय Salutations to him who is deep and profound. GAMBHIRĀYA रांभोराय Salutations to him who is possessed of mercy and compassion. DAYĀVATE दयावते SATYA VIGNYANA BHĀSKARĀYA Salutations to him who shines brilliantly with discernment and knowledge. विज्ञान भास्तारा ÍE Salutations to the one who shines by his own light. SADĀSHIVĀYA सदाभिवाय Salutations to him who makes better. SHREYASKĀYA श्रेयसकाय AGNYANA KHANDANĀYA Salutations to the one who annihilates non-knowledge. अ्ञानवं इनाय Salutations to the one who is fairness. constancy and contentment. DHRTAYE ृतये DAMBHA DARPA MADĀPAHĀYA Salutations to the remover of hypocriti- दं भदर्पमदापहाय० cal pride and intoxicated frenzy. GUNĀNTAKĀYA Salutations to the remover of the Gunas. गुणांतकाय JVARANĀSHANĀYA Salutations to the destroyer of fever and illness. উवरनानान BHEDAVAITANDA KHANDANĀYA Salutations to him who breaks destru- भेयजतंडखंडनाय ctiveness and silly arguments. NIRVĀSANĀYA Salutations to the one who has no Vásanās or entrapping conditionings. मिवसिनाय NIRIHÃYA Salutations to him who is motionless. निरोहाम inactive, desireless and still. NIRAHANKĀRĀYA Salutations to the one who is without निरहकाराम ego. Nirmala Yoga 19

 SHOKA DUKHA HARÂYA शौककु आहराम० Salutations to him who removes anxie and pain. निराशीनिक्पाध्रिकाम NIRASHIRNIRUPADHIKAYA Salutations to him who is devoid of qualities of hopelessness and depressio Salutations to him who endless ANANTA VIKRAMĀYA अनेतविक्रमाय० conquers and overcomes. BHEDÂNTAKĀYA Salutations to him who makes an er of destruction and splitting. भेदांतकाय Salutations to him who is the gre (sage) Muni, the essence of silence. Salutations to the great yogi. MUNAYE मुनये MAHÄYOGINE महायोगिने Salutations to him who illuminates th repeated practice and discipline of yog योगाभ्यासप्रकाशनाम YGGABHYASAPRAKASHANAYA Salutations to the destroyer of arroganc and enemies of yoga. YOGĀRERDARPA NASHANĀYA कोंगारेदपनाशनाय Salutations to him who is eternally i NITYAMUKTĀYA निस्यमुक्ताम yoga, Salutations to the one who is yoga. YOGĀYA बोगाय Salutations to him who gives stabilit and a place to stay. STHANADĀYA स्पानदाम Salutations to the one who is th becoming of great experience an understanding. МАНANUBHAVA BHAVITAYA महानुभवभाविताय Salutations to him who has conquere desire, lust and passion. KĀMAJITE कामजिते Salutations to him who is most magn ficent and glorious. SHUCHIRBHŪTAYA शुचिर्भुताय Salutations to the one who is the se of abandoning and the abandoning. TYÄGAKĀRAŅATYĀGĀTMANE स्पागकारणरगात्मने cause t Salutations to him who has abandone totally both intellect and manas. MANOBUDDHI VIHINĀTMANE मनोबूदि विहीनात्मने MĀNĀTMANE Salutations to him who is the Self o the Manas (imaginative desiring qualit in man). मानात्मने Salutations to the one who has aban doned and CHETANĀ VIGATĀYANE चेतनानिगतापने० gone beyond thinking Bwareness. Salutations to him who is eternally fre and liberated. AKSHARA MUKTÄYA भ्षरमुक्ताय Nirmala Yog 20

 Salutations to him who takes the last absolute step. PARĀKRAMINE पराक्रमिणे ARAN Salutations to the one who is perfectly accomplished in the meaning of renun- ciation. H I TYÄGĀRTHA SAMPANNĀYA स्यागापसंपचाप०। Salutations to him who is the analysis and resolution of renunciation. TYÄGA VIGRAHAYA स्यागदिग्रहाय Salutations to him who is the cause of renunciation. TYÄGA KĀRAŅĀYA त्यागकारणाय Salutations to him who causes one to become attached to withdrawal of the फ्रत्याहारनियोजकाम PRATYAHARA NIYOJAKAYA senses. Salutations to him who dawns and becomes light before ones very eyes. Salutations to him who is the supreme goal of the Devas. Salutations to him who is victorious of death and dead spirits. PRATYAKSHA VARATAVE प्रत्पक्षवरतवे DEVĀNĀM PARAMAGATAYE देवानां परमागतये MAHĀDEVÄYA महादेवाय Salutations to him who limits and des- troys the universe of Shri Yama. Salutations to him who is the destroyer BHUVANÄNTAKĀYA भुवनांतकाय PĀPA NÄSHANĀYA पापनागनाय of sins. Salutations to the one who has come through hell, conquering it. Salutations to the one who sustains. and removes intoxication. AVADHUTAYA নबনতुताय MADĀ PAHĀYA मदापहाप। Salutations to him who has been freed from Maya. Salutations to him who is the highest attention. MĀYĀMUKTÃYA मायापुक्ताप CHIDUTTAMĀYA चिदुत्तमाम Salutations to the knower of the field. Shri Krishna, the Atman or Spirit. KSHETRAGNYÄYA Salutations to the goer into the field. Salutations to the one who is the field. KSHETRAGĀYA क्षेत्रमाय KSHETRAYA क्षेत्राय Salutations to him who destroys the darkness of samsara and transmigration. SAMSĀRA TAMONĀSHANĀÃYA संसारतमोनाशना म SHAMKĀMUKTA SAMĀDHIMATE Salutations to him who is bliss, free शंकामुक्तसमाधिमते from fear or alarm. Salutations to the protector. PĀTRE पावे Salutations to him who is eternal purity. NITYA SHUDDHAYA नित्यशुद्धाप Salutations to the boy, the child. BÄLAYA আলाम 21 Nirmala Yoga

 BRAHMACHARIŅE Salutations to the pure and chaste youthful student. बहाचारिणे] HRDAYASTHAYA Salutations to him who is placed in the हुदयस्थाय heart. प्रबर्तनाय Salutations to him who is in constant enlightened motion. Salutations to him who rips apart and destroys the pain of planning. Salutations to him who brings living creatures alive, Salutations to the one who is beyond PRAVARTANĀYA संकर्पदुःखदलनाय SAMKALPADUKHA DALANAYA जीवसंनोवनाथ० JIVA SAMJIVANĀYA लपातीताय LAYATITAYA dissolution. LAYASYANTĀYA लयस्पतिम Salutations to him who flows with dissolution. PRAMUKHAYA Salutations to the most excellent one who faces alL. प्रमुखाय Salutations to the rejoicer. Salutations to him who is devoid of false appearances. नंदिने NANDINE NIRĀBHĀSĀYA निराभासाय Salutations to him who is simple, pure, clean, undecorated and unblemished. NIRANJANĀYA मिरंजनाय SHRADDHARTHINE Salutations to him who is endowed अরাখিন with meaning, purpose, faith and devotion. GOSĀKSHINE Salutations to the one who has many गोसाक्षिपी eyes. NIRĀBHĀSĀYA Salutations to him who is without lalseness or deception. निराभासाय VISHUDDHOTTAMA GAURAVĀYA Salutations to him who is the highest चिंगुडोत्तमगोर्वाय untainted purity of the Guru. NIRAHARIŅE Salutations to the one who gives and takes nothing for himself. निराहारिणे NITYABODHĀYA Salutations to the one who gives eternal awakening. नित्पबोधाप Salutations to the ancient Lord, the ancient dawning light. PURANA PRABHAVE पुराचाप्रभवे Salutations to the one who bears and supports that which is essential to SATTVABHRTE सरवभूते existence. Salutations to him who is auspicious and beneficent to all beings. BHUTASHANKARĀYA भूतणंकराम Nirmale Yoga 22

 Salutations to the witnes5, pure and swanlike in his discrimination. HAMSASÄKSHINE हमुमासाकिण Salutations to the knower of the essence of existence on sattva guna. SATTVAVIDE सस्य विदे Salutations to him who is possessed of Vidyā or Knowledge. VIDYĀVATE নিজনন Salutations to him who is perfect and excellent in his perception of the Atman. ATMĀNUBHAVA SAMPANNAYA आमानुभयसंप्नाय Salutations to him who has mighty large, powerful eyes. VISHĀLĀKSHAYA विमालाक्षाय Salutations to him who increases DHARMA VARDHANAYA | धर्मवनाय Dharma. Salutations to the enjoyer. ВНОКTRE भोक्ते Salutations to him who should be BHOGYAYA भोग्पाय enjoyed. Salutations to the perfected one in the meaning and significance of how to enjoy. BHOGARTHA SAMPANNAYA भौगामेसंपन्नाय BHOGAGNYĀNAPRAKĀSHANAYA Salutations to him who illuminates the भोगजानप्रकाशनाय knowledge of how to enjoy. Salutations to him who is spontaneous. SAHAJĀYA हलाम Salutations to the one who blazes with light. DIPTÄYA दीप्ताय Salutations to the one who is Nirvina. NIRVAŅĀYA निবাণ্যয TETETATATRIR TATTVATMAGNYANASAGARAYA Salutations to him who is the ocean of the knowledge of the Tattvas. Salutations to him who is the ocean of PARAMĀNANDA SAGARĀYA परमानंदमागराप० supreme bliss. OM TVAMEVA SAKSHAT SHRI DATTATREYA SAKSHAT SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI TVAMEKAM SHARANAM GACHHAMI 23 Nirmala Yoga

 Her Holiness Shri Mataji Sahaja Temple DELHI Our Goal is to be the Spirit- nothing but the Spirit Feb. 8 1983 Now you will be amazed that you go to any Indian University, you will hardly find aspirations between India and the developed four or five people to listen to me. Whatever countries, the way history has taken them: you are doing there, like Jazz, or say all these discoutheque business, hippism,-everything is now followed in our cities. So we cannot say that India is very much towards the Spirit, is a wrong idea. All our leaders, all our bureaucrats, all of them still think that Sahaja Yogi : Mother, today we would like you to discuss the difterence in the aims and and also what they have to offer each other. SHRI MATAJI: Apparently India has the same aim as you had before. They are actually trying to follow you-apparently. in our political systems, we are trying all your methods, in our economic development you are the happiest people living in the we are trying all the paths that you have following your methods, they are going followed and faltered. In bur approach to education we are trying to follow you. In our mental development we are trying to follow absolutely out of date person, and they will the West. Even the young people of this country are now trying to follow you, even copy you, in every way. So 'apparently this is the condition of this country. Whatever you did about, say, twenty years back, we're are not thinking of saving the world, but doing the same now. And we are getting following the world, into the disaster into into a state where the decline might start very which it is going. We are joining hands, soon.-'Apparently', I'm saying. whole Universe. And they are blindly abroad to learn all your styles of disaster. And if I talk to them, they will think that I am think I am just talking because I have no sense in my brain. So apparently, in this country, today, we you see, all the countries which are not yet developed. See we have two categories, one are developed and one are not develo- ped. These brands have come from the West, But as far as myself is concerned, it was the other way round. I could see the future of the disasters of that we are not yet developed, so we must Industrial Development long time back, and develop, because if their tail is cut, our tail also where all such people who are blindly also must be cut. And they are giving us following the West will go into. So my money to cut our tail. whole search, personally, was to go towards the roots, towards the Spirit, towards the by giving us money, sometimes humiliating subtler side of life, which will in any case sustain the human race. So the development they are putting in us and doing all kinds of things, and trying to develop us. Of course it is true that poverty Virmalo Yoga 24

 anywhere is a threat to prosperity anywhere, cannot submit to the higher goal, but the and that if you people are living well or are lower goal also they have submitted in a having Kshema' then its a different point. But way because the matter is now sittting on overall picture of the West that I see is full their heads, of unhappiness, of darkness, and hopeless conditioning; at least the developing countries have some hopes, may be of the disaster, but country. Since ages we have been living a they have some hopes. Now in India since ages it is a traditional different life. When ancient times...you see now, even the climate is so good that you You don't eed so many things in this country. So in the So now, for you people to understand that can stay outside in a forest. you are facing a big shock is sensible, because you are advanced in that direction. ancient times so many people, we can call as Now in the West whatever you have done, still, because of ego orientation your leaders out what is the basis of human beings? are not willing to accept that you are in a disastrous condition. Your political systems the ultimate goal of human beings? And they are not going to admit that you are no good, found out that it is the Spirit. And they that you have harmed yourself. It is too based all the Indian laws and Indian much for them to admit that they have philosophies, Music, Art, Dance, Drama- committed this mistake, because they will not every aspect of life on the basis that'we eat the crow. who is going to convince the Indians that you better take to another course. Seers and Saints, went into the forest to find What is the meaning of human life? What is Under these circumstances have to become the Spirit'. But when we have the western influence and western education put on to us, everyone decided that What has gone wrong with the West is give up whatever was traditional, whatever that they have never worried about their Spirit. They have negated all that is Spirit. really bothered at all about the ancient things all that is subtler life, and have thought that it is better to master the matter, master all these things which they can master. was old, and take to this. And even if we were in our country, it was more academic, so that you could write books, you could write something by which you can make some money, giving some new ideas or giving Yesterday, as I told you in Hindi language some new samples, so people might be that whatever you master is lower than you, attracted. There was no serious probing into is not higher than you. So if you have to go further, you have to go little higher, you have to fix a nail to go higher. And whatever you think you can have, or whatever things you things. And ultimately what was accepted can use for your purpose are lower than you. in the West was tantrism. It is the tantrism But if you want to be higher then you have to be useful to that higher goal. So you Nothing else, that they could see something have to be humble and you have to accept better. Like you can say, that if you go to that "if we have to be higher, we should allow the sea, you will find lots of muck coming up that higher thing to rule us". And surrender to that higher thing instead of dominating being appreciated, not the depth of the sea these lower things, it is better to submit where you find the pearls. So with that yourself to something higher. Because of they are now thinking that you see, the ego this submission is an impossibility. We Indians are the people who indulge into this the subject matter. It was just superficial way of dealing with that really has impressed the western people. on the superficial level and that is what is Nirmala Yoga 25

 once we get money-oriented you see... the and anybody who does not know tantrism is people who have money in this country are just the same as you are. But we used to look down upon that kind of community like Märvādis and all that, but I find in the West most of the people are just like Mārvādis, kind of a tantrism, that kind of a tantrism, not sophisticated. At the same time development you had such horrible people there, like Freud and others, that you lost all their styles are just like Märvädis only. your traditions, your ideas about Spirit, whatever it was; came through christianity or any other source, even the christianity qualities which are within, you have just got itself ruined the whole chances of going near everything outside, inside there is no develp- God. But on the whole what has happened is that the whole attitude of the human much load has been taken, so much has been beings in the West now seems to be a sex point. They just want to be a sex point, I mean absurd it is ! That is what of a glass for this kind of an alcohol, that they are reduced to on one side; on other kind of a thing only; you see ultimately what side is more surprising, is that, with all IS the goal I just don't understand. You see, affluence and everything people are very stingy. They are extremely money-minded don't find there is any goal. It is just a kind and very-very stingy and narrow minded people. Despite you have all the weapons with you, people are so frightened, they don't after from one want to another, to another even allow a little baby to enter their house. With the Atom-bomb at your disposal, they like mad. That's all it is. What is the goal are so frightened of others. See the immigra- of a mad man? I am amazed the way people tion laws, more strict in the Western countries are money oriented there. It's most surprising. than in the Eastern countries. Where the And I asked somebody, I said, "why do you people are really having a problem, they have need so much no problem of getting any number of people so much money, why are you so money coming. You see, how many are there on the road if you walk. So many you will meet. How many are settled down here, money." What is your life style? "We have But this fear has come into the minds of the to drink". Must you drink? I mean if you mighty nations. They are disgracefully gene- in your so-called So instead of developing all the higher ment. It is all outside development. So put upon yourself, the norms you see: this kind of a glass is needed for wine, that kind you get lost. What is the goal. I just get lost, I of a madness, a crazyness to create more and more and more, and like-mad to run want to another want, and go on like that oriented?". They said, "Our life is such, our life style is such that you have to have can not afford why do you drink? So drinking If they are generous, it is disgraceful, is a thing very sophisticated there. Not in money-minded. India. In India if somebody finds somebody rous. 'extremely or they are money-oriented. No body can believe it, is drinking, nobody will marry the daughter that how people are so much money-oriented in their family. Of course, not these wester- in the West. i myself, you see, was surprised nised,I am not talking of westernised. that how could they be so much money- Normally nobody will have any relationship with them. So the virtues and the righteous- ness of life, which is the basis of life, the oriented. While in the East so far they are not. The goal of life, is itself in question there. So the advantage is, thank God, we are not "develo- goals they have accepted are all anti-life, ped." That we are not so money oriented, anti-God, anti-human beings. Nirmala Yoga 26

 yet,-thank God ! we haven't when you try to develop outside you must have inside development. To carry all this Here, developed that pressure of the matter on our heads. So still inside we are large people. junk also you need an elephant, whether it I mean there is lot of room for us to grow, is 8 junk or anything, you need an elephant. inside. But the outside rules are so much and the norms and the whole sort of ideas ant and carry all this junk, then that junk which flows from the minds. Like the other becomes more important than this little ant day they said, "Now a days you see, more inside, is't it? And that is exactly what has fashionable is to have this kind of a dress." happened in the west. I said, why? Then what will you do to the old ones. "They are to be thrown out, this is fashion". So the inside elephant, if you make it into an Now in India. so far people have still some toom to grow because they have'nt But I said how did it come. They said, "There is a fashion designer yet developed so many non-sensical ideas. somebody very well known, in Paris, has brought in this fashion" But for what? I mean there is no questioning "But for what?" Your dress was comfortable, good, nice, if it was already say, five years back, why today just crawled into it, you see, and nothing but suddenly this dress is going to be much Useful? See to the point. The sun is rising domination of this matter on you. You are The first time we had people here from the west, and all the time what they were seeking was comfort; 'crawling" into the corners of comfort. Anywhere they got comfort they is "comfort". And the comfort is nothing but the same way, the light is the same, the rain is the same, now why your dress has to change every third month? not free birds. Your body always needs comfort: If you allow your body to lie down in one pose all it's life, it will be very These are all the problems because once happy. It will say "Alright, let it grow, I you start looking up at your ātmā, your brain am eating my food, starts working. And the brain starts, like a machine it spins, goes on spinning, spinnig, don't go out"; everything attached to it. Very spinning, spinning ideas. And this spinning nice body. goes round and round you and you become like a spindle completely covered with the str- ings. So you have no way to grow. You just fort also is so much, that they have lost the don't grow at all, Inside there is no growth it is only outside growth, you see. When people walk along, you find lots of plastic han- ging around this side, lot of tins jingling that side and lots of steel hanging that side. They are walking very proudly. But inside there is not an elephant. there might be just being they have become that unless & until an ant carrying all these things. I am doing everything here. Only one bed is the house for me, I But if that is the goal, of human life, then I think you can't help me. So to get to com- power to see that the so much comfort has made us slave and that we have no goal left, we have become like cabbages. Such lethar- gy, that nobody will believe that these are the same people who came in this country and fought us. Such lethargy and such heavy somebody rouses them, they cannot give up the comforts. To them comfort is the last end of happiness. But thank God in this country, we are not yet developed but I can't say that it will be like that, because we are feeling very inferior that we are not yet developed outside. The inside development nobody thought of, that So first comes the sex point, second is the comfort which is another siavery. Now third comes the ego. Ego is the goal or 27 Nirmala Yoga

 we can't help it, we have to tell lies in in every respect. How smart they are? How this country, otherwise you can't exist. We they have befooled everyone? How they have to do lot of hanky-panky. otherwise you have been able to get rid of others, to outwit can't exist". All these excuses they can others, to laugh at others to make fun of give. "How to feed our children unless & expression of ege is the goal of the west,- see them, make a joke out of everyone, and until you are dishonest." think that they are the wisest "fools", is the goal of ego. Because you know ego makes So the other side of it, that the goal of you stupid. And so the goal of ego, to make Indians now, apparently again, is of course, you stupid, is so much that small-small I mean as far as morality is concerned is all things that the western people do even or- right, they won't look out at other men's wife, dinary villager in India will roar with laughter they will give their daughters an education, to hear, "Oh! do they do like that." Which of remaining a good wife, creating a good the western people might think, "Oh I we are society. But, as far as the other moral side is great". So this is the trouble, that when the concerned-keeping the honesty of money & stupid people start laughing at others, thin- all that, that they will not do. So one side king, "Oh! these are stupid people, useless people are miserly, because they think they are honest. You see, because if they are honest people," then how to tell them? You can not talk to them because they think that they are they are martyrs, naturally, because they the wisest ever known, because they are the think that if they have remained honest they best ever known. You can't tell that this is have done the greatest favour to God. So they are martyrs, so their money is very precious, every pie they spend, they must ask for account. Indians believe in earning money some way or the other and then spending it the way they like, So I do not know which stupidity. The wisdom lies in knowing your Spirit. But yet, you know it is hard to find yet an Indian; he may to the most westernised, a goal is correct. great miserly, useless fellow or may be a very narrow minded westernised fellow in india. They are lost on this side, and you are You were just like Indians, to begin with, but Tost on other side. But still, in lIndia, because then you ended up into something else and now Indians are becoming like you, so I can't say westerners are just the people who are to be a sort of like a caste. Not. You see, we Indians can become like you, exactly like of traditional training, parents still holding fort, better society is here. You will hardly find an Indian who will believe in absurd thing in which you believe. Absolutely obtuse absurd and also anti-God things that you believe to be good. That is why they have not reached that much development. I mean But still, because, you see, we have our it's like, you see, your brain developing so roots rather deep, we cannot uproot ourselves much that it goes the other way round, and you become just a person who sees everything today believe that a Saint is definltely higher in a different angle in an angle which is just than them, and to become a Saint it is a great the opposite of that. So yet that much deve- thing. The aspiration of an Indian is to become lopment has not taken place, you see, from concave to convex, they have not become. but there are ascapes of the mind that "how So there is still some space with the Indians. can we become that we are house-holders, But because you have seen the disaster you you, even worse than you. to that extent. So most of the Indians even the Spirit, most of the Indians think like that Nirmala Yoga 28

 are facing some of you, who are, thoughtful is people who have not reached that height of the Most generous Father you could think of idiacity, are very great seekers, ardently and He looks after our material side, so we' seeking, working it out. But Indians are not that much of seekers, I must say, because deliver the goods. He is the Father, who don't have to worry about it, it just happens that he looks after. But they will comne and they still think that, "Alright, we have to complain, "my material side is just the same believe in the Spirit. alright good idea, we have to be the Spirit." But partly the Spirit something about it and then I will'never do." partly the other side of it, Becuase they are better off than us. So still they want to go half way this side and half way that side. So Indians are not such good seekers, you have very good seekers, but there is a convexity. rence between the goals aims and objects. There is concavity. but there is no seeking, As far as I am concerned, I look at this side can you imagine my situation; Indians have no goal as far as spiritual life is concerned, mostly. Il they have it, it is so limited that it should help them in family life, in their goal and that is to rise in Spirit. Not related relationship with others, with their bodies or with their jobs, or with their marriages or little more and little more, that is all. But very gross. the goal is extremely gross of Indians, is that they want to achieve a kind you people believe, that you should become of an affiuence that you have, in their heart of hearts: But they do not know the pangs. I don't know what to do now Mother, do On the contrary they should say "my Spiritual side is not all right. That's a better idea. This is the diffe- 18 and that side and I don't know what to say. Because all of you must have only one anyway there that they have to accumulate some wealth, or they have to do some sart of a material progression. And on your side that you have to do some material regression. Like hippies and you will go nearer to God: You will not, because your brain is beyond hip- pism, beyond everything, so you cannot. Your But they think that we can keep the brain is ultra-modern, how can you become Spirit as well as other side of it. you cannot, hippy, you become primitive outside. So in you cannot serve two masters. So now what your dresses and all that, even if you reduce to do? They would prefer to choose this side than to choose the Spirit. this hair style and all that, inside the brain is the modern brain-extra modern. So must understand that unless and until you bring So the goal of Indians today, is somehow the Spirit into your brain, all these outside or other to make money. If some body knows that you know certain Ministers, then they will be after your life, "Tell the Minister like this, will you tell your brother like this, your father like this". Everyone, all of them, will people are confused. They have seen the be just coming out with.. mean it is a value of this material affluence. So they are 'very nothing new, for them it's everyday affair style, that style. They are changing the style. to them to tell somebody" do get it done, it Alternate styles, but by changing the styles must be done." It is all gross it is all absoli- tely materialistic, but that is what their goal doing samething else. While the Indians is. Not the goal of the Spirit. To believe that think that they are poor and God should help God Almighty is the only one who is going to things are not going to help. So it's a big confusion. That is the modern times, are a canfusion, that the western common feature with Indians. It is trying to give up the material affluence also you do't achieve much. That's another them to make them rich. This is another Nirmala Yoga 29

 alternate style. This is also outside. Or they made a complete mess out of it. Here also we had great saints and great incarnations, but the saints are the people who told that you must seek, you must seek, Not that have no ochildern, then they will come, "Mother, I have no children" If they hava 100 many children, then, I have no job: You get them the job, then they will say "Marry my Christ did not say you do not seek, but elder daughter to some one." Then you do nobody is bothered on that point, whether that, they will say that do "this". But nobody we should seek or not. says "what about my Spirit my ? What about Atma?. Mother what about my Spirit? What is happening to it? Where is it? Am l alright? Ami clear ? So to say that Indians have the aims that are correct. is wrong. Or to say that you people have correct aims is also wrong, because your aims may be that you want to meet God, and you want to become the Kind to us, Mother be kind to us." For What? Spirit, but it goes wrong, because the methods you employ are all wrong. But in the east people know that we have to seek, wa have to get to God. But to get to God for what?-"Just that we should be benefitted in our material life". So this goal is of no use. "Mother, you are very kind,"-some of them say "be What kindness more you want. I have given you the Spirit, finished. Now what more kindness? But that does not mean, "You have But as far as the value of Spiritual life given us the realisation, but now look after is concerned, I would give the western people more marks-those who are seekers. is a very very poor show. And that is why / get Forget all that idiotic people, I am talking of the idiots but I am talking about kind of a aspect of Sahaja Yoga, I feel very the sane people, the Spiritual value is much disappointed. But I go to the West and very higher. While the Dharmik value of the eastern seriously they have problems which I just do people is much higher. So it's like some body who has lot of property and does not blems, because materially they are alright, so want to give, and somebody who has no they have emotional problems, And 'absurd" property and wants to give. So this is the emotional problems, they have, And these situation today I find in the East & the West. our Bank Balance." It's a very poor show, it disappointed. When I come here 1 find this not not understand, because these are no pro- emotional problems also have no meaning at all, have no basis at all, they just try to find But basically from the ancient times in out a way and method of not living together, this country people have been seeking-some somehow. Somehow. You see their brain is of them, but not all,-because seeking al- ways has been done by one person. two suddenly we have become BHOOTS". How so clever. "First we were alright, but now persons, or three persons. First fish must have come out then shoals of fishes must fourteen people are married. I am just wor- have followed. So the goal of the fish was to come on the shore, and many must have followed that. So in this country the search find to quarrel with the other party. What is *within' actually started long-long time back. the difference between the other party and But in the West, it was never done that way. myself. Now, how to ruin the image of each do you explain? "We were doing well..." Now ried about the Western couples because the brain is still thinking, "Now what should we had people like Christ who never other. How to ruin the joy, how to ruin also They needed any search, like me, I don't have to go searching something. He brought all the Truths of Life to you to give it to you but you the respect that we have for each other."- That is how it will work out. the brain is too active. And its a serious thing, because if you Nirmale Yoga 30

 cannot live together, two persons, how cân matter. The essence of matter all of you live together. is not comfort, by any chance, is not. Is not possession that it gives you, or the surrender it gives you. Neither the ego that you receive by having a big car, this and that. But the essence of the matter is the joy one receives Not only that you too are human beings, but you are saints, you are Sahaja Yogis and you have to have tolerance for each other and you are just analysing each other when there is no fundamental problem. I can under- Wien you part with it. If you do not have stand if somebody has a fundamental anytning with you, you see, ifI do not have problem. Just with your brain if you start any money then I do not know what is the joy doing like that, then how can the whole 0f parting with it, giving it to someone. But world live together? Just think of it. Here the Supposing I have the money then only wilt husbend-wife will stick, no problem, they njoy. Sa you must have money. That is the will live. The children will live together no problem on that point. But the problem that that you can give to others. Actually this is comes to me is collective, that I must solve now not the problem of one person but all of Carrying on more of the essence part. The first them. Even when they are sticking together part of gaining money is wrong, but giving they do not become a powerful unit. On the contrary they become a powerful problem! only reason you must have the matter so the essence of it. That way Indians are money is alright, they enjoy giving, you see, somebody goes to their house, they will love to give him tea, coffee, serve food, all that So the aim as it should be whether East they like. Anywhere you go to their house, or West, should be to be what you are made they will not be stingy on that, they would like for. You are made a human being to be the to give. But how did they get their money, Spirit. So the aim should be that you should be the Spirit. You have to think through the when it comes to giving they are... So they Spirit. You have to understand through the know the essence part should say, that Spirit. You have to be satisfied through the giving is the way. Spirit. You have to be certified through the Spirit and not through your brains. For both thing is that how you get your money, you of you people the aim should be the Spirit. see, otherwise you are middle class this and This I am talking of the new race that is that. How you get money you see, that part going to comē up. you do not askl That is a different point. But While in the west the more important of thing is there. But you get to it through So the Western problems are that they do that kind of an idea then you just stick on to not recognise Spirit and the Eastern problem it, it does not pass through your hands. You is they recognize the Spirit, but are materiali- stic. And the western people do not recognize miss the point. the Spirit but are materialistic. So they are keeping a balance alright. Now what I have so happy that they are keeping to the essence to say is this. This matter is produced for of the matter. Sharing. They love to share. your joy and happiness, but even the essence of the matter you are not enjoying. Because and joyous despite their poverty, despite you are not the Spirit, even the essence of their frugal life. And this is what I just donot the matter you are not enjoying. So what understand that once you do not have and you have to do is to become the essence yourself and enjoy at least the essence of don't want to give it. are literally frightened to part with it, so you That is why the Indians look so generous, And that is what is keeping them so happy you want to give and when you have it you Nirmala Yoga 31

 Human beings go on changing their goals. Depends on what level you are. If you are a poor man you want to become rich. If you are a rich man you want to become poor. But people have less quality, or the Eastern poor in the sense, poor inside, not outside. people have less intelligence, it is only that Now actually the goal of every human being they have no idea as to have only 'single- is to become the Spirit, nothing but the minded' goal to be the Spirit. in both the Spirit, that is the goal of every human being. And if you do not become Spirit then solved. whatever you are doing is against your goal. Once you become the Spirit, no more this human being, but the Spirit, then the whole thing changes in a different way, you act in a different way, you use your telecom- munication. you use your television, you use your things in a different way, at a different level. At the Unconscious, level. So you have to reach to that UnconsCIous have lost that subtle side of life, they just see And this is the message of your Mother. I have to give you the message. I have to give you the "right' thing. It is not that the Western cases. Once you decide on that. porblem A day may come when Westerners will be more Easterners than the Easterners. I mean, you see, in the West when the Indians go there,-the uprooted ones,-they are much more Westerners then you people are. They cannot understand Indian classical music, they do not like Indian furniture, they do not like Indian paintings, nothing. Because they level where "everything' is available for you, everything, That is how these miracles take place. Like the other day we wanted to buy some saris. And I just stopped at a shop I said, "Now here". Now we got the saris for Indians) littlebit of the Spirit is lost as soon as one tenth of the price, we should say. of dne with the West, they just got transformed into eighth of the price of the saris that you get in the market. So, when the Spirit guides you get everything, there is affluence, and you are generous because it is so much of the So you like the life of the Spirit. But to say affluence in the real sense flowing. to the superficial side and they live like that, While you are becoming subtler. whatever was Because there hankering in them they went away from here. They get mixed up western life, and they have accepted it. While now you are transformed into your Spirit that Indians today are great people of Spirit, L must say, to be honest, they are not at all. Because of their past traditions here, because What I can only tell you is what goals you should have. And the goal as I told you is of this Yoga Bhoomi of course, they cannot to be the Spirit, that is what is your goal. To uproot themselves, but they are trying very me East, West, North, South does not count, hard to get themselves uprooted.All of do not know the directions. I only feel that if every human being in this world decides that he has to be the Spirit and Spirit alone Sahaja Yoga, they are still not trying to go all other probelms will be solved, because he lives with the absolute, not with the rela- tive, he does not compare. He is in absolute their complexes about their material life. It is state. He does not compare there is no rela- tivity. The relativity creates a problem, like developed, under-developed. All these are relative terms, isn't it! But if you are the absolute then there is no relativity, there is opinion about yourself. Today who look to no problem and you become the goal itself. them, are trying very hard to get uprooted. Even Sahaja Yogis, when they come to downward towards the Spirit, but trying to use Sahaja Yoga for building up so-called so It's a very sad thing, but that's a fact So it is meant for all the westerners and the easterners that don't be on a firm be lost may be the people who might guide Nirmala Yoga 32

 -But again for that' you you. Might be one day that it is those people is going to Bless- who were thought to be absolutely gone should not. cases will have to fetch you out of your own problems. The goal should be a higher goal. But the higher goal should not be seen relative to whatever are the lower goals. Accept the higher goal in an absolute way. Otherwise So everyone of us must honestly decide that 'wa hava to be the Spirit. that is the goal of life. Then all problems are solved. when I say this, you fix it like that "Mother has said that all problems will be solved, "so take to Spirit"is again relative. But astent would be slow. Alright, what is the second question? S.Y.: I think Mother you've answered the second question which was "What is so No, take to Spirit. "Mother has said täke to Spirit, alright we take to Spirit". Even important about Self-realization?" why say Mcther has said it", but say, "/ say / will take to Spirit." point. So, by God's grace all the humanity will rise at a higher' level than what they are. Actually, the level at which the human beings are, are called as Laukika (Rifew), beings to become human beings. means the gross type. To go to the subtler, or the Alaukika (*i). you have to give up from vour awn' angle, but from the Creator's using this brain. But you have to use the Spirit. And if the Spirit is not available to you then what will you do? Shri Mataji : No, but that I've not given. Keep it at that The importance of Sahaja Yoga", I've not given. Now, what is so important for human So the importance we have not to see e angle; because you donot understand your importance as it is. Human beings never think "why have I become a human being"? Anything that Sahaja Yogis are doing Do they? So they have no sense of impor- today; say, a marriage. Now, you are Sahaja Yogis and you are married, but you are married "in Spirit". So that is to be kept afloat, one must understand. If you keep that alloat you'll be amazed you'll enjoy that marriage, enjoy the whole thing, and you'll have the best of children born to you. tance about themselves. So how can they have sense of importance about Self-realiza- tion? From human point of view I would say, "Because you have to ascend"-But why? I would say, "So that you will get your Kshema' (rH), your well-being"-But for But for' that you do not seek the Spirit. what? "When you will become the Spirit. again. This is how the Mother tries to you that. "Do this, then l'll give you one peppermint". But if you are mature then you don't listen to these things. You just say, "Mother, whatever is right that's what I have to do. Because I'm here to do the right, and I'm convinced that you'll always tell me the right thing to do. So l'll do the right thing". i# God wants us to do it, we'll do it". Just Such a decision anybody vwho says or takes, all your problems will be solved"-But why? tell ...you see, the human beings are like that. But it is important because "the 'most important thing is your Creator, and He wants you to have your Self-realization". Is the absolute thing. "If He wants it, alright". How many are there who will say. "Alright. for God's sake "THY 'WILL' BE DONE". whether he is north, south, east, west, any side, he is the Yogi. He is the one whom God "He has arranged it, He has made us 33 Nirmala Yoga

 human beings. let Him make whatever He wants out of us."-This is absolute again. the importance, your brain will give you the Surrendering to God has to be there before other side of it also, and will start telling you understanding this problem. "Thy will be done" should be your first attitude, before attempting to understand this answer of wouldn't be any individual left, you will all mine. Is the will of God; God who has have to move in the buses. in the dust! created us, God who has made us human Wherever God takes you you'll have to go beings, God who has given us everything. there, and live with great discomfort! You God who has given us Sahaja Yoga. So it is may have to hug people who may not the Will of God that we should be the Spirit, apparently look that sophisticated! And you so we will be". With your brain if you start thinking about that "If you get self-realization. then you'll have to surrender to God! Then there may have to lead a style of life which is not suitable to a "sophisticated western, persona- What have we given to God, so far? We lityl"-All these problems would arise. And have been extracting all His energies, we when such problems will arise, your brain have been extracting the Mother Earth, from will have no way to answer it. All importance the sun we are getting this, for everything, will be finished. and we are creating problems for Him, we are troubling Him so much that He has to solve our problems. So let us be surrendered way, "If that is the important thing, to Esta- to Him. So that is His Will that He wants us blish my Spirit, I will do it. to be the Spirit, sa let us be the Spirit".-This is the greatest importance of getting Self- realization. So best is just to say in a surrendering Because when you are on the brain level you are always in relative state. Everything has a double thing. I mean you talk to any- But if you cannot stay to that state, and one-The other day I was talking to some- body about the Israelies being cruel to PLOS. So they said "What about PLOS? They I said, but where to end tion, in these days of turmoil and all kinds it? He said, "It can be ended later on when PLOS are finished". I said... Everything has a second thing! Whatever you may say it has Because this brain has a But God has no problems. He has no great capacity to produce waves on both the sides. Because it lives in relative terminology. you come down at a human level, then I can write a book saying that. "Self-realization is very important because without Self-realiza- have been cruel". of problems, there is no solution. The man has to be transformed". a second idea. problems if you do not want to get to self- realization. He solves the problem just like thatl He has many quick methods by which He can just solve all His problems. So in a To overcome this. there is only one way, is that you forget this and that, and you just nutshell, one should understand that the say "IT IS". Then only you will know the importance of this has to be "because God wants it" and otherwise He might be doing something else! So better get to it. importance of it. Because any number of importance I may give you, you'll neutralise it. That's why This understanding is that of a child who Sahaja Yogis fizzle out. You've seen that. surrenders to his mother, knowing that the Why Sahaja Yogis-they get realization and mother is doing everything for his good. everything-still they fizzle out one by one. 34 Nirmala Yoga

 Why 7-Because their brain has a great capa- city to produce anti-Sahaja Yoga understand- ing. So what importance should I tell you which is absolute for your brain, I just don't you cannot travel. In the same way we have to see if the ticket is available there or not. When we think of God also we think He Because you are very clever, I5 lower than us, so we can use Him. You cannot push people into it. Only those who will be allowed by God will be there. Its the understand. and you will find out an anti-dote of that "also' ! other way round, we must understand this This is what we miss. *That if we want we It's impossible to convince certain people, but one thing one should know that God can push as many number as possible. We Almighty is an Absolute Power. It will do can get so many people to God"-is a very- what it likes. So better be surrendered to it very wrong idea. You 'cannot' force God. He's That's what a Mother can tell to the children, that this power of Love and Beauty ness with prayer, with great asking, and then is to be surrendered to... yam ( )-the one to be accep- ted, the One which is to be surrendered to. That's the One to be surrendered to. The beauty of the whole thing is that this is the power one should surrender to, than to credibility.-Not with God. So many will be the power of your brain or of your mind. And just dropped down,I must warn you. once you realise this, then the importance of the whole thing will dawn upon you. not under you. You have to take His gracious- you can save these people. He's not interes ted. He can create many more. Tvamekam Varen- So those who are not wanting, you should not try to sell. You cannot sell Sahaja Yoga. You may think that more quantity is a sign of You have to be careful as to see, that Even if you bring one person, you must con- Now, if you want to tell the people who solidate. That's a better idea than to get a are not seekers, you are in for trouble, I must big quantity of people who will not get even say. It's not easy to convince these people, a ticket, leave alone the seats. because they want to escape. And the idea that we have, "that we should convince everyone",.. you are sadly mistaken. brain level you cannot convince them. So s Y: What are Vibrations ? So, one should be satisfied. Alright ? What is the third question ? On best thing is, that you can take them to a point.-'see for yourself' Otherwise, you give- up. They are the losers, not you. What can you do ? You have tried your level-best! Shri Mataji: Vibrations are the pulsation of the all-pervading power within us, which we can feel in the central nervous system. The Spirit doesn't pulsate. It doesn't pulsate. But we think that we should have more The pulsation exists in the all-pervading people with us. But I don't know how many power. But through Spirit when you get can be accomodated there. It's the other connected, then only the flow starts. And way round. Like, when you have to go by you then start feeling the pulsation on the the piane, you have to ask the company to central nervous system, And this pulsation give you a ticket. If the ticket is not available of the Holy Ghost are the Vibrations. Nirmala Yoga 35

 Sayings of Shri Mataji Dedication, Bhakti and Surrender You have to dedicate yourself completely to me; not to Sahaja Yoga. but to me. Sahaja Yoga is just one of my aspects. Leaving everything, you have to dedicate. Complete Dedication. otherwise you cannot ascent any further. arguing. Dedication is the easiest way to get rid of 'all' your angularities, all' your problems, "all' your badhas. Complete Dedication is the only vway you can grow further. Without questioning, without Krishna said. "Sarva dharmanām parityajya mamekam sharanam vraja"-forget all the religions of the world. There is no difference between Him and Me, but today I am the One. I am the one who has given you realisation. All these dharmas are to be given up "entirely. And you have to surrender fully from your heart. Here. as you are before me today, I want to tell you very frankly, as Krishna has told only Arjuna, Sarva dharminām parityajya, mamekam sharanam vraja". Shri Krishna has said. "Give up all your dharmas and surrender them to Me, surrender to my dharma only. You should only know what you owe to me", meaning the Divinity. Shri Krishna is not there, it's Me who is Shri Krishna, so you must know what you owe to Me. She can be only achieved through bhakti. She can only be ach jeved through Dedi- cation. She's only fond of Her bhaktas-the devotees. I should say. Emotionally you may feel closer to Me in your heart. But through meditation, Surrender. Meditation is nothing but surrendering-is complete surrendering. In your full freedom, complete freedom, you have to surrender. For this. meditation is the only way Only through your bhakti-through you Devotion and Dedication you can achieve Me. My achjevement is the complete manifestation of your Divine powers. It's very simple, made so simple, I'm only pleased by people who are simple, innocent. who'are not tricky, who are loving, affectionate to each other. It's very easy to please me. When I see you loving each other, talking good of each other, helping each other. respecting each other, laughing aloud together, enjoying together each other's company, I get my first blessing-first joy. So, the Dedication in meditation. Complete Dedication in meditation must be prac- ticed. It's not for your' good now you're doing it So-called 'your. First you were a little baby, a small thing. Now you are that Collective Being. so you are not doing anything for yourself, but for that collective being. You are growing to be aware" of that Whole, which you are going to become. Your jobs, your money, your wives, your husbands, the children, the father, mother. relations-these considerations are have to take up the 'responsibility of Sahaja Yoga. Everyone of you is quite capable; you're brought up for that. In Dedication. in complete Devotion, you have to do it 'now' not for your own good, for your own achievement-that's over now. Is for completely getting out of the mire and standing on the land, singing aloud the praise of your Father. You all over now. You've to bear the brunt; and the sacrifice-which are no more sacrifices to you because Spirit gives, it never sacrifices. It's quality is to give. So, you don't sacrifice, you just give. Our Greatest possession The greatest possession you have is your Mother. Through Her you have your brothers and sisters. Now. the name of your Mother is vary poNarful. You know that is the most powerful name than all other namas, the most pow arful mintra. But you must know how Nirmala Yoga 36

 to take it. With that 'complete Dedication you have to take that name. I have taken birth in this world in the binding of Sahaja Yogis and have been moving around only in their bind- ing. I am desireless and hence my everything depends upon your desires. Attain me, I am Suous, yours, I am for you. I have given you that which has been beyond the reach of very great sages and saints. When I am speaking it is a mantra, when I'm not speaking, is a mantra flowing. Those who are fanatically adhering to me are also not correct. There should be no fanaticism' about it. The Ascent Has To Come From You Unless and until you are cleansed how can you be completely blessed? You have to be fully blessed by the Divine, clothed by the Love of God. But now your ascent has to come from you. Your rising has to come from you. That has to be worked out by you' and 'you" alone. Not by any other Sahaja Yogi or by me. Develop that Dedication within yourself. So the tree of Kundalini has to grow. And from that tree, Paramatma Himself. the Parabrahma itself. has to pull you out. It grows out of the mire, and the Parabrahma has to pull you out-one by one, take you in the Hand and swing you out. On Love Try to love each other-in Dedication; because you're all my children, created out of my love. blessings. A 'deep love should exist. Selfishness has no place in Sahaja Yoga, Miser- liness has no place in Sahaja Yoga. In the womb of my love you all have resided. From my heart I've given you these You must have a heart as your Mother has Pulsating with love, with Compassion. with Joy, with Happiness, with Giving. That should be the attitude. Not rationality. Nothing, It is to feel. Feeling for the pains of others. Feeling for their longing and feel- ing for their aspirations. Just feel within yourself, is there Desire to be the Whole', to be the Ocean itself is so fulfilling All that is sustaining, all that is nurturing, all that is ennobling comes from this sense of love, which is within us very much developed, but within others also who are not yet realised The Great Message Tell all the nations and tell all the people, all over, the great message-that the time of Resurrectionn is Here. the ones who are capable of manifesting God's joy on this earth. You are the flutes which are going to play the Melody of God. I am doing all this to perfect you to be the 'most beautiful instruments of God. Like the ship is built, is brought to the sea, tried, and found out to be sea-worthy to sail out, when you know everything about the ship, everything about the sea. With complete freedom and wisdom, you have to sail now. Not afraid of any storms or any gales or any typhoons because now all you know. Your job is to cross through. Now. at this time, and that you all are capable of doing it. You are You become the Ocean, yoau become the Moon, you become the Sun, you become the Earth, you become the Ether. the firmament-and you become, the Spirit. You work for all of them. All the stars and universes you become, and take up their work. True Freedom Freedom in subtlest form is complete egolessness, no angularities, complete hollowness just like the flute; so that the melody of God could be played well-that's complete free- Nirmala Yoga 37

 dom. Freedom is when you really get your own powers which are within you. In your Central Nervous System, in your conscious mind, you must feel the existence of the Spirit. On Puja A Puja or a prayer grows from your heart. Mantras are the words of your Kundalini. But if Puja is not performed from the heart or if Kundalini is not associated with recitation of Mantras then that Puja becomes a ritual. Best is worshipping in the heart. You should say the Mantras in Puja but with great faith (Shraddha). You should perform the puja when Shraddha goes deep so that heart itself gets all Puja performed. At that time. waves of bliss start flowing because it is the Spirit that is saying. People pour their wine in the glass. Your Puja is like that. In that. wine is your faith and the glass is the recitation of Mantras and the worshipping. When you are drinking that wine forgetting everything how can a thought come ! Then only you are bathing in the ocean of bliss. However the joy that you get after drinking the wine is eternal and ever-present. The Infinite Treasure I have given you the key to the treasure, which others haven't got. But you must work to open the door. Do you want to go empty-handed despite having the key to the treasure? Why should one brag of one's achievements ? You must understan i that whatever is being done by you, is all God's power i.e. working of Adi-Shakti and you are only the witnesses to see these miracies. For achieving that stage you should pray. "May our l consciousness' fade away, may the truth that all of us are small parts of your being, be assimilated within us, so that your Divine Bliss would resonate every particle of our bodies and this life would be filled with beautiful melodies enchanting the whole mankind and would show light to the rest of the world", Let love flow from your hearts. Love is unlimited. Your attention is on material things and you are talking about eternity Your attention should merge in eternity so that you will have eternal life. Self-Realisation Complete Self-Realisation is that stage attaining which nothing else is required. Thereafter. only enjoying the bliss and the satisfaction of fulfilment. Man wants peace, wealth, power etc. but God is the origin of all these. We should pray to God for peace and keep the desire to meet God, who is peace itself. This should be the difference in satisfa- ction of a common man and that of a Sahaja Yogi. All attention must be on Him. For that, one must have dedication, determination and concentration (tapasvita) and in that all material attachments should be destroyed. A True Sahaja Yogi A Sahaja Yogi is happy in the circumstances that are prevailing. If he is not. then his satisfaction is superficial and not from within. A river starts with a very small, little drop, and then it expands, expands, expands, expands. central point The person who is a generous person. for him the whole world is his family. So expand your self. When you become the parents and then" you enjoy other children as much as you enjoy your child. then your generosity has started. You have to be a peace- ful person, not an aggressive person, The person who is peaceful is powerful-the one who doesn't react to anything else, is the most powerful. You have to be kind to others. You have You go to the source, "absolutely to the Nirmala Yoga 38

 to be neat and clean. First is forgiveness, second the detachment leading to compassion. These are the wheels of your chariot which moves you. You have been made like temples. Keep it clear. We are moving towards the soothing qualities of the Spirit. You have to 'soothe others and not to excite, but to soothe. Let God's melodies be sounded from your flutes. You must have the capacity to deepen your maditative po w3i, so that these ideals go and settle in your heart. as a part and parcel of your being. Once the saints know this is the principle on which we have to live, they become one with the principles. You become the mother, and you, whatever you are which has to grow, is the child. If you are a Sahaja Yogi you have to be a flower, and a strong flower, and an eternal flower that always grows, does not fade out. always growing, never fades. such a flower you have to be, Sahaja Yogis should never be angry. Without getting annoyed. they should improve everything tactfully and intelligently. Never get angry. Every individual has to work it out for himself so the Whole can be alright. There could be some people who are only worried about others. Worry about yourself and see the good points of others. If somebody has to tell you that you must organise, go fast and all that. do not feel bad. waste. Till you keep the maryadas of Sahaja Yoga, saying morning-evening-night that, am a Sahaja Yogi", nobody can harin you, hurt you. Nobody can trouble you. On the contrary you will be enjoying life if you keep to the "maryadas. We have to do so much wark in this warld we have no time to One must promise to God also that we will know about Sahaja Yoga. through proper understanding, reading every word of it. We'll master the knowledge of Sahaja Yoga. We'll keep ourselves clean. And completely surrender our lives to Sahaja Yoga. Surrendering to Sahaja Yoga is actually surrendering to joy, bliss and peace. Language should be sweet. your behaviour should be good, it should be very gentle and soft. You should. move like a Yogi, live like a Saint, and people should see through you the greatness of Sahaja Yoga. See the trees when they get their flowers. they are not so respectful ; but when they are laden by the fruits, they bow down to Mother Earth. In the same way when you have got the fruits of Sahaja Yoga, you all must bow down. You have to be sensitive to God and not to bad things. You have to change your methods. A Person who cannot change his methods cannot spread Sahaja Yoga because he sticks to only one way, with which people get bored. You should find new ways. An established Sehaja Yogi is the one who becomes completely one with God and wins Him over. He has to do everything for that. Conquering Ego Say from your heart: "I don't want this ego any more. I want Reality. Let the Reality be seen by me, felt by me, enjoyed by me". Once you start doing it from your heart, you will be amazed that your voice will become sweet. The second thing you have to surrender, is the pride, or vanity. Before God, what is your property? What is your money? What is your position? What is your family? What is your education? We should be proud of one thing only, that His vibrations flow through us. The human mind has another capacity, to be jealous, to be jealous of others. Another offshoot of ego is called 'hot temper'. Another enemy we have is greed. Material greed and also human greed. like possessing your wife, possessing your children, possessing this, possessing Mataji also. The ego and the super-ego both rise from the Vishuddhi chakra. You give up all your dharmas and surrender to Me. That is how your Vishuddhi chakra gets opened up. The matured people are those who surrender. who bow to the Mother Earth. Humility is the best way of conquering this ego of Vishuddhi. When talking to others, try to develop sweet methods, sweet ways, unhurting other people. You will be surprisad that Vishuddhi will immediately start behaving in such a sweet manner. Nirmala Yoga 39

 Kundalini Shakti Your Kundalini is the same as the Adi Kundalini. and it's power the Parabrahma. You are the officials of God's kingdom then why are you sulking ? All deities are your elder brothers in this kingdom. They are present in many forms along the path of Kundalini. You should recognise them and attain them. Kundalini is your Mother. Learn to always remain under Her care. tatwa which is flowing within you in the form of vibrations cleanses all your three sheaths viz. awakened within you, is Brahma Shakti and it is present in the universe in different forms and even in molecules. It is the solidity (Jada-Shakti) in solids, in living being it is beauty (Saundarya Shakti) in waking state it is the power of bliss, in Sahaja Yoga it is the power of consciousness bliss, in Param Yoga it is supreme bliss and within Bhagwati it is the power of being Brahma (Brahmabhootawa Shakti). Kundalini as you know, is the true desire', So true desire to perfect yourself, to grow yourself. If it is really true desire nothing else is important. Be Her child and She will take you to the ultimate. Brahma- Body, Mind and Ego. This power of callective consciousness which is How to keep Mother pleased "So how to please Mother ?" I am also a very simple person, so I want a simple hearted person. So this Heart Chakra is to be first looked after, that with your heart desire, you will keep your Mother pleased. First of all your heart must be clear. If the heart is not clear, then everything has no meaning, because it is a dark heart which is doing all these things. The heart has to be clean, absolutely surrendered and must try to put Me before everything else. The Lakshmi tattva has to become Mahalakshmi tattva. That is for your ascent. And just to get into that Mahalakshmi tattva, what you have to do is to use all your material things and your material being in such a way that you please Me. You have to keep your Mother pleased by pleasing other Sahaja Yogis, and not other people. What 'Guru Dakshina' (Gift to the Guru) have you given me ? Understand that your money is not worth the dust on the feet of your Mother-Guru. You should give your hearts: only clean and holy hearts. You must clean your physical beings. You must get up early in the morning and spend at least one hour on meditation and worshipping. Perform "Arti' and meditation in the evening. Discipline You are my children. How are people going to have respect for you, or for Me, if you have no discipline? The discipline has to come from "within yourself. The discipline of within is like the fragrance of a flower. It gives you complete freedom, and it gives freedom to others. You have to kill the greatest enemy within yourselfindiscipline and irresponsi- bility. Laws of the Divine One must know these laws of The Divine, that we have to live with self-respect. that we have to be chaste, that we have to have dignity, that we cannot steal money and steal things and be parasites. That we cannot kill others and we cannot beat others and say harsh things-they are just the same. And that we have respect, the respect for all that is sublime. Respect for all the saints that are Sahaja Yogis. And the respect for the leaders who represent your Mother. With all this, we are very different people. We are a different race. We are virtuous, we are righteous and we are proud to be that way. We are sure of everything. We know about everything. We are the personification of Compassion, of Love of God. That's what we are. We are not ordinary people. On the subtler side, is Compassion. Is Forgiveness. Is Love. But the greatest of all is the Servica to God. Wa are doing the work of God. How can we be tired? The dynamic is flowing through us. that Compassion is so fulfilling, that Nirmala Yoga 40

 love is so beautifying that how can we not do it? God has created this universe, this world and you people out of His Compassion only. just His Compassion. Blessings of the Devi There are so many blessings waiting for you, to be manifested. Just you have to concentrate your efforts in devotion and dedication. The enjoyment of life is only possible if we could get conected to the Spirit and that connection to the Spirit is only possible if you sprout into that: you become the Spirit as Christ has said in simple words that you have to be born again The whole existence itself will have no meaning if we do not become the Spirit. We all have to become the Spirt otherwise we are useless, we're good for nothing.'our life has no meaning. The Pure Desire There is only one pure desire and that is to be one with the Divine, one with the Brahma, one with God. That's the 'only' pure desire. All other desires are impure. So train your mind gradually to achieve that desire as the main thing. To achieve that you have to keep your Mother pleased, very simple. Bliss of the Spirit You get the bliss of the Spirit, if you become of sound body. pure mind and egoless. The only thing you can do is to enter into His Kingdom and become a part and parcel of that blissful domain. What to do after getting realisation? After receiving you must give. Agnya Chakra If your Agnya is alright, then your eyes are perfectly alright. They emit nothing but love wherever they glance. Only with a glance of your eyes you can raise the Kundalini; with the glance of your eyes you can cure people. Only with your glance you can bring joy into the destroyed, ruined people, with your eyes. They are the windows of your being. A realised soul's eyes sparkle like diamonds. One must know what to order and how to obey. Obey the Divine. Obey our elders. Obey your Self-and not your ego. Then you can order also others. Not only human beings, but the Sun and the Moon and the winds, and everything in the world. Everything you can control with this Agnya. If you know someone is going to do something wrong, take his name to your Agnya and he wll not do it. Anything you order on your Agnya must be respected. But your Agnya must have Christ there-your Agnya has to be clear. Those who have a good Agnya can master anything. You can really become the master of yourselves. When people see you they will know Christ is reborn again within you. As long as you have done no wrong, there is nothing to worry. And as it is. even if you have done some wrong God is there to forgive you. Culture of God It's the culture of God, we are talking about. it's the culture of His kingdom. Where we give to others, enjoy giving, doing for others. loving others. caring for others. without any return. VIshuddhi and Shri Krishna The best way to develop that absolute nature of your Vishuddhi Chakra is to witness the whole thing with a detached mind. And to develop love for your Mother in your heart. so that She cleanses all these enemies, in such a way that when you are faced with them. you are a powerful person. Shri Krishna is one of the aspects of Sadashiva which is the Father. And the Adi Shakti or the Holy Ghost is the other aspect of Sadashiva which is His Power The first aspect of Shri Krishna we have to understand is the Yogeshwara and the

 Regiatered with the Repistrar:of Newanapera under Regd. No 36999 8|1. second aspeCt of him as the Virata. The element a yogi controls is ether. When you enter into your ethereal zone. you actually enter into the area which is thoughtless awareness. The greatest quality of Yogeshwara is that He is not at all involved into it. detached. absolutely. Whatever He is, He is complete: sixteen petals is complete moon, SIxteenth day of the moon is Purnima. That is how one has to be, complete in oneself But confidence should not be confused with ego. Confidence is complete wisdom, it is complete dharma. Its complete love, complete beauty, and is complete God. That's what it should be It is the Virata Shakti that is manifesting at this time and not the Shri Krishna Shakti which was at His time. So the integration of this brain has to take place with Heart and with your liver. Then only the Virata Shakti takes another form The weapons of killing became the weapons of forgiveness So you are the fruits. That Viratängana Shakti, you are the fruits. We are going to worship thut Virata Shakti which has given fruits, Absolutely the humility inside is really going to givet you the complete value of Sahaja Yoga fruits. Achieve the completion of this Virata Shakti which ultimately becomes aMadhurya Shakti. Vishuddhi chakra is the centre of the Virata The massege at Shri Krishna was to surrender When Shri Krishna was taiking about surrender, He was saying, "surrender your enemies to me so that will ger rid of them": The vworst enemy That we have is our ego Ganesha and Innocence Today is the first day of Navaratri. Today your attention should be on Shn Ganesha. His devotion is infinite. He has never worshipped anybody else except Mother. Hence He is so great Gauri is the one who, as a Virgin, Crested Shri Ganesha. And in the same pattern you have got your realisation. The first chakra belongs to the power of Gauri, the power of the Mother of Shri Ganesha. Because of Her power you have got your realisation Have we been able to develop our innocence within ourselves? The power of innocence is so great. It makes you absolutely feariess. And the greatest thing of innocence is that you are respect- ful. In your chiidlike nature only, you can receive the blessing of Gauri. Innocence has a special capacity to make a person 'extremely peaceful, Extrümely peaceful The one who is not innocent is never wise. Wisdom comes only with innacence, When yo grow you find this wisdom really fragrant with compassion. When you have Gauri's power then you stand out because you have that innocent. lustless. greedless, beautiful. sparkling eyes and wherever you turm your eyes, even ane glance would taise the Kundalini immediately It is the maturity of your innocence that must be developed. that keeps you a very religious person. dharmic person. Vishva Nirmala Dharma We have started Vishva Nirmala Dharma, You are under the vision of Shri Ganeshn under the guidance of your Spirit. and under the blessings of God Almighty But be caretul, because once you become that. you have to keep to that Dharma. you have to be hanest about it Sahaja Yogis today represent the growth of this univerae, the growth of the humin race You wil become like a latus-beautiful, fragrant. overpowering all kinds of negativity So let us now promise within our heart. that we are the people who are beneficiaries of the blessings of God. that we have got our realisation, that we have risen so high. But how let us Spread our wings On Meditation So everyone should meditate everyday. Everyone must today promise to me that they will mediate everyday I can tell you this much, next year those who do not meditate every- day, will not be here anymore. Editod & Published by Sh, S.C. Ral 43, Bunglow Road, Delhi-110007 & Printed at The Central Electric Press, 80-D, Kamla Nagar. Delhi 110007. One issue Rs. 9.00, Annual Subscription Rs. 51.00 Fornign (by Airmail £75 14)



----------------------

1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Nirmala Yoga
Bi-Monthly
Vol. 5 No, 29
Sept.-Oct. 1985
"Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns al the religions and
seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga-THE UNION"
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-1.txt 
 YOGA
NIRM ALA
43, Bungalow Road, Delhi-10007 (India)
Founder : Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Editorial Board : Dr. S.K. Mathur, Sri A.S. Mishra, Sri R.D. Kulkarni
Representatives
Australia
RAJEN MAHARAJ, 26, Ocean St, Bondi, NSW 2026
: INGE KELLY, Josef Melichargasse 20, 1210 VIENNA.
: LORI & CARY HYNEK, 1540, Taylor Way, West Vancouver, B.C. VIS 1N4.
: M. CERNAY, 175, Av. Ledru Rollin PARIS-75011.
Austria
Canada
France
: ANTONIO SARACINO, NIRMALA HOUSE, Localita Pichini s.n.s., 00010
S. Angelo Romano, ROMA
M.B. RATNANNWAR, 13, Merwan Mansion, Genjewala Lane, Borivali (W),
BOMBAY-400092.
Italy
India
JUAN ANTONIO DELGADO, Avenida De Burgos, 30, 1, A, MADRID-28036
:CHARLES & MRS. MAGDA MATHYS, 5, Chemin Des Mouldins.
1256, Troinax (Canton de Geneva).
Spain
Switzerland
U. K.
: GAVIN BROWN, Brown's Geological Information Services Ltd., 134 Great
Portland Street, London WIN 5PH.
IAN BASCOMBE, 32, Hooker Road, Exeter, Devon, England
: CHRISTINE & MICHAEL PETRUNIA, 270, Jay Street (APT. 1-C),
BROOKLYN, NY-11201.
URSULA SEHLMEYER, 191 Canal ST. #23 SAN RAFAEL, CA-94901.
U.S.A.
CONT ENTS
Page
1. Editorial
1
2. Nirvikalpa (Austria, 1985)
3. False modesty and Sahaja Yogi
4. Sahasrara Day Pooja (Austria, 1985)
5. Guru Pooja (France, 1985)
6.108 Names of Shri Adi Guru
7. Our Goal is to be the Spirit, nothing but the Spirit (Delhi, 1983)
8. Sayings of Shri Matají
7.
8.
11
18
24
36
Front Cover: Shri Mataji at Guru Pooja, Lodge Hill, England (July 1983)
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Editorial
What is the Essence of Religion?
The essence of Religion is to know God the Almighty. And one can never know the
Almighty unless one knows the Spirit-for it is His reflection in man. And only through it
can one know Him:-when it awakens to assume its seat in the Sahasrāra of the
Cosmos, one becomes One with Him. It is the goal of all ascent, and without it ascent has no
meaning, is sterile and deprived of essence. For we should know we are by His desire
created, and made to become and remain One -part and parcel with Him.
To deny the unity of the Creator and His Creation is an escape of the ego-and of those
possessed by it. It is an escape of the individual and a denial of the Advaita (ia) nature of
the creation.
Contemporary with the great Shri Adi Guru prophet Shri Mohammad Dattätreya, another
great soul Shri Adi Shankarāchārya took birth to reveal to Mankind the essence of the
Advaita Philosophy-and as a rejoicing, it is said. was taken by Shri Adi Guru Dattåtreya
Himself, from the seat of the Devi, Nanda Devi Parvat (in Himalayas), to the Feet of Shri
Sadāshiva in Mount Kailasha-where the Saundarya Lahari was revealed to him.
Any religion which does not reveal to man his unity with the Absolute through the
grace and glory of the gift of the Atma within him-is not a religion. And any individual who
denies the unity of God with His creation-or it's fulfilment,-denies the Love, Mercy and
Compassion of God,-and the Love which is the essence of His creation.
This fulfilment of God's love, is the incarnation and work of Shri Adi Shakti, Shri
Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi-and it's fruit. Sahaja Yoga and Sahaja Yogis. There is nothing else
of either meaning or significance-and this is the Nirmala Yoga and Nirmala Vidyā of the
Universe. All else is mire.
Sākshāt Shri Sahaja Yoga Pradāyani
Sākshāt Shri Adi Shakti Bhagavati
Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Namo Namah
ॐ साक्षात् श्री सहज योग प्रदायनी
साक्षात् श्री आदिशक्ति भगवती
माताजी श्री निमंला देवी नमो नमः
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-3.txt 
 May 4, 1985
VIENNA
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Nirvikalpa
It is gratifying to see so many Sahaja say to ourselves "What are you doing?
Yogis have come to celebrate the Sahasrara What is surrendering? It is enjoyment. it
Day. Without breaking the Sahasrara, we
could not have achieved the ascent en masse.
But the Sahasrara which is the brain has gone
is just enjoyment. Then why 1 cannot
surrender? What is lacking in me? Am 1
a very low level person? Am I the one
inta too much complications in the west. who was just saying I'm a seeker but I'm
And the thoughts are very much twisted,
one upon the other. To keep Sehasrara surrender? If so, what am
open should be very easy if the Western Myself? If that is the situation, then why am
brains could understand and be aware I so much enamoured by my tgo?"
about your Mother. When your Mother is
the Deity of Sahasrara, the only waY to be has to dissolve into the Ocean to become the
able to keep the Sahasrara open nas to Ocean, and a drop cannot be greater than the
not. Am dishonest person that I cannot
I proud of?
What do you have to surrender? A drop
be complete surrendering.
Ocean, can it be? So what is the surren-
For that many ask me, How do we do it ? dering? Surrendering of our conditionings,
It's a very funny question. It is irrelevant. If of our ego and the artificial barriers we have
your Sahasrara has been opened out by built around us.
someone, and luckily that is the Deity before
you, it should be the easiest thing to approach emotionally and also physically we
surrender. But it is not. It is difficult because
the attention that has come up through the ourselves through mantras, through seeing
cells of the brain expressing itself through the ourselves, through knowing ourselves. But
cells of the brain is polluted. It is impure, It
is destructive. It's poisonous and when the test opportunity for you, not for the Divine. It
nerves are spoiled, the light of the Spirit does vou are not available the Divine can find its
not shine on the nerves, And you feel the
inability to surrender. Normally, it should be expression. Even to understand how immense
the easiest thing to do.
One can approach mentally. one can
can approach ourselves. We can approach
one should know this is the greatest of grea-
own ways of fulfilling its last culmination of
the task is, you need a surendering heart.
have to mentally approach
So we
ourselves. We have to talk to ourselves and arrive, you develop a petty ego that you are
Only through mental approach when you
Evening before Sahasrara Day Pooja
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-4.txt 
 big thing. They are the people who deserve.
It's not what you dress and what you eat and
doing a great work. Like i telephoned to
America saying that I'Il be coming. There's a
very big scientist in Los Angeles who is an what you have. t's what you can give and
Indian Maharashtrian fellow. He missed his give up. The tags of mundane life are to be
Nobel prize, such a great scientist.
telephoned to me immediately saying "Mother gress of people like slaves tied up to chains,
I am coming to New York to receive you.
I'm taking leave for fifteen days. When you
are here I want to be with you. What else is suddenly the ego coming up automatically.
to be done? As it is I am doing Sahaja Yoga On the contrary, to surrender to fill up your
by-the-way at my own convenience, when- vessel with the bliss, the bliss of Divinity, so
ever I get time. That's what l'm doing, isn't that when you go to others you pour on them
it? But I would like to travel with you to the beauty and love of God. It is for you to
Europe to all the different places with you to understand yourself very well and not.others.
spend some time, otherwise, what am I doing Don't blame anyone.
here?"
dn anb
cut off. You must understand. It's a pro-
He
chains of desires, of complacentness, chains
of lethargy, chains... When I say this, I find
It's so precious that no words can describe
But what have heard, that people are the greatness of these moments which we
arriving at different times for Sahasrara Day.
I was amazed. It's typical western mind. By within yourself, the assignment that is given
the way, Sahaja Yoga is to be done, mostly to you through your own Spirit, through your
by-the-way. It should be convenient. It
should be a weekend. When just by-the-way But lack of faith in yourself cannot give you
for a holiday, we can go to Vienna. There, surrendering powers. Surrender is the opening
of course, by-the-way, we'Il have a puja and of Sahasrara, keeping it completely open so
by-the-way Mother will raise the Kundalini. that Nirvikalpa state is established within us.
She will awaken our Deities and then by-the- There should be a regular progress of impro-
way we'll be enjoying the blessings. No
sacrifice can be done for God. No time, they you ever seen any lotus or any flower that
have no time. Everything is by-the-way. It's blooms, blooms, and in between again does
rather amazing, for war people give up their
lives, for destruction they work so hard, day then blooms. Have you ever seen such a non-
and night. But for construction of humanity sensical phenomenon in the nature ? You
for the ultimate goal of Divinity, in the West,
how many there are who really surrender? If
it suits, then we'il be there. Sahaja, this is that comes up, again goes inside the mud,
Sahaja style. We should reach Saheja.
heard about this many a times. There are mud, blaming other people. Have you seen
still many who take that kind of an attitude
towards Sahaja Yoga. It is sometimes becomes a dwarf, again it grows, again it
surprising for me.
are spending together. You have to feel ir
own state. You can fulfill the assignment.
vement, regular progress of the opening. Have
not bloom and then blooms then collapses
come up, again you go down, again you come
up, you go down. Have you ever seen a tree
I again it comes up, again it goes back into the
any animal which started growing, then it
becomes a dwarf.
Even these huge palaces which have been
Do you see that
If I go to a village, people take leave for
fifteen days, one month. In Rahuri people built so beautifully for us.
take leave for one month to prepare for my they become small suddenly and then
coming. One day leave for them is a very collapse and then again they blow up, Only
3.
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-5.txt 
 balloons of ego and super-ego does that. down, he should know he is still not up to
And when you are identified with that. you.
too become very peculiar personalities. The and tell himself or herself that "No, I have to
lotus of your Sahasrara is open now. It must
open more and more and more and should down".
not suddenly collapse, again open, again
collapse. It's a very complicated phenamenon.
You can see in the west and you can be very.
much surprised sometimes. To
sometimes very shocking to see. Suddenly saved. They will be punished. May not be
someone will come ""Oh, I'm very nervous
about this thing, I'm very nervous about that.
Another person will come and tell me "I want
to leave Sahaja Yoga now". Another one
comes and tells me "Oh, it's too much. I any circumstance. Do not blame your father,
cannot go any further with it". So we must atmosphere, this, that.
realize that there is something very peculiar There's no need to blame anyone, "Because
within us, something absurd within us, that's somebody came we were influenced". What
why it happens. We go forward, backwards,
forward, backwards, all the time: What is influenced by me. How are you influenced
this pendulum? That cannot be Sahasrara. by somebody who is so stupid obviously, so
Sahasrara is not a pendulum. It is a lotus.
So the pendulum is the chitta, is the atten-
tion.
the point and he should face up to himself
be into Nirvikalpa where I do not come
The people who are not in the Nirvikalpa
state are not going to be saved. I am very
5orry to say that. They are not going to be
me it's
the same way (as) those who are not realized
souls, but they will not ocupy the seats in
the realm of God Almighty. At least you must
reach the state of Nirvikalpa: Do not blame
mother, brother,
is the matter with you?
/'m here, you are not
dominating? That means what is your level ?
So tomorrow I have decided to tell you how
to be at the state of Nirvikalpa. As l said,
we can approach mentally. But mentally I
say you take this medicine and you do not
take the medicine; that is just a mental thing.
The attention that moves trom left to
right, right to left, goes on like that all the
time.
But the area of Sahasrara is the realm of The medicine is kept on the cupboard. You
God, When the Brahmarandhra opens fully.
then the heavens open within yourself. The
Kundalini which has risen up and given you
realization creates that subtle opening, by have decided that you have to be at the
which the Diivine starts pouting all its sub- Nirvikalpa state. You can say this Sahasrara
tleties inside your brain. But if you're day is a very big day because never threw
pressing it from both sides with these
balloons, sometimes opening, sometimes
closing, sometimes opening, the Divine
recedes its attention. You must know that. religions where, after the deaths of the
The attention is receded back and if it is done incarnation, people started the religion and
many a times, the Divine doesn't bother. So did whatever they wanted to do with that.
it is you who has to achieve that state and in our living time we are going to make
all of us can achieve that state of Nirvikalpa. ourselves that instrument which will represent
In that there is just
Nirvikalpa you
somebody is still going up and down, up and them by all our mistakes. Doesn't matter.
are just the same and then you say "Mother,
yes we listened to your lecture".
So the keynote of tomorrow's pooja as I
such an ultimatum before. Because now we
are established as Vishva Dharma, as the
Universal Religion. We are not like other
progression. After the Vishva Dharma. We have to have strong
cannot come down. If Deities vwithin ourselves. We have weakened
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-6.txt 
 T hey are weak because traditionally we end of our journey to left and right. Because
haven't got the strength. Doesn't matter. "my husband is like that"-"my wife is like
that"-because my child is like this"=you
We cannot have black spots any more. We've are not going to be excused. Whom are you
telling-your own Spirit ? Tell your Spirit.
Does it understand? It takes away your
vibrations, it takes away your joy, it takes
to dilly-dally. Thase who will be left behind away your position. Nirvichāra is very easy
to establish. But that also some people have
not. What about Nirvikalpa? You have to
But now this Religion has been established.
done all the choosing, the training. every
thing. And you all have to jump into the
boat now. Thare's no more time left for us
will be lef behind. It's a
very intense
period now. you must understand. The
intensity of the period is not by-the-way. It's take it up very seriously.
not any more Sehaja Yoga. it is Maha Yaga
now. And you have to become Maha, you celebrating in Europe, maybe, I don't know.
have to become great, otherwise you cannot
be thare. You have to jump out of all these
things.
This may be the last Sahasrara day we are
It's not that Mother is only happy if there are
people of higher qualification or higher calibre.
It's not that. I have very great concern for
Tomorrow I'l try whatever is possible on thase who are lost, who are left out. But
my side. I'll work it out: There is a serious sometimes through my experience I think
matter. I must tell you that once I've esta-
such people get spoilt.My love is not for
blished the Religion I don't want to have any spoiling you, is not ruining you. It is for your
holes in it. I avoided it because I was not
emancipation. is for you to enjoy the beauty
of God's blessings on you. Even now if
sure. Now / know for sure that there are
many who could be called as Nirmalites. there are people who are not righteous who
Because no more black spots on the beautiful are not truthful, who are not virtuous at the
sari of your Mother. It has to be absolutely dharma stage, then what can I talk to them?
highest quality Gradually we used to drop And then if they are not even the Spirit, then
people, gradually worked out this. There's what am I to do with them?
no time left now. As I have told you I'm
going back to India. Tomorrow l'll be able
to tell you" how gradually you have got up to
your Sahasrara and to get to Nirvikalpa you
have to really dedicate yourself fully.
The ideologies, the talking, the discussion
and arguments do not lead you there. No
It's meditation. What is
meditation? is actually facing yourself and
correcting yourself with the full understanding
as to what you are. We have to create ideal
to Sahaja Yoga. It's a Sahasrara Day. You human beings. That is what is the Vishva
have to cross the Himälayas. If you read the Dharma, otherwise we have many adharmas
lives of the people who tried to travel up to going on. So many religious activities in the
Kailāsha, you will know what hardships they name of all the great incarnations, which are
they do not.
It's not a matter of convenience to come
have gone through. 've taken you very
sweetly, delicately up to that point, but don't opposite of it.
get spoiled by that. You'Il all fizzle out into
thin air unless and until you are in the
Nirvikalpa state.
nowhere near
the incarnation, just the
This Nirvikalpa state has to be established
once and for all, so I don't have to then
struggle with you. The group of people
who'll attend tomorrow's Sahasrara should
be able to establish that state-otherwise they
I'm sorry I have to say that here, in Austria.
This is the place which should demarcate the
• Please see Sahasrara Day Paaja, pp. 8.
5.
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-7.txt 
 are just like the people who are newcomers.
They are coming for the first time, or ten
times, or eleven times, or hundred times.
What difference does it make? To me it is that "See, you are Adi Shakti
clear cut. I have short time, becauss the you have spoilt your children, you have
instrument has to be alright. If you have to not done full justice to them, They take
expedite the growth of the instrument in a everything so easy and mundane."
proper way so that the God of Love, God's
Love flows and the God of that Love feels
happy about it. We have to create such
beautiful flowers that He appreciates, that He are important. It has to be living action of
does not destroy. The spectator of this play your being. That should prove it, that should
has to be satisfied so that He postpones His
destruction. That's why / said the time is And the effects of that you will feel in your
short, time is very short.
know if you are praising me. I do not feel
the praise because I myself I am not myself. I
see myself as separate and then I tell myself
alright, but
So you have to tomorrow take a vow
Within your heart. It's not the words that
convince you that we are fully surrendered.
own personality, in your own being, in your
own manifestation
If we want our children to grow into the
realm of God, they are great saints who are
born, if you want to give them a full chance
of the enjoyment, then let us first of all
become proper parents and not people who
just live with illusions. Everything in Sahaja some still who are possessed, there are some
Yoga cannot be explained. I cannot explain.
I cannot because you don't have those
With so many Saints, why should I have
any worry of spreading of Sahaja Yoga?
Because there are some who drag you down,
there are some adamant people and there are
who are murmuring souls. Just don't pay
any attention to them. They'll be all lost.
Doesn't matter.
powers to understand.
Like a girl said "Mother I want to have
the sun." Because people told her "The
weekend will be terrible. There won't be any
sun." Within fifteen minutes, the sun was
We have to create the great day for us to
be proud that we belong to this great Religion
of truth. There has been no religion so far
which is the Religion of Truth. It practices
shining. Within fifteen minutes. The wind
started blowing, all the clouds settled around something and preaches something and it
Vienna, beautifully like the Sahasrara and the
sky opened as I want your Sahasrara to be
open. All the nature is so anxious to work it
out. But you must learn to cooperate with
your Spirit. It's not a cooperation that is just
by the way. It is to be the Spirit, the becom-
ing of the Spirit fully. is very important.
Nothing should stop that.
has nothing to do with the incarnation. You
have to do something that people should
say we can see our Mother in this person.
Today is the day when I want to bless
some children. I've blessed many children.
I would like to bless all the parents also to
understand that they have to contribute a lot
for the up-bringing, of the children. There
1 hope today's announcement will help have been some very good tapes they have
made in England, how to help the children to
grow properly in this crazy western life.. And
the one who has been the greatest enemy
love. It's nice to praise me for whatever has of yours worked in this place, He's the one
all of us to have that understanding of our
responsibilities towards ourselves and towards
our Creator. It's nice to praise me for my
happened, but to be very frank, I do not
who has ruined you and you had to commit
6.
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Sin against your near. It's the Ocean of all the rivers. All
sin against the Holy Ghost.
Mother. Now at this time in this place we the rivers flow to this great Ocean of Vishva
have to turn our face to hope it will work Dharma.
out.
So we have to mould ourselves to fit
But just think in your mind what have we into the new pattern, the new rhythm, the
sacrificed so far? No sacrifice is sufficient.
But have we sacrificed anything? That will until that happens, I do not think that
make you understand that your Mother has western people have much chance. If you
given you your second birth without any
difficulties. She has taken up all the fabour Tomorrow I would like ta work out as much
pains upon Herself. Now you are grown up as possible.
and you have to understand that now you
are grown up people and you can't behave
like children. That is over now. Now you minute I waste. And in the same way I hope
are grown up people, you have to become you will dedicate your 24 hours for your
responsible for this Maha Yoga and for this emancipation and the emancipation of the
great Dharma that we have established. The whole universe.
Dharma that integrates all the Dharmas. The
Dharma that purifies anybody who comes
new music of Divine flute. Unless and
have come for Sahasrara, be prepared.
I'm working 24 hours. Not a single
May God bless you all.
"False Modesty and the Sahaja Yogi"
It is very common for Sahaja Yogis who
have done something great, to become all
coy and unassuming and to say "No I didn't
do it, You did it", etc. Stating the obvious.
how it was so great, said." i don't know-He
just puts me to His lips and blows and beautiful
music comes out l". A Sahaja Yogi who says
we' and "Thou" accepts his actions without
being falsely modest or over-reacting to them.
He accepts them with detachment-for he
Why is it necessary to state the obvious ?
Because somewhere at the back of his mind, reconizes their inevitability. They are like
it is not obvious.. Somewhere he is still say-
the sweat of his body-unimportant. The
ing I', I did it". And to compensate for nis only thing that is important is the Feet of the
ego-which like a disgraceful relative is not
Power of the Almighty that allows them to
allowed in Sahaja Yoga circles, but kept in become manifest. and he keeps his attention
the bedroom, he invites his more acceptable,
Super-ego relative to have tea with his
friends,
fixed securely on those Feet, seeing nothing
else-not even the consequences of his
actions,-for then it is all "Thou",-Tü hi',
A Sahaja Yogi has only one reason to Ta hi', and not I' 1, as the great poet Kabir
exist. to be the surrendered instrument and sang.
devotee of God the Almighty and His Divine
Shakti. If he is truly a hollow instrument of
the Divine and a devotee of the Lord, he can-
Amen = नमः इति
सकात श्री आदिशस्ति भगवती माताजी श्री निर्मंता देवी मुनम :
not help doing Great things, after all it is in : Sakshat Shri Adishakti Bhagavati Mataji
the nature of the Divine to do great things. Shri Nirmala Devi Sunamah Sunamah. Amen
like Lord Krishna's flute, who, when asked fa
नमः इति
-Dr. Rustom
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-9.txt 
 5th May 1985
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Sahasrara Day Pooja
16th Sahasrara Day
Laxenburg, Vienna, Austria
It is a very privileged place for you to
enter into the Sahasrara of the Virāta, to
that are the human dharmas-human dharma
is that his attention gets attracted either with
reside in the brain as cells of that Sahasrära. lust, greed, at something, and then he cannot
Let us see what is the quality of the cells of pull out his attention. But riow the attention
Sahasrāra. These are specially created cells becomes dharmāteet-means the attention
through the working of the Swadhisthana. loses its dharma. 7The dharma of the attention
Passing through all the chakras, when they are such that we have to put the dharmas
arrive at Sahasrāra they are equipped to taught by the prophets to control them,
handle the brain's activity without getting Because we are coming from the lowest
level. So these dharmas exist in our being
and start showing, and when they attack us,
involved with the other cells-human beings, then we have to have some measures to
control it. So we build up our dharmas, our
own self-regulation, and control them, the
dharmas which have cone to us from lower
conditioning. This is the greatriess of human
involved into other elements in the body. In
the same way the Sahaja Yogis are not to be
of the body of this universe.
The first thing that happens to a Sahaja
Yogi at the Sahasrara level that he becomes-
beyond"ateet". So many things he transc-
ends: "Kāläteet"-he goes beyond time. Time beings, that they have made their own
is his slave. If you have to go somewhere dharmas, established on top of the lower
then suddenly you discover that everything dharmas. Like carbon has, say, four valencies,
is working about the same time when you
are able to do it. Like you are, say, to Catch ding to the four valencies, it cannot make it
a train and you arrive late at the station, you
find the train is late for you. Things work out
in such a way that you feel they are all active
for your complete convenience. So you go
beyond time-"kālāteet".
it has to be in four valencies, it acts accor-
six. But human beings can make those
valencies established which are supposed to
be representing the human dharma, the
"Manudharma". But with the Sahasrara ascent
the attention loses that quality. means, you
don't have need, there is no need, to put
dharmas, restrictions upon yourself. You don't
Then you go beyond dharma-"dharmāte-
et". Means, dharma becomes part and parcel have to discipline, but you get disciplined
of your being, Nobody has to tell you, you automatically. That is the first sign of a
do this or you do that-you just don't do it.
Whatever you have to do it, you do it.
person who is belonging to Nirmal Religion.
That is pure. Attention doesn't get attached
or attacked by anything whatsoever, it is so
When you go beyond all these dharmas,
Nirmala Yoga
8.
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-10.txt 
 pure, Like the Lotus leaf, the water doesn't a person cannot be described. You cannot say
stay on it. So you become küläteet, You why Socrates agreed to take the poison. Why
become dharmāteet. You become gunateet.
Means, the three moods in which you are human comprehension. That's how you
born, left, right and centre, you go beyond behave beyond human comprehension and
them. The laft one is the oane by which you you are not to take certificates from human
have emotional attachments of your attention. beings. Your certificates come from God
The second one is the physical and the Almighty and not from these human beings
mental attachments. And the third one, the who are at a lower level. It would be like a
attachment to the dharma. Attachment to be dog writing about human beings
righteous and making others righteous, of
disciplining others and disciplining yourself,
which is Sāttvika. Where a person tries to
control all his enemies of lust, anger, pride, out"-without. So such a person is without
vanity. attachments and greed. All these thought, he doesn't think. Such a person
restrictions on the attention get lost and you is without greed, such a person is without
become a free person of complete wisdom. lust- devoid of. Such
Your attention itself becomes dharmic. So to be "ashesha-out of which nothing
you lose all your gunas and you become is left out. Like when you want to make a
Satgunis", means virtuous, but not by vacuum, you go on creating the vacuum,
discipline, but spontaneously. You become reach any point and the vacuum cannot be
righteaus spontaneously. Sometimes such
people puzzle you: like Christ took a hunter time where you find some part of it has to be
in his hand and beat people who were remained. You cannot have a complete vacu-
selling things in the presence of God, in the Um. But such a person has a complete
sense, in front of the temples. According to Vacuum-vacuum of all the negative, aggres
laws, we should not have temper, but this sive qualities, it doesn't exist, complete.
temper is a temper of a Gunāteet and such a
temper is a spontaneous happening, which is can kill, nobody can harm, nobody can hurt.
not to be analysed, has to happen. The
temper of the Devi on the rākshasas, the
killing of the rākshasas, Krishna's samhäras,
Krishna telling Arjuna that you have to kill disturbed by insults or non -insults. He is not
all these people, they are all dead already.the capacity to enjoy the boons of the ego.
Christ agreed to get crucified. That's beyond
So you reach a state where it can be
described with the word a", means "with-
a person is said
complete because it reaches a point all the
Such a person is eternal being, nobody
The anger of anyone or respect of anyone
does not touch such a person. He is not
They all get explained because you go bey- the
ond. So in the "Ateet beyond conditions
arise. Only the one who can control is gets the blessing of the word "Nihi"-Nihi is
beyond. The ane who is in it cannot control the first word of my name, but in Sanskrit,
it. If you have to pull out a ship you have to when you combine it with "Mala
be on the shore, The one who has gone
beyond can only do that. So you go beyond,
that is in ateet. But, when it comes to the
knowledge about such a person, you cannot "sheer". Or when an "i" is added fo it, but
think, because such a person is beyond the first Nihi means without-devoid and
thinking. You cannot describe because such "Nira" means sheer. Like when you say
So the third state where he reaches, he
becomes "Nirmala". But the word is 'nihi'.
Ni which shakes a little-Ni-i. That means
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Nirānanda, Nirätma sheer atma, sheer joy. the satisfaction of the ego. But the state has
Kevalam, the only, there is nothing but joy.
But this word is used, nira or nihi, used in nda. Then what is the question of fear?
two forms as I told you. One for say, without What is the question of talking about it ?
or devoid of. Then another form is: the only, You cannot talk, because how will you
absolute. The absolute. So here the joy relate it? I cannot say it is like this, it is like
becomes Nirānanda, absolute joy, nothing that. There are no words for absolute to des-
but joy. It's complete freedom.
now to be established within us is of Nirâna-
cribe. Only by negation, "not this, not this".
what remains is absolute. So you reach the
state of absolute and that is the state a com-
So you have all kinds of joys, as I
you before, you have Swänanda-the joy of plete communication is established and in
the Spirit. Then you have got Brahmānanda-
the joy of well-being. You've got Leelananda. but the Absolute within you:
Krishnänanda-where you have the joy of the
play. But when you reach the state of
Sahasrāra it is Nirānanda-means, sheer abso- for. That is the level to which you should
lute joy. Though the name "Nira" is my aspire. That should be the ascent. We should
name, it means absolute. So when you put be established within ourselves. We don't
such an adjective before anything else It have to go to Himalayas, we don't have to do
becomes absolute. Thus you become absolute. anything drastic. Remaining in this world we
And when you are at that state of absolute have to become the Absolute. The only.
then there is no place for anything else to be
there but yourself.
told
that communication you have nabody else
That is the Sahasrāra Poojā you are here
*Kevalam. There is nothing like "how'" for
it, you just become. You just become, like a
flower becomes the fruit. It's all built in,
within you. Allow it to work out.
absolute.
But let us see what is
US
That
no relative qualities. Absolute cannot be
compared, "atulniya", it cannot be compared.
It cannot be related to anything, it is absolute.
It cannot be comprehended because it cannot ness. It is absolute
be related to anything else through which compassion, it is absolute power. The words
we can comprehend. It is absolute. What-
ever way you try to know it you go away the absolute and feel your absoluteness
from absolute. Wherever you try to analyse through it with that oneness. If somebody is
the absolute you are away from it. So this is not with you, you don't worry. There is no
what at Sahasrāra you get-Nirānanda.
means it is not relative, it has
Just by surrendering you become. Surren-
der it and you'll be surprised you will be at
the state where you will enjoy your adsolute-
absolute love, it is absolute
stop, the description stops. You just become
company needed. You're alone, enjoying the
absolute. There only you can enjoy the
absolute in others also, in the best form.
In different stages of Sahaja Yoga we
had to start from Shreeananda, means the Without seeing anything else but the
ananda of the body, manasānanda-the joy absolute.
of the manasa-is the psyche. Then you can
say Ahamkarānanda, where you have to have
May God bless you.
Nirmala Yoga
10
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-12.txt 
 Her Holiness Mataji Nirmala Devi
Chateau-de-Chamarande,
PARIS, FRANCE
Guru Pooja
29 June 1985
I believe you say all these things (mantras), fore, first time I see such a horrible thing. In
and you listen: to it, and say it from your my living time if you are doing like this, after
heart. Only the ones who are united with my death so many gurus will rise, to mislead
God can worship Shri Ganesha. And Shri you. Are you going to accept all that ?
Ganesha worships your Mother.
All the Deities refused to do this. They
First of all one must understand that there tortured my life, they would not accept to
is a combination of a Mother and a Guru. allow you to have this pooja.-Absolutely,
Because Guru is a very hard task master. He nothing doing.-Because they love me, they
does not allow any liberties to be taken. respect me. They have the proper protocol.
And Mother is very kindly. But you don't They don't want to become gurus themselves,
have feelings for the Mother, do you ? You and misbehave in this manner.
did all a lip-service that you listen, goes into
your head, and you think you have become
the surrendered Sahaja Yogis. Like all Islam strong, with the French. I've told so many
people believe they are surrendered to God,
like Christians believe they are surrendered And you should fall a trap-something like
to God. It's just a lip-service that you are
this, you are that. Or do you know it, what supra- conscious. And arrogant.
is said is a fact. Have you not seen the Sun
in my hand 7 What more proof do you want?
Anybody who misleads you is of course sin-
ful no doubt. but to fall a trap to such a
Last time when I came I was really' very
times that French is the Hell of the Universe.
that. It's very supra-conscious, extremely
I've never known of such a Guru Pooja.
Never. Indians had only one Guru pooja,
and they are praying that they should have at
least one more Guru pooja. With all these
Guru poojas if you have achieved this kind of
person..
If you had told a child that the Mother is surrendering, it's better you donot have any
coming, he would have fought, "I'm going". more Guru poojas at all ! Don't deserve it I
You cannot become Gurus, I can see that
He would have cried and wept.
clearly. Without surrender how will you ?
What about your vibrations ? You don't
use your vibrations I You have come all the
way for Guru Pooja here, who is your Guru ? showered upon you. And what have you
Whom are you going to worship ? Anybody given back ? Such ego! That you act to
comes from anywhere becomes suddenly
important. How ? It was never done be- a very bad example. You have to wash the
All the Blessings of the Divine have been
somebody because he has greater egol It is
11
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-13.txt 
 feet of the Indians and drink that water. May should not have happened," they aiways tell
be then you might realise where you are;-
may be very developed and all that. And plaints and complaints I And for this kind of
the Indians who are of your type, all of them
have to do that. Why didn't you see your You are all ego-oriented people and you like
vibrations ? When the blind gets liis eyes, he egoistical supraconscious nonsense. That's
doesn't close his eyes to see things, does he? what it is. You have all come for Guru pooja
me. Complaints and complaints and com-
a nonsense, they have no protest, nothing!
or for what have you come for?
And what has happened to your leaders
also ? All of them put together could not
say that we will not have this nonsense at
this time ! Just coming to the airport so l'm talking to you as a Mother. "Is this the
many people have risen higher in life. What way to respect Her?"
will you do here 7 You should have pro- the last Guru pooja you'll be having, the
This I'm talking to you as a Mother, and
not as a Guru. As a Guru l'll do what I'll do.
I had told you, this is
tested.
"last' pooja you will be having, may be. It's
shocking
!
would like to know how many wanted
to go to the airport and asked for it. Raise
your hands. Honestly. Honestly... These to your Guru. It is said that the Guru is the
are the only people who love me... May Param Chaitanya ( a), but it is: the
God Bless you.
You have to respect your Guru. Surrender
Param Chaitanya is your Guru, "Agati Param
Tomorrow somebody tells you to insult Chaitanyam, Dhanyoham Tava Dharshanāt
me, will you do that ?
(आगता परम चैतन्यम धन्पोहम् तब द्शनात) -When the
Param Chaitanya itself will come on this
You know that if a king arrives from a earth I will feel myself so gratified to see the
- small-little place somewhere,
minister from a very small island.-from
Lakshadweep and Maldive islands the prime
minister came, and the prime minister of
England had to go and receive him. And it Krishna could be punished by His Mother.
darshan of that....
or a prime-
In what world are you living ? Where are
you ? Taking for grantedI I know Mother
has a right to punish you, very well. Even
your Guru has come, all the gurus have to
come and receive me, or to listen to some-
thing non-sensical here ? I felt like going
back from the airport only, the kind of vibra-
tions I felt.
But l'm not interested. The children who want
to disrespect me, and insult me, I have nothing
to do with them. They have no love for me,
I have nothing to do.
Only those who protested and wanted to
go to the airport should come forward to do
my pooja.
How do you get into this kind of a mire ?
How you join hands ? Except for few....
Your quality will be known (by) "how much
you are surrendered to'Me. *"
said that. And today I say to you that.
You should be ashamed of yourself. You
have insulted your Mother, who has given
Christ has
On all other things Sahaja Yogis will Selflessly I've been working day in and day
protest. "This was not good, that was not
good, this was done..." Against each other,
out, neglecting my own children, my own
femily, my grand children,-for you!
against everything they will protest, "Sahaja
Yogi took this much money from us, this
Only those people who wanted to go to
Nirmala Yoga
12
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-14.txt 
 the airport and said, and did not go, please
come forward....Those who were here and
tell you how to behave. No protocol-sense
of protocol, even. It's like beggars.
did not come, should understand that you
are living in the Kingdom of God. And when
the Goddess of the Kingdom arrives, you have
to be there. I'm sorry I've to do that, this is
the promise I had to give to the Deities.
Today you have to resolve, and ask (the
forgiveness of all the Deities, that you are
going to use your vibrations all the time.
Resolve. And that no more such a thing we
are going to repeat again. This is the last,
never like this..
Know that you have to have ascent, you
have to work hard, you have to meditate.
Shows, that there is no discipline.. One man
can save and one man can destroy. Your lea-
der is alright till it comes to Mother's part, but
when it comes to that point, then you have to
protest against your leader. All the rest with some people, those who have love for
should go at the back, just go at the back.
Please go back. All others. go back', and this ring to Guido.
sit down there. I had to promise this. I
had to promise this to the Deities. They would
not accept, they would not accept!
..Many people have not seen me for
months together. Whether you have seen
me or not
As I'm angry with you, also I'm pleased
me. And as a symbol of that I want to give
What surprises me, the gurus who lynch.
- the one who wanted the Rolls Royce :-
they starved themselves tor one year; bought
a Rolls Royce, and went to receive him, and
You must know there are Deities and
Ganas and every one is sitting here. They came such a crowd that people could not get to
forward before me, to France. y the airport. That sort of a guru you need,
24 hours they
are working, you know that very well. You
*know' it, it's not a story, you 'know that.
They are working for you, in every way, sol-
ving all your problems, don't they?
who'll take you to Hell ! You don't want to
go to heaven, you don't want to be the
citizen of God's world.
Now whatever mantra you say please
listen, put it in your head what you
are talking, what you are saying from
you lips, listen', put it in your heart
what you are saying. Don't be hypocrite.
Otherwise they protest for everything, No explanation is needed-"I've been to a
every day I'm receiving letters from people. guru, I've done this, I've done that,"-nothing
of the kind. Even if at this stage, after so
many days, if you have not realised that
right to criticize everyone. French have been whatever we believe into should be part and
stupid in the past, and they are stupid even parcel of ourselves. Imean these wretched
now. That's what they are. Think no end people like Christians and other people, these
Hindus and Muslims and all that, they've not
upon a time, very aggressive, but in Sahaja seen God, they've not got realisation, nothing
but to them it becomes a faith, they fight for
how to respect. You've had no good training. it. And for you people who have seen the
Very bad breeding,-that's what God is going Reality it is not, what's wrong with mel People
to say about you. I've done my level best to are afraid of the police, afraid of this.-You
...All the leaders who did not protest
should also go back. Those who have not
protested... What courage is needed for that
kind of a thing ?...
"This is not good, that is not working out,
this is not happening...", Every body has a
of themselves. Spanish people were, once
Yoga they are not like that. You must learn
Nirmala Yoga
13
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-15.txt 
 have entered into the Kingdom of God, you
have seen what has happened with people on this earth.
Only for those who are my children I co
Not for those who are no
who have tried to trouble me. Aren't you l've nothing to do with them. I did try 1
save you, as a prodigal son has to be save
that's different. That's very different. B
don't take liberties with me, I must tell yo
afraid of that ?
Don't become frivolous: "What was there
to go to the airport, after all doesn't matter".
All the Ganas are there, with me. They have
all noted down, and they are here too. I am
so cautiousily taking you out. because you
don't see them. But you'll see them very
soon.-It's not easy to control them also, you
must know./ do not cantrol you.-neither I
and warn you.
(The heat is just drying up everything.)
You feel like a Mother who is insulte
abused, ill-treated by her own children. Yc
can take insult from others, not from your ov
children. You cannot It's a different thin
control them.
So now, I don't want to be unkind to
people who have been desiring to come and
see me, who love me so much. And I want
to forgive you all-all of you, because this
was the first mistake.
If you donot understand any protoci
because you are so naive, you have nev
known anything, you don't know how
respect; then you better learn it. There is i
Shraddha, because it was never there. Yi
Nobody should tix my programme without don't know how to respect anything.
asking me. Nobody should take such liberty. only have respect for yourself,-perhaps m
From next time l'Il not allow anything of the
kind, I'm telling you very clearly! You fix
my programme, and l'II let you down !
Without asking me you are not to fix me any
where! Without taking my permission-
written permission. If you ever try to do
not be that even.
Today is a day of a very great event. A
"Guru" as I told you, comes from the wo
"Gravity." The gravity. And the gravity, tha
what I felt-that I have no gravity to attri
such tricks with me, I'll put you right. You you people. Or you people have no weight
know I have all the powers to correct you. all in you that I should gravitate you.
Don't take liberties with me anymore, I'm thing that has weight. gravitates, automat
telling you and warning you. Try to under- ally. It does not gravitate towards itself, bu
stand, you are facing Someone Who has all gravitates. There's also gravity between 1
the Powers. You know that; know well, matter. But what it has towards Mother Ea
within yourself.
is incomparable. You throw any stone o
it comes back. It's impossible to fight 1
It's not even like Mohammad. Mohammad
just talked. He never gave realization. He gravity. And that gravity is the integration
warned. None of them, none of them,-but
your Shraddha, of your Dedication, and y
after seeing, none of them have photographs Surrender. Without that gravity you cani
as you have seen of mine.
What more proof you want to know what
I am.
nourish yourself: you cannot grow.
Have they ?
Just imagine, the roots go towards t
gravity. And when they are nourished, th
Now behave yourself. I'm warning youl only the tree rises above. If your roots
Mahāmäya-the other side of it, is horrible.
not deep, if your roots are so flimsy, y
cannot go down. Unless and until you
Be careful.
14
Nirmala Yo
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-16.txt 
 How does the tree grow 7-It does not
It grows in the
morning, early in the morning, you never see
that. How are these roots going to grow
into the head ?-Into your brain, into that
Jada (. gross). You have to meditate.
That's the only way you have to do it. Those
who do not meditate wilI become superficial.
So the only way one can ascend in Sahaja They ll not achieve anything, they'll create
If they are right sided, they'll
become supra-conscious, they'll become
bhoots. If they are left-sided, they'll become
seen many Sahaja Yogis who talk big about left sided they will be thrown out ! You've
seen it, in the Sistine Chapel, you see Christ
write things.-The other day I saw somebody throwing them out one by one. And then
writing a big pamphlet about Sahaja Yoga, you should not blame me. Just listening to
nothing inside the person ! That's not the me is not sufficient: It must grow, actuali-
A Sahaja Yogi has to zation of the growth of the thing is needed.
down in that gravity, you cannot come up.
You cannot nourish yourself.
grow in the day time.
Now my talk should not be a waste
again. Please listen to me. I'm addressing
to you, all of you..
not think that I'm addressing to somebody
else. It is to you all.
Remember that. Do
Yoga is through putting the roots down. problems.
Allow the roots to grow. Unless and until
roots grow, the tree cannot grow. 1 have
Sahaja Yoga, they can write books. they can
sign of a Sahaja Yogi.
to gravitate inside.
Do you follow me ?
You've read all kinds of non-sensical
things before. All kinds of horrid things, I
How do we do it?
In the year 1982 I told you the eight- know what you have read. You have had in
fold ways of doing it, andI said I will tell
you later, and I 'was' about to tell you-but sadists, like Sade,-or whatever you call it.
not now-the other eight ways by which you
can rise. Because, you are not yet grounded horrible books for you, which you have read.
in Sahaja Yoga, you are not yet grounded. I
thought you would be grounded, but you're many Sahaja Yogis who have not yet read
not. You have to nourish-the other way "Advent." But only reading is not going to
round, the roots are in the head,-by be- help, it must go into your 'brains'. And brain
coming thoughtless, by not making the cells
to think. By resting them, by peace within. System. Brain doesn't mean-in the thinking.
It's not a show of peace, or just-some Into your central nervous system, into the
people look very peaceful for a show. You celis of your central nervous system. That
have to work it out here in your head. The light has to come into the cells. You have
ground ing : it has to go into your head.
How 7-Meditation.
this horrible French country all kinds of
And there were many like this, who wrote
But they have not read "Advent." There are
means what 7-Into your Central Nervous
to grow and grow and grow !
There's only way left out to you to go to
There's no discipline I'm told. Hounslow, Himalayas, and not to any Ashram or any
I'm told, there's no discipline of any kind. place. And settle down somewhere where you
I'm surprised Hounslow people have no dis- don't eat anything or do anything, and take
cipline of getting up early in the morning another birth. That's the only way I think.
and doing meditation. What are you doing?
How are you going to grow ?
We 'can' work it out, not difficult. If you
Please See NIRMALA YOGA No. 24 (Nov-Dec, 1984) pp. 12,
15
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-17.txt 
 you? What have you got, to become
Guru? What can you give?
have the seeking within your heart. and
if you have understanding, sense, intelligence
to understand that you have achieved some-
thing in life, you' can do it. You all can do it.
All the Saints have spent their o!
money, all-over the world any where it is.
We don't forgive others, we forgive our- spread Sahaja Yoga how much money ha
selves. This is the 'worst' thing that we do. We
all the time try to forgive the others, that's the
best way to work it out. But no, we try to
forgive ourselves all the time and not to
forgive others. Everything you do the other
you spent? Of your own. How much mon
have you spent of your own to spread Sah.
Yoga ? They used to starve themselves.
I have spent thousands, you know t
very well. You know for definite how ma
thousands ! have spent on you people. Ev
the pooja money I get, you know eve
money I used it for buying some silver thin
for you, It should not be for you, it is for
I should say, but I do it. 'Every Saint used
spend money. Christ had to spend money
-His dog. And do you know what spread His Christianity.-He never sprei
way round.
We are Sahaja Yogis. We're Yogis-
"Saints". So, you have to be the Guru.
I'm a Guru myself, and what's the con-
veyance of Guru? What is the animal he
keeps?-
a dog is, do you know the qualities of a dog?
-He loves his master. He'll give his life for
his Master. He'll not sleep till he sees his Whatever they had, they used that mone
Christianity-His own message. Tukārăn
had to do it. Gyaneshwara had to do
master return back. Any time!
whatever they had, to spread Sahaja Yoga.
We had a dog and 'everytime' I went out,
everytime he would come and sit at the
door waiting for me. And some people tried notice, everybody is so blessed. They has
very hard thing on him-some vegetarians-
and he was about to die. We put him in the everything so well done. They are so blesser
hospital. When I went there, I sat before him.
He just pulled all his body, put his head on
my feet, and died peacefully....it's a dog,-
animal. When I went away, say, out of my
house, he would not eat food tilI I came
back. To any other country I went, he would
not eat food for all these days, he would not
eat his food,-till I came back. He would not
disturb me, but would sleep outside waiting
for me to get home.
And in Sahaja Yoga, the greatest thing
nice houses, nice Ashrams all convenience
God looks after them, all their problem
get solved.
good marriages are done, everythin
is done well. Everything gets sorted out.
They want marriages,
Only blessings are there, no duties. "Hoi
much money have you spent for Sahaja Yoga'
first of all you must ask a question. "Hov
much time I have given for Sahaja Yoga? Hov
many people I have given realisation to? Hov
much righteous and virtuous / have been
That's a disciple. Unless and until you What have I done to bring the good name t
become good disciples how are you going Sahaja Yoga? What about my personal beha
to become the Gurus? What's the use of my viour, how I have livad?" Arneau has spent lo
telling you anything about it? You don't of money. I know : he and his wife. I knov
have any discipline of your own, how are you about everyone. You have to give time
money-everything, your job,-everything you
self are tempted into all kinds of things, how have to give up. Peopla have given up jobs
are you going to make others understand 've told you the story how people have
going to give discipline to others? You your-
Nirmala Yoga
16
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-18.txt 
 sacrificed for ordinary things like freedom like a dog which is amuck, which has got
rabies. After realization you have' to be
disciplined people. Discipline yourself. This
is what I said in '82, again I'm repeating it.
But now, the second half of it which I said.
P'll tell in India, which I hope they will send
fighting and all that.
So today, as I told you, you have to
resolve that: We are going to have the growth
within ourselves through our Shraddha, and
through our Surrender. Only through Medita-
tion you can do it. "We are all going to grow
Mother, into this, "-this you have to promise
me as I stand before you as a Guru. Alright?
it over to you.
..When you give everything, after that you
have to put a Tulasi (gent) leaf, and put the
water on it, that is "we surrender everything
to you." 'Everything-All our health, all our
wealth, everything that we have, we surren-
der everything to you-ls symbolic. Every-
talk to me; smile, giggle, clap,-in the prog- thing:-our body, our mana ()-our mind
-our speech, our talk, our thinking, 'every-
there is a bhoot of-a-pope sitting. you keep thing we surrender to you. All our work, our
quiet. No breeding at all, ill-mannered, badly job, responsibilities, everything we surrender
to you. All our mistakes, our wealth, our
you know. But such dogs are killed. They money, everything we surrender to you. All
our relations, all our connections, all our
friends, all our nations,-the whole world we
surrender to you. All aur education, al our
We'll have the Guru pooja now, the
Mother's pooja I don't feel like having.
..When I say something. you smile and
ramme also. In the church you keep quiet. If
brought up. It's like a dog becomes mad,
are not kept in the public....
See now Italians have brought such
beautiful dogs for you to see. (Sahaja Yogi:
Those are the dogs chosen by Shri Mataji).
rea ding, all our books, all that we have done
so far everything we surrender to you.
Shri Mataji: I chose you also. I've chosen
you also...But look at them how sweet they
are. So pleasure giving, so joy-giving, They your head again. Meditate on this point-to
are so timely they'll absorb all the anger of surrender everything: "Nothing belongs to
the Deities l'm sure, sitting down here like
Deities. Beautifully. So sweet they are.
I hope you have heard it and put it in
us."
US
Now the symbol of this is like this-you
must understand the symbol. That is just a
Beautiful.
Do not forgive yourself, forgive others. leaf. The last thing left with us is this leaf.
you will
become Gurus.
Then
Of course, Tulasi represents the left Vishuddhi,
Your life
should be such, that those who come in close but also an attachment. So when you have it
contact with you are so disciplined, very
disciplined.I've seen this. My husband is put water to see that it goes away, even its
coming, tomorrow, you'll be having prog- smell, everything goes away from the hand.
ramme. And I've seen one thing about his It is significant of that..
life, one thing which I have to tell you, which
has made him such a great man; ""He's an
extremely disciplined
disciplined.
on the hand it sticks, it doesn't fall. So you
(The following observations were made
by Shri Mataji while 108 names of the Guru
were being said.)
Extremely
n".
man
The one who does not have discipline, is
These are all my qualifications, and not
Nirmala Yoga
17
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-19.txt 
 your's so far. They have to be your qualifica-
tions...
In your
Who is the beauty-is the Guru...
attention, who is the ornament
...Now this is all the description of the
Guru who on human level is like this. What- Gunas): Now think of it, that if you are in th
ever I am, I am on the Divine level, It's much Gunas how can you do that ? If you are o
more than this. But on human level you have the right or on the left, in the supraconsciou
to have all this. These are the signs of a
Guru who is a human-being. Do you follow You have to be beyond it yourself, then onl
that point? This is not the Divine Mother they you can remove it..
are describing. Is the Guru who is a human
being, If I am that, it's nothing great, because
I'm much more than that. But you have to (who causes one to become attached t
become that, that's the point.
Gunāntakāya, (griae) (Remover of th
or the subconscious, how can you do tha
(घरपाहार नियोजकाम )
Pratyāhāraniyojakāya
withdrawal of senses), Through Pratyahai
you develop your discipline. And the on
Chitkirtibhooshanäya. (fraiy ) That's who himself is not disciplined, how can h
the ornament of the attention, is the Guru. do it?
108 Names of Shri Adi Guru Dattatreya
SATTVĀYA
Salutations to the one who is Sattv
सदवान
SATTVA BHRTANGATAYE
Salutations to the one who sustair
Sattva.
सत्त्वभृतांगतये
KAMALĀLAYĀYA
Salutations to the one who is the aboc
of Lotuses
कमलालयाय
HIRANYA GARBHAYA
Salutations to the Golden Egg c
Brahma, the Subtle body of the Virata.
हिरय्पग्माग
Salutations to the one who is th
collective shelter of awakening.
BODHA SAMĀSHRAYAYA
बोधसमाधयाय
NĀBHĀVINE
Salutations to him who lives in or is th
াभाविने
possessor of the Navel or Nabhi Chakra
DEHA SHUNYÂYA
Salutations to the one who is the Voi
of the body.
देहुशूरयाय
Salutations to the one who can see th
PARAMĀRTHA DRSHE
परमार्यटमे
Supreme Goal.
Salutations to the knower of yantras.
में तविदे
YANTRAVIDE
DHARA DHARAYA
Salutations to
घराधराय
the support of a
supports.
SANĀTANAYA
सनातनाम
Salutations to the Seed of Mantras.
CHITKIRTI BHUSHANÄYA
चिल्क्रीतिमूषगाय०
Salutations to the one who is adorne
in the glory of attention and awarenes
18
Nirmala Yag
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-20.txt 
 wit
CHANDRASURYAGNILOCHANAYA Salutations to the one who is not
excited or agitated.
ANTAH PORNĀYA
Salutations to him who is completely
fulfilled within.
अंतःपूर्षाय
Salutations to him who is completely
fulfilled without.
BAHIH PURNĀYA
बहिःपुर्णांम
Salutations to him who is the Self of full-
ness and fulfilment.
PURNĀTMANE
पुर्णत्मते
Salutations to the one who is self-
KHAGARBHAYA
खगर्भाम
contained.
Salutations to the immortal one honoured
and respected.
AMARĀRCHITĀYA
अमरानिताय
Salutations to him who is deep and
profound.
GAMBHIRĀYA
रांभोराय
Salutations to him who is possessed
of mercy and compassion.
DAYĀVATE
दयावते
SATYA VIGNYANA BHĀSKARĀYA Salutations to him who shines brilliantly
with discernment and knowledge.
विज्ञान भास्तारा
ÍE
Salutations to the one who shines by
his own light.
SADĀSHIVĀYA
सदाभिवाय
Salutations to him who makes better.
SHREYASKĀYA
श्रेयसकाय
AGNYANA KHANDANĀYA
Salutations to the one who annihilates
non-knowledge.
अ्ञानवं इनाय
Salutations to the one who is fairness.
constancy and contentment.
DHRTAYE
ृतये
DAMBHA DARPA MADĀPAHĀYA Salutations to the remover of hypocriti-
दं भदर्पमदापहाय०
cal pride and intoxicated frenzy.
GUNĀNTAKĀYA
Salutations to the remover of the Gunas.
गुणांतकाय
JVARANĀSHANĀYA
Salutations to the destroyer of fever and
illness.
উवरनानान
BHEDAVAITANDA KHANDANĀYA Salutations to him who breaks destru-
भेयजतंडखंडनाय
ctiveness and silly arguments.
NIRVĀSANĀYA
Salutations to the one who has no
Vásanās or entrapping conditionings.
मिवसिनाय
NIRIHÃYA
Salutations to him who is motionless.
निरोहाम
inactive, desireless and still.
NIRAHANKĀRĀYA
Salutations to the one who is without
निरहकाराम
ego.
Nirmala Yoga
19
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-21.txt 
 SHOKA DUKHA HARÂYA
शौककु आहराम०
Salutations to him who removes anxie
and pain.
निराशीनिक्पाध्रिकाम NIRASHIRNIRUPADHIKAYA
Salutations to him who is devoid of
qualities of hopelessness and depressio
Salutations to him who endless
ANANTA VIKRAMĀYA
अनेतविक्रमाय०
conquers and overcomes.
BHEDÂNTAKĀYA
Salutations to him who makes an er
of destruction and splitting.
भेदांतकाय
Salutations to him who is the gre
(sage) Muni, the essence of silence.
Salutations to the great yogi.
MUNAYE
मुनये
MAHÄYOGINE
महायोगिने
Salutations to him who illuminates th
repeated practice and discipline of yog
योगाभ्यासप्रकाशनाम YGGABHYASAPRAKASHANAYA
Salutations to the destroyer of arroganc
and enemies of yoga.
YOGĀRERDARPA NASHANĀYA
कोंगारेदपनाशनाय
Salutations to him who is eternally i
NITYAMUKTĀYA
निस्यमुक्ताम
yoga,
Salutations to the one who is yoga.
YOGĀYA
बोगाय
Salutations to him who gives stabilit
and a place to stay.
STHANADĀYA
स्पानदाम
Salutations to the one who is th
becoming of great experience an
understanding.
МАНANUBHAVA BHAVITAYA
महानुभवभाविताय
Salutations to him who has conquere
desire, lust and passion.
KĀMAJITE
कामजिते
Salutations to him who is most magn
ficent and glorious.
SHUCHIRBHŪTAYA
शुचिर्भुताय
Salutations to the one who is the se
of abandoning and the
abandoning.
TYÄGAKĀRAŅATYĀGĀTMANE
स्पागकारणरगात्मने
cause t
Salutations to him who has abandone
totally both intellect and manas.
MANOBUDDHI VIHINĀTMANE
मनोबूदि विहीनात्मने
MĀNĀTMANE
Salutations to him who is the Self o
the Manas (imaginative desiring qualit
in man).
मानात्मने
Salutations to the one who has aban
doned and
CHETANĀ VIGATĀYANE
चेतनानिगतापने०
gone beyond thinking
Bwareness.
Salutations to him who is eternally fre
and liberated.
AKSHARA MUKTÄYA
भ्षरमुक्ताय
Nirmala Yog
20
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Salutations to him who takes the last
absolute step.
PARĀKRAMINE
पराक्रमिणे
ARAN
Salutations to the one who is perfectly
accomplished in the meaning of renun-
ciation.
H I TYÄGĀRTHA SAMPANNĀYA
स्यागापसंपचाप०।
Salutations to him who is the analysis
and resolution of renunciation.
TYÄGA VIGRAHAYA
स्यागदिग्रहाय
Salutations to him who is the cause of
renunciation.
TYÄGA KĀRAŅĀYA
त्यागकारणाय
Salutations to him who causes one to
become attached to withdrawal of the
फ्रत्याहारनियोजकाम PRATYAHARA NIYOJAKAYA
senses.
Salutations to him who dawns and
becomes light before ones very eyes.
Salutations to him who is the supreme
goal of the Devas.
Salutations to him who is victorious of
death and dead spirits.
PRATYAKSHA VARATAVE
प्रत्पक्षवरतवे
DEVĀNĀM PARAMAGATAYE
देवानां परमागतये
MAHĀDEVÄYA
महादेवाय
Salutations to him who limits and des-
troys the universe of Shri Yama.
Salutations to him who is the destroyer
BHUVANÄNTAKĀYA
भुवनांतकाय
PĀPA NÄSHANĀYA
पापनागनाय
of sins.
Salutations to the one who has come
through hell, conquering it.
Salutations to the one who sustains.
and removes intoxication.
AVADHUTAYA
নबনতुताय
MADĀ PAHĀYA
मदापहाप।
Salutations to him who has been freed
from Maya.
Salutations to him who is the highest
attention.
MĀYĀMUKTÃYA
मायापुक्ताप
CHIDUTTAMĀYA
चिदुत्तमाम
Salutations to the knower of the field.
Shri Krishna, the Atman or Spirit.
KSHETRAGNYÄYA
Salutations to the goer into the field.
Salutations to the one who is the field.
KSHETRAGĀYA
क्षेत्रमाय
KSHETRAYA
क्षेत्राय
Salutations to him who destroys the
darkness of samsara and transmigration.
SAMSĀRA TAMONĀSHANĀÃYA
संसारतमोनाशना म
SHAMKĀMUKTA SAMĀDHIMATE Salutations to him who is bliss, free
शंकामुक्तसमाधिमते
from fear or alarm.
Salutations to the protector.
PĀTRE
पावे
Salutations to him who is eternal purity.
NITYA SHUDDHAYA
नित्यशुद्धाप
Salutations to the boy, the child.
BÄLAYA
আলाम
21
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-23.txt 
 BRAHMACHARIŅE
Salutations to the pure and chaste
youthful student.
बहाचारिणे]
HRDAYASTHAYA
Salutations to him who is placed in the
हुदयस्थाय
heart.
प्रबर्तनाय
Salutations to him who is in constant
enlightened motion.
Salutations to him who rips apart and
destroys the pain of planning.
Salutations to him who brings living
creatures alive,
Salutations to the one who is beyond
PRAVARTANĀYA
संकर्पदुःखदलनाय
SAMKALPADUKHA DALANAYA
जीवसंनोवनाथ०
JIVA SAMJIVANĀYA
लपातीताय
LAYATITAYA
dissolution.
LAYASYANTĀYA
लयस्पतिम
Salutations to him who flows with
dissolution.
PRAMUKHAYA
Salutations to the most excellent one
who faces alL.
प्रमुखाय
Salutations to the rejoicer.
Salutations to him who is devoid of
false appearances.
नंदिने
NANDINE
NIRĀBHĀSĀYA
निराभासाय
Salutations to him who is simple, pure,
clean, undecorated and unblemished.
NIRANJANĀYA
मिरंजनाय
SHRADDHARTHINE
Salutations to him who is endowed
अরাখিন
with
meaning,
purpose, faith and
devotion.
GOSĀKSHINE
Salutations to the one who has many
गोसाक्षिपी
eyes.
NIRĀBHĀSĀYA
Salutations to him who is without
lalseness or deception.
निराभासाय
VISHUDDHOTTAMA GAURAVĀYA Salutations to him who is the highest
चिंगुडोत्तमगोर्वाय
untainted purity of the Guru.
NIRAHARIŅE
Salutations to the one who gives and
takes nothing for himself.
निराहारिणे
NITYABODHĀYA
Salutations to the one who gives eternal
awakening.
नित्पबोधाप
Salutations to the ancient Lord, the
ancient dawning light.
PURANA PRABHAVE
पुराचाप्रभवे
Salutations to the one who bears and
supports that which is essential to
SATTVABHRTE
सरवभूते
existence.
Salutations to him who is auspicious
and beneficent to all beings.
BHUTASHANKARĀYA
भूतणंकराम
Nirmale Yoga
22
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-24.txt 
 Salutations to the witnes5, pure and
swanlike in his discrimination.
HAMSASÄKSHINE
हमुमासाकिण
Salutations to the knower of the essence
of existence on sattva guna.
SATTVAVIDE
सस्य विदे
Salutations to him who is possessed of
Vidyā or Knowledge.
VIDYĀVATE
নিজনন
Salutations to him who is perfect and
excellent in his perception of the Atman.
ATMĀNUBHAVA SAMPANNAYA
आमानुभयसंप्नाय
Salutations to him who has mighty
large, powerful eyes.
VISHĀLĀKSHAYA
विमालाक्षाय
Salutations to him who increases
DHARMA VARDHANAYA
| धर्मवनाय
Dharma.
Salutations to the enjoyer.
ВНОКTRE
भोक्ते
Salutations to him who should be
BHOGYAYA
भोग्पाय
enjoyed.
Salutations to the perfected one in the
meaning and significance of how to
enjoy.
BHOGARTHA SAMPANNAYA
भौगामेसंपन्नाय
BHOGAGNYĀNAPRAKĀSHANAYA Salutations to him who illuminates the
भोगजानप्रकाशनाय
knowledge of how to enjoy.
Salutations to him who is spontaneous.
SAHAJĀYA
हलाम
Salutations to the one who blazes with
light.
DIPTÄYA
दीप्ताय
Salutations to the one who is Nirvina.
NIRVAŅĀYA
निবাণ্যয
TETETATATRIR TATTVATMAGNYANASAGARAYA Salutations to him who is the ocean of
the knowledge of the Tattvas.
Salutations to him who is the ocean of
PARAMĀNANDA SAGARĀYA
परमानंदमागराप०
supreme bliss.
OM TVAMEVA SAKSHAT
SHRI DATTATREYA SAKSHAT
SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
TVAMEKAM SHARANAM GACHHAMI
23
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-25.txt 
 Her Holiness Shri Mataji
Sahaja Temple
DELHI
Our Goal is to be the Spirit-
nothing but the Spirit
Feb. 8 1983
Now you will be amazed that you go to
any Indian University, you will hardly find
aspirations between India and the developed four or five people to listen to me. Whatever
countries, the way history has taken them: you are doing there, like Jazz, or say all these
discoutheque business, hippism,-everything
is now followed in our cities. So we cannot
say that India is very much towards the
Spirit, is a wrong idea. All our leaders, all
our bureaucrats, all of them still think that
Sahaja Yogi : Mother, today we would like
you to discuss the difterence in the aims and
and also what they have to offer each other.
SHRI MATAJI: Apparently India has the
same aim as you had before. They are
actually trying to follow you-apparently.
in our political systems, we are trying all
your methods, in our economic development you are the happiest people living in the
we are trying all the paths that you have following your methods, they are going
followed and faltered. In bur approach to
education we are trying to follow you. In our
mental development we are trying to follow absolutely out of date person, and they will
the West. Even the young people of this
country are now trying to follow you, even
copy you, in every way. So 'apparently this
is the condition of this country. Whatever
you did about, say, twenty years back, we're are not thinking of saving the world, but
doing the same now. And we are getting following the world, into the disaster into
into a state where the decline might start very which it is going. We are joining hands,
soon.-'Apparently', I'm saying.
whole Universe.
And they are blindly
abroad to learn all your styles of disaster. And
if I talk to them, they will think that I am
think I am just talking because I have no
sense in my brain.
So apparently, in this country, today, we
you see, all the countries which are not yet
developed. See we have two categories,
one are developed and one are not develo-
ped. These brands have come from the West,
But as far as myself is concerned, it was
the other way round.
I could see the future of the disasters of that we are not yet developed, so we must
Industrial Development long time back, and develop, because if their tail is cut, our tail
also where all such people who are blindly also must be cut. And they are giving us
following the West will go into. So my money to cut our tail.
whole search, personally, was to go towards
the roots, towards the Spirit, towards the by giving us money, sometimes humiliating
subtler side of life, which will in any case
sustain the human race.
So the development they are putting in
us and doing all kinds of things, and trying to
develop us. Of course it is true that poverty
Virmalo Yoga
24
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-26.txt 
 anywhere is a threat to prosperity anywhere, cannot submit to the higher goal, but the
and that if you people are living well or are lower goal also they have submitted in a
having Kshema' then its a different point. But way because the matter is now sittting on
overall picture of the West that I see is full their heads,
of unhappiness, of darkness, and hopeless
conditioning; at least the developing countries
have some hopes, may be of the disaster, but country. Since ages we have been living a
they have some hopes.
Now in India since ages it is a traditional
different life. When ancient times...you see
now, even the climate is so good that you
You don't eed
so many things in this country. So in the
So now, for you people to understand that can stay outside in a forest.
you are facing a big shock is sensible,
because you are advanced in that direction. ancient times so many people, we can call as
Now in the West whatever you have done,
still, because of ego orientation your leaders out what is the basis of human beings?
are not willing to accept that you are in a
disastrous condition. Your political systems the ultimate goal of human beings? And they
are not going to admit that you are no good, found out that it is the Spirit. And they
that you have harmed yourself. It is too based all the Indian laws and Indian
much for them to admit that they have philosophies, Music, Art, Dance, Drama-
committed this mistake, because they will not every aspect of life on the basis that'we
eat the crow.
who is going to convince the Indians that you
better take to another course.
Seers and Saints, went into the forest to find
What is the meaning of human life? What is
Under these circumstances
have to become the Spirit'. But when we
have the western influence and western
education put on to us, everyone decided that
What has gone wrong with the West is give up whatever was traditional, whatever
that they have never worried about their
Spirit. They have negated all that is Spirit. really bothered at all about the ancient things
all that is subtler life, and have thought that
it is better to master the matter, master all
these things which they can master.
was old, and take to this. And even if we were
in our country, it was more academic, so that
you could write books, you could write
something by which you can make some
money, giving some new ideas or giving
Yesterday, as I told you in Hindi language some new samples, so people might be
that whatever you master is lower than you, attracted. There was no serious probing into
is not higher than you. So if you have to go
further, you have to go little higher, you have
to fix a nail to go higher. And whatever you
think you can have, or whatever things you things. And ultimately what was accepted
can use for your purpose are lower than you. in the West was tantrism. It is the tantrism
But if you want to be higher then you have
to be useful to that higher goal. So you Nothing else, that they could see something
have to be humble and you have to accept better. Like you can say, that if you go to
that "if we have to be higher, we should allow the sea, you will find lots of muck coming up
that higher thing to rule us". And surrender
to that higher thing instead of dominating being appreciated, not the depth of the sea
these lower things, it is better to submit where you find the pearls. So with that
yourself to something higher. Because of they are now thinking that you see, the
ego this submission is an impossibility. We Indians are the people who indulge into this
the subject matter.
It was just superficial way of dealing with
that really has impressed the western people.
on the superficial level and that is what is
Nirmala Yoga
25
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-27.txt 
 once we get money-oriented you see... the
and anybody who does not know tantrism is people who have money in this country are
just the same as you are. But we used to
look down upon that kind of community like
Märvādis and all that, but I find in the West
most of the people are just like Mārvādis,
kind of a tantrism, that kind of a tantrism,
not sophisticated.
At the same time
development you had such horrible people
there, like Freud and others, that you lost all their styles are just like Märvädis only.
your traditions, your ideas about Spirit,
whatever it was; came through christianity
or any other source, even the christianity qualities which are within, you have just got
itself ruined the whole chances of going near everything outside, inside there is no develp-
God. But on the whole what has happened
is that the whole attitude of the human much load has been taken, so much has been
beings in the West now seems to be a
sex point. They just want to be a sex
point, I mean absurd it is ! That is what of a glass for this kind of an alcohol, that
they are reduced to on one side; on other kind of a thing only; you see ultimately what
side is more surprising, is that, with all IS the goal I just don't understand. You see,
affluence and everything people are very
stingy. They are extremely money-minded don't find there is any goal. It is just a kind
and very-very stingy and narrow minded
people. Despite you have all the weapons
with you, people are so frightened, they don't after from one want to another, to another
even allow a little baby to enter their house.
With the Atom-bomb at your disposal, they like mad. That's all it is. What is the goal
are so frightened of others. See the immigra- of a mad man? I am amazed the way people
tion laws, more strict in the Western countries are money oriented there. It's most surprising.
than in the Eastern countries. Where the And I asked somebody, I said, "why do you
people are really having a problem, they have need so much
no problem of getting any number of people so much money, why are you so money
coming. You see, how many are there on
the road if you walk. So many you will
meet. How many are settled down here, money." What is your life style? "We have
But this fear has come into the minds of the to drink". Must you drink? I mean if you
mighty nations. They are disgracefully gene-
in your so-called
So instead of developing all the higher
ment. It is all outside development. So
put upon yourself, the norms you see: this
kind of a glass is needed for wine, that kind
you get lost. What is the goal. I just get lost, I
of a madness, a crazyness to create more
and more and more, and like-mad to run
want to another want, and go on like that
oriented?". They said, "Our life is such,
our life style is such that you have to have
can not afford why do you drink? So drinking
If they are generous, it is disgraceful, is a thing very sophisticated there. Not in
money-minded. India. In India if somebody finds somebody
rous.
'extremely
or they are
money-oriented. No body can believe it, is drinking, nobody will marry the daughter
that how people are so much money-oriented in their family. Of course, not these wester-
in the West. i myself, you see, was surprised nised,I am not talking of westernised.
that how could they be so much money-
Normally nobody will have any relationship
with them. So the virtues and the righteous-
ness of life, which is the basis of life, the
oriented.
While in the East so far they are not. The goal of life, is itself in question there. So the
advantage is, thank God, we are not "develo- goals they have accepted are all anti-life,
ped." That we are not so money oriented, anti-God, anti-human beings.
Nirmala Yoga
26
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-28.txt 
 yet,-thank God ! we haven't when you try to develop outside you must
have inside development. To carry all this
Here,
developed that pressure of the matter on our
heads. So still inside we are large people. junk also you need an elephant, whether it
I mean there is lot of room for us to grow, is 8 junk or anything, you need an elephant.
inside. But the outside rules are so much
and the norms and the whole sort of ideas ant and carry all this junk, then that junk
which flows from the minds. Like the other becomes more important than this little ant
day they said, "Now a days you see, more inside, is't it? And that is exactly what has
fashionable is to have this kind of a dress." happened in the west.
I said, why? Then what will you do to the
old ones. "They are to be thrown out, this
is fashion".
So the inside elephant, if you make it into an
Now in India. so far people have still
some toom to grow because they have'nt
But I said how did it come.
They said, "There is a fashion designer yet developed so many non-sensical ideas.
somebody very well known, in Paris, has
brought in this fashion" But for what? I
mean there is no questioning "But for what?"
Your dress was comfortable, good, nice, if
it was already say, five years back, why today just crawled into it, you see, and nothing but
suddenly this dress is going to be much
Useful? See to the point. The sun is rising domination of this matter on you. You are
The first time we had people here from the
west, and all the time what they were seeking
was comfort; 'crawling" into the corners of
comfort. Anywhere they got comfort they
is "comfort". And the comfort is nothing but
the same way, the light is the same, the
rain is the same, now why your dress has to
change every third month?
not free birds. Your body always needs
comfort: If you allow your body to lie down
in one pose all it's life, it will be very
These are all the problems because once happy. It will say "Alright, let it grow, I
you start looking up at your ātmā, your brain am eating my food,
starts working. And the brain starts, like a
machine it spins, goes on spinning, spinnig, don't go out"; everything attached to it. Very
spinning, spinning ideas. And this spinning nice body.
goes round and round you and you become
like a spindle completely covered with the str-
ings. So you have no way to grow. You just fort also is so much, that they have lost the
don't grow at all, Inside there is no growth it
is only outside growth, you see. When people
walk along, you find lots of plastic han-
ging around this side, lot of tins jingling that
side and lots of steel hanging that side.
They are walking very proudly. But inside
there is not an elephant. there might be just being they have become that unless & until
an ant carrying all these things.
I am doing everything
here. Only one bed is the house for me, I
But if that is the goal, of human life, then
I think you can't help me. So to get to com-
power to see that the so much comfort has
made us slave and that we have no goal left,
we have become like cabbages. Such lethar-
gy, that nobody will believe that these are
the same people who came in this country
and fought us. Such lethargy and such heavy
somebody rouses them, they cannot give up
the comforts. To them comfort is the last
end of happiness.
But thank God in this country, we are not
yet developed but I can't say that it will be
like that, because we are feeling very inferior
that we are not yet developed outside. The
inside development nobody thought of, that
So first comes the sex point, second is
the comfort which is another siavery. Now
third comes the ego. Ego is the goal or
27
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-29.txt 
 we can't help it, we have to tell lies in
in every respect. How smart they are? How this country, otherwise you can't exist. We
they have befooled everyone? How they have to do lot of hanky-panky. otherwise you
have been able to get rid of others, to outwit can't exist". All these excuses they can
others, to laugh at others to make fun of give. "How to feed our children unless &
expression of ege is the goal of the west,-
see
them, make a joke out of everyone, and until you are dishonest."
think that they are the wisest "fools", is the
goal of ego. Because you know ego makes
So the other side of it, that the goal of
you stupid. And so the goal of ego, to make Indians now, apparently again, is of course,
you stupid, is so much that small-small I mean as far as morality is concerned is all
things that the western people do even or- right, they won't look out at other men's wife,
dinary villager in India will roar with laughter they will give their daughters an education,
to hear, "Oh! do they do like that." Which of remaining a good wife, creating a good
the western people might think, "Oh I we are society. But, as far as the other moral side is
great". So this is the trouble, that when the concerned-keeping the honesty of money &
stupid people start laughing at others, thin- all that, that they will not do. So one side
king, "Oh! these are stupid people, useless people are miserly, because they think they are
honest. You see, because if they are honest
people," then how to tell them? You can not
talk to them because they think that they are they are martyrs, naturally, because they
the wisest ever known, because they are the think that if they have remained honest they
best ever known. You can't tell that this is have done the greatest favour to God. So
they are martyrs, so their money is very
precious, every pie they spend, they must ask
for account. Indians believe in earning money
some way or the other and then spending it
the way they like, So I do not know which
stupidity.
The wisdom lies in knowing your
Spirit.
But yet, you know it is hard to find yet an
Indian; he may to the most westernised, a goal is correct.
great miserly, useless fellow or may be a very
narrow minded westernised fellow in india.
They are lost on this side, and you are
You were just like Indians, to begin with, but Tost on other side. But still, in lIndia, because
then you ended up into something else and
now Indians are becoming like you, so I
can't say westerners are just the people who
are to be a sort of like a caste. Not. You see,
we Indians can become like you, exactly like
of traditional training, parents still holding
fort, better society is here. You will hardly
find an Indian who will believe in absurd
thing in which you believe. Absolutely obtuse
absurd and also anti-God things that you
believe to be good. That is why they have
not reached that much development. I mean
But still, because, you see, we have our it's like, you see, your brain developing so
roots rather deep, we cannot uproot ourselves much that it goes the other way round, and
you become just a person who sees everything
today believe that a Saint is definltely higher in a different angle in an angle which is just
than them, and to become a Saint it is a great the opposite of that. So yet that much deve-
thing. The aspiration of an Indian is to become lopment has not taken place, you see, from
concave to convex, they have not become.
but there are ascapes of the mind that "how So there is still some space with the Indians.
can we become that we are house-holders, But because you have seen the disaster you
you, even worse than you.
to that extent. So most of the Indians even
the Spirit, most of the Indians think like that
Nirmala Yoga
28
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-30.txt 
 are facing some of you, who are, thoughtful is
people who have not reached that height of the Most generous Father you could think of
idiacity, are very great seekers, ardently and He looks after our material side, so we'
seeking, working it out. But Indians are not
that much of seekers, I must say, because
deliver the goods. He is the Father, who
don't have to worry about it, it just happens
that he looks after. But they will comne and
they still think that, "Alright, we have to complain, "my material side is just the same
believe in the Spirit. alright good idea, we
have to be the Spirit." But partly the Spirit something about it and then I will'never do."
partly the other side of it, Becuase they are
better off than us. So still they want to go
half way this side and half way that side. So
Indians are not such good seekers, you have
very good seekers, but there is a convexity. rence between the goals aims and objects.
There is concavity. but there is no seeking, As far as I am concerned, I look at this side
can you imagine my situation; Indians have
no goal as far as spiritual life is concerned,
mostly. Il they have it, it is so limited that it
should help them in family life, in their goal and that is to rise in Spirit. Not related
relationship with others, with their bodies or
with their jobs, or with their marriages or
little more and little more, that is all. But
very gross. the goal is extremely gross of
Indians, is that they want to achieve a kind you people believe, that you should become
of an affiuence that you have, in their heart
of hearts: But they do not know the pangs.
I don't know what to do now Mother, do
On the contrary they should say "my
Spiritual side is not all right.
That's a better idea. This is the diffe-
18
and that side and I don't know what to say.
Because all of you must have only one
anyway there that they have to accumulate
some wealth, or they have to do some sart of
a material progression. And on your side that
you have to do some material regression. Like
hippies and you will go nearer to God: You
will not, because your brain is beyond hip-
pism, beyond everything, so you cannot. Your
But they think that we can keep the brain is ultra-modern, how can you become
Spirit as well as other side of it. you cannot, hippy, you become primitive outside. So in
you cannot serve two masters. So now what your dresses and all that, even if you reduce
to do? They would prefer to choose this
side than to choose the Spirit.
this hair style and all that, inside the brain is
the modern brain-extra modern. So must
understand that unless and until you bring
So the goal of Indians today, is somehow the Spirit into your brain, all these outside
or other to make money. If some body knows
that you know certain Ministers, then they
will be after your life, "Tell the Minister like
this, will you tell your brother like this, your
father like this". Everyone, all of them, will people are confused. They have seen the
be just coming out with.. mean it is a value of this material affluence. So they are
'very
nothing new, for them it's everyday affair style, that style. They are changing the style.
to them to tell somebody" do get it done, it Alternate styles, but by changing the styles
must be done." It is all gross it is all absoli-
tely materialistic, but that is what their goal doing samething else. While the Indians
is. Not the goal of the Spirit. To believe that think that they are poor and God should help
God Almighty is the only one who is going to
things are not going to help.
So it's a big confusion. That is the modern
times, are a canfusion, that the western
common feature with Indians. It is trying to give up the material affluence
also you do't achieve much. That's another
them to make them rich. This is another
Nirmala Yoga
29
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-31.txt 
 alternate style. This is also outside. Or they made a complete mess out of it. Here also
we had great saints and great incarnations,
but the saints are the people who told that
you must seek, you must seek, Not that
have no ochildern, then they will come,
"Mother, I have no children" If they hava 100
many children, then, I have no job: You get
them the job, then they will say "Marry my Christ did not say you do not seek, but
elder daughter to some one." Then you do nobody is bothered on that point, whether
that, they will say that do "this". But nobody we should seek or not.
says "what about my Spirit my ? What about
Atma?. Mother what about my Spirit? What is
happening to it? Where is it? Am l alright? Ami
clear ? So to say that Indians have the aims
that are correct. is wrong. Or to say that you
people have correct aims is also wrong,
because your aims may be that you want to
meet God, and you want to become the Kind to us, Mother be kind to us." For What?
Spirit, but it goes wrong, because the
methods you employ are all wrong.
But in the east people know that
we have to seek, wa have to get to
God. But to get to God for what?-"Just
that we should be benefitted in our material
life". So this goal is of no use. "Mother, you
are very kind,"-some of them say "be
What kindness more you want. I have given
you the Spirit, finished. Now what more
kindness? But that does not mean, "You have
But as far as the value of Spiritual life given us the realisation, but now look after
is concerned, I would give the western
people more marks-those who are seekers. is a very very poor show. And that is why / get
Forget all that idiotic people, I am
talking of the idiots but I am talking about kind of a aspect of Sahaja Yoga, I feel very
the sane people, the Spiritual value is much disappointed. But I go to the West and very
higher. While the Dharmik value of the eastern seriously they have problems which I just do
people is much higher. So it's like some
body who has lot of property and does not blems, because materially they are alright, so
want to give, and somebody who has no they have emotional problems, And 'absurd"
property and wants to give. So this is the emotional problems, they have, And these
situation today I find in the East & the West.
our Bank Balance." It's a very poor show, it
disappointed. When I come here 1 find this
not
not understand, because these are no pro-
emotional problems also have no meaning at
all, have no basis at all, they just try to find
But basically from the ancient times in out a way and method of not living together,
this country people have been seeking-some somehow. Somehow. You see their brain is
of them, but not all,-because seeking al-
ways has been done by one person. two suddenly we have become BHOOTS". How
so clever. "First we were alright, but now
persons, or three persons. First fish must
have come out then shoals of fishes must fourteen people are married. I am just wor-
have followed. So the goal of the fish was to
come on the shore, and many must have
followed that. So in this country the search find to quarrel with the other party. What is
*within' actually started long-long time back. the difference between the other party and
But in the West, it was never done that way. myself. Now, how to ruin the image of each
do you explain? "We were doing well..." Now
ried about the Western couples because the
brain is still thinking, "Now what should we
had people like Christ who never other. How to ruin the joy, how to ruin also
They
needed any search, like me, I don't have to go
searching something. He brought all the
Truths of Life to you to give it to you but you
the respect that we have for each other."-
That is how it will work out. the brain is too
active. And its a serious thing, because if you
Nirmale Yoga
30
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-32.txt 
 cannot live together, two persons, how cân matter. The essence of matter
all of you live together.
is not comfort,
by any chance, is not. Is not possession that
it gives you, or the surrender it gives
you. Neither the ego that you receive by
having a big car, this and that. But the
essence of the matter is the joy one receives
Not only that you too are human beings,
but you are saints, you are Sahaja Yogis and
you have to have tolerance for each other
and you are just analysing each other when
there is no fundamental problem. I can under- Wien you part with it. If you do not have
stand if somebody has a fundamental anytning with you, you see, ifI do not have
problem. Just with your brain if you start any money then I do not know what is the joy
doing like that, then how can the whole 0f parting with it, giving it to someone. But
world live together? Just think of it. Here the Supposing I have the money then only wilt
husbend-wife will stick, no problem, they njoy. Sa you must have money. That is the
will live. The children will live together no
problem on that point. But the problem that that you can give to others. Actually this is
comes to me is collective, that I must solve
now not the problem of one person but all of Carrying on more of the essence part. The first
them. Even when they are sticking together part of gaining money is wrong, but giving
they do not become a powerful unit. On the
contrary they become a powerful problem!
only reason you must have the matter so
the essence of it. That way Indians are
money is alright, they enjoy giving, you see,
somebody goes to their house, they will love
to give him tea, coffee, serve food, all that
So the aim as it should be whether East they like. Anywhere you go to their house,
or West, should be to be what you are made they will not be stingy on that, they would like
for. You are made a human being to be the to give. But how did they get their money,
Spirit. So the aim should be that you should
be the Spirit. You have to think through the when it comes to giving they are... So they
Spirit. You have to understand through the know the essence part should say, that
Spirit. You have to be satisfied through the giving is the way.
Spirit. You have to be certified through the
Spirit and not through your brains. For both thing is that how you get your money, you
of you people the aim should be the Spirit. see, otherwise you are middle class this and
This I am talking of the new race that is that. How you get money you see, that part
going to comē up.
you do not askl That is a different point. But
While in the west the more important
of thing is there. But you get to it through
So the Western problems are that they do that kind of an idea then you just stick on to
not recognise Spirit and the Eastern problem it, it does not pass through your hands. You
is they recognize the Spirit, but are materiali-
stic. And the western people do not recognize miss the point.
the Spirit but are materialistic. So they are
keeping a balance alright. Now what I have so happy that they are keeping to the essence
to say is this. This matter is produced for of the matter. Sharing. They love to share.
your joy and happiness, but even the essence
of the matter you are not enjoying. Because and joyous despite their poverty, despite
you are not the Spirit, even the essence of their frugal life. And this is what I just donot
the matter you are not enjoying. So what understand that once you do not have and
you have to do is to become the essence
yourself and enjoy at least the essence of don't want to give it.
are literally frightened to part with it, so you
That is why the Indians look so generous,
And that is what is keeping them so happy
you want to give and when you have it you
Nirmala Yoga
31
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-33.txt 
 Human beings go on changing their goals.
Depends on what level you are. If you are a
poor man you want to become rich. If you are
a rich man you want to become poor. But people have less quality, or the Eastern
poor in the sense, poor inside, not outside. people have less intelligence, it is only that
Now actually the goal of every human being they have no idea as to have only 'single-
is to become the Spirit, nothing but the minded' goal to be the Spirit. in both the
Spirit, that is the goal of every human
being. And if you do not become Spirit then solved.
whatever you are doing is against your goal.
Once you become the Spirit, no more this
human being, but the Spirit, then the whole
thing changes in a different way, you act in
a different way, you use your telecom-
munication. you use your television, you use
your things in a different way, at a different
level. At the Unconscious, level.
So you have to reach to that UnconsCIous have lost that subtle side of life, they just see
And this is the message of your Mother. I
have to give you the message. I have to give
you the "right' thing. It is not that the Western
cases. Once you decide on that. porblem
A day may come when Westerners will be
more Easterners than the Easterners. I mean,
you see, in the West when the Indians go
there,-the uprooted ones,-they are much
more Westerners then you people are. They
cannot understand Indian classical music,
they do not like Indian furniture, they do not
like Indian paintings, nothing. Because they
level where "everything' is available for you,
everything, That is how these miracles take
place. Like the other day we wanted to buy
some saris. And I just stopped at a shop I
said, "Now here". Now we got the saris for Indians) littlebit of the Spirit is lost as soon as
one tenth of the price, we should say. of dne with the West, they just got transformed into
eighth of the price of the saris that you get
in the market. So, when the Spirit guides you
get everything, there is affluence, and you
are generous because it is so much of the So you like the life of the Spirit. But to say
affluence in the real sense flowing.
to the superficial side and they live like that,
While you are becoming subtler.
whatever was
Because
there hankering in them
they went away from here. They get mixed up
western life, and they have accepted it. While
now you are transformed into your Spirit
that Indians today are great people of Spirit, L
must say, to be honest, they are not at all.
Because of their past traditions here, because
What I can only tell you is what goals you
should have. And the goal as I told you is of this Yoga Bhoomi of course, they cannot
to be the Spirit, that is what is your goal. To uproot themselves, but they are trying very
me East, West, North, South does not count, hard to get themselves uprooted.All of
do not know the directions. I only feel that
if every human being in this world decides
that he has to be the Spirit and Spirit alone Sahaja Yoga, they are still not trying to go
all other probelms will be solved, because
he lives with the absolute, not with the rela-
tive, he does not compare. He is in absolute their complexes about their material life. It is
state. He does not compare there is no rela-
tivity. The relativity creates a problem, like
developed, under-developed. All these are
relative terms, isn't it! But if you are the
absolute then there is no relativity, there is opinion about yourself. Today who look to
no problem and you become the goal itself.
them, are trying very hard to get uprooted.
Even Sahaja Yogis, when they come to
downward towards the Spirit, but trying to
use Sahaja Yoga for building up so-called
so It's a very sad thing, but that's a fact
So it is meant for all the westerners and
the easterners that don't be on a firm
be lost may be the people who might guide
Nirmala Yoga
32
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-34.txt 
 -But again for that' you
you. Might be one day that it is those people is going to Bless-
who were thought to be absolutely gone should not.
cases will have to fetch you out of your own
problems.
The goal should be a higher goal. But the
higher goal should not be seen relative to
whatever are the lower goals. Accept the
higher goal in an absolute way. Otherwise
So everyone of us must honestly decide
that 'wa hava to be the Spirit. that is the goal
of life. Then all problems are solved.
when I say this, you fix it like that "Mother
has said that all problems will be solved, "so
take to Spirit"is again relative.
But
astent would be slow.
Alright, what is the second question?
S.Y.: I think Mother you've answered the
second question which was "What is so
No, take to Spirit. "Mother has said täke
to Spirit, alright we take to Spirit". Even important about Self-realization?"
why say Mcther has said it", but say,
"/ say / will take to Spirit."
point. So, by God's grace all the humanity
will rise at a higher' level than what they
are. Actually, the level at which the human
beings are, are called as Laukika (Rifew), beings to become human beings.
means the gross type. To go to the subtler,
or the Alaukika (*i). you have to give up from vour awn' angle, but from the Creator's
using this brain. But you have to use the
Spirit. And if the Spirit is not available to you
then what will you do?
Shri Mataji : No, but that I've not given.
Keep it at that The importance of Sahaja Yoga", I've not
given.
Now, what is so important for human
So the importance we have not to see
e
angle; because you donot understand your
importance as it is. Human beings never
think "why have I become a human being"?
Anything that Sahaja Yogis are doing Do they? So they have no sense of impor-
today; say, a marriage. Now, you are Sahaja
Yogis and you are married, but you are
married "in Spirit". So that is to be kept
afloat, one must understand. If you keep
that alloat you'll be amazed you'll enjoy that
marriage, enjoy the whole thing, and you'll
have the best of children born to you.
tance about themselves. So how can they
have sense of importance about Self-realiza-
tion?
From human point of view I would say,
"Because you have to ascend"-But why?
I would say, "So that you will get your
Kshema' (rH), your well-being"-But for
But for' that you do not seek the Spirit. what? "When you will become the Spirit.
again. This is how the Mother tries to
you that. "Do this, then l'll give you one
peppermint". But if you are mature then you
don't listen to these things. You just say,
"Mother, whatever is right that's what I have
to do. Because I'm here to do the right, and
I'm convinced that you'll always tell me the
right thing to do. So l'll do the right thing". i# God wants us to do it, we'll do it". Just
Such a decision anybody vwho says or takes,
all your problems will be solved"-But why?
tell
...you see, the human beings are like that.
But it is important because "the 'most
important thing is your Creator, and He wants
you to have your Self-realization". Is the
absolute thing. "If He wants it, alright".
How many are there who will say. "Alright.
for God's sake "THY 'WILL' BE DONE".
whether he is north, south, east, west, any
side, he is the Yogi. He is the one whom God
"He has arranged it, He has made us
33
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-35.txt 
 human beings. let Him make whatever He
wants out of us."-This is absolute again. the importance, your brain will give you the
Surrendering to God has to be there before other side of it also, and will start telling you
understanding this problem. "Thy will be
done" should be your first attitude, before
attempting to understand this answer of wouldn't be any individual left, you will all
mine. Is the will of God; God who has have to move in the buses. in the dust!
created us, God who has made us human Wherever God takes you you'll have to go
beings, God who has given us everything. there, and live with great discomfort! You
God who has given us Sahaja Yoga. So it is may have to hug people who may not
the Will of God that we should be the Spirit, apparently look that sophisticated! And you
so we will be".
With your brain if you start thinking about
that "If you get self-realization. then you'll
have to surrender to
God! Then there
may have to lead a style of life which is not
suitable to a "sophisticated western, persona-
What have we given to God, so far? We lityl"-All these problems would arise. And
have been extracting all His energies, we when such problems will arise, your brain
have been extracting the Mother Earth, from will have no way to answer it. All importance
the sun we are getting this, for everything, will be finished.
and we are creating problems for Him, we
are troubling Him so much that He has to
solve our problems. So let us be surrendered way, "If that is the important thing, to Esta-
to Him. So that is His Will that He wants us blish my Spirit, I will do it.
to be the Spirit, sa let us be the Spirit".-This
is the greatest importance of getting Self-
realization.
So best is just to say in a surrendering
Because when you are on the brain level
you are always in relative state. Everything
has a double thing. I mean you talk to any-
But if you cannot stay to that state, and one-The other day I was talking to some-
body about the Israelies being cruel to PLOS.
So they said "What about PLOS? They
I said, but where to end
tion, in these days of turmoil and all kinds it? He said, "It can be ended later on when
PLOS are finished". I said... Everything has
a second thing! Whatever you may say it has
Because this brain has a
But God has no problems. He has no great capacity to produce waves on both the
sides. Because it lives in relative terminology.
you come down at a human level, then I can
write a book saying that. "Self-realization is
very important because without Self-realiza-
have been cruel".
of problems, there is no solution. The man
has to be transformed".
a second idea.
problems if you do not want to get to self-
realization. He solves the problem just like
thatl He has many quick methods by which
He can just solve all His problems. So in a
To overcome this. there is only one way,
is that you forget this and that, and you just
nutshell, one should understand that the say "IT IS". Then only you will know the
importance of this has to be "because God
wants it" and otherwise He might be doing
something else! So better get to it.
importance of it.
Because any number of importance I may
give you, you'll neutralise it.
That's why
This understanding is that of a child who Sahaja Yogis fizzle out. You've seen that.
surrenders to his mother, knowing that the Why Sahaja Yogis-they get realization and
mother is doing everything for his good.
everything-still they fizzle out one by one.
34
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-36.txt 
 Why 7-Because their brain has a great capa-
city to produce anti-Sahaja Yoga understand-
ing. So what importance should I tell you
which is absolute for your brain, I just don't
you cannot travel. In the same way we have
to see if the ticket is available there or not.
When we think of God also we think He
Because you are very clever, I5 lower than us, so we can use Him. You
cannot push people into it. Only those who
will be allowed by God will be there. Its the
understand.
and you will find out an anti-dote of that
"also' !
other way round, we must understand this
This is what we miss. *That if we want we
It's impossible to convince certain people,
but one thing one should know that God can push as many number as possible. We
Almighty is an Absolute Power. It will do can get so many people to God"-is a very-
what it likes. So better be surrendered to it very wrong idea. You 'cannot' force God. He's
That's what a Mother can tell to the
children, that this power of Love and Beauty ness with prayer, with great asking, and then
is to be surrendered to...
yam ( )-the one to be accep-
ted, the One which is to be surrendered to.
That's the One to be surrendered to. The
beauty of the whole thing is that this is the
power one should surrender to, than to credibility.-Not with God. So many will be
the power of your brain or of your mind. And just dropped down,I must warn you.
once you realise this, then the importance of
the whole thing will dawn upon you.
not under you. You have to take His gracious-
you can save these people. He's not interes
ted. He can create many more.
Tvamekam Varen-
So those who are not wanting, you should
not try to sell. You cannot sell Sahaja Yoga.
You may think that more quantity is a sign of
You have to be careful as to see, that
Even if you bring one person, you must con-
Now, if you want to tell the people who solidate. That's a better idea than to get a
are not seekers, you are in for trouble, I must big quantity of people who will not get even
say. It's not easy to convince these people, a ticket, leave alone the seats.
because they want to escape. And the idea
that we have, "that we should convince
everyone",.. you are sadly mistaken.
brain level you cannot convince them. So s Y: What are Vibrations ?
So, one should be satisfied. Alright ?
What is the third question ?
On
best thing is, that you can take them to a
point.-'see for yourself' Otherwise, you give-
up. They are the losers, not you. What can
you do ? You have tried your level-best!
Shri Mataji: Vibrations are the pulsation of
the all-pervading power within us, which we
can feel in the central nervous system. The
Spirit doesn't pulsate. It doesn't pulsate.
But we think that we should have more The pulsation exists in the all-pervading
people with us. But I don't know how many power. But through Spirit when you get
can be accomodated there. It's the other connected, then only the flow starts. And
way round. Like, when you have to go by you then start feeling the pulsation on the
the piane, you have to ask the company to central nervous system, And this pulsation
give you a ticket. If the ticket is not available
of the Holy Ghost are the Vibrations.
Nirmala Yoga
35
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-37.txt 
 Sayings of Shri Mataji
Dedication, Bhakti and Surrender
You have to dedicate yourself completely to me; not to Sahaja Yoga. but to me. Sahaja
Yoga is just one of my aspects. Leaving everything, you have to dedicate. Complete
Dedication. otherwise you cannot ascent any further.
arguing. Dedication is the easiest way to get rid of 'all' your angularities, all' your problems,
"all' your badhas. Complete Dedication is the only vway you can grow further.
Without questioning, without
Krishna said. "Sarva dharmanām parityajya mamekam sharanam vraja"-forget all the
religions of the world. There is no difference between Him and Me, but today I am the
One. I am the one who has given you realisation. All these dharmas are to be given up
"entirely. And you have to surrender fully from your heart. Here. as you are before me
today, I want to tell you very frankly, as Krishna has told only Arjuna, Sarva dharminām
parityajya, mamekam sharanam vraja".
Shri Krishna has said. "Give up all your dharmas and surrender them to Me, surrender
to my dharma only. You should only know what you owe to me", meaning the Divinity.
Shri Krishna is not there, it's Me who is Shri Krishna, so you must know what you owe
to Me.
She can be only achieved through bhakti. She can only be ach jeved through Dedi-
cation. She's only fond of Her bhaktas-the devotees.
I should say. Emotionally you may feel closer to Me in your heart. But through meditation,
Surrender. Meditation is nothing but surrendering-is complete surrendering. In your
full freedom, complete freedom, you have to surrender.
For this. meditation is the only way
Only through your bhakti-through you Devotion and Dedication you can achieve Me.
My achjevement is the complete manifestation of your Divine powers. It's very simple, made
so simple, I'm only pleased by people who are simple, innocent. who'are not tricky, who are
loving, affectionate to each other. It's very easy to please me. When I see you loving each
other, talking good of each other, helping each other. respecting each other, laughing aloud
together, enjoying together each other's company, I get my first blessing-first joy.
So, the Dedication in meditation. Complete Dedication in meditation must be prac-
ticed. It's not for your' good now you're doing it So-called 'your. First you were a
little baby, a small thing. Now you are that Collective Being. so you are not doing anything
for yourself, but for that collective being. You are growing to be aware" of that Whole,
which you are going to become. Your jobs, your money, your wives, your husbands, the
children, the father, mother. relations-these considerations are
have to take up the 'responsibility of Sahaja Yoga. Everyone of you is quite capable; you're
brought up for that. In Dedication. in complete Devotion, you have to do it 'now' not for
your own good, for your own achievement-that's over now. Is for completely getting out
of the mire and standing on the land, singing aloud the praise of your Father.
You all
over now.
You've to bear the brunt; and the sacrifice-which are no more sacrifices to you because
Spirit gives, it never sacrifices. It's quality is to give. So, you don't sacrifice, you just
give.
Our Greatest possession
The greatest possession you have is your Mother. Through Her you have your brothers
and sisters. Now. the name of your Mother is vary poNarful. You know that is the most
powerful name than all other namas, the most pow arful mintra. But you must know how
Nirmala Yoga
36
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-38.txt 
 to take it. With that 'complete Dedication you have to take that name. I have taken birth
in this world in the binding of Sahaja Yogis and have been moving around only in their bind-
ing. I am desireless and hence my everything depends upon your desires. Attain me, I am
Suous,
yours, I am for you. I have given you that which has been beyond the reach of very great
sages and saints. When I am speaking it is a mantra, when I'm not speaking, is a mantra
flowing.
Those who are fanatically adhering to me are also not correct. There should be no
fanaticism' about it.
The Ascent Has To Come From You
Unless and until you are cleansed how can you be completely blessed? You have to
be fully blessed by the Divine, clothed by the Love of God. But now your ascent has to
come from you. Your rising has to come from you. That has to be worked out by you'
and 'you" alone. Not by any other Sahaja Yogi or by me. Develop that Dedication within
yourself.
So the tree of Kundalini has to grow. And from that tree, Paramatma Himself. the
Parabrahma itself. has to pull you out. It grows out of the mire, and the Parabrahma has
to pull you out-one by one, take you in the Hand and swing you out.
On Love
Try to love each other-in Dedication; because you're all my children, created out of my
love.
blessings. A 'deep love should exist. Selfishness has no place in Sahaja Yoga, Miser-
liness has no place in Sahaja Yoga.
In the womb of my love you all have resided. From my heart I've given you these
You must have a heart as your Mother has Pulsating with love, with Compassion.
with Joy, with Happiness, with Giving. That should be the attitude. Not rationality.
Nothing, It is to feel. Feeling for the pains of others. Feeling for their longing and feel-
ing for their aspirations. Just feel within yourself, is there Desire to be the Whole', to be
the Ocean itself is so fulfilling
All that is sustaining, all that is nurturing, all that is ennobling comes from this sense
of love, which is within us very much developed, but within others also who are not yet
realised
The Great Message
Tell all the nations and tell all the people, all over, the great message-that the time of
Resurrectionn is Here.
the ones who are capable of manifesting God's joy on this earth. You are the flutes which
are going to play the Melody of God. I am doing all this to perfect you to be the 'most
beautiful instruments of God. Like the ship is built, is brought to the sea, tried, and found
out to be sea-worthy to sail out, when you know everything about the ship, everything about
the sea. With complete freedom and wisdom, you have to sail now. Not afraid of any storms
or any gales or any typhoons because now all you know. Your job is to cross through.
Now. at this time, and that you all are capable of doing it. You are
You become the Ocean, yoau become the Moon, you become the Sun, you become
the Earth, you become the Ether. the firmament-and you become, the Spirit. You work
for all of them. All the stars and universes you become, and take up their work.
True Freedom
Freedom in subtlest form is complete egolessness, no angularities, complete hollowness
just like the flute; so that the melody of God could be played well-that's complete free-
Nirmala Yoga
37
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-39.txt 
 dom. Freedom is when you really get your own powers which are within you. In your
Central Nervous System, in your conscious mind, you must feel the existence of the Spirit.
On Puja
A Puja or a prayer grows from your heart. Mantras are the words of your Kundalini.
But if Puja is not performed from the heart or if Kundalini is not associated with recitation
of Mantras then that Puja becomes a ritual. Best is worshipping in the heart. You should
say the Mantras in Puja but with great faith (Shraddha). You should perform the puja when
Shraddha goes deep so that heart itself gets all Puja performed. At that time. waves of bliss
start flowing because it is the Spirit that is saying.
People pour their wine in the glass. Your Puja is like that. In that. wine is your faith
and the glass is the recitation of Mantras and the worshipping. When you are drinking
that wine forgetting everything how can a thought come ! Then only you are bathing in
the ocean of bliss. However the joy that you get after drinking the wine is eternal and
ever-present.
The Infinite Treasure
I have given you the key to the treasure, which others haven't got. But you must
work to open the door. Do you want to go empty-handed despite having the key to the
treasure?
Why should one brag of one's achievements ? You must understan i that whatever is
being done by you, is all God's power i.e. working of Adi-Shakti and you are only the
witnesses to see these miracies. For achieving that stage you should pray. "May our l
consciousness' fade away, may the truth that all of us are small parts of your being, be
assimilated within us, so that your Divine Bliss would resonate every particle of our bodies
and this life would be filled with beautiful melodies enchanting the whole mankind and
would show light to the rest of the world", Let love flow from your hearts. Love is
unlimited. Your attention is on material things and you are talking about eternity Your
attention should merge in eternity so that you will have eternal life.
Self-Realisation
Complete Self-Realisation is that stage attaining which nothing else is required.
Thereafter. only enjoying the bliss and the satisfaction of fulfilment. Man wants peace,
wealth, power etc. but God is the origin of all these. We should pray to God for peace and
keep the desire to meet God, who is peace itself. This should be the difference in satisfa-
ction of a common man and that of a Sahaja Yogi. All attention must be on Him. For
that, one must have dedication, determination and concentration (tapasvita) and in that
all material attachments should be destroyed.
A True Sahaja Yogi
A Sahaja Yogi is happy in the circumstances that are prevailing. If he is not. then his
satisfaction is superficial and not from within. A river starts with a very small, little drop,
and then it expands, expands, expands, expands.
central point The person who is a generous person. for him the whole world is his family.
So expand your self. When you become the parents and then" you enjoy other children
as much as you enjoy your child. then your generosity has started. You have to be a peace-
ful person, not an aggressive person, The person who is peaceful is powerful-the one who
doesn't react to anything else, is the most powerful. You have to be kind to others. You have
You go to the source, "absolutely to the
Nirmala Yoga
38
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-40.txt 
 to be neat and clean. First is forgiveness, second the detachment leading to compassion.
These are the wheels of your chariot which moves you. You have been made like temples.
Keep it clear. We are moving towards the soothing qualities of the Spirit. You have to 'soothe
others and not to excite, but to soothe. Let God's melodies be sounded from your flutes. You
must have the capacity to deepen your maditative po w3i, so that these ideals go and settle
in your heart. as a part and parcel of your being. Once the saints know this is the principle
on which we have to live, they become one with the principles. You become the mother,
and you, whatever you are which has to grow, is the child. If you are a Sahaja Yogi you
have to be a flower, and a strong flower, and an eternal flower that always grows, does not
fade out. always growing, never fades. such a flower you have to be,
Sahaja Yogis should never be angry. Without getting annoyed. they should improve
everything tactfully and intelligently. Never get angry.
Every individual has to work it out for himself so the Whole can be alright. There
could be some people who are only worried about others. Worry about yourself and see
the good points of others. If somebody has to tell you that you must organise, go fast and
all that. do not feel bad.
waste. Till you keep the maryadas of Sahaja Yoga, saying morning-evening-night that,
am a Sahaja Yogi", nobody can harin you, hurt you. Nobody can trouble you. On the
contrary you will be enjoying life if you keep to the "maryadas.
We have to do so much wark in this warld we have no time to
One must promise to God also that we will know about Sahaja Yoga. through proper
understanding, reading every word of it. We'll master the knowledge of Sahaja Yoga. We'll
keep ourselves clean. And completely surrender our lives to Sahaja Yoga. Surrendering to
Sahaja Yoga is actually surrendering to joy, bliss and peace.
Language should be sweet. your behaviour should be good, it should be very gentle
and soft. You should. move like a Yogi, live like a Saint, and people should see through
you the greatness of Sahaja Yoga. See the trees when they get their flowers. they are not
so respectful ; but when they are laden by the fruits, they bow down to Mother Earth. In
the same way when you have got the fruits of Sahaja Yoga, you all must bow down. You
have to be sensitive to God and not to bad things.
You have to change your methods. A Person who cannot change his methods cannot
spread Sahaja Yoga because he sticks to only one way, with which people get bored. You
should find new ways.
An established Sehaja Yogi is the one who becomes completely one with God and
wins Him over. He has to do everything for that.
Conquering Ego
Say from your heart: "I don't want this ego any more. I want Reality. Let the Reality be
seen by me, felt by me, enjoyed by me". Once you start doing it from your heart, you will
be amazed that your voice will become sweet. The second thing you have to surrender, is
the pride, or vanity. Before God, what is your property? What is your money? What is your
position? What is your family? What is your education? We should be proud of one thing only,
that His vibrations flow through us. The human mind has another capacity, to be jealous, to
be jealous of others. Another offshoot of ego is called 'hot temper'. Another enemy we
have is greed. Material greed and also human greed. like possessing your wife, possessing
your children, possessing this, possessing Mataji also. The ego and the super-ego both
rise from the Vishuddhi chakra. You give up all your dharmas and surrender to Me. That is
how your Vishuddhi chakra gets opened up. The matured people are those who surrender.
who bow to the Mother Earth. Humility is the best way of conquering this ego of Vishuddhi.
When talking to others, try to develop sweet methods, sweet ways, unhurting other people.
You will be surprisad that Vishuddhi will immediately start behaving in such a sweet
manner.
Nirmala Yoga
39
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-41.txt 
 Kundalini Shakti
Your Kundalini is the same as the Adi Kundalini. and it's power the Parabrahma. You
are the officials of God's kingdom then why are you sulking ? All deities are your elder
brothers in this kingdom. They are present in many forms along the path of Kundalini.
You should recognise them and attain them. Kundalini is your Mother. Learn to always
remain under Her care.
tatwa which is flowing within you in the form of vibrations cleanses all your three
sheaths viz.
awakened within you, is Brahma Shakti and it is present in the universe in different
forms and even in molecules. It is the solidity (Jada-Shakti) in solids, in living being it
is beauty (Saundarya Shakti) in waking state it is the power of bliss, in Sahaja Yoga
it is the power of consciousness bliss, in Param Yoga it is supreme bliss and within
Bhagwati it is the power of being Brahma (Brahmabhootawa Shakti). Kundalini as you
know, is the true desire', So true desire to perfect yourself, to grow yourself. If it is really
true desire nothing else is important.
Be Her child and She will take you to the ultimate.
Brahma-
Body, Mind and Ego. This power of callective consciousness which is
How to keep Mother pleased
"So how to please Mother ?" I am also a very simple person, so I want a simple
hearted person. So this Heart Chakra is to be first looked after, that with your heart desire,
you will keep your Mother pleased. First of all your heart must be clear. If the heart is not
clear, then everything has no meaning, because it is a dark heart which is doing all these
things. The heart has to be clean, absolutely surrendered and must try to put Me before
everything else. The Lakshmi tattva has to become Mahalakshmi tattva. That is for your
ascent. And just to get into that Mahalakshmi tattva, what you have to do is to use all your
material things and your material being in such a way that you please Me. You have to keep
your Mother pleased by pleasing other Sahaja Yogis, and not other people.
What 'Guru Dakshina' (Gift to the Guru) have you given me ? Understand that your
money is not worth the dust on the feet of your Mother-Guru. You should give your hearts:
only clean and holy hearts. You must clean your physical beings. You must get up early
in the morning and spend at least one hour on meditation and worshipping. Perform "Arti'
and meditation in the evening.
Discipline
You are my children. How are people going to have respect for you, or for Me, if you
have no discipline? The discipline has to come from "within yourself. The discipline of
within is like the fragrance of a flower. It gives you complete freedom, and it gives freedom
to others. You have to kill the greatest enemy within yourselfindiscipline and irresponsi-
bility.
Laws of the Divine
One must know these laws of The Divine, that we have to live with self-respect. that
we have to be chaste, that we have to have dignity, that we cannot steal money and steal
things and be parasites. That we cannot kill others and we cannot beat others and say harsh
things-they are just the same. And that we have respect, the respect for all that is sublime.
Respect for all the saints that are Sahaja Yogis. And the respect for the leaders who represent
your Mother. With all this, we are very different people. We are a different race. We are
virtuous, we are righteous and we are proud to be that way. We are sure of everything. We
know about everything. We are the personification of Compassion, of Love of God. That's
what we are. We are not ordinary people. On the subtler side, is Compassion. Is Forgiveness.
Is Love. But the greatest of all is the Servica to God. Wa are doing the work of God. How
can we be tired? The dynamic is flowing through us. that Compassion is so fulfilling, that
Nirmala Yoga
40
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-42.txt 
 love is so beautifying that how can we not do it? God has created this universe, this world
and you people out of His Compassion only. just His Compassion.
Blessings of the Devi
There are so many blessings waiting for you, to be manifested. Just you have to
concentrate your efforts in devotion and dedication. The enjoyment of life is only possible if
we could get conected to the Spirit and that connection to the Spirit is only possible if you
sprout into that: you become the Spirit as Christ has said in simple words that you have to
be born again The whole existence itself will have no meaning if we do not become the
Spirit. We all have to become the Spirt otherwise we are useless, we're good for nothing.'our
life has no meaning.
The Pure Desire
There is only one pure desire and that is to be one with the Divine, one with the
Brahma, one with God. That's the 'only' pure desire. All other desires are impure. So train
your mind gradually to achieve that desire as the main thing. To achieve that you have to
keep your Mother pleased, very simple.
Bliss of the Spirit
You get the bliss of the Spirit, if you become of sound body. pure mind and egoless.
The only thing you can do is to enter into His Kingdom and become a part and parcel of
that blissful domain. What to do after getting realisation? After receiving you must give.
Agnya Chakra
If your Agnya is alright, then your eyes are perfectly alright. They emit nothing but love
wherever they glance. Only with a glance of your eyes you can raise the Kundalini; with the
glance of your eyes you can cure people. Only with your glance you can bring joy into the
destroyed, ruined people, with your eyes. They are the windows of your being. A realised soul's
eyes sparkle like diamonds. One must know what to order and how to obey. Obey the Divine.
Obey our elders. Obey your Self-and not your ego. Then you can order also others. Not
only human beings, but the Sun and the Moon and the winds, and everything in the world.
Everything you can control with this Agnya. If you know someone is going to do something
wrong, take his name to your Agnya and he wll not do it. Anything you order on your
Agnya must be respected. But your Agnya must have Christ there-your Agnya has to be
clear. Those who have a good Agnya can master anything. You can really become the
master of yourselves. When people see you they will know Christ is reborn again within
you. As long as you have done no wrong, there is nothing to worry. And as it is. even if you
have done some wrong God is there to forgive you.
Culture of God
It's the culture of God, we are talking about. it's the culture of His kingdom.
Where we give to others, enjoy giving, doing for others. loving others. caring for others.
without any return.
VIshuddhi and Shri Krishna
The best way to develop that absolute nature of your Vishuddhi Chakra is to witness
the whole thing with a detached mind. And to develop love for your Mother in your heart.
so that She cleanses all these enemies, in such a way that when you are faced with them.
you are a powerful person. Shri Krishna is one of the aspects of Sadashiva which is the
Father. And the Adi Shakti or the Holy Ghost is the other aspect of Sadashiva which is His
Power The first aspect of Shri Krishna we have to understand is the Yogeshwara and the
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-43.txt 
 Regiatered with the Repistrar:of Newanapera under Regd. No 36999 8|1.
second aspeCt of him as the Virata. The element a yogi controls is ether. When you enter
into your ethereal zone. you actually enter into the area which is thoughtless awareness.
The greatest quality of Yogeshwara is that He is not at all involved into it. detached.
absolutely. Whatever He is, He is complete: sixteen petals is complete moon, SIxteenth day
of the moon is Purnima. That is how one has to be, complete in oneself But confidence
should not be confused with ego. Confidence is complete wisdom, it is complete dharma. Its
complete love, complete beauty, and is complete God. That's what it should be It is the
Virata Shakti that is manifesting at this time and not the Shri Krishna Shakti which was at
His time. So the integration of this brain has to take place with Heart and with your liver. Then
only the Virata Shakti takes another form The weapons of killing became the weapons of
forgiveness So you are the fruits. That Viratängana Shakti, you are the fruits. We are going
to worship thut Virata Shakti which has given fruits, Absolutely the humility inside is really
going to givet you the complete value of Sahaja Yoga fruits. Achieve the completion of this
Virata Shakti which ultimately becomes aMadhurya Shakti. Vishuddhi chakra is the centre
of the Virata The massege at Shri Krishna was to surrender When Shri Krishna was taiking
about surrender, He was saying, "surrender your enemies to me so that will ger rid of
them": The vworst enemy That we have is our ego
Ganesha and Innocence
Today is the first day of Navaratri. Today your attention should be on Shn Ganesha.
His devotion is infinite. He has never worshipped anybody else except Mother. Hence He is so
great Gauri is the one who, as a Virgin, Crested Shri Ganesha. And in the same pattern you
have got your realisation. The first chakra belongs to the power of Gauri, the power of the
Mother of Shri Ganesha. Because of Her power you have got your realisation Have we been
able to develop our innocence within ourselves? The power of innocence is so great. It
makes you absolutely feariess. And the greatest thing of innocence is that you are respect-
ful. In your chiidlike nature only, you can receive the blessing of Gauri. Innocence has a
special capacity to make a person 'extremely peaceful, Extrümely peaceful The one who is
not innocent is never wise. Wisdom comes only with innacence, When yo grow you find
this wisdom really fragrant with compassion. When you have Gauri's power then you stand
out because you have that innocent. lustless. greedless, beautiful. sparkling eyes and
wherever you turm your eyes, even ane glance would taise the Kundalini immediately It is the
maturity of your innocence that must be developed. that keeps you a very religious person.
dharmic person.
Vishva Nirmala Dharma
We have started Vishva Nirmala Dharma, You are under the vision of Shri Ganeshn
under the guidance of your Spirit. and under the blessings of God Almighty But be caretul,
because once you become that. you have to keep to that Dharma. you have to be hanest
about it Sahaja Yogis today represent the growth of this univerae, the growth of the humin
race You wil become like a latus-beautiful, fragrant. overpowering all kinds of negativity
So let us now promise within our heart. that we are the people who are beneficiaries of the
blessings of God. that we have got our realisation, that we have risen so high. But how let
us Spread our wings
On Meditation
So everyone should meditate everyday. Everyone must today promise to me that they
will mediate everyday I can tell you this much, next year those who do not meditate every-
day, will not be here anymore.
Editod & Published by Sh, S.C. Ral 43, Bunglow Road, Delhi-110007 & Printed at The Central Electric
Press, 80-D, Kamla Nagar. Delhi 110007. One issue Rs. 9.00, Annual Subscription Rs. 51.00
Fornign (by Airmail £75 14)
