Nirmala Yoga BI-Monthly March-April 1985 Vol. 5 No. 26 "Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns all the religions and seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga-THE UNION"

 NIRM ALA YOGA 43, Bungalovw Road, Delhi-110007 (India) Founder : Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Editorial Board: Dr. S.K. Mathur, Sri A.S. Mishra, Sri R.D. Kulkarni Representatives I RAJEN MAHARAJ, 26, Ocean St. Bondi, NSW 2026 :INGE KELLY, Josef Melichargasse 20, 1210 VIENNA. : LORI & CARY HYNEK, 3151, Heatiher Street, Vancouver, B.C. V5Z 3K2. : M. CERNAY, 175, Av. Ledru Rollin PARIS-75011. :ANTONIO SARACINO, NIRMALA HOUSE, Localita Pichini s.n.s., 00010 S. Angelo Romano, ROMA : M.B. RATNANNWAR, 13, Merwan Mansion, Genjewala Lane, Borivali (W). BOMBAY-400092. Australia Austria Canada France Italy India : JUAN ANTONIO DELGADO, Avenida De Burgos, 30, 1, A, MADRID-28036 CHARLES & MRS. MAGDA MATHYS. 5 Chemin Des Mouldins, 1256. Troinex (Canton de Geneva). : GAVIN BROWN, Brown's Geological Information Services Ltd., 134 Great Portland Street, London WIN 5PH. IAN BASCOMBE, 5, St. Andrews Road, Exwick, Exeter, Devon, England : CHRISTINE & MICHAEL PETRUNIA, 270. Jay Street (APT. 1 -C). BROOKLYN, NY-11201. URSULA SEHLMEYER, 191 Canal ST. #23 SAN RAFAEL, CA-94901. Spain Switzerland U. K. U.S.A. CONTENTS Page 1. Editorial 1 2. Message of Shri Mataji on Her Birthday Pooja 3. Lotus Feet of Mother 4. Discipline from within 5. Innocence and Virginity 13 6. Be Sweet Loving & Peaceful 7. One more example of Shri Mother's Compassion 8. Concept and Reality 9. Understanding the Love of God 10. The Fourth dimension and the parasympathetic 11. Original Sin and Suddha Iccha of the Universe 21 23 24 29 38 42 12. Where things went wrong 43 13. Maria Montessori & Child Education 45 14. Festivals 4th Cover Front Cover : Shri Mataji; in Delhi March 1985

 Editorial यो न हृष्यति न हवेप्टि न शोचति न काडक्षति । शुभाशुभपरित्यागी भक्तिमान्यः स मे प्रिय ॥ १७॥ समः शत्री च मित्रे च तथा मानापमानयोः । शीतोष्णसुखदुःखघु सङ्गविवरजितः ॥१८॥ समः तुल्यनिन्दास्तुतिमौनी अनिकेतः स्थिरमतिर्भव्तिमात्मे प्रियो संतुष्टो येन केनचित् । नेरः ।।१६।। YO NA HRSHYATI NA DVESHTI NA SHOCHATI NA KĀNKSHATI I SHUBHÄSHUBH PARITYAGEE BHAKTIMÂNYAH SA ME PRIYAH11 17 11 SAMAH SHATRAU CHA MITRE CHA TATHĂ MĀNÄPA MANAYOH SHEETOSHNA SUKH DUKKHESHU SAMAH SANGA VIVARJITAH 11 18 11 TULYA NINDĂ STUTIR MAUNEE SANTUSHTO YENA KENA CHIT I ANIKETAH STHIR MATIR BHAKTI MÄNME PRIYO NARAH I| 19 11 He who neither rejoices nor hates, nor grieves nor desires, who renounces both good and evil and is full of devotion to me, is dear to me. He who is alike to friend and foe and like-wise to honour and ignominy, who is alike to heat and cold, pleasure and pain and is free from attachment. He who takes praise and reproach alike, who is given to meditation and content with what- ever comes unasked, has no attachment to home, is having stable intellect and is full of devotion to Me, that man is dear to Me. Nirmala Yoga

 The above verses, like those discussed in the last issue" describe the attitude one should adopt while interacting with the world. The advice can be summed up as under :- u a) There should be neither rejoicing, nor hatred, neither grief, nor desires. b) There should not be any attachment to friends, and enemies should not be hated. c) Honour and dishonour, heat and cold, pleasure and pain, good and evil, should not disturb our attention and cause an imbalance in the system. One should be ready to give up willingly even that d) Renunciation of both good and evil. which is considered good. e) Heart should be full of devotion. One should be always in the meditation, with buddhi uneffected in any distracting circumstances and attention steadfast on the Self and mind free from desires for sense-pleasures. The above indeed are divine qualities and are essential for further progress of Sahaja Yogis. We have understood and realized to an extent, the Self. Thanks to our beloved Mother for kindling the spark of Divinity and giving us the nectar of Divine Bliss. It is for us now to achieve the inner transformation so that the spark grows under the love and care of Mother, into the power of Divine light. Obviously, mental and emotional involvement in the wordly scores places limitations on fransformation and Self realization, as it effects the chakras. It is felt that the nature of taking a dispassionate view can be developed by accepting things as they are, with whatever possible effects in relation to oneself. The endeavour should be not to take the things around us as the sources of fulfilment of desires for sense-pleasures. Have no expectations from the world and it will cease to be a cause of joy, sorrow, miseries and other reactions. Scriptures have propounded various theories for the benefit of seekers. The world may be considered illusory, transient, transmutable; favidya' is to be discarded in search of the Eternal, Supreme, unchangeable, Blissful, Brahman, the cause of entire creation on whom its survival depends. Hence all mundane affairs are to be taken as passing phases. By another theory, the Universe is considered as an unbroken series of manifestation of Brahman. As our eyes can visualise only forms, the Brahman can be considered as appearing in different veils and forms. Thus, all that comes our way has to be accepted as the will of God Almighty and again offered to Him as He is the ultimate enjoyer. Yet another theory says: "Various combinations of Mäyā or Prakrti give birth to various objects, sentient or insentient. And this Māyā or Prakrti being the power of Ishwara, the crea- tion of these things are His. But the creation of a thing and its being enjoyed by some are not the same. The power and circumstances of a thing enjoyed are to be created by the person enjoying it, as this capability is being earned by the person through his action (Karma). Besides, the actual enjoyment is nothing but a modification of the individual mind, produced as a result of identification of the Chitta with the object of enjoyment. It is thus felt, that the path of knowledge is the only way to liberate oneself from the bondage of phenomenal world through the *Manas', Buddhi', Chitta' and "Ahankār'. The path consists of Sravana' (Study), "Manana' (Reflection) and Nididhyasan (Meditation) of Mahäväkyas (eternal truths) like Tat-twam Asi" (You are that, the Paramatma, the Supreme Being), "Aham Brahmäsni (I am the Brahma). * Verses 15 & 16, Chapter 12, Bhagavad Geeta. Nirmala Yoga

 Sahaja Yogis, being fortunate seekers, the Brahma has stood before them in person with the promise :- मदभक्तो मद्याजी मां नमस्कुरु । मामेवष्यसि सत्यंते प्रतिजाने प्रियोऽसि में ।॥ मन्मना भव MANMANA BHAV MADBHAKTO MADYĀJI MĀM NAMASKURU1 MĀME VAISHYASI SATYAM TE PRATIJĀNE PRIYOSI ME. II Fix your mind on Me, be devoted to me, worship Me and bow to Me, so shall you without doubt reach Me. This I trully promise you, for you are dcar to Me. Bhagavad Geetă-XVIII (65) So the path of knowledge is to be followed in relation to the Supreme Goddess, Adi Shakti, Param Paraméshwari, Shri Mataji. As much as possible, the attention should be engaged in reading and listening to Mother's lectures, understanding and practising Her advice. Remembering unceasingly in the heart, the ever-loving Bha gawati, Praying to Her to be present in the heart and on every chakra. It must be understood that She is present so long as Her Lotus Feet are remem- bered. Pursuit of wordly scores would cause diversion of attention, which, unless checked, would effect the system. The Buddhi should remind the mind and the Chitta, about Her presence within, that every act of omission and commission is being watched, that one's being is Her temple and pure heart is the sanctum sanctorum. If we meditate on this truth, it purifics and enlightens the Panchakosha', five sheathes. The Self would then shine with its full glow and become one with the Lotus Feet of Sakshat Shri Atma-Paramatma, Sakshat Shri Sacchidananda, Sakshat Shri Adi Shakti Mataji. This is the state of the true liberation, the identity of Jeeva (the empirical being) and Brahman ; ". Adi-Shankaracharya has described this state in the following verses. the experience of 'Aham Brahmasmi It should be our endeavour to achieve it. अकर्ताहमभोक्ताहमविकारोऽहमक्रियः | शुद्धवोधस्वरूपोहं केवलोऽहं सदाशिवः ॥१४ ०|। कर्तुभोक्तुविभिन्न एवाहम् । बोधात्मा ।४६१। द्रष्टुः श्रीतुव्वक्तुः नित्य निरन्तरनिष्क्रियनिः सीमासङ्गपूर्ण I am not the doer, I am not the experiencer, I am changeless and beyond activity, I am the essence of pure knowledge, I am absolute and identified with eternal good. 11 490 |1 I am indeed different from the seer, listener, speaker, doer and experiencer: I am the essence of knowledge, eternal without any break, beyond activity, limitless, unattached and infinite. Vivékachoodãmani || 491 tI Nirmala Yoga

 Message of Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi on Her Birthday Pooja Bombay 21st March 1985 Today is the day of Gauri. Gauri is the one who, as a Virgin, created Shri Ganesha. And in the same pattern you have got youF realisation. In the same pattern! So you have to use the same power within you, that is of Gauri, that you keep your heart clean. You must have a clean heart. You must have a clean thinking. There should be purity in your mind. Of course, the bhakti (devotion) 'does' give that purity, but if there is anything lingering in your mind I have to tell you there are three things that are going to happen from today. First, we have started Vishva Nirmala Dharma. You are under the vision of Shri Ganesh, under the guidance of your Spirit, and under the blessings of God Almighty. But be careful, because once you become that, you have to keep to that Dharma, you have to be honest about it. If you have decided, from today onwards you be careful; anything can happen to you if you get out of the 'Maryadās'. Till you keep the maryādās' of Sahaja Yoga, saying morning- evening-night that, "I am a Sahaja Yogi", nobody can harm you, hurt you. Nobody can trouble you. On the contrary you will be enjoying life if you keep to the 'maryädas'. But if you leave the 'maryādās' of Sahaja Yoga, you will have big problems. So this is the second thing I want to tell you that today we have started the great vision, which was promised long time back of realised souls. Now the third is that with all these things we are doing we must promise to God also that we will know about Sahaja Yoga, through proper understanding, reading every word of it. We'll master the knowledge of Sahaja Yoga. We'll keep ourselves clean. And completely surrender our lives to Sahaja Yoga. This is what you have to promise in your heart. Surrendering to Sahaja Yoga is actually surrendering to joy, bliss and peace. In that you are the gainer, nobody is a loser in it. This is how today we have to decide once for all. Today is the day as you know, my forefathers called it the first day of the year*. And they have the 'Kalasha' and the 'Shawl' of the Goddess as the emblem-or you can call it-as a flag of Shälivähan. In any way my delay is important because there was Amāvasyä (last lunar day of dark fortnight) earlier, and we had to get rid of that Amāvasya for the Ist day to start. That's how Gudi Padva. New Year day of Shalivahan Calender. Nirmala Yoga

 the delay was there, there was jam-everything is arranged. We should not worry: "Why there is delay, why there is this....7" Some times I may come earlier, I may come later,-it's all arranged. Because during Amāvasya how can you have my poojā? Simple thing like that. It is all arranged, it's all worked out. Everything is fine, just be your Self. Do not get upset with anything, do not get worried or anything. Just try to keep absolutely peaceful. I give you some tests by seeing how much you keep to that situation, of complete peace within yourself. If you have done no wrong, if you are a Sahaja Yogi, there should be no disturbance. If others have done wrong, it's alright, doesn't matter, you have not done any- thing. As long as you have done no wrong there is nothing to worry. And as it is, even if you have done some wrong, God is there to forgive you. So don't have any worry-nothing. Have all the strength, have all the courage, and go ahead with this promise onwards. Because I see now Sahaja Yoga is going to take a new turn. Definitely it is going to take. We are going to come upto a stage where thousands and thousands will join hands. But first of all those who are in the foundations, who are the first people must work very hard to keep themselves above all kinds of foolish temptations, all kinds of foolish things you have been doing, which is "Asahaja" (not Sahaja). Language should be sweet, your behaviour should be good, it should be very gentle and soft. You should move like a Yogi, live like a Saint, and people should see through you the greatness of Sahaja Yoga. May God Bless You. LOTUS FEET OF MOTHER श्रुतीनां मूर्घानो दरधतितव यौ शेखरतया ममाप्येती मातः शिरसि दयया धेहि चरणी । ययोः पाद्यं पाथ: पशुपतिजटाजूट तटिनी ययोल्लक्षालक्ष्मीररूणहरिचूडामणिरूचि : ॥841। Shruteenäm moordhäno dadhati tava yau shékharatayä mamapyetau matah shirasi dayaya dhehi charanau i Yayoh pādyam păthah pashupati-jată-joot-tatinee Yayor laksha-lakshmir aruna-hari-choodāmani-ruchih 1 I1 Verse 84, Saundarya-Lahari 11 O Mother ! pray place those Feet of Thine, in the plenitude of Thy mercy, on my head, Feet which the parts of the Vedas wear as a crest-bud, the water washing which (Feet) forms the river (Gangã) flowing over the matted hair of Pashupati (Shiva) and the beautiful lac dye over which (Feet) is the lustre of the red crest jewel of Hari. Nirmala Yoga

 Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Discipline from Within Navarātri Poojā, London 23.9.84. For all of us, that we are celebrating Nava- rätri today and all of us are mecting after such a long time of my tour. that there are some people of calibre, there are, but others talk more, show off more, and do not have the calibre. Now to achieve that When in Italy I said that England is the heart calibre sihould be possihle because you are born of the universe, they would not accept it. They on the special land of England. That possi- were very shocked at this statement, They bility must be built within you, could not believe that England could be the heart of the universe. One of the reasons was with all the possibility, with all the great that they felt that the English people were background, with all the merits to be here, invaded once by Romans, and Romans at that why is it we find that Sahaja Yogis, for years time also had felt that English were very bum- together, do not come up to many others. What ptious people. They would not even accept is the reason ? the defeat with the grace of a person, who has lost. Even if they were lost, they used to be bumptious. So they could not believe how could it be that the England is the heart of the uni- it is so regularised, it is so 'disciplined', that verse. If this is the heart, what is the situation of even a 'slightest' murmur, or slightest change the universe? And then they described to me at shows on the graph; is a very sensitive thing. length the bumptiousness of the English, and And that is what is lacking here, is that disci- then I felt that I have known something like pline of the heart. It is an erratic, funny heart that myself. But then what is lacking? Why is it, that Heart, if you see, has a pulse rate and it moves with a certain sound, and you can even get it on to a graph and it is so systematic, which swells up in ego. And whatever one Now, when we are celebrating the greatest may talk, this is another reading people have, of greatest, this Navarātri, there must be some- that whatever you may tell them, that time thing special about it, that we have to cleanse seriously they listen to you and second momenj this heart completely, fully and make it so pure it has 'no' effect on them. So this is another that it purifies all the blood that passes through thing we should see that if it is within us, let the whole of the body. So the cells of this heart, which has made this great organ, has to And that disciplining has to come, otherwise be the best, because the cells of the heart within a human body are the best cells, the highest quality, the most sensitive. And it's have is innate intelligence. No education, innate the heart expresses the 'anahata' the sound intelligence. Innate intelligence to understand that is without percussion. While we find that our calibre has to inmprove. us understand that what we lack is disciplining. our calibre cannot improve. But for all that, I think what we should Nirmala Yoga 6.

 Now here pulsates the Spirit, the Spirit and not the Power, The witness, the one that centres, have we been able to develop within watches, that is the reflection of the God, who ourselves ? How can you do it ? You have is the Spectator of the Work of the Devi. no time. You are all busy people. And Actually what happens that without rising bumptious. üpto that status if we also say, alright, we are also watching because we are the Spirit, then we donot achieve that calibre. And with all' the blessings,-like seven auras of the heart, we have got seven ashrams. We do not understand that we all have to discipiine sensical things like unemployment and all ourselves. Only to take advantage or to be in that. They just asked me, Mother, how do the Sahaja Yoga, to claim that you are a Sahajayogi, is not a sign of being a cell of the heart. of the seven centres. The power of these So now to derelop these powers we have to concentrate on these chakras. "Everywhere' I ' went, I was surprised, the questions they asked me, the way, they were. Nobody talked about Their family, house, jobs or any other non- we develop the power of this chakra, or that chakra or that chakra. And I asked them how is it you are asking about a particular And warning has to be given now. Very chakra. They said, "Because we find this is important is at this juncture when Sahaja Yoga missing in us, specially in me this one is not is now taking off-remember this,-the speed alright." kas been gained and it is taking off. Those who will be left behind, will be left behind. So do for me to discipline you or to tell you all these not get into bumptiousness. First is your things, because 1 hate to talk. in this tone to character, as everybody says, "They are very you today. But I have discovered that if I bumptious". Try to be humble and then do not warn you now, tomorrow you will understand that you have to be in the plane blame me that I did not warn you. Take it as and not left behind on the grounds. It is moving fast. Now for a realized soul, there is no need a serious warning. Now after realization there is no need for me to discipline you at all, be- Now the most fortunate thing is that today cause you have got the light, you have known is the Navaratri and that I should be in London what is realization, vou have knOwn what and this Navaritri puja should be performed here. No other country is that privileged, ow much you have gained out of it, how much because this is the highest poojā, the greatest your personality has improved. ritual, which you can attend. So why do we do Navarātri ? In the heart, to do Navarūtri is to done. Is to see for yourself, if you have really accept the powers of the Shakti, to realize the disciptined yourself or not. There is no need power that all these chakras have got in them- for any leader to tell you, there is no need for selves, and that when they are enlightened how any äshram fellow to tell you, there is no need you can express all these powers of these nine for anyone to tell you. It is you, who is a chakras within ourselves, The seven chakras realized soul, you are your own master, you plus the heart and the moon makes it nine. are your own guru. Imagine you are all gurus, But I would say that seven of these and on great gurus and Sadgurus, respected Saints top of that, we should say two more centres, where all the angels have to shower you with which Blake has described surprisingly as "nine flowers. Think of it! And here you are centres", clearly. Just now I cannot talk of bumptiously giving lectures, talking bum- the higher two centres, but let us at least talk ptiously. Very embarrassing-even for the means to be realized, and you have also known But there is something more that has to be Nirmala Yoga

 deities. They do not know what to do, whether to garland you or to shut your mouth. Here you are in such a great position that you have got realization. That only thing you have to accept is the beauty of this great Yoga, that you fust enlighten your own powers, which are on these seven chakras. you are bumptious, alright, you are in a big fool's paradise, as they call it, riding a fast horse,-all that is there is alright: is forgiven. But once you have seen the light, you must try to get rid of all the snakes that you have been holding on to-is a simple thing. In your childlike nature only, you can receive the blessing of Gauri, otherwise you cannot. You have to be really childlike, other- wise it is absolutely useless, no use telling you anything, because you think you are too clever. Tosucha person, who thinks he is clever, what's the use of talking to such a person, because he already knows everything. Now let us see the first chakra, belongs to the power of Gauri, the power of the Mother of Shri Ganesha. Gauri's power. Tremendous they are, aren't they ? Because of Her power you have got your realization. Now what have we done to ensihrine that power within ourselves? Today is, if it is the first day of Navarātri, let US see what have we done. Have we been able So the first power, when you develop, you must learn to sit on the Mother Earth, first of all. You must respect the Mother Earth, because the first chakra is made out of the Mother Earth. Try to be more settled down with yourself on Mother Earth. And the to develop our innocence within ourselves ? When people talk, they are so sharp. How can you be sharp if you are innocent ? are so bumptious. How can you be that if you are innocent ? People play games. How can you do that if you are innocent? Harm cach other. How can it be, if you are innocent ? respect. See the trees when they get their So first of all you have to see yourself, that the power of innocence, if it has to live, all the rest they are laden by the fruits, they bow down to of the nonsense has to go away. If you want to have the innocence, all that is anti-innocence has to be dropped out. They flowers, they are not so respectful; but when Mother Earth. In the same way when vou have got the fruits of Sahaja Yoga, you all must bow down. And innocence has a special capacity to make a person extremely' peaceful, 'Extremely I can understand about people, who are ignorant, who have ignorance. Then in ignorance, of course how will they talk of peacejul. All the anger, temper, violence. If innocence. But you are not ignorant people. You are knowledgable, you have got your enlightenment. a person does not have innocence, it cannot come in it, because a person who is not in- nocent is either sly or aggressive. He cannot have peace within his heart. But a innocent And the power of innocence is so great. It person is not bothered, innocently he lives, he makes you absolutely fearless,-not bumptious enjoys everything in complete peace and har- but fearless. And the greatest thing of in- mony. But this violence comes when a person nocence is that you are respectful. The sense becomes clever. He thinks, "I am so clever, of respect, if it is not developed within you, if the another one is so stupid, I have a right to you cannot develop the sense of respect for shout at that person. other Sahaja Yogis, for other people, for the Ashram, for the discipline and your own look sharp, but he is not wise. Wisdom comes Self-respeet, then it is of no use, even talking of only with innocence. And how much wisdom Sahaja Yoga, because that is the very begin- have you gathered,- that is what one has to ning of it. First you do not respect, alright, se. " And the one who is not innocent is never" wise, He may be, to look at, OWn Nirmala Yoga

 When your power of innocence increases, your explanation: It is like missing the plane. wisdom is apparent. People say, "That fellow When you miss the plane, whom are you going is very wise". For example if somebody is to explain the plane has left. So then you crying about his wife, a wise person will say, have to explain yourself only. You will tell "Oh baba ! just look at this, still busy with his the air, or to the gangway, or anything that wife." Another one is crying about his house "ob baba, it happened like that. There was or something. He will say, "Oh! look at this thing, I had no time, there was a jam, this one still busy with the house". There is this, that". But the plane is gone. Whom no end to it. are you explaining? So everyone should meditate everyday. That I have known people who get so swollen up that they think they must give a big lecture for is a very important thing, which people are one hour, on Sahaja until, they have given one hour lecture, they Because I am in England, people take me for do not think their ego has manifested itself granted: "Mother is doing everything". So fully. But a wise person, he doesn't have to talk or speak or do anything. He impresses his for you all. I better start doing that again. silence, his wisdom on others much more easily, That is what we have to see. Have we been able to discipline ourselves? Because our growth is very much in the beginning of it. they will meditate everyday'. Get up in the We have to grow quite a lot. And people morning. " " do not understand this point in an atmosphere The whole world can get up, why not the of egoistical temperament, that you have to English ? But when it was the war of Water- grow, you have not yet grown, You have to grow loo, they were the first to arrive there. They a lot'. And when you grow you find this wisdom won the war because they were punctual. What really fragrant with compassion. Your wisdom has happened to their punctuality today ? We is fragrant with compassion. Such beautiful compassion can emit through your being, that anybody who comes in contact with you, will decide today that, "Every morning I will get up feel your auspiciousness. But, again you and do my meditation. And while meditating I must give due respect to your Self realization and to your Self. That is the first thing you And see for myself what is catching, where am I have to do, is to meditate. Yoga. Unless and doing in all the countries where I am not. I get up at 4 O'clack, take my bath, meditate Otherwise you have no time to meditate, So at least let me meditate for your sake. So everyone must today promise to me that We cannot get up in the nmorning are not drinking, we do not have hangovers; we do not sleep late, so why should not we must concentrate on myself and not on others. catching, which chakra I am catching, what Somebody sent me a letter and I have I to do ?" vibrations were horrid. I asked what's the matter with this gentleman? His vibrations first day, the Gauri's power must be enlighte- are so horrid, what is he doing ? Then I ned within us, and they must express. And found out that he says he doesn't nced any they are 'tremendous.' I cannot describe them meditation. saw the So on this day of Navarätri, today as the He has already reached the in one lecture. Think of the Primordial fourteenth heaven, so he does't need any Kundalini. She acts in the Mother Earth, She meditation, does not have to do tation. It is casy to explain, but whom She acts in the matter, She acts in the human are you explaining? You have to explain to beings. And now She acts in you. She is the yourself, only yourself. Nobody else wants any medi- acts in the universe, She acts in the animals, one who decides the face and the figure that Nirmala Yoga 9.

 you are going to have. She is the one who decides what child you should have. She is yourself. the one who gives you the particular type of a child that you need. She is the one who has got you all these beautiful children, She is you see that vision, when you know the vision, the one who has given you these sparkling you cannot just stand there. Get into it. faces and sparkling eyes. All this She has done for you, but what about the power that you have within yourself. How much have everybody says-that, "Mother you have spent you manifested that ? The Promordial is working very hard, no doubt. But what about you, the individuals, thinking that because you are very great, that's who have got their own Kundalini awakened ? How far you have opened Her out. And what way you like. But the most important thing is is Kundalini-is a simple tiing as you know, is that you are on the land of Heart, and I have the true desire'. So true desire to perfect to cleanse you more, much more than others. yourself, to grow yourself. If it is really true desire nothing else is important. desires are secondary and tertiary. The most important desire is to grow. And for whose they have just mastered it; 'every one' of them. advantage ?-ls the advantage of your's and in Here, it is becoming a very centralized stuff your advantage only the advantage of the whole and everybody does not want to understand world rests. Everyday you müst meditate. Discipline Now you have come to a new perspective, You have come to a new vision. Now when Everyone says,-Damle was saying too, so much time for these English. Why so much time for them ?" May be you might be why I have to serve you people. Think the But it's just the other way round. Others are All other going so fast. I am amazed, their vibrations, their sensitivity, their understanding. And Sahaja Yoga, but everyone wants to give a lecture. There is no respect for elders. No respect who is older who is younger, and Sahaja Yogis today represent the growth of this universe, the growth of the human race. somebody who thinks that because they got Do you follow this point that you are playıng realization before others, they are higher, then such an important role at such a crucial time when the world is about to collapse? And you have great seers like William Blake, you had such great people who have talked about this time. They have built it up. Traditi- manifest' these powers. Manifestation of the onally we have built up all this. Now in powers, I do not know how far vou have England, the work of ages that has brought this England to this stage. Now do you realize that the position of English Sahaja soon as he enters a lall or any place, everybo- Yogis is 'very' important. But lack of wisdom dy's Kundalini rises, just to salute. When you and bumptiousness without understanding have Gauri's power then you stand out because your Self, how can you talk so loud? How you have that innocent, lustless, greedless, can you think of organising everything when beautiful, sparkling eyes and wherever you turn you yourself are so weak, so bumptious. So your eyes, even one glance would raise the today I am not going to take the count of the Kundalini immediately. People who suffer people, who meditate everyday or not. But I from cancer, suffer from this disease, that can tell you this much, next year those who do disease, all can be cured in no time if you not meditate everyday, he will not be here have developed only one power of Gauri. All anymore. Take it from me, is a fact. remember one word of Christ, that, "First will be the last". So try to understand that it is you who has to grow, it is you who has to understood. When a person who has Gauri's power, as your problems can be solved. Negativity will Nirmala Yoga 10

 go away and you will become like a lotus.- by talking about it or thinking about it, but by Beautiful, fragrant, overpowering all kinds of becoming that great power, to 'hecome that negativity. Here it is-"That fellow just touched me and people have and I was amazed when they told now I have become egoistical." If there is me, they have got this blessing, they have got one fellow who is egoistical, he just talks to that blessing. I mean unlimited blessings they another person, the person goes egoistical. I have got. And why can't we have that here ? mean this is not the way to be sensitive. You What's the problem with us? If we are not have to be sensitive to God and not to bad collective, if there is a problem between our- things. But we are more akin, more vulnerable to bad than to good. So the power of assimilation of good, the power of emission of good, all these powers that this has to go into your heart, a very deep are just in your complete reach. But all this feeling for ourselves, "that by God's grace we should not become a praise but should become a kind of a challenge, a kind of a beautiful happened, that we are the people who are curiosity and an advancement for you. But we are going down, I must tell you, we are going down in England. Because we have some funny tags, funny people who are all the time with tags. Such people will have to be warned, and later on may be declared, as these people have decided, should be declared as black listed, It is a very sad day today for me and that is why the whole place is filled with I mean I had no mind to have the pooj here, of marriages, you have done every kind of because I am really very sad. Because when I see the vibrations, when I see the way things time with. It is over now, finished. Now you are, people are just in a picnic way in England, do something new. How many people you have I feel so unhappy, you do not know. I have always been extremely enamoured, and I have already put up a big show of appreciating your have had, finished now. Finish it. efforts. But if you see in the substance of it: just see the substance, you watch within yourseif. Each individual should see the substance that is within us. We are worried about a friend, a fiance or a wife or a husband or this and that. That is not the calibre. The calibre is very low and is going down lower. That is intensity you have to do Sahaja Yoga. That not a good thing, is not good. If my love and does not mean that you give up your jobs, or compassion is spoiling you I better pull you out anything. If you are intense in Sahaja Yoga, wof it. Because you 'are' capable of your merits to be born in this country. You "are' capable of very great heights.-I know that.-Of very great heights, which you can achieve, But not see the collective blessings power. And seives, that means therc is some sort of an ego still in-between that is keeping us out. So let us, now promise within our heart are born at such a juncture when this thing has beneficiaries of the blessings of God that we have got our realization, that we have risen so high. But now let us spread our wings." But we are cutting them down. Don't become small minded people, worried about small-small things here and there, Nothing is important. If you see in your previous lives, you have had all kinds of foods, you have had all kinds of trips, you have done every kind other nonsensical things that people waste married in how many previous lives and houses you had in previous lives and how many pleasures you This is a special time. the best time of Ritambhara ( ) where you have to grow. That's the point, the season is that. In this season if you do not grow, you wouldn't grow. You have to take full advantage With full you will be intense in everything. But there is no intensity. Munich I decided, at last minute, because there was horrid one who had come по1 a Nirmala Yoga 11

 your Spirit, within your heart and try to develop that Munich and had told me Munich's seekers will ask such questions. your powers, inner powers, not of talking and I did not like them at all, It was very arrogant. showing off, but inner powers. I said I am not going to Munich. But in Vienna I just felt the vibrations of Munich. that. It is a shameful thing that even now And I was amazed! I said, alright, I am going in the temple of God there are people who are to Munich. We had to run up and down to get my visa, this thing. Everything worked be?... they do not talk at all or they eat not at out as usual. And in that short time,-3 days -four hundred people were there, And so intense I tell you, so intense,-even children discipline from your Spirit and you are disci- *so intense', and they were 'listening to every plined automatically. Let the Spirit rule you, word I was saying', and picking up as pearls, It is possible, It is possible because I have precious as diamonds, 'every' word they were seen in such short time and when I have been noting it down. And when they had their there for such realization they were just stunned people. Imagine the Germans, coming over you people, of you, by your names, and by your vibrations English. What will happen to you? They also. And they have gone up so much. are people of determination. If they decide to do good, they will do lot of good. They are not like this. And then when I left them, for people, like "house of Lords". Is true, but one hour, they were in the hall, just stunned, discussing about Sahaja Yoga. Still so many are possessed, you know possessed by horrible evil things. How can it all, All this is indiscipline. But going higher to this spiritual life, best thing is to take the a short time,-I dont't know even their names ! Here practically I know all So, today is a great privilege. Always you are privileged great day. of course a may be, one day may come when this house of Lords may be banished completely. You have But here as soon as I to behave like Lords. That is why my humble start discussing something so nonsensical! I request is that You must learn to worship disci- hear it. I know the vibrations and everything. pline. I do not say "do this, do that", you We are not intense, we must increase our know what is to be done. And then on top intensity. That is what is called as (a1) of that, you should not tell me, "I know, I And should have not, I know..." When you know, go away, people Shraddha, Is iniportant, "very important. I am sure this year you wil make it a point to why don't you do it ? You are empowered. do intense' understanding of Sahaja Yoga. That Today let us, with full confidence in ourselves and in our ascent, let us with full intensity altend this pooja, and in our hearts decide that, intensity is lacking. May be there is something gone wrong with you in the past and you are conditioned about "I am going to discipline myself." it, or you think about it. How can I do it, it is too much. forget the past, forget the past, Past has no Vibrations are very strong today. Tremendous. meaning whatsoever in Sahaja Yoga. You And you take full advantage of them. If you are being completely renovated but just use your mechanism. I work so hard with you whichever way you like... people that nothing is wrong with your mechanism. Only thing is that you have no faith in yourself. And those who do not have even worse than people who are really egoistical faith on themselves are always bumptious because they are themselves not aware at all people. So first of all station yourself within what they are talking about. May God Bless You Navarātri is beginning with a big force. You can do it, everything, you want, you can use your left hand or right hand, Even those who look egoistical are under the power of some possession. And they are Nirmala Yoga 12

 E SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI Innocence and Virginity 17-10-82 HAMPSTEAD, LONDON It's a great thing today that we are celeb- women, to develop any guilt in your mind. rating the Virgin's worship in England. you know, according to Sahaja Yoga, England as you know, at a later stage this guilt works in is the heart where resides the Spirit of Shiva. the opposite direction. It is of no help. But And that Virgin should be respected and reve- when we understand that we have these prob- red and worshipped in England is a great lems, we have to be humble about it. Not honour, I think, for all the Sahaja Yogis. As Because that is one thing is the greatest blemish guilty but humble. If you are not humble about it, and aggres- Now one has to think why such an importa- nce is paid to a Virgin ? Why a Virgin is respec- sive about demanding what have you got out ted,-to that extent. What are the powers of of Sahaja Yoga and complaining about it all a Virgin ? That She can bear a child of that the time, while not seeing what are 'your own' magnitude that was Christ, that She could punyas (merits); what do you deserve ? Your create Shri Ganesha out of Her own body, that Kundalini, despite every blemish, has been rai- She could protect innocent, dynamic force of sed. You know that. You are blessed. So. Her children who are egoless, who have not instead of complaining or being aggressive, you known what is ego. So this great power and force resides in a person who has lots of The greatest favour; that you are forgiven "poorva-punyas" ( go) who has done lots of completely, that this great blessing has been good things in previous lives, who has always bestowed upon you. And to come up to it understood that Virginity is a power higher you have to work hard. Not to feel guilty than any other power and would save the Vir- about it: but to be humble, to be thankful. That ginity and Chastity with all her effort and care. despite what we have done.-'played' with our- As you know that within our body She is placed selves 'completely'-still we are today sitting as as Kundalini. Means She is the Virgin. She God's devas. The Somrasa ( ) which is is untouched. The desire to become Spirit is the charanămrita (TTUga), the water that without any blemish : Nirmal (fa). There is washes the Mother, only you' are allowed to no blemish. It's waiting is pure. There is no drink it, only the devas. You are sitting in other desire, but to be one with the Divine. All that category, and how can you be deniand- other desires are finished. must know that it is a great 'favour' to you. ing ? It's a very difficult subject for me to talk about in the western country. It's embarrassing, your past, whatever mistakes we have commit- I do not want any one of you, whether men or ted-I am with you in this. Not to feel guilty. You have to humble yourself. By seeing S1 Nirmala Yoga 13

 not innocent can never be joy-giving. They are It's very embarrassing as I said to you, but please try to face yourself. We have to face themselves miserable creatures and make every- ourselves as we are. one miserable. The arrogance is not a child-like quality. We have to be like children. And even when The advantage of the Indians is that the Kun- dalini exists there. So whatever Indians may do, they are always aware it is wrong. For them vir- you were not, you were given realisation alright. tue is virtue, whether they are not virtuous. Right- But now you are sitting with the devas. Even cousness is righteousness, whether they are not. higher than them. So what is our decoration 7 It They know, all the time they are aware of it that is umility. It is simplicity. Not cleverness, they are doing wrong. They do not say what's wrong", nor do they propound things which but a complete surrender, surrendering all your are obviously wrong and against the Virginity, egoistical qualities. against the sublimity, against the divinity. Satanic things they never proclaim that this is God. They are hypocritical, alright: but they vear's day for us,"that we all will surrender our are aware all the time that these things are wrong. The whole society is like that. Because Kundalini stays there. arrogance, putting others down, showing-off, Let the Virginity be reborn in you. From today you all have to take a vow,-is the new horrible tempers, dominating nalures, asserting behaviours, ego-oriented harshness, domination I don't know what use it has. Unless and until you surrender that, the Lord of Virginity, Shri Ganesha, will not be able to crown your Agnya Chakra. When we lose our Innocense and our Virginity, first thing happens to us is that we become ego-oriented, and we start thinking t*what's wrong ?" Whatever we have done so far should just give us this. If our past could give us the idea as to how humble we have to be with cach other, with all the Sahaja Yogis, how kind we have to be, how loving, how universal. Your Shakti is your Kundalini and She is Virginity. She is your power. She is your stren- gth. Your Innoeence is your strength, the day you lost it that is the day we have committed the original sin. Virgin cannot accept ideas which are not universal, She cannot ! That's a sign of a Virgin because She is universal by nature. All fanati- So for us it is important that we have to be cism, all racialism, castecism, tall" these things which artificially separates man from man, very humble about it, and that we have to achieve something.-What ? Not the kingdoms woman from woman, nation from nation, will and some sort of a luxurious life, but a seat in all finish off as soon as you become innocent. But you can't become, by brain-washing you cannot. By Kundalini awakening, of course this holy land of Shiva. Shiva is forgiveness, He forgives everyone. you can, But to maintain it, your progress should Even the Rakshasas (demons) can be forgiven, be invard' and not outward. To seek your roO1s. but can they be given realisation ? Even the She is the Moola, She is the roots of your being. Pishāchas can be forgiven, but can they be She manifests all your roots. So your attention given realisation ? Forgiven is a different point. should be towards your roots and not towards One aspect is forgiveness, so that they can remain for a longer period, they may live longer, self, and develop your roots now. All the wes- because of Shiva's forgiveness. So what ? But what a wretched life. And the people who are your shoots, you have been that. Face your- tern society is without the roots, you can see that. We have lost our roots, let's face it as Nirmala Yoga 14

 western people,-as I am also with you today. Innocence. If materialism means to make things to give others happiness, to present others, as a cup that carries the nectar. If materialism is that cup which gives the nectar of love, then It dries out, it it's alright. But you don't eat the cup, do you ? To me materialism sounds like people eating the When it dies, it falls upon someone. It grows cup, and not the nectar ! Is cup more impor- thorns. All dried things grow thorns. It's like tant, or the nectar ? Supposing there is a gol- a desert, where only thorns can grow. When den cup and a poison is placed inside that, will the whole society becomes so stupid as to hate you take it because it is in golden cup ? If you each other, materialistic, then roses are not take it, of course, I will have more value for going to grow there, lotuses are not going to gold. Will anybody knowingly take a poison We 'have' to find our roots. You see in a tree which does not have roots. doesn't give any shade, after- wards it becomes a dry horrible dying tree. grow there. in a golden cup because it is in gold ? No com- monsense ! There is no commonsense at all. That material things connot give you happiness is the basic factor of economics. While you are the Lotuses of this country. You are born in the mud alright, but now come back to yourself. You were beautiful, you were like lotuses, fell into this mud, became the mud, out of which you came out because of thing material gives you greatest happiness when your true nature. Then you have become now you can give it to someone. I have seen that lotuses, but there is no fragrance. Lotus without a fragrance, one can't understand. taking. I mean you try, sometimes, to give Lotus has to have a fragrance. The fragrance away something, and see how happy you feel. In my own life time I have seen, thar any- way, always. I'enjoy' the giving more than that will overcome the filth of this mud. Of course, it should not be done because you want to get rid of it ! Actually it is done for You have to grow much more than Indians that only, perhaps, because whatever you po5- can grow. On the contrary the arrogance of sess is a headache in anyway,-even the subt- people, I am amazed. They start complaining lest form. Any possession is like getting this, complaining about that, complaining about possessed. It's slavery. It hinders your freedom another. What do they think of themselves ? Who are you ?-Because the roots are not deve- loped. Once you develop your roots, immedia- tely the humility will start coming into your people who are so afiluent are so miserly ? Why temperament. There is artificial humility, not are they so miserly ? People can't understand, from the heart. It will only come when you you know. For one 'p' if it is dearer, the whole become Virgins, you become Innocent. But it goes hand in hand. to grow. You know, people ask me, how it is these England would be ablaze, you see. All the time-what you hear is nothing-that so much Innocence doesn't only mean morality, percentage of rise in this thing and that, and doesn't mean only that. Many people think they are going for a strike for this. I can't that if you are a moral person,-No. It also means a non-materialistic attitude. For people, hat carpet is more important than their children. Morning till evening they will be saying harsh things just to save few nonsensical things which this sugar here and there, I would know, but I are going to be left here permanently. Materia- would just know that it is cheaper than the lism is the hit, it's the one that hits you, your understand how do you keep account of all If somebody asks me what is the price of other place. Because I am innocent. I get Nirmala Yoga 15

 things absolutely cheapest always, I have seen that, I always get things cheapest. Because I are already wounded people, because you have am so innocent. My Innocence takes me to wounded yourself. Nobody has done this places where it is the cheapest and I get the 'maximum' joy, because I can give it. I know yourself, very nicely. Every way possible you how to give it. It's a very delicate work I have to do. You harm to you, you people have nicely wounded have tried to hurt yourself. Now because of the hurt, the guilt is built-in and you are hurt- ing others. It is as simple as that. So don't That's how I would say, because of the "real force' of your Spirit which is Virginity, hurt yourself, there is no need to hurt yourself. you have lost the sense of joy also. You are joy killers, morning till evening you are killing harsh to anyone. Yo4 have to be sweet people. each others joy-to say harsh things, you see from this tongue. But remember that we have no business to be You have to be kind people. There are also psychologists who have I was folding my hands before you because come forward to give you explanation for your I knew it would little bit upset you, so I was just keeping it there, that your mind should not strong, If you don't talk like that others will be disturbed so much. In my palms, you see, take advantage." Who can take advantage of very carefully I was catching your heart to keep the western people ! It is absurd, absolutely it there, so that you should not feel hurt. Because absurd ! The ones who have done injustice all it was not harsh, but it was truth which was harsh. But still, in my palms I was holding it, absurd. I cannot understand how can they carefully, so that you should not feel hurtabout it. harshness, that * Your will-power should be over the world should say such a thing, it's give an explanation like that. But now the time has come, 'you' are the So to hurt anyone,-just open your tongue people who are going to change the mind of and hurt anyone,-one doesn't understand how many ripples of hatred you are creating within God. You are going to please Him. yourself. God with your good behaviour. The wrathful Who is going to deserve in this western Twenty-four hours are not sufficient for me world, you tell me, today. You are the ones: to love people. Now, I will be sixty years of chosen for this, specially prepared for this, age, I don't think I have dlone justification to these sixty years because I have not been able sion should be awakened, for the rest of to love people as much as I wanted to. The fiow is so great that my body suffers with that flow and sometimes I curse myself that why should I carry such load of love within myself. of Sahaja Yoga, what happened. We had And little excitement with the pooja also, you know what happens to me. I shudder, some- times, you are calling me for pooja, now what, only three. will happen. Then somebody can ask a ques- of my precious time in this country, and in the tion, sometimes, "Mother did we not suck West. Despite that, the arrogance sometimes your vibrations ?" It is obvious, but I don't baffles me. Arrogance among each other,- want to say that. Because if I say that, your even towards me sommetimes they are so arro- vishuddhi will be caught up again. You will gant I cannot think of anyone being that suck less. to create an area so that the deity of compas- them. The arrogance, you have seen in the spread a programme where we had, say, a thous- and people. For the next follow up there are It's typical. I have spent most arrogant to me, as the way they are. The way Nirmala Yoga 16

 they talk to me, the way they behave towards until you humble down. On everything you me, I just can't understand how can they be assert. For what ? It's impossible to worship like that. It can be anyway anywhere, any- Virgin when we are so arrogant and so strang- time. Specially women; I was amazed ! I went ling type. to Belgium, and I found that Belgium house- wives were even worse than British house- wives. Ah ! Terrific they are ; terrific women ! extremely simple. She does not understand Ah! Just horrible ! Absolutely. You just don't what are your plans and what is so important, know how to deal with them, it's terrific. everything. Her importance is her Virginity. They control the whole household into their That she knows, and she will not allow any- hands, I don't know how. I don't know how body to touch. That's her property, that's they do it. There's no The Virgin is: a simple woman. She is her wealth, that's her greatness. And she's humble because she is not afraid of anyone. So ego-oriented, I am amazed ! But if you She is not aggressive. But she doesn't allow go to America, American women are baba ! They are amazonic ! Horrible ! You just can't real Virgin. understand. There's no love, no affection, nothing. Showing off, all the time talking about their material things. Absolutely dry Yoga. I must warn you all about it. Don't sticks, I tell you. And they want realisation, take liberties too much with Sahaja Yoga. You and they want to be great, and this and are not obliging anyone else but yourself, be care- that. I don't know what are they. anybody to aggress: nobody dare aggress a A new page has been turned now, in Sahaja ful. Take up my warnings always seriously. You 'all' kave to come up rery well now. It is Today it is especially the day of Virginity. not only doing my poojā is going to help you, I have really great hopes from the women of I can tell you this much. Now you better this country, specially. Here the men don't worship yourself. You have to worship all talk at all. You see the pattern was worst in your Gods within you. Cleanse them. Belgium, no man would talk a word. They cannot talk, just poor things are just shut. They don't talk, strangled, completely strang- led by women, believe me. Horrible ! What and until you can worship that, you cannot go is going to happen to that country, you see, where men cannot talk and women talk. It's horrifying, let's face it up. What have they achieved, the women there. At least in India Don't take liberties with Sahaja Yoga. It has our Prime Minister is a woman. What are they ? Good for nothing, useless, just washing have seen the light of the day. But be prepared utensils in the house and showing off. I just for the night. Nobody should try to take don't understand. What sacrifices they can First is the God and Goddess of humility, of innocence, of simplicity. Worshup that. Unless further, you will not be protected. Again I say that a new page has been turned. bestowed all the blessings upon you. You liberties. Try to improve yourself. No more complaints. If you can't live in an Ashram like that, you better get out of it. It's not for go up to ? The woman is known by the amount of your convenience. Nobody is in need of you. sacrifices she makes. It's a challenge, I tell Take it from me. Nobody is in need of you, you, for all of you woman who are realised you have to be in need of yourself. If you are souls to see to it that you humble down your- seekers, if you want to find your roots, every- self. Your quality cannot improve unless and thing is available for you. But you have to be 17 Nirmala Yoga

 humble, to go down to the roots, not with you see what exactly exists. But if you are ego-oriented, you would never see yourself what exists. arrogance. You will see some sort of a We must understand why we are not progrES- bloated, you see, you will think yourself to sing. Actually arrogance comes to people who lack self-confidence. Self-confidence is shat- tered in people whose Self is not manifesting. you put your imagination like that, you can Let your Self manifest. When the Self is not manifesting, you get all kinds of problems, absolute false, and then you complain. Actually the problem resides within you. It is God who has to complain. Think of it. The One who has created this universe, the One who has created you all with such love and affection, the One who has given you everything under the sun, also the One who has given vou realisation given you light- everything that is possible. And you are complaining against Him ? You should not. Complain about yourself", that "I am not alright, I should be alright." Com- plain about it. Face yourself. be the King of God's heavens, you see. You 'can' see, if you want to : its imagination. If see yourself as anything !- Which is false, is You are your Self and you must see yourself as your Self, as your Spirit. And Spirit is a universal being, is the Innocence, is the Virgin within you. Respeet your's which is the Virgin, still exists. Because if it was not there, I could never have given you realisation. Despite every attack it existed there. Be sure on that point. If it had not existed, you could not have got your realization. it, respect that part of CO So many of them, they are very proud, "Oh ! I don't feel anything, Mother, you know, it's nothing." Then there is to be ashamed: or at least you feel that you are missing some- thing ! At least you should feel that you are missing, if something is not alright and you should be alright. At least think like that, "I should be alright, I am not alright." On the contrary No, no, I didn't feel. Oh what- I didn't feel I should feet." Like children when they face the mirror, they say "this is somebody else." But we believe. They never identify themselves with their own images that they see. They are identified with the image that they are". They don't create artificial images, or don't dwell with the images which are making them feel ego-oriented. They live with reality as it is. They are made like that. You see a camera, if it takes some photo- graph under a light which is some othercolour, the photograph could be different. Supposing Innocence, Complete wisdom. You find this I am wearing a red thing and supposing you among the villagers, or very simple people. put a light that is blue, this might start looking They are not planning in any way. You try green. But human eyes will see always the to befool them, and you will be amazed, at the same thing. It won't see something unreal. end of it you will find, "I am such a big fool, Camera can do all that. Camera can remove myself." Try that with some rustic peoplc, somebody's head and put somebody's head who are very simple, matter of fact, who live there. All these tricks are possible with camera but not with human eyes. Whatever you see is so-called intellectunls, if they try to befool a the thing that is. Of course, you are drunk, then simple man like that, after half-an-hour this it's different. I mean I am saying of normal educated and very M.A.-Ph. D. style will find conditions, you see.- In normal conditions that he is the biggest fool ever born,' So the wisdom. . Wisdom is the part that is with mother carth. You will find that all those 18 Nirmala Yoga

 There is a saying in Sanskrit, which is very " (Vidyi vinayc From this story we have to derive that the common" frar fan iTHÀ" more we are learned into Vidyā, into the techni- na shobhaté)- que of Sahaja Yoga, we have to be humble. That is our decoration, that is our certificate, that is "gets decorations or is beautified" only through the path into the entrance of every human humility. If there is an educated man he has being, that is the way we are going to be very to be a humble person. If he is not a humble close to the other seekers. To be humble, to find out ways and methods of being humble. This is the key of Nirmala Vidyā. : "How to be humble ?" By humility you will not ever say, *This is my bathroom, or this is my fruit, or this is my food, or this is my table, and this is common" विद्या विनये न शोभने (Vidya vinayé That is, "Vidyā," even the knowledge, is decorated-shobhaté-means person, then he is not educated, at all, in any way. I don't know ifI have told you a story about one saint who was meditating and was blind. Anda king came there and asked him, "Did you see some people around ? He said, "Yes. Yes King, my King. Sit down. I saw your servant come in, and then your minister came in, and then the prime mintster cme in, and then now you have come", He said, "You are blind, how did you know ? Through your meditation ?" He said "No. Commonsense". He said, "What is the commonsense 7" He said, first the my glass". Innocence gives vou strength to enjoy every- thing that is there.-I mean for me, sometimes I have to eat with bhoots, and sometimes I have to eat bhoots Not only eat with them, but also eat them.-Is worst part. So you also should not mind if there are people with bhoots. If they are drrogant, iry to give them bandhans, try to control them through all these methods. But if you think by arguing with them you will be able to He said, "What, you are bogus fellow sitting down here, wasting your time". He gave me two-three abuses, used bad language, and said, "Have you seen any person here ?" So I said, no. Then the minister came in. He didn't abuse me, but he just asked me. Then the prime minister came. He said "Sir" is the humility, is the mylin sheath. If you are to me.-Must have been from England ! And humble you will win the battle, if you are not, might have said also Thank you perhaps -And you will be lost. Then the whole thing will then came the king. And he said that, "You become a joke for you, 'absolute' joke. If you were extremly humble. You first touched my feet, you sat down on the mother earth, waited for me, to ask you, "what do you want", and in a very humble way said : If you have heard of people around you-because I am blind, so you didn't say something that would hurt me, in such a humble way-if I could tell you. But at least hundred and eight names of the Guru you took, before you asked me this. So I know you are the learned, you are the humblest, so you must be the king." Otherwise in those days we at least never had kings or prime ministers who were box-office actors. Even the public was so innocent that they would not accept such a nonsense, you see. So this was the difference. manage them, it's an impossibility. So try Nirmala Vidya, and that is humility, which is the mylin sheath of vibrations. Like every nerve has a mylin sheath covering it, in the same way are humble you can see the stupid, the bhoots and all the arrogant as clowns of this drama. Try to be humble with your Self, and with me. With me is very important. Youmust under- stand that it is one of the conditions that Christ has put on 'you', to be "careful'. Dealing with me, I don't want you to be in any way rude to me, because I can't help it there. Till you are humble with me, everything is in my charge. But as soon as you are rude to me, somebody else-and so many of them, thousands of them- take charge, and then don't blame me for that. Because you are my proteges, you are under my protection. Supposing you try to make holes Nirmala Yoga 19

 in your roof, and then say that the rain is Spirit: "Now you look after this connection. I forget everything else. I leave it into your you have already made holes in your roof. The hands. Lift me up. You raise me up. I forget roof that was to protect, you have made holes, all that was me before. Everything I have now the rain has to come in. Then if you want dropped out. No other desire. But just lift me that the roof still should protect you from the higher and higher. Make me yourself. The rest rain, then I must say you lack intelligence. of it is not important. All other manifestations of this, desires are over. Now, I am absolutely surrendered to you, my Spirit. Lift me higher coming in, what can you do about it ? I mean That's what it is. So this is the another warning. It's very embarrassing, but again today is the day of and higher. Higher and higher, away from all embarrassment as it is. Because the Virgin is in embarrassed condition always, she is a bashful complete Spirit, full Spirit". personality. She has to be bashful. She is embarrassed to say things which she does not want to say, of course that's a very sweet thing, fast ascent. Just you can do it if you try at this even there she is bashful, to say harsh things is a horrible stuff. the things that were not the Spirit. Make me Forget all that was there, That elevation, that ascent becomes a fast, quick trip, a 'very moment and every moment to give-up all that was not the Spirit. Anything that goes against So let us worship our Virginity within our- the Spirit must be given up, and that is what is selves, Let us rise up to that point. To mount the pure desire, that's what it is the Kundalini, that diamond of brilliance of our Virginity, in the is the Virgin. Is to be absolutely one with the setting of our humility. You can be angry with Spirit. All the res! has 'no' meaning, has no others, not with Sahaja Yogis, not with me. Even with others-when it is 'absolutely' requir- ed. But if you fight among yourselves, and tell people about Sahaja Yoga, nobody is going wherever vou are working, whatever is your to believe you. value. This ascent,-whatever may be your posses- sion, to whomsoever you may be married, situation, whatever may be your country, you fare' the Spirit. And if you are, raised aloft, you will dwell in the beautiful kingdom of God, And that is why, today is the day when the Virgin, Gauri, sat down to worship Shiva, She made a Shivalinga and was sitting and putting where all ugliness drops out. Like when the Her sindur on that: "that you look after this, lotus opens out, all the mud drops out, completely. which is the mark of my union with you. I leave In the same way, let my children become frag- it to you, to look after",-to Shiva. "You look after me. I surrender to you." With this, that's how Gauri your Kundalini surrenders to the rant, beautiful offerings of Sadāshiva. May God bless you. Q! Is truth beyond sense perception 7 Shri Mataji : It is Absolutely. Because if what we perceive through our senses-whatever we perceive through our senses-is the truth, then we don't have to seek anymore ! Whatever we perceive though our senses is what is very apparent, gross-not the subtle. What is 'behind' the gross, we cannot perceive. For example, we cannot say how to make an atom. We cannot say how an amoeba is made into a humap being. We cannot make one monkey into an human being-Can we?-through our perception of the senses. Through our perception of the senses we cannot do the subtle thing that is behind the gross. So we cannot perceive through the senses. But once you have perceived it you can feel it, through your senses. This is the second point. Nirmala Yoga 20

 Her Holiness Shri Mataji Be Sweet, Loving and Peaceful Birthday Pooja, Juhu, Bombay March 22, 1984. I have just told them (Indian Sahaja Yogis) दीख रहे हैं । आइये, शिवाजी महाराज ।" ऐसा आदरपूर्वक that you should not try to copy the western कहना चाहिये ताकि बो घबराएंगे नहीं) style of ego-oriented society where people use harsh words, because then we think that we have modernised ourselves. They use harsh words, "What do I care"-all these sentences, we have never used, these are unknown to us. To anybody to say like this is unmannerly. How can you say like that : "I hate you !". others. Insulting methods and emotional black- But now I have seen people talking like that, mail and all this nonsense is not at all tradi- "What is wrong with us". "Who are you to say that". Like that we do not talk. This is this will be thrown out. You should not do not the way we talk. You see, this is not the them, I can tell you, in Sahaja Yoga you can- way to talk. Any person who comes from a good family could not talk like this because this reflects on the family. But the language is most copied here than in the western countrics. I am surprised the way the people talk here in buses, in taxies and the way they use the language that's something I can't understand. And so I have asked them that the language be full of love and in our traditional style. Correction if it is to be done, we used to do this way; other side is not proper because it never corrects. See, that the other way you cannot control your children. All the time you are scolding them, insulting them, insulting tional in this country, and those who try to do not do it. You should not have all these ideas of insulting people, of bringing them into situa- tions that they can be insulted. This is all modern style. So we should not do like that. In Sahaja Yoga, we should behave in such a way that we should be dignified, behoving our style, our tradition. Sahaja Yoga tradition is that we talk to people in most sophisticated manner, the Sweetest manпer, in the most afectionate таппer The way we do not scold our children. If and inviting manner. And that is how we should we have to scold our children, we use language all speak. which makes them honourable (a Bahu- mānav) : Damle Sähab has put on a kurtā- So, this is the first thing I ask that in your pyjämä, so "You are looking like Shivaji expression of love there should not be a ". We thing that you shout. I do shout at people who have bhoots in them, but by that the bhoots age so that they would not get scared. (T e un away. But if you shout, you get the bhoots: साहब ने कुत्ता पाजामा डाला है, तो "फिवाजी महाराज से bhoots do not run away, they get attuned, so Mahārāj. Welcome, Shivaji Maharaj should speak in such respectful langu- Nirmala Yoga 21 therk

 better not do it. If you have my powers: you can do that. But you don't have. If you shout this should expreSs your love-Love ro others. at a person who has bhoot5, you get the bhoots. Like, now, in everywhere in next two-three years So be careful, you don't try my tricks, you see, you will have Ashrams, I am sure. And in the I'm different type of a person and I do say things Ashram, I will like to see Loving, caring, affec- understandingly, which you do not. So when tionate, patronising beautiful attitude for the you follow me in things I an the way that I am on the side that I forgive, the way I I am affectionate and nat the way where I am terrible, Because my terrible nature has got an undercurrent of my Love which you don't have, It will be your responsibility to see that it is nor those powers. So don't try these tricks with Mother's House and people are coming to the anybody else. Fou have no right to shout or get angry, because if you should, you get back people, with love, affection. Whatever you do- all the bhoots in you. For they are the ones who provoke you. They provoke you to get caught up into it and you get absolutely ruined, that people will think that he is not an arrogant the more you try to do so. Therefore, the best personality. I want top class persons to be in thing is to stand in the centre and to have affec- charge of a Ashram. If the person is mediocre, tion and love, the power that I have given you. he should not be appointed. By next year you That power you have to develop-that power of will have all the lands in your hands and love, First, develop that power of love, then you Ashrams will start by next year. May God don't have to worry, you don't have ta shout or do anything. Your power will become (Krita), (active), it will work out itself and create that beautiful atmosphere that we do not want to have anybody ruined. But if you shout, people thing that you have to give me today is: in your will run away. Specially in a egoistical society, ralle, in your behaviour in your heart, you will you cannot shout at all, it cannot appeal to them. If you shout in ego oriented society this will distract them and they will run away. And the scond one is that this peace and all people who come there. On the contrary if you do not have this, Ashrams will be reduccd to zero. It has happend in many places. You don't blame me why our Ashrams do not run. am loving, Mother's House: How Mother will treat these you can starve, but give to others kindness and sweetness so that the impression on the people, bless you. This is I give to you, so I have to tell you, that you might be highest of the highest, first reside me with Love. The second thing I have to ask is that you be peaceful. Try to have peace with yourself. I am asking for two things now. It is a Now don't fight with yourself. Now, the western funny thing that Mother has to ask for a gift. The people have one problem that they fight with gift you have to give is the first thing is that themselves. "How is this that this is happening you should express peacefulness through your to me?Iam this !I am So bad! I am no good!" If own character. But it does not mean that you go on fighting with yourself then you will people who are peaceful are timid, or who are not progress. You should say that, "I am so morbid people or who tolerate nonsense. No, good, what's wrong with me? I have got my but the people who are peaceful resistance. realization, what's wrong with me? There is You are not afraid of anything. You are not nothing wrong with me". Have that confidence going to bow down to anything, compromise in oneself, and then it will work out. Not that with anything, but you have that sort of a you start shouting at others, but supposing you temperament you should develop and express understand that there is nothing wrong with you. You have to be peaceful. You all have -is very important. Nirmala Yoga 22

 to be very peaceful. You have seen, my pcace- Sahasrära is open, the heart will open auto- ful nature has solved so many problems just matically, so you will have peaceful life. like that. You have to achieve that peace within you. That peace has not to be lost at any cost, should not be expressed outside, In a eriy established by the end of next year, but LIEO- On my birthday today so that you be prop- My peace itself becomes terrible. You first two conditions should be there. If you are way, don't have that kind of possibility. Don't do not ready for that, God will never give you an it, never do it that way, try to make your fore- Ashram. He does not want to give Ashram to head relaxed. Many pcople come to me with face some funny people. It becomes such that some like that (distorted, twisted face) and I see pcople have no place anywhere, come in the bhoots sitting in their forchead, then I shout Ashram. So unless and until you have people at them, forehead relaxes. "I am not doing it, of that calibre who remain loving and peaceful Mother is doing it". Relax. If you relax you will then the Ashrams will be established. find that your heart also opens out-why can't you open your heart? Because you have no trust in yourself. It will open your Agnya, open your Sahasrāra, and your heart will open. Once the You should be able to have Ashrams in every place. May God bless you. ONE MORE EXAMPLE OF SHRI MOTHER'S COMPASSION In June 1982 Shri Mataji visited Portugal. Many people got realization and the blessings that were showered by the grace of Shri Mataji can not be described here. One of the ladies who got self-realization asked blessings for her son who was in prison and led a life of delinquency from a very early age. She showed the photograph of the boy to Shri Mataji asking : "Mother what can You do for my son !" Her Holiness closed Her eyes and after some seconds declared : 'now he is my son' then told the Sahaja Yogis that only thing we had to do was to raise his Kundalini. Later he was given freedom due to an amnesty. We invited him for meditation at home and raised his Kundalini. Vibrations poured down very strongly and he behaved with the open mind characteristic of a seeker. We bow to the powers of Our Mother Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi. We rejoice in our hearts for the compassion and blessings we are being granted every THoment. It was in full freedom that Kundalini responded to the vibrations of Shri Adi Kundalini. It is in full freedom that we decide to start a completely new life, following the way of Dharma. jo A With the power of our wishes we pray that all our brothers and sisters who get realization accept the blessings that come from Kundalini awakening and from the practice of Sahaja Yoga. With unending love, Jai Shri Mataji. -L. Garrido. Nirmala Yoga 23

 Birthday Celebration AIWAN-E-GHALIB, DELHI 28-3-83 Concept and Reality At the very outset, I would like to thank of helm-of-affairs, are also in charge of the Dr. Nagendra Singhji for being so kind to helm-of-affairs of God. A day will come, when grace this occasion. Actually I have always they will take up their new roles, when they will treated him like my Jyéshtha (es, elder become aware that it is God who rules them, it is brother of husband), and find it difficult even He who does it, it is He who has created every- how to express my gratitude the way he has thing and it is He who enjoys everything. been kind to get this time, come over and talk to you about me, whom he had known for so For this awareness, as you have very kindly said Sir, it's important that you have to be for- tunate seekers. The seeking ultimately has to many years. The day I knew him, I knew that he was a come to human beings. Because all that is very very great soul. But as is in the bureau- done through mental projections and concep- cracy, you are not supposed to discuss religion. tions has one good point that it is always expo- Neither you are supposed to discuss anything that sed and comes to an end. Every set enterprise lies beyond your job. But when I was studying of human beings only moves in a lincar way minutely the various permutations and combinat- and at a point it drops down. That is why, all ions of human problems, I was really always very our conceptions and all our ideas are challeged much encouraged to know that there are people after some time. like him also, His greatness you will know very soon; and his sister about whom he was saying, herself, is another very great soul and the time of democracy or capitalism, we are talking of a I spent with her, I was really so much enamou- concept but not of Reality. For me, I am the red and encouraged to see such a learned per- greatest capitalist I think, because I know my sonality. Like her brother she knew so much of beautiful things about God, and beautiful I am the greatest communist, that despite having things she said from Raghuvansha' and everything in life, I cannot enjoy my life Kälidāsa. or In politics when we talk of communism powers and my properties, and I own them. without sharing it. "Every moment of it, "every' moment of it. I found myself very lonely always, where I could not talk of God and His greatness and His kindness for human beings in the company these ideologies become one at the lotus feet of of people who were doing work other work than your Spirit. Spirit is the only thing that is at of God. It was such a solace and such a hope that the centre, and at the periphery if yon look at people who apparently appear to be in the charge things, they look as if they are separate and So the meeting point only comes when all Nirmala Yoga 24

 different. But if you can approach somehow it is in my 'central nervous system, 'actually' 1 into that state where your Spirit resides, you will feel, that you are a part and parcel of me. When be amazed to see that everything integrates, Doctor Sahab's sister was sitting next to me, everything co-ordinates, and there is no differe- nce, say, in Mohammad Sähab, Dattätréya, her body is part of Me and I am part of her. Rāja Janaka or Shirdi Säi Nath. There is no difference in their principle, if you can just get portion ?" She said, "Yes, how do you know?" your Spirit. But this is a very major step for I said, I cannot tell you at this stage, but you human beings. It is a very major step for will also know the same way. human beings. Because they want to live with concept and not with reality. This is one of the problems which we have faced throughout in the compassion ? Because supposing this finger Sahaja Yoga, all of us have faced it. I 'myself" felt the pain within Myself; because And I asked her, "have you got a pain in this So when nobody is the other, then where is is paining, and if I try to rub it, am I doing any compassion to this finger ?-Because it is a part Even about compassion we have a concept. and parcel of Me. For example, if some body has a hospital and goes to the hospital regularly and treats some patients and does not take money, we think he is a very compassionate person. This is also lop egos or we develop another system by our concept about compassion. Actually when which we feel obliged or anything. But with reality expresses itself as compassion, then you reality you just do it. It just works. You start don't do anything about it. For example, to say speaking in third person. Like you say, "It that I raise your Kundalini, also I don't know does not work out." "It works out". What if I do that. Because you are all ready, you are is this It' that is working it out ? Then you all like candles. I am a candle which is enligh- realise that you are working for that great power tened, and if this candle enlightens another one, of God which is His Divine Love, which is all I do not think I haye done a great job. Because pervading, which is doing all living work and if I am enlightened and then if you are ready you have become part and parcel of it. and if I enlighten your candle, then it is just done. This is what reality is. There is no question of having any humility about it, but ego, which has gone to such an extent that in that is a fact ! I really do not do anything. You the west if you go, you will recognise it much more are all made ready for this purpose. God has prepared you like this, and you just have to very good at hiding it. We may be very egoi- accept yourself, and if this works out in a simple stical, but in our every day-to-day life we are straightforward manner, you get your realiza- extremely humble to express it. tion. So, the difference between the reality and the concept is this: That with concept we deve- Same thing I found about the concept of than you recognise in India. Because we are If you go to a party,-simple thing I will tell you,-and if you don't drink, every body will say "why don't you drink, you must drink,' or they force you, go on forcing you. You say, "Baba, I don't drink. some' lie. You have to tell for this, to hide this thing from others, to achieve a greater goal, you have to give up some lower goals, of telling lies also. You have to say that "Doctor has Many people think that I have cured people so I have done any sort of a good deed or may be some obligation. But to be very frank, that is also a concept. Because what do I do to a person ? When I cure that person, I don't do anything. The reason is : when "I feel that I am yourself, you are a part and parcel of Me," it is not that I feel from my brain, but actually You have to tell 25 Nirmala Yoga

 told me notto drink." "Oh! forget the Doctor." believe in a morul life. In a moral life, where Then if you say that "Now you see, the prob- lem is I have allergies, I get into trouble". moral life. But we don't talk about it till you Somehow, you escape. say that, "Why do you drink?"-Then: "You matically you accept it. are a matron. You are very ego-oriented. You are very interfering. show off." you are married to a woman and lead a 'very get your realization. After realisation auto- But if you even once But by chance if you say that you have to be moral, then they just get after you. They say, "We have achieved our freedom, and this Victorian Lady is telling us some out of date things, and why should we accept." So the concept of ego itself is so funny that they do not know that they are cateching on their Agnya Chakra. You are trying to See the concept of ego is just...!-To be vir- tuous is a problem these days. If you are vir- tuous, everybody will attack you. But if you 'even" mention about virtue, you are out for a crucifixion, or you are out for poisoning, or something people will do. Because of the con- cept of ego. In this great assembly of realized souls,- which is a very very great thing, to have so But in Sahaja Yoga, ego is not a concept but many saints sitting around,-you know that a reality. Because when a person becomes ego- the ego means the catch of the Agnya chakra istical his Agnya chakra cateches, so he comes and it is a reality. Somebody may say, I to the Sahaja Yoga centre and says, "Now see, my Agnya has caught up". He says, "I am suffering from ego disease." Openly, without soul, he will say "Mother, I have got my feeling shy about it ! Because it is like a saree Agnya chakra catching, you please take it away, which is now become black, so I Because it becomes a reality to him. And when cleaned. He is not identified. Concepts give it becomes a reality, you must know you are you all misidentifications with 'everything. So enlightened. when it comes to reality, all this misidentifications just drop our and that is why I have seen people when there is light you start "seeing' what is fransform sofast. I mean, you connot believe wrong with you. You start sceing that we are it, how people transform. Now as Dr. Warren has told you that in hall is going to cause problem to 'all of us'. west, we have lots of seekers, but the western civilization is the civilization of the tree. They scious' within yourself. are growing without their roots. While we Indians know about the roots, we are not In the United Nations and everything I have bothered. They are not at all in the knowledge seen, that it is only they are working on the of their roots. The trouble is, they have be- come so ego-oriented that their concept of ego cious. But in reality they haven't got it on makes them forget that they have roots. Even their central nervous system, as you all have got to accept that they have roots, they find it it. They will say, "All right, you are brothers impossible. Under these circumstances what and sisters, we must help the nations, we must do happens, that the ego itself reacts on itself. And this," and all that. But when it comes to rea- that is why all the western societies today are lity, when it comes to the working of it, you collapsing under that pressure of ego. But if find they do not do it. They just do the other you have to talk to them it is not possible to way round. Now, you cannot explain, you may tell them. For example, in Sahaja Yoga we write books after it and you may write dogmas have no ego". Alright you have nonel Because better not say. But supposing he is a realized better get it But If it is all darkness, you do not see: 'Any' problem to this sitting under one roof. And that is how you become "collectively con- This is also another concept people have. 15 concept which they got it from their Uncons- Nirmala Yoga 26

 expression of love and the waves of this ocean of and you may write many articles about it, But actually they just can't do it, by temperament, because they are not SPIRIT. love expressed all over the world. Even if you meet 'one' single Sahaja Yogi But when you becomes the Spirit, the Spirit, somewhere, you will be amazed the way he leads his life. And the way he is so beautiful, reality, the concept becomes your awareness. In that he impresses people immediately. Though your chetana (taa) you start feeling others some people do try to trouble him. But God *within' yourself. So what is there, from Canada looks after Sahaja Yogis,-is a fact. And Sahaja or from Australia, I feel when these people meet Yogis all of you know, how He looks after and the way they love each other, the way they enjoy how He just tries to protect youin a very simple being the colleetive conseiousness itself is the and bcautiful way. each other. When these Westerners go to the small villages in India, the way the villagers just em- To know God 'itself" is such a great' bless- brace them, and the way they become one with ing, because He is the God Almighty. The God who has all the powers' and all the loved ones. He is our Father, He is waiting for us to enter lies about each other. But just a meeting of into His Kingdom, to enjoy that peace and these people, like a huge family ! The whole beauty of His Being, because He has created us system of joy giving and enjoying, is 'so' beauti- and He wants this creation to come up to that. Today, the great day of होनिका दहन (Holiki Dahana), where the symbolism of this occasion each other, we have never seen people going into politics, fighting with each other or saying ful that even to watch that itself is like warching a very beautiful drama of Krishna's Leelā ! I have seen this happening in all the parts is that the Satanic forces were burnt by the innocence of Prahlada. And that is what we of the country. When people come from across they may be Muslims, Hindus, whatever they have to remember, that when the Sahaja Yogis are, the friendship and the love and the fond- take to innocence and complete dependence on to ness to do for others, is so great that people their VIBRATORY AWARENESS, which is the are surprised that how can it be that these indication of God's Manifestation through them, people who are living together like this are so they are 'completely' protected, and even a sata- nic person like Holika could not burn him. And this is the day today, we have to recognize that as Sahaja Yogis we stand no dangers in life. We are fearless people, but we are humble pcople, loving people and anxious to sare as many as possible. To raise the whole humanity into another awareness, in the process of your evolu- tion you have to achieve, for which you have to work hard. As Tukārāma has said very clearly: much helpful to each other, so much loving to cach other. They never quarrel, they never talk against cach other. There is no question of people who will try to cut each other's throat. Because the competition is in loving more, the competition is in giving more, the competition is in understanding. There is no problemin the society of Sahaja Yoga. Sir, you will be happy to know, though our society is not so large. Compared to this uni- verse, ours is a very small society. But you will be amazed we 'never' have problems which normal people have. We are really abnormally normal. Because we have no angularities, we have no problems. People have become so honest, so courageous, so bold, so loving, so giving, I am myself sometimes,-I feel so enamoured by this "Yéryā gabādyāché Käm nohé." -This is the work of the Great Virās. Only the courageous can do it. Because you know, how sometimes one has to face this world,-the difficulties and critici- sms-,and how people try to insult you and trouble you, where you have to keep your peace. As realized souls, I congratulate you Nirmala Yoga 27

 very much. So many realized souls are sitting here today is the greatest honour for any She is a Yoga Bhoomi. And as Indians, you Mother. To my great country India, I bow, because have a 'special advantage, because as I told you My age is now quite a lot, as you know, and that Ashtu-vināyakas, all are here, all the I 'never' felt ten years back, that within ten Jyotirlingas are here, allthe Adi Shakti's Peethas years I will see 'so' many people being realized. are here, all the three and a half Peethas of the My father, as I told you, was a very great soul Kundalini are in Maharashtra. All of you and he himself had told me that unless and until you find out a en masse method of realiza- We have to get from the West, and that is the tion, you should not talk about it. Because great Saints that are born in the West. It is unless and until it is en masse, people are not going to recognize God, nor they are going to once they take to Sahaja Yoga, they really recognize any saints. But today, when it has dedicate themselves and they think there is become the reality, when it is no more a con- nothing more needed to be done. This is what cept: God is no more a concept, it is the reality. their life is. The way they have worked in the joy and happiness of your Spirit, Sacchida- Australia, I was amazed! There are five centres, nand Sthiti ( , the state of Truth, they have started, and 'every centre, is doing Attention and Bliss) is just manifested, and I so well, that it is amazing to see how these am enjoying all that. I do not know how to thank you for years back, can you believe it ! And he took organizing the birthday of your Mother. Nor- Sahaja Yoga to Australia, and today you find mally people don't think of the Mother in Kaliyuga, they say. But I must tell you, there is one person sitting before you, Dr. Nagendra of them who got realization 'settled down' in Singh, who was a great devotee of his mother, Sahaja Yoga. Absolutely settled. and his mother was a realized soul, a great realised soul. I met her many a times and I always made it a point to see her. And her you being Indians get realization very fast, no children have got that from her. know all about it. But there is something more most surprising that they are "very' saintly, and people,-Warren got his realization only two "so many'. In a hall,-I spoke, there were four to six hundred people. Not only that, but all So the same way one has to feel. Though doubt, much faster than them. You have much And this is what one has to recognize, that greater facility, because of your 'Punyas' (works in this world there are "many people who are of merit) you are born in this Punya Bhoomi. basically very great Spirits. Only thing you But still, one has to know that in Sahaja Yoga have to approach them, find themout, understand you have' to work out in such a way that this them, and discover them. Sahaja Yoga becomes a Maha Yoga as predi- ted by Gyaneshwara. Now Sahaja Yogis are not so much upset as they were about 10 years back. Now they know that there are many people in this world who understand Sahaja Yoga, But that is not sufficient. We have to give realization to many. in My lifetime I will be able to see that you thousands and thousands of people have to get have achieved that great state within yourself realization. This is to prove, when you celeb- and without, that people would say that the Mahā rate my Birthday, that this is not any more a Kaliyaga but KRITA YUGAhas started, and that Krita yuga has to be finished now to bring the Satyuga, on this earth. I am sure with all your love and affection for each other, for me, 'and' for the whole humanity, Yoga has really been accomplished by Sahaja Yogis. May God bless you. Nirmala Yoga 28

 Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Understanding the Love of God Public Programme Caxton Hall, London LI.5.83 For the last so many lectures we have been moncy and all these concepts are your own. saying that you cannot pay for God's love. It He didn't make this world to get any fruits out makes me laugh sometimes. of it; nothing. He just made it because He loved. He wanted to express His love, just to Human beings can never understand His manifest that love, he made this world. There love, because they live in a very limited sphere. is 'nothing' else expected. And to put the His love is unlimited, His forgiveness is unlimi- ted, even this word 'unlimited, and infinite', we do not understand, because we have not known understanding how forgiving He is, how kind anything like that. And to say that something He is, how nice He is. is genuine is also like certifiying something that is genuine, you don't need a certificate. Even that human beings don't understand. We live West-always, even with artificialities, we try to find the truth, problem I faced, was that human beings feel again we accept artificiality as truth, again we guilty. And this guilt is such a big problem in go on fighting, then we think this is the truth, the West, I just don't understand ! You see, again that turns out to be something artificial why to feel guilty so much, and that is one of thing or some sort of a mental projection. human mind at that level is an impossibility, I find in the beginning. But gradually they start So the first problem I have to face in the in Paris this was the the hurdles of Sahaja Yoga, I have seen, that people start feeling guilty to such an extent All these limited endeavours of human that they don't believe that they can get reali- beings, and the experiences they have, made sation. They think they are sinners, born, them so conditioned that it is not easy to under- outright, permanently-branded as sinners, stand God. He made all this universe in His and they can never get their realisation. I compassion and love. He created you as human beings also, in His compassion and love. self pity also. I would say it's even self-destru- He doesn't need any thing. But He loves. And ctive. you can't understand a person who loves beyond any reason, without any reward. Just loves, for love's sake. We can't think of 'one' human vishuddhi, because I felt that I must one day being like that who can love, only for love's speak on this subject, "that this is absolutely sake. Only after realization, as you grow more and more, you realise that loving is the what ? Guilty for what ? If you ask yourself greatest joy, And then you cannot think of you say "Oh, we are guilty, because we cruci- money in relation to Him, its something you fied Christ".-At is the say,-but I think even to say this "we don't maximum guilt a human being can say on his need money" or "we don't take money," itself head. "We crucified Christ, we tortured all is so low level, its so much gross. Because mean just they brand themselves. It is beyond Today I have taken the subject of left- not intelligible to God that you are guilty". For the most.That the saints"; alright. But by being guilty what Nirmala Yoga 29

 do you get? Do you get Him back ? Can you-even when you were born you never you go back and correct that situation ? You knew what was the pain of the birth; your mother took over, -He has made you a human being, so carefully, delicately built you up. For what? What is the fruit of this beautiful flower ? Why the flower starts eating itself ? Have you ever heard of anyone like that ? This is the worst disease with which we in the West suffer. cannot. But harping upon that, you do get into your subconscious mind. a position where you are no more normal to reccive the love of God. You recede into a You get into corner of your mind which is darkness, which is ignorance, which is blindness, where you cannot receive that beautiful ray, that eternal flow that is coming in. You hide your Self at number of people that we have here today the back and then you say "What about the surprisingly. But all of them had the same sun ? I cannot receive it, because I don't problem, and I think all their psychologists, deserve it", Behind all this ego-orientation psychoanalysts, we can say all books, all the in the West,-though I think I wish they were purely egoistical-they're not. All this ego recedes back into that little pouch, what we everybody accepts them; and they curse call the guilt. You say something to somcone. It's not saying that point at that stage that so many wrinkles on their forehead. And if "I've said it, all right, I've said it and I take the you ask them they will say," Mother, we are responsibility, it's good", not that. But you very unhappy people". Just like asking un- come back home and "Oh God, I should not happiness to come and decorate you. have said that". IS. French-yes. We had at least double the writers, the philosophers, 'everyone has done to them-They have given these ideas and themselves morning till evening, walking with But it has a subtler meaning of which peo- ple are not aware. These are the times when So you wobble between one kind of action into another kind, from say,-into an aggres- vou have to get vour realisation, this mass real- sive to the another one of a receding type. And fsation has to work out,-is all prophecised.- this wobbling really is very very troublesome. And these are very impartant times. All the It can go on too much, the oscillation could be so much that it can make you absolutely is helping us. All the elements are helping frantic, diffident, and sometimes useless. stars are acting to help us. The whole universe us. We are on the stage. But when the actors On the contrary, God wants to find human arrive on the stage they are finished, they can't beings who are cheerful people, who are happy act, they can't do anything, they can't play people, who are thankful to Him for His bles- sings. The most unhappy animal in this world is different roles. And that is why one has to a human being. Can you believe it ! Ani- understand the subtler effect of it, then only mals don't know happiness and unhappiness, you will get rid of this guilt. is also a good point. But the most unhappy human being and the most complicated human forces. They are not less than any atomic being has become so over self-destructive that . Now what is a destruction force is built within himself. their game. They are so involved with their You are playing into the hands of negative bombs built within yourselves. the way it works out, I think people don't realise; it's a very subtle method. Now think of that force that has built you up into a human. How with care and love, without your knowledge, without troubling Let's see, the atomic bomb, Hydrogen bomb, what do we do with that? 30 Nirmala Yoga

 They will separate something which should possibile if you can somelhow or other get to not be separated. We break atom, which is that integrating fcrce which is still there and its not divisible, into it's divisible parts. So we I would say, put a pressure to break them and when that breaking force,-that's aggression I would say, forces have set in motion, of which you may is worked out, that becomes another destruc- tive force. So whatever effort we have put you don't know what darkness is there. And into that, multiplies,-its not the same force.- and that we use for our destruction. I mean, this only human beings can do,to create things to destroy ourselves. But this force which works ample, there is complcte darkness, alright? I within our minds, within our selves within our being, where we actually really hate ourselves- where you are sitting, we are all so separated, sometimes I feel, the way we are destroying our- selves,. This force we build within ourselves, thanks to many non-sensical writers and con- ditioners and people who talk of conditioning, hold this and say this is the truth. All really condition you much worse. quite dim. Thai's the last chance, now, that has to be. The way the negative be not aware at all, you may not be aware, - to fight it what one has to da is to bring in that light of the Spirit which integrates. Darkness always disintegrates. For ex- can't feel you, I don't know who you are, I can't see I don't know who the people are who are there, I would not know where is the window, where is the door. I will disintegrated personalities: and disintegrated You should be singing and chirping like people always see aberrations, they see diffe- a bird, you should be laughing and enjoying rent things, different auras, different things. like a flower. While you find human beings Now it's a very vicious circle. Just think of all looking so very unhappy. What's the it: It's a very great vicious circle we have: reason? The reason is JUH are separated The vicious circie is, that we try to think about fronm your own being. The being that integrates it, which is limited. Supposing I have a limited vision, there's darkness, what will I fee? You start thinking about it and thinking about it, you, you are completely disintegrated. When you disintegrate an hydrogen atom, you form a very big force built into it. In the same way pondering over it. The more you think about you are disintegrating your being,-your phy- it, the worse it becomes. Another way could be people may try to solve this problem: to another side, your spiritual being on another think that we are disintegrated, is to talk of side. There's no integrating part. And when big things. "We are all brothers and sisters, you connot feel that integration, you feel let's form U.N. council, let's do world organisa- guilty, but that guilt is just a symptom of a tion." All blind people doing world organisation will end up at the most as a labour... what you call, labour department, That's all. With all This is the way we are guing to destroy these institutions working in the big name, ourselves. No other way. Our destruction is where are we? Actually when we become aware, we don't need them. We don't need sical being on one side, your mental being on very big destructive force built-in. not going to come to us from outside, that can be controlled. It's going to come from within, at all. within ourselves. Everything we do now after disintegration, is further disintegration, or fur- So this awareness is nothing but is the ther building up that negative force within light of the Spirit within you which is missing. The Spirit is watching you alright. It goes up to a point, It sees your stupidity and üp to a very great extent I should say-and it's ourselves. But to integrate it, to make rou feel com- plete integration with all your being, is only your limitedness,-and it goes 31 Nirmala Yoga

 finished. It disappears and a person dies, or he told and prescribed and has been prophecised, gets into trouble, He becomes crazy, mad, nobody seeks it. No one seeks it. See now whatever you call it. He develops other disea- in the Bible. You have to be born again, ses like cancer, which are caused by another Christ is to be born in your heart.' I mean, problem here, as you know of Ekädasha. they do it, even before solving the whole drama they do it, of giving you second birth, by So these forces are built within us of "Christening" you so-called. Hindus believe negativity, when we go to the extremes f that without yoga there is no sense, "Yoga of negativity. kshéma Vahamyaham" Krishna has said, that all the time that you seek yoga, what are you seeking? All these treatise and all the big books and all these scriptures are aiming at what? Even those who talk "you must live with dharma, you must live balanced lives." For what? Why do we đo it? What is the destination?-And the destination is the Spirit. can develop it, And there are 'so many things And today the background is so black and so that can create this, that sometimes one would dark that this solution is the end of everything. So in the Kundalini shāstra (scienee) we can say that the left and right side when nsed too much, you build up these forces in the head, of cleven rudras, of the eleven destructive forces. A cancer patient develops it, but even before developing cancer, people feel in this vicious circle, that how are you But do we realise this? going to patch up the whole sky? On the contrary the vicious circle builds in within us. All the time, "Oh, see how the And there's 'only one' thing that will save the situation-is Self-realisation. All other things world is miserable. How can I be happy. I am are destroying, are absolutely contusing. But so unhappy in life." I have yet to come across there is only 'one' thing if you can do it saves the whole. Like putting on the light, finished. But people don't understand the importance of might say I am happy, meaning my ego is, you Self realisation because some people ask me, "What's the use of getting the cool breeze in the hands?" Now see the big canvas of the whole thing, the whole cosmos is in a jeopardy. vicious circle is set in, this ego-oriented circle See what's happening to human beings today, and if they are to be saved no use being un- happy. Like in France they said "Mother, vicious circle, we go on, from one to another, you cannot say you are a very happy person, I said, "why? "Because that means you are ignorant, of the shocks."* You see I have to say I am very unhappy, you see! I had to paint some lines here to show that I am very "deeply' concerned, you know, worried" about the whole world! But what is the solution have you got? You want me to weep like you lust and greed, then that is God's love within us, only? Is that the solution? That if ten people That He is the embodiment of that Pure Love are weeping you also join them weeping. Is which just loves, which has given you this beau- that the solution? And the one and only tiful human life and wants to make you more' method that we have, which has been already heautiful. He created all tihis creation for you a person before realisation saying that I am a happy person. May be ego-oriented people see if he goes in a smart car or something like that, he is very happy, on top of the world. After ten minutes you see him. And this or another one, it sets in. Another vicious circle and another vicious circle, and another moving on the wheels after wheels. Without realising where we are going. And vicious circle has to be broken, by one faith, by one understanding: "That God is forgiveness, God is love". this When we feel love for anyone without any Nirmala Yoga 32

 and that He wants you to enjoy the counties of the forest how he lives, one should go and of this creation. He wants you to enjoy as the citizens of His realm and the kingdom of His sce. But he's happy, he's full of joy. Oh, he has to kill an animal he'll kill it, with his dignity cat one or two days, finished. Then he lives for ten days without food. Whenever he feels Grace. 6Do we go to see someone who is highly hungry, he goes. He's not bothered. He doesn't placed with a morose face, do we? we will specially brush our hair, make our hair into a beautiful thing, make our face nice, dress up well to look that we are well. But that's outside. Inside if we just feel "how kind He is, how He has worked out meticu- lously this blissful life of a human being". I done everything beautifully. After realisation mean, think, how much He's done for us: you start understanding your Self and enjoy- Instead of that if you are all the time going to say," "I am very unhappy in life." I mean, think of someone who does everything for you, is the "only way' you can get the light in. Enli- and you just come back saying," "Oh, I am, a Very unhappy person". What is He going to feel about it? No gratitude. That day feel guilty for killing anybody, he's hungry, he has to cat, hc cats finished. But human beings are, they will cat someone without the need, and then feel guilty. This is the problem. He has made you in His own image. He has ing your Self as you enjoy others. The fragra- nce of others you start enjoying. Self-realisation ghtenment. Everybody talks of enlightenment. Enlight- enment for some people is that you start jump- Count your blessings one by one, that's ing. Is it enlightenment to be abnormal like what one has 10 do. Is to have complete under that? Or take out your clothes? I mean, just standing that He is God Almignty, He can do anything that He likes. And we are the reci- understand. That doing all these non sensical pient of His All Might. He is the Ocean of things how can that be enlightenment? Or tak- love, and 'we' are the recipient of His love. ing to alchohols, drinking, or drugs, or any- Let us feel that within ourselves, and under- thing, how can it give your enlightenment? Has stand logically with wisdom. If this sets into your it given to anyone so far. It might to be some mind, I think that's the best conditioning human beings can hae. What you call in sanskrit but not enlightenment. In enlightenment you get the "susanskāra", means the auspicious condi- integrated, you see your way through, you know tionings. You see we don't have only condition- where you are standing and how yau are moving ing and ego, we have a third thing also called in relationship to others. good-conditioning. The conditionings that have ruined your chances of enjoyment, let it be brought round, and see for yourself. Logi- wise method, the way we deal with life, becomes cally you can see how much He's done for a kind of a possession, and we are possessed by you. think how does it go into their brains. I can't sort of funny strange experience you might get, So the illogical method, I would say, un- that negative force which is eating us off. And we go on living with that idea, enjoying that I mean, none of the animals were that idea that we are miserable people, or we are comfortable, as you are, they don't know the unhappy, we are helpness. I mean, I have seen idea of comfort, I mean they've never had people sitting on the streets and discussing, even ehairs to sit down. It's easy to say nice to be like animals, but just go and see the way stars coming in and we will all be destroyed". they live, poor things. You know, even the King I mean, just imagine! "Oh Thank God! there are going to be eight Im 33 Nirmala Yoga

 But we have to think about the one who has created us. Is He waiting for your destruc- tion? Will He be happy with that? How much are we co-operating with Him? With what care, and love He's created ns, with what hopes, whatever it is. What does He want to do for us, that we are sitting down feeling guilty. And now I have to tell openly, that it has come to you also through other vehicles, apart from the psychologists, psychoanalysts. He has created you in your own glory, and in your own dignity. He's not created you to be only wasted like this. Then the second thing that disintegrates us Very much more is the idea that we are here to live in a gross way. Somehow fighting, political economic, all this nonsensical progress that we are making. And everything is explained, all destructive forces are explained in the name of political or economic growth. I don't know if it is growth, or whatever it is, but definitely it is not love. Take it from me. It is not love, That is why the economics of God is to be Psychoanalysts! The other day we had a girl. She came to see me. She is French, her English was wonderful. And she said The psychologists, they made me mad." I said, why? understood. Politics of God is to be under- "They said I have bad relationship with my mother, bad relationship with my father. bad they must have Self-realisation. relationship with every third person. I don't have, I have absolutely pure relationship. They He enjoys His generosity. Material things are tried to put that idea into my head that there's to express your generosity, isn't it? What are something abnormal, pathological about me, they for? The most enjoyable thing is to 'give', which I'm not. And they are making my brother's relationship also funny by telling him problems will be solved completely. Because that I have bad relations with him". This is it. She hit at the point of pure love. Disinte- The problems are because you want to grab. grate. You can't have good relationship with your own mother, with your own father, with your own sister, with your brother, nobody. is no joy, there is no happiness, there is no re- Because you cannot love except that you are sexpoints, you have just relationship of sex. giving is the way you can get rid of that mate- Even animals have better relationships than we have, if you have to accept these psychologists. away. Give away everything hat you have and they take money to suggest all these non- sensical ideas into your head. There are some sitting here, I will face them later on. stood. And for human beings to understand it THE In His economics, generosity is the key note. and when you give you will see your economic you are here to give not take. No problems. And once you start giving you get it as much as you want, because if there is no outlet, there lief from the material domination on you. But rial domination on your head that you give and you will be surprised how it flows. Now when 1 say it is fantastic the way it acts, fantastic the way it acts, I mean its easy to sort of say that Mother is saying something which is something miraculous. But what do you think of Moses crossing the sea? You mean it was miraculous, or it was a false story, what do you think of it? It was absolutely true, that he did cross the sea, with the help of God, he could do it. What about Christ walking on the water? He did, beeause by His nature he did it. What about all the miracles that were done by This is how they put in ideas into your heads that you are a person who has no purity, and that you are a sinner, you are a damned person, and any person you look upon you have only sex relationship, nothing else. I mean are we sexpoints? With 'all' this evolution God has made us into a sexpoint-that's what we have done to ourselves. Reduced ourselves to that point only. 34 Nirmala Yoga

 these incarnations. It's absolutely true. I am here point the Agyä Chakra, where you see the to prave all af them. But you must get your crossing of it, you have to say Lord's prayer. Realisation. Not before that, I can't prove it. You have to take the name of Christ, other- wise Kundalini doesn't rise. Now most of the You must enter into that realm of awareness, otherwise I cannot prove it, It's true. The other people who are here, who are realised know this. It has been proved to them. In the Nabhi, I said, "How do you say?" He said "Because in this Void if it is hanging, you have to take he looks like a fiction". I said, to human mind the name of Moses, whether youare jew or not or they cannot understand God, who has millions you are hater of Jews or whatever you may be, and millions of hands and eyes to workout his you have to take the name of Moses. The whole movemeni of the Kundalini is to integrate all the truths which are treated as miraculous. Some day somebody was saying that Rama is afiction. plan. So naturally Rāma is a fiction Krishna is a fiction, everybody is a fiction. Because we ourselves are ficticious I think. It's not that it people think it's falsehood, is good for noth- is a fiction but we are 'incapable' of grasping ing, useless, -all these things are proved by the that is miraculous, which is divine, and that's movement of the Kundalini in your Central No. Everything path. And the greastest, and greatest thing that is proved is that God exists, not only exists but He is active, that be does 'everything for us, that it is He who is the truth and is His why he just call it, "Oh! ." is true. Believe me, everything is true. Now Rama's case let us take. Simple thing like Räma's. Alright? Räma is a fiction. Many Power, the Brahma is the truth. The rest is all of our Indians are very anglicised now very falschood and nonsense, It works in all details, westernised. So they want to say "we don't in small details also. Now Sahaja Yogis have want to believe in all this fiction", so they become English you see. For them to become explain. You cannot explain also. When you English is the last epitome, you see, the last become realised you are surprised how you are word. So we don't believe in Răma nothing, helped, how you meet people, how you get to you see, it's all our old style of thinking. But things, how things work out, and how it He exists, and He is within us. Can be proved works out so smoothly, you just can't imagine. with your Kundalini awakening. A person who Even to the smallest detail it can work out has got "asthama", catches on the right heart. "beautifully'. You have to take the name of Rama to cure him, nothing else can cure him. It's simple. The Kundalıni stops here. Many people don't believe the kingdom of God, not with these fanatical in Christ."We don't believe in Christ". You don't ideas. Like you go to the catholic church and believe in Christ, but under what circumstances? they say, Now you must confess". I don't Why? Why don't you believe in Christ? "Be- cause we don't think he existed. How can it be think that Christ would have ever said that you possible? We do not believe in Moses, we don't better go and confess to these priests who are believe in Christ, we don't believe in anyone". Alright. Do you believe in yourself? Perhaps do by confession7 that is missing, Because the Self is not there. If you know your Self, you will believe in them. Because when Kundalini rises, at this priest. I asked hini. He is a nice man, he is a point-you will be amazed,-at this point realised soul now, and he is working for Sahaja whether you believe in Christ or not, at this Yoga. But he told me. scen the mirncles of Sahaja Yoga. They cannot But you have to be establish your self in know where did they get this idea. I don't even not realised souls. What are they going to And then the answer came to me from a "The reason is, in the 35 Nirmala Yoga

 Bible, it is written, that whatever is corrected this is the truth". No, see for yourself what is on this earth will be corrected in the heaven, that's why you better correct it by telling to all One, Like Christ has said, "Those who are the priest." Now, by 'any' logical means, do you think this priest can correct you telling them Moses and Christ are one, which can be prov- anything? Whatever is to be corrected on this ed. Same in other religions. earth is your Kundalini, and your chakras. the truth, and you will be anazed that they are Who are they'? not against me are with me", So religion is another way to disintegrate you. You hate each other, fundamentalists The language of the Bible has been--spec- fighting. For what? Fundamental difference, ially the Old testament-has been extremely you know! Can you just imagine what is the guarded. It was a security measure. Like "the fundamental of these religions? Is the Spirit, tree of life" is nothing but the Kundalini isn't it? Is there difference between the Spirit of one and another? Fundamentals are: "That God is one. He has created us." And what are you fighting about? Fundamental difference, you know fundamental difference! Where there which is enligbtened. Absolutely it is that, it looks like that, like a tree. The other day they were having a program- me, I think today only, my children showed me, "Look, the Kundalini". I went and saw. They were describing about Moses something perhaps and this was the tree of life they said. And my exists no difference at all. So we have psychologists, we have 'religious leaders teaching us how to fight and hate God, and you, and fellow beings, in the name of God. This is another disintegrating thing that sets into us. So you people who are thinking, should grandchildren said, "See the Kundalini". The language used may be, for security measures may be but not a word, if it not changed by understand that "anything that creates such limi- human beings, is false. Human being can change also. That's a different point. But you can see, in Sahaja Yoga you can see what is changed, what is wrong, which is falschood, you can see all these things. tation within us, any kind of fanaricism, is dang- erous not only to you, but to the whole society, and if you support it even this much you are supporting that destruction. With Sahaja Yoga we ean establish this that anybody who is a fanatic has problems, suffers from many disea- ses which normal people don't. So to disintegrate you, these things are again created in the name of religion so called. I mean these people are here for God or for Then there are another type of people who making you feel guilty? Like, say, Jews think say that "Alright, we don't believe in God, that Christ was not a saviour. They are still because how can God create this fanaticism. How can you blame God for fanaticism! I just waiting for two hundred years. It's not true. He is the one without him you 'cannot raise can't understand. He never created it. Actually the Kundalini. One should understand that he He never created any difference between you people, just a variety, just to make it look beautiful, that's all. See He didn't create Eng- land separately, this separately, to 'that' extent the way you think. But he created them beca- use they are different organs in the body of God. Do we take out an eye and say "this is an eye", so I do not have anything to do with is the Mahāvishnu described. But if I say something, that doesn't mean that you should believe me, not at all, but you should see for yourself. Because if you are inte- rested in the emancipation of the whole world, you should not get stuck on to one idea, stuck on to one thing and say, “This is the truth and it. Can we? Nirmala Yoga 36

 It is like that ! It's simple as that, its so once that higher freedom comes into you, then simplel The truth is so simple, and so starkingly you can feel the responsibility. The responsibi- before you. That we are doing all these things: lity to be responsible for your freedom. To put fighting, quarrelling, all the time within oursel- this beautiful responsibility onto you, you have ves and without. to know how to use your freedom. Tetialo Now for that, Self realisation, God has B This is only transition which has led all of us into this feeling-guilty business or this aggr- ession, can you imagine? If you could have waited for a while without feeling so sick, I mean sometimes. I feel the people are going for a funeral, the way they look. Miserable. The rest are busy creating such people. So there are only two types of people one sees,-some who placed this wonderful thing Kundalini within us, very beautifully, in the best possible posi- tion. It could not be better anywhere. To create this happening within us, in our awareness, the Kundalini has to rise and give us realisation. Now people ask questions to God also: can be. They can say, Why did He do it? Why are being victims and some who are victimis- didn't He make us wise to begin with? There ing- are many like that. He should have just made u$ wise, just from monkeys dipped into some wisdom powder, and pushed us out, as "wise people living in the kingdom of God." Why freedom. He gave you freedom to know. And didn't he do it in our evolution, why did he make us so stupid? One can say to God, you all the problems you face, not God. God has see, why did he create these problems!" But not created any problems for you. No, He who are we to ask him questions? He does what He likes. So to have the balance in the centre, to stand in the centre, God has created this little time where you have to just learn how to weigh your this freedom is the only thing that has created wanted to make a very smooth ascent. He has made your machine so beautifully. But, there's a reason. If you have to enter into that 'complete freedom' you must know no doubt. But because of habits, you may run how to be free. If you are just abandoned down again into it, again you may have an as- people, you have no sense of freedom you don't cent, again go down. It happens with some know how to be choosy about the good and people, doesn't matter. But if you are steady, the bad and you do not understand the value it is going to work out. It has to work out. God of your own wisdom,-and if you are put in has to save His cereation. He has to do it. Only charge. Imagine some mad people put it charge thing, how many are going to cooperate and of a government, what will happen? So you take advantage of His compassion is to be have to 'grow' up to that point, to Jeel your free- seen. That is the most important thing, how dom, that in your freedom you are righteous, in many are going to be wise', to see to 'their that freedom you are kind, in that freedom you own' advantage, to their own ascent, is the only are absolutely balanced. And when that happens choice to you, then only the higher freedom is given to you. Because that is completely free. And Despite all this you do get your realisation, TIO May God Bless you. 37 Nirmala Yoga

 Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi For Doctors Brighton 26.7.84 The Fourth Dimension and the parasympathetic Now when he controls the parasypmpathetice he controls the supply to all the centres through certain movements, through certain kind of technique. For example, some person is suffering from a disease of the heart. Now, a normal person who does not have this fourth dimension will not know that he is suffering The Fourth dimension that they mention about, what do they mean by that ?.. (They call that Transcendental state) –They cannot describe it. But what? 15 Supposing somebody has a low heart-beat, low pulse-rate, or has a low consumption of exygen or anything,-that's not a transcenden- from some heart trouble. He will have no tal state because you are still in a state where your attention is on your body. So it is not transcendental. You have to "trans,-trans- cendental means you have to jump on to the parasympathetic. idea. He will never feel his heart or anything- till he suddenly gets the attack, and then he dies. But at the very onset of it a person who is in the fourth dimension, that is, a realised soul, can feel that something is going wrong with his heart. Also he knows how to cure himself-the technique of curing himself. Also he knows that he is the source of the medi- cines that he has to give,- is a vital thing. You see, we have 4 dimensions, you can say. One is the dimension of the left sympa- thetic, another is of the right sympathetie, then we have got the central nervous system, which is our conscious mind, and the fourth one is the parasympathetic. So this is the fourth dimension, is a great potential becoming a kinetic force, like a egg becoming a bird. So the egg.-we can see the egg has no way of flying out. There's a tremendous difference between an egg and a bird. So such a person who gets realization and gets established, is no more a person who can be tested with these machines and all that, because these machines deal only In Sahaja Yoga we jump on to the para- sympathetic--means, your attention starts cont- rolling the parasympathetic nervous system. But a bird can. Now how do we prove it, that we become the 4th dimension ? First thing is, the person who becomes the with the physical side. controller of the parasympathetic becomes the auto. He can do things. He can do things, like he can tell that another person is suffering is a realised soul can test another person. You on these centres. Without going to any labo- don't use any machine for that. He becomes ratory, without going to any medical check-up. the one who diagnoses, he becomes the one On the fingertips. So the person who becomes who cures, he becomes the person who can the 4th dimension, he becomes the auto, which soothe. Not only that,-on physical level. But is the autonomous nervous system, you see, the somebody who is emotionally disturbed, then auto part of it. He controls the parasympa- such a person knows precisely which centre is thetic. But it is he who can test. Even a child who disturbed. He also knows how to put that Nirmala Yoga 38

 centre right. You do not have to go to the cure human beings, but not people who are lunatic asylum to get cured, But a person who abnormal-there is no word for that, but has fourth dimension can cure that person of satanic people. So that's how it does not work out in some people. Also the cases which have gone very down, onto the state where we can say now absolutely out of order, then Sahaja So all the diseases which are only physical Yoga allows such a body to take another birth, that sickness, because he precisely knows where the trouble is, and how to put it right. can be cured, which are psychosomatic can be and try. cured, the combination of both can be cured. Any combination of these things can be cured by a person who is an established Sahaja Yogi. So, because it is a fourth dimension, we can not take medical science as a vehicle to express everything, because this is higher than that. But in many ways we can medically show that people have been cured of Asthma, of Cancer, of Leukaemia, of everything, through the vehicle t But in case a disease has gone so far that it is irrepairable, or something artificial has been introduced in the body, as they put steel-sticks and all that,-then Sahaja Yoga does not work on dead things, it works on living. If the organ is still living, it can work out. But if it is not living, then it does not work out. of parasympathetic nervous system,-which doctors cannot handle. Because they have their. own limitation,-they cannot jump on to the parasympathetic nervous system. And that is why they cannot cure a patient who has prob- lems of parasympathetic. It works out on 80% of people. But the 20% of people on whom it cannot work out are the people who do not have the basic foundation to be a human being. They are sympathetic in case the basic conditions-if like animals. Their attitudes are like animals. they are fulfilled. All problems can be solved through para- even worse than animals. In medical science, people will even treat Hitler. There is no discrimination. But as you So a state that could be the so-called' 4th dimension, would be where a person would be no more a human being. He becomes either a devil, or Satanic person. This has to be accepted by medical science that there are people who can be very devilish, and they can- not ascend any further into the 4th dimension. grow higher and higher, even in evolution, you become more discreet. And at this stage you cannot treat a person who is a hypocrite, or who is a cruel man, or who is aggressive to others, or who is practising methods to subvert people-as we have many gurus who take money and destroy many people, just for The fourth dimension is not a mechanical money's sake. Such people cannot go to 4th process, but it is a living process of the evolu- dimension, why should they talk about the 4th tion by which you evolve to a higher being. But for that you have to have some basic foun- dations. dimension ? Such people have to be something so extra- ordinary that they become righteous, virtuous, A person who is an alcoholic, can be cured compassionate, and very dynamic people. of alcohol, but a person who is cheating him- They have the greatest quality, is of compas- self, cheating other people, is cruel to others- sion, which though we accept in our ordinary or say a person like Hitler-he cannot exist. life, in medical science we do not accept. He has gone beyond that state, where we can- But on what basis is medical science ? s on not cure him, We can cure animals, we can compassion. 39 Nirmala Yoga

 So you 'become' the compassion. This is the point, is to be seen when we talk of the fourth ract thing, but is a happening of evolution that dimension, we talk of the beyond. And when has to take place, and this is in the last break- we talk of the beyond, we have to project our through about which 'many' people, scientists mind, to see what we expect ourselves to be and also doctors,-we can say psychologists- when we become something of the 'beyond'. have talked about; though they are not taken Åre you going to be the same mean, aggressive, seriously. complicated human being ? Or are we going to be something like a Saint ? It's not poctry, it's not some sort of a abst- So now there is time for us to think seriou- sly about it, and to know that we are not only So this projection is to be brought into the this body, mind and ego, but we are something minds of the doctors. Unless and until they beyond. That is the fourth dimension, And project their mind to that extent to see that if what are we there ? we have to be at a higher position we have to accept that we have to be better people. We are the auto, and the auto is called as Self. Unless and until you project your mind Now Sahaja Yoga is the synthesis of all the higher, and do not get contented with what three powers that are within us. The first is discoveries you have made, on a physical gross the physical power, second is the emotional level, you cannot see the point of Sahaja Yoga. power, and third is the evolutionary power. And what is there to argue about when Sahaja You become the synthesis of all these three Yoga is curing people ? Why do you argue ? Why don't you see how it is curing ? It's not the analysis. powers. But medical science is the analysis. So it just analyses physical side, goes on analysing, so that you have one doctor for one eye and another doctor for another cye. Supposing a doctor is practising, and people go and argue with him "How do you cure ?" You will tell them, "What do you mean, I'm not supposed to tell that, but I do cure." Now you have a certificate, say from a nosolution for many problems that we have. So, medical college or somewhere, so you think you are a doctor. But supposing somebody has a there must be something missing that we have certificate from the Divine itself, then why not see ? Why not keep your eyes open like a scientist ? Why close them by whatever you have known so far ? Why to make a barrier from the scientific research you have done ? Why not be a research student in Sahaja Yoga also, and see for yourself that you really achieve that state, But a doctor has to understand that thcre is they have to raise their eyes higher to see that to look for. Of course, medical science is very important because once you get your realization, even you may not be a doctor and you become establis- hed Sahaja Yogi, you can cure people. But with medical science you can prove that it has been cured. So medical science also has it's own purpose. you have to become that state. Now, those who talk of the fourth dimension otherwise make people mad. They make them lunatics. They end up as lost cases. So how can that be a fourth dimension ? There are so many cases of these people one can show, that doing those horrible courses and things, they have be- And the basis of medical science, that is the compassion, is now expressed through the hu- man being who now becomes the embodiment of compassion. 40 Nirmala Yoga

 It is actually the evolutionary process. see parasympathetic works at different levels of our evolution. Say, at the stage where you are the matter, it organizes you in the periodic table. Who does that organization ? It is para- sympathetic. Then, when you rise higher, as Moreover to be only alright in health is not an animal, then it gives you the understanding sufficient. One must also see that point. One of eating food, seeking food-by which animals should not be so much attached to the body, seek food. Then as it rises higher, it gives you because supposing you have all wrestlers or another feeling-of protection. You seek pro- boxers in this country-now take a position tection. Animals also secek protection. That like that-Then what will happen ? As it is we is how the evolution goes on, by giving these have too many of them. Now what we need feelings within us. Or we can say, as the para- are the Saints. Not physically overhealthy sympathetic starts manifesting higher and higher the seeking starts becoming higher and You come realy mad. And they are good for noth- ing, they are cheats. They are doing all the bad things that one can do. So how can you say that this meditation helps anyone to be a better person, or a better person in health ? people, who will try to boss over others, but people who are saints, who help-without higher. charging any money, without any aggression, out of compassion, cffortlessly-those who are suffering. Then it comes upto the human stage, where people seek food, protection. Then when they achieve that, they seek money, they seek posses- sions, they seek the possession of other people, you see,-sometimes called as love. Seek all kinds of such things, but still their seeking is not finished. Then the But there is another barrier, which must be told very frankly. That when you become a Sahaja Yogi, the vital forces of new dimension start pouring. Effortlessly. And you do not charge any money for that-you enjoy your own compassion. Compassion that is the basis of medical science. So that state, may be, doctors may not like to have. But there are many, many people who cannot be cured by Kundalini, Which is actually the power of Sahaja Yoga, and they can come to doctors, so doctors should not have fears about it. Still they are seeking. same parasympathetic creates an urge within us that we have to seek some- thing higher. This last feeling after the human stage is to be manifested, and for that there is a residual force placed within us called as the desire within us, which has manifested every thing but it is still residual because it has not yet manifested itself, because this is the power How many people can be helped by Sahaja Yoga, cannot be said. But those who come to Sahaja Yoga can be helped. So it should be at least accepted as a higher type of redemption or a curing power, which must be accepted. And those who "can' be cured by that must be given a chance. And there should be no barrier about it. of desire to be one with that divine vital force. And that's why it rests in the sacrum bone- sacrum : meaning sacred ; so people knew about it-and then when this force rises through the various centres, and picrces through the fonta- nelle bone area, you actually get the cool breeze coming out of your head. For that you donot need any medical science, any laboratory,-just Q: What is this parasympathetic in fact 7 put your hand on top of such a person and you If it's described in the medical sciences as a 8get the cool breeze coniing out of such a per- thing which balances, brings everything back son. Not only that, but that person himself IS feels that cool breeze coming out of his head and after some time he feels it cöming into balance. out of his own hands: SHRI MATAJI: It depends on, it depends on. 41 Nirmala Yoga

 Then he tries to use. And when he uses that, he finds that this is the power that works out all the cures. So one has to realize and accept that at the state of the human level you cannot achieve the fourtb dimension, you have to beco- me something more. ssed. And you think that you have already been something different. But to be different is not the point. To be higher' is to be seen. And higher means the one who has full control over himself, who is "completely' relaxed, who is at peace, who is And this is the thing where the people who compassion, and who is a higher personality. Anybody who is physically fit is by no chance you become is a possessed person. They brain- a very evolved person, or who has got the fourth wash you, you become a dffierent person. They dimension. On the contrary they also come to me and ask me, "Mother give us peace". want to cheat you for money have used, that what put some possessions into you, you become posse- ON ORIGINAL SIN AND THE SHUDDHA ICCHA (PURE DESIRE) OF THE UNIVERSE one sin? This is a state essential for a realised The state of innocence is like being like a child in the presence of God, dependant on soul and represents-the full opening of the Him for everyting-and accepting everything Moolādhāra Chakra. Of course, it has to be He gives. In such a state, one has no desires or actions of one's own, but is a true reflector or instrument of His Desire-the Shuddha but God acting through me,"-for that is Icchā (17-1) of the Universe-manifested in Blasphemy and Sacrilege of the most severe the Shri Adishakti. In such a state one has no free will and one's ascent and evolution are uninterrupted-effortless-and painfree. so in reality. There is no point in doing what one wants, and saying, "Really it was not me, sort. This is the state Lord Krishna describes in the Geetā, and the Lord Christ prayed for- when he said, "Not my will but Thine, O Lord.."-And this is the state we can achieve If however, one chooses to have free will -then one expresses one's own desires. It is obvious that these must be limited and imper- fect-and hence one gets into trouble, distress of the Divine Mother. and difficulty, In the Bible, Adam and Eve are described as eating of the tree of the know- ledge of Good and Evil-i.e. entering the world simple, just say everyday: "Not my will but of dualities and so God informed them that Thine" to the photo of Shri Mataji, in medita- they and their children would be in trouble. so easily in the Sahasrāra-through the Grace So how to attaln, establish and fix it? Very tion,-and pray to become a pure instrument of the world's Shuddha Iccha-And as free will In innocence there is no duality only disappears, so do ego and superego--so as the oneness-the "isness" or "tattva". Everything Moolādhāra opens fully, so does Agnyā, and just is-and there is no Good or evil-for if this is the power and grace of Omkära as one has no free will, one doesn't act, God acts for one,-and if one doesn't act, then how can manifested in these two chakras. -Dr. Rustom Nirmala Yoga 42

 WHERE THINGS WENT WRONG A notion which emerges when one stresses (public place) of Athens where Socrates used to the basic difference in spiritual achievemments talk and, presenting my hommage to him, I felt between India and the West is the one of "posi- the atmosphere filled with deep and majestic tive conditioning". Because of positive conditio- vibrations. The wind started blowing. ning, laid down by the main stream of tradition and culture, the common man in India fears God and thus is either afraid of sin or, at least, Greece was not absorbed by the people of that Aware that he is committing a sin. That is, basi- time. Hear what Socrates had to say to his cally, he is endowed with dharma awareness, judges in his "apology" that awareness which is a prerequisite of spiritual evolution, If dharma awareness, the awareness, Alas this abundance of divine blessings on Please do not be offended if I tell you the truth. No ma'n on earth who conscientiously opposes either you or any other organized democracy, and flatly prevents a great many wrongs and illegalities from taking place in the state to which he belongs, can possibly escape with his life. The true champion of justice, if he intends to survive even for a short time, must necessarily confine himself to private life and leave politics alone." of right and wrong, is largely missing in the megalopolis of today's West it is because things went wrong a long time back, at the very roots of our Western civilisation. The foundation of the Western civilisation is to be found in Greece, whose culture influenced Rome and christianity. Here are a few comments inspired by a one week visit in Athens. Between sun and sea, Greece and its islands After this, Socrates was sentenced to death and used to be a blessed land. On the acropolis of with him, the very conscience of Athens was Athens thousands of tourists flock every day to murdered. admire a marvel of world architecture: the Par- thenon. The Parthenon is the temple of the tutelary goddess of Athens, Athena parthene, on Greece in both the fields of politics and that is, Athena the Virgin. As Shri Mataji said morals. As far as politics are concerned, the that Athena stands for Adi Shakti, the Parthenon history of the Greek cities is a tragic one, full is the temple of the virgin Adi Shakti, Gauri or of hate, wars, destruction. As far as morals Kundalini. Athena is represented with a helmet are concerned the story is worth a closer look. adorned with a glaring crest, holding a large shield and the spear, often fighting against the titans (asuras) of the right side. It is through dressed. But when I went to the National Arch- Her auspicious protection that Athens rose to eological Museum of Athens I was surprised prominency, glorified by political supremacy to feel heavy vibrations and a very joyless atm- (Pericles) and the blossoming of arts (Phidias). osphere. I then realised that all the statues of On top of this, the blessings of the Divine the other gods are nude statues designed to keep Mother to the Greek civilisation manifested the attention on the physical body in a vary through the teaching of the Adi guru. Indeed ambiguous way. Nudity can be powerful and Socrates, the father of the Western philosophy, innocent (Michelangelo) or symbolical (the raised human consciousness to an unprecedented heavy breasts of the Mother in India express level of self enquiry. I went on the old agora her maternity; the lean form of Mahavira his The negative forces launched their attacks The virgin Athena is always represented fully Nirmala Yoga 43

 asceticism). But nudity in the Greek tradition is sensuous. It is sensuousness raised to cultural general, my second specific. respectability by the power of art. It is a trick to keep the attention entrapped in a dimension where the Spirit cannot get joy. It is a missuse alos gaies (navel of the earth) of the ancient of aesthetics. It is not innocent. To make this world and, according to Shri Mataji who went point clear there are to be found statues glorif- there, the navel of the Universe, which lies at ving homosexual lovers, obscene statuettes and the geographic centre of Greece, I had prepared designs whose replica fill the tourists' shops of myself to worship Shri Vishnu on the Adi today's Athens, bearing the mention: "remem- Nabhi chakra and seek the blessings of His ber Greece". While in India perversions were, so evolutionary power, Shri Lakshmi: Let the to say, legitimized by tantric religious interpret- ations, in Greece they were, in a much bigger a typical Sahaj, unexpected way, I got the way, legitimized by art. The perversion of the answer. Before the rock where the priestess ancient Greek lifestyle, subtly expressed in its used to stand, at the core of the sanctuary, art, tells the tale of a gigantic fight between stood a swayambhu Ganesha with big eyes, left light and darkness...where darkness unfortun- trunk, smile, bent in adoration, absorbed in ately prevailed. The apollinien calling of the childlike joy, looking from below at the rock Greek culture (Apollo, light, clarity, knowledge) that symbolises the earth, Gauri, the Mother, was overcome by the dyonisien temptation looking at it and nothing else. Shri Mataji had (Dyonisios, intoxication, ritual debauchery). described it to me. I felt joy rushing through ny As a result Greece was cursed and fell under tired limbs. And I knew: this, and nothing else the domination of the Turks for about five is THE answer. centuries. What is to be done? My first remark is I went to the sanctuary of Delfi, the omph- West rediscover dharma-awareness. In Delfi, in More specifically, Western Sahaja Yogis on the following Torn between the Greek temptation of could put their attention sensuousness and the morose christian ascetici- project to purify the roots of their civilisation sm, Western art, on the whole, did not manage and of their subconscious. We need Greek to find its balance on the centre in a joy giving speaking, good Sahaja Yogis to go to Athens manifestation of man's deeper reality. It for perhaps six months. Get a job, prepare became only too often frivolous or mental, Shri Mataji's programme there. If Shri Mataji Today the curse which started from Greece, could come, say, in spring 1986 we could millenia ago, returns to Greece through the medium of mass tourism and holiday lifestyle: Then, in the Puja, we would present Her with Thousands of shameless more or less young the fiery helmet; the spear and the shield of Western tourists defile the beaches and challe- nge the sea with their nudity which, again, aims at subduing the attention. Some islands OM TWAMEWA SAKSHAT SHRI ATHENA have become a world Mecca of homosexuality and these hellish holidays are called: sun, sea sex. One feels like adding a fourth "S", for Satan who, like everybody knows, is the prince of seducers. have the SIXTEENTH Sahasrara day there. Athena. What else needs to be done? PARTHENE SAKSHAT SHRI NIRMALA DEVI NAMOH NAMAH!!! -Gregoire Vienna 12 April 1985 Nirmala Yoga 44

 Maria Montessori and Child Education Our present day educational system is for children, and, as a consequence, God's failing to bring out the grear potential inherent plan for men thenselves. in human beings, as proven by the terrible state of affairs in the West. Born-realised children as well our Sahaja Yogi children need an enlightened school system, where they can grow and manifest the great Souls that have taken birth. The Montessori Method of edu- cation is one such enlightened system. One of the most significant ways to support this process of unfoldment is to create an environment which calls forth and supports the full development of inner potential. There should be order, beauty, simplicity, and the children's space should be proportioned to their smaller size. This encourages indepen- Shri Mataji told us that Maria Montes- dence, an extremely important quality to nurture, which gives the child self-respect. By sori was a realised soul. Recently reading one of her books, The Secret of Childhood, we found doing everything for a child, out of love, we truly brilliant, inspiring vision of children mistakenly give them the impression that they are helpless. Surrounded by love and beauty, which could be integrated into a Sahaja uppro-and seeure in an environment in which he can ach to education. operate independently, a child can proceed Maria Montessori was born in Chiaravelle, With his work, the secret to his childhood; Italy in 1870. In 1894 she was the first woman to graduate in Medicine from the University of as a manifestation of the Spirit. Rome. She than began her work on education- al problems of handicapped children. Achiev- ing astonishing results, she began to apply her form. How does he come to distinguish things, methods to normal children. Opening the first and by what marvellous means does he come "Children's Home" for poor children in 1907, she began her experiments which led to a new without a teacher merely by living simply, joy- model of education. Today there are Montess- fully, and without fatigue?" In her experiments ori Schools all over the world, as well as speci- al traiinng centers for teachers. namely, the creation of the human personality "A child is a discoverer. He is an amorph- ous, splendid being in search of his own proper to learn a language in all it's minute details at the first Children's Homes (schools), Mon- tessori became aware of a phenomenon which she calls the "sensitive periods". These are Basically, she calls for adults and educators "impulses towards a specific kind of activity. to have an attitude of responsibility towards which lead to the acquisition of a particular our children's evolution which, she stresses, trait", Children are attracted to what they need unfolds spontaneously from within. She writes, for their growth. It's truly amazing. Montessori "Our attitude..should be...of reverence before the mystery of creation, that a spiritual being teristic of the sensitive periods". The child has been confined within limits perceptible to guides himself by his own joy ! How Sahaja us. A child has within himself the key to his how beautiful. Now, we as adults do nothing. own personality.. he has a plan of development to influence these states, but we can hinder and laws to be observed, (and) these must be their manifestations through our own ignorance. delicate powers indeed. From time immemorial men, through their interference with these natural laws, have hindered the Divine plan which makes a child extremely sensitive to order. writes about "the transport of joy so charac- One example of a sensitive period is one Nirmala Yoga 45

 Reaistered with the Registraar of Newspapers under Regod No. 36999/61 This appears in a child's first vear and conti- nues on through the second."Order consists in child. Since the basic premise is that children recognizing the place for each objeet in relation develop spontaneously from within, the school to its environment and in remembaring where environment is meant to support the process cach thing should be." This is related to orien- Ling one's sell within one's environment At a Montessori School there are special materials are profound. Montessori contends that through which a child can work with at this particular stage, which will allow him to experiment with childern, found in thie spontaneous patterns of "order" until knowledge of it is assimilated. growth within each child, we have perverted There are materials for each sensitive period, man's truc nature. By perceiving children and children choose thier own materials every through our own-adult eyes, and thus misund- day. They alone know what they need. Some erstanding their true needs, we super-impose other examples of sensitivc periods are, the competitive, ego-oriented personalities on other- desire to talk, sensitivity to tiny details, and writing. My daughter is in this latter educational system would bring about an perjod: she passionately writes letters again evolution of society, of human nature itself. and agnin, for an hour at a time. The "short And for our realised children, such a deep attention span" of children we hear about understanding of childhood will help them becomes a myth when they are doing wwhat grow into strong spiritual beings, those who their Spirit enjoys! with an understanding of the evolution of the of growth, rather than influece it. The inplications of this model of education our ignorance of "God's Divine Plan" for wise potentially splendid beings. An enlightened wifl spread the Light and bring in the new age. -Nancy Partridge (Boston) In short, Montessori Schools are structured FESTIVALS Name of the Festival Date according to English Calender Date according to Ind an Calender Remarks L Nág Panchami Month-Shravan Fortnight-Shukla Paksha Tithi-Panchami (5th Day) Month-Shrävan The Puja of Kundalini 20th August 1985 2. Raksha Bandhan Sister ties Rakhi thread to her brother as a symbol of pure love & 30th August 1985 Shukla Paksha Paurnima (Full Moon) protection, 3. Gauri Puja Month-Bhadrapad Shukla- Paksha, Shashthi (6th day) Month-Ashwin Shukla, Paksha Pratipada during the period of to Navami (Ist to 9th day) nine days. 20th Sept. 1985 4. Navrātri 14th to 21st Oct. Puja of Adi Shakti 5. Dussehra (Vijay Dashmi) 22nd Oct. 1985 Shri Rüma killed demon Rivana symbolising the victory of Truth over civil. Dashmi (Tenth day) 6. Khojagiri Paurnima 27th Oet, 1985 of Goddess Month-Ashwin Puja Lakshmi. Devotees are Shukla Paksha awake during the whole night and sing songs in the praise of the Goddess. Paurnima (Full Moon) Edited & Published by Sh. S.C. Rai 43, Bunglow Road, Delhi-110007 & Printed at The Central Electric Press, 80-D, Kamla Nagar. Deihi 110007. One issue Rs 9.00, Annual Subscription Rs. 51.00 Foreign (by Airmail £ 75 14)



----------------------

1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Nirmala Yoga
BI-Monthly
March-April 1985
Vol. 5 No. 26
"Unique Magazine of Maha Yoga that crowns all the religions and
seekings of Yoga by actualizing the Experience of Yoga-THE UNION"
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-1.txt 
 NIRM ALA YOGA
43, Bungalovw Road, Delhi-110007 (India)
Founder : Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Editorial Board: Dr. S.K. Mathur, Sri A.S. Mishra, Sri R.D. Kulkarni
Representatives
I RAJEN MAHARAJ, 26, Ocean St. Bondi, NSW 2026
:INGE KELLY, Josef Melichargasse 20, 1210 VIENNA.
: LORI & CARY HYNEK, 3151, Heatiher Street, Vancouver, B.C. V5Z 3K2.
: M. CERNAY, 175, Av. Ledru Rollin PARIS-75011.
:ANTONIO SARACINO, NIRMALA HOUSE, Localita Pichini s.n.s., 00010
S. Angelo Romano, ROMA
: M.B. RATNANNWAR, 13, Merwan Mansion, Genjewala Lane, Borivali (W).
BOMBAY-400092.
Australia
Austria
Canada
France
Italy
India
: JUAN ANTONIO DELGADO, Avenida De Burgos, 30, 1, A, MADRID-28036
CHARLES & MRS. MAGDA MATHYS. 5 Chemin Des Mouldins,
1256. Troinex (Canton de Geneva).
: GAVIN BROWN, Brown's Geological Information Services Ltd., 134 Great
Portland Street, London WIN 5PH.
IAN BASCOMBE, 5, St. Andrews Road, Exwick, Exeter, Devon, England
: CHRISTINE & MICHAEL PETRUNIA, 270. Jay Street (APT. 1 -C).
BROOKLYN, NY-11201.
URSULA SEHLMEYER, 191 Canal ST. #23 SAN RAFAEL, CA-94901.
Spain
Switzerland
U. K.
U.S.A.
CONTENTS
Page
1. Editorial
1
2. Message of Shri Mataji on Her Birthday Pooja
3. Lotus Feet of Mother
4. Discipline from within
5. Innocence and Virginity
13
6. Be Sweet Loving & Peaceful
7. One more example of Shri Mother's Compassion
8. Concept and Reality
9. Understanding the Love of God
10. The Fourth dimension and the parasympathetic
11. Original Sin and Suddha Iccha of the Universe
21
23
24
29
38
42
12. Where things went wrong
43
13. Maria Montessori & Child Education
45
14. Festivals
4th Cover
Front Cover : Shri Mataji; in Delhi March 1985
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Editorial
यो न हृष्यति न हवेप्टि न शोचति न काडक्षति ।
शुभाशुभपरित्यागी भक्तिमान्यः स मे प्रिय ॥ १७॥
समः शत्री च मित्रे च तथा मानापमानयोः ।
शीतोष्णसुखदुःखघु
सङ्गविवरजितः ॥१८॥
समः
तुल्यनिन्दास्तुतिमौनी
अनिकेतः स्थिरमतिर्भव्तिमात्मे प्रियो
संतुष्टो येन केनचित् ।
नेरः ।।१६।।
YO NA HRSHYATI NA DVESHTI NA SHOCHATI NA KĀNKSHATI I
SHUBHÄSHUBH PARITYAGEE BHAKTIMÂNYAH SA ME PRIYAH11 17 11
SAMAH SHATRAU CHA MITRE CHA TATHĂ MĀNÄPA MANAYOH
SHEETOSHNA SUKH DUKKHESHU SAMAH SANGA VIVARJITAH 11 18 11
TULYA NINDĂ STUTIR MAUNEE SANTUSHTO YENA KENA CHIT I
ANIKETAH STHIR MATIR BHAKTI MÄNME PRIYO NARAH I| 19 11
He who neither rejoices nor hates, nor grieves nor desires, who renounces both good and
evil and is full of devotion to me, is dear to me.
He who is alike to friend and foe and like-wise to honour and ignominy, who is alike to heat
and cold, pleasure and pain and is free from attachment.
He who takes praise and reproach alike, who is given to meditation and content with what-
ever comes unasked, has no attachment to home, is having stable intellect and is full of devotion
to Me, that man is dear to Me.
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-3.txt 
 The above verses, like those discussed in the last issue" describe the attitude one should
adopt while interacting with the world. The advice can be summed up as under :-
u
a) There should be neither rejoicing, nor hatred, neither grief, nor desires.
b) There should not be any attachment to friends, and enemies should not be hated.
c) Honour and dishonour, heat and cold, pleasure and pain, good and evil, should not
disturb our attention and cause an imbalance in the system.
One should be ready to give up willingly even that
d) Renunciation of both good and evil.
which is considered good.
e) Heart should be full of devotion. One should be always in the meditation, with buddhi
uneffected in any distracting circumstances and attention steadfast on the Self and mind
free from desires for sense-pleasures.
The above indeed are divine qualities and are essential for further progress of Sahaja Yogis.
We have understood and realized to an extent, the Self. Thanks to our beloved Mother for
kindling the spark of Divinity and giving us the nectar of Divine Bliss. It is for us now to
achieve the inner transformation so that the spark grows under the love and care of Mother,
into the power of Divine light.
Obviously, mental and emotional involvement in the wordly scores places limitations on
fransformation and Self realization, as it effects the chakras. It is felt that the nature of taking
a dispassionate view can be developed by accepting things as they are, with whatever possible
effects in relation to oneself. The endeavour should be not to take the things around us as the
sources of fulfilment of desires for sense-pleasures. Have no expectations from the world and
it will cease to be a cause of joy, sorrow, miseries and other reactions.
Scriptures have propounded various theories for the benefit of seekers. The world may be
considered illusory, transient, transmutable; favidya' is to be discarded in search of the Eternal,
Supreme, unchangeable, Blissful, Brahman, the cause of entire creation on whom its survival
depends. Hence all mundane affairs are to be taken as passing phases. By another theory, the
Universe is considered as an unbroken series of manifestation of Brahman. As our eyes can
visualise only forms, the Brahman can be considered as appearing in different veils and forms.
Thus, all that comes our way has to be accepted as the will of God Almighty and again offered
to Him as He is the ultimate enjoyer.
Yet another theory says: "Various combinations of Mäyā or Prakrti give birth to various
objects, sentient or insentient. And this Māyā or Prakrti being the power of Ishwara, the crea-
tion of these things are His. But the creation of a thing and its being enjoyed by some are not
the same. The power and circumstances of a thing enjoyed are to be created by the person
enjoying it, as this capability is being earned by the person through his action (Karma). Besides,
the actual enjoyment is nothing but a modification of the individual mind, produced as a result
of identification of the Chitta with the object of enjoyment. It is thus felt, that the path of
knowledge is the only way to liberate oneself from the bondage of phenomenal world through the
*Manas', Buddhi', Chitta' and "Ahankār'. The path consists of Sravana' (Study), "Manana'
(Reflection) and Nididhyasan (Meditation) of Mahäväkyas (eternal truths) like Tat-twam Asi"
(You are that, the Paramatma, the Supreme Being), "Aham Brahmäsni (I am the Brahma).
* Verses 15 & 16, Chapter 12, Bhagavad Geeta.
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Sahaja Yogis, being fortunate seekers, the Brahma has stood before them in person with the
promise :-
मदभक्तो मद्याजी मां नमस्कुरु ।
मामेवष्यसि सत्यंते प्रतिजाने प्रियोऽसि में ।॥
मन्मना भव
MANMANA BHAV MADBHAKTO MADYĀJI MĀM NAMASKURU1
MĀME VAISHYASI SATYAM TE PRATIJĀNE PRIYOSI ME. II
Fix your mind on Me, be devoted to me, worship Me
and bow to Me, so shall you without doubt reach Me.
This I trully promise you, for you are dcar to Me.
Bhagavad Geetă-XVIII (65)
So the path of knowledge is to be followed in relation to the Supreme Goddess, Adi Shakti,
Param Paraméshwari, Shri Mataji. As much as possible, the attention should be engaged in reading
and listening to Mother's lectures, understanding and practising Her advice. Remembering
unceasingly in the heart, the ever-loving Bha gawati, Praying to Her to be present in the heart and
on every chakra. It must be understood that She is present so long as Her Lotus Feet are remem-
bered. Pursuit of wordly scores would cause diversion of attention, which, unless checked,
would effect the system. The Buddhi should remind the mind and the Chitta, about Her presence
within, that every act of omission and commission is being watched, that one's being is Her
temple and pure heart is the sanctum sanctorum. If we meditate on this truth, it purifics and
enlightens the Panchakosha', five sheathes. The Self would then shine with its full glow and
become one with the Lotus Feet of Sakshat Shri Atma-Paramatma, Sakshat Shri Sacchidananda,
Sakshat Shri Adi Shakti Mataji. This is the state of the true liberation, the identity of Jeeva
(the empirical being) and Brahman ; ". Adi-Shankaracharya
has described this state in the following verses.
the experience of 'Aham Brahmasmi
It should be our endeavour to achieve it.
अकर्ताहमभोक्ताहमविकारोऽहमक्रियः |
शुद्धवोधस्वरूपोहं केवलोऽहं सदाशिवः ॥१४ ०|।
कर्तुभोक्तुविभिन्न एवाहम् ।
बोधात्मा ।४६१।
द्रष्टुः श्रीतुव्वक्तुः
नित्य निरन्तरनिष्क्रियनिः सीमासङ्गपूर्ण
I am not the doer, I am not the experiencer, I am changeless and beyond activity, I am the
essence of pure knowledge, I am absolute and identified with eternal good.
11 490 |1
I am indeed different from the seer, listener, speaker, doer and experiencer: I am the essence
of knowledge, eternal without any break, beyond activity, limitless, unattached and infinite.
Vivékachoodãmani
|| 491 tI
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Message of Her Holiness Shri Mataji
Nirmala Devi on Her Birthday Pooja
Bombay
21st March 1985
Today is the day of Gauri. Gauri is the one who, as a Virgin, created Shri Ganesha. And
in the same pattern you have got youF realisation. In the same pattern!
So you have to use the same power within you, that is of Gauri, that you keep your heart
clean. You must have a clean heart. You must have a clean thinking. There should be
purity in your mind. Of course, the bhakti (devotion) 'does' give that purity, but if there
is anything lingering in your mind I have to tell you there are three things that are going to
happen from today.
First, we have started Vishva Nirmala Dharma. You are under the vision of Shri
Ganesh, under the guidance of your Spirit, and under the blessings of God Almighty. But
be careful, because once you become that, you have to keep to that Dharma, you have to be
honest about it.
If you have decided, from today onwards you be careful; anything can happen to you if
you get out of the 'Maryadās'. Till you keep the maryādās' of Sahaja Yoga, saying morning-
evening-night that, "I am a Sahaja Yogi", nobody can harm you, hurt you. Nobody can
trouble you. On the contrary you will be enjoying life if you keep to the 'maryädas'.
But if you leave the 'maryādās' of Sahaja Yoga, you will have big problems.
So this is the second thing I want to tell you that today we have started the great vision,
which was promised long time back of realised souls.
Now the third is that with all these things we are doing we must promise to God also that
we will know about Sahaja Yoga, through proper understanding, reading every word of
it. We'll master the knowledge of Sahaja Yoga. We'll keep ourselves clean. And completely
surrender our lives to Sahaja Yoga.
This is what you have to promise in your heart. Surrendering to Sahaja Yoga is actually
surrendering to joy, bliss and peace. In that you are the gainer, nobody is a loser in it.
This is how today we have to decide once for all.
Today is the day as you know, my forefathers called it the first day of the year*. And
they have the 'Kalasha' and the 'Shawl' of the Goddess as the emblem-or you can call it-as a
flag of Shälivähan.
In any way my delay is important because there was Amāvasyä (last lunar day of dark
fortnight) earlier, and we had to get rid of that Amāvasya for the Ist day to start. That's how
Gudi Padva. New Year day of Shalivahan Calender.
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-6.txt 
 the delay was there, there was jam-everything is arranged. We should not worry: "Why there
is delay, why there is this....7" Some times I may come earlier, I may come later,-it's
all arranged. Because during Amāvasya how can you have my poojā? Simple thing like that.
It is all arranged, it's all worked out.
Everything is fine, just be your Self. Do not get upset with anything, do not get worried
or anything. Just try to keep absolutely peaceful.
I give you some tests by seeing how much you keep to that situation, of complete peace
within yourself. If you have done no wrong, if you are a Sahaja Yogi, there should be no
disturbance. If others have done wrong, it's alright, doesn't matter, you have not done any-
thing. As long as you have done no wrong there is nothing to worry. And as it is, even
if you have done some wrong, God is there to forgive you.
So don't have any worry-nothing. Have all the strength, have all the courage, and go
ahead with this promise onwards.
Because I see now Sahaja Yoga is going to take a new turn. Definitely it is going to take.
We are going to come upto a stage where thousands and thousands will join hands. But
first of all those who are in the foundations, who are the first people must work very hard to
keep themselves above all kinds of foolish temptations, all kinds of foolish things you have
been doing, which is "Asahaja" (not Sahaja). Language should be sweet, your behaviour
should be good, it should be very gentle and soft. You should move like a Yogi, live like a
Saint, and people should see through you the greatness of Sahaja Yoga.
May God Bless You.
LOTUS FEET OF MOTHER
श्रुतीनां मूर्घानो दरधतितव यौ शेखरतया
ममाप्येती मातः शिरसि दयया धेहि चरणी ।
ययोः पाद्यं पाथ: पशुपतिजटाजूट तटिनी
ययोल्लक्षालक्ष्मीररूणहरिचूडामणिरूचि : ॥841।
Shruteenäm moordhäno dadhati tava yau shékharatayä
mamapyetau matah shirasi dayaya dhehi charanau i
Yayoh pādyam păthah pashupati-jată-joot-tatinee
Yayor laksha-lakshmir aruna-hari-choodāmani-ruchih 1
I1 Verse 84, Saundarya-Lahari 11
O Mother ! pray place those Feet of Thine, in the plenitude of Thy mercy, on my head,
Feet which the parts of the Vedas wear as a crest-bud, the water washing which (Feet) forms
the river (Gangã) flowing over the matted hair of Pashupati (Shiva) and the beautiful lac dye
over which (Feet) is the lustre of the red crest jewel of Hari.
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Discipline from Within
Navarātri Poojā,
London 23.9.84.
For all of us, that we are celebrating Nava-
rätri today and all of us are mecting after such
a long time of my tour.
that there are some people of calibre, there
are, but others talk more, show off more, and
do not have the calibre. Now to achieve that
When in Italy I said that England is the heart calibre sihould be possihle because you are born
of the universe, they would not accept it. They on the special land of England. That possi-
were very shocked at this statement, They bility must be built within you,
could not believe that England could be the
heart of the universe. One of the reasons was with all the possibility, with all the great
that they felt that the English people were background, with all the merits to be here,
invaded once by Romans, and Romans at that why is it we find that Sahaja Yogis, for years
time also had felt that English were very bum- together, do not come up to many others. What
ptious people. They would not even accept is the reason ?
the defeat with the grace of a person, who has
lost. Even if they were lost, they used to be
bumptious. So they could not believe how could
it be that the England is the heart of the uni- it is so regularised, it is so 'disciplined', that
verse. If this is the heart, what is the situation of even a 'slightest' murmur, or slightest change
the universe? And then they described to me at shows on the graph; is a very sensitive thing.
length the bumptiousness of the English, and And that is what is lacking here, is that disci-
then I felt that I have known something like pline of the heart. It is an erratic, funny heart
that myself.
But then what is lacking? Why is it, that
Heart, if you see, has a pulse rate and it
moves with a certain sound, and you can
even get it on to a graph and it is so systematic,
which swells up in ego. And whatever one
Now, when we are celebrating the greatest may talk, this is another reading people have,
of greatest, this Navarātri, there must be some- that whatever you may tell them, that time
thing special about it, that we have to cleanse seriously they listen to you and second momenj
this heart completely, fully and make it so pure it has 'no' effect on them. So this is another
that it purifies all the blood that passes through thing we should see that if it is within us, let
the whole of the body. So the cells of this
heart, which has made this great organ, has to And that disciplining has to come, otherwise
be the best, because the cells of the heart
within a human body are the best cells, the
highest quality, the most sensitive. And it's have is innate intelligence. No education, innate
the heart expresses the 'anahata' the sound intelligence. Innate intelligence to understand
that is without percussion. While we find that our calibre has to inmprove.
us understand that what we lack is disciplining.
our calibre cannot improve.
But for all that, I think what we should
Nirmala Yoga
6.
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Now here pulsates the Spirit, the Spirit and
not the Power, The witness, the one that centres, have we been able to develop within
watches, that is the reflection of the God, who ourselves ? How can you do it ? You have
is the Spectator of the Work of the Devi. no time. You are all busy people. And
Actually what happens that without rising bumptious.
üpto that status if we also say, alright, we are
also watching because we are the Spirit, then
we donot achieve that calibre. And with all'
the blessings,-like seven auras of the heart,
we have got seven ashrams. We do not
understand that we all have to discipiine sensical things like unemployment and all
ourselves. Only to take advantage or to be in that. They just asked me, Mother, how do
the Sahaja Yoga, to claim that you are a
Sahajayogi, is not a sign of being a cell of the
heart.
of the seven centres. The power of these
So now to derelop these powers we have to
concentrate on these chakras. "Everywhere' I
' went, I was surprised, the questions they asked
me, the way, they were. Nobody talked about
Their family, house, jobs or any other non-
we develop the power of this chakra, or that
chakra or that chakra. And I asked them
how is it you are asking about a particular
And warning has to be given now. Very chakra. They said, "Because we find this is
important is at this juncture when Sahaja Yoga missing in us, specially in me this one is not
is now taking off-remember this,-the speed alright."
kas been gained and it is taking off. Those who
will be left behind, will be left behind. So do for me to discipline you or to tell you all these
not get into bumptiousness. First is your things, because 1 hate to talk. in this tone to
character, as everybody says, "They are very you today. But I have discovered that if I
bumptious". Try to be humble and then do not warn you now, tomorrow you will
understand that you have to be in the plane blame me that I did not warn you. Take it as
and not left behind on the grounds. It is
moving fast.
Now for a realized soul, there is no need
a serious warning. Now after realization there
is no need for me to discipline you at all, be-
Now the most fortunate thing is that today cause you have got the light, you have known
is the Navaratri and that I should be in London what is realization, vou have knOwn what
and this Navaritri puja should be performed
here. No other country is that privileged, ow much you have gained out of it, how much
because this is the highest poojā, the greatest your personality has improved.
ritual, which you can attend. So why do we do
Navarātri ? In the heart, to do Navarūtri is to done. Is to see for yourself, if you have really
accept the powers of the Shakti, to realize the disciptined yourself or not. There is no need
power that all these chakras have got in them- for any leader to tell you, there is no need for
selves, and that when they are enlightened how any äshram fellow to tell you, there is no need
you can express all these powers of these nine for anyone to tell you. It is you, who is a
chakras within ourselves, The seven chakras realized soul, you are your own master, you
plus the heart and the moon makes it nine. are your own guru. Imagine you are all gurus,
But I would say that seven of these and on great gurus and Sadgurus, respected Saints
top of that, we should say two more centres, where all the angels have to shower you with
which Blake has described surprisingly as "nine flowers. Think of it! And here you are
centres", clearly. Just now I cannot talk of bumptiously giving lectures, talking bum-
the higher two centres, but let us at least talk ptiously. Very embarrassing-even for the
means to be realized, and you have also known
But there is something more that has to be
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-9.txt 
 deities. They do not know what to do,
whether to garland you or to shut your mouth.
Here you are in such a great position that you
have got realization. That only thing you have
to accept is the beauty of this great Yoga,
that you fust enlighten your own powers, which
are on these seven chakras.
you are bumptious, alright, you are in a big
fool's paradise, as they call it, riding a fast
horse,-all that is there is alright: is forgiven.
But once you have seen the light, you must try
to get rid of all the snakes that you have been
holding on to-is a simple thing.
In your childlike nature only, you can
receive the blessing of Gauri, otherwise you
cannot. You have to be really childlike, other-
wise it is absolutely useless, no use telling you
anything, because you think you are too clever.
Tosucha person, who thinks he is clever, what's
the use of talking to such a person, because he
already knows everything.
Now let us see the first chakra, belongs to
the power of Gauri, the power of the Mother
of Shri Ganesha. Gauri's power. Tremendous
they are, aren't they ? Because of Her power
you have got your realization. Now what have
we done to ensihrine that power within ourselves?
Today is, if it is the first day of Navarātri, let
US see what have we done. Have we been able
So the first power, when you develop, you
must learn to sit on the Mother Earth, first of
all. You must respect the Mother Earth,
because the first chakra is made out of the
Mother Earth. Try to be more settled down
with yourself on Mother Earth. And the
to develop our innocence within ourselves ?
When people talk, they are so sharp. How
can you be sharp if you are innocent ?
are so bumptious. How can you be that if
you are innocent ? People play games. How
can you do that if you are innocent? Harm
cach other. How can it be, if you are innocent ? respect. See the trees when they get their
So first of all you have to see yourself, that the
power of innocence, if it has to live, all the rest they are laden by the fruits, they bow down to
of the nonsense has to go away. If you want
to have the innocence, all that is anti-innocence
has to be dropped out.
They
flowers, they are not so respectful; but when
Mother Earth. In the same way when vou
have got the fruits of Sahaja Yoga, you all must
bow down.
And innocence has a special capacity to
make a person extremely' peaceful, 'Extremely
I can understand about people, who are
ignorant, who have ignorance. Then in
ignorance, of course how will they talk of peacejul. All the anger, temper, violence. If
innocence. But you are not ignorant people.
You are knowledgable, you have got your
enlightenment.
a person does not have innocence, it cannot
come in it, because a person who is not in-
nocent is either sly or aggressive. He cannot
have peace within his heart. But a innocent
And the power of innocence is so great. It person is not bothered, innocently he lives, he
makes you absolutely fearless,-not bumptious enjoys everything in complete peace and har-
but fearless. And the greatest thing of in- mony. But this violence comes when a person
nocence is that you are respectful. The sense becomes clever. He thinks, "I am so clever,
of respect, if it is not developed within you, if the another one is so stupid, I have a right to
you cannot develop the sense of respect for shout at that person.
other Sahaja Yogis, for other people, for the
Ashram, for the discipline and your own look sharp, but he is not wise. Wisdom comes
Self-respeet, then it is of no use, even talking of only with innocence. And how much wisdom
Sahaja Yoga, because that is the very begin- have you gathered,- that is what one has to
ning of it. First you do not respect, alright, se.
" And the one who is not
innocent is never" wise, He may be, to look at,
OWn
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-10.txt 
 When your power of innocence increases, your explanation: It is like missing the plane.
wisdom is apparent. People say, "That fellow When you miss the plane, whom are you going
is very wise". For example if somebody is to explain the plane has left. So then you
crying about his wife, a wise person will say, have to explain yourself only. You will tell
"Oh baba ! just look at this, still busy with his the air, or to the gangway, or anything that
wife." Another one is crying about his house "ob baba, it happened like that. There was
or something. He will say, "Oh! look at this thing, I had no time, there was a jam,
this one still busy with the house". There is this, that". But the plane is gone. Whom
no end to it.
are you explaining?
So everyone should meditate everyday. That
I have known people who get so swollen up
that they think they must give a big lecture for is a very important thing, which people are
one hour, on Sahaja
until, they have given one hour lecture, they Because I am in England, people take me for
do not think their ego has manifested itself granted: "Mother is doing everything". So
fully. But a wise person, he doesn't have to
talk or speak or do anything. He impresses his for you all. I better start doing that again.
silence, his wisdom on others much more easily,
That is what we have to see. Have we been
able to discipline ourselves? Because our
growth is very much in the beginning of it. they will meditate everyday'. Get up in the
We have to grow quite a lot. And people morning. " "
do not understand this point in an atmosphere The whole world can get up, why not the
of egoistical temperament, that you have to English ? But when it was the war of Water-
grow, you have not yet grown, You have to grow loo, they were the first to arrive there. They
a lot'. And when you grow you find this wisdom won the war because they were punctual. What
really fragrant with compassion. Your wisdom has happened to their punctuality today ? We
is fragrant with compassion. Such beautiful
compassion can emit through your being, that
anybody who comes in contact with you, will decide today that, "Every morning I will get up
feel your auspiciousness. But, again you and do my meditation. And while meditating I
must give due respect to your Self realization
and to your Self. That is the first thing you And see for myself what is catching, where am I
have to do, is to meditate.
Yoga. Unless and doing in all the countries where I am not.
I get up at 4 O'clack, take my bath, meditate
Otherwise you have no time to meditate, So at
least let me meditate for your sake.
So everyone must today promise to me that
We cannot get up in the nmorning
are not drinking, we do not have hangovers;
we do not sleep late, so why should not we
must concentrate on myself and not on others.
catching, which chakra I am catching, what
Somebody sent me a letter and I have I to do ?"
vibrations were horrid. I asked what's the
matter with this gentleman? His vibrations first day, the Gauri's power must be enlighte-
are so horrid, what is he doing ? Then I ned within us, and they must express. And
found out that he says he doesn't nced any they are 'tremendous.' I cannot describe them
meditation.
saw the
So on this day of Navarätri, today as the
He has already reached the in one lecture. Think of the Primordial
fourteenth heaven, so he does't need any Kundalini. She acts in the Mother Earth, She
meditation, does not have to do
tation. It is casy to explain, but whom She acts in the matter, She acts in the human
are you explaining? You have to explain to beings. And now She acts in you. She is the
yourself, only yourself. Nobody else wants
any medi- acts in the universe, She acts in the animals,
one who decides the face and the figure that
Nirmala Yoga
9.
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-11.txt 
 you are going to have. She is the one who
decides what child you should have. She is yourself.
the one who gives you the particular type of a
child that you need. She is the one who has
got you all these beautiful children, She is you see that vision, when you know the vision,
the one who has given you these sparkling you cannot just stand there. Get into it.
faces and sparkling eyes. All this She has
done for you, but what about the power that
you have within yourself. How much have everybody says-that, "Mother you have spent
you manifested that ?
The Promordial is working very hard, no
doubt. But what about you, the individuals, thinking that because you are very great, that's
who have got their own Kundalini awakened ?
How far you have opened Her out. And what way you like. But the most important thing is
is Kundalini-is a simple tiing as you know, is that you are on the land of Heart, and I have
the true desire'. So true desire to perfect to cleanse you more, much more than others.
yourself, to grow yourself. If it is really true
desire nothing else is important.
desires are secondary and tertiary. The most
important desire is to grow. And for whose they have just mastered it; 'every one' of them.
advantage ?-ls the advantage of your's and in Here, it is becoming a very centralized stuff
your advantage only the advantage of the whole and everybody does not want to understand
world rests.
Everyday you müst meditate. Discipline
Now you have come to a new perspective,
You have come to a new vision. Now when
Everyone says,-Damle was saying too,
so much time for these English. Why so much
time for them ?" May be you might be
why I have to serve you people. Think the
But it's just the other way round. Others are
All other going so fast. I am amazed, their vibrations,
their sensitivity, their understanding. And
Sahaja Yoga, but everyone wants to give a
lecture. There is no respect for elders. No
respect who is older who is younger, and
Sahaja Yogis today represent the growth
of this universe, the growth of the human race. somebody who thinks that because they got
Do you follow this point that you are playıng realization before others, they are higher, then
such an important role at such a crucial time
when the world is about to collapse? And
you have great seers like William Blake, you
had such great people who have talked about
this time. They have built it up. Traditi- manifest' these powers. Manifestation of the
onally we have built up all this. Now in powers, I do not know how far vou have
England, the work of ages that has brought
this England to this stage. Now do you
realize that the position of English Sahaja soon as he enters a lall or any place, everybo-
Yogis is 'very' important. But lack of wisdom dy's Kundalini rises, just to salute. When you
and bumptiousness without understanding have Gauri's power then you stand out because
your Self, how can you talk so loud? How you have that innocent, lustless, greedless,
can you think of organising everything when beautiful, sparkling eyes and wherever you turn
you yourself are so weak, so bumptious. So your eyes, even one glance would raise the
today I am not going to take the count of the Kundalini immediately. People who suffer
people, who meditate everyday or not. But I from cancer, suffer from this disease, that
can tell you this much, next year those who do disease, all can be cured in no time if you
not meditate everyday, he will not be here have developed only one power of Gauri. All
anymore. Take it from me, is a fact.
remember one word of Christ, that, "First will
be the last". So try to understand that it is
you who has to grow, it is you who has to
understood.
When a person who has Gauri's power, as
your problems can be solved. Negativity will
Nirmala Yoga
10
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-12.txt 
 go away and you will become like a lotus.- by talking about it or thinking about it, but by
Beautiful, fragrant, overpowering all kinds of becoming that great power, to 'hecome that
negativity.
Here it is-"That fellow just touched me and people have and I was amazed when they told
now I have become egoistical." If there is me, they have got this blessing, they have got
one fellow who is egoistical, he just talks to that blessing. I mean unlimited blessings they
another person, the person goes egoistical. I have got. And why can't we have that here ?
mean this is not the way to be sensitive. You What's the problem with us? If we are not
have to be sensitive to God and not to bad collective, if there is a problem between our-
things. But we are more akin, more vulnerable
to bad than to good.
So the power of assimilation of good, the
power of emission of good, all these powers that this has to go into your heart, a very deep
are just in your complete reach. But all this feeling for ourselves, "that by God's grace we
should not become a praise but should become
a kind of a challenge, a kind of a beautiful happened, that we are the people who are
curiosity and an advancement for you.
But we are going down, I must tell you, we
are going down in England. Because we have
some funny tags, funny people who are all the
time with tags. Such people will have to be
warned, and later on may be declared, as these
people have decided, should be declared as
black listed, It is a very sad day today for me
and that is why the whole place is filled with
I mean I had no mind to have the pooj here, of marriages, you have done every kind of
because I am really very sad. Because when
I see the vibrations, when I see the way things time with. It is over now, finished. Now you
are, people are just in a picnic way in England, do something new. How many people you have
I feel so unhappy, you do not know. I have
always been extremely enamoured, and I have
already put up a big show of appreciating your have had, finished now. Finish it.
efforts. But if you see in the substance of it: just
see the substance, you watch within yourseif.
Each individual should see the substance that is
within us. We are worried about a friend, a
fiance or a wife or a husband or this and
that. That is not the calibre. The calibre is
very low and is going down lower. That is intensity you have to do Sahaja Yoga. That
not a good thing, is not good. If my love and does not mean that you give up your jobs, or
compassion is spoiling you I better pull you out anything. If you are intense in Sahaja Yoga,
wof it. Because you 'are' capable of your merits
to be born in this country. You "are' capable
of very great heights.-I know that.-Of very
great heights, which you can achieve, But not
see the collective blessings
power. And
seives, that means therc is some sort of an ego
still in-between that is keeping us out.
So let us, now promise within our heart
are born at such a juncture when this
thing has
beneficiaries of the blessings of God that we have
got our realization, that we have risen so high.
But now let us spread our wings."
But we are cutting them down. Don't
become small minded people, worried about
small-small things here and there, Nothing is
important. If you see in your previous lives,
you have had all kinds of foods, you have had
all kinds of trips, you have done every kind
other nonsensical things that people waste
married in how many previous lives and houses
you had in previous lives and how many
pleasures you
This is a special time. the best time of
Ritambhara ( ) where you have to grow.
That's the point, the season is that. In this
season if you do not grow, you wouldn't grow.
You have to take full advantage With full
you will be intense in everything. But there
is no intensity.
Munich I decided, at last minute, because
there was
horrid one who had come
по1
a
Nirmala Yoga
11
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-13.txt 
 your Spirit, within your heart and try to develop
that
Munich and had told me
Munich's seekers will ask such questions. your powers, inner powers, not of talking and
I did not like them at all, It was very arrogant. showing off, but inner powers.
I said I am not going to Munich. But in
Vienna I just felt the vibrations of Munich. that. It is a shameful thing that even now
And I was amazed! I said, alright, I am going in the temple of God there are people who are
to Munich. We had to run up and down to
get my visa, this thing. Everything worked be?... they do not talk at all or they eat not at
out as usual. And in that short time,-3 days
-four hundred people were there, And so
intense I tell you, so intense,-even children discipline from your Spirit and you are disci-
*so intense', and they were 'listening to every plined automatically. Let the Spirit rule you,
word I was saying', and picking up as pearls, It is possible, It is possible because I have
precious as diamonds, 'every' word they were seen in such short time and when I have been
noting it down. And when they had their there for such
realization they were just stunned people.
Imagine the Germans, coming over you people, of you, by your names, and by your vibrations
English. What will happen to you? They also. And they have gone up so much.
are people of determination. If they decide to
do good, they will do lot of good. They are
not like this. And then when I left them, for people, like "house of Lords". Is true, but
one hour, they were in the hall, just stunned,
discussing about Sahaja Yoga.
Still so many are possessed, you know
possessed by horrible evil things. How can it
all, All this is indiscipline. But going higher to
this spiritual life, best thing is to take the
a short time,-I dont't know
even their names ! Here practically I know all
So, today is a
great privilege. Always you are privileged
great day. of course
a
may be, one day may come when this house of
Lords may be banished completely. You have
But here as soon as I to behave like Lords. That is why my humble
start discussing something so nonsensical! I request is that You must learn to worship disci-
hear it. I know the vibrations and everything. pline. I do not say "do this, do that", you
We are not intense, we must increase our know what is to be done. And then on top
intensity. That is what is called as (a1) of that, you should not tell me, "I know, I
And should have not, I know..." When you know,
go away, people
Shraddha, Is iniportant, "very important.
I am sure this year you wil make it a point to why don't you do it ? You are empowered.
do intense' understanding of Sahaja Yoga. That Today let us, with full confidence in ourselves
and in our ascent, let us with full intensity
altend this pooja, and in our hearts decide that,
intensity is lacking.
May be there is something gone wrong with
you in the past and you are conditioned about "I am going to discipline myself."
it, or you think about it. How can I do it, it
is too much.
forget the past, forget the past, Past has no Vibrations are very strong today. Tremendous.
meaning whatsoever in Sahaja Yoga. You And you take full advantage of them. If you
are being completely renovated but just use
your mechanism. I work so hard with you whichever way you like...
people that nothing is wrong with your
mechanism. Only thing is that you have no
faith in yourself. And those who do not have even worse than people who are really egoistical
faith on themselves are always bumptious because they are themselves not aware at all
people. So first of all station yourself within what they are talking about.
May God Bless You
Navarātri is beginning with a big force.
You can do it, everything, you
want, you can use your left hand or right hand,
Even those who look egoistical are under
the power of some possession. And they are
Nirmala Yoga
12
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-14.txt 
 E SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
Innocence and Virginity
17-10-82
HAMPSTEAD, LONDON
It's a great thing today that we are celeb- women, to develop any guilt in your mind.
rating the Virgin's worship in England.
you know, according to Sahaja Yoga, England as you know, at a later stage this guilt works in
is the heart where resides the Spirit of Shiva. the opposite direction. It is of no help. But
And that Virgin should be respected and reve- when we understand that we have these prob-
red and worshipped in England is a great lems, we have to be humble about it. Not
honour, I think, for all the Sahaja Yogis.
As Because that is one thing is the greatest blemish
guilty but humble.
If you are not humble about it, and aggres-
Now one has to think why such an importa-
nce is paid to a Virgin ? Why a Virgin is respec- sive about demanding what have you got out
ted,-to that extent. What are the powers of of Sahaja Yoga and complaining about it all
a Virgin ? That She can bear a child of that the time, while not seeing what are 'your own'
magnitude that was Christ, that She could punyas (merits); what do you deserve ? Your
create Shri Ganesha out of Her own body, that Kundalini, despite every blemish, has been rai-
She could protect innocent, dynamic force of sed. You know that. You are blessed. So.
Her children who are egoless, who have not instead of complaining or being aggressive, you
known what is ego. So this great power and
force resides in a person who has lots of The greatest favour; that you are forgiven
"poorva-punyas" ( go) who has done lots of completely, that this great blessing has been
good things in previous lives, who has always bestowed upon you. And to come up to it
understood that Virginity is a power higher you have to work hard. Not to feel guilty
than any other power and would save the Vir- about it: but to be humble, to be thankful. That
ginity and Chastity with all her effort and care. despite what we have done.-'played' with our-
As you know that within our body She is placed selves 'completely'-still we are today sitting as
as Kundalini. Means She is the Virgin. She God's devas. The Somrasa ( ) which is
is untouched. The desire to become Spirit is the charanămrita (TTUga), the water that
without any blemish : Nirmal (fa). There is washes the Mother, only you' are allowed to
no blemish. It's waiting is pure. There is no drink it, only the devas. You are sitting in
other desire, but to be one with the Divine. All that category, and how can you be deniand-
other desires are finished.
must know that it is a great 'favour' to you.
ing ?
It's a very difficult subject for me to talk
about in the western country. It's embarrassing, your past, whatever mistakes we have commit-
I do not want any one of you, whether men or ted-I am with you in this. Not to feel guilty.
You have to humble yourself. By seeing
S1
Nirmala Yoga
13
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-15.txt 
 not innocent can never be joy-giving. They are
It's very embarrassing as I said to you, but
please try to face yourself. We have to face themselves miserable creatures and make every-
ourselves as we are.
one miserable.
The arrogance is not a child-like quality.
We have to be like children. And even when
The advantage of the Indians is that the Kun-
dalini exists there. So whatever Indians may do,
they are always aware it is wrong. For them vir- you were not, you were given realisation alright.
tue is virtue, whether they are not virtuous. Right- But now you are sitting with the devas. Even
cousness is righteousness, whether they are not. higher than them. So what is our decoration 7 It
They know, all the time they are aware of it that is umility. It is simplicity. Not cleverness,
they are doing wrong. They do not say what's
wrong", nor do they propound things which but a complete surrender, surrendering all your
are obviously wrong and against the Virginity, egoistical qualities.
against the sublimity, against the divinity.
Satanic things they never proclaim that this is
God. They are hypocritical, alright: but they vear's day for us,"that we all will surrender our
are aware all the time that these things are
wrong. The whole society is like that. Because
Kundalini stays there.
arrogance, putting others down, showing-off,
Let the Virginity be reborn in you. From
today you all have to take a vow,-is the new
horrible tempers, dominating nalures, asserting
behaviours, ego-oriented harshness, domination
I don't know what use it has. Unless and until
you surrender that, the Lord of Virginity, Shri
Ganesha, will not be able to crown your Agnya
Chakra.
When we lose our Innocense and our
Virginity, first thing happens to us is that we
become ego-oriented, and we start thinking
t*what's wrong ?"
Whatever we have done so far should
just give us this. If our past could give us
the idea as to how humble we have to be with
cach other, with all the Sahaja Yogis, how kind
we have to be, how loving, how universal.
Your Shakti is your Kundalini and She is
Virginity. She is your power. She is your stren-
gth. Your Innoeence is your strength, the day
you lost it that is the day we have committed
the original sin.
Virgin cannot accept ideas which are not
universal, She cannot ! That's a sign of a Virgin
because She is universal by nature. All fanati-
So for us it is important that we have to be cism, all racialism, castecism, tall" these things
which artificially separates man from man,
very humble about it, and that we have to
achieve something.-What ? Not the kingdoms
woman from woman, nation from nation, will
and some sort of a luxurious life, but a seat in all finish off as soon as you become innocent.
But you can't become, by brain-washing you
cannot. By Kundalini awakening, of course
this holy land of Shiva.
Shiva is forgiveness, He forgives everyone. you can, But to maintain it, your progress should
Even the Rakshasas (demons) can be forgiven, be invard' and not outward. To seek your roO1s.
but can they be given realisation ? Even the She is the Moola, She is the roots of your being.
Pishāchas can be forgiven, but can they be She manifests all your roots. So your attention
given realisation ? Forgiven is a different point. should be towards your roots and not towards
One aspect is forgiveness, so that they can
remain for a longer period, they may live longer, self, and develop your roots now. All the wes-
because of Shiva's forgiveness. So what ? But
what a wretched life. And the people who are
your shoots, you have been that. Face your-
tern society is without the roots, you can see
that. We have lost our roots, let's face it as
Nirmala Yoga
14
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-16.txt 
 western people,-as I am also with you today. Innocence. If materialism means to make things
to give others happiness, to present others, as a
cup that carries the nectar. If materialism is
that cup which gives the nectar of love, then
It dries out, it it's alright. But you don't eat the cup, do you ?
To me materialism sounds like people eating the
When it dies, it falls upon someone. It grows cup, and not the nectar ! Is cup more impor-
thorns. All dried things grow thorns. It's like tant, or the nectar ? Supposing there is a gol-
a desert, where only thorns can grow. When den cup and a poison is placed inside that, will
the whole society becomes so stupid as to hate you take it because it is in golden cup ? If you
each other, materialistic, then roses are not take it, of course, I will have more value for
going to grow there, lotuses are not going to gold. Will anybody knowingly take a poison
We 'have' to find our roots.
You see in a tree which does not have roots.
doesn't give any shade, after-
wards it becomes a dry horrible dying tree.
grow there.
in a golden cup because it is in gold ? No com-
monsense ! There is no commonsense at all.
That material things connot give you happiness
is the basic factor of economics.
While you are the Lotuses of this country.
You are born in the mud alright, but now come
back to yourself. You were beautiful, you
were like lotuses, fell into this mud, became
the mud, out of which you came out because of thing material gives you greatest happiness when
your true nature. Then you have become now you can give it to someone. I have seen that
lotuses, but there is no fragrance. Lotus
without a fragrance, one can't understand. taking. I mean you try, sometimes, to give
Lotus has to have a fragrance. The fragrance away something, and see how happy you feel.
In my own life time I
have seen, thar any-
way, always. I'enjoy' the giving more than
that will overcome the filth of this mud.
Of course, it should not be done because you
want to get rid of it ! Actually it is done for
You have to grow much more than Indians that only, perhaps, because whatever you po5-
can grow. On the contrary the arrogance of sess is a headache in anyway,-even the subt-
people, I am amazed. They start complaining lest form. Any possession is like getting
this, complaining about that, complaining about possessed. It's slavery. It hinders your freedom
another. What do they think of themselves ?
Who are you ?-Because the roots are not deve-
loped. Once you develop your roots, immedia-
tely the humility will start coming into your people who are so afiluent are so miserly ? Why
temperament. There is artificial humility, not are they so miserly ? People can't understand,
from the heart. It will only come when you you know. For one 'p' if it is dearer, the whole
become Virgins, you become Innocent.
But it goes hand in hand.
to grow.
You know, people ask me, how it is these
England would be ablaze, you see. All the
time-what you hear is nothing-that so much
Innocence doesn't only mean morality, percentage of rise in this thing and that, and
doesn't mean only that. Many people think they are going for a strike for this. I can't
that if you are a moral person,-No. It also
means a non-materialistic attitude. For people, hat
carpet is more important than their children.
Morning till evening they will be saying harsh
things just to save few nonsensical things which this sugar here and there, I would know, but I
are going to be left here permanently. Materia- would just know that it is cheaper than the
lism is the hit, it's the one that hits you, your
understand how do you keep account of all
If somebody asks me what is the price of
other place. Because I am innocent. I get
Nirmala Yoga
15
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-17.txt 
 things absolutely cheapest always, I have seen
that, I always get things cheapest. Because I are already wounded people, because you have
am so innocent. My Innocence takes me to wounded yourself. Nobody has done this
places where it is the cheapest and I get the
'maximum' joy, because I can give it. I know yourself, very nicely. Every way possible you
how to give it.
It's a very delicate work I have to do. You
harm to you, you people have nicely wounded
have tried to hurt yourself. Now because of
the hurt, the guilt is built-in and you are hurt-
ing others. It is as simple as that. So don't
That's how I would say, because of the
"real force' of your Spirit which is Virginity, hurt yourself, there is no need to hurt yourself.
you have lost the sense of joy also. You are
joy killers, morning till evening you are killing harsh to anyone. Yo4 have to be sweet people.
each others joy-to say harsh things, you see
from this tongue.
But remember that we have no business to be
You have to be kind people.
There are also psychologists who have
I was folding my hands before you because come forward to give you explanation for your
I knew it would little bit upset you, so I was
just keeping it there, that your mind should not strong, If you don't talk like that others will
be disturbed so much. In my palms, you see, take advantage." Who can take advantage of
very carefully I was catching your heart to keep the western people ! It is absurd, absolutely
it there, so that you should not feel hurt. Because absurd ! The ones who have done injustice all
it was not harsh, but it was truth which was
harsh. But still, in my palms I was holding it, absurd. I cannot understand how can they
carefully, so that you should not feel hurtabout
it.
harshness, that * Your will-power should be
over the world should say such a thing, it's
give an explanation like that.
But now the time has come, 'you' are the
So to hurt anyone,-just open your tongue people who are going to change the mind of
and hurt anyone,-one doesn't understand how
many ripples of hatred you are creating within God. You are going to please Him.
yourself.
God with your good behaviour. The wrathful
Who is going to deserve in this western
Twenty-four hours are not sufficient for me world, you tell me, today. You are the ones:
to love people. Now, I will be sixty years of chosen for this, specially prepared for this,
age, I don't think I have dlone justification to
these sixty years because I have not been able sion should be awakened, for the rest of
to love people as much as I wanted to. The
fiow is so great that my body suffers with that
flow and sometimes I curse myself that why
should I carry such load of love within myself. of Sahaja Yoga, what happened. We had
And little excitement with the pooja also, you
know what happens to me. I shudder, some-
times, you are calling me for pooja, now what, only three.
will happen. Then somebody can ask a ques- of my precious time in this country, and in the
tion, sometimes, "Mother did we not suck West. Despite that, the arrogance sometimes
your vibrations ?" It is obvious, but I don't baffles me. Arrogance among each other,-
want to say that. Because if I say that, your even towards me sommetimes they are so arro-
vishuddhi will be caught up again. You will gant I cannot think of anyone being that
suck less.
to create an area so that the deity of compas-
them.
The arrogance, you have seen in the spread
a programme where we had, say, a thous-
and people. For the next follow up there are
It's typical. I have spent most
arrogant to me, as the way they are. The way
Nirmala Yoga
16
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-18.txt 
 they talk to me, the way they behave towards until you humble down. On everything you
me, I just can't understand how can they be assert. For what ? It's impossible to worship
like that. It can be anyway anywhere, any- Virgin when we are so arrogant and so strang-
time. Specially women; I was amazed ! I went ling type.
to Belgium, and I found that Belgium house-
wives were even worse than British house-
wives. Ah ! Terrific they are ; terrific women ! extremely simple. She does not understand
Ah! Just horrible ! Absolutely. You just don't what are your plans and what is so important,
know how to deal with them, it's terrific. everything. Her importance is her Virginity.
They control the whole household into their That she knows, and she will not allow any-
hands, I don't know how. I don't know how body to touch. That's her property, that's
they do it. There's no
The Virgin is: a simple woman. She is
her wealth, that's her greatness. And she's
humble because she is not afraid of anyone.
So ego-oriented, I am amazed ! But if you She is not aggressive. But she doesn't allow
go to America, American women are baba !
They are amazonic ! Horrible ! You just can't real Virgin.
understand. There's no love, no affection,
nothing. Showing off, all the time talking
about their material things. Absolutely dry Yoga. I must warn you all about it. Don't
sticks, I tell you. And they want realisation, take liberties too much with Sahaja Yoga. You
and they want to be great, and this and are not obliging anyone else but yourself, be care-
that. I don't know what are they.
anybody to aggress: nobody dare aggress a
A new page has been turned now, in Sahaja
ful. Take up my warnings always seriously.
You 'all' kave to come up rery well now. It is
Today it is especially the day of Virginity. not only doing my poojā is going to help you,
I have really great hopes from the women of I can tell you this much. Now you better
this country, specially. Here the men don't worship yourself. You have to worship all
talk at all. You see the pattern was worst in your Gods within you. Cleanse them.
Belgium, no man would talk a word. They
cannot talk, just poor things are just shut.
They don't talk, strangled, completely strang-
led by women, believe me. Horrible ! What and until you can worship that, you cannot go
is going to happen to that country, you see,
where men cannot talk and women talk. It's
horrifying, let's face it up. What have they
achieved, the women there. At least in India Don't take liberties with Sahaja Yoga. It has
our Prime Minister is a woman. What are
they ? Good for nothing, useless, just washing have seen the light of the day. But be prepared
utensils in the house and showing off. I just for the night. Nobody should try to take
don't understand. What sacrifices they can
First is the God and Goddess of humility, of
innocence, of simplicity. Worshup that. Unless
further, you will not be protected.
Again I say that a new page has been turned.
bestowed all the blessings upon you. You
liberties. Try to improve yourself. No more
complaints. If you can't live in an Ashram
like that, you better get out of it. It's not for
go up to ?
The woman is known by the amount of your convenience. Nobody is in need of you.
sacrifices she makes. It's a challenge, I tell Take it from me. Nobody is in need of you,
you, for all of you woman who are realised you have to be in need of yourself. If you are
souls to see to it that you humble down your- seekers, if you want to find your roots, every-
self. Your quality cannot improve unless and thing is available for you. But you have to be
17
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-19.txt 
 humble, to go down to the roots, not with you see what exactly exists. But if you are
ego-oriented, you would never see yourself
what exists.
arrogance.
You will see some sort of a
We must understand why we are not progrES- bloated, you see, you will think yourself to
sing. Actually arrogance comes to people who
lack self-confidence. Self-confidence is shat-
tered in people whose Self is not manifesting. you put your imagination like that, you can
Let your Self manifest. When the Self is not
manifesting, you get all kinds of problems, absolute false,
and then you complain. Actually the problem
resides within you. It is God who has to
complain. Think of it. The One who has
created this universe, the One who has created
you all with such love and affection, the One
who has given you everything under the sun,
also the One who has given vou realisation
given you light- everything that is possible.
And you are complaining against Him ? You
should not. Complain about yourself", that
"I am not alright, I should be alright." Com-
plain about it. Face yourself.
be the King of God's heavens, you see. You
'can' see, if you want to : its imagination. If
see yourself as anything !- Which is false, is
You are your Self and you must see yourself
as your Self, as your Spirit. And Spirit is a
universal being, is the Innocence, is the Virgin
within you. Respeet
your's which is the Virgin, still exists. Because
if it was not there, I could never have given
you realisation. Despite every attack it
existed there. Be sure on that point. If it
had not existed, you could not have got your
realization.
it, respect that part of
CO
So many of them, they are very proud,
"Oh ! I don't feel anything, Mother, you know,
it's nothing." Then there is to be ashamed:
or at least you feel that you are missing some-
thing ! At least you should feel that you are
missing, if something is not alright and you
should be alright. At least think like that,
"I should be alright, I am not alright." On
the contrary No, no, I didn't feel. Oh what-
I didn't feel I should feet."
Like children when they face the mirror, they
say "this is somebody else." But we believe.
They never identify themselves with their own
images that they see. They are identified with
the image that they are". They don't create
artificial images, or don't dwell with the images
which are making them feel ego-oriented. They
live with reality as it is. They are made like
that.
You see a camera, if it takes some photo-
graph under a light which is some othercolour,
the photograph could be different. Supposing Innocence, Complete wisdom. You find this
I am wearing a red thing and supposing you among the villagers, or very simple people.
put a light that is blue, this might start looking They are not planning in any way. You try
green. But human eyes will see always the to befool them, and you will be amazed, at the
same thing. It won't see something unreal. end of it you will find, "I am such a big fool,
Camera can do all that. Camera can remove myself." Try that with some rustic peoplc,
somebody's head and put somebody's head who are very simple, matter of fact, who live
there. All these tricks are possible with camera
but not with human eyes. Whatever you see is so-called intellectunls, if they try to befool a
the thing that is. Of course, you are drunk, then simple man like that, after half-an-hour this
it's different. I mean I am saying of normal educated and very M.A.-Ph. D. style will find
conditions, you see.- In normal conditions that he is the biggest fool ever born,'
So the wisdom.
. Wisdom is the part that is
with mother carth. You will find that all those
18
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-20.txt 
 There is a saying in Sanskrit, which is very
" (Vidyi vinayc
From this story we have to derive that the
common" frar fan iTHÀ" more we are learned into Vidyā, into the techni-
na shobhaté)- que of Sahaja Yoga, we have to be humble. That
is our decoration, that is our certificate, that is
"gets decorations or is beautified" only through the path into the entrance of every human
humility. If there is an educated man he has being, that is the way we are going to be very
to be a humble person. If he is not a humble close to the other seekers. To be humble, to
find out ways and methods of being humble.
This is the key of Nirmala Vidyā. : "How to be
humble ?" By humility you will not ever say,
*This is my bathroom, or this is my fruit, or
this is my food, or this is my table, and this is
common" विद्या विनये न
शोभने
(Vidya vinayé
That is, "Vidyā," even the
knowledge, is decorated-shobhaté-means
person, then he is not educated, at all, in any
way.
I don't know ifI have told you a story about
one saint who was meditating and was blind.
Anda king came there and asked him, "Did you
see some people around ? He said, "Yes. Yes
King, my King. Sit down. I saw your servant
come in, and then your minister came in, and
then the prime mintster cme in, and then now
you have come", He said, "You are blind, how
did you know ? Through your meditation ?"
He said "No. Commonsense". He said, "What
is the commonsense 7" He said, first the
my glass".
Innocence gives vou strength to enjoy every-
thing that is there.-I mean for me, sometimes
I have to eat with bhoots, and sometimes I have
to eat bhoots Not only eat with them, but
also eat them.-Is worst part. So you also should
not mind if there are people with bhoots. If they
are drrogant, iry to give them bandhans, try to
control them through all these methods. But if
you think by arguing with them you will be able to
He said, "What, you are
bogus fellow sitting down here, wasting your
time". He gave me two-three abuses, used bad
language, and said, "Have you seen any person
here ?" So I said, no. Then the minister came
in. He didn't abuse me, but he just asked me.
Then the prime minister came. He said "Sir" is the humility, is the mylin sheath. If you are
to me.-Must have been from England ! And humble you will win the battle, if you are not,
might have said also Thank you perhaps -And you will be lost. Then the whole thing will
then came the king. And he said that, "You become a joke for you, 'absolute' joke. If you
were extremly humble. You first touched my
feet, you sat down on the mother earth, waited
for me, to ask you, "what do you want", and
in a very humble way said : If you have heard
of people around you-because I am blind, so
you didn't say something that would hurt me,
in such a humble way-if I could tell you. But
at least hundred and eight names of the Guru
you took, before you asked me this. So I know
you are the learned, you are the humblest, so
you must be the king." Otherwise in those days
we at least never had kings or prime ministers
who were box-office actors. Even the public
was so innocent that they would not accept such
a nonsense, you see. So this was the difference.
manage them, it's an impossibility. So try
Nirmala Vidya, and that is humility, which is the
mylin sheath of vibrations. Like every nerve
has a mylin sheath covering it, in the same way
are humble you can see the stupid, the bhoots
and all the arrogant as clowns of this drama.
Try to be humble with your Self, and with
me. With me is very important. Youmust under-
stand that it is one of the conditions that Christ
has put on 'you', to be "careful'. Dealing with
me, I don't want you to be in any way rude to
me, because I can't help it there. Till you are
humble with me, everything is in my charge.
But as soon as you are rude to me, somebody
else-and so many of them, thousands of them-
take charge, and then don't blame me for that.
Because you are my proteges, you are under my
protection. Supposing you try to make holes
Nirmala Yoga
19
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-21.txt 
 in your roof, and then say that the rain is Spirit: "Now you look after this connection.
I forget everything else. I leave it into your
you have already made holes in your roof. The hands. Lift me up. You raise me up. I forget
roof that was to protect, you have made holes, all that was me before. Everything I have
now the rain has to come in. Then if you want dropped out. No other desire. But just lift me
that the roof still should protect you from the higher and higher. Make me yourself. The rest
rain, then I must say you lack intelligence. of it is not important. All other manifestations
of this, desires are over. Now, I am absolutely
surrendered to you, my Spirit. Lift me higher
coming in, what can you do about it ? I mean
That's what it is.
So this is the another warning. It's very
embarrassing, but again today is the day of and higher. Higher and higher, away from all
embarrassment as it is. Because the Virgin is in
embarrassed condition always, she is a bashful complete Spirit, full Spirit".
personality. She has to be bashful. She is
embarrassed to say things which she does not
want to say, of course that's a very sweet thing, fast ascent. Just you can do it if you try at this
even there she is bashful, to say harsh things is
a horrible stuff.
the things that were not the Spirit. Make me
Forget all that was there, That elevation,
that ascent becomes a fast, quick trip, a 'very
moment and every moment to give-up all that
was not the Spirit. Anything that goes against
So let us worship our Virginity within our- the Spirit must be given up, and that is what is
selves, Let us rise up to that point. To mount the pure desire, that's what it is the Kundalini,
that diamond of brilliance of our Virginity, in the is the Virgin. Is to be absolutely one with the
setting of our humility. You can be angry with Spirit. All the res! has 'no' meaning, has no
others, not with Sahaja Yogis, not with me.
Even with others-when it is 'absolutely' requir-
ed. But if you fight among yourselves, and
tell people about Sahaja Yoga, nobody is going wherever vou are working, whatever is your
to believe you.
value.
This ascent,-whatever may be your posses-
sion, to whomsoever you may be married,
situation, whatever may be your country, you
fare' the Spirit. And if you are, raised aloft,
you will dwell in the beautiful kingdom of God,
And that is why, today is the day when the
Virgin, Gauri, sat down to worship Shiva, She
made a Shivalinga and was sitting and putting where all ugliness drops out. Like when the
Her sindur on that: "that you look after this, lotus opens out, all the mud drops out, completely.
which is the mark of my union with you. I leave In the same way, let my children become frag-
it to you, to look after",-to Shiva. "You look
after me. I surrender to you." With this, that's
how Gauri your Kundalini surrenders to the
rant, beautiful offerings of Sadāshiva.
May God bless you.
Q! Is truth beyond sense perception 7
Shri Mataji : It is Absolutely. Because if what we perceive through our senses-whatever we
perceive through our senses-is the truth, then we don't have to seek anymore ! Whatever we
perceive though our senses is what is very apparent, gross-not the subtle. What is 'behind' the
gross, we cannot perceive. For example, we cannot say how to make an atom. We cannot say
how an amoeba is made into a humap being. We cannot make one monkey into an human
being-Can we?-through our perception of the senses. Through our perception of the senses
we cannot do the subtle thing that is behind the gross. So we cannot perceive through the senses.
But once you have perceived it you can feel it, through your senses. This is the second point.
Nirmala Yoga
20
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Her Holiness Shri Mataji
Be Sweet, Loving and Peaceful
Birthday Pooja,
Juhu, Bombay
March 22, 1984.
I have just told them (Indian Sahaja Yogis) दीख रहे हैं । आइये, शिवाजी महाराज ।" ऐसा आदरपूर्वक
that you should not try to copy the western कहना चाहिये ताकि बो घबराएंगे नहीं)
style of ego-oriented society where people use
harsh words, because then we think that we
have modernised ourselves. They use harsh
words, "What do I care"-all these sentences,
we have never used, these are unknown to us.
To anybody to say like this is unmannerly.
How can you say like that : "I hate you !". others. Insulting methods and emotional black-
But now I have seen people talking like that, mail and all this nonsense is not at all tradi-
"What is wrong with us". "Who are you to
say that". Like that we do not talk. This is this will be thrown out. You should not do
not the way we talk. You see, this is not the them, I can tell you, in Sahaja Yoga you can-
way to talk. Any person who comes from a
good family could not talk like this because this
reflects on the family. But the language is
most copied here than in the western countrics.
I am surprised the way the people talk here in
buses, in taxies and the way they use the
language that's something I can't understand.
And so I have asked them that the language be
full of love and in our traditional style.
Correction if it is to be done, we used to do
this way; other side is not proper because it
never corrects. See, that the other way you
cannot control your children. All the time you
are scolding them, insulting them, insulting
tional in this country, and those who try to do
not do it.
You should not have all these ideas of
insulting people, of bringing them into situa-
tions that they can be insulted. This is all
modern style. So we should not do like that.
In Sahaja Yoga, we should behave in such a way
that we should be dignified, behoving our style,
our tradition. Sahaja Yoga tradition is that we
talk to people in most sophisticated manner, the
Sweetest manпer, in the most afectionate таппer
The way we do not scold our children. If and inviting manner. And that is how we should
we have to scold our children, we use language all speak.
which makes them honourable (a Bahu-
mānav) : Damle Sähab has put on a kurtā-
So, this is the first thing I ask that in your
pyjämä, so "You are looking like Shivaji expression of love there should not be a
". We thing that you shout. I do shout at people who
have bhoots in them, but by that the bhoots
age so that they would not get scared. (T e un away. But if you shout, you get the bhoots:
साहब ने कुत्ता पाजामा डाला है, तो "फिवाजी महाराज से bhoots do not run away, they get attuned, so
Mahārāj. Welcome, Shivaji Maharaj
should speak in
such respectful langu-
Nirmala Yoga
21
therk
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-23.txt 
 better not do it. If you have my powers: you
can do that. But you don't have. If you shout this should expreSs your love-Love ro others.
at a person who has bhoot5, you get the bhoots. Like, now, in everywhere in next two-three years
So be careful, you don't try my tricks, you see, you will have Ashrams, I am sure. And in the
I'm different type of a person and I do say things Ashram, I will like to see Loving, caring, affec-
understandingly, which you do not. So when tionate, patronising beautiful attitude for the
you follow me in things I an the way that I am
on the side that I forgive, the way I
I am affectionate and nat the way where I am
terrible, Because my terrible nature has got an
undercurrent of my Love which you don't have, It will be your responsibility to see that it is
nor those powers. So don't try these tricks with Mother's House and people are coming to the
anybody else. Fou have no right to shout or
get angry, because if you should, you get back people, with love, affection. Whatever you do-
all the bhoots in you. For they are the ones
who provoke you. They provoke you to get
caught up into it and you get absolutely ruined, that people will think that he is not an arrogant
the more you try to do so. Therefore, the best personality. I want top class persons to be in
thing is to stand in the centre and to have affec- charge of a Ashram. If the person is mediocre,
tion and love, the power that I have given you. he should not be appointed. By next year you
That power you have to develop-that power of will have all the lands in your hands and
love, First, develop that power of love, then you Ashrams will start by next year. May God
don't have to worry, you don't have ta shout or
do anything. Your power will become (Krita),
(active), it will work out itself and create that
beautiful atmosphere that we do not want to
have anybody ruined. But if you shout, people thing that you have to give me today is: in your
will run away. Specially in a egoistical society, ralle, in your behaviour in your heart, you will
you cannot shout at all, it cannot appeal to
them. If you shout in ego oriented society this
will distract them and they will run away.
And the scond one is that this peace and all
people who come there. On the contrary if you
do not have this, Ashrams will be reduccd to
zero. It has happend in many places. You
don't blame me why our Ashrams do not run.
am loving,
Mother's House: How Mother will treat these
you can starve, but give to others kindness and
sweetness so that the impression on the people,
bless you.
This is I give to you, so I have to tell you,
that you might be highest of the highest, first
reside me with Love.
The second thing I have to ask is that you
be peaceful. Try to have peace with yourself.
I am asking for two things now. It is a Now don't fight with yourself. Now, the western
funny thing that Mother has to ask for a gift. The people have one problem that they fight with
gift you have to give is the first thing is that themselves. "How is this that this is happening
you should express peacefulness through your to me?Iam this !I am So bad! I am no good!" If
own character. But it does not mean that you go on fighting with yourself then you will
people who are peaceful are timid, or who are not progress. You should say that, "I am so
morbid people or who tolerate nonsense. No, good, what's wrong with me? I have got my
but the people who are peaceful resistance. realization, what's wrong with me? There is
You are not afraid of anything. You are not nothing wrong with me". Have that confidence
going to bow down to anything, compromise in oneself, and then it will work out. Not that
with anything, but you have that sort of a you start shouting at others, but supposing you
temperament you should develop and express understand that there is nothing wrong with
you. You have to be peaceful. You all have
-is very important.
Nirmala Yoga
22
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-24.txt 
 to be very peaceful. You have seen, my pcace- Sahasrära is open, the heart will open auto-
ful nature has solved so many problems just matically, so you will have peaceful life.
like that. You have to achieve that peace
within you. That peace has not to be lost at
any cost, should not be expressed outside, In a eriy established by the end of next year, but
LIEO-
On my birthday today so that you be prop-
My peace itself becomes terrible. You first two conditions should be there. If you are
way,
don't have that kind of possibility. Don't do not ready for that, God will never give you an
it, never do it that way, try to make your fore- Ashram. He does not want to give Ashram to
head relaxed. Many pcople come to me with face some funny people. It becomes such that some
like that (distorted, twisted face) and I see pcople have no place anywhere, come in the
bhoots sitting in their forchead, then I shout Ashram. So unless and until you have people
at them, forehead relaxes. "I am not doing it, of that calibre who remain loving and peaceful
Mother is doing it". Relax. If you relax you will then the Ashrams will be established.
find that your heart also opens out-why can't
you open your heart? Because you have no trust
in yourself. It will open your Agnya, open your
Sahasrāra, and your heart will open. Once the
You should be able to have Ashrams in
every place.
May God bless you.
ONE MORE EXAMPLE OF SHRI MOTHER'S COMPASSION
In June 1982 Shri Mataji visited Portugal. Many people got realization and the blessings
that were showered by the grace of Shri Mataji can not be described here.
One of the ladies who got self-realization asked blessings for her son who was in prison and
led a life of delinquency from a very early age. She showed the photograph of the boy to Shri
Mataji asking : "Mother what can You do for my son !" Her Holiness closed Her eyes and after
some seconds declared : 'now he is my son' then told the Sahaja Yogis that only thing we had to
do was to raise his Kundalini.
Later he was given freedom due to an amnesty. We invited him for meditation at home
and raised his Kundalini. Vibrations poured down very strongly and he behaved with the open
mind characteristic of a seeker.
We bow to the powers of Our Mother Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi.
We rejoice in our hearts for the compassion and blessings we are being granted every
THoment.
It was in full freedom that Kundalini responded to the vibrations of Shri Adi Kundalini.
It is in full freedom that we decide to start a completely new life, following the way of
Dharma.
jo A
With the power of our wishes we pray that all our brothers and sisters who get realization
accept the blessings that come from Kundalini awakening and from the practice of Sahaja
Yoga.
With unending love, Jai Shri Mataji.
-L. Garrido.
Nirmala Yoga
23
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-25.txt 
 Birthday Celebration
AIWAN-E-GHALIB, DELHI
28-3-83
Concept and Reality
At the very outset, I would like to thank of helm-of-affairs, are also in charge of the
Dr. Nagendra Singhji for being so kind to helm-of-affairs of God. A day will come, when
grace this occasion. Actually I have always they will take up their new roles, when they will
treated him like my Jyéshtha (es, elder become aware that it is God who rules them, it is
brother of husband), and find it difficult even He who does it, it is He who has created every-
how to express my gratitude the way he has thing and it is He who enjoys everything.
been kind to get this time, come over and talk
to you about me, whom he had known for so
For this awareness, as you have very kindly
said Sir, it's important that you have to be for-
tunate seekers. The seeking ultimately has to
many years.
The day I knew him, I knew that he was a come to human beings. Because all that is
very very great soul. But as is in the bureau- done through mental projections and concep-
cracy, you are not supposed to discuss religion. tions has one good point that it is always expo-
Neither you are supposed to discuss anything that sed and comes to an end. Every set enterprise
lies beyond your job. But when I was studying of human beings only moves in a lincar way
minutely the various permutations and combinat- and at a point it drops down. That is why, all
ions of human problems, I was really always very our conceptions and all our ideas are challeged
much encouraged to know that there are people after some time.
like him also, His greatness you will know very
soon; and his sister about whom he was saying,
herself, is another very great soul and the time of democracy or capitalism, we are talking of a
I spent with her, I was really so much enamou- concept but not of Reality. For me, I am the
red and encouraged to see such a learned per- greatest capitalist I think, because I know my
sonality. Like her brother she knew so much
of beautiful things about God, and beautiful I am the greatest communist, that despite having
things she said from Raghuvansha' and everything in life, I cannot enjoy my life
Kälidāsa.
or
In politics when we talk of communism
powers and my properties, and I own them.
without sharing it. "Every moment of it,
"every' moment of it.
I found myself very lonely always, where I
could not talk of God and His greatness and
His kindness for human beings in the company these ideologies become one at the lotus feet of
of people who were doing work other work than your Spirit. Spirit is the only thing that is at
of God. It was such a solace and such a hope that the centre, and at the periphery if yon look at
people who apparently appear to be in the charge things, they look as if they are separate and
So the meeting point only comes when all
Nirmala Yoga
24
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-26.txt 
 different. But if you can approach somehow it is in my 'central nervous system, 'actually' 1
into that state where your Spirit resides, you will feel, that you are a part and parcel of me. When
be amazed to see that everything integrates, Doctor Sahab's sister was sitting next to me,
everything co-ordinates, and there is no differe-
nce, say, in Mohammad Sähab, Dattätréya, her body is part of Me and I am part of her.
Rāja Janaka or Shirdi Säi Nath. There is no
difference in their principle, if you can just get portion ?" She said, "Yes, how do you know?"
your Spirit. But this is a very major step for I said, I cannot tell you at this stage, but you
human beings. It is a very major step for will also know the same way.
human beings. Because they want to live with
concept and not with reality. This is one of the
problems which we have faced throughout in the compassion ? Because supposing this finger
Sahaja Yoga, all of us have faced it.
I 'myself" felt the pain within Myself; because
And I asked her, "have you got a pain in this
So when nobody is the other, then where is
is paining, and if I try to rub it, am I doing any
compassion to this finger ?-Because it is a part
Even about compassion we have a concept. and parcel of Me.
For example, if some body has a hospital and
goes to the hospital regularly and treats some
patients and does not take money, we think he
is a very compassionate person. This is also lop egos or we develop another system by
our concept about compassion. Actually when which we feel obliged or anything. But with
reality expresses itself as compassion, then you reality you just do it. It just works. You start
don't do anything about it. For example, to say speaking in third person. Like you say, "It
that I raise your Kundalini, also I don't know does not work out." "It works out". What
if I do that. Because you are all ready, you are is this It' that is working it out ? Then you
all like candles. I am a candle which is enligh- realise that you are working for that great power
tened, and if this candle enlightens another one, of God which is His Divine Love, which is all
I do not think I haye done a great job. Because pervading, which is doing all living work and
if I am enlightened and then if you are ready you have become part and parcel of it.
and if I enlighten your candle, then it is just
done. This is what reality is. There is no
question of having any humility about it, but ego, which has gone to such an extent that in
that is a fact ! I really do not do anything. You the west if you go, you will recognise it much more
are all made ready for this purpose. God has
prepared you like this, and you just have to very good at hiding it. We may be very egoi-
accept yourself, and if this works out in a simple stical, but in our every day-to-day life we are
straightforward manner, you get your realiza- extremely humble to express it.
tion.
So, the difference between the reality and
the concept is this: That with concept we deve-
Same thing I found about the concept of
than you recognise in India. Because we are
If you go to a party,-simple thing I will
tell you,-and if you don't drink, every body
will say "why don't you drink, you must drink,'
or they force you, go on forcing you. You
say, "Baba, I don't drink.
some' lie. You have to tell for this, to hide
this thing from others, to achieve a greater goal,
you have to give up some lower goals, of telling
lies also. You have to say that "Doctor has
Many people think that I have cured people
so I have done any sort of a good deed or may
be some obligation. But to be very frank, that
is also a concept. Because what do I do to a
person ? When I cure that person, I don't do
anything. The reason is : when "I feel that I
am yourself, you are a part and parcel of Me,"
it is not that I feel from my brain, but actually
You have to tell
25
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-27.txt 
 told me notto drink." "Oh! forget the Doctor." believe in a morul life. In a moral life, where
Then if you say that "Now you see, the prob-
lem is I have allergies, I get into trouble". moral life. But we don't talk about it till you
Somehow, you escape.
say that, "Why do you drink?"-Then: "You matically you accept it.
are a matron. You are very ego-oriented.
You are very interfering.
show off."
you are married to a woman and lead a 'very
get your realization. After realisation auto-
But if you even once
But by chance if you say that you have to
be moral, then they just get after you. They
say, "We have achieved our freedom, and this
Victorian Lady is telling us some out of date
things, and why should we accept." So the
concept of ego itself is so funny that they do
not know that they are cateching on their Agnya
Chakra.
You are trying to
See the concept of ego is just...!-To be vir-
tuous is a problem these days. If you are vir-
tuous, everybody will attack you. But if you
'even" mention about virtue, you are out for a
crucifixion, or you are out for poisoning, or
something people will do. Because of the con-
cept of ego.
In this great assembly of realized souls,-
which is a very very great thing, to have so
But in Sahaja Yoga, ego is not a concept but many saints sitting around,-you know that
a reality. Because when a person becomes ego- the ego means the catch of the Agnya chakra
istical his Agnya chakra cateches, so he comes and it is a reality. Somebody may say, I
to the Sahaja Yoga centre and says, "Now see,
my Agnya has caught up". He says, "I am
suffering from ego disease." Openly, without soul, he will say "Mother, I have got my
feeling shy about it ! Because it is like a saree Agnya chakra catching, you please take it away,
which is now become black, so I Because it becomes a reality to him. And when
cleaned. He is not identified. Concepts give it becomes a reality, you must know you are
you all misidentifications with 'everything. So enlightened.
when it comes to reality, all this misidentifications
just drop our and that is why I have seen people when there is light you start "seeing' what is
fransform sofast. I mean, you connot believe wrong with you. You start sceing that we are
it, how people transform.
Now as Dr. Warren has told you that in hall is going to cause problem to 'all of us'.
west, we have lots of seekers, but the western
civilization is the civilization of the tree. They scious' within yourself.
are growing without their roots. While we
Indians know about the roots, we are not In the United Nations and everything I have
bothered. They are not at all in the knowledge seen, that it is only they are working on the
of their roots. The trouble is, they have be-
come so ego-oriented that their concept of ego cious. But in reality they haven't got it on
makes them forget that they have roots. Even their central nervous system, as you all have got
to accept that they have roots, they find it it. They will say, "All right, you are brothers
impossible. Under these circumstances what and sisters, we must help the nations, we must do
happens, that the ego itself reacts on itself. And this," and all that. But when it comes to rea-
that is why all the western societies today are lity, when it comes to the working of it, you
collapsing under that pressure of ego. But if find they do not do it. They just do the other
you have to talk to them it is not possible to way round. Now, you cannot explain, you may
tell them. For example, in Sahaja Yoga we write books after it and you may write dogmas
have no ego". Alright you have nonel Because
better not say. But supposing he is a realized
better get it
But
If it is all darkness, you do not see:
'Any' problem to this
sitting under one roof.
And that is how you become "collectively con-
This is also another concept people have.
15
concept which they got it from their Uncons-
Nirmala Yoga
26
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-28.txt 
 expression of love and the waves of this ocean of
and you may write many articles about it, But
actually they just can't do it, by temperament,
because they are not SPIRIT.
love expressed all over the world.
Even if you meet 'one' single Sahaja Yogi
But when you becomes the Spirit, the Spirit, somewhere, you will be amazed the way he
leads his life. And the way he is so beautiful,
reality, the concept becomes your awareness. In that he impresses people immediately. Though
your chetana (taa) you start feeling others some people do try to trouble him. But God
*within' yourself. So what is there, from Canada looks after Sahaja Yogis,-is a fact. And Sahaja
or from Australia, I feel when these people meet Yogis all of you know, how He looks after and
the way they love each other, the way they enjoy how He just tries to protect youin a very simple
being the colleetive conseiousness itself is the
and bcautiful way.
each other. When these Westerners go to the small
villages in India, the way the villagers just em-
To know God 'itself" is such a great' bless-
brace them, and the way they become one with ing, because He is the God Almighty. The God
who has all the powers' and all the loved ones.
He is our Father, He is waiting for us to enter
lies about each other. But just a meeting of into His Kingdom, to enjoy that peace and
these people, like a huge family ! The whole beauty of His Being, because He has created us
system of joy giving and enjoying, is 'so' beauti- and He wants this creation to come up to that.
Today, the great day of होनिका दहन (Holiki
Dahana), where the symbolism of this occasion
each other, we have never seen people going
into politics, fighting with each other or saying
ful that even to watch that itself is like warching
a very beautiful drama of Krishna's Leelā !
I have seen this happening in all the parts is that the Satanic forces were burnt by the
innocence of Prahlada. And that is what we
of the country. When people come from across
they may be Muslims, Hindus, whatever they have to remember, that when the Sahaja Yogis
are, the friendship and the love and the fond- take to innocence and complete dependence on to
ness to do for others, is so great that people their VIBRATORY AWARENESS, which is the
are surprised that how can it be that these indication of God's Manifestation through them,
people who are living together like this are so they are 'completely' protected, and even a sata-
nic person like Holika could not burn him.
And this is the day today, we have to recognize
that as Sahaja Yogis we stand no dangers in life.
We are fearless people, but we are humble pcople,
loving people and anxious to sare as many as
possible. To raise the whole humanity into
another awareness, in the process of your evolu-
tion you have to achieve, for which you have to
work hard. As Tukārāma has said very clearly:
much helpful to each other, so much loving to
cach other. They never quarrel, they never
talk against cach other. There is no question
of people who will try to cut each other's throat.
Because the competition is in loving more, the
competition is in giving more, the competition is
in understanding. There is no problemin the
society of Sahaja Yoga.
Sir, you will be happy to know, though our
society is not so large. Compared to this uni-
verse, ours is a very small society. But you
will be amazed we 'never' have problems which
normal people have. We are really abnormally
normal. Because we have no angularities, we
have no problems. People have become so honest,
so courageous, so bold, so loving, so giving, I am
myself sometimes,-I feel so enamoured by this
"Yéryā gabādyāché Käm nohé."
-This is the work of the Great Virās. Only
the courageous can do it.
Because you know, how sometimes one has
to face this world,-the difficulties and critici-
sms-,and how people try to insult you and
trouble you, where you have to keep your
peace. As realized souls, I congratulate you
Nirmala Yoga
27
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-29.txt 
 very much. So many realized souls are sitting
here today is the greatest honour for any She is a Yoga Bhoomi. And as Indians, you
Mother.
To my great country India, I bow, because
have a 'special advantage, because as I told you
My age is now quite a lot, as you know, and that Ashtu-vināyakas, all are here, all the
I 'never' felt ten years back, that within ten Jyotirlingas are here, allthe Adi Shakti's Peethas
years I will see 'so' many people being realized. are here, all the three and a half Peethas of the
My father, as I told you, was a very great soul Kundalini are in Maharashtra. All of you
and he himself had told me that unless and
until you find out a en masse method of realiza- We have to get from the West, and that is the
tion, you should not talk about it. Because great Saints that are born in the West. It is
unless and until it is en masse, people are not
going to recognize God, nor they are going to once they take to Sahaja Yoga, they really
recognize any saints. But today, when it has dedicate themselves and they think there is
become the reality, when it is no more a con- nothing more needed to be done. This is what
cept: God is no more a concept, it is the reality. their life is. The way they have worked in
the joy and happiness of your Spirit, Sacchida- Australia, I was amazed! There are five centres,
nand Sthiti ( , the state of Truth, they have started, and 'every centre, is doing
Attention and Bliss) is just manifested, and I so well, that it is amazing to see how these
am enjoying all that.
I do not know how to thank you for years back, can you believe it ! And he took
organizing the birthday of your Mother. Nor- Sahaja Yoga to Australia, and today you find
mally people don't think of the Mother in
Kaliyuga, they say. But I must tell you, there
is one person sitting before you, Dr. Nagendra of them who got realization 'settled down' in
Singh, who was a great devotee of his mother, Sahaja Yoga. Absolutely settled.
and his mother was a realized soul, a great
realised soul. I met her many a times and I
always made it a point to see her. And her you being Indians get realization very fast, no
children have got that from her.
know all about it. But there is something more
most surprising that they are "very' saintly, and
people,-Warren got his realization only two
"so many'. In a hall,-I spoke, there were four
to six hundred people. Not only that, but all
So the same way one has to feel. Though
doubt, much faster than them. You have much
And this is what one has to recognize, that greater facility, because of your 'Punyas' (works
in this world there are "many people who are of merit) you are born in this Punya Bhoomi.
basically very great Spirits. Only thing you But still, one has to know that in Sahaja Yoga
have to approach them, find themout, understand you have' to work out in such a way that this
them, and discover them.
Sahaja Yoga becomes a Maha Yoga as predi-
ted by Gyaneshwara.
Now Sahaja Yogis are not so much upset as
they were about 10 years back. Now they
know that there are many people in this world
who understand Sahaja Yoga, But that is not
sufficient. We have to give realization to many. in My lifetime I will be able to see that you
thousands and thousands of people have to get have achieved that great state within yourself
realization. This is to prove, when you celeb- and without, that people would say that the Mahā
rate my Birthday, that this is not any more a
Kaliyaga but KRITA YUGAhas started, and that
Krita yuga has to be finished now to bring the
Satyuga, on this earth.
I am sure with all your love and affection for
each other, for me, 'and' for the whole humanity,
Yoga has really been accomplished by Sahaja
Yogis.
May God bless you.
Nirmala Yoga
28
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-30.txt 
 Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Understanding the Love of God
Public Programme
Caxton Hall, London
LI.5.83
For the last so many lectures we have been moncy and all these concepts are your own.
saying that you cannot pay for God's love. It He didn't make this world to get any fruits out
makes me laugh sometimes.
of it; nothing. He just made it because He
loved. He wanted to express His love, just to
Human beings can never understand His manifest that love, he made this world. There
love, because they live in a very limited sphere. is 'nothing' else expected. And to put the
His love is unlimited, His forgiveness is unlimi-
ted, even this word 'unlimited, and infinite', we
do not understand, because we have not known understanding how forgiving He is, how kind
anything like that. And to say that something He is, how nice He is.
is genuine is also like certifiying something that
is genuine, you don't need a certificate. Even
that human beings don't understand. We live West-always, even
with artificialities, we try to find the truth, problem I faced, was that human beings feel
again we accept artificiality as truth, again we guilty. And this guilt is such a big problem in
go on fighting, then we think this is the truth, the West, I just don't understand ! You see,
again that turns out to be something artificial why to feel guilty so much, and that is one of
thing or some sort of a mental projection.
human mind at that level is an impossibility, I
find in the beginning. But gradually they start
So the first problem I have to face in the
in Paris this was the
the hurdles of Sahaja Yoga, I have seen, that
people start feeling guilty to such an extent
All these limited endeavours of human that they don't believe that they can get reali-
beings, and the experiences they have, made sation. They think they are sinners, born,
them so conditioned that it is not easy to under- outright, permanently-branded as sinners,
stand God. He made all this universe in His and they can never get their realisation. I
compassion and love. He created you as
human beings also, in His compassion and love. self pity also. I would say it's even self-destru-
He doesn't need any thing. But He loves. And ctive.
you can't understand a person who loves beyond
any reason, without any reward. Just loves, for
love's sake. We can't think of 'one' human vishuddhi, because I felt that I must one day
being like that who can love, only for love's speak on this subject, "that this is absolutely
sake. Only after realization, as you grow
more and more, you realise that loving is the what ? Guilty for what ? If you ask yourself
greatest joy, And then you cannot think of you say "Oh, we are guilty, because we cruci-
money in relation to Him, its something you fied Christ".-At is the
say,-but I think even to say this "we don't maximum guilt a human being can say on his
need money" or "we don't take money," itself head. "We crucified Christ, we tortured all
is so low level, its so much gross. Because
mean just they brand themselves. It is beyond
Today I have taken the subject of left-
not intelligible to God that you are guilty". For
the most.That
the saints"; alright. But by being guilty what
Nirmala Yoga
29
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-31.txt 
 do you get? Do you get Him back ? Can you-even when you were born you never
you go back and correct that situation ? You
knew what was the pain of the birth; your
mother took over, -He has made you a human
being, so carefully, delicately built you up.
For what? What is the fruit of this beautiful
flower ? Why the flower starts eating itself ?
Have you ever heard of anyone like that ?
This is the worst disease with which we in the
West suffer.
cannot.
But harping upon that, you do get into
your subconscious mind.
a position where you are no more normal to
reccive the love of God. You recede into a
You get into
corner of your mind which is darkness, which
is ignorance, which is blindness, where you
cannot receive that beautiful ray, that eternal
flow that is coming in. You hide your Self at number of people that we have here today
the back and then you say "What about the surprisingly. But all of them had the same
sun ? I cannot receive it, because I don't problem, and I think all their psychologists,
deserve it", Behind all this ego-orientation psychoanalysts, we can say all books, all the
in the West,-though I think I wish they were
purely egoistical-they're not. All this ego
recedes back into that little pouch, what we everybody accepts them; and they curse
call the guilt. You say something to somcone.
It's not saying that point at that stage that so many wrinkles on their forehead. And if
"I've said it, all right, I've said it and I take the you ask them they will say," Mother, we are
responsibility, it's good", not that. But you very unhappy people". Just like asking un-
come back home and "Oh God, I should not happiness to come and decorate you.
have said that".
IS.
French-yes. We had at least double the
writers, the philosophers, 'everyone has done
to them-They have given these ideas and
themselves morning till evening, walking with
But it has a subtler meaning of which peo-
ple are not aware. These are the times when
So you wobble between one kind of action
into another kind, from say,-into an aggres- vou have to get vour realisation, this mass real-
sive to the another one of a receding type. And fsation has to work out,-is all prophecised.-
this wobbling really is very very troublesome. And these are very impartant times. All the
It can go on too much, the oscillation could
be so much that it can make you absolutely is helping us. All the elements are helping
frantic, diffident, and sometimes useless.
stars are acting to help us. The whole universe
us. We are on the stage. But when the actors
On the contrary, God wants to find human arrive on the stage they are finished, they can't
beings who are cheerful people, who are happy act, they can't do anything, they can't play
people, who are thankful to Him for His bles-
sings. The most unhappy animal in this world is different roles. And that is why one has to
a human being. Can you believe it ! Ani- understand the subtler effect of it, then only
mals don't know happiness and unhappiness, you will get rid of this guilt.
is also a good point. But the most unhappy
human being and the most complicated human forces. They are not less than any atomic
being has become so over self-destructive that . Now what is
a destruction force is built within himself.
their game. They are so involved with their
You are playing into the hands of negative
bombs built within yourselves.
the way it works out, I think people don't
realise; it's a very subtle method.
Now think of that force that has built you
up into a human. How with care and love,
without your knowledge, without troubling
Let's see, the atomic bomb, Hydrogen
bomb, what do we do with that?
30
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-32.txt 
 They will separate something which should possibile if you can somelhow or other get to
not be separated. We break atom, which is that integrating fcrce which is still there and its
not divisible, into it's divisible parts. So we I would say,
put a pressure to break them and when that
breaking force,-that's aggression I would say, forces have set in motion, of which you may
is worked out, that becomes another destruc-
tive force. So whatever effort we have put you don't know what darkness is there. And
into that, multiplies,-its not the same force.-
and that we use for our destruction. I mean,
this only human beings can do,to create things
to destroy ourselves. But this force which works ample, there is complcte darkness, alright? I
within our minds, within our selves within our
being, where we actually really hate ourselves- where you are sitting, we are all so separated,
sometimes I feel, the way we are destroying our-
selves,. This force we build within ourselves,
thanks to many non-sensical writers and con-
ditioners and people who talk of conditioning, hold this and say this is the truth. All
really condition you much worse.
quite dim. Thai's the last chance,
now, that has to be. The way the negative
be not aware at all, you may not be aware,
- to fight it what one has to da is to bring in
that light of the Spirit which integrates.
Darkness always disintegrates. For ex-
can't feel you, I don't know who you are,
I can't see I don't know who the people
are who are there, I would not know where
is the window, where is the door. I will
disintegrated personalities: and disintegrated
You should be singing and chirping like people always see aberrations, they see diffe-
a bird, you should be laughing and enjoying rent things, different auras, different things.
like a flower. While you find human beings Now it's a very vicious circle. Just think of
all looking so very unhappy. What's the it: It's a very great vicious circle we have:
reason? The reason is JUH are separated The vicious circie is, that we try to think about
fronm your own being. The being that integrates it, which is limited. Supposing I have a limited
vision, there's darkness, what will I fee? You
start thinking about it and thinking about it,
you, you are completely disintegrated. When
you disintegrate an hydrogen atom, you form
a very big force built into it. In the same way pondering over it. The more you think about
you are disintegrating your being,-your phy- it, the worse it becomes. Another way could
be people may try to solve this problem: to
another side, your spiritual being on another think that we are disintegrated, is to talk of
side. There's no integrating part. And when big things. "We are all brothers and sisters,
you connot feel that integration, you feel let's form U.N. council, let's do world organisa-
guilty, but that guilt is just a symptom of a tion." All blind people doing world organisation
will end up at the most as a labour... what you
call, labour department, That's all. With all
This is the way we are guing to destroy these institutions working in the big name,
ourselves. No other way. Our destruction is where are we? Actually when we become
aware, we don't need them. We don't need
sical being on one side, your mental being on
very big destructive force built-in.
not going to come to us from outside, that can
be controlled. It's going to come from within, at all.
within ourselves. Everything we do now after
disintegration, is further disintegration, or fur-
So this awareness is nothing but is the
ther building up that negative force within light of the Spirit within you which is missing.
The Spirit is watching you alright. It goes
up to a point, It sees your stupidity and
üp to a
very great extent I should say-and it's
ourselves.
But to integrate it, to make rou feel com-
plete integration with all your being, is only
your limitedness,-and it goes
31
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-33.txt 
 finished. It disappears and a person dies, or he told and prescribed and has been prophecised,
gets into trouble, He becomes crazy, mad, nobody seeks it. No one seeks it. See now
whatever you call it. He develops other disea- in the Bible. You have to be born again,
ses like cancer, which are caused by another Christ is to be born in your heart.' I mean,
problem here, as you know of Ekädasha.
they do it, even before solving the whole drama
they do it, of giving you second birth, by
So these forces are built within us of "Christening" you so-called. Hindus believe
negativity, when we go to the extremes f that without yoga there is no sense, "Yoga
of
negativity.
kshéma Vahamyaham" Krishna has said, that
all the time that you seek yoga, what are you
seeking? All these treatise and all the big
books and all these scriptures are aiming at
what? Even those who talk "you must live
with dharma, you must live balanced lives."
For what? Why do we đo it? What is the
destination?-And the destination is the Spirit.
can develop it, And there are 'so many things And today the background is so black and so
that can create this, that sometimes one would dark that this solution is the end of everything.
So in the Kundalini shāstra (scienee) we
can say that the left and right side when
nsed too much, you build up these forces in
the head, of cleven rudras, of the eleven
destructive forces. A cancer patient develops
it, but even before developing cancer, people
feel in this vicious circle, that how are you But do we realise this?
going to patch up the whole sky?
On the contrary the vicious circle builds in
within us. All the time, "Oh, see how the
And there's 'only one' thing that will save
the situation-is Self-realisation. All other things world is miserable. How can I be happy. I am
are destroying, are absolutely contusing. But so unhappy in life." I have yet to come across
there is only 'one' thing if you can do it saves
the whole. Like putting on the light, finished. But
people don't understand the importance of might say I am happy, meaning my ego is, you
Self realisation because some people ask me,
"What's the use of getting the cool breeze in
the hands?" Now see the big canvas of the
whole thing, the whole cosmos is in a jeopardy. vicious circle is set in, this ego-oriented circle
See what's happening to human beings today,
and if they are to be saved no use being un-
happy. Like in France they said "Mother, vicious circle, we go on, from one to another,
you cannot say you are a very happy person,
I said, "why? "Because that means you are
ignorant, of the shocks."* You see I have
to say I am very unhappy, you see! I had to
paint some lines here to show that I am very
"deeply' concerned, you know, worried" about
the whole world! But what is the solution
have you got? You want me to weep like you lust and greed, then that is God's love within us,
only? Is that the solution? That if ten people That He is the embodiment of that Pure Love
are weeping you also join them weeping. Is which just loves, which has given you this beau-
that the solution? And the one and only tiful human life and wants to make you more'
method that we have, which has been already heautiful. He created all tihis creation for you
a person before realisation saying that I am a
happy person. May be ego-oriented people
see if he goes in a smart car or something like
that, he is very happy, on top of the world.
After ten minutes you see him. And this
or another one, it sets in. Another vicious
circle and another vicious circle, and another
moving on the wheels after wheels. Without
realising where we are going. And
vicious circle has to be broken, by one faith, by
one understanding: "That God is forgiveness,
God is love".
this
When we feel love for anyone without any
Nirmala Yoga
32
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-34.txt 
 and that He wants you to enjoy the counties of the forest how he lives, one should go and
of this creation. He wants you to enjoy as the
citizens of His realm and the kingdom of His
sce. But he's happy, he's full of joy. Oh, he has
to kill an animal he'll kill it, with his dignity
cat one or two days, finished. Then he lives for
ten days without food. Whenever he feels
Grace.
6Do we go to see someone who is highly hungry, he goes. He's not bothered. He doesn't
placed with a morose face, do we?
we will specially brush our hair, make our
hair into a beautiful thing, make our face nice,
dress up well to look that we are well. But
that's outside. Inside if we just feel "how
kind He is, how He has worked out meticu-
lously this blissful life of a human being". I done everything beautifully. After realisation
mean, think, how much He's done for us: you start understanding your Self and enjoy-
Instead of that if you are all the time going to
say," "I am very unhappy in life." I mean,
think of someone who does everything for you, is the "only way' you can get the light in. Enli-
and you just come back saying," "Oh, I am, a
Very unhappy person". What is He going to feel
about it? No gratitude.
That day
feel guilty for killing anybody, he's hungry, he
has to cat, hc cats finished. But human beings
are, they will cat someone without the need,
and then feel guilty. This is the problem.
He has made you in His own image. He has
ing your Self as you enjoy others. The fragra-
nce of others you start enjoying. Self-realisation
ghtenment.
Everybody talks of enlightenment. Enlight-
enment for some people is that you start jump-
Count your blessings one by one, that's ing. Is it enlightenment to be abnormal like
what one has 10 do. Is to have complete under that? Or take out your clothes? I mean, just
standing that He is God Almignty, He can do
anything that He likes. And we are the reci- understand. That doing all these non sensical
pient of His All Might. He is the Ocean of things how can that be enlightenment? Or tak-
love, and 'we' are the recipient of His love. ing to alchohols, drinking, or drugs, or any-
Let us feel that within ourselves, and under- thing, how can it give your enlightenment? Has
stand logically with wisdom. If this sets into your it given to anyone so far. It might to be some
mind, I think that's the best conditioning human
beings can hae. What you call in sanskrit but not enlightenment. In enlightenment you get
the "susanskāra", means the auspicious condi- integrated, you see your way through, you know
tionings. You see we don't have only condition- where you are standing and how yau are moving
ing and ego, we have a third thing also called in relationship to others.
good-conditioning. The conditionings that
have ruined your chances of enjoyment, let it
be brought round, and see for yourself. Logi- wise method, the way we deal with life, becomes
cally you can see how much He's done for a kind of a possession, and we are possessed by
you.
think how does it go into their brains. I can't
sort of funny strange experience you might get,
So the illogical method, I would say, un-
that negative force which is eating us off. And
we go on living with that idea, enjoying that
I mean, none of the animals were that idea that we are miserable people, or we are
comfortable, as you are, they don't know the unhappy, we are helpness. I mean, I have seen
idea of comfort, I mean they've never had people sitting on the streets and discussing,
even ehairs to sit down. It's easy to say nice to
be like animals, but just go and see the way stars coming in and we will all be destroyed".
they live, poor things. You know, even the King I mean, just imagine!
"Oh Thank God! there are going to be eight
Im
33
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-35.txt 
 But we have to think about the one who
has created us. Is He waiting for your destruc-
tion? Will He be happy with that? How much
are we co-operating with Him? With what care,
and love He's created ns, with what hopes,
whatever it is. What does He want to do for
us, that we are sitting down feeling guilty. And
now I have to tell openly, that it has come to
you also through other vehicles, apart from
the psychologists, psychoanalysts.
He has created you in your own glory, and
in your own dignity. He's not created you to be
only wasted like this.
Then the second thing that disintegrates us
Very much more is the idea that we are here to
live in a gross way. Somehow fighting, political
economic, all this nonsensical progress that we
are making. And everything is explained, all
destructive forces are explained in the name of
political or economic growth. I don't know if
it is growth, or whatever it is, but definitely it
is not love. Take it from me. It is not love,
That is why the economics of God is to be
Psychoanalysts! The other day we had a
girl. She came to see me. She is French, her
English was wonderful. And she said The
psychologists, they made me mad." I said, why? understood. Politics of God is to be under-
"They said I have bad relationship with my
mother, bad relationship with my father. bad they must have Self-realisation.
relationship with every third person. I don't
have, I have absolutely pure relationship. They He enjoys His generosity. Material things are
tried to put that idea into my head that there's to express your generosity, isn't it? What are
something abnormal, pathological about me, they for? The most enjoyable thing is to 'give',
which I'm not. And they are making my
brother's relationship also funny by telling him problems will be solved completely. Because
that I have bad relations with him". This is it.
She hit at the point of pure love. Disinte- The problems are because you want to grab.
grate. You can't have good relationship with
your own mother, with your own father, with
your own sister, with your brother, nobody. is no joy, there is no happiness, there is no re-
Because you cannot love except that you are
sexpoints, you have just relationship of sex. giving is the way you can get rid of that mate-
Even animals have better relationships than we
have, if you have to accept these psychologists. away. Give away everything hat you have
and they take money to suggest all these non-
sensical ideas into your head. There are some
sitting here, I will face them later on.
stood. And for human beings to understand it
THE
In His economics, generosity is the key note.
and when you give you will see your economic
you are here to give not take. No problems.
And once you start giving you get it as much
as you want, because if there is no outlet, there
lief from the material domination on you. But
rial domination on your head that you give
and you will be surprised how it flows.
Now when 1 say it is fantastic the way it
acts, fantastic the way it acts, I mean its easy to
sort of say that Mother is saying something
which is something miraculous. But what do
you think of Moses crossing the sea? You mean
it was miraculous, or it was a false story, what
do you think of it? It was absolutely true, that
he did cross the sea, with the help of God, he
could do it. What about Christ walking on the
water? He did, beeause by His nature he did it.
What about all the miracles that were done by
This is how they put in ideas into your
heads that you are a person who has no purity,
and that you are a sinner, you are a damned
person, and any person you look upon you
have only sex relationship, nothing else. I mean
are we sexpoints? With 'all' this evolution God
has made us into a sexpoint-that's what we
have done to ourselves. Reduced ourselves to
that point only.
34
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-36.txt 
 these incarnations. It's absolutely true. I am here point the Agyä Chakra, where you see the
to prave all af them. But you must get your crossing of it, you have to say Lord's prayer.
Realisation. Not before that, I can't prove it. You have to take the name of Christ, other-
wise Kundalini doesn't rise. Now most of the
You must enter into that realm of awareness,
otherwise I cannot prove it, It's true. The other people who are here, who are realised know
this. It has been proved to them. In the Nabhi,
I said, "How do you say?" He said "Because in this Void if it is hanging, you have to take
he looks like a fiction". I said, to human mind the name of Moses, whether youare jew or not or
they cannot understand God, who has millions you are hater of Jews or whatever you may be,
and millions of hands and eyes to workout his you have to take the name of Moses. The whole
movemeni of the Kundalini is to integrate all the
truths which are treated as miraculous. Some
day somebody was saying that Rama is afiction.
plan. So naturally Rāma is a fiction Krishna is
a fiction, everybody is a fiction. Because we
ourselves are ficticious I think. It's not that it people think it's falsehood, is good for noth-
is a fiction but we are 'incapable' of grasping ing, useless, -all these things are proved by the
that is miraculous, which is divine, and that's movement of the Kundalini in your Central
No. Everything path. And the greastest, and greatest thing
that is proved is that God exists, not only
exists but He is active, that be does 'everything
for us, that it is He who is the truth and is His
why he just call it, "Oh! ."
is true. Believe me, everything is true.
Now Rama's case let us take. Simple thing
like Räma's. Alright? Räma is a fiction. Many Power, the Brahma is the truth. The rest is all
of our Indians are very anglicised now very falschood and nonsense, It works in all details,
westernised. So they want to say "we don't in small details also. Now Sahaja Yogis have
want to believe in all this fiction", so they
become English you see. For them to become explain. You cannot explain also. When you
English is the last epitome, you see, the last become realised you are surprised how you are
word. So we don't believe in Răma nothing, helped, how you meet people, how you get to
you see, it's all our old style of thinking. But things, how things work out, and how it
He exists, and He is within us. Can be proved works out so smoothly, you just can't imagine.
with your Kundalini awakening. A person who Even to the smallest detail it can work out
has got "asthama", catches on the right heart. "beautifully'.
You have to take the name of Rama to cure
him, nothing else can cure him. It's simple. The
Kundalıni stops here. Many people don't believe the kingdom of God, not with these fanatical
in Christ."We don't believe in Christ". You don't ideas. Like you go to the catholic church and
believe in Christ, but under what circumstances? they say, Now you must confess". I don't
Why? Why don't you believe in Christ? "Be-
cause we don't think he existed. How can it be think that Christ would have ever said that you
possible? We do not believe in Moses, we don't better go and confess to these priests who are
believe in Christ, we don't believe in anyone".
Alright. Do you believe in yourself? Perhaps do by confession7
that is missing, Because the Self is not there.
If you know your Self, you will believe in
them. Because when Kundalini rises, at this priest. I asked hini. He is a nice man, he is a
point-you will be amazed,-at this point realised soul now, and he is working for Sahaja
whether you believe in Christ or not, at this Yoga. But he told me.
scen the mirncles of Sahaja Yoga. They cannot
But you have to be establish your self in
know where did they get this idea. I don't
even not realised souls. What are they going to
And then the answer came to me from a
"The reason is, in the
35
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-37.txt 
 Bible, it is written, that whatever is corrected this is the truth". No, see for yourself what is
on this earth will be corrected in the heaven,
that's why you better correct it by telling to all One, Like Christ has said, "Those who are
the priest." Now, by 'any' logical means, do you
think this priest can correct you telling them Moses and Christ are one, which can be prov-
anything? Whatever is to be corrected on this ed. Same in other religions.
earth is your Kundalini, and your chakras.
the truth, and you will be anazed that they are
Who are they'?
not against me are with me",
So religion is another way to disintegrate
you. You hate each other, fundamentalists
The language of the Bible has been--spec- fighting. For what? Fundamental difference,
ially the Old testament-has been extremely you know! Can you just imagine what is the
guarded. It was a security measure. Like "the fundamental of these religions? Is the Spirit,
tree of life" is nothing but the Kundalini isn't it? Is there difference between the Spirit of
one and another? Fundamentals are: "That God
is one. He has created us." And what are you
fighting about? Fundamental difference, you
know fundamental difference! Where there
which is enligbtened. Absolutely it is that, it
looks like that, like a tree.
The other day they were having a program-
me, I think today only, my children showed me,
"Look, the Kundalini". I went and saw. They
were describing about Moses something perhaps
and this was the tree of life they said. And my
exists no difference at all.
So we have psychologists, we have 'religious
leaders teaching us how to fight and hate God,
and you, and fellow beings, in the name of God.
This is another disintegrating thing that sets
into us. So you people who are thinking, should
grandchildren said, "See the Kundalini". The
language used may be, for security measures
may be but not a word, if it not changed by understand that "anything that creates such limi-
human beings, is false. Human being can
change also. That's a different point. But you
can see, in Sahaja Yoga you can see what is
changed, what is wrong, which is falschood,
you can see all these things.
tation within us, any kind of fanaricism, is dang-
erous not only to you, but to the whole society,
and if you support it even this much you are
supporting that destruction. With Sahaja Yoga
we ean establish this that anybody who is a
fanatic has problems, suffers from many disea-
ses which normal people don't.
So to disintegrate you, these things are
again created in the name of religion so called.
I mean these people are here for God or for
Then there are another type of people who
making you feel guilty? Like, say, Jews think say that "Alright, we don't believe in God,
that Christ was not a saviour. They are still because how can God create this fanaticism.
How can you blame God for fanaticism! I just
waiting for two hundred years. It's not true.
He is the one without him you 'cannot raise can't understand. He never created it. Actually
the Kundalini. One should understand that he He never created any difference between you
people, just a variety, just to make it look
beautiful, that's all. See He didn't create Eng-
land separately, this separately, to 'that' extent
the way you think. But he created them beca-
use they are different organs in the body of
God. Do we take out an eye and say "this is
an eye", so I do not have anything to do with
is the Mahāvishnu described.
But if I say something, that doesn't mean
that you should believe me, not at all, but you
should see for yourself. Because if you are inte-
rested in the emancipation of the whole world,
you should not get stuck on to one idea, stuck
on to one thing and say, “This is the truth and
it. Can we?
Nirmala Yoga
36
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-38.txt 
 It is like that ! It's simple as that, its so once that higher freedom comes into you, then
simplel The truth is so simple, and so starkingly you can feel the responsibility. The responsibi-
before you. That we are doing all these things: lity to be responsible for your freedom. To put
fighting, quarrelling, all the time within oursel- this beautiful responsibility onto you, you have
ves and without.
to know how to use your freedom.
Tetialo
Now for that, Self realisation, God has B This is only transition which has led all of
us into this feeling-guilty business or this aggr-
ession, can you imagine? If you could have
waited for a while without feeling so sick, I
mean sometimes. I feel the people are going
for a funeral, the way they look. Miserable. The
rest are busy creating such people. So there are
only two types of people one sees,-some who
placed this wonderful thing Kundalini within
us, very beautifully, in the best possible posi-
tion. It could not be better anywhere. To create
this happening within us, in our awareness, the
Kundalini has to rise and give us realisation.
Now people ask questions to God also: can
be. They can say, Why did He do it? Why are being victims and some who are victimis-
didn't He make us wise to begin with? There ing-
are many like that. He should have just made
u$ wise, just from monkeys dipped into some
wisdom powder, and pushed us out, as "wise
people living in the kingdom of God." Why freedom. He gave you freedom to know. And
didn't he do it in our evolution, why did he
make us so stupid? One can say to God, you all the problems you face, not God. God has
see, why did he create these problems!" But not created any problems for you. No, He
who are we to ask him questions? He does what
He likes.
So to have the balance in the centre, to stand
in the centre, God has created this little time
where you have to just learn how to weigh your
this freedom is the only thing that has created
wanted to make a very smooth ascent. He has
made your machine so beautifully.
But, there's a reason. If you have to enter
into that 'complete freedom' you must know no doubt. But because of habits, you may run
how to be free. If you are just abandoned down again into it, again you may have an as-
people, you have no sense of freedom you don't cent, again go down. It happens with some
know how to be choosy about the good and people, doesn't matter. But if you are steady,
the bad and you do not understand the value it is going to work out. It has to work out. God
of your own wisdom,-and if you are put in has to save His cereation. He has to do it. Only
charge. Imagine some mad people put it charge thing, how many are going to cooperate and
of a government, what will happen? So you take advantage of His compassion is to be
have to 'grow' up to that point, to Jeel your free- seen. That is the most important thing, how
dom, that in your freedom you are righteous, in many are going to be wise', to see to 'their
that freedom you are kind, in that freedom you own' advantage, to their own ascent, is the only
are absolutely balanced. And when that happens choice
to you, then only the higher freedom is given to
you. Because that is completely free. And
Despite all this you do get your realisation,
TIO
May God Bless you.
37
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-39.txt 
 Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
For Doctors
Brighton 26.7.84
The Fourth Dimension
and the parasympathetic
Now when he controls the parasypmpathetice
he controls the supply to all the centres through
certain movements, through certain kind of
technique. For example, some person is
suffering from a disease of the heart. Now, a
normal person who does not have this fourth
dimension will not know that he is suffering
The Fourth dimension that they mention
about, what do they mean by that ?.. (They
call that Transcendental state)
–They cannot describe it.
But what?
15
Supposing somebody has a low heart-beat,
low pulse-rate, or has a low consumption of
exygen or anything,-that's not a transcenden- from some heart trouble. He will have no
tal state because you are still in a state where
your attention is on your body. So it is not
transcendental. You have to "trans,-trans-
cendental means you have to jump on to the
parasympathetic.
idea. He will never feel his heart or anything-
till he suddenly gets the attack, and then he
dies. But at the very onset of it a person who
is in the fourth dimension, that is, a realised
soul, can feel that something is going wrong
with his heart. Also he knows how to cure
himself-the technique of curing himself. Also
he knows that he is the source of the medi-
cines that he has to give,- is a vital thing.
You see, we have 4 dimensions, you can
say. One is the dimension of the left sympa-
thetic, another is of the right sympathetie,
then we have got the central nervous system,
which is our conscious mind, and the fourth
one is the parasympathetic.
So this is the fourth dimension, is a great
potential becoming a kinetic force, like a egg
becoming a bird. So the egg.-we can see the
egg has no way of flying out.
There's a tremendous difference between an
egg and a bird. So such a person who gets
realization and gets established, is no more a
person who can be tested with these machines
and all that, because these machines deal only
In Sahaja Yoga we jump on to the para-
sympathetic--means, your attention starts cont-
rolling the parasympathetic nervous system.
But a bird can.
Now how do we prove it, that we become
the 4th dimension ?
First thing is, the person who becomes the with the physical side.
controller of the parasympathetic becomes the
auto. He can do things. He can do things,
like he can tell that another person is suffering is a realised soul can test another person. You
on these centres. Without going to any labo- don't use any machine for that. He becomes
ratory, without going to any medical check-up. the one who diagnoses, he becomes the one
On the fingertips. So the person who becomes who cures, he becomes the person who can
the 4th dimension, he becomes the auto, which soothe. Not only that,-on physical level. But
is the autonomous nervous system, you see, the somebody who is emotionally disturbed, then
auto part of it. He controls the parasympa- such a person knows precisely which centre is
thetic.
But it is he who can test. Even a child who
disturbed. He also knows how to put that
Nirmala Yoga
38
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-40.txt 
 centre right. You do not have to go to the cure human beings, but not people who are
lunatic asylum to get cured, But a person who abnormal-there is no word for that, but
has fourth dimension can cure that person of satanic people. So that's how it does not work
out in some people. Also the cases which have
gone very down, onto the state where we can
say now absolutely out of order, then Sahaja
So all the diseases which are only physical Yoga allows such a body to take another birth,
that sickness, because he precisely knows where
the trouble is, and how to put it right.
can be cured, which are psychosomatic can be and try.
cured, the combination of both can be cured.
Any combination of these things can be cured
by a person who is an established Sahaja Yogi.
So, because it is a fourth dimension, we can
not take medical science as a vehicle to express
everything, because this is higher than that.
But in many ways we can medically show that
people have been cured of Asthma, of Cancer,
of Leukaemia, of everything, through the vehicle
t
But in case a disease has gone so far that it
is irrepairable, or something artificial has been
introduced in the body, as they put steel-sticks
and all that,-then Sahaja Yoga does not work
on dead things, it works on living. If the organ
is still living, it can work out. But if it is not
living, then it does not work out.
of parasympathetic nervous system,-which
doctors cannot handle. Because they have their.
own limitation,-they cannot jump on to the
parasympathetic nervous system. And that is
why they cannot cure a patient who has prob-
lems of parasympathetic.
It works out on 80% of people. But the
20% of people on whom it cannot work out
are the people who do not have the basic
foundation to be a human being. They are sympathetic in case the basic conditions-if
like animals. Their attitudes are like animals. they are fulfilled.
All problems can be solved through para-
even worse than animals.
In medical science, people will even treat
Hitler. There is no discrimination. But as you
So a state that could be the so-called' 4th
dimension, would be where a person would be
no more a human being. He becomes either
a devil, or Satanic person. This has to be
accepted by medical science that there are
people who can be very devilish, and they can-
not ascend any further into the 4th dimension.
grow higher and higher, even in evolution, you
become more discreet. And at this stage you
cannot treat a person who is a hypocrite, or
who is a cruel man, or who is aggressive to
others, or who is practising methods to subvert
people-as we have many gurus who take
money and destroy many people, just for
The fourth dimension is not a mechanical money's sake. Such people cannot go to 4th
process, but it is a living process of the evolu- dimension, why should they talk about the 4th
tion by which you evolve to a higher being.
But for that you have to have some basic foun-
dations.
dimension ?
Such people have to be something so extra-
ordinary that they become righteous, virtuous,
A person who is an alcoholic, can be cured compassionate, and very dynamic people.
of alcohol, but a person who is cheating him- They have the greatest quality, is of compas-
self, cheating other people, is cruel to others- sion, which though we accept in our ordinary
or say a person like Hitler-he cannot exist. life, in medical science we do not accept.
He has gone beyond that state, where we can- But on what basis is medical science ? s on
not cure him, We can cure animals, we can compassion.
39
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-41.txt 
 So you 'become' the compassion. This is the
point, is to be seen when we talk of the fourth ract thing, but is a happening of evolution that
dimension, we talk of the beyond. And when has to take place, and this is in the last break-
we talk of the beyond, we have to project our through about which 'many' people, scientists
mind, to see what we expect ourselves to be and also doctors,-we can say psychologists-
when we become something of the 'beyond'. have talked about; though they are not taken
Åre you going to be the same mean, aggressive, seriously.
complicated human being ? Or are we going to
be something like a Saint ?
It's not poctry, it's not some sort of a abst-
So now there is time for us to think seriou-
sly about it, and to know that we are not only
So this projection is to be brought into the this body, mind and ego, but we are something
minds of the doctors. Unless and until they beyond. That is the fourth dimension, And
project their mind to that extent to see that if what are we there ?
we have to be at a higher position we have to
accept that we have to be better people.
We are the auto, and the auto is called as
Self. Unless and until you project your mind
Now Sahaja Yoga is the synthesis of all the higher, and do not get contented with what
three powers that are within us. The first is discoveries you have made, on a physical gross
the physical power, second is the emotional level, you cannot see the point of Sahaja Yoga.
power, and third is the evolutionary power. And what is there to argue about when Sahaja
You become the synthesis of all these three Yoga is curing people ? Why do you argue ?
Why don't you see how it is curing ?
It's not the analysis.
powers.
But medical science is the analysis. So it
just analyses physical side, goes on analysing,
so that you have one doctor for one eye and
another doctor for another cye.
Supposing a doctor is practising, and people
go and argue with him "How do you cure ?"
You will tell them, "What do you mean, I'm
not supposed to tell that, but I do cure."
Now you have a certificate, say from a
nosolution for many problems that we have. So, medical college or somewhere, so you think you
are a doctor. But supposing somebody has a
there must be something missing that we have certificate from the Divine itself, then why not
see ? Why not keep your eyes open like a
scientist ? Why close them by whatever you have
known so far ? Why to make a barrier from the
scientific research you have done ? Why not be
a research student in Sahaja Yoga also, and see
for yourself that you really achieve that state,
But a doctor has to understand that thcre is
they have to raise their eyes higher to see that
to look for.
Of course, medical science is very important
because once you get your realization, even you
may not be a doctor and you become establis-
hed Sahaja Yogi, you can cure people. But
with medical science you can prove that it has
been cured. So medical science also has it's
own purpose.
you have to become that state.
Now, those who talk of the fourth dimension
otherwise make people mad. They make them
lunatics. They end up as lost cases. So how can
that be a fourth dimension ? There are so many
cases of these people one can show, that doing
those horrible courses and things, they have be-
And the basis of medical science, that is the
compassion, is now expressed through the hu-
man being who now becomes the embodiment
of compassion.
40
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-42.txt 
 It is actually the evolutionary process.
see parasympathetic works at different levels of
our evolution. Say, at the stage where you are
the matter, it organizes you in the periodic
table. Who does that organization ? It is para-
sympathetic. Then, when you rise higher, as
Moreover to be only alright in health is not an animal, then it gives you the understanding
sufficient. One must also see that point. One of eating food, seeking food-by which animals
should not be so much attached to the body, seek food. Then as it rises higher, it gives you
because supposing you have all wrestlers or another feeling-of protection. You seek pro-
boxers in this country-now take a position tection. Animals also secek protection. That
like that-Then what will happen ? As it is we is how the evolution goes on, by giving these
have too many of them. Now what we need feelings within us. Or we can say, as the para-
are the Saints. Not physically overhealthy sympathetic starts manifesting higher and higher
the seeking starts becoming higher and
You
come realy mad. And they are good for noth-
ing, they are cheats. They are doing all the bad
things that one can do. So how can you say
that this meditation helps anyone to be a better
person, or a better person in health ?
people, who will try to boss over others, but
people who are saints, who help-without higher.
charging any money, without any aggression,
out of compassion, cffortlessly-those who are
suffering.
Then it comes upto the human stage, where
people seek food, protection. Then when they
achieve that, they seek money, they seek posses-
sions, they seek the possession of other people,
you see,-sometimes called as love. Seek all
kinds of such things, but still their seeking
is not finished.
Then the
But there is another barrier, which must be
told very frankly. That when you become a
Sahaja Yogi, the vital forces of new dimension
start pouring. Effortlessly. And you do not
charge any money for that-you enjoy your
own compassion. Compassion that is the basis
of medical science. So that state, may be,
doctors may not like to have. But there are
many, many people who cannot be cured by Kundalini, Which is actually the power of
Sahaja Yoga, and they can come to doctors, so
doctors should not have fears about it.
Still they are seeking.
same parasympathetic creates
an urge within us that we have to seek some-
thing higher. This last feeling after the human
stage is to be manifested, and for that there is
a residual force placed within us called as the
desire within us, which has manifested every
thing but it is still residual because it has not
yet manifested itself, because this is the power
How many people can be helped by Sahaja
Yoga, cannot be said. But those who come to
Sahaja Yoga can be helped. So it should be
at least accepted as a higher type of redemption
or a curing power, which must be accepted.
And those who "can' be cured by that must be
given a chance. And there should be no barrier
about it.
of desire to be one with that divine vital force.
And that's why it rests in the sacrum bone-
sacrum : meaning sacred ; so people knew about
it-and then when this force rises through the
various centres, and picrces through the fonta-
nelle bone area, you actually get the cool breeze
coming out of your head. For that you donot
need any medical science, any laboratory,-just
Q: What is this parasympathetic in fact 7 put your hand on top of such a person and you
If it's described in the medical sciences as a 8get the cool breeze coniing out of such a per-
thing which balances, brings everything back son. Not only that, but that person himself
IS
feels that cool breeze coming out of his
head and after some time he feels it cöming
into balance.
out of his own hands:
SHRI MATAJI: It depends on, it depends on.
41
Nirmala Yoga
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-43.txt 
 Then he tries to use. And when he uses that,
he finds that this is the power that works out
all the cures. So one has to realize and accept
that at the state of the human level you cannot
achieve the fourtb dimension, you have to beco-
me something more.
ssed. And you think that you have already
been something different.
But to be different is not the point. To be
higher' is to be seen. And higher means the
one who has full control over himself, who is
"completely' relaxed, who is at peace, who is
And this is the thing where the people who compassion, and who is a higher personality.
Anybody who is physically fit is by no chance
you become is a possessed person. They brain- a very evolved person, or who has got the fourth
wash you, you become a dffierent person. They dimension. On the contrary they also come to
me and ask me, "Mother give us peace".
want to cheat you for money have used, that what
put some possessions into you, you become posse-
ON ORIGINAL SIN AND THE SHUDDHA ICCHA (PURE DESIRE)
OF THE UNIVERSE
one sin? This is a state essential for a realised
The state of innocence is like being like a
child in the presence of God, dependant on soul and represents-the full opening of the
Him for everyting-and accepting everything Moolādhāra Chakra. Of course, it has to be
He gives. In such a state, one has no desires
or actions of one's own, but is a true reflector
or instrument of His Desire-the Shuddha but God acting through me,"-for that is
Icchā (17-1) of the Universe-manifested in Blasphemy and Sacrilege of the most severe
the Shri Adishakti. In such a state one has no
free will and one's ascent and evolution are
uninterrupted-effortless-and painfree.
so in reality. There is no point in doing what
one wants, and saying, "Really it was not me,
sort.
This is the state Lord Krishna describes in
the Geetā, and the Lord Christ prayed for-
when he said, "Not my will but Thine, O
Lord.."-And this is the state we can achieve
If however, one chooses to have free will
-then one expresses one's own desires. It is
obvious that these must be limited and imper-
fect-and hence one gets into trouble, distress of the Divine Mother.
and difficulty, In the Bible, Adam and Eve are
described as eating of the tree of the know-
ledge of Good and Evil-i.e. entering the world simple, just say everyday: "Not my will but
of dualities and so God informed them that Thine" to the photo of Shri Mataji, in medita-
they and their children would be in trouble.
so easily in the Sahasrāra-through the Grace
So how to attaln, establish and fix it? Very
tion,-and pray to become a pure instrument
of the world's Shuddha Iccha-And as free will
In innocence there is no duality only disappears, so do ego and superego--so as the
oneness-the "isness" or "tattva". Everything Moolādhāra opens fully, so does Agnyā, and
just is-and there is no Good or evil-for if this is the power and grace of Omkära as
one has no free will, one doesn't act, God acts
for one,-and if one doesn't act, then how can
manifested in these two chakras.
-Dr. Rustom
Nirmala Yoga
42
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-44.txt 
 WHERE THINGS WENT WRONG
A notion which emerges when one stresses (public place) of Athens where Socrates used to
the basic difference in spiritual achievemments talk and, presenting my hommage to him, I felt
between India and the West is the one of "posi- the atmosphere filled with deep and majestic
tive conditioning". Because of positive conditio- vibrations. The wind started blowing.
ning, laid down by the main stream of tradition
and culture, the common man in India fears
God and thus is either afraid of sin or, at least, Greece was not absorbed by the people of that
Aware that he is committing a sin. That is, basi- time. Hear what Socrates had to say to his
cally, he is endowed with dharma awareness, judges in his "apology"
that awareness which is a prerequisite of spiritual
evolution, If dharma awareness, the awareness,
Alas this abundance of divine blessings on
Please do not be offended if I tell you the
truth. No ma'n on earth who conscientiously
opposes either you or any other organized
democracy, and flatly prevents a great many
wrongs and illegalities from taking place in
the state to which he belongs, can possibly
escape with his life. The true champion of
justice, if he intends to survive even for a
short time, must necessarily confine himself
to private life and leave politics alone."
of right and wrong, is largely missing in the
megalopolis of today's West it is because things
went wrong a long time back, at the very roots
of our Western civilisation.
The foundation of the Western civilisation is
to be found in Greece, whose culture influenced
Rome and christianity. Here are a few comments
inspired by a one week visit in Athens.
Between sun and sea, Greece and its islands After this, Socrates was sentenced to death and
used to be a blessed land. On the acropolis of with him, the very conscience of Athens was
Athens thousands of tourists flock every day to murdered.
admire a marvel of world architecture: the Par-
thenon. The Parthenon is the temple of the
tutelary goddess of Athens, Athena parthene, on Greece in both the fields of politics and
that is, Athena the Virgin. As Shri Mataji said morals. As far as politics are concerned, the
that Athena stands for Adi Shakti, the Parthenon history of the Greek cities is a tragic one, full
is the temple of the virgin Adi Shakti, Gauri or of hate, wars, destruction. As far as morals
Kundalini. Athena is represented with a helmet are concerned the story is worth a closer look.
adorned with a glaring crest, holding a large
shield and the spear, often fighting against the
titans (asuras) of the right side. It is through dressed. But when I went to the National Arch-
Her auspicious protection that Athens rose to eological Museum of Athens I was surprised
prominency, glorified by political supremacy to feel heavy vibrations and a very joyless atm-
(Pericles) and the blossoming of arts (Phidias). osphere. I then realised that all the statues of
On top of this, the blessings of the Divine the other gods are nude statues designed to keep
Mother to the Greek civilisation manifested the attention on the physical body in a vary
through the teaching of the Adi guru. Indeed ambiguous way. Nudity can be powerful and
Socrates, the father of the Western philosophy, innocent (Michelangelo) or symbolical (the
raised human consciousness to an unprecedented heavy breasts of the Mother in India express
level of self enquiry. I went on the old agora her maternity; the lean form of Mahavira his
The negative forces launched their attacks
The virgin Athena is always represented fully
Nirmala Yoga
43
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-45.txt 
 asceticism). But nudity in the Greek tradition
is sensuous. It is sensuousness raised to cultural general, my second specific.
respectability by the power of art. It is a trick
to keep the attention entrapped in a dimension
where the Spirit cannot get joy. It is a missuse alos gaies (navel of the earth) of the ancient
of aesthetics. It is not innocent. To make this world and, according to Shri Mataji who went
point clear there are to be found statues glorif- there, the navel of the Universe, which lies at
ving homosexual lovers, obscene statuettes and the geographic centre of Greece, I had prepared
designs whose replica fill the tourists' shops of myself to worship Shri Vishnu on the Adi
today's Athens, bearing the mention: "remem- Nabhi chakra and seek the blessings of His
ber Greece". While in India perversions were, so evolutionary power, Shri Lakshmi: Let the
to say, legitimized by tantric religious interpret-
ations, in Greece they were, in a much bigger a typical Sahaj, unexpected way, I got the
way, legitimized by art. The perversion of the answer. Before the rock where the priestess
ancient Greek lifestyle, subtly expressed in its used to stand, at the core of the sanctuary,
art, tells the tale of a gigantic fight between stood a swayambhu Ganesha with big eyes, left
light and darkness...where darkness unfortun- trunk, smile, bent in adoration, absorbed in
ately prevailed. The apollinien calling of the childlike joy, looking from below at the rock
Greek culture (Apollo, light, clarity, knowledge) that symbolises the earth, Gauri, the Mother,
was overcome by the dyonisien temptation looking at it and nothing else. Shri Mataji had
(Dyonisios, intoxication, ritual debauchery). described it to me. I felt joy rushing through ny
As a result Greece was cursed and fell under tired limbs. And I knew: this, and nothing else
the domination of the Turks for about five is THE answer.
centuries.
What is to be done? My first remark is
I went to the sanctuary of Delfi, the omph-
West rediscover dharma-awareness. In Delfi, in
More specifically, Western Sahaja Yogis
on the following
Torn between the Greek temptation of could put their attention
sensuousness and the morose christian ascetici- project to purify the roots of their civilisation
sm, Western art, on the whole, did not manage and of their subconscious. We need Greek
to find its balance on the centre in a joy giving speaking, good Sahaja Yogis to go to Athens
manifestation of man's deeper reality. It for perhaps six months. Get a job, prepare
became only too often frivolous or mental, Shri Mataji's programme there. If Shri Mataji
Today the curse which started from Greece, could come, say, in spring 1986 we could
millenia ago, returns to Greece through the
medium of mass tourism and holiday lifestyle: Then, in the Puja, we would present Her with
Thousands of shameless more or less young the fiery helmet; the spear and the shield of
Western tourists defile the beaches and challe-
nge the sea with their nudity which, again,
aims at subduing the attention. Some islands OM TWAMEWA SAKSHAT SHRI ATHENA
have become a world Mecca of homosexuality
and these hellish holidays are called: sun, sea
sex. One feels like adding a fourth "S", for
Satan who, like everybody knows, is the prince
of seducers.
have the SIXTEENTH Sahasrara day there.
Athena. What else needs to be done?
PARTHENE SAKSHAT SHRI NIRMALA
DEVI NAMOH NAMAH!!!
-Gregoire
Vienna 12 April 1985
Nirmala Yoga
44
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-46.txt 
 Maria Montessori and Child Education
Our present day educational system is for children, and, as a consequence, God's
failing to bring out the grear potential inherent plan for men thenselves.
in human beings, as proven by the terrible
state of affairs in the West. Born-realised
children as well our Sahaja Yogi children need
an enlightened school system, where they can
grow and manifest the great Souls that have
taken birth. The Montessori Method of edu-
cation is one such enlightened system.
One of the most significant ways to support
this process of unfoldment is to create an
environment which calls forth and supports
the full development of inner potential. There
should be order, beauty, simplicity, and the
children's space should be proportioned to
their smaller size. This encourages indepen-
Shri Mataji told us that Maria Montes- dence, an extremely important quality to
nurture, which gives the child self-respect. By
sori was a realised soul. Recently reading one
of her books, The Secret of Childhood, we found
doing everything for a child, out of love, we
truly brilliant, inspiring vision of children mistakenly give them the impression that they
are helpless. Surrounded by love and beauty,
which could be integrated into a Sahaja uppro-and seeure in an environment in which he can
ach to education.
operate independently, a child can proceed
Maria Montessori was born in Chiaravelle, With his work, the secret to his childhood;
Italy in 1870. In 1894 she was the first woman
to graduate in Medicine from the University of as a manifestation of the Spirit.
Rome. She than began her work on education-
al problems of handicapped children. Achiev-
ing astonishing results, she began to apply her form. How does he come to distinguish things,
methods to normal children. Opening the first and by what marvellous means does he come
"Children's Home" for poor children in 1907,
she began her experiments which led to a new without a teacher merely by living simply, joy-
model of education. Today there are Montess- fully, and without fatigue?" In her experiments
ori Schools all over the world, as well as speci-
al traiinng centers for teachers.
namely, the creation of the human personality
"A child is a discoverer. He is an amorph-
ous, splendid being in search of his own proper
to learn a language in all it's minute details
at the first Children's Homes (schools), Mon-
tessori became aware of a phenomenon which
she calls the "sensitive periods". These are
Basically, she calls for adults and educators "impulses towards a specific kind of activity.
to have an attitude of responsibility towards which lead to the acquisition of a particular
our children's evolution which, she stresses, trait", Children are attracted to what they need
unfolds spontaneously from within. She writes, for their growth. It's truly amazing. Montessori
"Our attitude..should be...of reverence before
the mystery of creation, that a spiritual being teristic of the sensitive periods". The child
has been confined within limits perceptible to guides himself by his own joy ! How Sahaja
us. A child has within himself the key to his how beautiful. Now, we as adults do nothing.
own personality.. he has a plan of development to influence these states, but we can hinder
and laws to be observed, (and) these must be their manifestations through our own ignorance.
delicate powers indeed. From time immemorial
men, through their interference with these
natural laws, have hindered the Divine plan which makes a child extremely sensitive to order.
writes about "the transport of joy so charac-
One example of a sensitive period is one
Nirmala Yoga
45
 1985_Nirmala_Yoga_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-47.txt 
 Reaistered
with the Registraar of Newspapers under Regod
No. 36999/61
This appears in a child's first vear and conti-
nues on through the second."Order consists in child. Since the basic premise is that children
recognizing the place for each objeet in relation develop spontaneously from within, the school
to its environment and in remembaring where environment is meant to support the process
cach thing should be." This is related to orien-
Ling one's sell within one's environment At a
Montessori School there are special materials are profound. Montessori contends that through
which a child can work with at this particular
stage, which will allow him to experiment with childern, found in thie spontaneous patterns of
"order" until knowledge of it is assimilated. growth within each child, we have perverted
There are materials for each sensitive period, man's truc nature. By perceiving children
and children choose thier own materials every through our own-adult eyes, and thus misund-
day. They alone know what they need. Some erstanding their true needs, we super-impose
other examples of sensitivc periods are, the competitive, ego-oriented personalities on other-
desire to talk, sensitivity to tiny details, and
writing. My daughter is in this latter educational system would bring about an
perjod: she passionately writes letters again evolution of society, of human nature itself.
and agnin, for an hour at a time. The "short And for our realised children, such a deep
attention span" of children we hear about understanding of childhood will help them
becomes a myth when they are doing wwhat grow into strong spiritual beings, those who
their Spirit enjoys!
with an understanding of the evolution of the
of growth, rather than influece it.
The inplications of this model of education
our ignorance of "God's Divine Plan" for
wise potentially splendid beings. An enlightened
wifl spread the Light and bring in the new age.
-Nancy Partridge (Boston)
In short, Montessori Schools are structured
FESTIVALS
Name of the
Festival
Date according to
English Calender
Date according to
Ind an Calender
Remarks
L Nág Panchami
Month-Shravan
Fortnight-Shukla Paksha
Tithi-Panchami (5th Day)
Month-Shrävan
The Puja of Kundalini
20th August 1985
2. Raksha Bandhan
Sister ties Rakhi thread
to her brother as a
symbol of pure love &
30th August 1985
Shukla Paksha
Paurnima (Full Moon)
protection,
3. Gauri Puja
Month-Bhadrapad Shukla-
Paksha, Shashthi (6th day)
Month-Ashwin
Shukla, Paksha Pratipada during the period of
to Navami (Ist to 9th day) nine days.
20th Sept. 1985
4. Navrātri
14th to 21st Oct.
Puja of Adi Shakti
5. Dussehra
(Vijay Dashmi)
22nd Oct. 1985
Shri Rüma killed demon
Rivana symbolising the
victory of Truth over
civil.
Dashmi
(Tenth day)
6. Khojagiri Paurnima 27th Oet, 1985
of
Goddess
Month-Ashwin
Puja
Lakshmi. Devotees are
Shukla Paksha
awake during the whole
night and sing songs
in the praise of the
Goddess.
Paurnima
(Full Moon)
Edited & Published by Sh. S.C. Rai 43, Bunglow Road, Delhi-110007 & Printed at The Central Electric
Press, 80-D, Kamla Nagar. Deihi 110007. One issue Rs 9.00, Annual Subscription Rs. 51.00
Foreign (by Airmail £ 75 14)
