Makar Sankranti Puja Date 14th January 1985 : Place Mumbai Type Puja Speech Language English & Marathi CONTENTS | Transcript | 02 - 04 English 07 - 09 Marathi Hindi || Translation 05 - 06 English 10 - 13 Hindi Marathi

 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT ENGLISH TALK Today we are celebrating here a special day called Makar Sankrant. For the information of the foreign Sahaja Yogis, I will explain to you what it means. It means the day today is the day the sun crosses over from the Tropic of Capricorn to the Tropic of Cancer. It is a very big day for us because, now during the summer time we have the harvest, and we look forward to the rain and so many things that happen in every country. The sun falls at right angles in this country during the summer season and so we welcome the sun. We eat something that we must have eaten already what we call as til and Jaggary. It is to prepare your body and your mind to give it sufficiency to receive the sun. Because if you are living in the cool season, then all your body mind becomes lethargic and you become also sometimes very lazy about things in the sense that the day is so small that you cannot achieve results. So the body has become cold as we call it. We take these things, which give us heat so body is prepared to receive the heat of the sun to welcome. many To overcome the inertia setting by the cold weather and also to liberate the body's strength to the sun, people take to all these ways of treating you by which they give you something that is heat creating in the body. But it has another very subtle expression, which I find is when they give you these they say now you take now til and gul and you say things, which are sweet. Because when you are taking til and gul, your body gets heated and you become right sided. When you become right- sided person you seldom speaks sweetly. So it is a contrast that they give you a thing to heat you up so that your body gets heated up but you must be sweet. So there is a warning that you are eating all these things but that doesn't mean now you ride on a big horse of ego and start splashing every one. It's a very subtle thing to understand that when we become temperamentally right sided, we are so much covered by our ego that we do not feel that we are hurting others by what we say. If there are two egoistical people, they can manage among themselves. But if there is one egoistical and another one who is subdued, then the subdued is finished. That's why they say today is the day when we start speaking the truth. Even if there is some enemy or somebody who is not friendly with you, there has been some misunderstanding this is the day we say that all right take this and say something very sweet. Talk sweetly. But today only I think I received a letter from a Sahaja Yogini, which was so full of harshness that I am surprised that I should receive today. Not to Me but some other Sahaja Yogi. So one thing today we have to decide and think about that to another Sahaja Yogi we are not going to say harsh and talk to him in a way as if he is an ordinary person. Now supposing he is a leader then there is more reason that you should show respect. And if he is a senior leader, then there is more reason that you must respect. The first thing one has to learn that we have to respect. Now the Sun is so much respected in this country that in early morning time all the people get up and say Namaskars to Surya with all His names and do a particular type of exercise to show that they are completely surrendered to the will of the Surya. When you do that then the ego doesn't come. Now the sun, when He shines here, it gives you a feeling that you have to be active you have to work very hard. As a result of that you might develop ego. But when you develop ego then its surrounds your brain completely and when the brain is surrounded with ego you do not know which way to go. You do not know what is right what is wrong. You do not have any discretion and no limit. You do what you think and whatever pleases Me. 6. And this is the day when we celebrate it in a way to surrender ourselves to the Surya the Sun which is, as we know is the residence of Shri Lord Jesus Christ. He resides on the Sun. So how humble He is, how humble He was residing on the sun. The more He lived on the sun there should be much more humility. Of course I must say in India people are humble. But still the quality of Sun can make

 Original Transcript : English extremely arrogant and very unpleasant person. This unpleasant person can really waive all kinds you of good relations. But the worst thing that happens we start to lose our integration. Because when we say harsh things to anyone you feel guilty we have another problem, our heart feels bad, our liver feels bad everything whatsoever and thus you feel absolutely disintegrated. And this integrated is the shine of our not evolving at all or we shall say devolve. This integration is such a permanent thing that we see in ourselves. We see that we fight with our ego. Then we fight with our super ego then we fight with our heart with our emotions and all the time we are fighting within ourselves. So at least within ourselves we should speak sweetly on this day. Then we can start speaking to others very very sweet. Now some people think, to speak sweetly is a sign of weakness. In some countries people believe that if you speak to someone sweetly is a sign of innocent. It is the greatest time of Sahaja Yogi to speak to others with respect with proper protocol and with proper understanding. Now because of arrogance, people also forget what is their situation is and this indiscreet temperament gives you no sense of direction. You move in every direction and you don't know where you are going. As long as your ego is satisfied you go ahead with it and by the time you discover that you have really become a humpty-dumpty you do not know what you have done to yourself. So the best way to conquer your ego is to speak sweetly first. It is such a small thing to be done but it brings you to that synthesis of character within yourselves first ofall and to the synthesis of all the beautiful principles of life. Like you talk to somebody sweetly, the person may like you. He may tell you something, which he may be knowing of a very great importance for you. If you talk to somebody sweetly then you may get the peace of mind because you have given peace to another person. Whatever you give to another person that you feel within yourselves. But if you are quarreling with another person actually it is the reflection of your quarrelling nature within yourself. Today there is a big [dirt or hurt?] and big cry and big organizations working out the peace missions. The peace mission is within yourself. Let us start all of us the Sahaja Yogis who are great saints sitting here decide today that we are going to make peace with ourselves and with others. But first and foremost thing the peace cannot be made with quarrels. You see like America and Russia want to decide it with missiles, the peace spoils. They say next five time as many as will be made then they can live in peace let all those who are fighting kill each other; they think this is the solution of the problem. It is the other way around. Let everybody live peacefully within themselves and give peace to others so that this peace will become a nucleus for the peace of the world. So your great task today is to establish a great source of peaceful being. We have so many Sahaja Yogis here. They are sitting in complete peace and happiness and joy you don't know you are emitting all that peace, channelizing it and doing it. But still there are some who are suffering from quarrelling and hurting people and they are trying to do something, which they should never do, is to think there's nothing. If you are thinking just now you will not register what I am saying for this is another quality of a person who is ego oriented is not to register. You may say anything you like but they don't hear. They hear what they want to hear or they don't hear. So this is another thing we have to today decide that we will register things than to tell out. Let us register. This is a sign of a character that wants to know who wants to know more but criteria of ascent is synthesis and integration. A person who is not integrated with other Sahaja Yogi is not a man who has ascent. Who tries to divide and talk of divisions. We the English, We the Germans, We the Indians, then they are not Sahaja Yogis. They are Indians all right but not Sahaja Yogis. Sahaja Yogis have no caste, creed or nationality. We have to carry our passport only because we are born in this jail. We have to carry our criminal number but actually you don't need it. You don't need all those things. Now for us today to decide first of all in your heart that we will take to peace within ourselves when we are troubling, we will be taking to peace within. Anybody who is trying to provoke you or trying to create a problem or divide you on any issue whatsoever run away from that person as fast as possible. Anybody who talks of peace, peace makers stick on to that person then only you will 3

 Original Transcript : English understand that you are also getting peace. Here you have come to get peace not to create problems or to listen to your problems but to get peace. Peace is a nature or is the quality of your spirit. So, once you jump onto your peace somehow what happens that you go beyond the cause and the effect. You are beyond the cause and the effect. So the cause disappears and the effect also disappears. So today we all have come here to worship the peace within and without. Let us be peaceful. Let us not draw in groups who hate, who talk hate. Who wants to hate one person who wants to create a group. Who says "we the Americans" or "we the this", just. 99 99 In Sahaja Yoga you must learn from people who have advanced who have very much progressed For example I would say among all the Europeans, Australians have done very well. There is nothing to feel jealous. All right if Australians have done well, right that's your glory. So ask them how have they worked it out. Tomorrow may be that Americans I wish that very much they do the best, so then you should ask them how have you done so well. That's the way were going to live. We are not going to compete, we are not going to be jealous, but we are going to absorb all that is peace. This is Sahaja Yoga. It is the other way around, like if they discover something a pilot is above then they will discover something as which is a machineless man. No, it is another one. We develop a mind, which absorbs everything, and then we develop a bigger mind, which gives everything. There is no secret in Sahaja Yoga. Everybody who has known something better, have had some good experiences of Sahaja Yoga should tell. But then in ego I have seen people start preaching that all right this method is right, that method is good, there is no need to be that also because of lack of discretion. If you have discretion you would have known that this is not to be done. What is not to be done in Sahaja Yoga is not to be done. Now how will you know when you don't have the discretion, like a lost ship. So then you have to see how your Mother would act at such a position and then I am sure you will go beyond the cause and the effect. So today is the day I should also not say anything that is in anyway hurting to anyone and I am trying to make you smile and laugh but you are so serious. . So today we decide on peace. Peace with ourselves, peace with others and that is how you worship the Sun, Christ the one who was the emblem. Who was the absolute of practical symbol [OF CHRIST?]. And once you understand these, I am sure you will try to follow that instead of hitting everybody, getting angry with everybody. Just forgive all. You have come here to ascend and your game is your game. Your fighting is not your game remember that. Your quarrelling is not your game. The game is the peace that you have achieved, the love that you have developed, the compassion that you can envelope, the amount of relationship and the power you can penetrate into others. This is your game which we have to receive today am I a heart like a lion and not chicken hearted people. Not people who would be angry in this most of your anger, these days are gone the most of the peace, the most of our contentment, the most of our glory and the most of our state. And that is the state where you are now in the Kingdom of God. May God bless you! 4

 ENGLISH TRANSLATION (Marathi Talk) Now I want to tell you that so many guests have come to us responding to your cordial invitation and you have made proper arrangements for their stay. Also, nobody of you has even slightly indicated to me how much trouble you have taken or efforts you have made to make them comfortable. Indeed, the Mumbaites have made great efforts and on behalf of you and these people I want to tell that they have, in this regard, surged ahead. However I am telling you, which I have already told to them, that today we distribute the sesame and jagarry mix, so as to avoid any problem from the Sun. First problem we face is, with hot Sun in the sky one becomes irascible and insults others. The person has strong ego. The people who are directly exposed to Sun have big egos. Hence, such people should remember the mantra, "Talk sweet (god god bola)" The eating of the sesame and jaggary, increases the body heat and the person starts showing his temper. Just a short time back you were given the sesame and jaggary, at least for that time you speak sweet words with me! But even that does not happen. He started shouting immediately after accepting the sesame and jaggary. Then what is the use of the sesame and jaggary? Better to throw it away! So, on this occasion, all should decide that this is good opportunity and that even though Shri Mataji comes here and advises us, Her advice will not enter in our brains if there is heat in our beings. Where does heat come from? It comes from our egos In the past, when I started teaching the Sahaja Yoga, all were fighting, which used to be so much that, fortunately, they were short of breaking each others' heads. They used to fight for some reason or the other. Half of them ran away and half continued. I said, Sahaja Yoga is not possible with these people. It was like; one man came for the work and ran away after two days, the second man came and disappeared after three days! It is in this situation of people running away, that we have established the Sahaja Yoga. 99 The main reason is, you should have the desire, "We have come to meet God almighty, we want his blessings, we want to know Divine Principle. We want to destroy all that torments the people." So we cannot afford to fight. The ego has caused problems all over world and we should completely give it up in the Sahaja Yoga. "Aataa Sahaja Yoga madhe maatra hyaalaa poorna-pane Tillanjali dili pahije" Take sesames in hands held together in the cup form, and drop them in water. Thus you make a resolve, "We shall not indulge into falsehood and also we shall eschew anger." יי 66 You should try to bring it into practice. You must try at least once. Then you will see; how many things can one settle, how many things one can face, and that a number of problems are solved just because you have not paid attention to them. If you attach too much importance to anything, then it can be said that you have become Taamasik, left-sided by temperament. What is being Taamasik ( left-sided) ? It means the person who makes big issue out of a small one. Suppose a woman's husband is sick. She goes on harping, "My husband is sick, my husband is sick". All right your husband is sick, but you are all right, what about you? This fact is ignored. In a way, husband's illness is important. But people take a small issue and blow it out of proportion and harass others with it. This is a common practice with us because we attach great importance to minor things and ignore major things. As for these people, small and big are just the same. They do not understand anything from them, but you do! The reason is the heritage, that we have received, is very great. We were born on this land of Yoga (Yoga bhoomi) but having been born here what have we achieved? It is said that one is born in India after the Tapasya (penance) of a thousand years and after another thousand years in Maharashtra. But when I see inebriated persons lying on road side, I wonder whether they are from Maharashtra or somewhere else, I mean one cannot understand how these worms were born here. 5

 English Translation (Marathi Talk) You have become Sahaja Yogis because of your Tapasya of the last life, now you are getting its reward. But it does not mean that Shri Mataji has to perform the rest of your Tapasya in this life. The first penance of this life is to talk sweet and with love and not to be curt. Hence we have initiated the practice of having the Puja on this first day. On this day we should speak sweet words today and continue with the use of those words as talking sweet is easy and getting angry is difficult. Beating someone is impossible to man. Then why to do these difficult things? Talk sweet, simple and straight forward. We have many who use sugar coated words. I thought that the people from their families speak that way. They really spoke sweet but while using sugar coated words they cut others' throats. So, I asked," What is this" They answered, "In the past while our people spoke sweet language, others took their disadvantage. So we use sweet words and also cut the throats." I asked, "Why are you doing it? Have you learnt a good thing by it? Has it done anything good to you? Have you risen above it? Those who used only sweet language were all right. They lived comfortably and contentedly. 99 Suppose you quarrel with two persons and you cut their throats, then what have You must see what you have achieved. So, today is the day of a special festival which all enjoy. Hence I do not want to say unpleasant. I always speak with full care so that nothing should happen that would hurt the peoples' feelings and make them sad. Now, some people come and suddenly touch my body. It troubles me a lot and should not be done. But, how can one tell them? Hence I have to bear it; that let it go, lest that person will feel bad. Thus I have to bear a lot. I do not mind it, since that person will feel sad if pulled up. So instead of admonishing him I bear that pain. I do not mind it being aware that the powers that I have others have not. achieved? you The same is also true about love. If our power of love is stronger and the others' is less, then who is greater, we or those people? If this way we use our discretion, that we are Sahaja Yogis and our mother has bestowed on us the power of love. So we are greater than them. So, what do we lose even if they say something? What is the need to get angry and fight with them? As your temperament becomes peaceful, your face will shine. When people around see you they will feel your peace. However, being peaceful does not mean that if somebody beats you up, you should bear it. Not at all! I told that only with respect to Sahaja Yogis that if you are slapped on one cheek, show the other. This is not so with respect to people who are not Sahaja Yogis. As for them, I tell you that if they give you one slap you give them four, so that bhoots possessing them will run away. Among Sahaja Yogis your speech should be pure and loving. It is very necessary. All should talk lovingly amongst themselves. I do not mind if you speak this way with an outsider. But, one who is ours a Sahaja Yogi, is in my body. Every Sahaja Yogi is in my body. Hence when you abuse or fight amongst you, should think that you are abusing me. You should know each other and should be of sweet and gentle behavior. It is not correct to be like a distracted person; somebody runs after someone, another indulges into childish prattles, third one sings the songs, yet another always read poems, this and that. We should do that which is pragmatic and beautiful. There should also be beauty in the demeanors. We make ornaments for the Mother. How beautiful they are! But you are my ornaments and on my body. If those ornaments are unclean and lack in purity, meaning they are deficient of the main quality, like gold ornaments without gold, or contain brass instead of gold, of what use they are? The same applies to you too. Where will I go wearing the ornament which contains fake main ingredient? So you are my decorations. You have decorated me and I do not need any other decoration. So I request you to be considerate, humble and gentle when you talk to, or on the whole, deal with children or other persons. You should not be aggressive, rude, or hasty with anybody. Thereby a day will come when the whole world will behold you and wonder, as to, "Who are these people? Where are they from"? Then, the world will know that these are messengers from heaven. God has sent those angels; to take care of the world, to bestow success on the whole world, to take the world at the God's doorstep. I bow to such angels.

 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT MARATHI TALK आता तुम्हा लोकांना सांगायचं म्हणजे असं की इतकी मंडळी आपल्याकडे पाहणे म्हणून आली आणि त्यांना तुम्ही सगळ्यांनी एवढ्या ह्याने बोलावलंत आणि त्यांची इतकी व्यवस्था केली. त्याबद्दल कोणीही, काहीही मला असं दाखवलं नाही की, मला अशी मेहनत पडली किंवा मला त्रास झाला. आणि मुंबईकरांनी विशेष करून फारच मेहनत केलेली आहे. त्याबद्दल तुम्हा सर्वांच्या तर्फे, ह्या सर्वांच्या तर्फे मला असं म्हणावं लागेल, की मुंबईकरांनी फार आघाडी मारलेली आहे. पण जे ह्यांना सांगते तेच आपल्याला सांगते. आज आपण तिळगूळ देतो. कारण सूर्यापासून जे त्रास आहेत ते आपल्याला होऊ नयेत. पहिला त्रास म्हणजे, सूर्य आला म्हणजे मनुष्य चिडचिडा होतो. एक दुसऱ्याला उणंदुणं बोलतो. त्याच्यामध्ये अहंकार बळावतो. सूर्याच्या खाली राहणाऱ्या लोकांना फार अहंकार आहे. म्हणून अशा लोकांनी एक गोष्ट लक्षात ठेवायची, हा मंत्र आहे, की 'गोड गोड बोला. ' तिळगूळ घेतल्याबरोबर अंगात गरमी येते आणि लागले वसकन् ओरडायला. म्हणजे झालं! अहो, आत्ताच तिळगूळ दिला. निदान तेवढं तरी तुम्ही गोड बोला माझ्याशी. ते सुद्धा जुळत नाही. तिळगूळ घेतला नी लागले ओरडायला. कसला तिळगूळ तुमचा, फेका तिकडे. तेव्हा ह्या ह्याच्यामध्ये आपण असं ठरवून घ्यायचं, की ही पार सुसंधी आहे. माताजी आल्या आणि माताजींनी आम्हाला कितीही सांगितलं ते आमच्या डोक्यात जाणार नाही. जर आमच्या डोक्यात गरमी असली तर काहीही जाणार नाही. ही गरमी निघायला पाहिजे. आणि ही गरमी आपल्यामध्ये कुठून येते ? तर ती अहंकारामधून येते. पूर्वीच्या काळी जेव्हा आम्ही सहजयोग केला, तेव्हा सगळ्यांच्या भांडाभांडी असायच्या. म्हणजे सुरू इथपर्यंत की डोकी फोडली नाही हे नशीब! बाकी डोकी शाबूत आहेत सगळ्यांची आता. पण भांडणं, कुणाचं कशावरून भांडण, तर कुणाचं कशावरून भांडण. अर्धे पळाले, अर्धे राहिले. म्हटलं सहजयोग काही व्हायचा नाही. कारण एक आला कामाला, दोन दिवसाने पळाला. दूसरा आला तो तीन दिवसाने पळाला. तर अशी स्थिती होती. ह्या पळापळीतच आपण सहजयोग बसवलेला आहे. पण त्याला मुख्य कारण एकच, की तुम्हाला इच्छा असायला पाहिजे की, 'काहीही असलं तरी आम्ही परमेश्वराला भेटायला आलोत. आम्हाला परमेश्वराचे आशीर्वाद हवे. आम्हाला परमेश्वरी तत्त्व जाणायचंय. आम्हाला जगातल्या ह्या ज्या सर्व काही गोष्टी आहेत, ज्याने सगळ्यांना ताप आणि त्रास होतोय त्यांना नष्ट करायचंय.' तेव्हा इथे भांडाभांडी करून चालणार नाही. ह्या अहंकारामुळे इतके त्रास सबंध जगामध्ये झालेले आहेत ! आता सहजयोगामध्ये मात्र ह्याला पूर्णपणे तिलांजली दिली पाहिजे. आणि तिलांजली म्हणजे तिळांची अंजली. म्हणजे हातात हे तीळ घेऊन त्याची अंजली तुम्ही देऊन टाकावी. म्हणजे आता ह्याच्यापुढे आपण काही खोटं करणार नाही. रागवणार नाही. एकवेळा करून बघा. एक वेळेला करून बघायचं! न रागवता किती तरी गोष्टींना मनुष्य समेटू शकतो. किती तरी गोष्टींचा सामना करू शकतो आणि किती तरी गोष्टींकडे नुसते लक्ष न दिल्यामुळे सबंध काही उत्तरच त्याचं मिळालेले आहे, सबंध त्यांचे जे काही प्रश्न आहेत ते सुटलेले आहेत, असं तुमच्यासमोर एखादं दृश्य येईल.

 Original Transcript : Marathi तेव्हा कोणत्याही गोष्टीला आपण अत्यंत जर महत्त्व दिलं, तर आपण त्याच्यामध्ये तामसिक स्वभावाचे झालो. असं म्हणता येईल. तामसिक म्हणजे काय? जो मनुष्य, जे लहानसं असेल त्याचं खूप मोठं करतो. म्हणजे एखादी बाई, आता तिचा नवरा आजारी. 'माझा नवरा आजारी, माझा नवरा आजारी.' कबूल. पण तू आहेस ना ! तुझी तब्येत ठीक आहे नां! तुझ्याबद्दल काय? ते काही नाही. पण तो तरी म्हणा नवरा आहे, ते तरी महत्त्वाचं आहे. पण एक लहानशी गोष्ट घेऊन बसायचं. त्याचा गवगवा करायचा. दूसर्यांना हैराण करायचं. त्रास द्यायचा. ही जी आपल्याकडे एक पद्धत आहे, त्याला कारण असं आहे, की आपल्यामध्ये क्षुल्लक गोष्टींचं महत्त्व जास्त आहे आणि मोठ्या गोष्टींकडे लक्षच नाही. त्या लोकांना काय, मोठे आणि लहान सगळे बरोबरच आहे. काही समजत नाही त्याच्यातलं. पण तुम्हाला समजलं पाहिजे. कारण आपलं जे काही आहे एवढं मोठं, हा जो काही वारसा मिळालेला आहे, फार मोठा आहे. तेव्हा वारसा मिळाला. आम्ही ह्या योगभूमीत जन्माला आलो. ह्या योगभूमीत आम्ही आल्यावर आम्ही काय मिळवलं? हजारो वर्षाच्या तपश्चर्येनंतर म्हणतात हिंदुस्थानात जन्म होतो आणि त्याच्या हजार वर्षानंतर महाराष्ट्रात होतो. आता रस्त्यात झिंगत लोक पाहिले, की मला समजत नाही, महाराष्ट्रातले आहेत की कुठले आहेत? म्हणजे किडे कसे जन्माला आले ते समजत नाही. आता तुम्ही सहजयोगी झालात. कारण तुमची पूर्वजन्माची तपश्चर्या आहे. आज ती फळाला आली. पण त्याचा अर्थ असा नाही, की बाकीची सगळी ही तपश्चर्या ह्या जन्मात आता माताजींनी करायची. ह्या जन्मातली पहिली तपश्चर्या म्हणजे आपापसात गोड बोललं पाहिजे. प्रेमाने वागलं पाहिजे. तोडून नाही बोलायचं. पहिली गोष्ट. म्हणून आज पहिला दिवस आपला पूजेचा आपण सुरू केलेला आहे. त्यादिवशी आपण सर्वांनी गोड बोललं पाहिजे आणि गोडीत राहिलं पाहिजे. कारण गोड बोलणं हे फार सोपं काम आहे. रागावणं तर त्याहून कठीण आणि मारणं तर जमतच नाही माणसाला. तेव्हा कशाला कठीण कामं करायची. सरळ गोड बोललं की झालं. आता आपल्याकडे पुष्कळ 'गोडबोले' वगैरे असतात. मी असा विचार केला की ह्यांच्या फॅमिलीतच लोक गोड बोलत असतील वगैरे. तर खरोखर ते लोक गोड बोलत असत. पण ते गोड बोलून दुसऱ्यांचे गळे कापत. मग म्हटलं हा काय प्रकार ! 'अहो,' म्हणे, 'पूर्वी आमच्याकडे लोक गोड बोलत असत. त्यांच्या गोड बोलण्यामुळे लोकांनी त्यांचा फायदा उचलला. आता आम्ही गोड बोलतो, पण आम्ही गळेही कापतो.' म्हटलं, 'कशाला? हे काही तुम्ही चांगल शिकले का? हे काही तुमचं भलं केलं का? त्याच्या वर गेलात का तुम्ही?' ती मंडळी बरी होती जी गोड बोलायची. ती आरामात राहिली. संतोषात राहिली. दोन माणसांबरोबर तुमची भांडणं झाली उद्या आणि तुम्ही त्यांचे गळे कापले. तर तुम्ही मिळवलं काय? आपण मिळवलं काय हे बघितलं पाहिजे. तेव्हा आजचा दिवस विशेष सणाचा. सगळ्यांना अत्यंत साजरा असा आहे. ह्यावेळेला मला तरी काही कडू बोलायचं नाही आणि सगळ्यांचं मन राखून मी सांगते, की मी एवढी काळजी घेत असते, कुठून असं नाही झालं पाहिजे, की लोकांना वाईट वाटेल किंवा काय होईल. आता काही लोक येतात की माझ्या अंगाला पटकन हात लावतात. आता त्याने त्रास होतो मला. तसं करायचं नसतं. पण सांगायचं कसं ? मग सहन करते मी! जाऊ दे बाबा, काय करता आता? कसं, त्याला वाईट वाटेल. असं पुष्कळ सहन करावं लागतं. मला काही हरकत नाही, हे सहन करण्याची. कारण त्याला दुखवलं तर त्याला दु:ख वाटेल. कशाला? तेवढं दु:ख मी सहन करू शकते. आपल्यामध्ये जेवढी शक्ती असते ती दुसऱ्यामध्ये नाही ही जाणीव असल्यामुळे त्याचं काही वाटत नाही. 8.

 Original Transcript : Marathi त्या प्रेमाच्या बाबतीतसुद्धा तसंच. आपल्या जर प्रेमाची शक्ती जास्त आहे, आणि दुसऱ्याची कमी आहे, तर आपण मोठे की ते दूसरे. असा एक सारासार विचार जर घेतला, तर आपण सहजयोगी आहोत आणि आपल्याला आईने प्रेमाची शक्ती दिली आहे. तेव्हा आम्ही त्यांच्यापेक्षा मोठे आहोत. तेव्हा ते काहीतरी बोलले तर आपलं काय जातं त्याच्यामध्ये. त्यांच्याशी एवढी भांडाभांडी आणि रागराग करण्याची काय गरज. हळूहळू तुमचा स्वभाव शांत झाला. तुमच्या चेहऱ्यावर तेज येणार. इतकेच नव्हे तर चार लोक तुमच्या आसपास आले तर तुम्हाला बघून म्हणतील की हे शांत आहेत. पण शांतपणाचा हा अर्थ नव्हे, की तुम्ही कोणी जोडी मारले तरी खा. असं मुळीच नाही. फक्त सहजयोग्यांसाठी सांगितलेले आहे, की तुमच्या तोंडात कोणी थोबाडीत मारली तर दुसरे थोबाड पुढे करा. फक्त सहजयोग्यांसाठी. इतर लोकांसाठी नाही. इतर लोकांनी एक थोबाडीत मारली , तर तुम्ही चार मारा असं मी सांगेन. कारण त्यांची भूतं असतील तर निघून जातील. पण आपापसामध्ये, सहजयोग्यांच्यामध्ये तुमचं बोलणं शुद्ध असायला पाहिजे आणि प्रेमळ असायला पाहिजे. ही फार आवश्यक गोष्ट आहे. सगळ्यांनी प्रेमळपणे आपापसात बोलणं केलं पाहिजे आणि जो बाहेरचा मनुष्य आहे, त्याच्यावर तुम्ही असे बोलले तर मला काही हरकत नाही. पण जो आपला आहे, हा सहजयोगी सगळा माझ्या अंगात आलेला आहे. एक एक मनुष्य माझ्या शरीरात गेलेला आहे. तुम्ही जर एकदुसऱ्यांना लाथा मारल्यात किंवा शिव्या दिल्यात, त्या मलाच तुम्ही शिव्या देता असं समजलं पाहिजे. एकमेकांची ओळख असायला पाहिजे आणि वागतांना आपल्यामध्ये सोज्वळता असायला पाहिजे. काहीतरी बहकल्यासारखं एखाद्याच्या मागेच लागायचं किंवा असते कोणी, काहीतरी बहकल्यासारखं बडबडत रहायचं किंवा बोलत रहायचं. पुष्कळांना गाणं म्हणण्याची ट्रम काही कविताच वाचत बसेल, तर कोणी गाणंच म्हणत बसेल, कोणी काय.. असं नाही. जे बरोबर, व्यवहारी आणि सौंदर्यमय असेल ते केलं पाहिजे. वागण्यामध्येसुद्धा सुंदरता असायला पाहिजे. आणि आपण आता जेव्हा सगळे दागिने वरगैरे करतो आईसाठी, किती सुंदर असतात. पण तुम्हीच माझे दागिने आहात. तुम्हालाच अंगावर मी लेवून घेतलेले आहे. त्या दागिन्यांमध्ये जर स्वच्छता नसली, किंवा त्याच्यामध्ये जर अशुद्धता म्हणजे त्याच्या अंगातले जे मुख्य गुण आहेत, तेच नाही त्याच्यात. सोन्याचं जर सोनं नसलं, सोन्याच्या जागी पितळ असलं, तर त्याला काय अर्थ आहे? तसंच तुमचं आहे. तुमच्या अंगातला मुख्य जो धातू आहे, तोच जर खोटा असला, तर त्याला घालून मी कुठे मिरवायचं? तेव्हा तुम्हीच माझं लेणं तुम्हीच माझं भूषण आहात. तुम्हीच मला भूषवून दिलेले आहे. मला कोणत्याच दुसर्या भूषणाची गरज नाही. असं मी तुमच्याजवळ आता फार विनवून सांगते, की बोलतांना वरगैरे एकंदरीत मुलांच्या बाबतीत किंवा कोणाच्याही बाबतीत अत्यंत समजूतदारपणाने अत्यंत नम्रपणाने आणि सावकाशपणे सगळे कार्य झालं पाहिजे. कोणावरही जबरदस्ती, जुलूम किंवा घाई वगैरे करण्यात काही अर्थ नाही. अशा रीतीने एक दिवस असा येणार आहे, की सगळं जग तुमच्याकडे बघून आश्चर्यचकित होईल. 'अहो, ही मंडळी कुठली? हे कुठले लोक? हे कोण आले?' मग कळेल, की हे स्वर्गातले दूत आलेत. सर्व जगाला सांभाळण्यासाठी, जगाला यश देण्यासाठी, सर्व जगाला परमेश्वराच्या दारात नेण्यासाठी, हे परमेश्वराने पाठवलेले आहेत. सर्व दूत अशा सर्व दूतांना माझा नमस्कार! 9.

 HINDI TRANSLATION (English Talk) अब आपको कहना है, कि इतने लोग हमारे यहाँ मेहमान आए हैं और आप सबने उन्हें इतने प्यार से बुलाया, उनकी अच्छी व्यवस्था की, उसके लिए किसी ने भी मुझे कुछ दिखाया नहीं कि हमें बहुत परिश्रम करना पड़ा, हमें कष्ट हुए और मुंबईवालों ने विशेषतया बहुत ही मेहनत की है। उसके लिए आप सबकी तरफ से व इन सब की तरफ से मुझे कहना होगा कि मुंबईवालों ने प्रशंसनीय कार्य किया है । अब जो इन से (विदेशियों से) अंग्रेजी में कहा वही आपको कहती हूं। आज के दिन हम लोग तिल गुड़ देते हैं। क्योंकि सूर्य से जो कष्ट होते हैं वे हमें न हों। सबसे पहला कष्ट यह है कि सूर्य आने पर मनुष्य चिड़चिड़ा होता है। एक-दूसरे को उलटा -सीधा बोलता है। उसमें अहंकार बढ़ता है। सूर्य के निकट सम्पर्क में रहने वाले लोगों में बहुत अहंकार होता है। इसलिए ऐसे लोगों को एक बात याद रखनी चाहिए, उनके लिए ये मन्त्र है कि गुड़ जैसा बोलें गुड़ खाने से अन्दर गरमी आती है, और तुरन्त लगते हैं चिल्लाने। अरे, अभी तो (मीठा-मीठा बोलो)। तिल तिल-गुड़ खाया, तो अभी तो कम से कम मीठा बोलो। ये भी नहीं होता। तिल-गुड़ दिया और लगे चिल्लाने। काहे का ये तिल-गुड़? फेंको इसे उधर! तो आज के दिन आप तय कर लीजिए। ये बहुत बड़ा सुसंयोग है कि श्री माताजी आई हैं। उन्होंने हमें कितना भी कहा तो भी हमारे दिमाग में वह नहीं आएगा। अगर हमारे दिमाग में गरमी होगी तो कुछ भी नहीं आएगा। ये गरमी निकलनी चाहिए। और ये गरमी हम में कहाँ से आती है ? अहंकार के कारण। बहुत पहले जब मैंने सहजयोग शुरू किया तब सबका लड़ाई-झगड़ा। यहाँ तक कि एक दूसरे के सर नहीं फूटे, यही गरनीमत है। बाकी सभी के सर ठीक-ठाक हैं। परन्तु झगड़े बहुत, किसी का किस बात पर, किसी का किस बात पर। देखा आधे भाग गए, कुछ बच गए। मैंने सोचा, अब सहजयोग को कुछ नहीं होने वाला। क्योंकि एक आया काम करने, दो दिन बाद भाग गया। दूसरा आया, तीन दिन बाद भाग गया, ये स्थिति थी। ऐसी स्थिति में अब हमने सहजयोग जमाया है। पर उसके लिए आपकी इच्छा चाहिए कि कुछ भी हो हम परमात्मा को पाने आए हैं। हमें परमात्मा का आशीर्वाद चाहिए। हमें परमात्मा का तत्व जानना है। हमें दुनिया की सारी गलत बातें जिनसे कि कष्ट और परेशानियाँ हो रही है, नष्ट करनी हैं। तो यहाँ झगड़े नहीं करने हैं। इस अहंकार से सारी दुनिया में इतनी परेशानियाँ हुई हैं। अब सहजयोग में इसे पूर्णतया तिलांजली देनी पड़ेगी। तिलांजली माने तिल की अंजली। मतलब अब तिल- गुड़ खाकर इसकी (अहंकार की) अंजली आप दीजिए । मतलब इसके बाद हम कोई क्रोध नहीं करेंगे, गुस्सा नहीं करेंगे। एक बार करके देखिए । देखना चाहिए । गुस्सा न करके कितनी बातों को मनुष्य समेट सकता है। कितनी बातों का सामना कर सकता है। बहुत सी बातें ऐसी हैं जिनमें ज़्यादा चित्त न रखने से उनके हल मिले हैं। और जो कुछ समस्याएं हैं वह पूरी तरह से हल हुई हैं। तो किसी बात में आपने बहुत ज़्यादा चित्त रखा तो आप तामसिक स्वभाव के बन गए, ऐसा कहते हैं। तामसिक माने क्या? तो कोई औरत है, अब उसका पति बीमार है, 'मेरा पति 10

 Hindi Translation (English Talk) बीमार है, मेरा पति बीमार है।' बाबा है, मान लिया ! परन्तु तुम तो ठीक हो न? तुम्हारी तबियत तो अच्छी है! उसका कुछ नहीं। पति है ये भी तो बड़ी बात है। परन्तु नहीं, एक छोटी सी बात को लेकर के हल्ला मचाना, दूसरों को हैरान करना। ये जो हमारे यहाँ बात है, उसका कारण है हमारे यहाँ छोटी सी बात को ज़्यादा महत्व देना और बड़ी-बड़ी बातों की तरफ ध्यान नहीं देना। इन लोगों (विदेशियों) के लिए बड़ा क्या, छोटा क्या, सब बराबर है। कुछ नहीं मालूम। पर आप लोगों को समझना चाहिए। क्योंकि हमारा जो वारसा है वह इतना महान है। हम इस योगभूमि भारत में जन्मे हैं। इस योगभूमि में जन्म लेकर हमने क्या प्राप्त किया है? हजारों वर्षों की तपस्या के फलस्वरूप इस भारत में जन्म होता है। और उसमें भी हजारों वर्षों से महाराष्ट्र में होता है। लेकिन रास्ते पर पी कर पड़े हुए लोगों को देखकर मेरी समझ में नहीं आता ये महाराष्ट्र के हैं या और कहीं के? ये कीड़े यहाँ कहाँ से जन्मे हैं? यही नहीं समझ में आता? अबआप सहजयोगी हैं और आपकी पूर्व जन्मों की तपस्या अब फलित हुई है। परन्तु इसका मतलब ये नहीं कि बाकी की, इस जन्म की, तपस्या माताजी ने करनी है। इस जन्म की पहली तपस्या है आपस में मीठा बोलना, प्यार से रहना। ये पहली बात। इसलिए पहला दिन हमने पूजा का शुरू किया है। उस दिन आप सब को मीठे बोल बोलने चाहिए। और मिठास से रहना चाहिए, क्योंकि मीठा बोलना ये सबसे आसान है। गुस्सा करना बड़ा कठिन काम है, और मारना तो आता ही नहीं है। तो इतने कठिन काम किसलिए करते हैं? तो सीधी- सीधी बात, मीठा बोलो, बस। अब हमारे यहाँ बहत से लोगों का नाम (सरनेम) 'गोडबोले' होता है। तो मैंने सोचा इनके परिवार में लोग मीठा बोलते थे। पर वे मीठी बातें करके लोगों के गले काटते थे। मैंने मीठा बोलते होंगे। तो सचमुच वे लोग कहा ये कहाँ का मीठी बातें करने का तरीका ? तो बोले, 'हाँ, हमारे यहाँ पहले लोग बड़ा मीठा बोलते थे। उनके बहुत मीठा बोलने का लोगों ने बहुत फायदा उठाया। इसलिए अब हम मीठा बोलते हैं और लोगों के गले काटते हैं।' मैंने कहा , 'ऐसा क्यों करते हैं? इससे आपको क्या लाभ हुआ है? वही लोग अच्छे थे जो मीठा बोलते थे और आराम से रहते थे। वे सन्तोष में रहते थे। किसी व्यक्ति के साथ आपकी लड़ाई हो गई और उसके आपने गले काटे तो (गले काटना माने 'मुंह में राम, बगल में छुरी) तो आपने क्या पाया?' हमने क्या प्राप्त किया? यह देखना है। तो आज का दिन विशेष त्यौहार का, सभी को अत्यन्त सुशोभित करने वाला है। इस समय मुझे तो बिल्कुल भी कटु नहीं बोलना है। बड़े सम्भालकर मैं बात करती हूँ। मैं इतना समझकर व्यवहार करती हूँ कि किसी को किसी बात से दु:ख न पहुँचे। अब कुछ लोग आतेहैं, वे मुझे झट से हाथ लगाते हैं उससे मुझे बड़ी तकलीफ होती है। वैसा नहीं करना चाहिए। परन्तु यह कैसे बताएं ? इसलिए सहती रहती हूँ। जाने दो, क्या करें ? अब कैसे बताऊं? उनको दुःख होगा। ऐसी बहुत सी बातें मैं सहती हूँ। मेरी कोई बात नहीं, मैं सह सकती हूँ। जो सहनशक्ति मुझ में है, वह दूसरों में नहीं है। दूसरों को दुःखी करने से अच्छा वही दु:ख में सह लू। यह बात जानने से उसका दुःख नहीं महसूस होता। प्रेम के बारे में यही बात है। अपने प्रेम की शक्ति ज़्यादा है और दूसरों में कम है। तो हम बड़े कि वे बड़े? इस तरह का एक विचार ले लिया तो आप सहजयोग अच्छी तरह पा सकते हैं। हमें माँ ने प्रेम की शक्ति ज़्यादा दी है, तो वे कुछ भी बोलें उससे हमारा क्या बिगड़ता है? क्या जरूरत है उनसे लड़ाई-झगड़े करने की ? धीरे-धीरे आपका स्वभाव शान्त हो जाएगा। तब आपका चेहरा तेजस्वी दिखाई देगा। जब लोग आपके 11

 Hindi Translation (English Talk) निकट आएंगे तो कहेंगे, 'अरे, ये कौन है?' परन्तु 'शान्त स्वभाव' का ये मतलब नहीं कि, कोई आपको जूते मारे तो भी आप चुप रहें, ऐसा बिलकुल नहीं। केवल सहजयोगियों के लिए ख्रिस्त ने कहा है । किसी ने आपको एक गाल पे मारा तो आप दूसरा गाल आगे करिए, केवल सहजयोगियों के लिए, ख्रिस्त ने कहा है। औरों ने अगर एक मारा तो आप उसे चार मारिए, ये मैं कहूँगी। क्योंकि उनके जो भूत होंगे वे निकल जाएंगे | परन्तु सहजयोगियों की आपस में शुद्ध बातचीत होनी चाहिए। प्यार से आपस में बातें करनी है। ये बड़ी आवश्यक बात है। औरों के साथ आप कैसे भी रहें, कोई हर्ज नहीं है। परन्तु जो अपने हैं, ये सहजयोगी सारे मेरे शरीर में हैं। एक-एक मनुष्य मेरे शरीर के अन्दर है। आपने अगर एक-दूसरे को लातें मारी, गालियाँ दीं तो मुझे ही गाली दी, ऐसा समझना चाहिए। क्योंकि अब देखिए किसी पेड़ की डालियाँ आपस में लड़ने लगेंगी तो उस पेड़ का क्या होगा? और उन पत्तों का भी क्या होगा? अब ये एक हाथ अगर दूसरे हाथ से लड़ने लगे, तो क्या होगा ? अगर ये चीज़ समझ में आ गई कि हम सब एक हैं, समग्र हैं, हमारे में इतनी एकता है कि हम सब एक शरीर के अंग-प्रत्यंग हैं, तब आपने किस तरह का व्यवहार करना चाहिए? आपमें कितनी समझदारी होनी चाहिए? कितना प्यार होना चाहिए? आपस में कितना सुख बॉटने की इच्छा होनी चाहिए? इनके लिए क्या करू? इन्हें क्या अच्छा लगता है? दिवाली के समय हम कुछ उपहार देते हैं या संक्रान्ति के समय क्या 'वाण' (उपहारस्वरूप वितरण की जाने वाली वस्तु) दें उन्हें? तो जो सस्ते से सस्ता होगा ऐसा कुछ गन्दा सा बाजार से लाकर दे देना इसमें हम माहिर हैं! जो सबसे सस्ती कोई चीज़ है वह लाकर देते हैं। और ये लीजिए 'वाण'! बहत अच्छे! फिर चाहे वह (जिसे दिया) उसको उठाकर फेंक दे। तो हृदय का बड़्पन हुए बगैर ये बातें नहीं होने वाली। और उस हृदय के बड़प्पन की आपके लिए कोई कमी नहीं है। वह हृदय के बड़प्पन की आपके लिए कोई कमी नहीं है । वह हृदय आप में है ही क्योंकि उसमें आत्मा का दीप जला है। उसने आपको प्रकाश दिया है। ऐसा स्वच्छ, सुन्दर हृदय, उसमें जो कुछ बह रहा है, उसी की तरफ देखते रहना। मुझे यहाँ पर आप सबको देखकर लगा, अरे इस हृदय के प्रकाश में क्या- क्या देख रही हूँ? कितना मज़ा आ रहा है? ऐसा ही आपको होना चाहिए, कि हम सब माताजी के शरीर के अंग - प्रत्यंग हैं, हमने कोई गलती की तो माताजी को तकलीफ होगी। उन्हें तकलीफ हो इस तरह का हमें व्यवहार नहीं करना चाहिए। हम में एक तरह की सुज्ञता होनी चाहिए, एक तरह की पहचान होनी चाहिए । रोजमर्रा के व्यवहार में शालीनता होनी चाहिए। कहीं किसी व्यक्ति के पीछे पड़ना (तंग करना), कभी कुछ बहककर बड़बड़ाते रहना। बहुतों को गाना गाने की ही आदत होती है। किसी को कविता ही पढ़ते रहने की आदत होती है। वे कविता ही बोलते रहते हैं, तो कोई गाने ही गाते रहते हैं। ऐसा नहीं। जो ठीक है, व्यवहारी है, सौन्दर्यमय है, वही करना चाहिए। रोज के व्यवहार में भी सुन्दरता होनी चाहिए। अब आप माँ के लिए सब जेवर बनाते हो (इस दिन तिल के दानों के जेवर बनाने का रिवाज है।) कितने सुन्दर होते हैं वे! परन्तु आप ही मेरे जेवर हो, आप ही से मैंने अपने आपको सजाया है। उन जेवरें में अगर स्वच्छता न हो या वे अशुद्ध हों, माने उनका जो मुख्य गुण है, वही अगर उनमें नहीं हो। मान लीजिए सोने की जगह सोना न होकर पीतल है तो उसका क्या अर्थ है? वैसे ही आपका है। आपमें की जो महत्वपूर्ण धातु है वही झूठी होगी तो उसे सजाकर मैं कहाँ जाऊंगी? तो आप ही मेरे जेवर हैं, आप ही मेरे भूषण हैं। मुझे आप ही ने विभूषित किया है । मुझे किसी दूसरे आभूषण की आवश्यकता नहीं 12

 Hindi Translation (English Talk) है। यही मैं अब आपसे विनती करती हूँ कि बात करते समय, बच्चों से हो या और किसी के साथ हो, अत्यन्त समझदारी से, अत्यन्त नम्रता से और आराम से सब कार्य होना चाहिए। किसी से भी जबरदस्ती, जुल्म या जल्दबाजी करने की जरूरत नहीं है। इसी तरह एक दिन ऐसा आएगा जब सारी दुनिया आपकी तरफ आश्चर्य से देखेगी, 'अरे, ये कहाँ के लोग हैं? ये कौन आए?' तब मालूम होगा कि ये स्वर्गलोक के दूत हैं, सारी दुनिया को सम्भालने के लिए, सारी दुनिया को यशस्वी बनाने के लिए, और सबको परमात्मा के साम्राज्य के दरवाजे तक ले जाने के लिए, ये परमात्मा के भेजे हुए दूत है। ऐसे सभी द्तों को मेरा नमस्कार! 13



----------------------

19850114_Makar Sankranti Puja_Mumbai.pdf-page0.txt 
 Makar Sankranti Puja
Date
14th January 1985
:
Place
Mumbai
Type
Puja
Speech
Language
English & Marathi
CONTENTS
| Transcript
|
02 - 04
English
07 - 09
Marathi
Hindi
|| Translation
05 - 06
English
10 - 13
Hindi
Marathi
 19850114_Makar Sankranti Puja_Mumbai.pdf-page1.txt 
 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT
ENGLISH TALK
Today we are celebrating here a special day called Makar Sankrant. For the information of the
foreign Sahaja Yogis, I will explain to you what it means. It means the day today is the day the sun
crosses over from the Tropic of Capricorn to the Tropic of Cancer. It is a very big day for us because,
now during the summer time we have the harvest, and we look forward to the rain and so many things
that happen in every country. The sun falls at right angles in this country during the summer season
and so we welcome the sun. We eat something that we must have eaten already what we call as til and
Jaggary. It is to prepare your body and your mind to give it sufficiency to receive the sun. Because if
you are living in the cool season, then all your body mind becomes lethargic and you become also
sometimes very lazy about things in the sense that the day is so small that you cannot achieve
results. So the body has become cold as we call it. We take these things, which give us heat so body is
prepared to receive the heat of the sun to welcome.
many
To overcome the inertia setting by the cold weather and also to liberate the body's strength to the
sun, people take to all these ways of treating you by which they give you something that is heat
creating in the body. But it has another very subtle expression, which I find is when they give you
these they say now you take now til and gul and you say things, which are sweet. Because when you
are taking til and gul, your body gets heated and you become right sided. When you become right-
sided person you seldom speaks sweetly. So it is a contrast that they give you a thing to heat you up so
that your body gets heated up but you must be sweet. So there is a warning that you are eating all these
things but that doesn't mean now you ride on a big horse of ego and start splashing every one. It's a
very subtle thing to understand that when we become temperamentally right sided, we are so much
covered by our ego that we do not feel that we are hurting others by what we say.
If there are two egoistical people, they can manage among themselves. But if there is one
egoistical and another one who is subdued, then the subdued is finished. That's why they say today is
the day when we start speaking the truth. Even if there is some enemy or somebody who is not friendly
with you, there has been some misunderstanding this is the day we say that all right take this and say
something very sweet. Talk sweetly. But today only I think I received a letter from a Sahaja Yogini,
which was so full of harshness that I am surprised that I should receive today. Not to Me but some
other Sahaja Yogi. So one thing today we have to decide and think about that to another Sahaja Yogi
we are not going to say harsh and talk to him in a way as if he is an ordinary person. Now supposing he
is a leader then there is more reason that you should show respect. And if he is a senior leader, then
there is more reason that you must respect. The first thing one has to learn that we have to respect.
Now the Sun is so much respected in this country that in early morning time all the people get up
and say Namaskars to Surya with all His names and do a particular type of exercise to show that they
are completely surrendered to the will of the Surya. When you do that then the ego doesn't come. Now
the sun, when He shines here, it gives you a feeling that you have to be active you have to work very
hard. As a result of that you might develop ego. But when you develop ego then its surrounds your
brain completely and when the brain is surrounded with ego you do not know which way to go. You do
not know what is right what is wrong. You do not have any discretion and no limit. You do what you
think and whatever pleases Me.
6.
And this is the day when we celebrate it in a way to surrender ourselves to the Surya the Sun
which is, as we know is the residence of Shri Lord Jesus Christ. He resides on the Sun. So how humble
He is, how humble He was residing on the sun. The more He lived on the sun there should be much
more humility. Of course I must say in India people are humble. But still the quality of Sun can make
 19850114_Makar Sankranti Puja_Mumbai.pdf-page2.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
extremely arrogant and very unpleasant person. This unpleasant person can really waive all kinds
you
of good relations. But the worst thing that happens we start to lose our integration. Because when we
say harsh things to anyone you feel guilty we have another problem, our heart feels bad, our liver feels
bad everything whatsoever and thus you feel absolutely disintegrated. And this integrated is the shine
of our not evolving at all or we shall say devolve.
This integration is such a permanent thing that we see in ourselves. We see that we fight with our
ego. Then we fight with our super ego then we fight with our heart with our emotions and all the time
we are fighting within ourselves. So at least within ourselves we should speak sweetly on this day.
Then we can start speaking to others very very sweet. Now some people think, to speak sweetly is a
sign of weakness. In some countries people believe that if you speak to someone sweetly is a sign of
innocent. It is the greatest time of Sahaja Yogi to speak to others with respect with proper protocol and
with proper understanding. Now because of arrogance, people also forget what is their situation is and
this indiscreet temperament gives you no sense of direction. You move in every direction and you
don't know where you are going. As long as your ego is satisfied you go ahead with it and by the time
you discover that you have really become a humpty-dumpty you do not know what you have done to
yourself. So the best way to conquer your ego is to speak sweetly first. It is such a small thing to be
done but it brings you to that synthesis of character within yourselves first ofall and to the synthesis of
all the beautiful principles of life.
Like you talk to somebody sweetly, the person may like you. He may tell you something, which
he may be knowing of a very great importance for you. If you talk to somebody sweetly then you may
get the peace of mind because you have given peace to another person. Whatever you give to another
person that you feel within yourselves. But if you are quarreling with another person actually it is the
reflection of your quarrelling nature within yourself. Today there is a big [dirt or hurt?] and big cry and
big organizations working out the peace missions. The peace mission is within yourself. Let us start
all of us the Sahaja Yogis who are great saints sitting here decide today that we are going to make
peace with ourselves and with others. But first and foremost thing the peace cannot be made with
quarrels. You see like America and Russia want to decide it with missiles, the peace spoils. They say
next five time as many as will be made then they can live in peace let all those who are fighting kill
each other; they think this is the solution of the problem. It is the other way around.
Let everybody live peacefully within themselves and give peace to others so that this peace will
become a nucleus for the peace of the world. So your great task today is to establish a great source of
peaceful being. We have so many Sahaja Yogis here. They are sitting in complete peace and happiness
and joy you don't know you are emitting all that peace, channelizing it and doing it. But still there are
some who are suffering from quarrelling and hurting people and they are trying to do something,
which they should never do, is to think there's nothing.
If you are thinking just now you will not register what I am saying for this is another quality of a
person who is ego oriented is not to register. You may say anything you like but they don't hear. They
hear what they want to hear or they don't hear. So this is another thing we have to today decide that we
will register things than to tell out. Let us register. This is a sign of a character that wants to know who
wants to know more but criteria of ascent is synthesis and integration. A person who is not integrated
with other Sahaja Yogi is not a man who has ascent. Who tries to divide and talk of divisions. We the
English, We the Germans, We the Indians, then they are not Sahaja Yogis. They are Indians all right
but not Sahaja Yogis. Sahaja Yogis have no caste, creed or nationality. We have to carry our passport
only because we are born in this jail. We have to carry our criminal number but actually you don't need
it. You don't need all those things.
Now for us today to decide first of all in your heart that we will take to peace within ourselves
when we are troubling, we will be taking to peace within. Anybody who is trying to provoke you or
trying to create a problem or divide you on any issue whatsoever run away from that person as fast as
possible. Anybody who talks of peace, peace makers stick on to that person then only you will
3
 19850114_Makar Sankranti Puja_Mumbai.pdf-page3.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
understand that you are also getting peace. Here you have come to get peace not to create problems or
to listen to your problems but to get peace. Peace is a nature or is the quality of your spirit. So, once
you jump onto your peace somehow what happens that you go beyond the cause and the effect. You
are beyond the cause and the effect. So the cause disappears and the effect also disappears. So today
we all have come here to worship the peace within and without. Let us be peaceful. Let us not draw in
groups who hate, who talk hate. Who wants to hate one person who wants to create a group. Who says
"we the Americans" or "we the this", just.
99
99
In Sahaja Yoga you must learn from people who have advanced who have very much progressed
For example I would say among all the Europeans, Australians have done very well. There is nothing
to feel jealous. All right if Australians have done well, right that's your glory. So ask them how have
they worked it out. Tomorrow may be that Americans I wish that very much they do the best, so then
you should ask them how have you done so well. That's the way were going to live. We are not going to
compete, we are not going to be jealous, but we are going to absorb all that is peace. This is Sahaja
Yoga. It is the other way around, like if they discover something a pilot is above then they will
discover something as which is a machineless man. No, it is another one. We develop a mind, which
absorbs everything, and then we develop a bigger mind, which gives everything. There is no secret in
Sahaja Yoga. Everybody who has known something better, have had some good experiences of
Sahaja Yoga should tell. But then in ego I have seen people start preaching that all right this method is
right, that method is good, there is no need to be that also because of lack of discretion. If you have
discretion you would have known that this is not to be done. What is not to be done in Sahaja Yoga is
not to be done. Now how will you know when you don't have the discretion, like a lost ship. So then
you have to see how your Mother would act at such a position and then I am sure you will go beyond
the cause and the effect.
So today is the day I should also not say anything that is in anyway hurting to anyone and I am
trying to make you smile and laugh but you are so serious. . So today we decide on peace. Peace with
ourselves, peace with others and that is how you worship the Sun, Christ the one who was the emblem.
Who was the absolute of practical symbol [OF CHRIST?]. And once you understand these, I am sure
you will try to follow that instead of hitting everybody, getting angry with everybody. Just forgive all.
You have come here to ascend and your game is your game. Your fighting is not your game remember
that. Your quarrelling is not your game. The game is the peace that you have achieved, the love that
you have developed, the compassion that you can envelope, the amount of relationship and the power
you can penetrate into others. This is your game which we have to receive today am I a heart like a lion
and not chicken hearted people. Not people who would be angry in this most of your anger, these days
are gone the most of the peace, the most of our contentment, the most of our glory and the most of our
state. And that is the state where you are now in the Kingdom of God.
May God bless you!
4
 19850114_Makar Sankranti Puja_Mumbai.pdf-page4.txt 
 ENGLISH TRANSLATION
(Marathi Talk)
Now I want to tell you that so many guests have come to us responding to your cordial invitation
and you have made proper arrangements for their stay. Also, nobody of you has even slightly
indicated to me how much trouble you have taken or efforts you have made to make them
comfortable. Indeed, the Mumbaites have made great efforts and on behalf of you and these people I
want to tell that they have, in this regard, surged ahead. However I am telling you, which I have
already told to them, that today we distribute the sesame and jagarry mix, so as to avoid any problem
from the Sun.
First problem we face is, with hot Sun in the sky one becomes irascible and insults others. The
person has strong ego. The people who are directly exposed to Sun have big egos. Hence, such people
should remember the mantra, "Talk sweet (god god bola)" The eating of the sesame and jaggary,
increases the body heat and the person starts showing his temper. Just a short time back you were
given the sesame and jaggary, at least for that time you speak sweet words with me! But even that does
not happen. He started shouting immediately after accepting the sesame and jaggary. Then what is the
use of the sesame and jaggary? Better to throw it away! So, on this occasion, all should decide that
this is good opportunity and that even though Shri Mataji comes here and advises us, Her advice will
not enter in our brains if there is heat in our beings. Where does heat come from? It comes from our
egos In the past, when I started teaching the Sahaja Yoga, all were fighting, which used to be so much
that, fortunately, they were short of breaking each others' heads. They used to fight for some reason or
the other. Half of them ran away and half continued. I said, Sahaja Yoga is not possible with these
people. It was like; one man came for the work and ran away after two days, the second man came and
disappeared after three days! It is in this situation of people running away, that we have established the
Sahaja Yoga.
99
The main reason is, you should have the desire, "We have come to meet God almighty, we want
his blessings, we want to know Divine Principle. We want to destroy all that torments the people." So
we cannot afford to fight. The ego has caused problems all over world and we should completely give
it up in the Sahaja Yoga. "Aataa Sahaja Yoga madhe maatra hyaalaa poorna-pane Tillanjali dili
pahije" Take sesames in hands held together in the cup form, and drop them in water. Thus you make a
resolve, "We shall not indulge into falsehood and also we shall eschew anger."
יי
66
You should try to bring it into practice. You must try at least once. Then you will see; how many
things can one settle, how many things one can face, and that a number of problems are solved just
because you have not paid attention to them. If you attach too much importance to anything, then it
can be said that you have become Taamasik, left-sided by temperament. What is being Taamasik (
left-sided) ? It means the person who makes big issue out of a small one. Suppose a woman's husband
is sick. She goes on harping, "My husband is sick, my husband is sick". All right your husband is sick,
but you are all right, what about you? This fact is ignored. In a way, husband's illness is important. But
people take a small issue and blow it out of proportion and harass others with it. This is a common
practice with us because we attach great importance to minor things and ignore major things.
As for these people, small and big are just the same. They do not understand anything from them,
but you do! The reason is the heritage, that we have received, is very great. We were born on this land
of Yoga (Yoga bhoomi) but having been born here what have we achieved? It is said that one is born in
India after the Tapasya (penance) of a thousand years and after another thousand years in
Maharashtra. But when I see inebriated persons lying on road side, I wonder whether they are from
Maharashtra or somewhere else, I mean one cannot understand how these worms were born here.
5
 19850114_Makar Sankranti Puja_Mumbai.pdf-page5.txt 
 English Translation (Marathi Talk)
You have become Sahaja Yogis because of your Tapasya of the last life, now you are getting its
reward. But it does not mean that Shri Mataji has to perform the rest of your Tapasya in this life. The
first penance of this life is to talk sweet and with love and not to be curt. Hence we have initiated the
practice of having the Puja on this first day. On this day we should speak sweet words today and
continue with the use of those words as talking sweet is easy and getting angry is difficult. Beating
someone is impossible to man. Then why to do these difficult things? Talk sweet, simple and straight
forward. We have many who use sugar coated words. I thought that the people from their families
speak that way. They really spoke sweet but while using sugar coated words they cut others' throats.
So, I asked," What is this" They answered, "In the past while our people spoke sweet language, others
took their disadvantage. So we use sweet words and also cut the throats." I asked, "Why are you doing
it? Have you learnt a good thing by it? Has it done anything good to you? Have you risen above it?
Those who used only sweet language were all right. They lived comfortably and contentedly.
99
Suppose you quarrel with two persons and you cut their throats, then what have
You must see what you have achieved. So, today is the day of a special festival which all enjoy. Hence
I do not want to say unpleasant. I always speak with full care so that nothing should happen that would
hurt the peoples' feelings and make them sad. Now, some people come and suddenly touch my body.
It troubles me a lot and should not be done. But, how can one tell them? Hence I have to bear it; that let
it go, lest that person will feel bad. Thus I have to bear a lot. I do not mind it, since that person will feel
sad if pulled up. So instead of admonishing him I bear that pain. I do not mind it being aware that the
powers that I have others have not.
achieved?
you
The same is also true about love. If our power of love is stronger and the others' is less, then who is
greater, we or those people? If this way we use our discretion, that we are Sahaja Yogis and our mother
has bestowed on us the power of love. So we are greater than them. So, what do we lose even if they
say something? What is the need to get angry and fight with them? As your temperament becomes
peaceful, your face will shine. When people around see you they will feel your peace. However, being
peaceful does not mean that if somebody beats you up, you should bear it. Not at all! I told that only
with respect to Sahaja Yogis that if you are slapped on one cheek, show the other. This is not so with
respect to people who are not Sahaja Yogis. As for them, I tell you that if they give you one slap you
give them four, so that bhoots possessing them will run away.
Among Sahaja Yogis your speech should be pure and loving. It is very necessary. All should talk
lovingly amongst themselves. I do not mind if you speak this way with an outsider. But, one who is
ours a Sahaja Yogi, is in my body. Every Sahaja Yogi is in my body. Hence when you abuse or fight
amongst you, should think that you are abusing me. You should know each other and should be of
sweet and gentle behavior. It is not correct to be like a distracted person; somebody runs after
someone, another indulges into childish prattles, third one sings the songs, yet another always read
poems, this and that. We should do that which is pragmatic and beautiful. There should also be beauty
in the demeanors. We make ornaments for the Mother. How beautiful they are! But you are my
ornaments and on my body. If those ornaments are unclean and lack in purity, meaning they are
deficient of the main quality, like gold ornaments without gold, or contain brass instead of gold, of
what use they are? The same applies to you too. Where will I go wearing the ornament which contains
fake main ingredient?
So you are my decorations. You have decorated me and I do not need any other decoration. So I
request you to be considerate, humble and gentle when you talk to, or on the whole, deal with children
or other persons. You should not be aggressive, rude, or hasty with anybody. Thereby a day will come
when the whole world will behold you and wonder, as to, "Who are these people? Where are they
from"? Then, the world will know that these are messengers from heaven. God has sent those angels;
to take care of the world, to bestow success on the whole world, to take the world at the God's
doorstep.
I bow to such angels.
 19850114_Makar Sankranti Puja_Mumbai.pdf-page6.txt 
 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT
MARATHI TALK
आता तुम्हा लोकांना सांगायचं म्हणजे असं की इतकी मंडळी आपल्याकडे पाहणे म्हणून आली आणि त्यांना
तुम्ही सगळ्यांनी एवढ्या ह्याने बोलावलंत आणि त्यांची इतकी व्यवस्था केली. त्याबद्दल कोणीही, काहीही मला
असं दाखवलं नाही की, मला अशी मेहनत पडली किंवा मला त्रास झाला. आणि मुंबईकरांनी विशेष करून फारच
मेहनत केलेली आहे. त्याबद्दल तुम्हा सर्वांच्या तर्फे, ह्या सर्वांच्या तर्फे मला असं म्हणावं लागेल, की मुंबईकरांनी
फार आघाडी मारलेली आहे. पण जे ह्यांना सांगते तेच आपल्याला सांगते. आज आपण तिळगूळ देतो. कारण
सूर्यापासून जे त्रास आहेत ते आपल्याला होऊ नयेत.
पहिला त्रास म्हणजे, सूर्य आला म्हणजे मनुष्य चिडचिडा होतो. एक दुसऱ्याला उणंदुणं बोलतो.
त्याच्यामध्ये अहंकार बळावतो. सूर्याच्या खाली राहणाऱ्या लोकांना फार अहंकार आहे. म्हणून अशा लोकांनी
एक गोष्ट लक्षात ठेवायची, हा मंत्र आहे, की 'गोड गोड बोला. ' तिळगूळ घेतल्याबरोबर अंगात गरमी येते आणि
लागले वसकन् ओरडायला. म्हणजे झालं! अहो, आत्ताच तिळगूळ दिला. निदान तेवढं तरी तुम्ही गोड बोला
माझ्याशी. ते सुद्धा जुळत नाही. तिळगूळ घेतला नी लागले ओरडायला. कसला तिळगूळ तुमचा, फेका तिकडे.
तेव्हा ह्या ह्याच्यामध्ये आपण असं ठरवून घ्यायचं, की ही पार सुसंधी आहे. माताजी आल्या आणि माताजींनी
आम्हाला कितीही सांगितलं ते आमच्या डोक्यात जाणार नाही. जर आमच्या डोक्यात गरमी असली तर काहीही
जाणार नाही. ही गरमी निघायला पाहिजे. आणि ही गरमी आपल्यामध्ये कुठून येते ? तर ती अहंकारामधून येते.
पूर्वीच्या काळी जेव्हा आम्ही सहजयोग
केला, तेव्हा सगळ्यांच्या भांडाभांडी असायच्या. म्हणजे
सुरू
इथपर्यंत की डोकी फोडली नाही हे नशीब! बाकी डोकी शाबूत आहेत सगळ्यांची आता. पण भांडणं, कुणाचं
कशावरून भांडण, तर कुणाचं कशावरून भांडण. अर्धे पळाले, अर्धे राहिले. म्हटलं सहजयोग काही व्हायचा
नाही. कारण एक आला कामाला, दोन दिवसाने पळाला. दूसरा आला तो तीन दिवसाने पळाला. तर अशी स्थिती
होती. ह्या पळापळीतच आपण सहजयोग बसवलेला आहे. पण त्याला मुख्य कारण एकच, की तुम्हाला इच्छा
असायला पाहिजे की, 'काहीही असलं तरी आम्ही परमेश्वराला भेटायला आलोत. आम्हाला परमेश्वराचे
आशीर्वाद हवे. आम्हाला परमेश्वरी तत्त्व जाणायचंय. आम्हाला जगातल्या ह्या ज्या सर्व काही गोष्टी आहेत,
ज्याने सगळ्यांना ताप आणि त्रास होतोय त्यांना नष्ट करायचंय.' तेव्हा इथे भांडाभांडी करून चालणार नाही. ह्या
अहंकारामुळे इतके त्रास सबंध जगामध्ये झालेले आहेत ! आता सहजयोगामध्ये मात्र ह्याला पूर्णपणे तिलांजली
दिली पाहिजे. आणि तिलांजली म्हणजे तिळांची अंजली. म्हणजे हातात हे तीळ घेऊन त्याची अंजली तुम्ही देऊन
टाकावी. म्हणजे आता ह्याच्यापुढे आपण काही खोटं करणार नाही. रागवणार नाही.
एकवेळा करून बघा. एक वेळेला करून बघायचं! न रागवता किती तरी गोष्टींना मनुष्य समेटू शकतो. किती
तरी गोष्टींचा सामना करू शकतो आणि किती तरी गोष्टींकडे नुसते लक्ष न दिल्यामुळे सबंध काही उत्तरच त्याचं
मिळालेले आहे, सबंध त्यांचे जे काही प्रश्न आहेत ते सुटलेले आहेत, असं तुमच्यासमोर एखादं दृश्य येईल.
 19850114_Makar Sankranti Puja_Mumbai.pdf-page7.txt 
 Original Transcript : Marathi
तेव्हा कोणत्याही गोष्टीला आपण अत्यंत जर महत्त्व दिलं, तर आपण त्याच्यामध्ये तामसिक स्वभावाचे झालो.
असं म्हणता येईल. तामसिक म्हणजे काय? जो मनुष्य, जे लहानसं असेल त्याचं खूप मोठं करतो. म्हणजे एखादी
बाई, आता तिचा नवरा आजारी. 'माझा नवरा आजारी, माझा नवरा आजारी.' कबूल. पण तू आहेस ना ! तुझी
तब्येत ठीक आहे नां! तुझ्याबद्दल काय? ते काही नाही. पण तो तरी म्हणा नवरा आहे, ते तरी महत्त्वाचं आहे.
पण
एक लहानशी गोष्ट घेऊन बसायचं. त्याचा गवगवा करायचा. दूसर्यांना हैराण करायचं. त्रास द्यायचा. ही जी
आपल्याकडे एक पद्धत आहे, त्याला कारण असं आहे, की आपल्यामध्ये क्षुल्लक गोष्टींचं महत्त्व जास्त आहे
आणि मोठ्या गोष्टींकडे लक्षच नाही. त्या लोकांना काय, मोठे आणि लहान सगळे बरोबरच आहे. काही समजत
नाही त्याच्यातलं. पण तुम्हाला समजलं पाहिजे. कारण आपलं जे काही आहे एवढं मोठं, हा जो काही वारसा
मिळालेला आहे, फार मोठा आहे. तेव्हा वारसा मिळाला. आम्ही ह्या योगभूमीत जन्माला आलो. ह्या योगभूमीत
आम्ही आल्यावर आम्ही काय मिळवलं? हजारो वर्षाच्या तपश्चर्येनंतर म्हणतात हिंदुस्थानात जन्म होतो आणि
त्याच्या हजार वर्षानंतर महाराष्ट्रात होतो. आता रस्त्यात झिंगत लोक पाहिले, की मला समजत नाही, महाराष्ट्रातले
आहेत की कुठले आहेत? म्हणजे किडे कसे जन्माला आले ते समजत नाही. आता तुम्ही सहजयोगी झालात.
कारण तुमची पूर्वजन्माची तपश्चर्या आहे. आज ती फळाला आली. पण त्याचा अर्थ असा नाही, की बाकीची
सगळी ही तपश्चर्या ह्या जन्मात आता माताजींनी करायची.
ह्या जन्मातली पहिली तपश्चर्या म्हणजे आपापसात गोड बोललं पाहिजे. प्रेमाने वागलं पाहिजे. तोडून नाही
बोलायचं. पहिली गोष्ट. म्हणून आज पहिला दिवस आपला पूजेचा आपण सुरू केलेला आहे. त्यादिवशी आपण
सर्वांनी गोड बोललं पाहिजे आणि गोडीत राहिलं पाहिजे. कारण गोड बोलणं हे फार सोपं काम आहे. रागावणं तर
त्याहून कठीण आणि मारणं तर जमतच नाही माणसाला. तेव्हा कशाला कठीण कामं करायची. सरळ गोड बोललं
की झालं. आता आपल्याकडे पुष्कळ 'गोडबोले' वगैरे असतात. मी असा विचार केला की ह्यांच्या फॅमिलीतच
लोक गोड बोलत असतील वगैरे. तर खरोखर ते लोक गोड बोलत असत. पण ते गोड बोलून दुसऱ्यांचे गळे
कापत. मग म्हटलं हा काय प्रकार ! 'अहो,' म्हणे, 'पूर्वी आमच्याकडे लोक गोड बोलत असत. त्यांच्या गोड
बोलण्यामुळे लोकांनी त्यांचा फायदा उचलला. आता आम्ही गोड बोलतो, पण आम्ही गळेही कापतो.' म्हटलं,
'कशाला? हे काही तुम्ही चांगल शिकले का? हे काही तुमचं भलं केलं का? त्याच्या वर गेलात का तुम्ही?' ती
मंडळी बरी होती जी गोड बोलायची. ती आरामात राहिली. संतोषात राहिली. दोन माणसांबरोबर तुमची भांडणं
झाली उद्या आणि तुम्ही त्यांचे गळे कापले. तर तुम्ही मिळवलं काय? आपण मिळवलं काय हे बघितलं पाहिजे.
तेव्हा आजचा दिवस विशेष सणाचा. सगळ्यांना अत्यंत साजरा असा आहे. ह्यावेळेला मला तरी काही कडू
बोलायचं नाही आणि सगळ्यांचं मन राखून मी सांगते, की मी एवढी काळजी घेत असते, कुठून असं नाही झालं
पाहिजे, की लोकांना वाईट वाटेल किंवा काय होईल. आता काही लोक येतात की माझ्या अंगाला पटकन हात
लावतात. आता त्याने त्रास होतो मला. तसं करायचं नसतं. पण सांगायचं कसं ? मग सहन करते मी! जाऊ दे
बाबा, काय करता आता? कसं, त्याला वाईट वाटेल. असं पुष्कळ सहन करावं लागतं. मला काही हरकत नाही,
हे सहन करण्याची. कारण त्याला दुखवलं तर त्याला दु:ख वाटेल. कशाला? तेवढं दु:ख मी सहन करू शकते.
आपल्यामध्ये जेवढी शक्ती असते ती दुसऱ्यामध्ये नाही ही जाणीव असल्यामुळे त्याचं काही वाटत नाही.
8.
 19850114_Makar Sankranti Puja_Mumbai.pdf-page8.txt 
 Original Transcript : Marathi
त्या प्रेमाच्या बाबतीतसुद्धा तसंच. आपल्या जर प्रेमाची शक्ती जास्त आहे, आणि दुसऱ्याची कमी आहे, तर
आपण मोठे की ते दूसरे. असा एक सारासार विचार जर घेतला, तर आपण सहजयोगी आहोत आणि आपल्याला
आईने प्रेमाची शक्ती दिली आहे. तेव्हा आम्ही त्यांच्यापेक्षा मोठे आहोत. तेव्हा ते काहीतरी बोलले तर आपलं
काय जातं त्याच्यामध्ये. त्यांच्याशी एवढी भांडाभांडी आणि रागराग करण्याची काय गरज. हळूहळू तुमचा
स्वभाव शांत झाला. तुमच्या चेहऱ्यावर तेज येणार. इतकेच नव्हे तर चार लोक तुमच्या आसपास आले तर
तुम्हाला बघून म्हणतील की हे शांत आहेत. पण शांतपणाचा हा अर्थ नव्हे, की तुम्ही कोणी जोडी मारले तरी खा.
असं मुळीच नाही. फक्त सहजयोग्यांसाठी सांगितलेले आहे, की तुमच्या तोंडात कोणी थोबाडीत मारली तर दुसरे
थोबाड पुढे करा. फक्त सहजयोग्यांसाठी. इतर लोकांसाठी नाही. इतर लोकांनी एक
थोबाडीत मारली , तर तुम्ही
चार मारा असं मी सांगेन. कारण त्यांची भूतं असतील तर निघून जातील. पण आपापसामध्ये,
सहजयोग्यांच्यामध्ये तुमचं बोलणं शुद्ध असायला पाहिजे आणि प्रेमळ असायला पाहिजे. ही फार आवश्यक गोष्ट
आहे. सगळ्यांनी प्रेमळपणे आपापसात बोलणं केलं पाहिजे आणि जो बाहेरचा मनुष्य आहे, त्याच्यावर तुम्ही असे
बोलले तर मला काही हरकत नाही. पण जो आपला आहे, हा सहजयोगी सगळा माझ्या अंगात आलेला आहे.
एक एक मनुष्य माझ्या शरीरात गेलेला आहे. तुम्ही जर एकदुसऱ्यांना लाथा मारल्यात किंवा शिव्या दिल्यात, त्या
मलाच तुम्ही शिव्या देता असं समजलं पाहिजे. एकमेकांची ओळख असायला पाहिजे आणि वागतांना
आपल्यामध्ये सोज्वळता असायला पाहिजे. काहीतरी बहकल्यासारखं एखाद्याच्या मागेच लागायचं किंवा
असते कोणी,
काहीतरी बहकल्यासारखं बडबडत रहायचं किंवा बोलत रहायचं. पुष्कळांना गाणं म्हणण्याची ट्रम
काही कविताच वाचत बसेल, तर कोणी गाणंच म्हणत बसेल, कोणी काय.. असं नाही. जे बरोबर, व्यवहारी
आणि सौंदर्यमय असेल ते केलं पाहिजे. वागण्यामध्येसुद्धा सुंदरता असायला पाहिजे. आणि आपण आता जेव्हा
सगळे दागिने वरगैरे करतो आईसाठी, किती सुंदर असतात. पण तुम्हीच माझे दागिने आहात. तुम्हालाच अंगावर
मी लेवून घेतलेले आहे. त्या दागिन्यांमध्ये जर स्वच्छता नसली, किंवा त्याच्यामध्ये जर अशुद्धता म्हणजे त्याच्या
अंगातले जे मुख्य गुण आहेत, तेच नाही त्याच्यात. सोन्याचं जर सोनं नसलं, सोन्याच्या जागी पितळ असलं, तर
त्याला काय अर्थ आहे? तसंच तुमचं आहे. तुमच्या अंगातला मुख्य जो धातू आहे, तोच जर खोटा असला,
तर
त्याला घालून मी कुठे मिरवायचं?
तेव्हा तुम्हीच माझं लेणं तुम्हीच माझं भूषण आहात. तुम्हीच मला भूषवून दिलेले आहे. मला कोणत्याच
दुसर्या भूषणाची गरज नाही. असं मी तुमच्याजवळ आता फार विनवून सांगते, की बोलतांना वरगैरे एकंदरीत
मुलांच्या बाबतीत किंवा कोणाच्याही बाबतीत अत्यंत समजूतदारपणाने अत्यंत नम्रपणाने आणि सावकाशपणे
सगळे कार्य झालं पाहिजे. कोणावरही जबरदस्ती, जुलूम किंवा घाई वगैरे करण्यात काही अर्थ नाही. अशा रीतीने
एक दिवस असा येणार आहे, की सगळं जग तुमच्याकडे बघून आश्चर्यचकित होईल. 'अहो, ही मंडळी कुठली?
हे कुठले लोक? हे कोण आले?' मग कळेल, की हे स्वर्गातले दूत आलेत. सर्व जगाला सांभाळण्यासाठी,
जगाला यश देण्यासाठी, सर्व जगाला परमेश्वराच्या दारात नेण्यासाठी, हे परमेश्वराने पाठवलेले आहेत.
सर्व
दूत
अशा सर्व दूतांना माझा नमस्कार!
9.
 19850114_Makar Sankranti Puja_Mumbai.pdf-page9.txt 
 HINDI TRANSLATION
(English Talk)
अब आपको कहना है, कि इतने लोग हमारे यहाँ मेहमान आए हैं और आप सबने उन्हें इतने प्यार से बुलाया,
उनकी अच्छी व्यवस्था की, उसके लिए किसी ने भी मुझे कुछ दिखाया नहीं कि हमें बहुत परिश्रम करना पड़ा, हमें
कष्ट हुए और मुंबईवालों ने विशेषतया बहुत ही मेहनत की है। उसके लिए आप सबकी तरफ से व इन सब की तरफ
से मुझे कहना होगा कि मुंबईवालों ने प्रशंसनीय कार्य किया है ।
अब जो इन से (विदेशियों से) अंग्रेजी में कहा वही आपको कहती हूं। आज के दिन हम लोग तिल गुड़ देते हैं।
क्योंकि सूर्य से जो कष्ट होते हैं वे हमें न हों। सबसे पहला कष्ट यह है कि सूर्य आने पर मनुष्य चिड़चिड़ा होता है।
एक-दूसरे को उलटा -सीधा बोलता है। उसमें अहंकार बढ़ता है। सूर्य के निकट सम्पर्क में रहने वाले लोगों में बहुत
अहंकार होता है। इसलिए ऐसे लोगों को एक बात याद रखनी चाहिए, उनके लिए ये मन्त्र है कि गुड़ जैसा बोलें
गुड़ खाने से अन्दर गरमी आती है, और तुरन्त लगते हैं चिल्लाने। अरे, अभी तो
(मीठा-मीठा बोलो)। तिल
तिल-गुड़ खाया, तो अभी तो कम से कम मीठा बोलो। ये भी नहीं होता। तिल-गुड़ दिया और लगे चिल्लाने। काहे
का ये तिल-गुड़? फेंको इसे उधर! तो आज के दिन आप तय कर लीजिए। ये बहुत बड़ा सुसंयोग है कि श्री
माताजी आई हैं। उन्होंने हमें कितना भी कहा तो भी हमारे दिमाग में वह नहीं आएगा। अगर हमारे दिमाग में गरमी
होगी तो कुछ भी नहीं आएगा। ये गरमी निकलनी चाहिए। और ये गरमी हम में कहाँ से आती है ? अहंकार के
कारण। बहुत पहले जब मैंने सहजयोग शुरू किया तब सबका लड़ाई-झगड़ा। यहाँ तक कि एक दूसरे के सर नहीं
फूटे, यही गरनीमत है। बाकी सभी के सर ठीक-ठाक हैं। परन्तु झगड़े बहुत, किसी का किस बात पर,
किसी का
किस बात पर। देखा आधे भाग गए, कुछ बच गए। मैंने सोचा, अब सहजयोग को कुछ नहीं होने वाला। क्योंकि
एक आया काम करने, दो दिन बाद भाग गया। दूसरा आया, तीन दिन बाद भाग गया, ये स्थिति थी। ऐसी स्थिति
में अब हमने सहजयोग जमाया है। पर उसके लिए आपकी इच्छा चाहिए कि कुछ भी हो हम परमात्मा को पाने
आए हैं। हमें परमात्मा का आशीर्वाद चाहिए। हमें परमात्मा का तत्व जानना है। हमें दुनिया की सारी गलत बातें
जिनसे कि कष्ट और परेशानियाँ हो रही है, नष्ट करनी हैं। तो यहाँ झगड़े नहीं करने हैं। इस अहंकार से सारी दुनिया में
इतनी परेशानियाँ हुई हैं।
अब सहजयोग में इसे पूर्णतया तिलांजली देनी पड़ेगी। तिलांजली माने तिल की अंजली। मतलब अब तिल-
गुड़ खाकर इसकी (अहंकार की) अंजली आप दीजिए । मतलब इसके बाद हम कोई क्रोध नहीं करेंगे, गुस्सा नहीं
करेंगे। एक बार करके देखिए । देखना चाहिए । गुस्सा न करके कितनी बातों को मनुष्य समेट सकता है। कितनी
बातों का सामना कर सकता है। बहुत सी बातें ऐसी हैं जिनमें ज़्यादा चित्त न रखने से उनके हल मिले हैं। और जो
कुछ समस्याएं हैं वह पूरी तरह से हल हुई हैं। तो किसी बात में आपने बहुत ज़्यादा चित्त रखा तो आप तामसिक
स्वभाव के बन गए, ऐसा कहते हैं। तामसिक माने क्या? तो कोई औरत है, अब उसका पति बीमार है, 'मेरा पति
10
 19850114_Makar Sankranti Puja_Mumbai.pdf-page10.txt 
 Hindi Translation (English Talk)
बीमार है, मेरा पति बीमार है।' बाबा है, मान लिया ! परन्तु तुम तो ठीक हो न? तुम्हारी तबियत तो अच्छी है!
उसका कुछ नहीं। पति है ये भी तो बड़ी बात है। परन्तु नहीं, एक छोटी सी बात को लेकर के हल्ला मचाना, दूसरों
को हैरान करना। ये जो हमारे यहाँ बात है, उसका कारण है हमारे यहाँ छोटी सी बात को ज़्यादा महत्व देना और
बड़ी-बड़ी बातों की तरफ ध्यान नहीं देना। इन लोगों (विदेशियों) के लिए बड़ा क्या, छोटा क्या, सब बराबर है।
कुछ नहीं मालूम। पर आप लोगों को समझना चाहिए। क्योंकि हमारा जो वारसा है वह इतना महान है। हम इस
योगभूमि भारत में जन्मे हैं। इस योगभूमि में जन्म लेकर हमने क्या प्राप्त किया है? हजारों वर्षों की तपस्या
के फलस्वरूप इस भारत में जन्म होता है। और उसमें भी हजारों वर्षों से महाराष्ट्र में होता है। लेकिन रास्ते पर पी
कर पड़े हुए लोगों को देखकर मेरी समझ में नहीं आता ये महाराष्ट्र के हैं या और कहीं के? ये कीड़े यहाँ कहाँ से
जन्मे हैं? यही नहीं समझ में आता? अबआप सहजयोगी हैं और आपकी पूर्व जन्मों की तपस्या अब फलित हुई है।
परन्तु इसका मतलब ये नहीं कि बाकी की, इस जन्म की, तपस्या माताजी ने करनी है।
इस जन्म की पहली तपस्या है आपस में मीठा बोलना, प्यार से रहना। ये पहली बात। इसलिए पहला दिन
हमने पूजा का शुरू किया है। उस दिन आप सब को मीठे बोल बोलने चाहिए। और मिठास से रहना चाहिए,
क्योंकि मीठा बोलना ये सबसे आसान है। गुस्सा करना बड़ा कठिन काम है, और मारना तो आता ही नहीं है। तो
इतने कठिन काम किसलिए करते हैं? तो सीधी- सीधी बात, मीठा बोलो, बस।
अब हमारे यहाँ बहत से लोगों का नाम (सरनेम) 'गोडबोले' होता है। तो मैंने सोचा इनके परिवार में लोग
मीठा बोलते थे। पर वे मीठी बातें करके लोगों के गले काटते थे। मैंने
मीठा बोलते होंगे। तो सचमुच वे लोग
कहा ये कहाँ का मीठी बातें करने का तरीका ? तो बोले, 'हाँ, हमारे यहाँ पहले लोग बड़ा मीठा बोलते थे। उनके
बहुत
मीठा बोलने का लोगों ने बहुत फायदा उठाया। इसलिए अब हम मीठा बोलते हैं और लोगों के गले काटते हैं।' मैंने
कहा , 'ऐसा क्यों करते हैं? इससे आपको क्या लाभ हुआ है? वही लोग अच्छे थे जो मीठा बोलते थे और आराम
से रहते थे। वे सन्तोष में रहते थे। किसी व्यक्ति के साथ आपकी लड़ाई हो गई और उसके आपने गले काटे तो (गले
काटना माने 'मुंह में राम, बगल में छुरी) तो आपने क्या पाया?' हमने क्या प्राप्त किया? यह देखना है।
तो आज का दिन विशेष त्यौहार का, सभी को अत्यन्त सुशोभित करने वाला है। इस समय मुझे तो बिल्कुल
भी कटु नहीं बोलना है। बड़े सम्भालकर मैं बात करती हूँ। मैं इतना समझकर व्यवहार करती हूँ कि किसी को किसी
बात से दु:ख न पहुँचे। अब कुछ लोग आतेहैं, वे मुझे झट से हाथ लगाते हैं उससे मुझे बड़ी तकलीफ होती है।
वैसा नहीं करना चाहिए। परन्तु यह कैसे बताएं ? इसलिए सहती रहती हूँ। जाने दो, क्या करें ? अब कैसे बताऊं?
उनको दुःख होगा। ऐसी बहुत सी बातें मैं सहती हूँ। मेरी कोई बात नहीं, मैं सह सकती हूँ। जो सहनशक्ति मुझ में है,
वह दूसरों में नहीं है। दूसरों को दुःखी करने से अच्छा वही दु:ख में सह लू। यह बात जानने से उसका दुःख नहीं
महसूस होता। प्रेम के बारे में यही बात है। अपने प्रेम की शक्ति ज़्यादा है और दूसरों में कम है। तो हम बड़े कि वे
बड़े? इस तरह का एक विचार ले लिया तो आप सहजयोग अच्छी तरह पा सकते हैं। हमें माँ ने प्रेम की शक्ति
ज़्यादा दी है, तो वे कुछ भी बोलें उससे हमारा क्या बिगड़ता है? क्या जरूरत है उनसे लड़ाई-झगड़े करने की ?
धीरे-धीरे आपका स्वभाव शान्त हो जाएगा। तब आपका चेहरा तेजस्वी दिखाई देगा। जब लोग आपके
11
 19850114_Makar Sankranti Puja_Mumbai.pdf-page11.txt 
 Hindi Translation (English Talk)
निकट आएंगे तो कहेंगे, 'अरे, ये कौन है?' परन्तु 'शान्त स्वभाव' का ये मतलब नहीं कि, कोई आपको जूते मारे
तो भी आप चुप रहें, ऐसा बिलकुल नहीं। केवल सहजयोगियों के लिए ख्रिस्त ने कहा है । किसी ने आपको एक
गाल पे मारा तो आप दूसरा गाल आगे करिए, केवल सहजयोगियों के लिए, ख्रिस्त ने कहा है। औरों ने अगर एक
मारा तो आप उसे चार मारिए, ये मैं कहूँगी। क्योंकि उनके जो भूत होंगे वे निकल जाएंगे | परन्तु सहजयोगियों की
आपस में शुद्ध बातचीत होनी चाहिए। प्यार से आपस में बातें करनी है। ये बड़ी आवश्यक बात है। औरों के साथ
आप कैसे भी रहें, कोई हर्ज नहीं है। परन्तु जो अपने हैं, ये सहजयोगी सारे मेरे शरीर में हैं। एक-एक मनुष्य मेरे
शरीर के अन्दर है। आपने अगर एक-दूसरे को लातें मारी, गालियाँ दीं तो मुझे ही गाली दी, ऐसा समझना
चाहिए। क्योंकि अब देखिए किसी पेड़ की डालियाँ आपस में लड़ने लगेंगी तो उस पेड़ का क्या होगा? और उन
पत्तों का भी क्या होगा? अब ये एक हाथ अगर दूसरे हाथ से लड़ने लगे, तो क्या होगा ? अगर ये चीज़ समझ में
आ गई कि हम सब एक हैं, समग्र हैं, हमारे में इतनी एकता है कि हम सब एक शरीर के अंग-प्रत्यंग हैं, तब आपने
किस तरह का व्यवहार करना चाहिए? आपमें कितनी समझदारी होनी चाहिए? कितना प्यार होना चाहिए?
आपस में कितना सुख बॉटने की इच्छा होनी चाहिए? इनके लिए क्या करू? इन्हें क्या अच्छा लगता है?
दिवाली के समय हम कुछ उपहार देते हैं या संक्रान्ति के समय क्या 'वाण' (उपहारस्वरूप वितरण की जाने
वाली वस्तु) दें उन्हें? तो जो सस्ते से सस्ता होगा ऐसा कुछ गन्दा सा बाजार से लाकर दे देना इसमें हम माहिर हैं!
जो सबसे सस्ती कोई चीज़ है वह लाकर देते हैं। और ये लीजिए 'वाण'! बहत अच्छे! फिर चाहे वह (जिसे दिया)
उसको उठाकर फेंक दे। तो हृदय का बड़्पन हुए बगैर ये बातें नहीं होने वाली। और उस हृदय के बड़प्पन की
आपके लिए कोई कमी नहीं है। वह हृदय के बड़प्पन की आपके लिए कोई कमी नहीं है । वह हृदय आप में है ही
क्योंकि उसमें आत्मा का दीप जला है। उसने आपको प्रकाश दिया है। ऐसा स्वच्छ, सुन्दर हृदय, उसमें जो कुछ
बह रहा है, उसी की तरफ देखते रहना। मुझे यहाँ पर आप सबको देखकर लगा, अरे इस हृदय के प्रकाश में क्या-
क्या देख रही हूँ? कितना मज़ा आ रहा है? ऐसा ही आपको होना चाहिए, कि हम सब माताजी के शरीर के अंग -
प्रत्यंग हैं, हमने कोई गलती की तो माताजी को तकलीफ होगी। उन्हें तकलीफ हो इस तरह का हमें व्यवहार नहीं
करना चाहिए। हम में एक तरह की सुज्ञता होनी चाहिए, एक तरह की पहचान होनी चाहिए । रोजमर्रा के व्यवहार में
शालीनता होनी चाहिए। कहीं किसी व्यक्ति के पीछे पड़ना (तंग करना), कभी कुछ बहककर बड़बड़ाते रहना।
बहुतों को गाना गाने की ही आदत होती है। किसी को कविता ही पढ़ते रहने की आदत होती है। वे कविता ही
बोलते रहते हैं, तो कोई गाने ही गाते रहते हैं। ऐसा नहीं। जो ठीक है, व्यवहारी है, सौन्दर्यमय है, वही करना
चाहिए। रोज के व्यवहार में भी सुन्दरता होनी चाहिए। अब आप माँ के लिए सब जेवर बनाते हो (इस दिन तिल के
दानों के जेवर बनाने का रिवाज है।) कितने सुन्दर होते हैं वे! परन्तु आप ही मेरे जेवर हो, आप ही से मैंने अपने
आपको सजाया है। उन जेवरें में अगर स्वच्छता न हो या वे अशुद्ध हों, माने उनका जो मुख्य गुण है, वही
अगर उनमें नहीं हो। मान लीजिए सोने की जगह सोना न होकर पीतल है तो उसका क्या अर्थ है? वैसे ही
आपका है। आपमें की जो महत्वपूर्ण धातु है वही झूठी होगी तो उसे सजाकर मैं कहाँ जाऊंगी? तो आप ही मेरे
जेवर हैं, आप ही मेरे भूषण हैं। मुझे आप ही ने विभूषित किया है । मुझे किसी दूसरे आभूषण की आवश्यकता नहीं
12
 19850114_Makar Sankranti Puja_Mumbai.pdf-page12.txt 
 Hindi Translation (English Talk)
है। यही मैं अब आपसे विनती करती हूँ कि बात करते समय, बच्चों से हो या और किसी के साथ हो, अत्यन्त
समझदारी से, अत्यन्त नम्रता से और आराम से सब कार्य होना चाहिए। किसी से भी जबरदस्ती, जुल्म या
जल्दबाजी करने की जरूरत नहीं है।
इसी तरह एक दिन ऐसा आएगा जब सारी दुनिया आपकी तरफ आश्चर्य से देखेगी, 'अरे, ये कहाँ के लोग
हैं? ये कौन आए?' तब मालूम होगा कि ये स्वर्गलोक के दूत हैं, सारी दुनिया को सम्भालने के लिए, सारी दुनिया
को यशस्वी बनाने के लिए, और सबको परमात्मा के साम्राज्य के दरवाजे तक ले जाने के लिए, ये परमात्मा के
भेजे हुए दूत है।
ऐसे सभी द्तों को मेरा नमस्कार!
13
