Christmas Puja - Stn Pavan Dam 25th December 1986 Date : Place Pune Type Puja Speech Language English & Marathi CONTENTS | Transcript | 02 - 03 English 07 - 11 Marathi Hindi || Translation English 04 - 06 Hindi Marathi

 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT ENGLISH TALK Today we have all been waiting to celebrate the birth of our Lord Jesus Christ. There's so much significant that we are in a place here, the same type of a hut Jesus had when He was born, and the wind was blowing from all sides and it was difficult to keep the room very warm, though if it is correct He was not born in the month of December, in a warmer month, not so very cold, maybe this much as you see so maybe that the climate of today is quite significant, with the climate that He must have felt. As for you people, you don't feel any discomfort in this climate, nor in these surroundings nor in this Spartan living. He never felt any discomfort, nor His Mother. When our attention is on our Spirit, then we do not feel the discomfort of nature or of worldly things. This is the first sign when a Sahaja Yogi starts complaining about comforts, then the first sign is that he is not a Sahaja Yogi as yet. To begin with we just get absolutely acclimatized with the climate and enjoy the style, the speed, the way it is molding you. There's no friction between the nature and the body because the Spirit which is synchronizer, helps you to become one with this nature and enjoy the best part of it. The way you are enjoying it shows that you are great Sahaja Yogis, and that goes to My credit, I think, that you people have accepted all the discomfort as enjoyment. Christ coming was a great event as I have told you to establish Agnya Chakra and He was born on this Earth but much before He was born in the consciousness and that absolute consciousness itself took birth as Jesus Christ. To explain His life is only possible if you are Realized souls, otherwise you cannot explain Christ– what He was, how He worked - still it's very difficult to explain many things in Sahaja Yoga as you know, you just go on seeing things. Today you saw fountains coming out of the lake, which nobody can explain, even the engineer said that they can't explain, nobody can explain it. It just happens that the water gets excited, feels the Divinity and starts pouring out its love in a bubbly manner. Can you imagine that even the water can feel it? You have seen how the light can feel it, in the same way every element can feel it. All those elements are within us, the highest of all, as we say, is the light, because light has an effect and that is governed by Jesus Christ. Light has an effect, light shows things that are correct. That's the one which makes us understand all the dimensions of worldly things and ultimately when this light comes from the Spirit and is enlightened by the Spirit, then you start seeing the other dimensions also which sometimes make you laugh, sometimes make you smile and sometimes make you cry also. Such a beautiful new dimension you have achieved through Sahaja Yoga, but it was all built in within you and you had to achieve it. People on the other side had to work very hard, like Jesus Christ was born in a small manger to show that Divinity need not be born in royal families, can be born in a manger, can be born anywhere, makes no difference to the Divinity. But that has given some funny ideas to people, that they are saying we should make ourselves miserable and we should give away everything to God. God doesn't want it. He cannot have it, and you cannot give anything. Is a wrong idea that you become like a pauper and give everything to God. He doesn't want that. What He wants that you have to be happy, joyous and enjoy. That's the main point. Also if you give a little bit, very little bit to God, then He gives you hundred times more. That's why you have to give a very wee bit to God. But you don't have to hang yourself by the trees to prove that you want to sacrifice. Christ has done everything for you. That's the beauty of His life is that from the very beginning of His birth He has shown that He has enjoyed no material well-being, as we call it. He has not enjoyed any worldly things as we know of but that just means that He has done that for us to see that there is no need for us to hanker after worldly things – they will hanker after us. You don't have to worry about these things. What you have to worry about is your Spirit, the main thing. All His life, which was very short I should say, He has been trying, He was very much interested

 Original Transcript : English in evaluating people because He didn't know what sort of things these human beings are. He was a foreigner for these human things. So He tried to evaluate and in that evaluation He said many things which are very remarkable, and one has to understand. One of the things He said that don't throw your pearls before people who do not want to understand you. For Sahaja Yogis it is important to understand that you should not talk about Sahaja Yoga to people who are anti-God. Now he may be your brother, may be your sister, may be your father, he may be anyone, there is no need to convince them about Sahaja Yoga because they are not your relations. Many people have only this worry how to convince my husband or how to convince my brother, there is no need at all for you to work it out, just give them up on this point. The another thing He has told us which is very important I think, that we must forgive. He has given the greatest weapon that we must forgive. Now it's such a practical thing to forgive. If you just forgive, the person doesn't exist anymore and the person doesn't trouble you anymore, nor is he in your attention, just to forgive is the simplest thing to do and the highest thing to do to get relief from worldly or mental tortures that we get. His life has been a story of spirituality, going through all kinds of turmoil and tortures, all types of troubles that the Spirit can go through, to show that nobody can kill that Spirit, as it said in the Gita ["Nayanam shranthi chittrani, nayanam pavaka ... " ?] It cannot be killed, it's an eternal life and He tried to prove through His life the eternity, from the beginning to the end He showed that Spirit is above matter, that nothing can dominate Spirit. It's a very big thing He has done for us is to create such a big confidence in our Spirit. He has proved it beyond doubt. 66 I hope you people will understand and will not bother Me or bother yourself with small petty things here and there, is nothing important. Ask for bigger things, eternal things, valuable things. Also I am very happy that you like this place and you are enjoying yourself very much and today we have declared so many marriages. There have been so many events in this short time. SoI would like to bless you all for this Christmas Eve and I wish you all very Happy Christmas and Happy New Year! 3.

 ENGLISH TRANSLATION (Marathi Talk) Today intentionally I have spoken in the English language. Since all Pune Sahaja Yogis know English, I do not have to explain further. On the Christmas day something has to be told to them about Christ. Therefore, I have spoken to them. Owing to our conditioning, we do not have much knowledge about of Christ, but it is not correct. It is no use following the past conditionings. These people have come from the Christianity religion but have learnt all about Divine incarnations that were born in this country and work they did here. In some respects, they are more knowledgeable than we are. So we should also learn about Christ, Mohammad, and other great Satgurus. The reason for you to have this knowledge is, when you become Gurus in the future and you are dedicated to the Brahma and you know what the Brahma is, this knowledge will enable you to talk to someone. Then you can clearly tell about each of them and correctly explain stories about them. Without you being knowledgeable about them, Sahaja Yoga cannot spread in the modern times. Sahaja Yoga's advent is in modern times when all the people know about all. All people know about great personalities. Now that we are not in our individual ponds, but have come in the big ocean, all Sahaja Yogis should acquire information about all the peoples, about the people from all communities, about the people from all countries, about the people from all religions, and understand where they have gone wrong and where we have gone wrong. Only then can we become real Sahaja Yogis and Satgurus. A little study is necessary for that and I adivise you to do it sincerely. My blessings to all. We shall have today's Puja with vocal music. I have already told you that Radhaji, meaning Shri Mahalakshmi was Christ's mother. Although She was Shri Mahalakshmi, She silently bore everything so that example that Christ was going to set up was absolutely without any flaw or shortcoming, which people would attribute to his mother. The way Mary, the form of Shri Mahalakshmi, bore everything, the way She sacrificed Her son, the way She witnessed Her son's crucifixion, and the way She endured all these things. From Her example we should realize that we should give up our attachment to our children, like my son, my son and instead observe, “How much my son has progressed from the view point of Spirit, what he has gained in Spirit". All of us have become Sahaja Yogis and have gained a lot on coming in the Sahaja Yoga. So, now we should see, "What do we have which we can give to our children." Only thing that we can give is the knowledge of Spirit. All should give that and all should receive it. I have purposely called you to this far away place, because I wanted you to see what hard work the people have to do for their living. You are troubled by small things. You are not ready to make even a little sacrifice. For everything you have to be cajoled to do this and that. With this nature, how will you become experts in Sahaja Yoga and how will you grow further? The people are not prepared for even a small sacrifice! This is not correct. I hear a lot about the Pune- Sahaja Yogis that they want everything for free and they never spare even a paisa. Unless you change your attitude how will other Puneits change? You are their examples; they will see and take you to be special people. And when they see you haggling for small amounts of money, they will think," What is the use of practicing Sahaja Yoga? These people are also like us"! Secondly, as I have repeatedly pointed out, feuds among brothers. It is a curse to us and I find it is there again. They quarrel over money. "Where has money gone? Why did they spend so much money? Why this, why that?" All disputes are over money. I am surprised. I am ready to do all for you but you want it free! One should have self- esteem. Shri Mataji has to spend on our food! It is not 4

 English Translation (Marathi Talk) correct! Money can easily become available by saving small amounts through the year. These people spend money and I also spend, but it does not look good and is not in keeping with self-esteem. If you go to any village, like I had been to Narayangaon on the other day, the people over there had cooked all food and kept it ready. They seated me and offered food. Nobody asked for money. Such was their hospitality. When guests come we have to keep our attention at them. I am astonished; even now Sahaja Yogis appear to be under the curse of quarrels amongst them. The people quarrel over small issues. This has happened about this and that has happened about that! Suppose a leader is told that he is not thenceforth leader and another Sahaja Yogi is leader their feud starts. If a Sahaja Yogi is told that he has no vibrations and hence he should stop going to the collective he starts squabbles. In everything they are cantankerous. They fight in marriages. The people think that when there are quarrels at auspicious place like a marriage, there is nothing bad in quarreling. However, it is very bad. It is very bad in the eyes of God and it should not be done. Christ has used the words," Murmuring souls" for such persons. They indulge in backbiting; speak against this person, that person in their absence. They also play one against the other. They are extremely mean. I call the city of Pune as the Punyapattanam. I say that all the Punya has been brought to this city and praise it and despite that this situation persists. 99 99 Next year all Sahaja Yogis should make vigorous efforts. Children of this place are wise. They collected money in which all have contributed. Then they gave the amount to me. I was so overjoyed to see them. How sweet they are! They are your children. Then what happens to the elders? Why do they behave the way they do? Let your hearts open a little bit in Sahaja Yoga! You have no burden of Sahaja Yoga. I do not take anything from you and do not want anything from you. On the other hand I have given you so much materially! Even if you see the material gifts that I have given you it is quite a lot. In spite of it, when I have to hear about such things, it makes me sad. So, please do not crucifix your Spirit again. Think that today is the day of your second birth and resolve to live with your hearts and with your self- respect. Please remember that you have to keep your self-esteem. open Today's auspicious day I have to tell this again since I cannot say when you and I shall meet again. So please take care in this respect. You should not behave this way, otherwise all will go down. On this day all should make vow that since Christ sacrificed his life and we have taken him as our elder brother, what we should do to be befitting to this relationship, how we should work it out. We have received so much in Sahaja Yoga. So what should we do in Sahaja Yoga? I do not ask for money from you. But what shall I do if you do not want to pay for your own food and transport? On top of it you pick up quarrels. The next time it should not happen. The people told me that when they asked for money to foot the bills of your food and transport nobody came forward. If you are so poor that you cannot pay even Rs 40-45, you should not continue in Sahaja Yoga, since will be a burden on us. We have not taken a contract to take care of beggars! If they are in such you poor circumstances, they should not continue in Sahaja Yoga at all. Those who cannot afford even this much and want to have free food, we are not distributing free food! If these things are not corrected in time they are never stopped and keep comtinuing. Even your leaders are fed up and do not want it. That has brought the deficit. However, those people think that the leaders harass them and do not allow them to meet Shri Mataji. All these things should be dispensed with. "We are now united. So far we have not done anything for Sahaja Yoga."I remember, during Gandhiji's time, my away her bangles, bracelets, and whatever was available in the house. And today people cannot pay a few rupees! Is there so much financial distress? No , ther is not! mother gave These people come here from faraway places. You also have assembled in the equal number. But you are not sharing the expenditure. Does it become of you? Pease tell all the Pune Sahaja Yogis that Shri Mataji has told every Pune Sahaja Yogi to do anything but come for the program. The people go to the Himalayas to have a glimpse of God. This is not the Himalayas and you did not have to walk so much as the people over there had to walk. All arrangements are in place. Yet the number who 5

 English Translation (Marathi Talk) attended the Puja over there has not come here. The people here will come only if the program is in Pune and will not attend if held outside. The people who behave this way shall never improve their financial position. Now you should come to Ganapati Pule with appropriate preparations. A good number of you should come. It is not very expensive. I have made all the calculations. Contribution is essential minimum to meet the food requirements. It is just that and not more! You have to pay only once a year. You are not in such bad shape and can collect a small amount by saving a few rupees every month. If somebody is in such poor state we can bear his expenditure. However, if everybody takes this position nobody will go. This question never arises in villages. It is quite different there. It is only on moving to cities, starts, "We want everything. We must watch movies every day. We must have bangles, we must have bracelets, and we must have armlets. Does not matter if we do not go to pay obeisance to God, or do not attend a Puja, but we must have all these." Our attention is more with food, which we must have in plenty and of our choice too. Our attention is never on God. Find out why we do not progress. Today everybody should decide that we will save some money instead of squandering it away. These people have given up all, given up their habits and vices. So they have now plenty of money. Similarly, you all should shake off the slavery which you have accepted all these years and get fully deep in the kingdom of God. 66 I am sorry to tell you this today. But all the history comes back to me and I feel that if not corrected it will go on and on, Hence it has to be put end to. These things have to be stopped. Moreover, quarrels amongst you should completely finish. One against the other and the other against some other should never happen. All should unite and intermingle. Look at these people, who have come from fourteen countries have mingled and are staying together. Whereas here the people who have come; not from one country, not from one state, but from one city, cannot come together! It seems, we were born with battens in hands and we started fighting soon after the births! It is so bad in Pune. Of course, there are many beautiful things in Pune. A number of Sahaja Yogis, especially the young ones, are very beautiful. The girls are also very sweet. I appreciate them a lot. All are so loving! However, the old ones need to work little harder on themselves. So today, all should make a vow that we are Sahaja Yogis. We have joined the path of Sahaja Yoga and shall do whatever is necessary to progress on it. Should make a vow and God shall help all. May God bless you. 6

 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT MARATHI TALK आज मी मुद्दामून इंग्लिशमध्ये बोलले, पण तुम्हा सगळ्या पुणेकरांना इंग्लिश येतंय. तेव्हा जास्त काही त्याचा खुलासा करून सांगायला नको. पण ह्या लोकांना आज, ख्िसमसच्या दिवशी काहीतरी ख्रिस्ताबद्दल सांगावं म्हणून मी सांगितलेले आहे. आता आपल्या संस्कारांमुळे ख्रिस्तांची आपल्याला फारशी माहिती नाहीये. पण ते बरोबर नाही. आपण त्याची माहिती करून घेतली पाहिजे. ती माहिती करून घ्यायला पाहिजे. कारण तो आज्ञा चक्रावर बसलेला आहे. आज्ञा चक्रावर बसलेल्या ख्रिस्ताला जर आपण जाणलं नाही, तर आपण गणेशाला जाणलं नाही. कारण गणेश हाच ख्रिस्त आहे. तेव्हा गणेशाने जगामध्ये येऊन काय कार्य केलं? त्याने अवतरण घेऊन काय काय कमाल केली? त्याने काय आपल्यासाठी केलंय? त्याचं जे काही कार्य आहे आणि त्याचा जो काही प्रादर्भाव आहे, तो आपल्याला ख्रिस्ताच्या जीवनात मिळतो. नुसत गणपती, गणपती करून बसतो. गणपती बसला, गणपती हे, ते, पण गणपती म्हणजे काय, करतो तरी काय आपल्यामध्ये? त्याचे काय गुण शुभकारी आहे, अमूक आहे, तमूक आहे. त्याने कसं शुभ केलं! त्याचं जे काही कार्य होतं ते ख्रिस्ताच्या आयुष्यामध्ये आपल्याला दिसतं. म्हणून सर्व लोकांनी ख्रिस्ताचं चरित्र वाचून काढलं पाहिजे आणि आहेत ? तो विचारणा केली पाहिजे. आता हे जे काही मागचे संस्कार आहेत त्याप्रमाणे वागून चालत नाही. जसे इकडे हे लोक ख्रिस्ती धर्मातून आलेले आहेत. त्यांनी आपल्याकडचे सर्व अवतार कोणते होते? त्यांनी काय काय कार्य केलं? ह्याबद्दल माहिती करून घेतली. आणि कधीतरी तर ते आपल्यापेक्षाही जास्त आहेत. तेव्हा आपणही खरिस्तांबद्दल, मोहम्मदांबद्दल, इतरही जे मोठमोठाले सद्गुरु झाले त्यांच्याबद्दल माहिती करून घेतली पाहिजे. ह्याला कारण असं आहे, की उद्या तुम्हाला गुरुपद मिळालं, तुम्ही ब्रह्मनिष्ठ असलात, तुम्हाला जरी ब्रह्म काय आहे ते कळलं , पण जर तुम्हाला उद्या कोणाशी बोलायचं असलं, तर तुमच्याजवळ हे ज्ञान असायला पाहिजे. हे तुम्ही प्रत्येकाबद्दल उघडून, स्पष्टपणे समजवून सांगाल आणि गोष्टीचं निरूपण करू शकाल. जर ही माहिती तुम्ही आज मिळविली नाही, तर ह्या आजच्या आधुनिक काळामध्ये सहजयोग पसरणार नाही. सहजयोग हा आधुनिक काळात आलेला आहे. वेळेला सगळ्यांना सगळ्यांची माहिती झालेली आहे. सगळ्यांना कोण कोण लोक मोठ मोठे झालेले आहेत ते ह्या सगळे माहिती आहे. आपण एकएका विहिरीत आता नाही आहोत. मोठ्या अथांग सागरात आल्यामुळे, सगळ्यांनी सगळी माहिती, सगळ्या जातीच्या लोकांची, सगळ्या देशांच्या लोकांची, सगळ्या धर्माच्या लोकांची माहिती आपण करून घेतली पाहिजे. त्यांचं कुठे चुकलं, आपलं कुठे चुकलं, हे समजून घेतलं पाहिजे. तेव्हाच आपण खरे सहजयोग आणि सद्गुरु होऊ शकता. त्यासाठी थोडासा तरी अभ्यास करावा लागेल आणि सर्वांनी तो मन:पूर्वक अभ्यास करावा, असं मी सांगते. सगळ्यांना माझा अनंत आशीर्वाद आहे.

 Original Transcript : Marathi आज आपण बहुतेक पूजा जी आहे ती गायनानेच करूयात. मी पूर्वी सांगितलेलेच आहे, की ख्रिस्ताची आई राधा म्हणजे महालक्ष्मी होती आणि महालक्ष्मी असूनसुद्धा तिने इतकं शांतपणाने सगळे काही सहन केलं आणि जशा रीतीने वागली ते फक्त एवढ्यासाठी की ख्रिस्ताचं जे काही उदाहरण होतं , ते अगदी पूर्णपणे जमलं पाहिजे. कोणत्या तऱ्हेची त्याच्यामध्ये अशी खोट आली नाही पाहिजे, की लोकांनी म्हटलं पाहिजे की त्याच्या आईमुळे असा दोष आला. त्या बाईने जसं सहन केलं. आपल्या मुलाचा जसा त्याग केला, त्याला क्रॉसवर जातांना पाहिलं. ह्या सर्व गोष्टी ज्यांनी इतक्या सहन केल्या, अशा या महालक्ष्मी स्वरूपात, मेरीच्या उदाहरणात असं पाहिलं पाहिजे, की जे आपण मुलांबद्दल, 'माझा मुलगा, माझा मुलगा' करत बसतो, ते सोडून 'माझा मुलगा आत्म्याच्या दृष्टीने किती पुढे आलेला आहे,' ते पाहिलं पाहिजे. आत्म्यामध्ये त्याचा किती लाभ झालेला आहे, हे पाहिलं पाहिजे. आपण सर्व आता सहजयोगी झालो आहोत आणि सहजयोगामध्ये येऊन आता पुष्कळ कमवलंय. आणि मुलांना देण्याचं काय आहे आपल्यामध्ये, ते पाहिलं पाहिजे. आणि ते देण्यासारखं एकच आहे, ते म्हणजे आत्म्याचं ज्ञान. ते मिळालं पाहिजे. ते सर्वांना दिलं पाहिजे आणि सर्वांनी मिळवलं पाहिजे. ह्यावेळेला मुद्दामहून मी म्हटलं की तुम्ही सगळ्यांनी इतक्या लांब या. कारण इतक्या लांब आल्यावर आपल्या लक्षात येईल, की किती काबाडकष्ट करून लोक चालतात, लोक राहतात. आपल्याला लहान लहान गोष्टींचा त्रास होतो आणि आपण थोडासाही त्याग करायला तयार होत नाही. प्रत्येक गोष्टीमध्ये आपल्याला गोंजारून सांगावं लागतं, असं करा, तसं करा. अशा रीतीने सहजयोगामध्ये तुम्ही कसे पारंगत व्हाल आणि पुढे वाढाल. जरासासुद्धा त्याग करायला मंडळी तयार होत नाहीत. हे बरोबर नाही. आणि पुणेकरांबद्दल सारखं मला ऐकायला मिळतं , की इथले लोक अगदी फुकटखोर आहेत, ते कधीच एक पैसा काढणार नाहीत. जोपर्यंत तुम्ही आपली प्रवृत्ती बदलणार नाहीत. तोपर्यंत हे पुणेकर कसे बदलणार! तुम्हीच त्यांचे पुढारी आहात. तुम्हीच त्यांचे उदाहरणं आहात . ज्याने की ही लोक बघतील की ही लोक काहीतरी विशेष आहेत. आणि तुमच्यामध्ये जर ह्याच्याबद्दल, त्याच्याबद्दल, पैशाबद्दल एवढी तळमळ पाहिली, तर ते लोाक म्हणतील, की सहजयोग करून फायदा काय? सगळे आमच्यातलेच आहेत. दूसरं म्हणजे, वारंवार मी म्हटलेले आहे, की भाऊबंदकी. आपल्यामध्ये हा एक शाप आहे. आणि ते मी परत बघते. पैशाला धरूनच भाऊबंदकी करतात. हे पैसे कुठे गेले, इतका पैसा कशाला खर्च केला? हे काय झालं, ते काय झालं? सगळी भांडणं पैशाला धरून करायची. याचं मला मोठं आश्चर्य वाटतं. तुमच्यासाठी आम्ही सगळं करायला तयार आहोत. पण फुकटात घ्यायचं! म्हणजे आत्मसन्मान माणसाला पाहिजे. माताजींनी खर्च करायचा आमच्या खाण्या-पिण्याचा. हे काही ठीक नाही. वर्षभरात जरी तुम्ही थोडेसे पैसे एकत्र केले, तरी सहज होऊ शकतं. तशी ही मंडळी खर्च करतातच आणि आम्हीही करतोच. पण बरं दिसत नाही. आत्मसन्मानाला धरून नाहीये. आता ही तुम्ही कोठे खेडेगावात गेलात, आता परवा मी नारायणगावला गेले होते. लोकांनी सगळा स्वयंपाक करून ठेवला होता. मला बसवलं, सगळें दिलं. त्यात काही पैसे पाहिजेत वगैरे असं काही म्हटलं नाही. 8.

 Original Transcript : Marathi आदरातिथ्य होतं. जसे चार पाहणे आपल्या घरी आले, त्यांच्याकडे आपलं लक्ष असलं पाहिजे. सहजयोग्यांमध्ये विशेष करून अजून आश्चर्य वाटतं की भाऊबंदकीचा शाप दिसतोय. लहानलहान गोष्टींसाठी लोक भांडणं करतात. त्यांचं हे झालं , त्यांचं ते झालं . समजा एखाद्या लीडरला म्हटलं की आता हा लीडर झाला. तर तो लीडर नाही त्याचं भांडण. म्हटलं की ह्या माणसाला व्हायब्रेशन्स नाहीत त्याला सध्या बंद करा तर ते भांडण. प्रत्येक गोष्टीमध्ये भांडकुदळपणा. लग्नातसुद्धा आपल्याकडे इतकी भांडणं आपण करतो. जेव्हा लग्नासारख्या शुभस्थळी आपण हे करतो, तर आपल्याला असं वाटतं, की कुठेही भांडणं केली तरी भांडणं हे काही वाईट नाही. हे फार वाईट आहे. परमेश्वराच्या दृष्टीने हे फार चुकीचं आहे आणि ते केलं नाही पाहिजे. त्याबद्दल ख्िस्तांनी एक शब्द वापरला आहे, 'मरमरिंग सोल्स', जे लोक मागे काहीतरी बोलत असतात सारखे, ह्यांना काहीतरी बोलायचंय, त्यांना काहीतरी बोलायचंय. इकडून तिकडे लावालावी करायची. अत्यंत क्षुल्लक आणि क्षुद्र गोष्टी आहेत. आणि तुमच्या पुण्याला आम्ही पुण्यपट्टणम म्हणतो, पुण्याला सगळी पुण्याई आणलेली आहे म्हणतो, सगळं काही म्हणतो आणि तेवढं करून ही अशीच परिस्थिती आहे, ते पाहून फार वाईट वाटतं. पुढच्या वर्षी सगळ्यांनी अगदी जोमाने प्रयत्न करायचा. इथली मुलंसुद्धा शहाणी आहेत. त्यांनीसुद्धा आपले पैसे जमा करून सगळ्यांनी दिले. माझा अगदी जीव भरून आला. किती चांगली मुलं आहेत ही! ती तुमचीच मुलं आहेत ना! मग मोठ्यांना काय होतंय? मोठे असे का वागतात ? थोडं तरी हृदय उघडून काम केलं पाहिजे सहजयोगात. काही तुमच्यावरती बोजा नाही सहजयोगाचा. काही तुमच्याकडून आम्ही काही घेत नाही. काही तुमच्याकडून आम्हाला नकोय. कितीतरी आम्ही तुम्हाला दिलेले आहे. म्हणजे वस्तुमात्र दिलेले आहे. नुसतं वस्तुमात्र पाहिलं तर किती तरी दिलेलं आहे. पण तरीसुद्धा अशा तऱ्हेच्या गोष्टी ऐकायला मिळाल्या की मला फार दुःख होतं. तेव्हा तुम्ही आपल्या आत्म्याला परत क्रूसावर टांगू नका. परत पुनर्जन्म झाला आजच्या दिवशी असं समजून, आता आम्ही खुल्या दिलाने राहू असं ठेवायचं आणि मान-पानाने रहायला पाहिजे. आत्मसन्मानाने रहायला पाहिजे. एवढं कृपा करून तुम्ही लक्षात ठेवा. आजच्या शुभदिवशी मला परत म्हणावं लागतं. कारण पुण्याला आता तुमची माझी परत भेट केव्हा होईल मला सांगता येत नाही. तेव्हा कृपा करून ह्याबद्दल तुम्ही काळजी घ्यावी. असं वागू नये. नाहीतर सगळे एकाबरोबरच खाली जातील. आजच्या ह्या दिवशी सगळ्यांनी एक तरी व्रतनिश्चय ठरवला पाहिजे, की ज्या ख्रिस्तांनी आपल्या आयुष्याचं बलिदान दिलं. तिथे आम्ही जर त्याला आमचा मोठा भाऊ मानलेलं आहे, तर आम्ही काय केलं पाहिजे. आमच्या हातून काय झालं पाहिजे? आम्ही इतकं सहजयोगात मिळविलेले आहे. आता आम्ही सहजयोगात काय केलं पाहिजे ? काही तुमच्याकडे पैसे वगैरे मागतच नाही आम्ही. पण खाण्या- पिण्याचे आणि वाहतुकीचेसुद्धा तुम्ही पैसे द्यायला तयार नसलात तर कसं करणार? त्यावर पण भांडाभांडी करता. पुढच्या वेळेला असं झालं नाही पाहिजे. लोकांनी सांगितलं की जसं आम्ही वाहतुकीचे आणि खाण्या-पिण्याचे पैसे मागितले तसं कोणीसुद्धा हात वर केला नाही. ४० - ४५ रुपयेसुद्धा जर तुम्ही काढू शकत नसलात, एवढी जर भिकार दशा असली तर सहजयोगात तुम्ही राहिलं नाही पाहिजे. आमच्यावरच बोजा पडणार. म्हणजे सगळ्या भिकाऱ्यांना पाळण्याचा आम्ही काही मतक्ता घेतलेला नाही. जर एवढी परिस्थिती असली तर मुळीच सहजयोगात rc

 Original Transcript : Marathi राहू नये. ज्या लोकांना इतकंही जमत नाही. ज्या लोकांना फुकट खायचंय, ही काही खैरात वगैरे नाही. आणि ह्या गोष्टी वाहवत जातात कधीकधी इतक्या की त्या जर सांगितल्या नाहीत तर थांबवर्या जात नाहीत. आणि तुमचे लीडरसुद्धा थकून म्हणतात, आम्हाला नको रे बाबा हे! त्यामुळे तफावत आलेली आहे. त्यामुळे लोक असं समजतात की, हे लीडर लोक जे आहेत ते आम्हाला त्रास देताहेत. माताजींजवळ जाऊ शकत नाही. वगैरे वरगैरे. ह्या सगळ्या गोष्टी सोडल्या पाहिजेत. आता आम्ही सगळे एक झालेलो आहोत. सहजयोगासाठी आम्ही आत्तापर्यंत काहीही केलेलं नाही. गांधीजींच्या वेळेला मला आठवतं, की माझ्या आईने तिच्या स्वत:च्या बांगड्या दिल्या. गोठ दिले, पाटल्या दिल्या, सगळं सगळं घरातलं दिलं तिने. आणि आजकाल लोकांना चार पैसे काढता येत नाही. म्हणजे इतकी दर्दशा आहे का आपली? तशी मुळीच नाहीये. ही मंडळी इतक्या लांबून इथे येतात. तितकीच मंडळी तुम्ही इथे आलेले आहात आज इथे. त्यामुळे तुमच्यावर खर्चाचा बोजा नाहीये. हे शोभतं कां! पुण्याच्या सगळ्या लोकांना सांगा, की माताजींनी सांगितलं, प्रत्येक पुण्याच्या लोकांना आजच्या ह्या कार्यक्रमाला कसंही करून उभ राहिलं पाहिजे. कारण हिमालयवरतीसुद्धा की लोक जातात देवाकडे. मग हा हिमालय नाहीये! तुम्हाला एवढं तुडवायला नव्हतं होत. सगळी व्यवस्था केलेलीच होती. पण तरीसुद्धा जेवढे लोक तिथे आले होते, तितके काही आज आले नाहीत. आणि पुण्यात झालं तर आम्ही येऊ, नाहीतर येणार नाही. हे असं करणाऱ्या लोकांना कधीही त्यांची पैशाची स्थिती ठीक होणार नाही. आणि आता गणपतीपुळ्यालासुद्धा व्यवस्थित यावं. पुष्कळांनी यावं. काही त्याच्यामध्ये एवढा खर्च नाहीये. मी सगळा बरोबर करून ठेवलेला आहे. जितका जरूरी लागेल तितका. फक्त खाण्यापिण्याचा असेल तेवढाच. त्या पलीकडे काही नाही. वर्षात एकवेळा. आणि इतकी काही तुमची दुर्दशा नाहीये. दोन पैसे जर एकत्र जोडून ठेवले तर तुम्ही वर्षाला थोडे पैसे एकत्र करू शकता. असाच एखादा असला तर आम्ही करू शकतो त्यांची व्यवस्था. पण प्रत्येकजणाने जर अशीच भूमिका घेतली, तर पुण्याहून कोणीच जाणार नाही. खेडेगावात मात्र वेगळं आहे खेडेगावात कधीच हा प्रश्न उभा रहात नाही. शहरात येऊनच आम्हाला प्रत्येक गोष्ट पाहिजे. सिनेमा रोज पाहिजे. हे झालंच पाहिजे. हातात आमच्या बांगड्या असल्याच पाहिजेत. गोठ असलेच पाहिजेत. पाटल्या असल्याच पाहिजेत. हे असलंच पाहिजे. मग आम्ही देवाला गेलो किंवा नाही गेलो, पूजेला गेलो किंवा नाही गेलो. ते एवढ मात्र पाहिजेच सगळं. पाहिजे म्हणजे पाहिजेच. जेवायला भरपूर पाहिजे. जेवायला अमकं पाहिजे, तमकं पाहिजे. ह्या सर्व गोष्टींकडे आपलं जास्त लक्ष आहे, देवाकडे कमी, मग आमची का प्रगती होत नाही. हे लक्षात आणलं पाहिजे. आता आजच्या दिवशी प्रत्येकाने निश्चय करायचा, की आम्ही इकडेतिकडे इतके पैसे वाया घालवतो. त्या पेक्षा थोडेसे पैसे आम्ही वाचवलेले बरे. ह्या लोकांनी सगळे सोडलंय. सगळे छंद सोडलेत आणि आता म्हणे आमच्याकडे पैसे मागतात. करायचं काय पैशांचं? तशीच सगळी जी काही तुम्ही गुलामी केलेली आहे आजपर्यंत ते सगळे सोडून परमेश्वराच्या साम्राज्यात पूर्णपणे उतरलं पाहिजे. आजच्या दिवशी मला सांगायला वाईट वाटतं, पण सगळा जो मागचा इतिहास आहे, तो माझ्या डोळ्यासमोर उभा राहतो आणि मग मला असं वाटतं की हे सांगितलं नाही तर हे वहावतच जाणार आहे. म्हणून आता आळा घातला पाहिजे. ह्या गोष्टीला पूर्णपणे आळा घातला पाहिजे. आणि आपापसातली भाऊबंदकी 10

 Original Transcript : Marathi पूर्णपणे सोडून टाकली पाहिजे. एकाच्या विरूद्ध दुसरा, दुसऱ्याच्या विरूद्ध तिसरा असं नाही. सगळ्यांनी मिळून मिसळून, इथे चौदा देशातले लोक कसे मिळून मिसळून बसलेत आणि आपण एका देशातलेच नाही, तर एका प्रांतातलेच नाही, तर एका शहरातले लोकसुद्धा एकत्र येऊन बसू शकत नाही म्हणजे काय म्हणावं ! म्हणजे आपण जन्मलोच हातात सोटे घेऊन असं मला म्हणावं वाटतं. जन्मल्याबरोबर मारामाऱ्या. इतकं आहे पुण्यामध्ये. पुष्कळशा सुंदर गोष्टी आहेत. पुष्कळसे सहजयोगी, जे तरुण सहजयोगी आहेत, ते फार सुंदर आहेत. त्यांच्या मुली फार छान आहेत. सगळ्यांच मला इतकं कौतुक वाटतं. सगळे इतके प्रेमळ आहेत. सगळं काही पण जे मोठे सहजयोगी आहेत, त्यांच्यामध्ये जराशी अजून मेहनत पाहिजे. तेव्हा कृपा करून आजच्या दिवशी सगळ्यांनी व्रत घेतलं पाहिजे, की आम्ही सहजयोगी आहोत आणि सहजयोगाच्या मार्गात आलेलो आहोत. पण ह्यांच्यात अग्रेसर होण्यासाठी जे जे करावं लागेल, ते आम्ही करू. असं व्रत घ्या म्हणजे परमेश्वर सगळ्यांची मदत करणार आहे. परमेश्वर तुम्हा सगळ्यांवर आशीर्वाद देवो. 11



----------------------

19861225_Christmas Puja - Pavan Dam_Pune.pdf-page0.txt 
 Christmas Puja -
Stn
Pavan Dam
25th December 1986
Date
:
Place
Pune
Type
Puja
Speech
Language
English & Marathi
CONTENTS
| Transcript
|
02 - 03
English
07 - 11
Marathi
Hindi
|| Translation
English
04 - 06
Hindi
Marathi
 19861225_Christmas Puja - Pavan Dam_Pune.pdf-page1.txt 
 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT
ENGLISH TALK
Today we have all been waiting to celebrate the birth of our Lord Jesus Christ. There's so much
significant that we are in a place here, the same type of a hut Jesus had when He was born, and the
wind was blowing from all sides and it was difficult to keep the room very warm, though if it is correct
He was not born in the month of December, in a warmer month, not so very cold, maybe this much as
you see so maybe that the climate of today is quite significant, with the climate that He must have felt.
As for you people, you don't feel any discomfort in this climate, nor in these surroundings nor in this
Spartan living. He never felt any discomfort, nor His Mother.
When our attention is on our Spirit, then we do not feel the discomfort of nature or of worldly
things. This is the first sign when a Sahaja Yogi starts complaining about comforts, then the first sign
is that he is not a Sahaja Yogi as yet. To begin with we just get absolutely acclimatized with the climate
and enjoy the style, the speed, the way it is molding you. There's no friction between the nature and the
body because the Spirit which is synchronizer, helps you to become one with this nature and enjoy the
best part of it. The way you are enjoying it shows that you are great Sahaja Yogis, and that goes to My
credit, I think, that you people have accepted all the discomfort as enjoyment.
Christ coming was a great event as I have told you to establish Agnya Chakra and He was born on
this Earth but much before He was born in the consciousness and that absolute consciousness itself
took birth as Jesus Christ. To explain His life is only possible if you are Realized souls, otherwise you
cannot explain Christ– what He was, how He worked - still it's very difficult to explain many things in
Sahaja Yoga as you know, you just go on seeing things. Today you saw fountains coming out of the
lake, which nobody can explain, even the engineer said that they can't explain, nobody can explain it.
It just happens that the water gets excited, feels the Divinity and starts pouring out its love in a bubbly
manner. Can you imagine that even the water can feel it? You have seen how the light can feel it, in the
same way every element can feel it. All those elements are within us, the highest of all, as we say, is the
light, because light has an effect and that is governed by Jesus Christ. Light has an effect, light shows
things that are correct. That's the one which makes us understand all the dimensions of worldly things
and ultimately when this light comes from the Spirit and is enlightened by the Spirit, then you start
seeing the other dimensions also which sometimes make you laugh, sometimes make you smile and
sometimes make you cry also. Such a beautiful new dimension you have achieved through Sahaja
Yoga, but it was all built in within you and you had to achieve it. People on the other side had to work
very hard, like Jesus Christ was born in a small manger to show that Divinity need not be born in royal
families, can be born in a manger, can be born anywhere, makes no difference to the Divinity.
But that has given some funny ideas to people, that they are saying we should make ourselves
miserable and we should give away everything to God. God doesn't want it. He cannot have it, and
you cannot give anything. Is a wrong idea that you become like a pauper and give everything to God.
He doesn't want that. What He wants that you have to be happy, joyous and enjoy. That's the main
point. Also if you give a little bit, very little bit to God, then He gives you hundred times more. That's
why you have to give a very wee bit to God. But you don't have to hang yourself by the trees to prove
that you want to sacrifice. Christ has done everything for you. That's the beauty of His life is that from
the very beginning of His birth He has shown that He has enjoyed no material well-being, as we call it.
He has not enjoyed any worldly things as we know of but that just means that He has done that for us to
see that there is no need for us to hanker after worldly things – they will hanker after us. You don't have
to worry about these things. What you have to worry about is your Spirit, the main thing.
All His life, which was very short I should say, He has been trying, He was very much interested
 19861225_Christmas Puja - Pavan Dam_Pune.pdf-page2.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
in evaluating people because He didn't know what sort of things these human beings are. He was a
foreigner for these human things. So He tried to evaluate and in that evaluation He said many things
which are very remarkable, and one has to understand. One of the things He said that don't throw your
pearls before people who do not want to understand you. For Sahaja Yogis it is important to
understand that you should not talk about Sahaja Yoga to people who are anti-God. Now he may be
your brother, may be your sister, may be your father, he may be anyone, there is no need to convince
them about Sahaja Yoga because they are not your relations. Many people have only this worry how to
convince my husband or how to convince my brother, there is no need at all for you to work it out, just
give them up on this point.
The another thing He has told us which is very important I think, that we must forgive. He has
given the greatest weapon that we must forgive. Now it's such a practical thing to forgive. If you just
forgive, the person doesn't exist anymore and the person doesn't trouble you anymore, nor is he in
your attention, just to forgive is the simplest thing to do and the highest thing to do to get relief from
worldly or mental tortures that we get.
His life has been a story of spirituality, going through all kinds of turmoil and tortures, all types of
troubles that the Spirit can go through, to show that nobody can kill that Spirit, as it said in the Gita
["Nayanam shranthi chittrani, nayanam pavaka ... " ?] It cannot be killed, it's an eternal life and He
tried to prove through His life the eternity, from the beginning to the end He showed that Spirit is
above matter, that nothing can dominate Spirit. It's a very big thing He has done for us is to create such
a big confidence in our Spirit. He has proved it beyond doubt.
66
I hope you people will understand and will not bother Me or bother yourself with small petty
things here and there, is nothing important. Ask for bigger things, eternal things, valuable things. Also
I am very happy that you like this place and you are enjoying yourself very much and today we have
declared so many marriages. There have been so many events in this short time.
SoI would like to bless you all for this Christmas Eve and I wish you all very
Happy Christmas and Happy New Year!
3.
 19861225_Christmas Puja - Pavan Dam_Pune.pdf-page3.txt 
 ENGLISH TRANSLATION
(Marathi Talk)
Today intentionally I have spoken in the English language. Since all Pune Sahaja Yogis know
English, I do not have to explain further. On the Christmas day something has to be told to them about
Christ. Therefore, I have spoken to them. Owing to our conditioning, we do not have much knowledge
about of Christ, but it is not correct. It is no use following the past conditionings. These people have
come from the Christianity religion but have learnt all about Divine incarnations that were born in this
country and work they did here. In some respects, they are more knowledgeable than we are. So we
should also learn about Christ, Mohammad, and other great Satgurus. The reason for you to have this
knowledge is, when you become Gurus in the future and you are dedicated to the Brahma and you
know what the Brahma is, this knowledge will enable you to talk to someone. Then you can clearly
tell about each of them and correctly explain stories about them. Without you being knowledgeable
about them, Sahaja Yoga cannot spread in the modern times. Sahaja Yoga's advent is in modern times
when all the people know about all. All people know about great personalities. Now that we are not in
our individual ponds, but have come in the big ocean, all Sahaja Yogis should acquire information
about all the peoples, about the people from all communities, about the people from all countries,
about the people from all religions, and understand where they have gone wrong and where we have
gone wrong. Only then can we become real Sahaja Yogis and Satgurus. A little study is necessary for
that and I adivise you to do it sincerely.
My blessings to all.
We shall have today's Puja with vocal music.
I have already told you that Radhaji, meaning Shri Mahalakshmi was Christ's mother. Although
She was Shri Mahalakshmi, She silently bore everything so that example that Christ was going to set
up was absolutely without any flaw or shortcoming, which people would attribute to his mother. The
way Mary, the form of Shri Mahalakshmi, bore everything, the way She sacrificed Her son, the way
She witnessed Her son's crucifixion, and the way She endured all these things. From Her example we
should realize that we should give up our attachment to our children, like my son, my son and instead
observe, “How much my son has progressed from the view point of Spirit, what he has gained in
Spirit".
All of us have become Sahaja Yogis and have gained a lot on coming in the Sahaja Yoga. So, now
we should see, "What do we have which we can give to our children." Only thing that we can give is
the knowledge of Spirit. All should give that and all should receive it. I have purposely called you to
this far away place, because I wanted you to see what hard work the people have to do for their living.
You are troubled by small things. You are not ready to make even a little sacrifice. For everything you
have to be cajoled to do this and that. With this nature, how will you become experts in Sahaja Yoga
and how will you grow further? The people are not prepared for even a small sacrifice! This is not
correct. I hear a lot about the Pune- Sahaja Yogis that they want everything for free and they never
spare even a paisa. Unless you change your attitude how will other Puneits change? You are their
examples; they will see and take you to be special people. And when they see you haggling for small
amounts of money, they will think," What is the use of practicing Sahaja Yoga? These people are also
like us"!
Secondly, as I have repeatedly pointed out, feuds among brothers. It is a curse to us and I find it is
there again. They quarrel over money. "Where has money gone? Why did they spend so much
money? Why this, why that?" All disputes are over money. I am surprised. I am ready to do all for you
but you want it free! One should have self- esteem. Shri Mataji has to spend on our food! It is not
4
 19861225_Christmas Puja - Pavan Dam_Pune.pdf-page4.txt 
 English Translation (Marathi Talk)
correct! Money can easily become available by saving small amounts through the year. These people
spend money and I also spend, but it does not look good and is not in keeping with self-esteem.
If you go to any village, like I had been to Narayangaon on the other day, the people over there
had cooked all food and kept it ready. They seated me and offered food. Nobody asked for money.
Such was their hospitality. When guests come we have to keep our attention at them. I am astonished;
even now Sahaja Yogis appear to be under the curse of quarrels amongst them. The people quarrel
over small issues. This has happened about this and that has happened about that!
Suppose a leader is told that he is not thenceforth leader and another Sahaja Yogi is leader their
feud starts. If a Sahaja Yogi is told that he has no vibrations and hence he should stop going to the
collective he starts squabbles. In everything they are cantankerous. They fight in marriages. The
people think that when there are quarrels at auspicious place like a marriage, there is nothing bad in
quarreling. However, it is very bad. It is very bad in the eyes of God and it should not be done. Christ
has used the words," Murmuring souls" for such persons. They indulge in backbiting; speak against
this person, that person in their absence. They also play one against the other. They are extremely
mean. I call the city of Pune as the Punyapattanam. I say that all the Punya has been brought to this city
and praise it and despite that this situation persists.
99
99
Next year all Sahaja Yogis should make vigorous efforts. Children of this place are wise. They
collected money in which all have contributed. Then they gave the amount to me. I was so overjoyed
to see them. How sweet they are! They are your children. Then what happens to the elders? Why do
they behave the way they do? Let your hearts open a little bit in Sahaja Yoga! You have no burden of
Sahaja Yoga. I do not take anything from you and do not want anything from you. On the other hand I
have given you so much materially! Even if you see the material gifts that I have given you it is quite a
lot. In spite of it, when I have to hear about such things, it makes me sad. So, please do not crucifix
your Spirit again. Think that today is the day of your second birth and resolve to live with your hearts
and with your self- respect. Please remember that you have to keep your self-esteem.
open
Today's auspicious day I have to tell this again since I cannot say when you and I shall meet again.
So please take care in this respect. You should not behave this way, otherwise all will go down. On this
day all should make vow that since Christ sacrificed his life and we have taken him as our elder
brother, what we should do to be befitting to this relationship, how we should work it out. We have
received so much in Sahaja Yoga. So what should we do in Sahaja Yoga?
I do not ask for money from you. But what shall I do if you do not want to pay for your own food
and transport? On top of it you pick up quarrels. The next time it should not happen. The people told
me that when they asked for money to foot the bills of your food and transport nobody came forward.
If you are so poor that you cannot pay even Rs 40-45, you should not continue in Sahaja Yoga, since
will be a burden on us. We have not taken a contract to take care of beggars! If they are in such
you
poor circumstances, they should not continue in Sahaja Yoga at all. Those who cannot afford even this
much and want to have free food, we are not distributing free food! If these things are not corrected in
time they are never stopped and keep comtinuing. Even your leaders are fed up and do not want it.
That has brought the deficit. However, those people think that the leaders harass them and do not
allow them to meet Shri Mataji. All these things should be dispensed with. "We are now united. So far
we have not done anything for Sahaja Yoga."I remember, during Gandhiji's time, my
away her bangles, bracelets, and whatever was available in the house. And today people cannot pay a
few rupees! Is there so much financial distress? No , ther is not!
mother
gave
These people come here from faraway places. You also have assembled in the equal number. But
you are not sharing the expenditure. Does it become of you? Pease tell all the Pune Sahaja Yogis that
Shri Mataji has told every Pune Sahaja Yogi to do anything but come for the program. The people go
to the Himalayas to have a glimpse of God. This is not the Himalayas and you did not have to walk so
much as the people over there had to walk. All arrangements are in place. Yet the number who
5
 19861225_Christmas Puja - Pavan Dam_Pune.pdf-page5.txt 
 English Translation (Marathi Talk)
attended the Puja over there has not come here. The people here will come only if the program is in
Pune and will not attend if held outside. The people who behave this way shall never improve their
financial position. Now you should come to Ganapati Pule with appropriate preparations. A good
number of you should come. It is not very expensive. I have made all the calculations. Contribution is
essential minimum to meet the food requirements. It is just that and not more! You have to pay only
once a year. You are not in such bad shape and can collect a small amount by saving a few rupees every
month. If somebody is in such poor state we can bear his expenditure. However, if everybody takes
this position nobody will go. This question never arises in villages. It is quite different there. It is only
on moving to cities, starts, "We want everything. We must watch movies every day. We must have
bangles, we must have bracelets, and we must have armlets. Does not matter if we do not go to pay
obeisance to God, or do not attend a Puja, but we must have all these." Our attention is more with food,
which we must have in plenty and of our choice too. Our attention is never on God. Find out why we
do not progress. Today everybody should decide that we will save some money instead of
squandering it away. These people have given up all, given up their habits and vices. So they have now
plenty of money. Similarly, you all should shake off the slavery which you have accepted all these
years and get fully deep in the kingdom of God.
66
I am sorry to tell you this today. But all the history comes back to me and I feel that if not
corrected it will go on and on, Hence it has to be put end to. These things have to be stopped.
Moreover, quarrels amongst you should completely finish. One against the other and the other against
some other should never happen. All should unite and intermingle. Look at these people, who have
come from fourteen countries have mingled and are staying together. Whereas here the people who
have come; not from one country, not from one state, but from one city, cannot come together! It
seems, we were born with battens in hands and we started fighting soon after the births! It is so bad in
Pune. Of course, there are many beautiful things in Pune. A number of Sahaja Yogis, especially the
young ones, are very beautiful. The girls are also very sweet. I appreciate them a lot. All are so loving!
However, the old ones need to work little harder on themselves. So today, all should make a vow that
we are Sahaja Yogis. We have joined the path of Sahaja Yoga and shall do whatever is necessary to
progress on it. Should make a vow and God shall help all.
May God bless you.
6
 19861225_Christmas Puja - Pavan Dam_Pune.pdf-page6.txt 
 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT
MARATHI TALK
आज मी मुद्दामून इंग्लिशमध्ये बोलले, पण तुम्हा सगळ्या पुणेकरांना इंग्लिश येतंय. तेव्हा जास्त काही
त्याचा खुलासा करून सांगायला नको. पण ह्या लोकांना आज, ख्िसमसच्या दिवशी काहीतरी ख्रिस्ताबद्दल
सांगावं म्हणून मी सांगितलेले आहे. आता आपल्या संस्कारांमुळे ख्रिस्तांची आपल्याला फारशी माहिती नाहीये.
पण ते बरोबर नाही. आपण त्याची माहिती करून घेतली पाहिजे. ती माहिती करून घ्यायला पाहिजे. कारण तो
आज्ञा चक्रावर बसलेला आहे. आज्ञा चक्रावर बसलेल्या ख्रिस्ताला जर आपण जाणलं नाही, तर आपण
गणेशाला जाणलं नाही. कारण गणेश हाच ख्रिस्त आहे. तेव्हा गणेशाने जगामध्ये येऊन काय कार्य केलं? त्याने
अवतरण घेऊन काय काय कमाल केली? त्याने काय आपल्यासाठी केलंय? त्याचं जे काही कार्य आहे आणि
त्याचा जो काही प्रादर्भाव आहे, तो आपल्याला ख्रिस्ताच्या जीवनात मिळतो. नुसत गणपती, गणपती करून
बसतो. गणपती बसला, गणपती हे, ते, पण गणपती म्हणजे काय, करतो तरी काय आपल्यामध्ये? त्याचे काय
गुण शुभकारी आहे, अमूक आहे, तमूक आहे. त्याने कसं शुभ केलं! त्याचं जे काही कार्य होतं ते
ख्रिस्ताच्या आयुष्यामध्ये आपल्याला दिसतं. म्हणून सर्व लोकांनी ख्रिस्ताचं चरित्र वाचून काढलं पाहिजे आणि
आहेत ? तो
विचारणा केली पाहिजे.
आता हे जे काही मागचे संस्कार आहेत त्याप्रमाणे वागून चालत नाही. जसे इकडे हे लोक ख्रिस्ती धर्मातून
आलेले आहेत. त्यांनी आपल्याकडचे सर्व अवतार कोणते होते? त्यांनी काय काय कार्य केलं? ह्याबद्दल माहिती
करून घेतली. आणि कधीतरी तर ते आपल्यापेक्षाही जास्त आहेत. तेव्हा आपणही खरिस्तांबद्दल, मोहम्मदांबद्दल,
इतरही जे मोठमोठाले सद्गुरु झाले त्यांच्याबद्दल माहिती करून घेतली पाहिजे. ह्याला कारण असं आहे, की उद्या
तुम्हाला गुरुपद मिळालं, तुम्ही ब्रह्मनिष्ठ असलात, तुम्हाला जरी ब्रह्म काय आहे ते कळलं , पण जर तुम्हाला उद्या
कोणाशी बोलायचं असलं, तर तुमच्याजवळ हे ज्ञान असायला पाहिजे. हे तुम्ही प्रत्येकाबद्दल उघडून, स्पष्टपणे
समजवून सांगाल आणि गोष्टीचं निरूपण करू शकाल. जर ही माहिती तुम्ही आज मिळविली नाही, तर ह्या
आजच्या आधुनिक काळामध्ये सहजयोग पसरणार नाही. सहजयोग हा आधुनिक काळात आलेला आहे.
वेळेला सगळ्यांना सगळ्यांची माहिती झालेली आहे. सगळ्यांना कोण कोण लोक मोठ मोठे झालेले आहेत ते
ह्या
सगळे माहिती आहे. आपण एकएका विहिरीत आता नाही आहोत. मोठ्या अथांग सागरात आल्यामुळे,
सगळ्यांनी सगळी माहिती, सगळ्या जातीच्या लोकांची, सगळ्या देशांच्या लोकांची, सगळ्या धर्माच्या लोकांची
माहिती आपण करून घेतली पाहिजे. त्यांचं कुठे चुकलं, आपलं कुठे चुकलं, हे समजून घेतलं पाहिजे. तेव्हाच
आपण खरे सहजयोग आणि सद्गुरु होऊ शकता. त्यासाठी थोडासा तरी अभ्यास करावा लागेल आणि सर्वांनी तो
मन:पूर्वक अभ्यास करावा, असं मी सांगते.
सगळ्यांना माझा अनंत आशीर्वाद आहे.
 19861225_Christmas Puja - Pavan Dam_Pune.pdf-page7.txt 
 Original Transcript : Marathi
आज आपण बहुतेक पूजा जी आहे ती गायनानेच करूयात.
मी पूर्वी सांगितलेलेच आहे, की ख्रिस्ताची आई राधा म्हणजे महालक्ष्मी होती आणि महालक्ष्मी असूनसुद्धा
तिने इतकं शांतपणाने सगळे काही सहन केलं आणि जशा रीतीने वागली ते फक्त एवढ्यासाठी की ख्रिस्ताचं जे
काही उदाहरण होतं , ते अगदी पूर्णपणे जमलं पाहिजे. कोणत्या तऱ्हेची त्याच्यामध्ये अशी खोट आली नाही
पाहिजे, की लोकांनी म्हटलं पाहिजे की त्याच्या आईमुळे असा दोष आला. त्या बाईने जसं सहन केलं. आपल्या
मुलाचा जसा त्याग केला, त्याला क्रॉसवर जातांना पाहिलं. ह्या सर्व गोष्टी ज्यांनी इतक्या सहन केल्या, अशा या
महालक्ष्मी स्वरूपात, मेरीच्या उदाहरणात असं पाहिलं पाहिजे, की जे आपण मुलांबद्दल, 'माझा मुलगा, माझा
मुलगा' करत बसतो, ते सोडून 'माझा मुलगा आत्म्याच्या दृष्टीने किती पुढे आलेला आहे,' ते पाहिलं पाहिजे.
आत्म्यामध्ये त्याचा किती लाभ झालेला आहे, हे पाहिलं पाहिजे.
आपण सर्व आता सहजयोगी झालो आहोत आणि सहजयोगामध्ये येऊन आता पुष्कळ कमवलंय. आणि
मुलांना देण्याचं काय आहे आपल्यामध्ये, ते पाहिलं पाहिजे. आणि ते देण्यासारखं एकच आहे, ते म्हणजे
आत्म्याचं ज्ञान.
ते मिळालं पाहिजे. ते सर्वांना दिलं पाहिजे आणि सर्वांनी मिळवलं पाहिजे. ह्यावेळेला मुद्दामहून
मी म्हटलं की तुम्ही सगळ्यांनी इतक्या लांब या. कारण इतक्या लांब आल्यावर आपल्या लक्षात येईल, की किती
काबाडकष्ट करून लोक चालतात, लोक राहतात. आपल्याला लहान लहान गोष्टींचा त्रास होतो आणि आपण
थोडासाही त्याग करायला तयार होत नाही. प्रत्येक गोष्टीमध्ये आपल्याला गोंजारून सांगावं लागतं, असं करा,
तसं करा. अशा रीतीने सहजयोगामध्ये तुम्ही कसे पारंगत व्हाल आणि पुढे वाढाल. जरासासुद्धा त्याग करायला
मंडळी तयार होत नाहीत. हे बरोबर नाही. आणि पुणेकरांबद्दल सारखं मला ऐकायला मिळतं , की इथले लोक
अगदी फुकटखोर आहेत, ते कधीच एक पैसा काढणार नाहीत. जोपर्यंत तुम्ही आपली प्रवृत्ती बदलणार नाहीत.
तोपर्यंत हे पुणेकर कसे बदलणार! तुम्हीच त्यांचे पुढारी आहात. तुम्हीच त्यांचे उदाहरणं आहात . ज्याने की ही
लोक बघतील की ही लोक काहीतरी विशेष आहेत. आणि तुमच्यामध्ये जर ह्याच्याबद्दल, त्याच्याबद्दल,
पैशाबद्दल एवढी तळमळ पाहिली, तर ते लोाक म्हणतील, की सहजयोग करून फायदा काय? सगळे
आमच्यातलेच आहेत.
दूसरं म्हणजे, वारंवार मी म्हटलेले आहे, की भाऊबंदकी. आपल्यामध्ये हा एक शाप आहे. आणि ते मी परत
बघते. पैशाला धरूनच भाऊबंदकी करतात. हे पैसे कुठे गेले, इतका पैसा कशाला खर्च केला? हे काय झालं, ते
काय झालं? सगळी भांडणं पैशाला धरून करायची. याचं मला मोठं आश्चर्य वाटतं. तुमच्यासाठी आम्ही सगळं
करायला तयार आहोत. पण फुकटात घ्यायचं! म्हणजे आत्मसन्मान माणसाला पाहिजे. माताजींनी खर्च करायचा
आमच्या खाण्या-पिण्याचा. हे काही ठीक नाही. वर्षभरात जरी तुम्ही थोडेसे पैसे एकत्र केले, तरी सहज होऊ
शकतं. तशी ही मंडळी खर्च करतातच आणि आम्हीही करतोच. पण बरं दिसत नाही. आत्मसन्मानाला धरून
नाहीये.
आता ही तुम्ही कोठे खेडेगावात गेलात, आता परवा मी नारायणगावला गेले होते. लोकांनी सगळा स्वयंपाक
करून ठेवला होता. मला बसवलं, सगळें दिलं. त्यात काही पैसे पाहिजेत वगैरे असं काही म्हटलं नाही.
8.
 19861225_Christmas Puja - Pavan Dam_Pune.pdf-page8.txt 
 Original Transcript : Marathi
आदरातिथ्य होतं. जसे चार पाहणे आपल्या घरी आले, त्यांच्याकडे आपलं लक्ष असलं पाहिजे. सहजयोग्यांमध्ये
विशेष करून अजून आश्चर्य वाटतं की भाऊबंदकीचा शाप दिसतोय. लहानलहान गोष्टींसाठी लोक भांडणं
करतात. त्यांचं हे झालं , त्यांचं ते झालं . समजा एखाद्या लीडरला म्हटलं की आता हा लीडर झाला. तर तो लीडर
नाही त्याचं भांडण. म्हटलं की ह्या माणसाला व्हायब्रेशन्स नाहीत त्याला सध्या बंद करा तर ते भांडण. प्रत्येक
गोष्टीमध्ये भांडकुदळपणा. लग्नातसुद्धा आपल्याकडे इतकी भांडणं आपण करतो. जेव्हा लग्नासारख्या शुभस्थळी
आपण हे करतो, तर आपल्याला असं वाटतं, की कुठेही भांडणं केली तरी भांडणं हे काही वाईट नाही. हे फार
वाईट आहे. परमेश्वराच्या दृष्टीने हे फार चुकीचं आहे आणि ते केलं नाही पाहिजे. त्याबद्दल ख्िस्तांनी एक शब्द
वापरला आहे, 'मरमरिंग सोल्स', जे लोक मागे काहीतरी बोलत असतात सारखे, ह्यांना काहीतरी बोलायचंय,
त्यांना काहीतरी बोलायचंय. इकडून तिकडे लावालावी करायची. अत्यंत क्षुल्लक आणि क्षुद्र गोष्टी आहेत.
आणि तुमच्या पुण्याला आम्ही पुण्यपट्टणम म्हणतो, पुण्याला सगळी पुण्याई आणलेली आहे म्हणतो, सगळं
काही म्हणतो आणि तेवढं करून ही अशीच परिस्थिती आहे, ते पाहून फार वाईट वाटतं.
पुढच्या वर्षी सगळ्यांनी अगदी जोमाने प्रयत्न करायचा. इथली मुलंसुद्धा शहाणी आहेत. त्यांनीसुद्धा आपले
पैसे जमा करून सगळ्यांनी दिले. माझा अगदी जीव भरून आला. किती चांगली मुलं आहेत ही! ती तुमचीच मुलं
आहेत ना! मग मोठ्यांना काय होतंय? मोठे असे का वागतात ? थोडं तरी हृदय उघडून काम केलं पाहिजे
सहजयोगात. काही तुमच्यावरती बोजा नाही सहजयोगाचा. काही तुमच्याकडून आम्ही काही घेत नाही. काही
तुमच्याकडून आम्हाला नकोय. कितीतरी आम्ही तुम्हाला दिलेले आहे. म्हणजे वस्तुमात्र दिलेले आहे. नुसतं
वस्तुमात्र पाहिलं तर किती तरी दिलेलं आहे. पण तरीसुद्धा अशा तऱ्हेच्या गोष्टी ऐकायला मिळाल्या की मला फार
दुःख होतं. तेव्हा तुम्ही आपल्या आत्म्याला परत क्रूसावर टांगू नका. परत पुनर्जन्म झाला आजच्या दिवशी असं
समजून, आता आम्ही खुल्या दिलाने राहू असं ठेवायचं आणि मान-पानाने रहायला पाहिजे. आत्मसन्मानाने
रहायला पाहिजे. एवढं कृपा करून तुम्ही लक्षात ठेवा.
आजच्या शुभदिवशी मला परत म्हणावं लागतं. कारण पुण्याला आता तुमची माझी परत भेट केव्हा होईल
मला सांगता येत नाही. तेव्हा कृपा करून ह्याबद्दल तुम्ही काळजी घ्यावी. असं वागू नये. नाहीतर सगळे
एकाबरोबरच खाली जातील. आजच्या ह्या दिवशी सगळ्यांनी एक तरी व्रतनिश्चय ठरवला पाहिजे, की ज्या
ख्रिस्तांनी आपल्या आयुष्याचं बलिदान दिलं. तिथे आम्ही जर त्याला आमचा मोठा भाऊ मानलेलं आहे,
तर
आम्ही काय केलं पाहिजे. आमच्या हातून काय झालं पाहिजे? आम्ही इतकं सहजयोगात मिळविलेले आहे.
आता आम्ही सहजयोगात काय केलं पाहिजे ? काही तुमच्याकडे पैसे वगैरे मागतच नाही आम्ही. पण खाण्या-
पिण्याचे आणि वाहतुकीचेसुद्धा तुम्ही पैसे द्यायला तयार नसलात तर कसं करणार? त्यावर पण भांडाभांडी करता.
पुढच्या वेळेला असं झालं नाही पाहिजे. लोकांनी सांगितलं की जसं आम्ही वाहतुकीचे आणि खाण्या-पिण्याचे
पैसे मागितले तसं कोणीसुद्धा हात वर केला नाही. ४० - ४५ रुपयेसुद्धा जर तुम्ही काढू शकत नसलात, एवढी जर
भिकार दशा असली तर सहजयोगात तुम्ही राहिलं नाही पाहिजे. आमच्यावरच बोजा पडणार. म्हणजे सगळ्या
भिकाऱ्यांना पाळण्याचा आम्ही काही मतक्ता घेतलेला नाही. जर एवढी परिस्थिती असली तर मुळीच सहजयोगात
rc
 19861225_Christmas Puja - Pavan Dam_Pune.pdf-page9.txt 
 Original Transcript : Marathi
राहू नये. ज्या लोकांना इतकंही जमत नाही. ज्या लोकांना फुकट खायचंय, ही काही खैरात वगैरे नाही. आणि ह्या
गोष्टी वाहवत जातात कधीकधी इतक्या की त्या जर सांगितल्या नाहीत तर थांबवर्या जात नाहीत. आणि तुमचे
लीडरसुद्धा थकून म्हणतात, आम्हाला नको रे बाबा हे! त्यामुळे तफावत आलेली आहे. त्यामुळे लोक असं
समजतात की, हे लीडर लोक जे आहेत ते आम्हाला त्रास देताहेत. माताजींजवळ जाऊ शकत नाही. वगैरे वरगैरे.
ह्या सगळ्या गोष्टी सोडल्या पाहिजेत. आता आम्ही सगळे एक झालेलो आहोत. सहजयोगासाठी आम्ही
आत्तापर्यंत काहीही केलेलं नाही. गांधीजींच्या वेळेला मला आठवतं, की माझ्या आईने तिच्या स्वत:च्या
बांगड्या दिल्या. गोठ दिले, पाटल्या दिल्या, सगळं सगळं घरातलं दिलं तिने. आणि आजकाल लोकांना चार पैसे
काढता येत नाही. म्हणजे इतकी दर्दशा आहे का आपली? तशी मुळीच नाहीये.
ही मंडळी इतक्या लांबून इथे येतात. तितकीच मंडळी तुम्ही इथे आलेले आहात आज इथे. त्यामुळे
तुमच्यावर खर्चाचा बोजा नाहीये. हे शोभतं कां! पुण्याच्या सगळ्या लोकांना सांगा, की माताजींनी सांगितलं,
प्रत्येक पुण्याच्या लोकांना आजच्या ह्या कार्यक्रमाला कसंही करून उभ राहिलं पाहिजे. कारण हिमालयवरतीसुद्धा
की
लोक जातात देवाकडे. मग हा हिमालय नाहीये! तुम्हाला एवढं तुडवायला नव्हतं होत. सगळी व्यवस्था केलेलीच
होती. पण तरीसुद्धा जेवढे लोक तिथे आले होते, तितके काही आज आले नाहीत. आणि पुण्यात झालं तर आम्ही
येऊ, नाहीतर येणार नाही. हे असं करणाऱ्या लोकांना कधीही त्यांची पैशाची स्थिती ठीक होणार नाही. आणि
आता गणपतीपुळ्यालासुद्धा व्यवस्थित यावं. पुष्कळांनी यावं. काही त्याच्यामध्ये एवढा खर्च नाहीये. मी सगळा
बरोबर करून ठेवलेला आहे. जितका जरूरी लागेल तितका. फक्त खाण्यापिण्याचा असेल तेवढाच. त्या पलीकडे
काही नाही. वर्षात एकवेळा. आणि इतकी काही तुमची दुर्दशा नाहीये. दोन पैसे जर एकत्र जोडून ठेवले तर तुम्ही
वर्षाला थोडे पैसे एकत्र करू शकता. असाच एखादा असला तर आम्ही करू शकतो त्यांची व्यवस्था. पण
प्रत्येकजणाने जर अशीच भूमिका घेतली, तर पुण्याहून कोणीच जाणार नाही. खेडेगावात मात्र वेगळं आहे
खेडेगावात कधीच हा प्रश्न उभा रहात नाही. शहरात येऊनच आम्हाला प्रत्येक गोष्ट पाहिजे. सिनेमा रोज पाहिजे.
हे झालंच पाहिजे. हातात आमच्या बांगड्या असल्याच पाहिजेत. गोठ असलेच पाहिजेत. पाटल्या असल्याच
पाहिजेत. हे असलंच पाहिजे. मग आम्ही देवाला गेलो किंवा नाही गेलो, पूजेला गेलो किंवा नाही गेलो. ते एवढ
मात्र पाहिजेच सगळं. पाहिजे म्हणजे पाहिजेच. जेवायला भरपूर पाहिजे. जेवायला अमकं पाहिजे, तमकं पाहिजे.
ह्या सर्व गोष्टींकडे आपलं जास्त लक्ष आहे, देवाकडे कमी, मग आमची का प्रगती होत नाही. हे लक्षात आणलं
पाहिजे. आता आजच्या दिवशी प्रत्येकाने निश्चय करायचा, की आम्ही इकडेतिकडे इतके पैसे वाया घालवतो.
त्या पेक्षा थोडेसे पैसे आम्ही वाचवलेले बरे. ह्या लोकांनी सगळे सोडलंय. सगळे छंद सोडलेत आणि आता म्हणे
आमच्याकडे पैसे मागतात. करायचं काय पैशांचं? तशीच सगळी जी काही तुम्ही गुलामी केलेली आहे आजपर्यंत
ते सगळे सोडून परमेश्वराच्या साम्राज्यात पूर्णपणे उतरलं पाहिजे.
आजच्या दिवशी मला सांगायला वाईट वाटतं, पण सगळा जो मागचा इतिहास आहे, तो माझ्या
डोळ्यासमोर उभा राहतो आणि मग मला असं वाटतं की हे सांगितलं नाही तर हे वहावतच जाणार आहे. म्हणून
आता आळा घातला पाहिजे. ह्या गोष्टीला पूर्णपणे आळा घातला पाहिजे. आणि आपापसातली भाऊबंदकी
10
 19861225_Christmas Puja - Pavan Dam_Pune.pdf-page10.txt 
 Original Transcript : Marathi
पूर्णपणे सोडून टाकली पाहिजे. एकाच्या विरूद्ध दुसरा, दुसऱ्याच्या विरूद्ध तिसरा असं नाही. सगळ्यांनी मिळून
मिसळून, इथे चौदा देशातले लोक कसे मिळून मिसळून बसलेत आणि आपण एका देशातलेच नाही, तर एका
प्रांतातलेच नाही, तर एका शहरातले लोकसुद्धा एकत्र येऊन बसू शकत नाही म्हणजे काय म्हणावं ! म्हणजे आपण
जन्मलोच हातात सोटे घेऊन असं मला म्हणावं वाटतं. जन्मल्याबरोबर मारामाऱ्या. इतकं आहे पुण्यामध्ये.
पुष्कळशा सुंदर गोष्टी आहेत. पुष्कळसे सहजयोगी, जे तरुण सहजयोगी आहेत, ते फार सुंदर आहेत. त्यांच्या मुली
फार छान आहेत. सगळ्यांच मला इतकं कौतुक वाटतं. सगळे इतके प्रेमळ आहेत. सगळं काही पण जे मोठे
सहजयोगी आहेत, त्यांच्यामध्ये जराशी अजून मेहनत पाहिजे. तेव्हा कृपा करून आजच्या दिवशी सगळ्यांनी व्रत
घेतलं पाहिजे, की आम्ही सहजयोगी आहोत आणि सहजयोगाच्या मार्गात आलेलो आहोत. पण ह्यांच्यात अग्रेसर
होण्यासाठी जे जे करावं लागेल, ते आम्ही करू. असं व्रत घ्या म्हणजे परमेश्वर सगळ्यांची मदत करणार आहे.
परमेश्वर तुम्हा सगळ्यांवर आशीर्वाद देवो.
11
