Shri Mahadevi Puja - Chalmala 21st December 1986 Date : Alibag Place Type Puja Speech Language English & Marathi CONTENTS | Transcript | 02 - 02 English 05 - 07 Marathi Hindi || Translation 03 - 04 English Hindi Marathi

 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT ENGLISH TALK I bow to all the sahajyogis. In this beautiful surround, surroundings many of you are wondering why God has created these beautiful things. Because you people had to come on this Earth and enjoy the beauty that is one of the reasons. And now God feels very much fulfilled with the joy and satisfaction and a kind of a completion of His desire. Why God has created this beautiful universe has been a question asked for thousands of years. The reason is very simple to understand. This beauty that is created cannot see itself. In the same way God who is the source of beauty, beauty cannot see His own beauty. Like a pearl cannot enter into itself to see its beauty. Like the sky cannot understand its own beauty. The stars cannot see their own beauty. The Sun cannot behold its own brilliance. In the same way God Almighty cannot behold His own being. He needs a mirror. And that's how He has created this beautiful universe as His mirror. In this mirror He has created now the beautiful things like the Sun. The Sun has to see His own reflection also. So He has created these beautiful trees to see that when He shines they come up so well and look so green. Then He has created those birds to rise early in the morning to greet the Sun. so the Sun knows that, "Yes, I am there, I am existing" or else He has created this beautiful lakes for these trees to see their reflection and the lakes to feel their existence when the ripples start moving within themselves. So then He created human beings. The human beings cannot also see their own beauty, their own glory. That's why they are in the darkness. They are ignorant. They cannot see what lies within themselves. So they are running after something which is absolutely against themselves, which is ugliness, eh, which is self destructive. And the struggle to get to reality is such a lot that as a result they destroy themselves. Like people have taken to these drugs, taken to all bad habits, of this place they say a lot of smuggling going on and all such endeavors that people take up because they do not know what beautiful things they are. So now a mirror has to be created for them, to see for themselves how beautiful they are. Their mirror is their Spirit. That Spirit is to be brought in their consciousness, in their attention. If it comes in their attention then they can see their image. Now this attention that comes in, as in enlightened attention is called in Sanskrit language as Chidabhas is the, is the expression of the attention which is enlightened. But it is also said that it is got a nature, which is very transitory, or we can say which is disappearing every moment to moment. When this is happening what is to be done? For that you have to steady yourself with meditation, with hearing the enlightened talks, by seeing the good things of life without thinking about them, by seeing also the goodness of others and then you start seeing goodness in yourselfalso. That is why I always say that one should not feel guilty. Because you are feeling guilty of something, which is just, just a illusion. You are guilty that you have got a shadow. It's something like that. So if you know that you are beautiful beings and that you have got a shadow is nothing to do with you and your beauty. If you can see you own beauty then you will be amazed that within us lies all those joy giving, all those beautiful things, which we are seeing outside but just now, the mirror is not all right. That's why you have to see the nature and the beauty. But, when you are one with yourself then you see all these nature within yourself. All the joy giving qualities of this nature within yourself. So I wanted you to come to this place just to learn how God has created this beautiful area for people to enjoy and to be here. you May God bless you!

 ENGLISH TRANSLATION (Marathi Talk) I bow down to all Sahaja Yogis. First I will speak in the English language and then I will speak in Marathi. I was telling them that many people ask, "Why God has created this world. Why was this world necessary?" “The He cannot understand how big source he is. Similarly you Sahaja Yogis are also its sources. Hence God has created such big mirror. He wants to see his own beauty in this mirror. He feels satisfied on seeing in this mirror but he wants to see one more thing in this mirror. He wants to see whether this mirror has awakened in the human being, whether this beauty has permeated in the human being that he has created, whether the human being is aware how beautiful he himself is, how many qualities he has acquired, how important he is, how great he is, whether he is worthy of understanding this. Saint Tukaram has said, “Although, I am smaller than the smallest, I am large as the sky." Person who has realized this about himself, will not waste his life on trivial, frivolous things. It is foolishness to fritter away one's life on trivial things. As for our country, we know that numerous such dirty practices have come in vogue. ason is that God is the source of beauty, joy, and love and he cannot see himself. 66 99 Now, the alchoholism. If somebody advises against having the liquor, nobody would agree and half of the people may get peevish and leave. But, when this mirror, which is your Spirit, is awakened you see yourself in that mirror. Moment you realize that you were about to consume very dirty thing that will only harm you, you will give it up of your own. Secondly, with this mirror awakened, an egotist in you can see his own arrogance with which he hurts others' feelings and harasses others. You will not see these things otherwise, whatever you may read, whatever chanting of God's name you may do, howsoever you may dance in the God' name. Only when you clearly see the light of Spirit and start watching your Spirit, will you realize that what I am about to do is contrary to myself. I am such a gentleman, I am so great, God has made me so great! I am not an animal. As the human being I am bestowed with good intelligence, bestowed with the freedom which is supreme freedom and I should achieve it. Then why should I take to the slavery to absurd things, the slavery to addiction? Since I am so independent, and live in the technique of Spirit, " Sva-tantra" the slavery should not be there. Hence Shivaji Maharaj has emphasized on identifying with the Sva-Dharma, meaning identifying with the Dharma of the "Sva" , the Sva means your mirror which is your Spirit and you must achieve it. 6- Now, so many funny notions are prevalent in our villages that sometimes I am amazed. A number of people think that God etc enters into somebody's body and make the sound of the blowing of air. Many women think that Goddess enters into them. But I want to tell you that having the Goddess in the body is not an easy thing. There is the power of Goddess by which the Kundalini is awakened. If you respect the woman as Goddess in whom ghosts enter, you are antagonistic to God. These are ghosts and the woman physically and psychically suffers being their medium. Not just this but all other members of her family are impoverished. So nobody should gullibly get carried away by them. Similarly in every village, some person or the other is there who carries out these activities. This is prominent in the Konkan area. This year I find, it is not so bad. They tell absurd stories like, a ghost has come from this person and that person in style that mesmerizes the people. Then befool such mesmerized person and extract money. This is a common practice here. Later somebody comes as priest and demands money in the name of God. God does not understand money, nor does he want your money. God wants you to hold the mirror of your Spirit in your hand and see your own form. But it is said that when you have the mirror in your 3

 English Translation (Marathi Talk) hand you get rather an unclear idea of it and for the clear idea and stabilizing in it the person has to sustain it through the meditation. So, first have the Kundalini awakening and then with the meditation and the understanding of your responsibility and freedom, be seated in your throne. We are not animals but human beings. We have not taken our lives to waste them in such absurd activities. However, till this day we have not respected ourselves. But on knowing his Spirit, immediately the person knows himself and all his bad qualities fall off. When I started preaching Sahaja Yoga in England seven such persons came who had a plethora of addictions. But, when they had their self-realization very same day they were free from their addictions. So, now you should make a resolve not to accept any slavery. Being, addicted is enslavement, although you may enjoy it, but actually it is slavery. So you should resolve that you shall not accept any enslavement. And when you make such resolve your Spirit clearly manifests and its effect is felt. Due to that effect all that is un-necessary clears out. Before that we like only that which we should not, which is bad. We take only that which is wrong. So I tell you as mother sees it that nobody should feel bad. Your addiction if any should not scare you. With the awakening of Spirit all shall be free from their addictions. All shall be free from the slavery. All peoples' poverty shall go away. All kinds of pains, all kinds of physical, mental, emotional, as well as familial problems shall vanish and it has to happen. So, we are in your village, Chalgaon. These people have also seen the purity of this place. They have met you, danced with you and were quite joyous. Also you have nicely felicitated them and have cooked delicious food for them. So, they have suggested, "Shri Mataji, please bestow upon them their lives' fulfillment." Now our practice is to give a gift to the landlady of the place we visit. Accordingly, Mr. Harish Chandra Koli who, you know, has worked very hard, set up his house here, established Sahaja Yoga. His wife has also helped him a lot. So we want to give her at least something as a token of our love and appreciation. I also want to give something to all other people as well. That something is what we call as blessings. In that blessings, you are to be made “ the Samartha" meaning; equal to the meaning of your life-also it means strong- by awakening your Kundalini Shakti. Also you are to be made self-supporting. Before I leave this place I want to do something by which you will fully understand your own glory, you will understand your own greatness, and you will have wisdom that comes with such understanding. Thereby, in my next visit, I will see all people very beautiful, with freshness and newness on their faces and having beautiful places made for God in their hearts, the place which is like that of fully bloomed lotus flowers. 66 99 66 99 You all have my blessings. 4

 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT MARATHI TALK सर्व सहजयोगी मंडळींना आमचा प्रणिपात असो! सुरुवातीला मी इंग्लिशमध्ये बोलणार आहे, नंतर मराठीत बोलेन. आता ह्यांना मी असं सांगत होते, की पुष्कळ लोक असं विचारतात की देवाने हे जग कशाला निर्माण केलं? या जगाची काय गरज होती ? तर त्याचं कारण असं आहे, की देव हा सौंदर्याचा, आनंदाचा, प्रेमाचा स्रोत आहे आणि तो स्वत:ला बघू शकत नाही. त्याला हे कळत नाही, की केवढा मोठा स्रोत तो आहे. तसेच तुम्ही सहजयोगीसुद्धा त्याचा स्रोत आहात. म्हणून देवाने हा सबंध आरसा त्याच्यासाठी तयार केला. हा आरसा बघण्यासाठी, की त्याच्यातलं सौंदर्य काय आहे ते बघण्यासाठी म्हणून हा आरसा तयार केला. आणि ह्या की आरशात बघून देव संतुष्ट होतो. पण ह्या आरशात आणखीन एक त्याला बघायचं आहे, ते म्हणजे असं, मानवामध्ये हा आरसा जागृत झाला की नाही. जो मी मानव तयार केलेला आहे, जो मी मनुष्य तयार केलेला आहे, त्या मनुष्यामध्ये हे सौंदर्य आलं की नाही? त्याला ह्याची जाणीव झाली की नाही, की तो किती सुंदर आहे, त्याच्यामध्ये किती गुण आहेत, तो किती महत्त्वाचा आहे, तो किती मोठा आहे. हे सगळं जाणण्याची त्याच्यामध्ये पात्रता आली की नाही? तुकारामांनी म्हटलेले आहे की, 'अणू-रेणूहनही थोडका , तुका आकाशाएवढा.' मी ह्या अणूरेणूपेक्षा जरी लहान असलो तरी आकाशापेक्षा मोठा आहे. ज्याने हे एकदा बघितलं स्वत:बद्दल, मग तो क्षुल्लक गोष्टींसाठी, भलत्या गोष्टींसाठी आपलं आयुष्य घालविणार नाही. व्यर्थ गमवणार नाही आपलं आयुष्य ह्या क्षुल्लक गोष्टीकरता गमावणं फार मूर्खपणाचं लक्षण आहे. म्हणजे आपल्या देशामध्ये आता अनेक घाणेरड्या गोष्टी आलेल्या आहेत. ते आपल्याला माहिती आहेत. आता दारू पिणे. कोणी म्हटलं, दारू पिऊ नका, तर कोणी ऐकणार नाही. उलट अर्धे लोक तर रागावून निघून जातील. पण जेव्हा तुमचा हा आरसा, म्हणजे तुमचा आत्मा जेव्हा जागृत होतो, तेव्हा त्या आरशात तुम्ही स्वत:ला बघता. 'आणि ही काहीतरी घाणेरडी वस्तू आहे. ह्या घाणेरड्या वस्तूमुळे आम्हाला त्रासच होणार आहे, हे लक्षात येऊन तुम्ही आपोआप ते टाकून देता. दुसरं आहे, माणसामध्ये अहंकार असतो. त्याचा उद्दामपणा, ज्याने लोकांना आपण दुखावतो, त्रास देतो. ह्या अहंकारालासुद्धा, हा आरसा जागृत झाल्यावर तुम्ही बघू शकता. ते कितीही तुम्ही वाचन केलं, कितीही तुम्ही देवाचं नाव घेतलं कितीही देवाच्या नावाने धिंगाणा घातला, तरीसुद्धा ते दिसणार नाही. फक्त आत्म्याचा प्रकाश जेव्हा स्पष्टरूपाने तुमच्यामध्ये दिसेल, तेव्हा त्या आत्म्याकडे तुम्ही बघायला लागाल, तर तुमच्या लक्षात येईल, की हे काहीतरी आपल्याला विसंगत आहे. आपण इतके सज्जन आहोत, इतके मोठे आहोत, देवाने आपल्याला किती मोठं बनवलं आहे! आपण काही जनावर नाही आहोत. पशू नाही आहोत. माणसाला सुबुद्धी दिलेली आहे. इतकंच नाही तर आपल्याला स्वतंत्रता दिलेली आहे, की जी परम स्वतंत्रता आहे, ती आपण मिळविली पाहिजे. मग ही फालतूची गुलामी कशाला

 Original Transcript : Marathi करायची. असे व्यसनं लावून गुलामी कशाला करायची! आम्ही जर स्वत:च एवढे स्वतंत्र आहोत, आमच्या 'स्व' च्या तंत्रात आम्ही चालतो, तर आम्हाला ही गुलामी काय कामाची? म्हणून शिवाजी महाराजांनी सांगितलं होतं, की स्वधर्म ओळखावा. 'स्व' चा ध्म ओळखला पाहिजे. 'स्व' म्हणजे तुमचा आरसा, जो तुमचा आत्मा आहे, तो तुमचा आरसा आहे. तो मिळविला पाहिजे. आता खेडेगावातून आपल्याकडे अशा पुष्कळ विचित्र कल्पना आहेत देवाबद्दल, की त्याचं मला कधी कधी फार आश्चर्य वाटतं. पुष्कळ लोकांना असं वाटतं की देव वगैरे सगळे अंगात येतात, घुमतात. पुष्कळ बायकांना असं वाटतं , की आपल्यामध्ये देवी येतात. आता सांगायचं म्हणजे देवीला झेलणं म्हणजे काही सोपं काम नाहीये. देवीची शक्ती असते आणि त्या शक्तीने कुंडलिनी जागृत होते. ज्या बाईच्या अंगात भुतं येतात, तिला तुम्ही जर देवी म्हणाल, तर तुम्ही परमेश्वराच्या विरोधात आहात. ही भूतं आहेत आणि त्या बाईला त्रास होतो. मानसिक त्रास होतो. इतकंच नाही, तर घरच्या सर्व लोकांना दरिद्रता येते. तिच्याकडे जाणार्या लोकांना त्रास होतो. त्यांना दरिद्रता येते. म्हणून अशा गोष्टींकडे आपण भोळेपणाने गेलं नाही पाहिजे. तसंच प्रत्येक ठिकाणी प्रत्येक गावात पाहिलं तर एक कोणी ना कोणी तरी असा मनुष्य, अशी बाई असते, जी काही तरी अशी कामं करीत असतात. विशेषत: कोकणात जास्त असतं. आता ह्या वर्षी बरं वाटतंय मला इतकं नाहीये. काहीतरी सांगायचं, की अमक्याकडचं भूत आलंय, तमक्याकडचं भूत आलंय. अशा रीतीने गोष्टी करायच्या, की लोकांना नुसतं भारावून टाकायचं. अशा भारावून टाकलेल्या लोकांना मूर्खात काढून त्यांच्याकडून पैसे उकळायचे. ही आपल्याकडची एक प्रथा झालेली आहे. नंतर कोणी तरी येऊन बसायंच, भटजी बनायचं आणि म्हणायचं की एवढे पैसे दे. देवाला पैसे वरगैरे काही कळत नाही. देवाला पैसे नकोत तुमचे. देवाला फक्त एकच गोष्ट पाहिजे, की तुम्ही स्वत:च्या आत्म्याचा आरसा हाती घ्यावा आणि त्यात आपलं स्वरूप बघावं. पण त्याबद्दल असं सांगितलेलं आहे, की जेव्हा हा हाती आरसा येतो, तर ह्याची जी आपल्याला अस्पष्ट कल्पना येत असते, ती स्पष्ट करण्यासाठी आणि स्थिरावण्यासाठी मनुष्याला ध्यान आणि धारणा केली पाहिजे. म्हणून आधी कुंडलिनीचं जागरण आणि त्या नंतर ध्यान-धारणा करून, पूर्णपणे आपण स्वत:ला जबाबदार समजून, स्वतंत्र समजून आपल्या आसनावर आरूढ झालं पाहिजे. आसनावर बसलं पाहिजे. आम्ही काही असे तसे नाही आहोत. आम्ही मानव आहोत. आम्ही काही आमचं आयुष्य असं वाया घालण्यासाठी आणलेलं नाही. आम्ही आमची काही कदर केलेली नाही आजपर्यंत. पण ती आत्म्याची ओळख झाल्याबरोबर लगेच मनुष्य स्वत:ची ओळख करू लागतो आणि त्याच्यातले वाईट गुण आहेत ते झडून पडतात. आता आमच्या इंग्लंडला, जेव्हा मी सहजयोग सुरू केला होता, तेव्हा सात असे लोक आले की जे पुष्कळ इकडचे-तिकडचे व्यसनं घेत असत. आणि एका दिवसात, त्याच दिवशी त्यांची सगळी व्यसनं सुटली. आता व्यसन ही गुलामगिरी आहे. जरी त्याच्यात तुम्हाला आनंद वाटतो, तरी ती एक गुलामगिरी आहे. कोणतीही गुलामगिरी पत्करायची नाही, असं ठरवलं पाहिजे. असं ठरवल्यानंतर हा जो आत्मा आहे, तो स्पष्टरूपाने दृष्टोत्पत्तीस पडतो. त्याचा आपल्याला परिणाम जाणवतो आणि त्या परिणामामुळे जे काही आपल्यामध्ये नको आहे, ते निघून जातं. पण त्याच्याआधी नको तेच आपल्याला आवडतं. जे वाईट तेच आपल्याला आवडतं. जे चुकीचं तेच आपण घेतो. तेव्हा मी एक आईच्या दष्टीने सांगते, की कोणी वाईट वाटून घेऊ नये. जर व्यसन असलं 6.

 Original Transcript : Marathi तर त्याबद्दल घाबरू नये. आत्म्याच्या जागृतीने सगळ्यांची व्यसनं सुटणार. सगळ्यांची गुलामी सुटणार. सगळ्यांची गरिबी सुटणार आणि सर्व तऱ्हेचे जेवढे काही क्लेष आहेत, त्रास आहेत, शारीरिक, मानसिक, बौद्धिक तसेच सांसारिक, सगळेच्या सगळे तुमचे त्रास ह्याच्यातून जाणार आहेत आणि ते झालेच पाहिजेत. तेव्हा ह्या गावाला आम्ही आलो, चाळगावाला, आणखीन ह्या लोकांनीसुद्धा इथे येऊन, इथली पवित्रता पाहिली, तुम्हा लोकांना भेटले. तुमच्याबरोबर नाचले आणि खूप आनंदात होते. आणि तुम्ही सगळ्यांनी एवढा सत्कार केला, सगळ्यांना स्वयंपाक करून इतकं सुंदर जेवायला दिलं. त्याबद्दल त्यांनी मला सांगितलंय की, 'माताजी, तुम्ही ह्यांना सगळ्यांना कृतार्थ करा.' आता आमची जी पद्धत आहे, की आम्ही ज्या गावाला जातो, तिथली जी मालकीण असते, तिला एक काहीतरी बक्षीस द्यायची पद्धत आहे. आणि त्याप्रमाणे इथे, आपले जे, तुम्हाला माहिती आहे, की हरिश्चंद्र कोळी म्हणून जे आहेत, त्यांनी एवढी मेहनत केली, हे घर स्थापन केलं, सहजयोग इथे स्थापन केला. त्यानंतर त्यांच्या पत्नीने त्यांची एवढी मदत केली. तेव्हा त्यांना फूल न फुलाची पाकळी म्हणून काहीतरी द्यायचं आहे. बाकी सर्व लोकांनाच काहीतरी द्यायचं आहे. आणि ते काहीतरी द्यायचं म्हणजे ज्याला आपण आशीर्वाद म्हणतो. ह्या आशीर्वादामध्ये तुमच्या कुंडलिनीचं जागरण करून तुम्हाला तुमच्यामध्येच समर्थ करायचं आहे. तुमच्यामध्ये तुम्हाला उभं करायचं आहे. तुमच्या गौरवाची तुम्हाला पूर्णपणे समज येईल, तुमच्या मोठेपणाची तुम्हाला जायचंय. म्हणजे मग पुढच्या वेळेला आल्यावरती इथे सबंध लोक फार सुंदर दिसतील आणखीन त्यांच्या चेहर्यावरती एक तजेला, नावीन्य, त्यातून त्यांच्या हृदयामध्ये जशी काही कमळाची फुलं उमलावीत असं सुंदर समज येईल, त्याची सुज्ञता तुमच्यात येईल, असं काहीतरी करून स्थान परमेश्वरासाठी तयार केलेलं आहे. माझा तुम्हा सर्वांना आशीर्वाद आहे.



----------------------

19861221_Shri Mahadevi Puja - Chalmala_Alibag.pdf-page0.txt 
 Shri Mahadevi Puja -
Chalmala
21st December 1986
Date
:
Alibag
Place
Type
Puja
Speech
Language
English & Marathi
CONTENTS
| Transcript
|
02 - 02
English
05 - 07
Marathi
Hindi
|| Translation
03 - 04
English
Hindi
Marathi
 19861221_Shri Mahadevi Puja - Chalmala_Alibag.pdf-page1.txt 
 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT
ENGLISH TALK
I bow to all the sahajyogis. In this beautiful surround, surroundings many of you are wondering
why God has created these beautiful things. Because you people had to come on this Earth and enjoy
the beauty that is one of the reasons. And now God feels very much fulfilled with the joy and
satisfaction and a kind of a completion of His desire. Why God has created this beautiful universe has
been a question asked for thousands of years. The reason is very simple to understand. This beauty
that is created cannot see itself. In the same way God who is the source of beauty, beauty cannot see
His own beauty. Like a pearl cannot enter into itself to see its beauty. Like the sky cannot understand
its own beauty. The stars cannot see their own beauty. The Sun cannot behold its own brilliance. In the
same way God Almighty cannot behold His own being. He needs a mirror. And that's how He has
created this beautiful universe as His mirror. In this mirror He has created now the beautiful things
like the Sun. The Sun has to see His own reflection also. So He has created these beautiful trees to see
that when He shines they come up so well and look so green.
Then He has created those birds to rise early in the morning to greet the Sun. so the Sun knows
that, "Yes, I am there, I am existing" or else He has created this beautiful lakes for these trees to see
their reflection and the lakes to feel their existence when the ripples start moving within themselves.
So then He created human beings. The human beings cannot also see their own beauty, their own
glory. That's why they are in the darkness. They are ignorant. They cannot see what lies within
themselves. So they are running after something which is absolutely against themselves, which is
ugliness, eh, which is self destructive. And the struggle to get to reality is such a lot that as a result they
destroy themselves. Like people have taken to these drugs, taken to all bad habits, of this place they
say a lot of smuggling going on and all such endeavors that people take up because they do not know
what beautiful things they are.
So now a mirror has to be created for them, to see for themselves how beautiful they are. Their
mirror is their Spirit. That Spirit is to be brought in their consciousness, in their attention. If it comes in
their attention then they can see their image. Now this attention that comes in, as in enlightened
attention is called in Sanskrit language as Chidabhas is the, is the expression of the attention which is
enlightened. But it is also said that it is got a nature, which is very transitory, or we can say which is
disappearing every moment to moment. When this is happening what is to be done? For that you have
to steady yourself with meditation, with hearing the enlightened talks, by seeing the good things of
life without thinking about them, by seeing also the goodness of others and then you start seeing
goodness in yourselfalso.
That is why I always say that one should not feel guilty. Because you are feeling guilty of
something, which is just, just a illusion. You are guilty that you have got a shadow. It's something like
that. So if you know that you are beautiful beings and that you have got a shadow is nothing to do with
you and your beauty. If you can see you own beauty then you will be amazed that within us lies all
those joy giving, all those beautiful things, which we are seeing outside but just now, the mirror is not
all right. That's why you have to see the nature and the beauty. But, when you are one with yourself
then you see all these nature within yourself. All the joy giving qualities of this nature within yourself.
So I wanted you to come to this place just to learn how God has created this beautiful area for
people to enjoy and to be here.
you
May God bless you!
 19861221_Shri Mahadevi Puja - Chalmala_Alibag.pdf-page2.txt 
 ENGLISH TRANSLATION
(Marathi Talk)
I bow down to all Sahaja Yogis. First I will speak in the English language and then I will speak in
Marathi.
I was telling them that many people ask, "Why God has created this world. Why was this world
necessary?" “The
He cannot understand how big source he is. Similarly you Sahaja Yogis are also its sources. Hence
God has created such big mirror. He wants to see his own beauty in this mirror. He feels satisfied on
seeing in this mirror but he wants to see one more thing in this mirror. He wants to see whether this
mirror has awakened in the human being, whether this beauty has permeated in the human being that
he has created, whether the human being is aware how beautiful he himself is, how many qualities he
has acquired, how important he is, how great he is, whether he is worthy of understanding this. Saint
Tukaram has said, “Although, I am smaller than the smallest, I am large as the sky." Person who has
realized this about himself, will not waste his life on trivial, frivolous things. It is foolishness to fritter
away one's life on trivial things. As for our country, we know that numerous such dirty practices have
come in vogue.
ason is that God is the source of beauty, joy, and love and he cannot see himself.
66
99
Now, the alchoholism. If somebody advises against having the liquor, nobody would agree and
half of the people may get peevish and leave. But, when this mirror, which is your Spirit, is awakened
you see yourself in that mirror. Moment you realize that you were about to consume very dirty thing
that will only harm you, you will give it up of your own. Secondly, with this mirror awakened, an
egotist in you can see his own arrogance with which he hurts others' feelings and harasses others. You
will not see these things otherwise, whatever you may read, whatever chanting of God's name you
may do, howsoever you may dance in the God' name. Only when you clearly see the light of Spirit and
start watching your Spirit, will you realize that what I am about to do is contrary to myself. I am such a
gentleman, I am so great, God has made me so great! I am not an animal. As the human being I am
bestowed with good intelligence, bestowed with the freedom which is supreme freedom and I should
achieve it. Then why should I take to the slavery to absurd things, the slavery to addiction? Since I am
so independent, and live in the technique of Spirit, " Sva-tantra" the slavery should not be there.
Hence Shivaji Maharaj has emphasized on identifying with the Sva-Dharma, meaning identifying
with the Dharma of the "Sva" , the Sva means your mirror which is your Spirit and you must achieve
it.
6-
Now, so many funny notions are prevalent in our villages that sometimes I am amazed. A number
of people think that God etc enters into somebody's body and make the sound of the blowing of air.
Many women think that Goddess enters into them. But I want to tell you that having the Goddess in
the body is not an easy thing. There is the power of Goddess by which the Kundalini is awakened. If
you respect the woman as Goddess in whom ghosts enter, you are antagonistic to God. These are
ghosts and the woman physically and psychically suffers being their medium. Not just this but all
other members of her family are impoverished. So nobody should gullibly get carried away by them.
Similarly in every village, some person or the other is there who carries out these activities. This
is prominent in the Konkan area. This year I find, it is not so bad. They tell absurd stories like, a ghost
has come from this person and that person in style that mesmerizes the people. Then befool such
mesmerized person and extract money. This is a common practice here. Later somebody comes as
priest and demands money in the name of God.
God does not understand money, nor does he want your money. God wants you to hold the mirror
of your Spirit in your hand and see your own form. But it is said that when you have the mirror in your
3
 19861221_Shri Mahadevi Puja - Chalmala_Alibag.pdf-page3.txt 
 English Translation (Marathi Talk)
hand you get rather an unclear idea of it and for the clear idea and stabilizing in it the person has to
sustain it through the meditation. So, first have the Kundalini awakening and then with the meditation
and the understanding of your responsibility and freedom, be seated in your throne. We are not
animals but human beings. We have not taken our lives to waste them in such absurd activities.
However, till this day we have not respected ourselves. But on knowing his Spirit, immediately the
person knows himself and all his bad qualities fall off.
When I started preaching Sahaja Yoga in England seven such persons came who had a plethora of
addictions. But, when they had their self-realization very same day they were free from their
addictions. So, now you should make a resolve not to accept any slavery. Being, addicted is
enslavement, although you may enjoy it, but actually it is slavery. So you should resolve that you shall
not accept any enslavement. And when you make such resolve your Spirit clearly manifests and its
effect is felt. Due to that effect all that is un-necessary clears out. Before that we like only that which
we should not, which is bad. We take only that which is wrong. So I tell you as mother sees it that
nobody should feel bad. Your addiction if any should not scare you. With the awakening of Spirit all
shall be free from their addictions. All shall be free from the slavery. All peoples' poverty shall go
away. All kinds of pains, all kinds of physical, mental, emotional, as well as familial problems shall
vanish and it has to happen.
So, we are in your village, Chalgaon. These people have also seen the purity of this place. They
have met you, danced with you and were quite joyous. Also you have nicely felicitated them and have
cooked delicious food for them. So, they have suggested, "Shri Mataji, please bestow upon them their
lives' fulfillment." Now our practice is to give a gift to the landlady of the place we visit. Accordingly,
Mr. Harish Chandra Koli who, you know, has worked very hard, set up his house here, established
Sahaja Yoga. His wife has also helped him a lot. So we want to give her at least something as a token of
our love and appreciation. I also want to give something to all other people as well. That something is
what we call as blessings. In that blessings, you are to be made “ the Samartha" meaning; equal to the
meaning of your life-also it means strong- by awakening your Kundalini Shakti. Also you are to be
made self-supporting. Before I leave this place I want to do something by which you will fully
understand your own glory, you will understand your own greatness, and you will have wisdom that
comes with such understanding. Thereby, in my next visit, I will see all people very beautiful, with
freshness and newness on their faces and having beautiful places made for God in their hearts, the
place which is like that of fully bloomed lotus flowers.
66
99
66
99
You all have my blessings.
4
 19861221_Shri Mahadevi Puja - Chalmala_Alibag.pdf-page4.txt 
 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT
MARATHI TALK
सर्व सहजयोगी मंडळींना आमचा प्रणिपात असो!
सुरुवातीला मी इंग्लिशमध्ये बोलणार आहे, नंतर मराठीत बोलेन.
आता ह्यांना मी असं सांगत होते, की पुष्कळ लोक असं विचारतात की देवाने हे जग कशाला निर्माण केलं?
या जगाची काय गरज होती ? तर त्याचं कारण असं आहे, की देव हा सौंदर्याचा, आनंदाचा, प्रेमाचा स्रोत आहे
आणि तो स्वत:ला बघू शकत नाही. त्याला हे कळत नाही, की केवढा मोठा स्रोत तो आहे. तसेच तुम्ही
सहजयोगीसुद्धा त्याचा स्रोत आहात. म्हणून देवाने हा सबंध आरसा त्याच्यासाठी तयार केला. हा आरसा
बघण्यासाठी, की त्याच्यातलं सौंदर्य काय आहे ते बघण्यासाठी म्हणून हा आरसा तयार केला. आणि ह्या
की
आरशात बघून देव संतुष्ट होतो. पण ह्या आरशात आणखीन एक त्याला बघायचं आहे, ते म्हणजे असं,
मानवामध्ये हा आरसा जागृत झाला की नाही. जो मी मानव तयार केलेला आहे, जो मी मनुष्य तयार केलेला
आहे, त्या मनुष्यामध्ये हे सौंदर्य आलं की नाही? त्याला ह्याची जाणीव झाली की नाही, की तो किती सुंदर आहे,
त्याच्यामध्ये किती गुण आहेत, तो किती महत्त्वाचा आहे, तो किती मोठा आहे. हे सगळं जाणण्याची त्याच्यामध्ये
पात्रता आली की नाही? तुकारामांनी म्हटलेले आहे की, 'अणू-रेणूहनही थोडका , तुका आकाशाएवढा.' मी ह्या
अणूरेणूपेक्षा जरी लहान असलो तरी आकाशापेक्षा मोठा आहे. ज्याने हे एकदा बघितलं स्वत:बद्दल, मग तो
क्षुल्लक गोष्टींसाठी, भलत्या गोष्टींसाठी आपलं आयुष्य घालविणार नाही. व्यर्थ गमवणार नाही
आपलं आयुष्य
ह्या क्षुल्लक गोष्टीकरता गमावणं फार मूर्खपणाचं लक्षण आहे. म्हणजे आपल्या देशामध्ये आता अनेक घाणेरड्या
गोष्टी आलेल्या आहेत. ते आपल्याला माहिती आहेत.
आता दारू पिणे. कोणी म्हटलं, दारू पिऊ नका, तर कोणी ऐकणार नाही. उलट अर्धे लोक तर रागावून
निघून जातील. पण जेव्हा तुमचा हा आरसा, म्हणजे तुमचा आत्मा जेव्हा जागृत होतो, तेव्हा त्या आरशात तुम्ही
स्वत:ला बघता. 'आणि ही काहीतरी घाणेरडी वस्तू आहे. ह्या घाणेरड्या वस्तूमुळे आम्हाला त्रासच होणार
आहे, हे लक्षात येऊन तुम्ही आपोआप ते टाकून देता. दुसरं आहे, माणसामध्ये अहंकार असतो. त्याचा
उद्दामपणा, ज्याने लोकांना आपण दुखावतो, त्रास देतो. ह्या अहंकारालासुद्धा, हा आरसा जागृत झाल्यावर तुम्ही
बघू शकता. ते कितीही तुम्ही वाचन केलं, कितीही तुम्ही देवाचं नाव घेतलं कितीही देवाच्या नावाने धिंगाणा
घातला, तरीसुद्धा ते दिसणार नाही. फक्त आत्म्याचा प्रकाश जेव्हा स्पष्टरूपाने तुमच्यामध्ये दिसेल, तेव्हा त्या
आत्म्याकडे तुम्ही बघायला लागाल, तर तुमच्या लक्षात येईल, की हे काहीतरी आपल्याला विसंगत आहे.
आपण इतके सज्जन आहोत, इतके मोठे आहोत, देवाने आपल्याला किती मोठं बनवलं आहे! आपण काही
जनावर नाही आहोत. पशू नाही आहोत. माणसाला सुबुद्धी दिलेली आहे. इतकंच नाही तर आपल्याला स्वतंत्रता
दिलेली आहे, की जी परम स्वतंत्रता आहे, ती आपण मिळविली पाहिजे. मग ही फालतूची गुलामी कशाला
 19861221_Shri Mahadevi Puja - Chalmala_Alibag.pdf-page5.txt 
 Original Transcript : Marathi
करायची. असे व्यसनं लावून गुलामी कशाला करायची! आम्ही जर स्वत:च एवढे स्वतंत्र आहोत, आमच्या
'स्व' च्या तंत्रात आम्ही चालतो, तर आम्हाला ही गुलामी काय कामाची? म्हणून शिवाजी महाराजांनी सांगितलं
होतं, की स्वधर्म ओळखावा. 'स्व' चा ध्म ओळखला पाहिजे. 'स्व' म्हणजे तुमचा आरसा, जो तुमचा आत्मा
आहे, तो तुमचा आरसा आहे. तो मिळविला पाहिजे. आता खेडेगावातून आपल्याकडे अशा पुष्कळ विचित्र
कल्पना आहेत देवाबद्दल, की त्याचं मला कधी कधी फार आश्चर्य वाटतं. पुष्कळ लोकांना असं वाटतं की देव
वगैरे सगळे अंगात येतात, घुमतात. पुष्कळ बायकांना असं वाटतं , की आपल्यामध्ये देवी येतात. आता सांगायचं
म्हणजे देवीला झेलणं म्हणजे काही सोपं काम नाहीये. देवीची शक्ती असते आणि त्या शक्तीने कुंडलिनी जागृत
होते. ज्या बाईच्या अंगात भुतं येतात, तिला तुम्ही जर देवी म्हणाल, तर तुम्ही परमेश्वराच्या विरोधात आहात.
ही
भूतं आहेत आणि त्या बाईला त्रास होतो. मानसिक त्रास होतो. इतकंच नाही, तर घरच्या सर्व लोकांना दरिद्रता
येते. तिच्याकडे जाणार्या लोकांना त्रास होतो. त्यांना दरिद्रता येते. म्हणून अशा गोष्टींकडे आपण भोळेपणाने गेलं
नाही पाहिजे. तसंच प्रत्येक ठिकाणी प्रत्येक गावात पाहिलं तर एक कोणी ना कोणी तरी असा मनुष्य, अशी बाई
असते, जी काही तरी अशी कामं करीत असतात. विशेषत: कोकणात जास्त असतं. आता ह्या वर्षी बरं वाटतंय
मला इतकं नाहीये. काहीतरी सांगायचं, की अमक्याकडचं भूत आलंय, तमक्याकडचं भूत आलंय. अशा रीतीने
गोष्टी करायच्या, की लोकांना नुसतं भारावून टाकायचं. अशा भारावून टाकलेल्या लोकांना मूर्खात काढून
त्यांच्याकडून पैसे उकळायचे. ही आपल्याकडची एक प्रथा झालेली आहे. नंतर कोणी तरी येऊन बसायंच, भटजी
बनायचं आणि म्हणायचं की एवढे पैसे दे. देवाला पैसे वरगैरे काही कळत नाही. देवाला पैसे नकोत तुमचे. देवाला
फक्त एकच गोष्ट पाहिजे, की तुम्ही स्वत:च्या आत्म्याचा आरसा हाती घ्यावा आणि त्यात आपलं स्वरूप बघावं.
पण त्याबद्दल असं सांगितलेलं आहे, की जेव्हा हा हाती आरसा येतो, तर ह्याची जी आपल्याला अस्पष्ट कल्पना
येत असते, ती स्पष्ट करण्यासाठी आणि स्थिरावण्यासाठी मनुष्याला ध्यान आणि धारणा केली पाहिजे.
म्हणून आधी कुंडलिनीचं जागरण आणि त्या नंतर ध्यान-धारणा करून, पूर्णपणे आपण स्वत:ला जबाबदार
समजून, स्वतंत्र समजून आपल्या आसनावर आरूढ झालं पाहिजे. आसनावर बसलं पाहिजे. आम्ही काही असे
तसे नाही आहोत. आम्ही मानव आहोत. आम्ही काही आमचं आयुष्य असं वाया घालण्यासाठी आणलेलं नाही.
आम्ही आमची काही कदर केलेली नाही आजपर्यंत. पण ती आत्म्याची ओळख झाल्याबरोबर लगेच मनुष्य
स्वत:ची ओळख करू लागतो आणि त्याच्यातले वाईट गुण आहेत ते झडून पडतात.
आता आमच्या इंग्लंडला, जेव्हा मी सहजयोग सुरू केला होता, तेव्हा सात असे लोक आले की जे पुष्कळ
इकडचे-तिकडचे व्यसनं घेत असत. आणि एका दिवसात, त्याच दिवशी त्यांची सगळी व्यसनं सुटली. आता
व्यसन ही गुलामगिरी आहे. जरी त्याच्यात तुम्हाला आनंद वाटतो, तरी ती एक गुलामगिरी आहे. कोणतीही
गुलामगिरी पत्करायची नाही, असं ठरवलं पाहिजे. असं ठरवल्यानंतर हा जो आत्मा आहे, तो स्पष्टरूपाने
दृष्टोत्पत्तीस पडतो. त्याचा आपल्याला परिणाम जाणवतो आणि त्या परिणामामुळे जे काही आपल्यामध्ये नको
आहे, ते निघून जातं. पण त्याच्याआधी नको तेच आपल्याला आवडतं. जे वाईट तेच आपल्याला आवडतं. जे
चुकीचं तेच आपण घेतो. तेव्हा मी एक आईच्या दष्टीने सांगते, की कोणी वाईट वाटून घेऊ नये. जर व्यसन असलं
6.
 19861221_Shri Mahadevi Puja - Chalmala_Alibag.pdf-page6.txt 
 Original Transcript : Marathi
तर त्याबद्दल घाबरू नये. आत्म्याच्या जागृतीने सगळ्यांची व्यसनं सुटणार. सगळ्यांची गुलामी सुटणार.
सगळ्यांची गरिबी सुटणार आणि सर्व तऱ्हेचे जेवढे काही क्लेष आहेत, त्रास आहेत, शारीरिक, मानसिक,
बौद्धिक तसेच सांसारिक, सगळेच्या सगळे तुमचे त्रास ह्याच्यातून जाणार आहेत आणि ते झालेच पाहिजेत.
तेव्हा ह्या गावाला आम्ही आलो, चाळगावाला, आणखीन ह्या लोकांनीसुद्धा इथे येऊन, इथली पवित्रता
पाहिली, तुम्हा लोकांना भेटले. तुमच्याबरोबर नाचले आणि खूप आनंदात होते. आणि तुम्ही सगळ्यांनी एवढा
सत्कार केला, सगळ्यांना स्वयंपाक करून इतकं सुंदर जेवायला दिलं. त्याबद्दल त्यांनी मला सांगितलंय की,
'माताजी, तुम्ही ह्यांना सगळ्यांना कृतार्थ करा.' आता आमची जी पद्धत आहे, की आम्ही ज्या गावाला जातो,
तिथली जी मालकीण असते, तिला एक काहीतरी बक्षीस द्यायची पद्धत आहे. आणि त्याप्रमाणे इथे, आपले जे,
तुम्हाला माहिती आहे, की हरिश्चंद्र कोळी म्हणून जे आहेत, त्यांनी एवढी मेहनत केली, हे घर स्थापन केलं,
सहजयोग इथे स्थापन केला. त्यानंतर त्यांच्या पत्नीने त्यांची एवढी मदत केली. तेव्हा त्यांना फूल न फुलाची
पाकळी म्हणून काहीतरी द्यायचं आहे. बाकी सर्व लोकांनाच काहीतरी द्यायचं आहे. आणि ते काहीतरी द्यायचं
म्हणजे ज्याला आपण आशीर्वाद म्हणतो. ह्या आशीर्वादामध्ये तुमच्या कुंडलिनीचं जागरण करून तुम्हाला
तुमच्यामध्येच समर्थ करायचं आहे. तुमच्यामध्ये तुम्हाला उभं करायचं आहे. तुमच्या गौरवाची तुम्हाला पूर्णपणे
समज येईल, तुमच्या मोठेपणाची तुम्हाला
जायचंय. म्हणजे मग पुढच्या वेळेला आल्यावरती इथे सबंध लोक फार सुंदर दिसतील आणखीन त्यांच्या
चेहर्यावरती एक तजेला, नावीन्य, त्यातून त्यांच्या हृदयामध्ये जशी काही कमळाची फुलं उमलावीत असं सुंदर
समज येईल, त्याची सुज्ञता तुमच्यात येईल, असं काहीतरी करून
स्थान परमेश्वरासाठी तयार केलेलं आहे.
माझा तुम्हा सर्वांना आशीर्वाद आहे.
