Vol 1 No 5 GURU PUJA 23.7.89 SUNDAY LAGO DI BRIES SYNOPSIS The guru principle is within ourself. The principle may be nourished sometimes but the nourishment has to be retained within. Whenever you worship any principle outside you worship it Inside. Around the Nabhi is the Bhav Sagar which is the ocean of illusion it cannot be the guru principle. There are hidden chakras within The limits the Bhav Sagar which are to be awakened and manifested. of this principle are controlled by the movement of the Swadishthan Swadishthan Chakra gives you creativity. Chakra. The person who is a guru has to be a creative person. If you are not a creative If you lack in creativity you lack person you cannot be a guru. the guru principle because guru has to create from ordinary people a new dynamic personality. From the decay he has to create a new personality-so how to do it? You have powers to raise Kundalini to cure people, if desplte all this you can not create a new personality then you can not bea Guru. The new personality has to be dynamic and compassionate, you can only mould people through compassion and never through anger. You have to use the energy of compassion Unless you feel the concern, the compassion for the person, whom you give realisation and just show off the person will not care for you. Many people get realisation. they come to the Ashramas, Poojas still their Guru principle is not .....2

 created till they create many more Sahaja yogis. The vision of the Guru is, How am I going to create more Sahaja Yogis2" The force and energy of Swadishtan Chakra is attention. If your attention is wobbly. critising others, then your Guru principle is wasted, the effort of Sahaja Yoga is wasted. Minimum of minimum the attention should be pure. Your attention is not developed by ascetism, by concen- tration. We pay most attention to the children, spouse, relationship of love family. When our attention has got compassion and love for others only then you can work out their realisation. Only the intensity of love can give you pure attention. Attention that is self oriented is pure, The idea of spirituality is love. Spirituality is not dry like bean-stock. If the soap can not clean what use is it? If every one is afraid to come near such a dry spiritual person what use is he? If creativity is our object then the attention should be purified with love and compassion. When filled with love and compassion it makes you dynamic. The Joy of seeing the refiection of your love on another person is infinite. Like you see your reflection on a mirror. That is how you create, through your own reflection ,purified by the reflector If you only live for yourself then you have not expanded at all, you have not done your duty to the Guru. If you develop the Guru Tattwa then the quality of wisdom is born. Wisdom is when you realise them, the balance comes. In the beginning your mistakes and rectify the Guru principle is limited, then as you create more Sahaja Yogis it goes on increasing its limitations like a horizon. ..

 <- 3- The center point is Nabhi on which the whole movement takes place. You get the Nabhi Chakra from the mother, s0 a Guru must have 60. love her children, correct the quality of the mother. A Guru must them and help their growth. How can we love and yet tell the truth, you have to look after the benevolence of the disciple. He may not like to hear the truth today but one day he will thank you for it. If the aim of the disciple is not to ascend then better not have him We can love useless material things but not human beings. Love for love sake. Try to implant that love in someone else. We have to raise all our underetandings on love otherwise your Guru principle remains weak, and one day you will find yourself outside the shores of Sahaja Yoga. First you must try to develop your Curu principle otherwise it is no use doing the Guru Pooja. Today when you worship me as a Guru, any amount of blessings will not work out unless you develop the depths of Guru principles. It is easy to become an angel or a deity but difficult to maintain it. become in my image and My desire is that all my children should feel the oneness in my one image.

 SEMINAR AT LAGO DI BRAIES, ALP MOUNTAINS ITALY - 22/7/89 SUBJECT, HOW TO PRESENT SAHAJA YOGA" The promised Golden Years of Sahaja Yoga have come. Sahaja Yoga is spreading fast and many new centers are opening all over the world. Over a thousands Sahaja Yogis gathered bya most enchanting lake, overlooking snow clad peaks to worship the mother of all the Gurus. We were all very excited by the good news Akbar brought from Turkey.The Sahaja Yogis from Greece told us how they all prayed to Shri Ganesha for the success of Shri Mataji's programme. 1500 seekers came, the press and the radio and the television covered the news. Perhaps you are not paying enough attention on the press Sahaja Yoga touches every single aspect of life, from the gross to the subtle. We have to think of variety of ways to present it. It is the duty of the older Sahaja Yogis to make it easier for the new ones. In most countries it is being presented in a structure of a course varying from seven days duration. New comers are well informed and better prepared and like this method. The Austrian Sahaja Yogis prepared a special questionaire asking new comers what impresses them most and what distresses them. They praised the compassionate attitude of older Sahaja Yogis and put. If when, the Arrogance of some of them. Some older Sahaja Yogis like to show off their knowledge and boast of the number of years they have been in Sahaja Yoga. ......5

 We should speak to their hearts rather to their heads. By speaking to their head we only provoke reactions in their ego. The Australian Sahaja Yogis played a beautiful music tape that appealed to the heart but also contained words to convey the meaning. f a public The seminar concluded with a keynote that the success programme is the acid test of the collectivity. If the collectivity is impressive enough, the seekers will be attracted by their example. Therefore a desire and effort of every Sahaja Yogi is utmost important. While being a good instrument, we must remember that Shri Mataji does everything. Annual subscription rates are as follows : Rs.200/- only English Rs. 108/- only Hindi Rs.108/- only Marathi Please send your drafts in favour of VISHWA NIRMALA DHARMA Our Address: Vishwa Nirmala Dharma Post Box No. 1901 Kothrud, Pune - 411029. .....6

 ABRAHAM Abraham exemplifled virtue, righteousness, humility and total surrender. He would rush from his tent and greet the traveller on the dusty coad, beseeching him toenter his own tent and have "Just a little bread," Abraham would treat the traveller as If he was honouring the tent with his visit. So in a profusely Ingratiating manner, the prophet would recelve his guests as gems dropped from Heaven. "My Lord, if I have found favour in your sight, do not pass by your Servant. Let a Ilttle water be brought, and wash your feet, and rest yourselves under the tree, while I fetch a morsel of bread, that you may refresh yourselves, and after that you may pass on - since you have come to your servant." (Genesis 18, 3-5) CONFUCIUS Like his personality his teachings are natural, human and simple. Actual life was used to illustrate his polnts since this was easy for the people to understand. He divided life into five relationships which were 1) King and minister 2) Husband and wife 3) Father and son 4) Brother to brother 5) Friends to friend To conduct these relationships in a virtuous and respectable manner was to follow the will of heaven. He distingulshed between a spiritual and a materialistic man thus; 'The superior man understands what Is right, the inferior man understands what is profitable'. There were five virtues to nurture according to the sage; benevolence, righteousness, propriety, wisdom and sincerity. .....7

 RAJA JANAKA AND A BOWL OF MILK There is a beautiful story told by Shri Mataji about Raja Janaka; "You know, King Janaka wasi called as "Videha'. Great sage Narada asked him one day, "Revered Sir, how are you called as Vldeha, you live in this world how can you be a Videha ?" Raja Janaka sald, 'this is very simpie. I will tell you about It in the evening. Now, please do this little job for me. There is mllk in this bowl. You take this bowI and come along with me. Please see that not a single drop of milk Is spilled on the earth. Then only I will tell you why I am called Videha'. Narada took the bowl and followed Janaka everywhere. He had to be very careful because the bowl was such that by the slightest movement the milk might have spilled. He got quite tired. When they retired for the evening, Narada asked, Please tell me now. I am getting quite fed up with carry ing this bowl following you everywhere at the same time. Raja janaka sald, 'FIrst of all tell me what you have seen ?' Narada; 'Nothing except this bowl of milk so that it won't spill." Raja Janaka sald, 'Didn't you see there was a big procession in my honour, then there was a court wherein there was a programme of dancing ? Did'nt you see anything?" Narada; 'No Sir, I have not seen anything. Raja Janak; 'My Child, Hkewise with me, I also see nothing. All the time, I just watch my attention. Where is it going ? Making sure that it won't spill away 1ike the milk.' Explaining Chitta-nirodha, Shri Mataji said, "This sort of attention one had to develop by watching attention. Chitta-Nirodh. Nirodh means the saving of your attention. So your attention should not be on saving money and worldly things and all that, but attention itself must be saved. As you watch your money, as you watch your road when you drive, as you watch your child when it is growing, as you watch the beauty of your wife, or the care of your husband - all put together you watch yourself; your attentlon." .....8

 Just as Shri Mataji has stressed the mportance of sincerity in Sahaja Yoga, for example the necessity of singing and praying with love from the heart, so also Confuclus says, that by which self-completion is finished. The possessor of sincerity does not merely accomplish completion of himself, with this quality he completes other men. This quotation takes an added significance when it is considered in the light of Sahaja Yoga; an open, sincere heart facilitates the kundalini's passage up the Sushumma nadi. SOCRATES SOCRATES GUIDED HIS PUPILS to the truth by considering ideas in thein various aspects till the right answer was established. He brought forward the Theory of Forms - 'as above, so below'. The unseen Realm of forms is the Divine and heavenly strata of the Virata which contains the blueprint for all the earthly replicas. Eyerything on the earthly plane of existence is merely an Imperfect reflection which is subject to changes and human Imperfection, whilst that which exists in the absolute is divine, perfect, eternal and unchanging. The soul originates in the realm of forms and through seeking and aspiration eventually returns to it. This is the point in our we are now working towards in Sahaja Yoga evolution which by purifying our vibrations we enter the klngdom of God. "He who enters the next world uninitiated and unenlightened shall be in the myre but he who arrives there purified and enlightened shall dwell among the Gods." NANAKA At 10 yrs. of age his mother thought it was time he took part in the sacred thread ceremony. As the thread was being put over Nanaka's neck, Nanaka cried, "Wait sir, why must I wear this thread?, wlll it make me good and kind" "I'm not sure" is of no use to me, give me instead a thread of mercy and "Then it contentment". ....9

 "A tree is known from the truits fr oears, so a man's religi s knoon from the deeds that he performs. Robes, symbols, forms, rites, rituals deeds wi1 not take man to righteous and ceremonies that do not lead far in the path of spiritual progress. The real problem is to rid the mind of evil propensities. If that's not accomplished all our austeritles are of no avalI". "This body is a palace and it is the house of God. Within it God kept the infinite flame" - Guru Nanaka SAI NATH "My master told me to give bounteously to all that ask. No one asks with wisdom. My treasury is open. No one brings carts to take away the real treasures. I say dig and search, but no one wants to take any pains. Be the sons of the DIVINE MOTHER and fully stock yourself. What is to become of us. This body will return to earth and the air we breathe will melt 1Into air. This opportunity will not return." .... 10

 10 ADVE NTOF THE MASTERS 35. Janaka XX . Abraham иака 10 000 - 16 000 B C India. 2 000 B C Mesopotamia. A. Moses 1 300 B C Egypt. • Zarathustra Lave 1 000 B C Persia. 2.Lao Tze 604 B C China. *.Confucius ИСМS 551 B C China. K. Socrates 469 B C Greece. (*. Muhammad . Nanaka O Sai Nath 570 A D Mecca. 1469 A D India. 1856 A D India. .....11

 •Creation of Dattatreya The sage Narada went to the Coddesses Saraswati, Lakshni and Parvarti, saying that Anasuya, wife of Atri, was the most virtuous woman in any of the worlds. The Goddesses sent their husbands, Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva to test the piety of this woman. Anasuya washed her husband's feet and then sprinkled the Gods, who were disguised as Brahmins, with this water. They deprived of the power to return to their original form, were trapped at her hermitage. 2re turned into babes. The three Gods Saraswati, Lakshmi and Parvarti came in search of their husbands, but he said she had some claim as she had nursed them so long. The Gods agreed to create a combined form with three heads and six arms if she released them. This three headed divinity was named Dattatreya. The central head represents Vishnu, the right head represents Shiva and the other Bratuma. The dogs which are depicted with Dattatreya represent the perfect devotees, which are faithful to their master. Archetypal guru al quru Adi Guru Dattatreya is the Archetypal Guru. That is, he is the prototype or original model from which all gurus emerge. He is the Guru Principle. As the Adi Guru, he has incarnated many times to guide mankind. He came as the ten great. Primordial Masters. From Janaka through to Sai Nath, this great principle has incarnated to give form to God's love for mankind, returning again and again to correct our mistakes and bring us back to a God-centred life. The patience and love of the true guru is clearly illustrated in Sri Dattatreya's repeated, persevering, incarnating guidance. It is Guru Dattatreya who leads mankind across the Void, bringing us from the treacherous oceans of illusion to the safety of the far shore where Sri Mataji, as Sri Durga, waits for us with outstretched arms! Lord Dattatreya had only one job to do, to establish our Dharma, so that we could evolve. Each of his manifestations had orily this to do. Lord Dattatreya himself, is the essence and innocence of Sri Brahmadeva, Sri Vishnu, and Sri Shiva. He is the integration of all the three Guras, and above all is innocence itself. One is constantly reminded of Sri Mataji's emphasis on the first, and most important aspect of the Guru, Sri Ganesha. wellspring of the Guru, of wisdom. Innocence is the In his manifest form, as Confucius, Zarathustra, Lao Tze, Nanaka, Moses, Abraham and Muhammad, Lord Dattatreya has been the foundation of grest religions, preserving Man's Dharma. "Adi Guru Dattatreya worshipped Mother along the banks of the River Tamasa. Tamasa is the same as your Thames. And he himself came and worshapped here.... in this great country of Shiva, or the Spirit. "Dattatreya himself never said that 'He' was the incarnation of the Primordial Master, with all these three forces acting through innocence came n this earth to guide. Sri Mataji Nirmala Devi. ADIGURUDATTATRE-Y•A

 12- Sri Muharmad spoke extensively about the Day of Judgement, promising Para- dise to those who followed a right- Cous life ns explained in the Koran, and Hell for those who Lurned against God and his Messengers. Speaking of the Iay of hcgenent in Sura XXIV he says: "24. On the Day when their tongues, Their hands, and their feet Will bear wi tness against them As to their actions. On that Day God Will pay them back (AL1) their just dues, And they will realise That God is The (very) Truth That makes all things manifest" 25. And in Sura XXXVI: "65. A seal on their mouths But their hands will speak To us, and their feet Bear witness, to all That they did" That Day shall we set From Sura VII: "57. The Winds like heralds of glad tidings, going before llis Mercy: When they have Carried the heavy laden Clouds, We drive them To a land that is dead, Make rain to descent thereon And produce every kind Of harvest therewith: thus Shall we raise up the dead: Perchance ye may ramember." It is he who sendeth "58. And good, by the will Of it's Cherisher, springs up Proctuce (rich) after its kind: Put from thd land that is Rad, springs up nothing But that which is niggardly: Thus do we explain the Signs By various (symbols) to those Who are grateful." From the land that is clean , *MUH·A•M M A·D 13

 These contain the ten txisie virtues or dhiruas for all mankind. Shri Mataii say that as carbon has four valencies, as the the quality of gold is its untarnishable nature, so man has ten valeneies. These arc the ten sustenance points representing the ten petals of the Nathi Chakra. that we stay spiritunlly pure enough to a cend. is because of these, It 's valencies nxl those of carlon is that The significant ifferenee betwoon mm man has the free will to consciously choose tham, whereas carlon is iound to its valencics ly the lws of ature. These are the Conmanduents that God proclaimed to Moses on ME. Sinai: • I am the lord your fiexl.... • You shal1 have no other Cod before Me.... vnin • You shall not ake the name of the Lord your God in vain.. • Remember the Salliath ny, to keep İL huly. • Honour your Cather ael your mother.... • You shal1 not kill. You shall Ot conit adul tery. • You shal1 ot steal. You shall mt bear false witness against your neighbour. You shull not covet your neightotur's hoe... enpe. VO.S.E.SX

 142 Ideas of goHỈ and cvil, lleaven and llell, angels and devils are inhereut Every- thing was harnious in the Universe until the angel Ahrimn rebelled nl was driven froTm lleaven. tlenee the fisght between gooxl and vil will cuctire until the Judgement ikıy. Then the world will be renewed and evil will piss awy. The pire soul will attain the ren! aation of the Kinclon of Heaven. "The soul which is afeaid to fight against evil has failed to carry out its Divine mission ni het wIstel iie life during its sojourn in this wurld." "On the cay of Eesrection you shall be wrable to Auura Mazda f or your thoughts, words and decHti in this world." hall be an w Table to Anura Mazcia for yenir Joy The Avesta te is tistL the hitest aim of our lives is ta attain perfect happi- ness (Joy). Th s of doin this is to know God's Will w ta ct in liniony with it. "Let the joy of Livin, tii yer heart to overflowin." Marriage Chastity is one af thhe chief virtues of Zoroustrianism most inviolable contracts aixi children are a blessing. powers of marrie mcd mankind. m. arriage is cne of the Women are the sustaininng "A cnaste woman is the nobiest creation of Ahura Mazda. "Woman is the marvel of Crention. Unriv- alled and uncqualled in form ond beauty is she in the seven realms. She is the blooming flower in breathes pcEfUm nil around. the gorden of life that WOnan is tiho Leacher of gentility Lo man. she helps mm griw in moral beight. She is the susLainin man. g pwer of the LiFe of Z:ARATHUSTRAO0000

 15 - Tao andwaier The Tao is most akin to water, since water has the quality of being able to take the form of any vessel which contains it. Hence, it is the most flexible and spontaneous. The Tao is female in nature and is described as the Mother of al things It is obviously the Kundalini Herself. The spirit of the valley never dies. This is called the mysterious female. The gatevay of the mysterious fenale is called the root of Heaven and Earth. Dimly visible it seems as it were there yet use will never drain it.' Summary From Lao Tze's teachings we learn that a Gurus purpose is to spread the light of the Divine by becoming a channel that enlightens seekers and takes them to higher levels. Lao Tze was the embodiment of the Guru that expresses the Divine. This is not only seen though his teachings but also in his life. He could only see one thing, that is Tao or God as the absclute. There was no compromise. He was pure in attention. A Gucu teaches by having tremendous compassion. Lao Tze could love any seeker hecause he coula recognise the Divine in them. It was that which he loved and it was that to which he directed his teaching. A Guru teaches that which is pure. Purity enables us to see through the illusion of the Divine and there we find detachment in joy, contentment in love and absoluteness in the Spirit. When one becomes the Guru, one is absorbed in the ocean of the Divine. We are soothed, we find nothing matters, we know it is going to be alright because we become purity. "The world had a beginning and this beginning could be the Mother of the world, When you know the Mother go on to know the Child, After you have known the Child go back to holding fast to the Mother, And to the end of your days you will not meet with danger." Chreken F-en SUNG Derjchoy TS IN Yung cheng BAsidencta CHENG Shalhystri Pre Pxm Way Hsü-L PIs'ah Ts'a! Ts'el Chün Fang Yosg Shou-on' prod yeng Hsien thelsce PHURA Ying Kuei čni O L'A O TZE/YAYA E. Sea Huai



----------------------

1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Vol 1 No 5
GURU PUJA
23.7.89
SUNDAY
LAGO DI BRIES SYNOPSIS
The guru principle is within ourself.
The principle may be nourished
sometimes but the nourishment has to be retained within.
Whenever
you worship any principle outside you worship it Inside.
Around the Nabhi is the Bhav Sagar which is the ocean of illusion
it cannot be the guru principle.
There are hidden chakras within
The limits
the Bhav Sagar which are to be awakened and manifested.
of this principle are controlled by the movement of the Swadishthan
Swadishthan Chakra gives you creativity.
Chakra.
The person who
is a guru has to be a creative person.
If you are not a creative
If you lack in creativity you lack
person you cannot be a guru.
the guru principle because guru has to create from ordinary people
a new dynamic personality. From the decay he has to create a new
personality-so how
to do it? You have powers to raise Kundalini
to cure people, if desplte all this you can not create a new personality
then you can not bea Guru.
The new personality has to be dynamic and compassionate, you can
only mould people through compassion and never through anger. You
have to use the energy of compassion Unless you feel the concern,
the compassion for the person, whom you give realisation and just
show off the person will not care for you. Many people get realisation.
they come to the Ashramas, Poojas still their Guru principle is not
.....2
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5.pdf-page-1.txt 
 created till they create many more Sahaja yogis. The vision of the
Guru is, How am I
going to create more Sahaja Yogis2"
The force and energy of Swadishtan Chakra is attention. If your attention
is wobbly. critising others,
then your Guru principle is wasted,
the effort of Sahaja Yoga is wasted. Minimum of minimum the attention
should be pure. Your attention is not developed by ascetism, by concen-
tration. We pay most attention to the children, spouse, relationship
of love family. When our attention has got compassion and love for
others only then you can work out their realisation. Only the intensity
of love can give you pure attention. Attention that is self oriented
is pure, The idea of spirituality is love. Spirituality is not dry
like bean-stock. If the soap can not clean what use is it? If every
one is afraid to come near such a dry spiritual person what use
is he?
If creativity is our object then the attention should be purified with
love and compassion. When filled with love and compassion it makes
you dynamic. The Joy of seeing the refiection of your love on another
person is infinite.
Like you see your reflection
on a mirror. That
is how you create, through your own reflection ,purified by the reflector
If you only live for yourself then you have not expanded at all,
you have not done your duty to the Guru. If you develop the Guru
Tattwa then the quality of wisdom is born. Wisdom is when you realise
them, the balance comes. In the beginning
your mistakes and rectify
the Guru principle is limited, then as you create more Sahaja Yogis
it goes on increasing its limitations like a horizon.
..
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5.pdf-page-2.txt 
 <- 3-
The center point is Nabhi on which the whole movement takes place.
You get the Nabhi Chakra from the mother, s0 a Guru must have
60.
love her children, correct
the quality of the mother. A Guru must
them and help their growth.
How can we love and yet tell the truth, you have to look after the
benevolence of the disciple. He may not like to hear the truth today
but one day he will thank you for it. If the aim of the disciple
is not to ascend then better not have him
We can love useless material things but not human beings. Love for
love sake. Try to implant that love in someone else. We have to
raise all our underetandings on love otherwise your Guru principle
remains weak, and one day you will find yourself outside the shores
of Sahaja Yoga. First you must try to develop your Curu principle
otherwise it is no use doing the Guru Pooja. Today when you worship
me as a Guru, any amount of blessings will not work out unless you
develop the depths of Guru principles. It is easy to become an angel
or a deity but difficult to maintain it.
become in my image and
My desire is that all my children should
feel the oneness in my one image.
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5.pdf-page-3.txt 
 SEMINAR AT LAGO DI BRAIES, ALP MOUNTAINS ITALY - 22/7/89
SUBJECT, HOW TO PRESENT SAHAJA YOGA"
The promised Golden Years of Sahaja Yoga have come. Sahaja Yoga
is spreading fast and many new centers are opening all over the world.
Over a thousands Sahaja Yogis gathered bya most enchanting lake,
overlooking snow clad peaks to worship the mother of all the Gurus.
We were all very excited by the good news Akbar
brought from
Turkey.The Sahaja Yogis from Greece told us how they all prayed to
Shri Ganesha for the success of Shri Mataji's programme. 1500 seekers
came, the press and the radio and the television covered the news.
Perhaps you are not paying enough attention on the press
Sahaja
Yoga touches every single aspect of life, from the gross to the subtle.
We have to think of variety of ways to present it. It is the duty
of the older Sahaja Yogis to make it easier for the new ones. In
most countries it is being presented in a structure of a course varying
from
seven days duration. New comers are well informed and better
prepared and like this method.
The Austrian Sahaja Yogis prepared a special questionaire asking
new comers what impresses them most and what distresses them. They
praised the compassionate attitude of older Sahaja Yogis and
put.
If when, the Arrogance of some of them. Some older Sahaja Yogis like
to show off their knowledge and boast of the number of years they
have been in Sahaja Yoga.
......5
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5.pdf-page-4.txt 
 We should speak to their hearts rather to their
heads. By speaking
to their head we only provoke reactions in their ego. The Australian
Sahaja Yogis played a beautiful music tape that appealed to the heart
but also contained words to convey the meaning.
f a public
The seminar concluded with a keynote that the success
programme is the acid test of the collectivity. If the collectivity
is impressive enough, the seekers will be attracted by their example.
Therefore a desire and effort of every Sahaja Yogi is utmost important.
While being a good instrument, we must remember that Shri Mataji
does everything.
Annual subscription rates are as follows :
Rs.200/- only
English
Rs. 108/- only
Hindi
Rs.108/- only
Marathi
Please send your drafts in favour of VISHWA NIRMALA DHARMA
Our Address:
Vishwa Nirmala Dharma
Post Box No. 1901
Kothrud, Pune - 411029.
.....6
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5.pdf-page-5.txt 
 ABRAHAM
Abraham exemplifled virtue, righteousness, humility and total surrender.
He would rush from his tent and greet the traveller on the dusty coad,
beseeching him toenter his own tent and have "Just a little bread," Abraham
would treat the traveller as If he was honouring the tent with his visit.
So in a profusely Ingratiating manner,
the prophet would recelve his guests
as gems dropped from Heaven.
"My Lord, if I have found favour in your sight, do not pass by your
Servant. Let a Ilttle water be brought, and wash your feet, and rest
yourselves under the tree, while I fetch a morsel of bread, that you may
refresh yourselves, and after that you may pass on - since you have come
to your servant." (Genesis 18, 3-5)
CONFUCIUS
Like his personality his teachings are natural, human and simple. Actual
life was used to illustrate his polnts since this was easy for the people
to understand. He divided life into five relationships which were
1)
King and minister
2)
Husband and wife
3)
Father and son
4)
Brother to brother
5)
Friends to friend
To conduct these relationships in a virtuous and respectable manner was
to follow the will of heaven.
He distingulshed between a spiritual and a materialistic man thus;
'The superior man understands what Is right, the inferior man understands
what is profitable'.
There were five virtues to nurture according to the sage; benevolence,
righteousness, propriety, wisdom and sincerity.
.....7
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5.pdf-page-6.txt 
 RAJA JANAKA AND A BOWL OF MILK
There is a beautiful story told by Shri Mataji about Raja Janaka;
"You know, King Janaka wasi called as "Videha'. Great sage Narada asked him
one day, "Revered Sir, how are you called as Vldeha, you live in this world
how can you be a Videha ?"
Raja Janaka sald, 'this is very simpie. I will tell you about It in the evening.
Now, please do this little job for me. There is mllk in this bowl. You take
this bowI and come along with me.
Please see that not a single drop of milk
Is spilled on the earth. Then only I will tell you why I am called Videha'.
Narada took the bowl and followed Janaka everywhere. He had to be very careful
because the bowl was such that by the slightest movement the milk might have
spilled. He got quite tired. When they retired for the evening, Narada asked,
Please tell me now. I am getting quite fed up with carry ing this bowl
following you everywhere at the same time.
Raja janaka sald, 'FIrst of all tell me what you have seen ?'
Narada; 'Nothing except this bowl of milk so that it won't spill."
Raja Janaka sald, 'Didn't you
see there was a big procession in my honour,
then there was a court wherein there was a programme of dancing ? Did'nt you
see anything?"
Narada; 'No Sir, I have not seen anything.
Raja Janak; 'My Child, Hkewise with me, I also see nothing. All the time,
I just watch my attention. Where is it going ? Making sure that it won't spill
away 1ike the milk.'
Explaining Chitta-nirodha, Shri Mataji said, "This sort of attention one had to
develop by watching attention. Chitta-Nirodh. Nirodh means the saving of your
attention. So your attention should not be on saving money and worldly things
and all that, but attention itself must be saved. As you watch your money, as
you watch your road when you drive, as you watch your child when it is growing,
as you watch the beauty of your wife, or the care of your husband - all put
together you
watch yourself; your attentlon."
.....8
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Just as Shri Mataji has stressed the mportance of sincerity in Sahaja
Yoga, for example the necessity of singing and praying with love from
the heart, so also Confuclus says,
that by which self-completion is finished. The possessor
of sincerity does not merely accomplish completion of himself,
with this
quality he completes other men.
This quotation takes an added significance when it is considered in the
light of Sahaja Yoga; an
open, sincere heart facilitates the kundalini's
passage up the Sushumma nadi.
SOCRATES
SOCRATES GUIDED HIS PUPILS to the truth by considering ideas in thein
various aspects till the right answer was established. He brought forward
the Theory of Forms - 'as above, so below'. The unseen Realm of forms
is the Divine and heavenly strata of the Virata which contains the blueprint
for all the earthly replicas. Eyerything on the earthly plane of existence
is merely an Imperfect reflection which is subject to changes and human
Imperfection, whilst that which exists in the absolute is divine, perfect,
eternal and unchanging. The soul originates in the realm of forms and through
seeking and aspiration eventually returns to it. This is the point in our
we are now working towards in Sahaja Yoga
evolution which
by purifying our vibrations we enter the klngdom of God.
"He who enters the next world uninitiated and unenlightened shall be in
the myre but he who arrives there purified and enlightened shall dwell
among the Gods."
NANAKA
At 10 yrs. of age his mother thought it was time he took part in the
sacred thread ceremony. As the thread was being put over Nanaka's neck,
Nanaka cried, "Wait sir, why must I wear this thread?, wlll it make me
good and kind"
"I'm not sure"
is of no use to me, give me instead a thread of mercy and
"Then it
contentment".
....9
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5.pdf-page-8.txt 
 "A tree is known from the truits fr oears, so a man's religi s knoon
from the deeds that he performs. Robes, symbols, forms, rites, rituals
deeds wi1 not take man
to righteous
and ceremonies that do not lead
far in the path of spiritual progress. The real problem is to rid the mind
of evil propensities. If that's not accomplished all our
austeritles are
of no avalI".
"This body is a palace and it is the house of God. Within it God kept the
infinite flame" - Guru Nanaka
SAI NATH
"My master told me to give bounteously to all that ask. No one asks with
wisdom. My treasury is open. No one brings carts to take away the real
treasures. I say dig and search, but no one wants to take any pains. Be
the
sons of the DIVINE MOTHER and fully stock yourself. What is
to become of us. This body will return to earth and the air we breathe
will melt 1Into air. This opportunity will not return."
.... 10
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5.pdf-page-9.txt 
 10
ADVE NTOF THE MASTERS
35. Janaka
XX . Abraham
иака
10 000 - 16 000 B C
India.
2 000 B C
Mesopotamia.
A. Moses
1 300 B C
Egypt.
• Zarathustra
Lave
1 000 B C
Persia.
2.Lao Tze
604 B C
China.
*.Confucius
ИСМS
551 B C
China.
K. Socrates
469 B C
Greece.
(*. Muhammad
. Nanaka
O Sai Nath
570 A D
Mecca.
1469 A D
India.
1856 A D
India.
.....11
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5.pdf-page-10.txt 
 •Creation of Dattatreya
The sage Narada went to the Coddesses Saraswati, Lakshni and Parvarti, saying
that Anasuya, wife of Atri, was the most virtuous woman in any of the worlds.
The Goddesses sent their husbands, Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva to test the piety of
this woman.
Anasuya washed her husband's feet and then sprinkled the Gods, who were disguised
as Brahmins, with this water. They
deprived of the power to return to their original form, were trapped at her
hermitage.
2re turned into babes. The three Gods
Saraswati, Lakshmi and Parvarti came in search of their husbands, but he said
she had some claim as she had nursed them so long. The Gods agreed to create a
combined form with three heads and six arms if she released them.
This three headed divinity was named Dattatreya. The central head represents
Vishnu, the right head represents Shiva and the other Bratuma. The dogs which
are depicted with Dattatreya represent the perfect devotees, which are faithful
to their master.
Archetypal guru
al quru
Adi Guru Dattatreya is the Archetypal Guru. That is, he is the prototype or
original model from which all gurus emerge. He is the Guru Principle. As the Adi
Guru, he has incarnated many times to guide mankind. He came as the ten great.
Primordial Masters. From Janaka through to Sai Nath, this great principle has
incarnated to give form to God's love for mankind, returning again and again to
correct our mistakes and bring us back to a God-centred life.
The patience and love of the true guru is clearly illustrated in Sri Dattatreya's
repeated, persevering, incarnating guidance. It is Guru Dattatreya who leads
mankind across the Void, bringing us from the treacherous oceans of illusion to
the safety of the far shore where Sri Mataji, as Sri Durga, waits for us with
outstretched arms! Lord Dattatreya had only one job to do, to establish our
Dharma, so that we could evolve. Each of his manifestations had orily this to do.
Lord Dattatreya himself, is the essence and innocence of Sri Brahmadeva, Sri
Vishnu, and Sri Shiva. He is the integration of all the three Guras, and above
all is innocence itself. One is constantly reminded of Sri Mataji's emphasis on
the first, and most important aspect of the Guru, Sri Ganesha.
wellspring of the Guru, of wisdom.
Innocence is the
In his manifest form, as Confucius, Zarathustra, Lao Tze, Nanaka, Moses, Abraham
and Muhammad, Lord Dattatreya has been the foundation of grest religions,
preserving Man's Dharma.
"Adi Guru Dattatreya worshipped Mother along the banks of the River Tamasa.
Tamasa is the same as your Thames. And he himself came and worshapped here....
in this great country of Shiva, or the Spirit.
"Dattatreya himself never said that 'He' was the incarnation of the Primordial
Master, with all these three forces acting through innocence came n this earth
to guide.
Sri Mataji Nirmala Devi.
ADIGURUDATTATRE-Y•A
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5.pdf-page-11.txt 
 12-
Sri Muharmad spoke extensively about
the Day of Judgement, promising Para-
dise to those who followed a right-
Cous life ns explained in the Koran,
and Hell for those who Lurned against
God and his Messengers. Speaking of
the Iay of hcgenent in Sura XXIV
he says:
"24. On the Day when their tongues,
Their hands, and their feet
Will bear wi tness against them
As to their actions.
On that Day God
Will pay them back
(AL1) their just dues,
And they will realise
That God is
The (very) Truth
That makes all things manifest"
25.
And in Sura XXXVI:
"65.
A seal on their mouths
But their hands will speak
To us, and their feet
Bear witness, to all
That they did"
That Day shall we set
From Sura VII:
"57.
The Winds like heralds
of glad tidings, going before
llis Mercy: When they have
Carried the heavy laden
Clouds, We drive them
To a land that is dead,
Make rain to descent thereon
And produce every kind
Of harvest therewith: thus
Shall we raise up the dead:
Perchance ye may ramember."
It is he who sendeth
"58.
And good, by the will
Of it's Cherisher, springs up
Proctuce (rich) after its kind:
Put from thd land that is
Rad, springs up nothing
But that which is niggardly:
Thus do we explain the Signs
By various (symbols) to those
Who are grateful."
From the land that is clean
,
*MUH·A•M M A·D
13
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5.pdf-page-12.txt 
 These contain the ten txisie virtues or dhiruas for all mankind. Shri Mataii
say that as carbon has four valencies, as the the quality of gold is its
untarnishable nature, so man has ten valeneies. These arc the ten sustenance
points representing the ten petals of the Nathi Chakra.
that we stay spiritunlly pure enough to a cend.
is because of these,
It
's valencies nxl those of carlon is that
The significant ifferenee betwoon mm
man has the free will to consciously choose tham, whereas carlon is iound to
its valencics ly the lws of ature.
These are the Conmanduents that God proclaimed to Moses on ME. Sinai:
• I am the lord your fiexl....
• You shal1 have no other Cod before Me....
vnin
• You shall not ake the name of the Lord your God in vain..
• Remember the Salliath ny, to keep İL huly.
• Honour your Cather ael your mother....
• You shal1 not kill.
You shall Ot conit adul tery.
• You shal1 ot steal.
You shall mt bear false witness against your neighbour.
You shull not covet your neightotur's hoe...
enpe.
VO.S.E.SX
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5.pdf-page-13.txt 
 142
Ideas of goHỈ and cvil, lleaven and llell, angels and devils are inhereut Every-
thing was harnious in the Universe until the angel Ahrimn rebelled nl was
driven froTm lleaven. tlenee the fisght between gooxl and vil will cuctire until the
Judgement ikıy. Then the world will be renewed and evil will piss awy. The pire
soul will attain the ren! aation of the Kinclon of Heaven.
"The soul which is afeaid to fight against evil has failed to carry out its
Divine mission ni het wIstel iie life during its sojourn in this wurld."
"On the cay of Eesrection you shall be wrable to Auura Mazda f or your
thoughts, words and decHti in this world."
hall be an w Table to Anura Mazcia for yenir
Joy
The Avesta te is tistL the hitest aim
of our lives is ta attain perfect happi-
ness (Joy). Th s of doin this is to
know God's Will w ta ct in liniony with
it.
"Let the joy of Livin, tii yer heart to
overflowin."
Marriage
Chastity is one af thhe chief virtues of
Zoroustrianism
most inviolable contracts aixi children are
a blessing.
powers of marrie mcd mankind.
m. arriage is cne of the
Women are the sustaininng
"A cnaste woman is the nobiest creation
of Ahura Mazda.
"Woman is the marvel of Crention. Unriv-
alled and uncqualled in form ond beauty
is she in the seven realms. She is the
blooming flower in
breathes pcEfUm nil around.
the gorden of life that
WOnan is tiho Leacher of gentility Lo man.
she helps mm griw in moral beight. She
is the susLainin
man.
g pwer of the LiFe of
Z:ARATHUSTRAO0000
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5.pdf-page-14.txt 
 15 -
Tao andwaier
The Tao is most akin to water, since water has the quality of being able to
take the form of any vessel which contains it. Hence, it is the most flexible
and spontaneous.
The Tao is female in nature and is described as the Mother of al things
It is obviously the Kundalini Herself.
The spirit of the valley never dies. This is called the mysterious female.
The gatevay of the mysterious fenale is called the root of Heaven and Earth.
Dimly visible it seems as it were there yet use will never drain it.'
Summary
From Lao Tze's teachings we learn that a Gurus purpose is to spread the light
of the Divine by becoming a channel that enlightens seekers and takes them to
higher levels.
Lao Tze was the embodiment of the Guru that expresses the Divine. This is not
only seen though his teachings but also in his life. He could only see one
thing, that is Tao or God as the absclute. There was no compromise. He was
pure in attention.
A Gucu teaches by having tremendous compassion. Lao Tze could love any seeker
hecause he coula recognise the Divine in them. It was that which he loved and
it was that to which he directed his teaching. A Guru teaches that which is
pure. Purity enables us to see through the illusion of the Divine and there
we find detachment in joy, contentment in love and absoluteness in the Spirit.
When one becomes the Guru, one is absorbed in the ocean of the Divine. We are
soothed, we find nothing matters, we know it is going to be alright because
we become purity.
"The world had a beginning and this beginning could be the Mother of the world,
When you know the Mother go on to know the Child,
After you have known the Child go back to holding fast to the Mother,
And to the end of your days you will not meet with danger."
Chreken
F-en
SUNG
Derjchoy
TS IN
Yung
cheng
BAsidencta
CHENG
Shalhystri
Pre
Pxm
Way
Hsü-L
PIs'ah
Ts'a!
Ts'el
Chün
Fang
Yosg
Shou-on'
prod
yeng
Hsien
thelsce
PHURA
Ying
Kuei čni
O
L'A O TZE/YAYA
E.
Sea
Huai
