SRI MATAJI NIRI U LA DEVI SAHAJA YOGA

 Poem conpos eu at Guru Puja "To The Mother of All Gurus Where the emrald green lake washes the feet of the Almighty. Where the Almighty Goddess spreads a cloak of green forests and blushes in myraids of flowers. Where enthralled by Her splendour time stands in awe. Where cool winds of Spirit whisper sweet odes to the Primordial Guru. Where iron opens its heart to love, The Guru tattwa of the universe opens. Here come a thousand pilgrims to anoint the Mother of All Gurus. O' Devi we offer our gratitude from the iner most core of our hearts again and again. You have opened our hearts but give us the iron tattwa to strengh ten our love. Bless us with wisdom But also give us humility tosustain the wisdom. You have showered upon us your chnicest aifts but also teach us how to 6ala them. Please keep us forever like the yonder emrald lake sparkling blissfully at your feet Yogi Mahajan

 VOL 1 No. 8 DIVINE COOL BREEZE DEVI PUJA Melun France 9.7.89 Puja of Shri krishna's aspect; ALLAHAD DAYANI (Radha) Synopsis Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi's Talk The foundation of collectivity is very deep. The deep understanding can only tell you that the basis of collectivity is detached love. written many romantic novels on the subject but The French have the pure love as we understand in Sahaja yoga is now to be expressed by Sahaja Yogis among themselves. After all we are all human beings made by one God and that we are all Sahaja Yogis created by one there should be no misunderstandings between us of any Mother, so 60 kind. We must understand that something makes us a little different - if we can understand the problem that we face then it will become much easier for us to see why our love becomes so attached, starts becoming smaller and smaller and smaller; then a person just starts loving oneself only. One of the main reasons that we have this problem is because of our conditioning. We are conditioned in a way that we don't know how to love. They talk of East and west but don't know the demarca- tion line because it is one round world. There are two types of conditionings. The first is the condi- tioning of revenge, like revenge is the best way of fulfillment. This kind of conditioning comes to us from the outside that we should not forgive anyone. That if we do not take revenge then we are not worthy of our name. History shows the same thing that one cannot

 rest till revenge is taken. I think it is the quality of a snake. it follows you, all its life to take revenge. The only thing it does on the sly is to run after the person who had mistakenly stepped on it. In the same way human endeavour is after the person who had in some way harmed him. If we go on like this there is o end to it. is absolutely absurd. Once somebody insulted Firstly, it Buddha. When Buddha went away this person was filled with remorse and the next day he approached Buddha with an apology. But Buddha replies that yesterday is finished now, you are with me today, so why are you talking about yesterday." As they are celebrating the French Revolution I think that there was no need to kill Marie Antoinette. According to them she spent a lot of money in Versailles and created all this beautiful furni- ture but today they are showing that furniture only. Having won the revolution they formed a new government, they should have stopped at that point. Has the world improved with the revolution? A revolution should have been to change the government and nat to murder the people. So the second conditioning that comes to us is that we cross all limits of humanity when we take revenge. They would not have been satisfied that she was still iving. It does not mean that some one who has done wrong to the country should go on like that, but how far you go with anger is to be seen. The wisdom of Sahaja Yoga lies in the understanding of the limitations upto which you can ga to express your anger or revenge on anyone wbatsoever. But the best thing is to leave it to the Divine power. We all exist inside the Divine power. Nothing is outside that. This Divine power is the power of love and compassion which does everything. But when we take up the responsibility, when we decide we ...3

 - 3 - have to do something, that we are something, try to go against the Divine power; we become stupid. A Sahaja Yoga has to leave it in The the hands of the Divine power and just become its instrument. is so great that it is wisdom compassion and love of the Divine complete wiedome. A person who has no compassion cannot be wise. He could be worldly wise but not really wise. So those who believe that they have to be very accurate must know that their accuracy will be cha- llenged by the Divine Power. There has to be a lot of mobile and relaxed temperament. For instance now I have suddenly arrived. Perhaps you were not told and were not prepared with the formalities lined up together like the military. It makes no different to me. I am no way disturbed or unhappy. I was so happy to see you all because I love you all and you love me. Its a family and there are no forma- milities in a family. There is no formality between you and God Al- mighty. But there has to be understanding as to what we are doing. Human beings either become extremely relaxed extremely lazy or extre- mely confused. Another side is too much formality. Mother is coming, THE we have to give her something and something is missing - alright, doesn't matter. You should not be under tension. If you are in tension, you cannot absorb my vibrations, or if you are lethargic then also you cannot absorb them. You have to be in the centre. Centre is the reception mood like a child is. You have to absorb the vibrations with the feeling of expectations and Joy, 'we have to receive the Mother'. - but not with tensions that this is not done, that is not đone ... I see each and everything so beautifully done. All these ideas are expressive of your love and not your tensions. Are we trying to be tense because we are over alert or are

 - 4 - we trying to escape-between the two lles Sahaja Yoga. You are very much anxious, very much waiting-you want to do something with your heart and when there is fulfillment you enjoy. But when I come and I find you all tense with headache then first I have to tell you to remove your headaches then I will talk to you. It has to be a very relaxed rapport between us. Relaxed does not mean lethargic. Thus one conditioning we have is elther we want people to be over alert or we want them not to be alert at all. The problem is that in our conditioning we go to extremes. If you are absolutely lethargic, dishevelled, confused, you are not in the centre. On the otherhand if you are very strict like a rock of Gibralter or Hitler like behaviour - be before time, follow proper that is not Sahaja Yoga. Look at these flowers, see steps ete. one by non how beautiful they are. Each one is different. One leaf does not match the other, One petal does not match the other. They are all different but so relaxed, creating beauty 8giving us so much SO of joy. Different yet in unison, there is oneness io them that they all want to give us joy. In tension you cannot give joy. the west. This conditioning has Tension is very common in come because of certain life stylee in the past. New there is not going to be any Waterloo anymore. They are say that Waterloo won because they were on was time but that is not the thing, the war was won because of the Divine power. Even if they had reached late they would have won. Whatever happens is by the Divine Power. So there is no need to be tense. Then you would say then let us sit down and have a nice time, let everything be doneby the Divine power. No. the Divine Power is

 - 5 - going to work througn your institution, through your Redium, so you have to be alert. A person who is alert need not be B person who is lethargic. You can be both alert and relaxed because you are Sahaja people when you take Yogls. You are not lke other people. Other the name of air port they suddenly go off their heads. Supposing you are tense and miss the flight, so what. At the most there will be only one mishappening which 1s our death. That is inevitable because we are born this body has to die. Thats all, the rest of it is a joke. Even if you are tense or not tense makes no difference. However when the tension is reduced the heart opens, we become the ocean of bliss and Joy. So why should we have any tensions. Then there are conditionings of countries of different styles. France has the conditioning that you should not look happy. The conditioning is so stupid that according to ît whatever is ugly has become beautiful. These tensed oblique visions do not allow us to see the reality, Its being worried about a bubble, as if its an atomic bomb. Such unimportant things we worry about. When we worry, Worry and worry anybody who comes near us we are ready to jump upon him. What are you worried about, whats the problem? The only worry I have if any is that my children sheuld love each other. If we have worries its best to talk them over with a friena. Friendship is such a thing that you could share your secrets. Even if you are a leader you are a friend first. Like you share your pro blems with me why not share them with each other. Sahaja Yogis are all friends of each other. I think the relationship of friendship is much higher than any other relationship because there is nothing to be gained out of friendship. It never ceases and you just enjoy the friendship. it is the purest form of understanding of our relationship

 with each other. A friend is the one who is always concerned about his friend. Pure friendship is of a very beautiful nature that you enjoy I have seen these kind of friendships the joy of another person. I when we were young because in those days people were open hearted. My father's friend was an or chodox brahmin and chairman of the school where I was studying. As my father had to go far away he left me in the hostel in care of this friend. A brahmin does not touch eggs but he knewI eat eggs so in the mornings he would secretly cook the eggs himself and bring for me. Despite my protests he would not heed, saying that you need nourishment for your exams, your father has gone away and I have to look after you (so sweetly). was the Chairman of the school and he was breaking his own He rules for me. I was amazed at this friendship. My father and he hardly had anything in common but they were good friends neverthe- less. I have seen such friendships. When my father would go to jail, friends would come and take us to their homes. I never felt any difference between their children and us. As a matter of fact we always felt that they were looking after us more that their own children. It needs a very large heart to be a friend. There was a father who has a friend and a son who had a friend. The father told his son that friendship is that you can always rely on your friend. The son boasted that he had great friends, so the father said lets test your friends and my friends. He told the son to tell his friends that he had murdered some one and needed help. When they went to the first friend the friend responded, 'you murdered, just get out. and slammed the door. The next one replied, "No no

 -7- don't even mention that you came to this house, just leave. "They then went to the father's friend. The friend did not answer their knocks for a while then apologised saying, 'I knaw something was wrong because you would not have come at this houT SO o I was busy collecting my wife's ornaments as you might need them for money. Thats why I was late in opening the door. - If you have murdered doesn't matter, you have children, I don't have. So better say that I have murdered. The son was shocked. It is betier to have une good friend then twenty half baked friends. This is real friendship. with a friend you cannot be tense. You are fust relaxed enjoy- ing each other's company, Even if you have ta, argue, argue. If you have a different view its alright, there is no need to impost it on the friend. Try to understand each other, thats how we are going to learn a lot from each other. I learnt a lot from friends. For ins- tance I learnt a lot from the French, their ideas of art, music, culture. You have friends everywhere now, just go with my badge and they will do anything for you. This 1s friendship. in this world we have thousands of friends but we ourself have to be very friendly. There ia operess hetween one friend and the other. Love means compiete treedom to yourself and the other. This love has to be very pure. You have to feel such a friendship then you will feel very proud ul such friends. You are not alone. Imagine before this we had so many saints and great souls who were treated like singular people. tortured and killed they were alone. But you are not, you are friends oi each other. The greatest friend you have is the Divine Power which is looking after you and doing every thing for you. In this country of France where we have got liberation, let us take to real liberation of our Spirit to enjoy everything that is available with understanding. May God Bless you all. ... 8

 8. Viema Public Programme 25.7.89 Synopsis At the very outset we have to know that truth cannot be conceptualised. It is not a mental achievement. Human mind has its own limitations. A break through has to be made by which we develop a personality above that. Mental movement is linear, it recoils back, it does not know how to balance itself. For instance this linear move- ment has led to ecological imbalances resulting in the green house effect. Likewise all problems like aids etc are due to our own mistakes. But the One who has made this beautiful creation must have thought of something else, he cannot allow his creation to be destroyed. There is an instrument within you throught which you can experience the union with thé creator. Through religion you cannot make this connection because religion is also mental. Within us there is no power that can control our abandonment. For instancee there 15 no power within us which can stop us from taking drugs, alcohol etc. Where have we gone wrong that we cannot see the Divine Power? Everyday we see seeds sprouting, flowers blooming but we do not want to think how it happens. There is a power that does this work, Now the time has come to feel this power through the instrument within us. In your human awareness you have to develop a higher dimen- 5ion above the mental projection. It is a becoming. This is the last step we have to achieve. In the human awareness this breakthrough has to come otherwise there is no way of saving this universe. This instrument has no it is connected to the mains. We de not use our potential, our beauty, but KNOW Qur this connection with the Once mains is established you will be surprised at the results and the

 dynamism. To see oneself as an instrument for correction is true ressurrection. 2nd Day Talk Music has DO words,it does not give rise to any thoughts, that 1s how thoughts can be removed. We live on the cusps of thoughts. When we are in the past or the future we cannot be in the present. When one thought falls the next one rises, before the next one rises there is a gap thie is the present. When the kundalini rises the thought becomes smaller, the centre expands and we go into thoughtless ness. For instance when there is a thuught that my carpet should not be spollt then I cannot enjoy the beauty of its creation. However, when the kundalini rises and I am thoughtless then I can enjoy its beauty. The firat step is to establish thoughtlessness. This can be done if we understand the Chakra of the Agnya. When the kundalini passes through it she awakens its diety Lord Jesus Christ. He was first conceptualised by the Divine in the Mooladhara Chakra. He is the dieity of innocence which incarnates on earth. The body of Christ was made of vibreations thats why he could walk on water. He hes said that we should forgive. Thus as soon as we forgive others then this diety is awakened and he sucks the ego and the super ego. The brain opens up like a lotus inside the limbic area and the kunda- Iini passes through the fontanale bone area. But this centre has ta completely open. Question; what about our karmas. Shri Mataji: Only human beings think they do karmas, animais do not think thus. Because of our ego we think that we do right or wrong, ani mals do not think thus. Actually human beings do not t 10

 10 know what is right or wrong because they Hve in a relative world. Hui what is the absolute truth that you can only know through Divine vibrations. When you become the Divine Computer then every ne thinks the some way. Right and wrong becomes clear. Like animals a dirty drain without knowing but human beings will not can pass go there.. When you become saints you will know the right and the you cannot do anything wrong. you get a new dimension to wrong, know. However before that you have conditionings and you become a closed personality like an ego, But Christ sucks your conditionings and egu. That is the meaning of Christ dying for our sins for which ne is awakened. By his powers he can suck allour sins. Hence you need not feel guilty at all because all our karmas have been sucked. The idea of suffering comes from people who want you to suffer. They say that since you have sinned you must pay for your But God does not understand money. Are we going to suffer sins. more than Christ? St Thomas has talked of nothing but Sahaja Yoga when he said that the Almighty Father is so kind, so compassionate, can be ask you to suffer? He has said that our father is so TIOW anxious for us to enter his kingdom. So let us rejoice and be happy and give up the idnal of suffering . You are not to feel sad and guflty. question Can diabetes be cured? Shri. Mataji: Diatees is caused by over thinking. When we think grey cells are produced by swadishthana chakra. This chakra converts fat cells into grey cells for the use of the brain If you think too much then this chakra does only this work. But it has many other functions, it has to look after the liver etc. When you think too much all these organs are neglected. In India ...11

 11 they eat so much sugar but they do not get diabetes_ because they do not get diabetes because they do not think too much. But it is very difficult to stop thinking when the brain becomea modern To cure It the thinking must be brought under control. If thoughts are bombarding you say I forgive' three times and silence wilI settle down. Talk at the Vienna Ashram to Sahaja Yogis Sahaja Yoga is for your benevolence, but it is also a study. study the tapes. Somebody told me that my child is ll. This means you have not studied Sahaja Yoga, I have said on many occasions the things you should be doing for children. If you do them they Would never fall aick, This is the otherside of the Guru tattawa. We should be very knowledgable and not sound like some sort of slaves of Shri. Mataji. If you do not have knowledge in your brain then you cannot be a guru. All the knowledge is in the brain, just put your attention and you will get ideas - but the attention must be pure. SHRU Mataji vietta Saviot Unton 4th Augunt 19as was historte day, Soviat Undon openod Ita hoart Nstoric day, Soviat Union openod Ita hoart to Shri Mataji Shri. Mataji told the Saviat boaurocrats and pross ibout Sahaja Yogs and aven gave them realisatian. The Chalrman of Hon. he proninent Indo-Soviat Jjaint corporation touched har feet. They l1 felt the cool breese. Their chakraa ure atrung aul hoal thy, weil roserved undera dlaciplined ite style. Soviet Uniun ia the tront anya and China la The back agnye. clentisle doctora, psychaloglote at the ministry of hialth ware most uprossed by nahaja yoga and their x parioncos. A protecol signed with the Soviet Union and the Life Btornal Trust for Joint wan vonture in ressarch and use of 'sahaja yoga curauvos. Soviet Union la the firat country of the worid lo racognise the grostnesa of this rorld to recognlsa the grestness of thio Maha Yoga. The Soviets an truly Har chiidren being the descendants of Luv. Because of their pure Intelligence they could esally recogniso thin utimata truth. On 18th Aug Shrt MatajE eddressed mamoth gatharing of over 2000 sookera at the Palace of Youth Leningred. Sone 3000 saokers had af Youth Leningred, Soae 3000 aoker bad to Eurn back becsuse the e hall wan tull to capacity. The sane spactacle followad In Moscov w on the 20th. Tlie Pussians are coning- but in thousands

 12 Diet for Jaundice/Hepatitis and Overheated Liver as Suggested By Shri Mataji 1. Drink every morning and svening ono glass of radish leaf juice. Drink in the morning one glass of kokum syrup. 2. Holding an ice- pack with the left hand, place it on the liver, with the right hand toward the picture of H.H. Shri Mataji and meditate without any candle light or diya (lamp) in front of Shri Mataji's piclure. 3. 4. You can sat Bengalli sweets. 5. No friea food, red meat or lat undar any circumstances. No fish or dairy products at all except butermilk in which butter has been skimmed off. 6. 7. No cheese al all. Liv 52 tablets: 3-4 tablals per day for two months. 8. All citrus fruits are O.K. (no mango, apple, banana, papaya or chikku) C. 10. Sugar cane juice or sugar cane is very good. 11. No buiter at all. 12. No Arud daal (Arhar/Tuar) 13. Boiled rice, all vegetables, moong daal are O.K. WE 14. No chillies in food. 15. Ginger, polato, onion, and cucumber are O.K. Regular intake of lemon juica with vibrated sugar is OK. 16. 17. No ice cream. 18. Amla ka muraba is good and can be taken with both meals. Silver varak on food is good. 19. 20. All vegetables fruits grown under the earth are O.K. 21. No groundnuts, no groundnut oll. Groundnut oll is very bad for liver. Sunflower oll in little grentity is alright



----------------------

1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8.pdf-page-0.txt 
 SRI MATAJI
NIRI U LA DEVI
SAHAJA YOGA
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8.pdf-page-1.txt 
 Poem conpos eu at Guru Puja
"To The Mother of All Gurus
Where the emrald green lake washes the feet of the Almighty.
Where the Almighty Goddess spreads a cloak of green forests
and blushes in myraids of flowers.
Where enthralled by Her splendour time stands in awe.
Where cool winds of Spirit whisper sweet odes to the Primordial Guru.
Where iron opens its heart to love,
The Guru tattwa of the universe opens.
Here come a thousand pilgrims to anoint the Mother of All Gurus.
O' Devi we offer our gratitude from the iner most core of our hearts
again and again.
You have opened our hearts
but give us the iron tattwa to strengh ten our love.
Bless us with wisdom
But also give us humility tosustain the wisdom.
You have showered upon us your chnicest aifts
but also teach us how to 6ala them.
Please keep us forever like the yonder emrald lake
sparkling blissfully at your feet
Yogi Mahajan
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8.pdf-page-2.txt 
 VOL 1 No. 8
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
DEVI PUJA Melun France 9.7.89
Puja of Shri krishna's aspect; ALLAHAD DAYANI (Radha)
Synopsis
Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi's Talk
The foundation of collectivity is very deep. The deep understanding
can only tell you that the basis of collectivity is detached love.
written many romantic novels on the subject but
The French have
the pure love as we understand in Sahaja yoga is now to be expressed
by Sahaja Yogis among themselves. After all we are all human beings
made by one God and that we are all Sahaja Yogis created by one
there should be no misunderstandings between us of any
Mother, so
60
kind. We must understand that something makes us a little different
- if we can understand the problem that we face then it will become
much easier for us to see why our love becomes so attached, starts
becoming smaller and smaller and smaller; then a person just starts
loving oneself only.
One of the main reasons that we have this problem is because
of our conditioning. We are conditioned in a way that we don't know
how to love. They talk of East and west but don't know the demarca-
tion line because it is one round world.
There are two types of conditionings. The first is the condi-
tioning of revenge, like revenge is the best way of fulfillment. This
kind of conditioning comes
to us from the outside that we should
not forgive anyone. That if we do not take revenge then we are not
worthy of
our name. History
shows the same thing that one cannot
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8.pdf-page-3.txt 
 rest till revenge is taken. I
think it is the quality of
a snake. it
follows you, all its life to take revenge. The only thing it does on the
sly is to run after the person who had mistakenly stepped on it.
In the same way human endeavour is after the person who had in
some way harmed him. If we go on like this there is o end to it.
is absolutely
absurd. Once somebody insulted
Firstly, it
Buddha. When Buddha went away this person was filled with remorse
and the next day he approached Buddha with an apology. But Buddha
replies that yesterday is finished now, you are with me today, so
why are you talking about yesterday."
As they are celebrating the French Revolution I think that
there was no need to kill Marie Antoinette.
According to them she
spent a lot of money in Versailles and created all this beautiful furni-
ture but today they are showing that furniture only. Having won the
revolution they formed a new government, they should have stopped
at that point. Has the world improved with the revolution? A revolution
should have been to change the government and nat to murder the
people. So the second conditioning that comes to us is that we cross
all limits of humanity when we take revenge. They would not have
been satisfied that she was still iving. It does not mean that some
one who has done wrong to the
country should go on like that, but
how far you go with anger is to be seen.
The wisdom of Sahaja Yoga lies in the understanding of the
limitations upto which you can ga to express your anger or revenge
on anyone wbatsoever. But the best thing is to leave it to the Divine
power. We all exist inside the Divine power. Nothing is outside that.
This Divine power is the power of love and compassion which does
everything. But when we take up the responsibility, when we decide we
...3
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8.pdf-page-4.txt 
 - 3 -
have to do something, that we are something, try to go against the
Divine power; we become stupid. A Sahaja Yoga has
to leave it in
The
the hands of the Divine power and just become its instrument.
is so great that it is wisdom
compassion and love of the Divine
complete wiedome.
A person who has no compassion cannot be wise. He could
be worldly wise but not really wise. So those who believe that they
have to be very accurate must know that their accuracy will be cha-
llenged by the Divine Power. There has to be a lot of mobile and
relaxed temperament. For instance now I have suddenly arrived. Perhaps
you were not told and were not prepared with the formalities
lined
up together like the military. It makes no different to me. I am
no way disturbed or unhappy. I was so happy to see you all because
I love you all and you love me. Its a family and there are no forma-
milities in a family. There is no formality between you and God Al-
mighty. But there has to be understanding as
to what we are doing.
Human beings either become extremely relaxed extremely lazy or extre-
mely confused. Another side is too much formality. Mother is coming,
THE
we have to give her something and something is missing - alright,
doesn't matter. You should not be under tension. If you are in tension,
you cannot absorb my vibrations, or if you are lethargic then also
you cannot absorb them. You have to be in the centre. Centre is
the reception mood like a child is. You have to absorb the vibrations
with the feeling of expectations and Joy,
'we have to receive the
Mother'. -
but not with tensions that this is not done, that is not
đone ... I see each and everything so beautifully done. All these
ideas are expressive of your love and not your tensions.
Are we trying to be tense because we are over alert or are
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8.pdf-page-5.txt 
 - 4 -
we trying to escape-between the two lles Sahaja Yoga. You are very
much anxious, very much waiting-you want to do something with your
heart and when there is fulfillment you enjoy.
But when I come and I find you all tense with headache then
first I have to tell you to remove your headaches then I will talk
to you. It has to be a very relaxed rapport between us. Relaxed
does not mean lethargic. Thus one conditioning we have is elther
we want people to be over alert or we want them not to be alert
at all. The problem is that in our conditioning we go to extremes.
If you are absolutely lethargic, dishevelled, confused, you are not
in the centre. On the otherhand if you are very strict like a rock
of Gibralter or Hitler like behaviour - be before time, follow proper
that is not Sahaja Yoga. Look at these flowers, see
steps ete.
one by non how beautiful they are. Each one is different. One leaf
does not match the other, One
petal does not match the other. They
are all different but so relaxed, creating beauty 8giving us so much
SO
of joy. Different yet in unison, there is oneness io them that they
all want to give us joy. In tension you cannot give joy.
the west. This conditioning has
Tension is very common in
come because of certain life stylee in the past. New there is not
going to be any Waterloo anymore.
They are say that Waterloo
won because they were on
was
time but that is not the thing, the war was won because of the Divine
power. Even if they had reached late they would have won. Whatever
happens is by the Divine Power. So there is no need to be tense.
Then you would say then let us sit down and have a nice time, let
everything be doneby the Divine power. No. the Divine Power is
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8.pdf-page-6.txt 
 - 5 -
going to work througn your institution, through your Redium, so you
have to be alert.
A person who is alert need not be B person who
is lethargic. You can be both alert and relaxed because you are Sahaja
people when you take
Yogls. You are not lke other people. Other
the name of air port they suddenly go off their heads. Supposing
you are tense and miss the flight, so what. At the most there will
be only one mishappening which 1s our death. That is inevitable
because we are born this body has to die. Thats all, the rest of
it is a joke. Even if you are tense or not tense makes no difference.
However when the tension is reduced the heart opens, we become
the ocean of bliss and Joy. So why should we have any tensions.
Then there are conditionings of countries of different styles.
France has the conditioning that you should not look happy.
The
conditioning is so stupid that according to ît whatever is ugly has
become beautiful. These tensed oblique visions do not allow
us to
see the reality, Its being worried about
a bubble, as if its an atomic
bomb. Such unimportant things we worry about. When we worry, Worry
and worry
anybody who comes near
us we are ready to jump upon
him. What are you worried about, whats the problem? The only worry
I have if any is that my children sheuld love each other.
If we have worries its best to talk them over with a friena.
Friendship is such a thing that you could share your secrets. Even
if you are a leader you are a friend first. Like you share your pro
blems with
me why not share them with each other. Sahaja Yogis
are all friends of each other. I think the relationship of friendship
is much higher than any other relationship because there is nothing
to be gained out of friendship. It never ceases and you just enjoy
the friendship. it is the purest form of understanding of our relationship
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8.pdf-page-7.txt 
 with each other. A friend is the one who is always concerned about
his friend.
Pure friendship is of a very beautiful nature that you enjoy
I have seen these kind of friendships
the joy of another person. I
when we were young because in those days people were open hearted.
My father's friend
was an or chodox brahmin and chairman of the
school where I was studying. As my father had to go far away he
left me in the hostel in care of this friend. A brahmin does not
touch eggs but he knewI eat eggs so in the mornings he would secretly
cook the eggs himself and bring for me. Despite my protests he would
not heed, saying that you need nourishment for your exams, your
father has gone away and I have to look after you (so sweetly).
was the Chairman of the school and he was breaking his own
He
rules for me. I was amazed at this friendship. My father and he
hardly had anything in common
but they were good friends neverthe-
less.
I have seen such friendships. When my father would go
to
jail, friends would come and take us to their homes. I never felt
any difference between their children and us. As a matter of
fact we always felt that they were looking after us more that their
own children. It needs a very large heart to be a friend. There
was a father who has a friend and a son who had a friend. The
father told his son that friendship is that you can always rely on
your friend. The son boasted that he had great friends, so the father
said lets test your friends and my friends. He told the son to tell
his friends that he had murdered some one and needed help. When
they went to the first friend the friend responded, 'you murdered,
just get out. and slammed the door. The next one replied, "No no
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8.pdf-page-8.txt 
 -7-
don't even mention that you came to this house, just leave. "They
then went
to the father's friend. The friend did not answer their
knocks for a while then apologised saying,
'I knaw something was
wrong
because you would not have come at this houT SO
o I was
busy
collecting my wife's ornaments as you might need them for money.
Thats why I was late in opening the door. - If you have murdered
doesn't matter, you have children, I don't have. So better say that
I have murdered. The son was shocked. It is betier to have une
good friend then twenty half baked friends. This is real friendship.
with a friend you cannot be tense. You are fust relaxed enjoy-
ing
each other's company, Even
if you have ta, argue, argue. If you
have a different view its alright, there is no need to impost it on
the friend. Try
to understand each other, thats how we are going
to learn a lot from each other. I learnt a lot from friends. For ins-
tance I learnt a lot from the French, their ideas of art, music, culture.
You have friends everywhere now, just go with my badge and they
will do anything for you. This 1s friendship. in this world we have
thousands of friends but we ourself have to be very friendly. There
ia operess hetween one friend and the other. Love means compiete
treedom to yourself and the other. This love has to be very pure.
You have to feel such a friendship then you will feel very proud
ul such friends. You are not alone. Imagine before this we had so
many saints and great souls who were treated like singular people.
tortured and killed they were alone. But you are not, you are friends
oi each other. The greatest friend you have is the Divine Power
which is looking after you and doing every thing for you.
In this
country of France where we
have got liberation, let us take to real
liberation of our Spirit
to enjoy everything that is available with
understanding. May God Bless you all.
... 8
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8.pdf-page-9.txt 
 8.
Viema Public Programme 25.7.89
Synopsis
At the very outset we have to know that truth cannot be
conceptualised. It is not a mental achievement. Human mind has its
own limitations. A break through has to be made by which we develop
a personality above that. Mental movement is linear, it recoils back,
it does not know how to balance itself. For instance this linear move-
ment has led
to ecological imbalances resulting in the green house
effect. Likewise all problems like aids etc are due to our own mistakes.
But the One who has made this beautiful creation must have thought
of something else, he cannot allow his creation to be destroyed.
There is an instrument within you throught which you can
experience the union with thé creator. Through religion you cannot
make this connection because religion is also mental. Within us there
is no
power that can control our abandonment. For instancee
there
15 no power within us which can stop us from taking drugs, alcohol
etc. Where have we gone wrong that we cannot see the Divine Power?
Everyday we see seeds sprouting, flowers blooming but we do not
want to think how it happens. There is a power that does this work,
Now the time has
come to feel this power through the instrument
within us.
In your human awareness you have to develop a higher dimen-
5ion above the mental projection. It is a becoming. This is the last
step we have to achieve. In the human awareness this breakthrough
has to come otherwise there is no way of saving this universe. This
instrument has no
it is connected
to the mains. We de not
use
our
potential, our beauty, but
KNOW Qur
this connection with the
Once
mains is established you will be surprised at the results and the
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8.pdf-page-10.txt 
 dynamism.
To see oneself as an instrument for
correction is true
ressurrection.
2nd Day Talk
Music has DO words,it does not give rise to any thoughts, that 1s
how thoughts can be removed. We live on the cusps of thoughts.
When we are in the past or the future we cannot be in the present.
When one thought falls the next one rises, before the next one rises
there is a gap thie is the present.
When the kundalini rises the
thought becomes smaller, the centre expands and we go into thoughtless
ness. For instance when there is a thuught that my carpet should
not be spollt then I cannot enjoy the beauty of its creation. However,
when the kundalini rises and I am thoughtless then I can enjoy its
beauty.
The firat step is to establish thoughtlessness. This can be
done if we understand the Chakra of the Agnya. When the kundalini
passes through it she awakens its diety Lord Jesus Christ. He was
first conceptualised by the Divine in the Mooladhara Chakra. He is
the dieity of innocence which incarnates
on earth. The body of Christ
was made of vibreations thats why he could walk on water. He hes
said that we should forgive. Thus as soon as we forgive others then
this diety is awakened and he sucks the ego and the super ego.
The brain opens up like a lotus inside the limbic area and the kunda-
Iini passes through the fontanale bone area. But this centre has ta
completely open.
Question; what about our karmas.
Shri Mataji: Only human beings think they do karmas, animais
do not think thus. Because of our ego we think that we do right
or wrong, ani mals do not think thus. Actually human beings do not
t
10
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8.pdf-page-11.txt 
 10
know what is right or wrong because they Hve in a relative world.
Hui what is the absolute truth
that you can only know through
Divine vibrations. When you become the Divine Computer then every
ne thinks the some way. Right and wrong becomes clear. Like animals
a dirty drain without knowing but human beings will not
can pass
go there.. When you become saints you will know the right and the
you cannot do anything wrong.
you get a new dimension to
wrong,
know.
However before that you have conditionings and you become
a closed personality like an ego, But Christ sucks your conditionings
and egu. That is the meaning of Christ dying for our sins for which
ne is awakened. By his powers he can suck allour sins. Hence you
need not feel guilty at all because all our karmas have been sucked.
The idea of suffering comes from people who want you to
suffer. They say that since you have sinned you must pay for your
But God does not understand money. Are we going to suffer
sins.
more than Christ? St Thomas has talked of nothing but Sahaja Yoga
when he said that the Almighty Father is so kind, so compassionate,
can be ask you to suffer? He has said that our father is so
TIOW
anxious for us to enter his kingdom. So let us rejoice and be happy
and give up the idnal of suffering
. You are not to feel sad and guflty.
question Can diabetes be cured?
Shri. Mataji: Diatees is
caused by
over thinking. When
we think grey cells
are produced by swadishthana chakra. This
chakra converts fat cells into grey cells for the use of the brain
If you think too much then this chakra does only this work. But
it has many other functions, it has to look after
the liver
etc. When you think too much all these organs are neglected. In India
...11
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8.pdf-page-12.txt 
 11
they eat so much sugar but they do not get diabetes_ because they
do not get diabetes because they
do not think too much. But it is very difficult
to stop thinking when
the brain becomea modern To cure It the thinking must be brought
under control. If thoughts are bombarding you say I forgive' three
times and silence wilI settle down.
Talk at the Vienna Ashram to Sahaja Yogis
Sahaja Yoga is for your benevolence, but it is also a study.
study the tapes. Somebody told me that my child is ll. This means
you have not studied Sahaja Yoga, I have said on many occasions
the things you should be doing for children. If you do them they
Would never fall aick,
This is the otherside of the Guru tattawa.
We should be
very knowledgable and not sound like some sort of slaves of Shri.
Mataji. If you do not have knowledge in your brain then you cannot
be a guru. All the knowledge is in the brain, just put your attention
and you will get ideas - but the attention must be pure.
SHRU Mataji vietta Saviot Unton
4th Augunt 19as was historte day, Soviat Undon openod Ita hoart
Nstoric day, Soviat Union openod Ita hoart
to Shri Mataji Shri. Mataji told the Saviat boaurocrats and pross
ibout Sahaja Yogs and aven gave them realisatian. The Chalrman of
Hon.
he proninent Indo-Soviat Jjaint corporation touched har feet. They
l1 felt the cool breese. Their chakraa ure atrung aul hoal thy, weil
roserved undera dlaciplined ite style. Soviet Uniun ia the tront
anya and China la The back agnye.
clentisle doctora, psychaloglote at the ministry of hialth ware most
uprossed by nahaja yoga and their x parioncos.
A protecol
signed with the Soviet Union and the Life Btornal Trust for Joint
wan
vonture in ressarch and use of 'sahaja yoga curauvos. Soviet Union
la the firat country of the worid lo racognise the grostnesa of this
rorld to recognlsa the grestness of thio
Maha Yoga. The Soviets an
truly Har chiidren being the descendants
of Luv. Because of their pure Intelligence they could esally recogniso
thin utimata truth.
On 18th Aug Shrt MatajE eddressed
mamoth gatharing of over 2000
sookera at the Palace of Youth Leningred. Sone 3000 saokers had
af Youth Leningred, Soae 3000 aoker bad
to Eurn back becsuse the e
hall wan tull to capacity. The sane spactacle
followad In Moscov
w on the 20th. Tlie Pussians are coning- but in
thousands
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8.pdf-page-13.txt 
 12
Diet for Jaundice/Hepatitis and Overheated Liver
as Suggested By Shri Mataji
1.
Drink every morning and svening ono glass of radish leaf juice.
Drink in the morning one glass of kokum syrup.
2.
Holding an ice- pack with the left hand, place it on the liver, with the right hand
toward the picture of H.H. Shri Mataji and meditate without any candle light or diya
(lamp) in front of Shri Mataji's piclure.
3.
4.
You can sat Bengalli sweets.
5.
No friea food, red meat or lat undar any circumstances.
No fish or dairy products at all except butermilk in which butter has been skimmed
off.
6.
7.
No cheese al all.
Liv 52 tablets: 3-4 tablals per day for two months.
8.
All citrus fruits are O.K. (no mango, apple, banana, papaya or chikku)
C.
10.
Sugar cane juice or sugar cane is very good.
11. No buiter at all.
12. No Arud daal (Arhar/Tuar)
13. Boiled rice, all vegetables, moong daal are O.K.
WE
14. No chillies in food.
15. Ginger, polato, onion, and cucumber are O.K.
Regular intake of lemon juica with vibrated sugar is OK.
16.
17. No ice cream.
18. Amla ka muraba is good and can be taken with both meals.
Silver varak on food is good.
19.
20. All vegetables fruits grown under the earth are O.K.
21. No groundnuts, no groundnut oll. Groundnut oll is very bad for
liver. Sunflower oll in little grentity is alright
