THE PIYINF COOL BREEZE vOL 1 No.12 INDIA SUPPLEMENT Christmas Greetings

 SHRI MATAJI NIRMAL A DEVI VISITS THE SOVIET UNION. Shri Mataji was specially inviLed to uddress the ist world Conference on Yoga organised by the Soviet Winistry of She addressed a full house of Soviet doctors Health. seientists and press and even gave them realisation. Her address was widely covered by the Soviet press and TV. On public demand anothier special programne was arranged for 700 people. Shri Mataji also gave public programmes in Kiev und Leningrad. Answering many questions from her audience - assuring them notably that Communism had done them no harm at all by comparison with the Capitalism of America which had made them completely stupid. About Stalin she said better forget the past. Mr Gorbachev is s a realised soul and every one should support him a nd not oppose him for petty reasons. She asked the audience to ask whether Russia WAS going to l ead the world in spirituality. Everyone felt the cool breeze...Major Sahaja centres have been set up in Moscow, Leningrad a nd Keiv. Invitations for Sahaja programmes are pouring in from many other cities. A protocol has been signed with the Soviet Health Ministry for introducing Sahaja treatment. About 30 Russian Sahaja Yogis would be coming for the India tour this year and we all welcome them with all our heart. Synopsis of Shri Mataji's talk at the MoscOw University on 19.10.89 During the conference Today I am here to tell you about our Yoga syst em and its culmination. We had three types of movements in our country. The first one was the finding out the laws governing the universe. They also have been from the very begining in the Vedas. Ved means to know but if the truth is not known then the whole study is useless. Another system was a y earning to know the truth called bhakti or devotion. There was another important but secretive system to work out tue self realisation of a

 -2- person. Even Patanjali who has written the Sutra in 8 parts talked of the physical part in the begining like yama niyama but he did not stop there. Ultimately you have to reach the subtle power of love which I call as ritumbara pragnya. We had many yogis who started work on the middle path of human Ascent like Corakhnath, Adi Nath , Marchin Nath. They worked on the problem of human beings und how to make this ascent possible. They discovered in human beings in the triangular bone sacr uin a residual power. Over 1000 years ago Markendaya talked about it. In 8 th and 9th cent uury AD V asu Gupta wrote about it. So the eulmination or last achiev ement is to Ascend in to a new awareness of your Spirit. In all religions it is said that you have to seek the Eternal, and transitory thi ngs to be treated in its own limitations. But religions have gone astray completely. T hey have given terrible conditioning, people startea fightins in the name of religion. So this power resides in the triangular bone in every human being. When we become human beings from ameoba stage in the evolutionary process very subtle centres were created on the central nervous system. They are on the para sympathetic nervous system.. If we are seeking the truth we have to know that truth is what it is. Whatever you become you cannot see. If you are the light you cannot see the light.We have to know on the central nervous system the all pervading power and also we have to know how it works and we can work it out. At human nwareness we, cannot know the truth, we have to become the Spirit. The seat of the Spirit is at the top of the head at the fontanale bone area. The problem is to raise the kundalini and pierce it from the fontanale bone area to connect it to the all prevading power. When the kundalıni rises it passes through six centres and pierces the fontanale bone area and it nourishes our physical, emotional, mental and spiritual being. It happens spontaneously, it is a living process, ít is the last breakthrough in our evolution. You can feel it on your

 -3- Then you will know finger tips as the cool breeze. the protlem with you. In modern times we are so busy we have no time for So modern Sahaja Yoga is developed in such a anything. way that first you get your realisation, first you get the breakthrough then you see for yourself what's wrong with you in the little light you get. There is no end to knowledge. When you come in this room you want to put on the light switch and the whole light system comes Instead of going into the source and history of on. electricity better switch on the light Sahaja Yoga works like that. "EACH ONE OF US IS A MIRACLE. IN YOUR FACES I SEE A MARVELLOUS TRANSFORMATION. GOD TRIED TO CREATE A FEW ANGELS, HERE I SEE SO MANY. I FEEL TRANSPORTED TO A NEW WORLD, A DIFFERENT WORLD, A BETTER WORLD." MR. C.D. SRIVASTAVA - DIWALI PUJA.

 SHRI GANESH PUJA TALK BY SHRI MATAJI- (Synopsis) August 10, 1989 - Les Diablerets Switzerland be hase been singing the praise of Shri Ganesha before every puja and we have tremendous respect for Shri Ganesha, because Shri Ganesha is the syntol of innocence.lf it is not awakened within us, we cannot enter into the kingdom of Gud and we have to enjoy the blessings of Shri Ganesha. We have he's very to have out innocence fully blossoming. So we praise him and easily pleassed. Whatever we mighE have done wrong before coming to Sahaja Yogs, he completely forgives, because he is the eternal child. You have seen Ties get angry with them. They forget it. From children, vou slap them, somieti the very tweginning when a child is born to a Mother, he does not know what de has goe through. Then gradually the memory starts working and he starts storing things within himselt. In childhood, the children only remember the people who inave: foved them, but when they grow up, they only try to remember these peopie who have harmmed them, and that's how they make themselves very niscapce. But the prancipte i saresha is extremely subtle. It exists in everything. It exisis in matter the for o vibrations. There is no matter which is without tter pn the form vibrations. it nas vi brations which are seen even in the atoms and molecules tias of all matter which is existing. So Shri Ganesha was the first one who was established in matter as well, and as a result we can see he exists in the sun, moon, the whole univer se in the whole creation and he continues to exist in human beings also. Humans have the freedom to cover up their innocence and shut down the wisdom of Shri Ganesha and say that he does not exist. That is why we find that human beings are doing so many horrible thing5. But he acts. He acts in a way that he shows natural results of our wrong doings.Like if you do things which are not pleasing to Shri Ganesha, he goes up to a point, forgives you, and then he starts emerging out as physical disease and in women it becomes a menta! disease. Also it can create problems in nature. The natural calastrophies are also only the curse of Shri Ganesha. When people start doing

 -5- wrong things, behaving in a wrong manner collectively, then the natural catastro lesson. So his essence, though he exists in everything, phies come to teach them a he also has the capacity to assert his will, to bring forth the destruction of the whole world. We have the idea of Shri Ganesha as a minute being. We think he can go on a little mouse, so he must be very minute. He's as minute as he's great. He surpasses all the deities because of his wisdom. He is the giver of wisdom. He makes us learn. He's our guru in that respect mahaguru because he teaches us how we should behave. If you try to surpass him, or try to misbehave, even the mother won't support. Those who surpass Shri Ganesha are also the people who will never respect the mother. He does not know any other gods, so he is the power of complete surrender to Mother. That's why he's the most powerful deity among all the deities and nobody can surpass him in his power. We have to understand that as children are growing Shri Ganesha starts growing with them. But as they are hurnan beings so they can try to overpower Shri Ganesha. So it is the duty of parents to see that they look after their children in a very detached way so that Shri Ganesha in them is settled. The first sign of Shri Ganesha in a child is wisdom. If the child is not wise, if he's troublesome and does not know how to behave, then it shows that Shr: Ganesha is being attacked by him. And these days, in modern times, children are very much under attack. Innocence is under attack and it is very difficult for people to make a fine line as to how far to go with children and how far not to go. He is the giver of wisdom. So the parents must understand that he's the giver of wisdom, there should be wisdom within me and if 1 have ....3...

 -6- the wisdom, 1 have the balance and I won't lose temper with children. But will try Lo correct them in such a manner that they will get corrected." On the contrary, if you try to be very harsh with your children, they might react and go astray. Or if you try to restrict them too much then also they will behave in the same manner. So one thing is to be taught to your children, as Shri Ganesha himself does, is to respect your mother. Your Mother, who is the holy Mother and your own mother. If the father does not inake the child respect the mother then the child can never be alright. Because though the authority comes from the father, no doubt, but mother must be respected. For that it is very importnt that the mother must respect the father. So in the presence of children, if you fight with each other and misbehave, it will have a very bad effect lon the Ganesha tattwa of the child. This upbringing is very important in Sahaja Y oga as by God's grace, you all have born realised children. So you must know how far to go with your children to make them wiser to be moral and righteous. First of all, try to preserve their wisdom. If they say something nice, you must appreciate but they should not say it out of place and out of grace. So the misbehaviour is not to be tolerated in the sense that wheatever is wisdom within has to be expressed outside as light. Now we go further within to see how far Shri Ganesha acts. For example, water that is vibrated is the Ganesha Tattwa being enlightened in that water. Then that water goes into your stomach or your eyes or wherever it acts in a way that it excites the Ganesha Tattwa into anything that you put it. You have seen miracles of agriculture. Once you excite the Ganesha principle into the seed, it becomes ten times or a hundred times. Even the mother earth which we think to be something dead can be vibrated. Supposing Sahaja Yogis walked barefoot on the ground, the mother earth gets vibrated. It will act on the trees, grass, on the flowers, everything.

 -7- Ganesha Tattwa understands things, organises and works out if it is awakened. Like a seed when it sprouts at the tip of the seed, there is a little cell which has the Ganesha Tättwa which is being awakened. It knows how to go down, how to go round a stone, and how to reach the source of water. But it has only the sense of how far to go to exist, to nourish itseif on a very materiai plane, how to allow the tree to grow. But this Ganesha Tattwa starts becoming very very subtle at the point of agya-chakra. At thie time of agya-chakra, it understands that it now has the spiritual dimensions. The same Ganesha Tattwa which acted on the tip of a root now acts for the spiritual thing. That's why people close their cyes when they meditate. They don't want to see anything of else, they just want Shri Ganesha to act for the meditative process their Kundalıni. This pr ocess of meditation when we close our eyes acts. At the time of sleep, the eyes keep moving. This Ganesha Tattwanis now acted by your attention. If you have a roving attention, then it is affected. When we start looking at men or wornen all the time, then also our Ganesha Tattwa gets destroyed. Such people are more difficult tor rising in their ascent because agya Ganesha Tattwa can alsa be affected itself goes out. Then this if you are very materialistic, always worried about your things, always worried about matter, then also Ganesha Tattwa can be lost. Like when we go to the shop and keep looking at everything and what to buy. But suppose you are buying sornething out of beauty, and you are doing it to please others, then it acts the other way round. Then it increases your ascent, it is only sharing of the beauty of whatever you have bought. But suppose you buy things to inake other jealous, then the Ganesha Tattwa can be destroyed. It's a very motherly thing, like a mnother wants to please her c.ldren give food to them. In the sarme way, you have Vatsalya (feeling of mother ...5..

 -8- for child). In that way, you also satisfy a very great Ganesha principle, is wheni you have taken note of the artists, as the artists are creating all beautiful things out: of matter through swadistan. Without swadistana being governed by Shri Ganesha, it cannot be beautiful. These days, the artists are taking towards grotesque and imnioral things, and these things are of no eternal value. Today, people will buy thein and tomorrow they will throw them away. Only the things which have subtle Ganesha principle acting, which nakes you teel peaceful, which makes you feel happy is the one which is appreciated. So Ganesha establihses within you the higher self. The baser-self which enjoys all baser things in life is cut down or completely destroyed by Shri Ganesha. If you see Mlona Lisa, she cannot be an actress, or win any beauty contest, but her face is very serene and motherly and pure. Why 15 it she is eternally so much appreciated? The reason is there is Ganesha principle in her. It's the mother. The story goes that this lady had lost her child and she would never smile or cry. When one little child was brought to her, and she saw the child, the smile that came on her face of her love for the child is being depicted by this great artist. Even the eyes of a crocodile cracking her eggs to take out the babies is so gentle and loving. But when you become modern, your actions are very funny. So love for your child has to be absolutely impor tant, THEP but as Sahaja Yogis you should not have attachment only for your child. You must know how to give a complete margin to your love. The margin is benevolence. "Is it benevolent for my child? Am I spoiling my child? Am 1 encouraging my child too much? Am 1 playing into the hands of my child, or an 1 managing the child all right? Because in child- hood tie mother and the lather have to manage the children. The children have to be obedient, because the parents themselves are not obedient

 9- to each other. Also they find that the society is such where the children go on pestering their parents, so they also becorne like that, but doesn't Imatter, you are Sahaja Yogis, you should bring up your children, who should be obedient, wise and sensible with the same love which the crocodile has for her little crocadile. All these tihings are very important in life to create verygood rela- tionship between ourselves. Those who are younger than us, those who are not so well off, or those who are not so much talented, or those METE who are not so equipped in knowledge of Sahaja Yoga, or those who are not so much senior in Sahaja Yoga, you have to look after them in a fatherly manner, or, we can say, in a very motherly manner. We have a Ganesha Tattwa, so excite the Ganesha Tattwa. They should feel depen- dance on us for achieving the inner, or the inastery of the higher state. As the guru principle is absolutely bound by Ganesha principle. So the one who does not have a Ganesha principle becomes a horrid fellow. Life is a continuous process and one has to be all the time connected with the whole. Unless and until you are connected completely, you cannot understand the collectivity of innocence. Like child who comes and sits' in the lap of another, just like he doesn't know who is the father or mother, and all are one. We now are a means, an instrument, a media by which we express the Ganesha Tattwa all over, which is vibrations. So these vibrations are nothing but the principle of Shri Ganesha. He is Omkara ... And when it is, it is the feeling of Vatsalya, the feeling of love between mother and child. That feeling is the one which is vibrations. The distance between the two is vibrations. And that's what one has to feel. That's what one has to leel, that he's a child still, ard the Mother ....7..

 -10- is giving all the powers to the child, bringing up and loving the child, understnding the limitations of the child looking after all the sweeiness all the wisdorn of the child is to be appreciated. That is vibrations. All the relationships that are between human beings and gods are through che Ganesha principle. So when it becomes a relationship between you and God, there are vibrations and then that same relationship should extend to everything that you do. You should see that what's good has vibrations. Today, want to tell you sornething very impor tant about the all pervading power we have heard of. These are nothing but vibrations. The param chaitanya is nothing but vibrations; where all the identities are lost. Where mother is lost, father is lost, nothing remains, where all. And this is the only thing out of which it is subtle Vatsalya, that's everything comes and remains in itself. For example, the sun's rays come out, and try to create chlorophyll. Or from the ocean the clouds come out and try to nourish the mother earth. Everything is inside. This param chaitanya has got everything inside it. We can say, that everything is nothing but knowledge, is nothing but truth, is nothing but light. But when the folds of these come out, then we get into the folds of that chaitanya, then we becorne ignorant. Ignorance doesn't exist. Like there is darkness becausethere is no light. Once dight comes, the darkness doesn't exist. What happens, is that people go into the folds of the ocean and are lost. Thus we must understand one thing very carefully, that we are in param chaitanya, we are made by param chaitanya, all the time we are surrounded by by it, only thing is sometimes we are lost in the folds. And why are we lost? Because of our own unawareness. This awareness comes, that we are part and parcel of the whole. The whole thing is called as chidvilaasa, the piayful enjoyment of God's

 -11- attention. Now you will say, "How can that be?". For example, we see the sun, and then we see the water in the lake. Because of the sun, we can see the water. Then suppose we see a mirage and we think this is the water, and then we run after the water. But the whole thing is the play of the sun. ln the same way, the paran chaitanya acts, and we get lost in our awareness that we are param chaitanya. That's why the play starts.. When you give bandhans, what you do is to put the chaitanya into action. In every action in everything you do, you should know it's the param chaitanya that acts. Only thing is, you have to be aware of your self, and aware that it acts. And you just jump into that awareness, and it acts. So many people, though they know it in their brains, do not know it in their hearts. And so many people who know in their hearts, do not act in their attention. So only these three things you have to improve. One is your head, the other is your heart, and the third is your liver. If you can improve these three organs, this param chaitanya will act. But all this attention about money, there's nothing to it. Param chaitanya will create everything for you. It may not create money because it doesn't have a mind, but it will create possibilities and this is something to be understood very well. And it's so blissful to know that now you are aware of the param chaitanya and, you can master it. Not dominated but you ask him like a Jinn, "Do this, do that". With respect, it will do it. To know that you are in param chaitanya, and that's how you can be very sweet, very loving, affectionate and wise. May God bless you.

 TALK BY SHPI MATAJI AT DIVALI PUJA AIontecatINI Ely 29.10.1989. Synopsis. The purpoe of DIwali Puja is to feel the joy of God. Diwali WHE ccleberated over a 1000 years ago when Shri Rama was crowned on that day. That means the benevolence of humanity WALS CEROWned on that day. He was the benevolent king as described by Socrates.It was a joyous thing that u benesolent king was crowned. Such u thing is only possible if the people who choose tlhe king no othet have considersLion but benevolence of the subjects. So one has to come to tie conclusion that one has to become a sahaja yogi. Me bave two types of theories - Commun ism. The first is money oriented while the other is Capitali sm and based on obedience which is the best for sahaja yoga. The Sense of obedience is so great there that you tell them any thing for their benevolence and they follow it immediutely. They have grown sowIse and deep. On the other hand we are lost in our so called individual freedom. in the capitalist countries ben o nce Is finished.. When you have freedom to go amuck then you destroy yoursel f. For instunce people are crazy abot ny kind of absurd fashion.. These ideas come from entrepreneurs wh Wnt to exploit you. Benevolence is the highest. Whatever is benevolent for us we should accept if we are truely froe people. On the second day the demon Niarkasura was killed by the God. Today evil people are geting awards. Why this perversion? The evi1 within us should be killed which enjoys evil deeds. We have Lo recognise our problems. When you see yourself your heart opens. nless you open your heart you cannot enjoy yourself. All your conditionings wil1 go if you open your heart.1n very small things there is a ripple of joy. Forget your caste, nationality, everything. If you cannot mix with theE collectivity then something is the matter with you. Or this day the Goddess Laxmi is worshipped. She has no pride, Sie does not put pressure on others. Human beings are

 -13- the opposite, if they have noney they ride on # horse. she comes out of the water, she rests on a lotus and she sucks in her owD weight. We have to suck the weight of our position, money, education etc. All such nonsense makes you a heavy person pulling you downword She stands in balance. Her centre of gravity is so well balanced. In the same way you have to be balanced, You have to be grounded in the mother earth so that if the slightest thing ha ppens you come back to balance, Her two hands carry pink lotuses. Pink shows the nature of her warmth, hospitality, cOSiness. Cosy does not mean a hospital nor does it mean a lousy house but inviting , warm, comfortable. A rich man has l0 dogs outside No one can come inside not even a rat. There should be no extreme, no showing off, no aggression but something that would give joy and comfort to others. If something is , the host saying how cheaply he did it is a sign appreciated of a person who wants to give joy to his guests. To say how expensive it is is being aggresive. You must be able to enjoy everything otherwise you are not a saha ja yogi. You must encourage the artist. Some one may say that it is not being honest. A lotus is born in a pond of dirt but you do not see the dirt. The lotus covers the whole pond with fragrance and beauty. There is no honesty about it. Honesty lies in honestly understanding what your job is &S & sahaja yogi. With your love you are encouraging every one. With your love you are helping every one. With your love you are creating a confidence in every one. The most important thing is to be honest with yourself. First check with your mind, if you are going to say something to hurt others better stop. If you say pleasing things to others then pleasing things come to you. There are people who never smile ,so you are allowed to tickle them . You have to become like children.. One of the Laxmi principles is to be joyous. With the other hand the Laxmi gives. The person with money must give to those who need it but in such a way that no one knows, secretly. One hand should not know what the other

 -14- see wht is the need of the person. is the nced of the person.: hand gives. We should There should he a need of giving at the right place and the right moment. It should not be sensational. It should el evate the heart. What ever you give for spiritual growth is the best. For instance a flower is sufEficient for me. I a&m so self contained. other hand the Laxmi protects. This ha nd is a With the protection to all the sahaja yogis. I will always stand by a Saha ja yog i beeause the Spirit is present there. Protect all the artists, art, poetry, literature, honest politicians, righteous public servants and all those people who need protection. But whatever is dirty should not be supported. We must protect the goodness of others. It does not matter If they are not sahaja yogis, we are to protect their virtuous q uality. You are eternal, unlimited beings, the protectors of the. world. You should not be cruel. "When we see a motiher-in-law and a daughter-in-law quarrel we say how quarrelsome she is but we do the same thing. We ure not daggers, we are lot uses. If you have to hit some one use a lotus. One has to be deep in sahaja yoga to understand how to hit with a lotus. Once the La xmi covers you then you grow in Maha Laxmi. Then you think of the world benevolence, how to give them self realisation. Your attitude changes. We are hére to solve the problems. The world is our problem. We have to take up the responsiblities. If you are an architect create something great; if you are a musician create good music; if you are a government servant do well, I will help you. Every one's personality will grow. If you keep on the central path of the Sushumna then no one can touch you. You are not to find faults with others, then you are not sa haja yogis. If you are trying to control others then you are not sa ha ja yogis. Even lead'ers must not try to control. The whole Brahama chaitnya is the silent principle working out everything. You have to be silent to receive everything and the height of the Kailasha in your ascent. May God Bless you.

 -15- SONG BY ROME CHILDREN at Diwali Puja This little light of mine We are going to make it shine We are going to let it shine This little light of mine We are going to let it shine Let it shine, let it shine, let it shine. Shri Ganesha holds it-up This little light of mine Let it shine. -3 Up through swadishthana This little light of mine let it shine It fills our nabhi chakra This little light of mine Let it shine -3 It glows in my heart Phis little light of mine Let it shine -3. It spreads through the Vishudhi This little light of mine Let it shine -3 It opens Agya chakra This little light of mine Let it shine -3 It shines in the sahasrara This little light of mine Let it shine -3 And who makes it shine This little light of mine Let it shine -3. Shri Mataji makes it shine This little light of mine Let it shine -3

 -16- ISTANBUL - 30th. 0CT. 1989 - Shri MATA JI visits When we arrived in Turkey, I began tobe painfully aware with increasing awe of how far our worlds were apart -this young Turkey that mother was visiting and this so called Great America where mother has been Such smiling faces received MOTHER. visiting since 19721 She was very pleased and said that she felt as if she was coming back home to her birthplace. She spoke of She asked if the similarities between Turkey and India. there has been any Great Saints living in Turkey to give the good. vibrations of this country and it cane to light that many Sufis lived here and that the Virgin Mary was born in NEFISUS in West Turkey. There is a simplicity and a sense of freedomwhich gives the Turkish people their open heartedness and makes it easier for them to come to Sahaja Yoga, Reporting by Babette (N.V)

 ISTANBUL - 2nd. Nov. 89 SHRI MATAJI'S PUBLIC TALK - (Synopsis). The Koran said there will come a time when the clouds wi11 rise in the Seven Skies and will break the Then it will rain and that will bring forth mountain. peace on earth and the transformation of human beings. It spoke clearly about Sahaja Yoga and the breakthrough of the Kundalini that will overcome the ego of man. God almighty is our father, he loves us more than any enter his kingdom, father can love us, wants us to He he does not want us to suffer. To cure the Vishudhi He is Allah, Chakra, you have to say ALLAH O AKBAR. He not like the Rock of Gibraltor Rahim, Karim, Akbar. he has many aspects. As a father could be son or husband. The Bpirit is the reflec- So the spirit is the tion of God Almighty within us. collective being within us. If you become Spirit, you become collective. It is not just a Certificate, nor a badge but you become on your Central Nervous System means you can feel it on your finger tips centres of as. well as yourself. When the light another person of the Spirit comes into your attention than your attention becomes enlightened, Then you become a master, you give up all bad habits and become a free and strong Your attention becomes extremely compassio- personality. nate, the eyes become innocent, without greed or lust; they become so powerful with love that even their glance can bring peace and love to a person, Then this attention becomes the source of knowledge - absolute knowledge, The attention becomes dynamic, you become very creative,

 -18- You become so powerful. No habit can overpower you.. Secondly, you become the spirit and you enjoy because you become a witness - you see everything as a drama without involvement. Then you can solve your problems You start dissolving into ocean of joy. better. When you enter into Kingdom of God, at every step you feel a miracle is happening. At every step you feel as if You get well physically, someone is guiding vou. mentally, emotionally. After sometime you become Cmpowered and can enlighten and cure others and do things that can be called miracles. INDIA TOUR 1989-90. DATE: PLACE 17th. December, 89. VAITARNA. 18-20 RAHURI. 21-22 AURANGABAD. 23-27 DUNE. RRAHMDURI. 28-31 31-1st. January, 90. KOLAHPUR. 3rd. January, 90. GANPATIPULE. FOR INFORMATION FOR INTERNATIONAL SAHAJA YOGA SEMINAR Contact Orgnising Committee at - 602 SAKET, ADARSH DUGHDALAYA LANE, OFF MARVE ROAD, MALAD (WEST). BOMBAY-400064.



----------------------

1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_12.pdf-page-0.txt 
 THE PIYINF COOL BREEZE
vOL 1
No.12
INDIA SUPPLEMENT
Christmas Greetings
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_12.pdf-page-1.txt 
 SHRI MATAJI NIRMAL
A DEVI VISITS THE SOVIET UNION.
Shri Mataji was specially inviLed to uddress the ist world
Conference on Yoga organised by the Soviet Winistry of
She addressed a full house of Soviet doctors
Health.
seientists and press and even gave them realisation. Her
address was widely covered by the Soviet press and TV. On
public demand anothier special programne was arranged for 700
people.
Shri Mataji also gave public programmes in Kiev und
Leningrad. Answering
many questions from her audience -
assuring them notably that Communism had done them no harm
at all by comparison with the Capitalism of America which
had made them completely stupid. About Stalin she said
better forget the past. Mr Gorbachev is
s a realised soul and
every one should support him a nd not oppose him for petty
reasons. She asked the audience to ask whether Russia WAS
going to l ead the world in spirituality. Everyone felt the
cool breeze...Major Sahaja centres have been set up in
Moscow, Leningrad a nd Keiv. Invitations for Sahaja
programmes are pouring in from many other cities. A protocol
has been signed with the Soviet Health Ministry for
introducing Sahaja treatment. About 30 Russian Sahaja Yogis
would be coming for the India tour this year and we all
welcome them with all our heart.
Synopsis of Shri Mataji's talk at the MoscOw University
on 19.10.89
During the conference
Today I am here to tell you about our Yoga syst em and its
culmination. We had three types of movements in our country.
The first one was the finding out the laws governing the
universe. They also have been from the very begining in the
Vedas. Ved means to know but if the truth is not known then
the whole study is useless.
Another system was a
y earning to know the truth called
bhakti or devotion. There was another important but
secretive system to work out tue self realisation of a
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_12.pdf-page-2.txt 
 -2-
person. Even Patanjali who has written the Sutra in 8 parts
talked of the physical part in the begining like yama niyama
but he did not stop there. Ultimately you have to reach the
subtle power of love which I call as ritumbara pragnya. We
had many yogis who started work on the middle path of human
Ascent like Corakhnath, Adi Nath , Marchin Nath. They worked
on the problem of human beings und how to make this ascent
possible. They discovered in human beings in the triangular
bone sacr uin a residual power. Over 1000 years ago Markendaya
talked about it. In 8 th and 9th cent uury AD V asu Gupta wrote
about it. So the eulmination or last achiev ement is to
Ascend in to a new awareness of your Spirit.
In all religions it is said that you have to seek the
Eternal, and transitory thi ngs to be treated in its own
limitations. But religions have gone astray completely. T hey
have given terrible conditioning, people startea fightins in
the name of religion.
So this power resides in the triangular bone in every human
being. When we become human beings from ameoba stage in the
evolutionary process very subtle centres were created on the
central nervous system. They are on the para sympathetic
nervous system..
If we are seeking the truth we have to know that truth is
what it is. Whatever you become you cannot see. If you are
the light you cannot see the light.We have to know on the
central nervous system the all pervading power and also we
have to know how it works and we can work it out. At human
nwareness we, cannot know the truth, we have to become the
Spirit. The seat of the Spirit is at the top of the head at
the fontanale bone area. The problem is to raise the
kundalini and pierce it from the fontanale bone area to
connect it to the all prevading power. When the kundalıni
rises it passes through six centres and pierces the
fontanale bone area and it nourishes our physical,
emotional, mental and spiritual being. It happens
spontaneously, it is a living process, ít is the last
breakthrough in our evolution. You can feel it on your
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_12.pdf-page-3.txt 
 -3-
Then you will know
finger tips as the cool breeze.
the protlem with you.
In modern times we are so busy we have no time for
So modern Sahaja Yoga is developed in such a
anything.
way that first you get your realisation, first you get
the breakthrough then you see for yourself what's wrong
with you in the little light you get. There is no end
to knowledge.
When you come in this room you want to
put on the light switch and the whole light system comes
Instead of going into the source and history of
on.
electricity better switch on the light
Sahaja Yoga
works like that.
"EACH ONE OF US IS A MIRACLE.
IN YOUR FACES I SEE
A MARVELLOUS TRANSFORMATION.
GOD TRIED TO CREATE A
FEW ANGELS, HERE I SEE SO MANY.
I FEEL TRANSPORTED
TO A NEW WORLD, A DIFFERENT WORLD, A BETTER WORLD."
MR. C.D. SRIVASTAVA - DIWALI PUJA.
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_12.pdf-page-4.txt 
 SHRI GANESH PUJA
TALK BY SHRI MATAJI-
(Synopsis)
August 10, 1989 - Les Diablerets Switzerland
be hase been singing the praise of Shri Ganesha before every puja and
we have tremendous respect for Shri Ganesha, because Shri Ganesha is the
syntol of innocence.lf it is not awakened within us, we cannot enter into the
kingdom of Gud and we have to enjoy the blessings of Shri Ganesha. We have
he's very
to have out innocence fully blossoming. So we praise him
and
easily pleassed. Whatever we mighE have done wrong before coming to Sahaja
Yogs, he completely forgives, because he is the eternal child. You have seen
Ties get angry with them. They forget it. From
children, vou slap them, somieti
the very tweginning when a child is born to a Mother, he does not know what
de has goe through. Then gradually the memory starts working and he starts
storing things within himselt. In childhood, the children only remember the
people who inave: foved them, but when they grow up, they only try to remember
these peopie
who have harmmed them, and that's how they
make themselves
very niscapce.
But the prancipte i saresha is extremely subtle. It exists in everything.
It exisis in matter
the for o vibrations. There is no matter which is without
tter pn the form
vibrations. it nas vi
brations which are seen even in the atoms and molecules
tias
of all matter which is existing. So Shri Ganesha was the first one who was
established in matter as well, and as a result we can see he exists in the sun,
moon, the whole univer se in the whole creation and he continues to exist in
human beings also. Humans
have the freedom to cover up their innocence and
shut down the wisdom of Shri Ganesha and say that he does not exist. That
is why we find that human beings are doing so many horrible thing5. But he
acts. He acts in a way that he shows natural results of our wrong doings.Like
if you do things which are not pleasing to Shri Ganesha, he goes up to a point,
forgives you, and then he starts emerging out as physical disease and in women
it becomes a menta! disease. Also it can create problems in nature. The natural
calastrophies are also only the curse of Shri Ganesha. When people start doing
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_12.pdf-page-5.txt 
 -5-
wrong things, behaving in a wrong manner collectively, then the natural catastro
lesson. So his essence, though he exists in everything,
phies come to teach them a
he also has the capacity to assert his will, to bring forth the destruction of
the whole world.
We have the idea of Shri Ganesha as a minute being. We think he can
go on a little mouse, so he must be very minute. He's as minute as he's great.
He surpasses all the deities because of his wisdom. He is the giver of wisdom.
He makes us learn. He's our guru in that respect mahaguru because he teaches
us how we should behave. If you try to surpass him, or try to misbehave, even
the mother won't support. Those who surpass Shri Ganesha are also the people
who will never respect the mother. He does not know any other gods, so he
is the power of complete surrender to Mother. That's why he's the most powerful
deity among all the deities and nobody can surpass him in his power.
We have to understand that as children are growing Shri Ganesha starts
growing with them. But as they are hurnan beings so they can try to overpower
Shri Ganesha. So it is the duty of parents to see that they look after their
children in a very detached way so that Shri Ganesha in them is settled. The
first sign of Shri Ganesha in a child is wisdom. If the child is not wise, if he's
troublesome and does not know how to behave, then it shows that Shr: Ganesha
is being attacked by him. And these days, in modern times, children are very
much under attack. Innocence is under attack and it is very difficult for people
to make a fine line as to how far to go with children and how far not to go.
He is the giver of wisdom. So the parents must
understand
that
he's the giver of wisdom, there should be wisdom within me
and if 1 have
....3...
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_12.pdf-page-6.txt 
 -6-
the wisdom, 1 have the balance and I won't lose temper with children.
But will try Lo correct them in such a manner that they will get corrected."
On the contrary, if you try to be very harsh with your children, they might
react and go astray. Or if you try to restrict them too much then also
they will behave in the same manner. So one thing is to be taught to
your children, as Shri Ganesha himself does, is to respect your mother.
Your Mother, who is the holy Mother and your own mother. If the father
does not inake the child respect the mother then the child can never
be alright. Because though the authority
comes from the
father, no
doubt, but mother must be respected. For that it is very importnt that
the mother must respect the father. So in the presence of children, if
you fight with each other and misbehave, it will have a very bad effect
lon the Ganesha tattwa of the child. This upbringing is very important
in Sahaja Y oga as by God's grace, you all have born realised children.
So you must know how far to go with your children to make them wiser
to be moral and righteous. First of all, try to preserve their wisdom.
If they say something nice, you must appreciate but they should not
say it out of place and out of grace. So the misbehaviour is not to be tolerated
in the sense that wheatever is wisdom within has to be expressed outside
as light.
Now we go further within to see how far Shri Ganesha acts. For
example, water that is vibrated is the Ganesha Tattwa being enlightened
in that water. Then that water goes into your stomach or your eyes
or wherever it acts in a way that it excites the Ganesha Tattwa into
anything that you put it. You have seen miracles of agriculture. Once
you excite the Ganesha principle into the seed, it becomes ten times
or a hundred times. Even the mother earth which we think to be something
dead can be vibrated. Supposing Sahaja Yogis walked barefoot on the
ground, the mother earth gets vibrated. It will act on the trees, grass,
on the flowers, everything.
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_12.pdf-page-7.txt 
 -7-
Ganesha Tattwa understands things, organises and works out if
it is awakened. Like a seed when it sprouts at the tip of the seed, there
is a little cell which has the Ganesha Tättwa which is being awakened.
It knows how to go down, how to go round a
stone, and how to reach
the source of water. But it has only the sense of how far to go to exist,
to nourish itseif on a very materiai plane, how to allow the tree to grow.
But this Ganesha Tattwa starts becoming very very subtle at the point
of agya-chakra. At thie time of agya-chakra, it understands that it
now has the spiritual dimensions. The same Ganesha Tattwa which acted
on the tip of a root now acts for the spiritual thing. That's why people
close their cyes when they meditate. They don't want to see anything
of
else, they just want Shri Ganesha to act for the meditative process
their Kundalıni. This pr ocess of meditation when we close our eyes acts.
At the time of sleep, the eyes keep moving.
This Ganesha Tattwanis now acted by your attention. If you have
a roving attention, then it is affected. When we start looking at men
or wornen all the time, then also our Ganesha Tattwa gets destroyed.
Such people are more difficult tor rising in their ascent because agya
Ganesha Tattwa can alsa be affected
itself goes out. Then this
if you
are very materialistic, always worried about your things, always worried
about matter, then also Ganesha Tattwa can be lost. Like when we go
to the shop and keep looking at everything and what to buy. But suppose
you are buying sornething out of beauty, and you are doing it to please
others, then it acts the other way round. Then it increases your ascent,
it is only sharing of the beauty of whatever you have bought. But
suppose you buy things to inake other jealous, then the Ganesha Tattwa
can be destroyed.
It's a very motherly thing, like a mnother wants to please her c.ldren
give food to them. In the sarme way, you have Vatsalya (feeling of mother
...5..
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_12.pdf-page-8.txt 
 -8-
for child). In that way, you also satisfy a very great Ganesha principle,
is wheni you have taken note of the artists, as the artists are creating
all beautiful things out: of matter through swadistan. Without swadistana
being governed by Shri Ganesha, it cannot be beautiful. These days, the
artists are taking towards grotesque and imnioral things, and these things
are of no eternal value. Today, people will buy thein and tomorrow they
will throw them away. Only the things which have subtle Ganesha principle
acting, which nakes you teel peaceful, which makes you feel happy is
the one which is appreciated.
So Ganesha establihses within you the higher self. The baser-self
which enjoys all baser things in life is cut down or completely destroyed
by Shri Ganesha. If you see Mlona Lisa, she cannot be an actress, or
win any beauty contest, but her face is very serene and motherly and
pure. Why 15 it she is eternally so much appreciated? The reason is there
is Ganesha principle in her. It's the mother. The story goes that this
lady had lost her child and she would never smile or cry. When one little
child was brought to her, and she saw the child, the smile that came
on her face of her love for the child is being depicted by this great
artist. Even the eyes of a crocodile cracking her eggs to take out the
babies is so gentle and loving. But when you become modern, your actions
are very funny. So love for your child has to be absolutely impor tant,
THEP
but as Sahaja Yogis you should not have attachment only for your child.
You must know how to give a
complete margin to your love. The
margin is benevolence. "Is it benevolent for my child? Am I spoiling
my child? Am 1 encouraging my child too much? Am 1 playing into the
hands of my child, or an 1 managing the child all right? Because in child-
hood tie mother and the lather have to manage the children. The children
have to be obedient, because the parents themselves are not obedient
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_12.pdf-page-9.txt 
 9-
to each other. Also they find that the society is such where the children
go on pestering their parents, so they also becorne like that, but doesn't
Imatter, you are Sahaja Yogis, you should bring up your children, who
should be obedient, wise and sensible with the same love which the crocodile
has for her little crocadile.
All these tihings are very important in life to create verygood rela-
tionship between ourselves. Those who are younger than us, those who
are not so well off, or those who are not so much talented, or those
METE
who are not so equipped in knowledge of Sahaja Yoga, or those who are
not so much senior in Sahaja Yoga, you have to look after them in a
fatherly manner, or, we can say, in a very motherly manner. We have
a Ganesha Tattwa, so excite the Ganesha Tattwa. They should feel depen-
dance on us for achieving the inner, or the inastery of the higher state.
As the guru principle is absolutely bound by Ganesha principle. So the
one who does not have a Ganesha principle becomes a horrid fellow.
Life is a continuous process and one has to be all the time connected
with the whole. Unless and until you are connected completely, you cannot
understand the collectivity of innocence. Like
child who comes and
sits' in the lap of another, just like he doesn't know who is the father
or mother, and all are one. We now are a means, an instrument, a media
by which we express the Ganesha Tattwa all over, which is vibrations.
So these vibrations are nothing but the principle of Shri Ganesha. He
is Omkara ... And when it is, it is the feeling of Vatsalya, the feeling
of love between mother and child. That feeling is the one which is vibrations.
The distance between the two is vibrations. And that's what one has
to feel. That's what one has to leel, that he's a child still, ard the Mother
....7..
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_12.pdf-page-10.txt 
 -10-
is giving all the powers to the child, bringing up and loving the child,
understnding the limitations of the child looking after all the sweeiness
all the wisdorn of the child is to be appreciated. That is vibrations.
All the relationships that are between human beings and gods are
through che Ganesha principle. So when it becomes a relationship between
you and God, there are vibrations and then that same relationship should
extend to everything that you do. You should see that what's good has
vibrations.
Today, want to tell you sornething very impor tant about the all
pervading power we have heard of. These are nothing but vibrations.
The param chaitanya is nothing but vibrations; where all the identities
are lost. Where mother is lost, father is lost, nothing remains, where
all. And this is the only thing out of which
it is subtle Vatsalya, that's
everything comes and remains in itself. For example, the sun's rays come
out, and try to create chlorophyll. Or from the ocean the clouds come
out and try to nourish the mother earth. Everything is inside. This param
chaitanya has got everything inside it. We can say, that everything is
nothing but knowledge, is nothing but truth, is nothing but light. But
when the folds of these come out, then we get into the folds of that
chaitanya, then we becorne ignorant. Ignorance doesn't exist. Like there
is darkness becausethere is no light. Once dight comes, the darkness doesn't
exist. What happens, is that people go into the folds of the ocean and
are lost. Thus we must understand one thing very carefully, that we
are in param chaitanya, we are made by param chaitanya, all the time
we are surrounded by by it, only thing is sometimes we are lost in the
folds. And why are we lost? Because of our own unawareness.
This awareness comes, that we are part and parcel of the whole.
The whole thing is called as chidvilaasa, the piayful enjoyment of God's
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_12.pdf-page-11.txt 
 -11-
attention. Now you will say, "How can that be?". For example, we see
the sun, and then we see the water in the lake. Because of the sun,
we can see the water. Then suppose we see a mirage and we think this
is the water, and then we run after the water. But the whole thing is
the play of the sun. ln the same way, the paran chaitanya acts, and
we get lost in our awareness that we are param chaitanya. That's why
the play starts..
When you give bandhans, what you do is to put the chaitanya into
action. In every action in everything you do, you should know it's the
param chaitanya that acts. Only thing is, you have to be aware of your self,
and aware that it acts. And you just jump into that awareness, and it
acts. So many people, though they know it in their brains, do not know
it in their hearts. And so many people who know in their hearts, do not
act in their attention. So only these three things you have to improve.
One is your head, the other is your heart, and the third is your liver.
If you can improve these three organs, this param chaitanya will act.
But all this attention about money, there's nothing to it. Param chaitanya
will create everything for you. It may not create money because it doesn't
have a mind, but it will create possibilities and this is something to be
understood very well. And it's so blissful to know that now you are aware
of the param chaitanya and, you can master it. Not dominated but you
ask him like a Jinn, "Do this, do that". With respect, it will do it. To
know that you are in param chaitanya, and that's how you can be very
sweet, very loving, affectionate and wise.
May God bless you.
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_12.pdf-page-12.txt 
 TALK BY SHPI MATAJI AT
DIVALI PUJA
AIontecatINI Ely 29.10.1989. Synopsis.
The purpoe of DIwali Puja is to feel the joy of God. Diwali
WHE ccleberated over a 1000 years ago when Shri Rama was
crowned on that day. That means the benevolence of humanity
WALS CEROWned on that day. He was the benevolent king as
described by Socrates.It was a joyous thing that u
benesolent king was crowned. Such u thing is only possible
if the people who choose tlhe king
no othet
have
considersLion but benevolence of the subjects. So one has to
come to tie conclusion that one has to become a sahaja yogi.
Me bave two types of theories -
Commun ism. The first is money oriented while the other is
Capitali sm and
based on obedience which is the best for sahaja yoga. The
Sense of obedience is so great there that you tell them any
thing for their benevolence and they follow it immediutely.
They have grown sowIse and deep. On the other hand we are
lost in our so called individual freedom. in the capitalist
countries ben o
nce Is finished.. When you have freedom to
go amuck then you destroy
yoursel f. For instunce people are
crazy abot ny kind of absurd fashion.. These ideas come
from entrepreneurs wh Wnt to exploit you. Benevolence is
the highest. Whatever is benevolent for us we should accept
if we are truely
froe people.
On the second day the demon Niarkasura was killed by the
God. Today evil people are geting awards. Why this
perversion? The evi1 within us should be killed which enjoys
evil deeds. We have Lo recognise our problems. When you see
yourself your heart opens. nless you open your heart you
cannot enjoy yourself. All your conditionings wil1 go if you
open your heart.1n very small things there is a ripple of
joy. Forget your caste, nationality, everything. If you
cannot mix with theE collectivity then something is the
matter with you.
Or this day the Goddess Laxmi is worshipped. She has no
pride, Sie does not put pressure on others. Human beings are
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_12.pdf-page-13.txt 
 -13-
the opposite, if they have noney they ride on # horse. she
comes out of the water, she rests on a lotus and she sucks
in her owD weight. We have to suck the weight of our
position, money, education etc. All such nonsense makes you
a heavy person pulling you downword She stands in balance.
Her centre of gravity is so well balanced. In the same way
you have to be balanced, You have to be grounded in the
mother earth so that if the slightest thing ha ppens you come
back to balance, Her two hands carry pink lotuses. Pink
shows the nature of her warmth, hospitality, cOSiness. Cosy
does not mean a hospital nor does it mean a lousy house but
inviting , warm, comfortable. A rich man has l0 dogs outside
No one can come inside not even a rat. There should be no
extreme, no showing off, no aggression but something that
would give joy and comfort to others. If something is
, the host saying how cheaply he did it is a sign
appreciated
of a person who wants to give joy to his guests. To say how
expensive it is is being aggresive.
You must be able to enjoy everything otherwise you are not a
saha ja yogi. You must encourage the artist. Some one may say
that it is not being honest. A lotus is born in a pond of
dirt but you do not see the dirt. The lotus covers the whole
pond with fragrance and beauty. There is no honesty about
it. Honesty lies in honestly understanding what your job is
&S & sahaja yogi. With your love you are encouraging every
one. With your love you are helping every one. With your
love you are creating a confidence in every one. The most
important thing is to be honest with yourself. First check
with your mind, if you are going to say something to hurt
others better stop. If you say pleasing things to others
then pleasing things come to you. There are people who never
smile ,so you are allowed to tickle them . You have to
become like children.. One of the Laxmi principles is to be
joyous.
With the other hand the Laxmi gives. The person with money
must give to those who need it but in such a way that no one
knows, secretly. One hand should not know what the other
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_12.pdf-page-14.txt 
 -14-
see wht is the need of the person.
is the nced of the person.:
hand gives. We should
There should he a need of giving at the right place and the
right moment. It should not be sensational. It should
el evate the heart. What ever you give for spiritual growth is
the best. For instance a flower is sufEficient for me. I a&m
so self contained.
other hand the Laxmi protects. This ha nd is a
With the
protection to all the sahaja yogis. I will always stand by a
Saha ja yog i beeause the Spirit is present there. Protect all
the artists, art, poetry, literature, honest politicians,
righteous public servants and all those people who need
protection. But whatever is dirty should not be supported.
We must protect the goodness of others. It does not matter
If they are not sahaja yogis, we are to protect their
virtuous q uality. You are eternal, unlimited beings, the
protectors of the. world. You should not be cruel. "When we
see a motiher-in-law and a daughter-in-law quarrel we say how
quarrelsome she is but we do the same thing. We ure not
daggers, we are lot uses. If you have to hit some one use a
lotus. One has to be deep in sahaja yoga to understand how
to hit with a lotus.
Once the La xmi covers you then you grow in Maha Laxmi. Then
you think of the world benevolence, how to give them self
realisation. Your attitude changes. We are hére to solve the
problems. The world is our problem. We have to take up the
responsiblities. If you are an architect create something
great; if you are a musician create good music; if you are a
government servant do well, I will help you. Every one's
personality will grow. If you keep on the central path of
the Sushumna then no one can touch you. You are not to find
faults with others, then you are not sa haja yogis. If you
are trying to control others then you are not sa ha ja yogis.
Even lead'ers must not try to control. The whole Brahama
chaitnya is the silent principle working out everything. You
have to be silent to receive everything and the height of
the Kailasha in your ascent. May God Bless you.
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_12.pdf-page-15.txt 
 -15-
SONG BY ROME CHILDREN at Diwali Puja
This little light of mine
We are going to make it shine
We are going to let it shine
This little light of mine
We are going to let it shine
Let it shine, let it shine, let it shine.
Shri Ganesha holds it-up
This little light of mine
Let it shine. -3
Up through swadishthana
This little light of mine let it shine
It fills our nabhi chakra
This little light of mine
Let it shine -3
It glows in my heart
Phis little light of mine
Let it shine -3.
It spreads through the Vishudhi
This little light of mine
Let it shine -3
It opens Agya chakra
This little light of mine
Let it shine -3
It shines in the sahasrara
This little light of mine
Let it shine -3
And who makes it shine
This little light of mine
Let it shine -3.
Shri Mataji makes it shine
This little light of mine
Let it shine -3
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_12.pdf-page-16.txt 
 -16-
ISTANBUL - 30th. 0CT. 1989 -
Shri MATA JI visits
When we arrived in Turkey, I began tobe painfully
aware with increasing awe of how far our worlds were
apart -this young Turkey that mother was visiting and
this so called Great America where mother has been
Such smiling faces received MOTHER.
visiting since 19721
She was very pleased and said that she felt as if she
was coming back home to her birthplace. She spoke of
She asked if
the similarities between Turkey and India.
there has been any Great Saints living in Turkey to give
the good. vibrations of this country and it cane to light
that many Sufis lived here and that the Virgin Mary was
born in NEFISUS in West Turkey. There is a simplicity
and a sense of freedomwhich gives the Turkish people
their open heartedness and makes it easier for them to
come to Sahaja Yoga,
Reporting by Babette (N.V)
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_12.pdf-page-17.txt 
 ISTANBUL - 2nd. Nov. 89
SHRI MATAJI'S PUBLIC TALK -
(Synopsis).
The Koran said there will come a time when the
clouds wi11 rise in the Seven Skies and will break the
Then it will rain and that will bring forth
mountain.
peace on earth and the transformation of human beings.
It spoke clearly about Sahaja Yoga and the breakthrough
of the Kundalini that will overcome the ego of man.
God almighty is our father, he loves us more than any
enter his kingdom,
father can love us,
wants us to
He
he does not want us to suffer.
To cure the Vishudhi
He is Allah,
Chakra, you have to say ALLAH O AKBAR.
He not like the Rock of Gibraltor
Rahim, Karim, Akbar.
he has many aspects. As a father could be
son or husband. The Bpirit is the reflec-
So the spirit is the
tion of God Almighty within us.
collective being within us.
If you become Spirit, you
become collective. It is not just a Certificate, nor
a badge but you become on your Central Nervous System
means you can feel it on your finger tips centres of
as. well as yourself. When the light
another person
of the Spirit comes into your attention than your
attention becomes enlightened, Then you become a master,
you give up all bad habits and become a free and strong
Your attention becomes extremely compassio-
personality.
nate, the eyes become innocent, without greed or lust;
they become so powerful with love that even their glance
can bring peace and love to a person, Then this attention
becomes the source of knowledge - absolute knowledge,
The attention becomes dynamic, you become very creative,
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_12.pdf-page-18.txt 
 -18-
You become so powerful.
No habit can overpower you..
Secondly, you become the spirit and you enjoy because
you become a witness - you see everything as a drama
without involvement.
Then you can solve your problems
You start dissolving into ocean of joy.
better.
When
you enter into Kingdom of God, at every step you feel
a miracle is happening.
At every step you feel as if
You get well physically,
someone is guiding vou.
mentally, emotionally.
After sometime you become
Cmpowered and can enlighten and cure others and do
things that can be called miracles.
INDIA TOUR 1989-90.
DATE:
PLACE
17th. December, 89.
VAITARNA.
18-20
RAHURI.
21-22
AURANGABAD.
23-27
DUNE.
RRAHMDURI.
28-31
31-1st. January, 90.
KOLAHPUR.
3rd. January, 90.
GANPATIPULE.
FOR INFORMATION FOR INTERNATIONAL SAHAJA YOGA
SEMINAR Contact Orgnising Committee at -
602 SAKET, ADARSH DUGHDALAYA LANE,
OFF MARVE ROAD, MALAD (WEST).
BOMBAY-400064.
