Purity Of Sahaja Yogis Date 30th December 1989 : Brahmapuri Place Seminar & Meeting Type Speech Language English & Marathi CONTENTS | Transcript | 02 - 06 English 07 - 07 Marathi Hindi || Translation English Hindi Marathi

 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT ENGLISH TALK I am sorry what had happened yesterday. But I think the war has begun between the evil and good and after all the good prevails. In these modern times evil used to prevail on good. But now in this Kruta Yuga, the evil will be completely conquered by good and not that but good will spread all over. The evil has a capacity to go to extremes and then to fall out of the evolutionary process completely. Because they are blind they cannot see the good. That's why they are evil. If they could see the good they would give up their evil. In our country, which is a country of yoga, specially Maharashtra, which is the country of the saints, I was amazed to hear what people are up to. One of the real sources of this nonsense seems to be Rajneesh, the horrible fellow, because he has made an exhibition here, absolutely denouncing all the deities and saying all kinds of dirty things. And I think the chief minister of this place is also hand in glove with him. And they are all trying to prove that there is no God, there is no spirituality. They want to establish that science is everything. We have no heritage of science in India. We have the heritage of spirituality. I mean nobody is known as such a great scientist in this country. Nobody has made any special inventions. And the way people are organizing it in the name of science, there's hardly anyone who has done anything of science. So it's the evil which has taken this new form of talking about science and denouncing God. Of course in the west also the same thing has happened, to a great extent but not to that extent. They have not discarded everything that was spiritual. But here they have gone headlong, those few people who are there. Very, very few, but they are there. So it's a very bad growth in this country. It won't survive, I know, it cannot survive, because this country is so full of spirituality. In the West because people took to science, they have lost all culture of society. There is no culture of society. The etiquettes are limited to fork and spoon, or how you wish each other. There's no other culture. It's so outside, there's nothing deep within, because they have taken absolutely to the modern, or we can say that is the industrial, industrial evolution of the people. They have taken to all that, and have lost contact with reality. The culture of any country can only survive on spirituality. Science cannot talk of this. And it has so many limitations that it cannot even answer simple few questions that are facing them. Above all they have no idea what is love. They have no idea what is the All Pervading Power. Now you all have felt it and you know what it is, and you know how to use it. So under these circumstances I find that those people who are mediocre in Sahaja Yoga cannot help much for establishing goodness. You have to be very clean within yourself. You have to be very powerful within yourself. And you have to be extremely sensitive. So we are not to waste our energy, our attention on to superficial and nonsensical things. We have to get out of it. We have to become people who are detached, detached from any things which create problem. If you take a detached view ofeverything you will have a kind of a life that will nourish your society which is now sick, it's a sick society, is a decadent society. And for that decadent society you need people who are very morally strong. Who are tremendously pure, and who know everything about Sahaja Yoga. The mediocracy in Sahaja Yoga is very common in the west, very common. And so much involved in to their personal problems that I cannot understand how will they rise above this nonsensical, personal view point of view. So, one has to realize that the whole tree that has grown outside so much due to industrial revolution has to seek its own nourishment from spirituality, which is in India, no doubt. Spirituality without a development has no meaning. Spirituality has to have development outside; otherwise it is lost in the Mother Earth. It has to sprout and it has to show results. Which we are showing, no doubt. In so many ways Indian Sahaja Yogis are trying to show that, though

 Original Transcript : English they are rather slow about that part. So it's something funny, that in the west people are rather slow, Sahaja Yogis are rather slow about their spirituality and in India, people are rather slow about their manifestation outside. Unless and until we really do some dedicated effort, it's not going to work out. So I hope, as we have circulated letters, that we have come here not for fun, but for dedication and for our ascent, and it's a pilgrimage. Talking loose, talking about small things, quarreling with each other is out of question of course. But domination, terrible domination of falsehood, just to think that we are leaders or why is he leader, shows that we are not yet worthy. So the worthiness of a ship is very important if it has to fight the turbulence of the sea. If it cannot fight the turbulence of the sea, then it is definitely not sea worthy and it is absolutely useless because it cannot go across. In the same way have to be something, you have to work it out in such a manner that you really become worthy of if you crossing this ocean of illusion, and that many could cross with you. As in India they have started at every place, at every home, at every family, ascent. If they invite people, they talk about nothing but Sahaja Yoga. Now you can go all out to talk about it. I give you permission to tell them that I have come. There's nothing to hide. And you have to go and, go and open the doors of many churches and many temples and many organizations, and tell them that I am there. Now the time has come. You can see it so clearly. It's so obvious. First I used to say I would not go to the newspapers, this is not good, that's not good. Let us work it out. But it has come now, so much that I have to say things and I am going to say that very openly. I am going to say that, but I want all of you to be such, that nobody should point out a finger at you and say 'Oh, this is a Sahaja Yogi, and how this Sahaja Yogi is behaving.' If somebody is stupid and not working it out, it's better to get rid of such a person. Or else help that person and tell him that, "You have to come up, you can't be here." We don't want mediocre people here. We want some extraordinarily pure people. The purity is the main point, which we have to have. Once you are pure, you don't have to worry, then, I will look after you. But the purity of mind, purity of heart and the purity of your attention, these three things are very important. When it works out you will be surprised, collectivity will grow in no time. It is a tendency amongst Sahaja Yogis also still, to go back to the same materialism. And to try to have your own house, your family or children sort ofa nonsense. We have to be in the ashrams, and we have to work it out. We have to work it out very beautifully that we all live very happily in the ashram. But I find still people cannot work it out that way. They are more concerned about their jobs, concerned about their things. Once you live in the ashram, I'll see that you get everything. But if you do not want to have the blessings of God, how can anybody help you. So, tremendous sacrifice is needed. Of course as you know in Sahaja Yoga I don't need any money from you at all, but sacrifice is very important. And sacrifice of nonsensical ideas that you have. In every way we have to show that we are Sahaja Yogis. The way you dress up, the way you live, the way you think, the way you behave, the way you have relationships with each other, and the way you lead your married life, and the way you look at your children. Unless and until you have purity the light of love will not shine. The light of love will not shine. You have to absorb the light of love within yourself. But you cannot, unless and until you are a pure personality. And that pure personality has to develop by your meditation, by your working hard. It's a question of few years. In ten years we can change the whole world. In ten years, but you have to be really very dedicated. 6. It is you who has to change, not Me. You have to work it out, not Me. I have done My level best. But within ten years it should be possible that every Sahaja Yogi should become a tremendous force of Sahaja Yoga. So please try to avoid all those who are mediocres. If you find mediocracy, the leaders must go all out to correct them. All out to tell them off. Don't tolerate. You don't have to be very mild on this point. You have to tell them very frankly that, 'See now, you are an extremely mediocre person for Sahaja Yoga. It's not meant for mediocres.' It's not meant for foolish people, it's not meant for stupid people. It's meant for something who are ready to sacrifice anything for the sake of truth. These people are saying that, 'Why don't You go the way of science?' I say, 'Why don't you go the way of truth?' Take to truth. Science is not truth. Today it 3.

 Original Transcript : English might appear, tomorrow it disappears. Today you may think it is correct, but every hypothesis is challenged, every law is challenged, that's no law. You have to use Sahaja Yoga in every practical life, everywhere. But in no way you have to be fanatic about it. Like I have seen some people start giving vibrations. Or they start moving their hands for bandhans. Even if I am sitting, they are doing like that. There is no stupidity about it. It has to be very dignified, decent and decorous. But for that we need, really people of quality. And a complete obedience is needed I must say. I had told Indian people that time that they must have a proper case done for them. Theyjust didn't listen to Me that time. They said, 'Mother why do You want, no, You'll be in trouble', and all that. If they had listened to Me, there would have been no trouble today. But you must listen to Me, what I say. Don't give Me explanations, don't give Me logic, but I know everything, you know that. I know everything. Now we have something good for you, is the list of the marriages. But marriages is not such an important thing that you think about. Is not such an important thing for you that you dedicate all your attention to that? It's just by the way. Because you have to have a marriage, that's why. There's no need even to have, sometimes. We have to have it. And then letters after letters about your marriages, about your children, I just don't want to read that. Nothing about Sahaja Yoga. Ifyou are detached, whatever may be the quality of the wife, you will not fall. Whatever may be the quality of your husband, you'll not fall. So one has to be little concerned that what are we doing, what have we achieved? What are we going to give to the world? For Me, you are My instruments. I don't have to ask anybody else. You are My instruments and you have to work it out. You are not for Me, useless people. I have worked very hard with you, very hard. So please don't waste My energies also, and try to become very good Sahaja Yogis in every way that is possible. In every way you should be dedicated. In every way try to be something of very great qualities. Now you have seen how people are becoming violent and there's a violence on. Of course this may not continue, but is one of the signs that we have to be prepared to be very strong people, very strong. And that will work out I'm sure. This threw about 400 stones, may be more according to the police report and very few people were hurt. What does that mean? That there is somebody who is avoiding all these troubles. Regarding our tour further now I have decided we will not go to Atit because there the commissioner, the ESP has told Me that it's better not to go, these people are very bad and they are criminals. So now till the elections come in, they will be behaving in this manner. After the election of course they will be put down. So you should go by the understanding of the time and go directly to Sangli, so we'll go to Sangli, we will have a puja there, we can do shopping whatever you like. And then from there we will be going to Ganpatipule. But it's not fun. It's not fun. It is our development. Otherwise we will be coming to India, going back the same empty handed. I want you, everyone to be extremely active in your own sphere of life to talk about Sahaja Yoga. You must wear My badges, you must wear My rings. You must wear My necklaces. So that people ask you, 'Who is this?' Then you should say, 'She is the Holy Ghost.' You can say. 'We think She is the Holy Ghost.' Let us see what happens. So, it is a serious thing that I felt that I have to talk to you. And that we have to be very very careful about how we look at ourselves. We have to be aware. We have to be aware about ourselves and what is happening. I have been telling you this many a times. We have to be aware as to what we are and what is happening. But if your jobs are important, everything else is important, how are we going to work out Sahaja Yoga? So there has to be awareness. And with your awareness, the light will spread. But it's not silent; you have to talk about it. Eloquence is needed. It has to be eloquent. All your light has to talk. The light has to say. The light has to express. And has to be very confidently done. Let us see now after going from this tour how far people establish new things. So far, what's My own opinion is that there are fifty percent of the Sahaja Yogis in the west are still quite mediocre. And twenty five percent of them are just there to take advantage. Ifthey can get something free, they would like to take. Twenty five percent people are like that. It's very sad but it is so. 4

 Original Transcript : English But I must say Indians are poor people but they will not do anything, they will never take anything free from anyone, nothing. They will not. They are very selfrespecting. That is what we have to develop that self respect. Like I have seen, I had a house in house ware. Everybody went there and stayed there free. Now we have our house, there in Shudy camp where everybody goes, who has no job goes and stays there. It's such a nonsensical thing. So I am even afraid to start any ashram in London, because same thing will start. If they can take advantage, they would like to be there, even a spoon they would like to carry like that. It's a shameless thing for a Sahaja Yogi to behave like that I think. We have to have full selfrespect. We must understand that we have to sacrifice to do something. Because this is the last leg I would say, when I will be talking to you about all these things and in the beautiful atmosphere here and on the bank of Krishna river. We have to understand that the river flows, it makes a sound. It makes a sound to show that she, it exists. But we are not only the rivers. We are all the mountains, rivers, everything of the universe we are. And our manifestation is like a big zero as if the Mother Earth has been emptied out. It is time that we should watch ourselves and see ourselves. What's wrong with us? Very important. I had to say this once again, and again but I don't like to say these things because I love you so much. And I care for you so much. And you people also love Me. But loving is not sufficient, you have to love yourself and respect yourself. Only your self is going to work out. As Shivaji Maharaj has said, ' Swadharma Wadwawa' 'You must develop the religion of your spirit'. That's what we have to do. Is to develop the religion of our spirit. And once it happens, we can get the whole world completely emancipated. This is our work. And if we fail, then it is the responsibility of Sahaja yogis and nobody else. So for everyone I have to tell you that I don't have to please you, you have to please Me. For a small thing people react. For a small thing they feel bad. If I don't smile at somebody they feel bad. In little, little things they feel bad and they react. If I say anything, they react. So how can anything go into you? If it is such a convexity, how will you absorb it? It is important that we should try to absorb with humility, with understanding. Now you are Sahaja yogis, you know I am Adishakti. You have had photographs, you have known that I am Adishakti. But how much are we absorbing? How much we are taking within ourselves? This work is much more than anyone of the incarnations had to do. Is much more than Christ, is much more than Rama, much more than Shri Krishna. So create such great people among you. Because I have the power. Only thing you have to have, the absorption power. The acceptability. But if you run after something very cheapish, and something very frivolous, is impossible. You have to ask for your depth, and you have to take in whatever is emitting from My being. I hope now, you all will take it up seriously. Do your meditation every morning, whatever may be the time. Every morning you have to do the meditation. And we have to see that we finish our work in the night, and then we do little meditation and then sleep off. Without meditation you cannot grow. And that's why everything doing, you have to know that you have to get up in the morning, do your meditation, and then you can take to your work. Day time if you want, you can rest for a while. Now we are in such a place that we have time to rest in a while. But morning time you have to get up whatever time you sleep. You have to conquer your sleep a little bit. It gives you lot of lethargy. Last night I don't think I slept before 3 O'clock or something like that. And then the whole day I've been busy writing reports, this that. If I can manage at this age, at your age you should be able to manage something like that. We have no time to sleep. We have no time to discuss, argue or to eat our food. We have only time to meditate, that's all. I wish all of you absorb My saying and understanding without reacting to it. Please do not react. Don't think Mother is trying to chastise you. No. I am trying to help you to grow. This is the way you grow sometimes, very fast. So it's just your growth I'm worried about, and nothing else. So may God bless you all. I was very happy the way you were singing all the songs and the way you expressed yourself.

 Original Transcript : English (Talk continued on Science, problems on this India tour: ) They are all saying, that we want science to come here. They don't know what is their heritage is. Our heritage is spirituality, not science. What have they achieved in science, they don't even know English language. And they have got no idea about science, nothing. But they think you people are coming from the country of science and you know what science has done to you. That's why you must understand that this country, there is a kind of a stupid understanding about science. When the British were here, we were sticking onto our own culture. Science has no culture, and that's why you lost everything that you had, and you are having all your social problems and this violence and all that. Because they are dealing with science, they say there is no God. So then they can drink, they can do whatever they like, they can kill anybody, as what is happening in the West. all have So these are few people here, not many, but still you must see that what is growing in this country is very dangerous. That's why I have to request all the Sahaja yogis of India to work very hard, to spread Sahaja yoga so that these people will be controlled. They are very criminal type of people, very criminal. Already one of our Sahaja yogi was killed by them in Bombay. They are very criminal type and I think gradually the government will take over and they will be alright. They wanted to come on the stage because they can't arrange any program, they can't have people. Nobody is going to attend to their So they wanted to speak from this stage. And people said, 'We have not come here to program. listen to you, we have come to listen to Mother.' So just imagine how the violence is now spreading in this country and how important it is to spread Sahaja yoga. You all know very well what's happening in the West. They are saying that I must be taking you. Now is there anybody who can say that. Is the absurd thing, I tell you. Just a kind of a from money funny aggression, which has no meaning. So you should not really bother about these people, because they are here, tomorrow we will see to it that we inform the police about it and we will take them to task. (in Marathi). I think we should carry some dogs with us. That's a good idea. If we carry some dogs, they can attack them. Not we, we are not dogs. It's all a drama. Just see that. It has to go all in the history. That see how people are. In a country where there is so much of culture, spiritual culture, we have such an heritage. They have no heritage of science. Now what are they talking about I just don't understand. I think some of the doctors are afraid that if we start curing people out of Sahaja yoga, they might lose their jobs, or they might lose their patients. But there are so many patients in this world. And I told them yesterday that I am not going to treat all the rich people, let Me treat only the people who are poor, who cannot afford to get cured. I told them very frankly. But they don't want to listen because they are all drunkards. They are all drunkards and that's why they are behaving like this. Just like this they were shouting. So they cannot see us enjoying anything. That's the main thing. They can't see us enjoying anything. And that is why it important for us to understand that we are Sahaja yogis. It's nothing compared to what people have suffered for religion in this country. For their goodness, for their righteousness. (in Marathi). This Rangapur has a very special feature about it. You see, Shri Ramadas swami, the master of, the guru of Shivaji found the statue of Shri Rama, Sita and Lakshmana in this river, at this point in the Krishna river. And this was such a remarkable thing; they didn't know how the statue has come there. So it was taken to a place called Chaphal where they put it. Now Shri Ramdas swami had created lots of Hanumanas out of the Mother earth. Lot of Hanumanas out of the Mother earth. 6.

 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT MARATHI TALK आता आपण कोणतीही मोठमोठाली माणसं बघुयात, आपल्यासमोर टिळक आहेत, आगरकर आहेत, शिवाजी महाराज आहेत, अशी जी मोठमोठाली मंडळी झालीत, त्यांनी काय केलंय ? ते कसे वागले ? त्यांच्याकडे लक्ष दिले पाहिजे. शिवाजी महाराजांनासुद्धा चारदा लग्न करावं लागलं, राजकारणासाठी. त्यांनी केलं. 'राजकारणासाठी मला करायचंय तर मी केलं लग्न.' पण ते नि:संग होते, त्याच्यावर त्याचा परिणाम नव्हता काही. कराव लागलं तर केलं आम्ही. चार लोकांशी आम्हाला दोस्ती करायचीय. त्यांनी जात-पात पाहिली नाही, की शहाणवच कुळी असलं पाहिजे, की अमुकच असलं पाहिजे. असं काही पाहिलं नाही. त्यावेळेला जेव्हा इतके वर्षापूर्वी गागाभट्टांना इथे येऊन त्यांना राज्याभिषेक द्यावा लागला, जातीपातीच्या लोकांनी त्यांना किती हिणवलं , की तुम्ही कुणबी आहात, तुम्ही मराठा नाही. तेव्हा तुमची तेव्हा ह्या कोणतीही जात असेना का, तुम्ही आज सहजयोगी झालात, तुमची जात बदलली. तुमचा धर्म बदललेला आहे. हा धर्म 'विश्व निर्मल धर्म' आहे. तो तुमच्यात जागृत झालेला आहे, त्यामुळे तुमच्या वाईट सवयी गेल्या, सगळं काही गेलं. पण हे भूत अजून काही गेलेलं नाही. तुमच्या जातीच्या लोकांशी तुमचा संबंधच नाही आला पाहिजे. कारण ही जमात जी तुमची आहे, ती भुतं आहेत सगळी . दारू पिणं, मारणं, मग ते दारू पिओ, नाहीतर काही करो. हंडा घेवो नाहीतर काही करो. मग ते आमच्या जातीतलंच असलं पाहिजे. मग तुम्ही सहजयोगी कसे ? मग सहजयोग सोडा तुम्ही. तुम्ही दोन धर्मात उभे राहू शकता का ? नाही राहू शकत. त्याच्यामुळेच काल ह्यांना मार खावा लागला. हे लोक ज्यांनी सर्व धर्म सोडला, परमेश्वर सोडला, आणखीन आम्ही काहीच असं करत नाही असे उभे राहिले. त्यांनी काल मार दिला. त्याला कारण थोडसं तरी मला असं वाटतं, की आमच्यामधील जी कमजोरी आहे त्यांनी ती ओळखली आहे. आणि त्यांच्या मते आपण अंधश्रद्धेला पूर्ण झालोत. पण जर तुम्ही बोलत सुटलात की, 'आम्ही सहजयोगी आहोत. आम्हाला कोणतीच अंधश्रद्धा नाही. आम्ही कोणत्याच असल्या गोष्टी मानत नाही. आम्ही ह्याच्या पलीकडे आहोत. आम्ही करून दाखवू तुम्हाला.' तेव्हा ह्या लोकांच्या लक्षात येईल, की काहीतरी विशेष मंडळी आहेत. आम्ही आमच्या वडिलांना पाहिलं. आमच्या वडिलांना गांधीजींनी सांगितलं की सगळ्या मुलांची लग्न तुम्ही बाहेर करा. आता आम्हीसुद्धा शहाण्णवकुळीच आहोत. त्यामुळे फार विचार करून लग्न होत असत पूर्वी. वडिलांनी लगेच सांगितलं , काही हरकत नाही. कुठेही लग्न करा. सगळ्यांची अशीच लग्न लावून दिली आमची. काय आमचं वाईट झालं ? त्यांनी सांगितलं की मी काँग्रेसचा मनुष्य आहे. मला काय? मला दुसरं काही नाही. माझी जात नाही, धर्म नाही, काही नाही. माझा हाच धर्म आहे. गांधीधर्मी आहे. तेव्हा धर्म घ्यायचा तर पूर्णपणे घेतला पाहिजे. 7



----------------------

19891230_Puja_Talk_Brahmapuri_India_English_Marathi.pdf-page0.txt 
 Purity Of Sahaja Yogis
Date
30th December 1989
:
Brahmapuri
Place
Seminar & Meeting
Type
Speech
Language
English & Marathi
CONTENTS
| Transcript
|
02 - 06
English
07 - 07
Marathi
Hindi
|| Translation
English
Hindi
Marathi
 19891230_Puja_Talk_Brahmapuri_India_English_Marathi.pdf-page1.txt 
 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT
ENGLISH TALK
I am sorry what had happened yesterday. But I think the war has begun between the evil and good
and after all the good prevails. In these modern times evil used to prevail on good. But now in this
Kruta Yuga, the evil will be completely conquered by good and not that but good will spread all over.
The evil has a capacity to go to extremes and then to fall out of the evolutionary process completely.
Because they are blind they cannot see the good. That's why they are evil. If they could see the good
they would give up their evil.
In our country, which is a country of yoga, specially Maharashtra, which is the country of the
saints, I was amazed to hear what people are up to. One of the real sources of this nonsense seems to be
Rajneesh, the horrible fellow, because he has made an exhibition here, absolutely denouncing all the
deities and saying all kinds of dirty things. And I think the chief minister of this place is also hand in
glove with him. And they are all trying to prove that there is no God, there is no spirituality. They want
to establish that science is everything. We have no heritage of science in India. We have the heritage of
spirituality. I mean nobody is known as such a great scientist in this country. Nobody has made any
special inventions. And the way people are organizing it in the name of science, there's hardly anyone
who has done anything of science.
So it's the evil which has taken this new form of talking about science and denouncing God. Of
course in the west also the same thing has happened, to a great extent but not to that extent. They have
not discarded everything that was spiritual. But here they have gone headlong, those few people who
are there. Very, very few, but they are there. So it's a very bad growth in this country. It won't survive, I
know, it cannot survive, because this country is so full of spirituality. In the West because people took
to science, they have lost all culture of society. There is no culture of society. The etiquettes are limited
to fork and spoon, or how you wish each other. There's no other culture. It's so outside, there's nothing
deep within, because they have taken absolutely to the modern, or we can say that is the industrial,
industrial evolution of the people. They have taken to all that, and have lost contact with reality.
The culture of any country can only survive on spirituality. Science cannot talk of this. And it has
so many limitations that it cannot even answer simple few questions that are facing them. Above all
they have no idea what is love. They have no idea what is the All Pervading Power. Now you all have
felt it and you know what it is, and you know how to use it. So under these circumstances I find that
those people who are mediocre in Sahaja Yoga cannot help much for establishing goodness. You have
to be very clean within yourself. You have to be very powerful within yourself. And you have to be
extremely sensitive. So we are not to waste our energy, our attention on to superficial and nonsensical
things. We have to get out of it. We have to become people who are detached, detached from any
things which create problem. If you take a detached view ofeverything you will have a kind of a life
that will nourish your society which is now sick, it's a sick society, is a decadent society. And for that
decadent society you need people who are very morally strong. Who are tremendously pure, and who
know everything about Sahaja Yoga.
The mediocracy in Sahaja Yoga is very common in the west, very common. And so much
involved in to their personal problems that I cannot understand how will they rise above this
nonsensical, personal view point of view. So, one has to realize that the whole tree that has grown
outside so much due to industrial revolution has to seek its own nourishment from spirituality, which
is in India, no doubt. Spirituality without a development has no meaning. Spirituality has to have
development outside; otherwise it is lost in the Mother Earth. It has to sprout and it has to show results.
Which we are showing, no doubt. In so many ways Indian Sahaja Yogis are trying to show that, though
 19891230_Puja_Talk_Brahmapuri_India_English_Marathi.pdf-page2.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
they are rather slow about that part. So it's something funny, that in the west people are rather slow,
Sahaja Yogis are rather slow about their spirituality and in India, people are rather slow about their
manifestation outside. Unless and until we really do some dedicated effort, it's not going to work out.
So I hope, as we have circulated letters, that we have come here not for fun, but for dedication and
for our ascent, and it's a pilgrimage. Talking loose, talking about small things, quarreling with each
other is out of question of course. But domination, terrible domination of falsehood, just to think that
we are leaders or why is he leader, shows that we are not yet worthy. So the worthiness of a ship is very
important if it has to fight the turbulence of the sea. If it cannot fight the turbulence of the sea, then it is
definitely not sea worthy and it is absolutely useless because it cannot go across. In the same way
have to be something, you have to work it out in such a manner that you really become worthy of
if
you
crossing this ocean of illusion, and that many could cross with you.
As in India they have started at every place, at every home, at every family, ascent. If they invite
people, they talk about nothing but Sahaja Yoga. Now you can go all out to talk about it. I give you
permission to tell them that I have come. There's nothing to hide. And you have to go and, go and open
the doors of many churches and many temples and many organizations, and tell them that I am there.
Now the time has come. You can see it so clearly. It's so obvious. First I used to say I would not go to
the newspapers, this is not good, that's not good. Let us work it out. But it has come now, so much that I
have to say things and I am going to say that very openly. I am going to say that, but I want all of you to
be such, that nobody should point out a finger at you and say 'Oh, this is a Sahaja Yogi, and how this
Sahaja Yogi is behaving.' If somebody is stupid and not working it out, it's better to get rid of such a
person. Or else help that person and tell him that, "You have to come up, you can't be here." We don't
want mediocre people here. We want some extraordinarily pure people. The purity is the main point,
which we have to have. Once you are pure, you don't have to worry, then, I will look after you. But the
purity of mind, purity of heart and the purity of your attention, these three things are very important.
When it works out you will be surprised, collectivity will grow in no time.
It is a tendency amongst Sahaja Yogis also still, to go back to the same materialism. And to try to
have
your own house, your family or children sort ofa nonsense. We have to be in the ashrams, and we
have to work it out. We have to work it out very beautifully that we all live very happily in the ashram.
But I find still people cannot work it out that way. They are more concerned about their jobs,
concerned about their things. Once you live in the ashram, I'll see that you get everything. But if you
do not want to have the blessings of God, how can anybody help you. So, tremendous sacrifice is
needed. Of course as you know in Sahaja Yoga I don't need any money from you at all, but sacrifice is
very important. And sacrifice of nonsensical ideas that you have. In every way we have to show that
we are Sahaja Yogis. The way you dress up, the way you live, the way you think, the way you behave,
the way you have relationships with each other, and the way you lead your married life, and the way
you look at your children. Unless and until you have purity the light of love will not shine. The light of
love will not shine. You have to absorb the light of love within yourself. But you cannot, unless and
until you are a pure personality. And that pure personality has to develop by your meditation, by your
working hard. It's a question of few years. In ten years we can change the whole world. In ten years,
but you have to be really very dedicated.
6.
It is you who has to change, not Me. You have to work it out, not Me. I have done My level best.
But within ten years it should be possible that every Sahaja Yogi should become a tremendous force of
Sahaja Yoga. So please try to avoid all those who are mediocres. If you find mediocracy, the leaders
must go all out to correct them. All out to tell them off. Don't tolerate. You don't have to be very mild
on this point. You have to tell them very frankly that, 'See now, you are an extremely mediocre person
for Sahaja Yoga. It's not meant for mediocres.'
It's not meant for foolish people, it's not meant for stupid people. It's meant for something who are
ready to sacrifice anything for the sake of truth. These people are saying that, 'Why don't You go the
way of science?' I say, 'Why don't you go the way of truth?' Take to truth. Science is not truth. Today it
3.
 19891230_Puja_Talk_Brahmapuri_India_English_Marathi.pdf-page3.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
might appear, tomorrow it disappears. Today you may think it is correct, but every hypothesis is
challenged, every law is challenged, that's no law. You have to use Sahaja Yoga in every practical life,
everywhere. But in no way you have to be fanatic about it. Like I have seen some people start giving
vibrations. Or they start moving their hands for bandhans. Even if I am sitting, they are doing like that.
There is no stupidity about it. It has to be very dignified, decent and decorous. But for that we need,
really people of quality. And a complete obedience is needed I must say. I had told Indian people that
time that they must have a proper case done for them. Theyjust didn't listen to Me that time. They said,
'Mother why do You want, no, You'll be in trouble', and all that. If they had listened to Me, there would
have been no trouble today. But you must listen to Me, what I say. Don't give Me explanations, don't
give Me logic, but I know everything, you know that. I know everything.
Now we have something good for you, is the list of the marriages. But marriages is not such an
important thing that you think about. Is not such an important thing for you that you dedicate all your
attention to that? It's just by the way. Because you have to have a marriage, that's why. There's no need
even to have, sometimes. We have to have it. And then letters after letters about your marriages, about
your children, I just don't want to read that. Nothing about Sahaja Yoga. Ifyou are detached, whatever
may be the quality of the wife, you will not fall. Whatever may be the quality of your husband, you'll
not fall.
So one has to be little concerned that what are we doing, what have we achieved? What are we
going to give to the world? For Me, you are My instruments. I don't have to ask anybody else. You are
My instruments and you have to work it out. You are not for Me, useless people. I have worked very
hard with you, very hard. So please don't waste My energies also, and try to become very good Sahaja
Yogis in every way that is possible. In every way you should be dedicated. In every way try to be
something of very great qualities. Now you have seen how people are becoming violent and there's a
violence on. Of course this may not continue, but is one of the signs that we have to be prepared to be
very strong people, very strong. And that will work out I'm sure. This threw about 400 stones, may be
more according to the police report and very few people were hurt. What does that mean? That there is
somebody who is avoiding all these troubles.
Regarding our tour further now I have decided we will not go to Atit because there the
commissioner, the ESP has told Me that it's better not to go, these people are very bad and they are
criminals. So now till the elections come in, they will be behaving in this manner. After the election of
course they will be put down. So you should go by the understanding of the time and go directly to
Sangli, so we'll go to Sangli, we will have a puja there, we can do shopping whatever you like. And
then from there we will be going to Ganpatipule. But it's not fun. It's not fun. It is our development.
Otherwise we will be coming to India, going back the same empty handed. I want you, everyone to be
extremely active in your own sphere of life to talk about Sahaja Yoga. You must wear My badges, you
must wear My rings. You must wear My necklaces. So that people ask you, 'Who is this?' Then you
should say, 'She is the Holy Ghost.' You can say. 'We think She is the Holy Ghost.' Let us see what
happens.
So, it is a serious thing that I felt that I have to talk to you. And that we have to be very very careful
about how we look at ourselves. We have to be aware. We have to be aware about ourselves and what
is happening. I have been telling you this many a times. We have to be aware as to what we are and
what is happening. But if your jobs are important, everything else is important, how are we going to
work out Sahaja Yoga? So there has to be awareness. And with your awareness, the light will spread.
But it's not silent; you have to talk about it. Eloquence is needed. It has to be eloquent. All your light
has to talk. The light has to say. The light has to express. And has to be very confidently done. Let us
see now after going from this tour how far people establish new things. So far, what's My own opinion
is that there are fifty percent of the Sahaja Yogis in the west are still quite mediocre. And twenty five
percent of them are just there to take advantage. Ifthey can get something free, they would like to take.
Twenty five percent people are like that. It's very sad but it is so.
4
 19891230_Puja_Talk_Brahmapuri_India_English_Marathi.pdf-page4.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
But I must say Indians are poor people but they will not do anything, they will never take
anything free from anyone, nothing. They will not. They are very selfrespecting. That is what we have
to develop that self respect. Like I have seen, I had a house in house ware. Everybody went there and
stayed there free. Now we have our house, there in Shudy camp where everybody goes, who has no
job goes and stays there. It's such a nonsensical thing. So I am even afraid to start any ashram in
London, because same thing will start. If they can take advantage, they would like to be there, even a
spoon they would like to carry like that. It's a shameless thing for a Sahaja Yogi to behave like that I
think. We have to have full selfrespect. We must understand that we have to sacrifice to do something.
Because this is the last leg I would say, when I will be talking to you about all these things and in
the beautiful atmosphere here and on the bank of Krishna river. We have to understand that the river
flows, it makes a sound. It makes a sound to show that she, it exists. But we are not only the rivers. We
are all the mountains, rivers, everything of the universe we are. And our manifestation is like a big
zero as if the Mother Earth has been emptied out. It is time that we should watch ourselves and see
ourselves. What's wrong with us? Very important. I had to say this once again, and again but I don't
like to say these things because I love you so much. And I care for you so much. And you people also
love Me. But loving is not sufficient, you have to love yourself and respect yourself. Only your self is
going to work out. As Shivaji Maharaj has said, ' Swadharma Wadwawa' 'You must develop the
religion of your spirit'. That's what we have to do. Is to develop the religion of our spirit. And once it
happens, we can get the whole world completely emancipated. This is our work. And if we fail, then it
is the responsibility of Sahaja yogis and nobody else. So for everyone I have to tell you that I don't
have to please you, you have to please Me.
For a small thing people react. For a small thing they feel bad. If I don't smile at somebody they
feel bad. In little, little things they feel bad and they react. If I say anything, they react. So how can
anything go into you? If it is such a convexity, how will you absorb it? It is important that we should
try to absorb with humility, with understanding. Now you are Sahaja yogis, you know I am Adishakti.
You have had photographs, you have known that I am Adishakti. But how much are we absorbing?
How much we are taking within ourselves? This work is much more than anyone of the incarnations
had to do. Is much more than Christ, is much more than Rama, much more than Shri Krishna. So
create such great people among you. Because I have the power. Only thing you have to have, the
absorption power. The acceptability. But if you run after something very cheapish, and something
very frivolous, is impossible. You have to ask for your depth, and you have to take in whatever is
emitting from My being.
I hope now, you all will take it up seriously. Do your meditation every morning, whatever may be
the time. Every morning you have to do the meditation. And we have to see that we finish our work in
the night, and then we do little meditation and then sleep off. Without meditation you cannot grow.
And that's why everything doing, you have to know that you have to get up in the morning, do your
meditation, and then you can take to your work. Day time if you want, you can rest for a while. Now
we are in such a place that we have time to rest in a while. But morning time you have to get up
whatever time you sleep. You have to conquer your sleep a little bit. It gives you lot of lethargy. Last
night I don't think I slept before 3 O'clock or something like that. And then the whole day I've been
busy writing reports, this that. If I can manage at this age, at your age you should be able to manage
something like that. We have no time to sleep. We have no time to discuss, argue or to eat our food. We
have only time to meditate, that's all. I wish all of you absorb My saying and understanding without
reacting to it. Please do not react. Don't think Mother is trying to chastise you. No. I am trying to help
you to grow. This is the way you grow sometimes, very fast. So it's just your growth I'm worried about,
and nothing else.
So may God bless you all.
I was very happy the way you were singing all the songs and the way you expressed yourself.
 19891230_Puja_Talk_Brahmapuri_India_English_Marathi.pdf-page5.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
(Talk continued on Science, problems on this India tour: )
They are all saying, that we want science to come here. They don't know what is their heritage is.
Our heritage is spirituality, not science. What have they achieved in science, they don't even know
English language. And they have got no idea about science, nothing. But they think you people are
coming from the country of science and you know what science has done to you. That's why you must
understand that this country, there is a kind of a stupid understanding about science. When the British
were here, we were sticking onto our own culture. Science has no culture, and that's why you
lost everything that you had, and you are having all your social problems and this violence and all that.
Because they are dealing with science, they say there is no God. So then they can drink, they can do
whatever they like, they can kill anybody, as what is happening in the West.
all have
So these are few people here, not many, but still you must see that what is growing in this country
is very dangerous. That's why I have to request all the Sahaja yogis of India to work very hard, to
spread Sahaja yoga so that these people will be controlled. They are very criminal type of people, very
criminal. Already one of our Sahaja yogi was killed by them in Bombay. They are very criminal type
and I think gradually the government will take over and they will be alright. They wanted to come on
the stage because they can't arrange any program, they can't have people. Nobody is going to attend to
their
So they wanted to speak from this stage. And people said, 'We have not come here to
program.
listen to you, we have come to listen to Mother.' So just imagine how the violence is now spreading in
this country and how important it is to spread Sahaja yoga.
You all know very well what's happening in the West. They are saying that I must be taking
you. Now is there anybody who can say that. Is the absurd thing, I tell you. Just a kind of a
from
money
funny aggression, which has no meaning. So you should not really bother about these people, because
they are here, tomorrow we will see to it that we inform the police about it and we will take them to
task. (in Marathi). I think we should carry some dogs with us. That's a good idea. If we carry some
dogs, they can attack them. Not we, we are not dogs. It's all a drama. Just see that. It has to go all in the
history. That see how people are. In a country where there is so much of culture, spiritual culture, we
have such an heritage. They have no heritage of science. Now what are they talking about I just don't
understand. I think some of the doctors are afraid that if we start curing people out of Sahaja yoga, they
might lose their jobs, or they might lose their patients. But there are so many patients in this world.
And I told them yesterday that I am not going to treat all the rich people, let Me treat only the people
who are poor, who cannot afford to get cured. I told them very frankly. But they don't want to listen
because they are all drunkards. They are all drunkards and that's why they are behaving like this. Just
like this they were shouting. So they cannot see us enjoying anything. That's the main thing. They
can't see us enjoying anything. And that is why it important for us to understand that we are Sahaja
yogis. It's nothing compared to what people have suffered for religion in this country. For their
goodness, for their righteousness. (in Marathi).
This Rangapur has a very special feature about it. You see, Shri Ramadas swami, the master of,
the guru of Shivaji found the statue of Shri Rama, Sita and Lakshmana in this river, at this point in the
Krishna river. And this was such a remarkable thing; they didn't know how the statue has come there.
So it was taken to a place called Chaphal where they put it. Now Shri Ramdas swami had created lots
of Hanumanas out of the Mother earth. Lot of Hanumanas out of the Mother earth.
6.
 19891230_Puja_Talk_Brahmapuri_India_English_Marathi.pdf-page6.txt 
 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT
MARATHI TALK
आता आपण कोणतीही मोठमोठाली माणसं बघुयात, आपल्यासमोर टिळक आहेत, आगरकर आहेत,
शिवाजी महाराज आहेत, अशी जी मोठमोठाली मंडळी झालीत, त्यांनी काय केलंय ? ते कसे वागले ?
त्यांच्याकडे लक्ष दिले पाहिजे. शिवाजी महाराजांनासुद्धा चारदा लग्न करावं लागलं, राजकारणासाठी. त्यांनी
केलं. 'राजकारणासाठी मला करायचंय तर मी केलं लग्न.' पण ते नि:संग होते, त्याच्यावर त्याचा परिणाम नव्हता
काही. कराव लागलं तर केलं आम्ही. चार लोकांशी आम्हाला दोस्ती करायचीय. त्यांनी जात-पात पाहिली
नाही, की शहाणवच कुळी असलं पाहिजे, की अमुकच असलं पाहिजे. असं काही पाहिलं नाही.
त्यावेळेला जेव्हा इतके वर्षापूर्वी गागाभट्टांना इथे येऊन त्यांना राज्याभिषेक द्यावा लागला,
जातीपातीच्या लोकांनी त्यांना किती हिणवलं , की तुम्ही कुणबी आहात, तुम्ही मराठा नाही. तेव्हा तुमची
तेव्हा ह्या
कोणतीही जात असेना का, तुम्ही आज सहजयोगी झालात, तुमची जात बदलली. तुमचा धर्म बदललेला आहे.
हा धर्म 'विश्व निर्मल धर्म' आहे. तो तुमच्यात जागृत झालेला आहे, त्यामुळे तुमच्या वाईट सवयी गेल्या, सगळं
काही गेलं. पण हे भूत अजून काही गेलेलं नाही. तुमच्या जातीच्या लोकांशी तुमचा संबंधच नाही आला पाहिजे.
कारण ही जमात जी तुमची आहे, ती भुतं आहेत सगळी . दारू पिणं, मारणं, मग ते दारू पिओ, नाहीतर काही
करो. हंडा घेवो नाहीतर काही करो. मग ते आमच्या जातीतलंच असलं पाहिजे. मग तुम्ही सहजयोगी कसे ? मग
सहजयोग सोडा तुम्ही. तुम्ही दोन धर्मात उभे राहू शकता का ? नाही राहू शकत. त्याच्यामुळेच काल ह्यांना मार
खावा लागला. हे लोक ज्यांनी सर्व धर्म सोडला, परमेश्वर सोडला, आणखीन आम्ही काहीच असं करत नाही
असे उभे राहिले.
त्यांनी काल मार दिला. त्याला कारण थोडसं तरी मला असं वाटतं, की आमच्यामधील जी कमजोरी आहे
त्यांनी ती ओळखली आहे. आणि त्यांच्या मते आपण अंधश्रद्धेला पूर्ण झालोत. पण जर तुम्ही बोलत सुटलात
की, 'आम्ही सहजयोगी आहोत. आम्हाला कोणतीच अंधश्रद्धा नाही. आम्ही कोणत्याच असल्या गोष्टी मानत
नाही. आम्ही ह्याच्या पलीकडे आहोत. आम्ही करून दाखवू तुम्हाला.' तेव्हा ह्या लोकांच्या लक्षात येईल, की
काहीतरी विशेष मंडळी आहेत. आम्ही आमच्या वडिलांना पाहिलं. आमच्या वडिलांना गांधीजींनी सांगितलं की
सगळ्या मुलांची लग्न तुम्ही बाहेर करा. आता आम्हीसुद्धा शहाण्णवकुळीच आहोत. त्यामुळे फार विचार करून
लग्न होत असत पूर्वी. वडिलांनी लगेच सांगितलं , काही हरकत नाही. कुठेही लग्न करा. सगळ्यांची अशीच लग्न
लावून दिली आमची. काय आमचं वाईट झालं ? त्यांनी सांगितलं की मी काँग्रेसचा मनुष्य आहे. मला काय?
मला दुसरं काही नाही. माझी जात नाही, धर्म नाही, काही नाही. माझा हाच धर्म आहे. गांधीधर्मी आहे. तेव्हा धर्म
घ्यायचा तर पूर्णपणे घेतला पाहिजे.
7
