THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE INDIA SUPPLEMENT VOL. 1, No. 9. HER HOLINESS SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI "When your attention has got the compassion and love of another person then only you can work out the realization of others. " JHRI MATAJI.

 The Divine Cool Breeze- Buddha did not understand this and perverted His teachings, but Sahaja Yogis carinot spoil Sahaja Yoga because if they do they lose their vibrations. We should be baware, however, because the ego can fool us, even to the point of convincing us that we have vibrations when we don't. Shri Buddha's message of truth is known through our right side, through our attention: We should realize our own "I-ness as Sahaja Yogis, recognizing that we have lelt this universal religion innately and fully believe in it. We must be aware that our lives are for the work of God, and for that we must be pure and watch ourselves. We must not be hypocritical nor cheat ourselves through ego compassion, hard work, dedication and sacrifice taught by Shri Buddha. The trulh is going to make us beautiful." . We should remember the quallties of Shri Athena Puja Synopsis Athens, Greece, May 24, 1989 The themes of the first Shri Athena Puja in the history of Sahaja Yoga were integration and respect. Both individuals and entire nations must manifest these qualities in order to evolve. qualities in her history and will now lead the rest of the world In these areas. Greece, as the center of the Nabhi of the universe, has shown these Shri Athena is Adi Shakti, the One who unites and integrates. To do this, Shri Matalji said She came on this earth in material form in Greece, as Shri Athena, to "oreate an integrated force which will have the whole chaitanya spread like an Integrated force. Adi Shakti created the Devaloka, the area where the Deves were created, in Gr9ace. (The Ganas were created on the left-hand side in the region of Nepal.) Greek mythology shows that the Greeks knew of the Devas; however, the Greeks brought the Devas down to human level, whlch was the reason for their downfall. Greece provides the balance of the universe through dharma in the Nabhi. The special job of the Greeks is to integrate left and right-sided people. The Greek quality of integration can be seen in the life of Alexander who set out to conquer India but turned back. To move towards a goal but recede back integrating force at work. if the goal is not pure shows the The Primordial Masters had the specific task of creating balance. Abraham, Moses and Mohammad, confronted by ignorance and immorality in people who had gone into the lett, had to move to the right. They couldn't let the people try to understand dharma in their freedom. They had to lay down the law and use punishmant as an incentive. By the time of Socrates, people had evolved to the point where He could talk about wisdom, honesty, righteousness, peace and other eternal quallties. Fie was the Master of Logic. Logic is pure, whereas "rationality is blindness." In Sahaja Yoga, Shri Mataji first gives realization and then talks so that we are able to understand. Shri Mataji explained that there are two types of people: Sahaja Yogis and non-Sahaja Yogis. Some Sahaja Yogis may not be worthy, they may go back, but

 1. The Divine Cool Breeze Shri Buddha Puja Synopsis Spain, May 20, 1989 Shri Buddha was Guatama, who was born in a royal familly and became an ascetic to see mankind's problems arising out of desires. As an incarnatlon, Shri Buddha had to reach His enlightenment so that His whole potential could open out in a diferent way than an ordinary seeker. After that, He realized that one must become desireless. Shri Buddha taught that man's greatest problems come from ego, which leads a person to extremes. He worked on the Pingala Nadi and stationed Hirmself on the ego to control it. Christ, Mahavira and Buddha are the Lords, the rulers, of the Agnya chakre, which relates to tapas (penance); They have already done austeritles for us so there is no need fof us to do them. The essence of Shri Buddha's teaching was truthlulness, Including honesty wun Shri Mataji explained that many people try to escape the truth by giving Sahaja Yogis should know arguments or explanations to others and to thernselves. that they are real Brahmans because they have felt the truth of the Brahma, the all- pervading power. As such, they must lead spartan lives. Those with ego get easily dominated by others with ego. Going bllndly along with the latest fashion is an example of this. If the ego is all right, we should have our own character, personality and temperament. When one plays into the hands of ego, the left side is weakened. Then a the chastity also gats spoiled. This is why Shri Buddha advocated celibacy. Those who are to much on the right side develop complications. It starts with a "What's wrong?" attitude, which leads to dryness, speediness and inabllty to have chlldren. bring down ego we must worship Shrl Buddha, and to do this we must first respect our own chastity. This can be done in the context of marriage and family life. person has no braking function in the subtle systern so To Shri Mataji explained that there are three types of people. First, those who are not bothered about others and are overly invoived in themselves. even cruel, and feel they are the best and the cleverest, but no one likes them. The second type of person is always complaining, thinks he has lots of diseases, and always tells about things in a negative way. The first type of person Is over-satisfled, the second type is never satistied, and the third type is a saint who doesn't know if he is salistied or not; he just cares exemplitied in Shri Buddha. They can be very harsh, about otherS' satisfaction. This last type was Shri Buddha addressed the problems of all three types of people in three mantras. Buddham sharanam gachami, I bow to all those who are realized souls. All Sahaja Yogis must be respected and surrendered to as Buddhas, regardless of their situation in life. The next is Dhammam sharanam gachami, I bow myself to my dharma, which is Vishwa Nirmala Dharma. For this, we should ask what we can do for Sahaja Yoga. Each person should do every type of work and not criticize others, especially without examining one's own abilities first. The third mantra is Sangam sharanam gachami, I bow to collectivity. Self-reallization is the Delachment from within is central to Shri Buddha's teachings. goal, rather than misdirected worship of outside forms. The later followers of Shri

 The Divine Cool Breeze- 3. they can become worthy of understanding the knowledge. The Kundalini makes us capable; the Sahasrara enables us to absorb the knowledge, see the logic, and verify the truth. All past religions have made money and pulled their adherents towards hel in the name of the incarnation. Sahaja Yogis must pull others out Instead of going down themselves. Greece, as well as Egypt and China, have embodied the qualities of integration, balance, and respect in their cultures and these qualities are still manifesting in places in these countries. But the depth of awareness that India has is lacking. Shri Mataji has come to Greece only now, as Greece has now to grow up to the Sahasrara oolnt3; Shri Athena is now in Sahasrara. worthlessness of indulgence. Immorality has come from copying westerners, an effect of the Kali Yuga. But they are still solid and have a respect for women of character, and for the Mother. The Greeks have an understanding of the Shri Mataji then spoke of respect. Because of the Greek sense of respect, Alexander went to India and grew spiritually. The English, however, were there for 300 years and gained nothing. One must have respect for others, their culture. Once the British sense evolves into true respect, the worlid will transform. We must "positively respect" other Sahaja Yogis. Respect which comes from the heart indicates a high state of understanding of God. We must respect Adi Shakti from the heart, not in an artifical way. respect Adi Shakti as the Deities do. Greeks will lead us in this respect. When that happens, we will be transformed completely. We must learn to On the individual level, Sahaja Yogis need to balance themselves by integrating the qualities of left and right. The integrating force of Athena must evolve within the yogis, and Athena must awaken in Greece; then Greece will be purified and will help work out the balance for the rest of the world. PROTOCOL FOR SAHAJA YOGIS The following advice was given by Shri Mataji for all Sahaja Yogis. These are certain points to be kept in mind relating to Shri Mataji's public programmes: The photograph of Shri Mataji is not to be sold to anyone. It is only to be given free to genuine seekers at follow-ups but not at any public programmes.. 2. No person (Sahaja Yogi or press reporter) should take any photographs during Shri Mataji's talks at pujas or public programmes unless allowed by Shri Mataji. Yogis should be alert to spot and stop anyone doing so without prior permissioni. Sahaj 3. No printed materials are to be sold at public programmes unless they are approved by Shri Mataji and intended for public sale. Other books on Sahaja Yoga which are approved by Shri Mataji can only be sold at the centers to genuine seekers. printed material should state curatíve attributes of mantras.) (No

 The Divine Cool Breeze Ata public programme no trading activity should be undertaken in rings, pendants, stc. They may be sold only to Sahaja Yogis at cost (without charging any profit.) ENo unauthorized recording (audio or video) is permitted during Har talks at pujas or public programmes. Audio and video cassettes are not to be copied by individuals. These should be bought from the official distribution center. E During a puja or public programme no ane should extend their feet towards Shri Mataji, t is very disrespectful. 7. Do not close your eyes or give yourself a bhandan in a public programme or puja unless Shri Mataji asks you to do so. 3. Shri Mataji's chair should only be covered (wherever She sits) with an asana (silk brocade cloth) bought for Her for this purpose. No Sahaj Yogi should use any of their personal sarees or shawls for Her to sit on, walk on, or use lIn any other way. Anything used by Her should be kept aside for Her and not used again by anyane else. On the stage, to the right of Shri Mataji's chair (tacing the audience) keep a table with a pitcher of water and a glass (covered). On Her left side keep a candle on a stand. Keep the Virata Chart on a stand on Her lett. Keep enough chana ready to be vibrated and distributed as prasad after the programme. No one should sit, stand, walk, or remain on stage during Her talk during pujas or public programmes. To the right of Her chair on the stage, have a table witha cloth and a framed photograph of Shri Mataji. It should preferably be a regular meditation photograph (the black and white one from Indla in the 'Abhay-Daan mudra) or any other one; we should be careful not to use any puja photographs. Incense, in a holder, can be lit in front of the photograph. A candle and some flowers or a garland may also be offered. 1t The following are the colors of the chakras to be shown on the chart: Coral red Yellow Emerald green Ruby red Sapphire blue Pearl white All colors Mooladhara Swadisthan Manipura Anahata Vishuddhi Agnya, Sahastrara |General: Shri Mataji's photograph should not be used as a wall decoration, as a protocol 35to be observed with every displayed photo of Hers. On a daily basis, one should an Ihe photograph (if possible) with rosewater, apply perfume and kumkum, offer lowers, light incense and do puja f the photo is not being respected Her attention is TReto recde trom it.

 5. The Divine Coo! Breeze - 12. If one finds some consurnable item left over after use by Shri Mataji one should not have It alone. Only that which is shared equally amongst all present is prasad. 13. Sahaj Yogis should not leave to represent their center or country to visit another one without prior sanction from their leader. They should not stay in any ashram; their stay should be arranged independentiy or with a relative or triend carrying a letter of request from their leader as a reference may stay in an ashram if the host leader is willing to accommodate the person conveniently, and the daily expenses are met by the visiting yogi. Only persons For Indians Snri Hutaji. "Genda (marigold) flowers should not be offered to NEWS & NOTES Shri Mataji has asked all professional Sahaja Yogis to write on their letterheads about the scientific and logical method of Sahal Yoga and how they came to Sahaja Yoga and improved, She has also advised that all Sajaja yogis whose jobs have improved or have had better married lives since they have come to Sahaja Yoga, or have got out of possessions or traps of false gurus, should write about it to their center leader. All those who have been physically cured of any diseases should write about their experiences with all medical documentation and doctors' opinions, if possible, from diagnosis to cure. benefited in any way financially, emotionally, mentally, or spiritually should also write a letter of thanks to Her and give it to the leader. All others who have Dr. Deepak Chugh, an Indian Sahaja Yogi, has just received his M.D. degree based on the physiological effects of Sahaja Yoga. A new ashram has just been established in Queens, one of the five boroughs of New York City. Dr. Nigam and Dr. Rai have recently gone to Moscow for followup programes with the Health inin istry under our joint agreenent.

 6. The Divine Cool Breeze Brahma Chaitanya Puja Synopsis Munich Germany, July 1989 This was the first puja in which Sahaja Yogis worshipped Shri Mataji in the form of Paramchaitanya, "the all-pervading power of God's love." Shri Mataji explained that Paramchaitanya does everything. It is the power of Adi Shakti and contains everything within itselt. It may appear separated or dislocated, In the same way as we feel that there are differences between countries, but it is actually continuous, working within itself. It pays special attention to Sahaja Yogis; whatever is desired comes from the Paramchaitanya if we are one with it. This formless energy has all the intelligence, coordination and organization, and above all, it is the love of God and the love of our divine Mother. To become one with this Paramchaitanya, we have to become the reality. Shri Mataji explained that others' photographs cannot work out Sahaja Yoga because they have nol become the reality. A painting of rain will not make anything wet, nor can it make flowers grow. In the same way, we must know that in reality we don't do anything, and that everything is done by the Paramchaitanya. A Sahaja Yogl feels this as truth in his heart, while a non-Sahaja Yogi may understand it, but not feel it as part and parcel of his being. The Paramchaitanya is divine love. Shri Mataji explained that to us, love means mad behavior. We love our family, our children, which is unreal and unpredictable. But the Paramchaitanya knows how to express its love, and the essence of love is concern or Theet," benevolence. appearing cruel or affectionate. It works for the benevolence of the individual and the collective, "and it knows very well what is to be done." It behaves differently with different people. If Sahaja Yogis understand that it is always working for their correction, they will never be disappointed in their lives. Shrl Mataji noted that since Sahaja Yogis have found this Paramchaitanya and the connection within, they should stop thinking and worrying, simply jump into it and become part of this reality. It always corrects us, in whatever form is required, whether Shri Mataji also explained that horrible things have happened in the past, such as wars and the massacres that took piace in Germany, for example, but through them a lesson. is taught which makes us more collective and helps to overcome nationalism and racism. knowledge that something is wrong within us. Shri Mataji discussed modern problems such as AIDS, drugs, poverty and ecological problems. She said that leaders do not know how to solve these problems, and that most people are unwilling to recognize, face and correct their mistakes. In this time of Kall Yuga, everything that is Ignoble, detested and useless becomes good for people After every war there has been a kind of explosive movement toward the At the end of Her talk, Shri Mataji asked Sahaja yogis to pray that "we be more and more aware that we are part and parcel of the Paramchaitanya and we .can feel it, we can use it, we can work it out."

 Helsinki, Finiand 17.08.1989 Devi Puja How to deal with newcomers It is the end of lands and settle in the end. There are so many seekers here so there is more attraction in Finland. all the problems come So, here we for the negative forces to come and attack the seekers. When you Come to Sahnja Yoga, you have to know that Saha ja Yogis shows you gradually everything that you have. For example like the light that In the darkness you are carrying a snake in your hand, which you do not want to throw away. fright, so throw the snake away. the snake has come from Sahaja Yoga. But vhen the light on you see the snake and you get a But somebody might run away thinking that comes SO come to Saha ja Yoga may also be like that and wiil to face reality. So you have to be very patient with them, and careful, for he is coming from complete darkness not know what his mental condition is. Maybe he is half from some horrible disease or has some horrible guru. Or, much that they cannot feel it. So it is very So the people who be upset about themselves. They, will not THEI want and ignorance. You may mad or is suffering maybe they are suffering so complicated. The first principle of Sahaja Yoga is never get disappointed Sometimes I've worked on peopie for twenty hours and found they would'nt work out Just like a stone. At least out of stones I could have created out of all that hard work you put about in Saha ja Yoga. WHatever we we have to do. We should'nt worry about the fruits of it. This the main Principles of Gita. 'Do the Karma but do not worry about the right track. Otherwise you might get you have to work hard. a Ganesha. You may, find nothing has is nothing to feel cOme in. So there to do, of frustated have is one the fruits.' This will keep you on frustrated. Once in Boston they were very worried and asked if all of them will I said that at least you should not give up hopes. intil the them, and it has started working out there. In the the beginning you never get many people. want us to have too many people because there would to be hel11. go end we should try to save way you have the Divine does not many useless people joining us. First of all we have to have real good to know that in same Also be so Saha ja Yogis. And those who call themselves Sahaja Yogis have to build themselves very good Saha ja Yogis. And there are no attention is good. Once they are established, then them. Otherwise if the foundation is up in such catches nothing , and their that they are Manner the whole building on can build up weak, the whole building can collapse. we few Sahaja Yogis. We cannot afford to go there's a flood of people. In Italy seen my face, or knew who I was, but So we have to bave, have LO have many-though you see whenever when I to Milano, they had never I went full. So many thousands of people came that you had to just I could see the whole hall was wade through it. out of all those thousands. Then ten people more, and ten more and that's how it started gathering. you are no good for Sahaja Yoga. the future also. So we got about ten people Because in Sahaja Yoga you have to become. Otherwise

 8. this is a very big problem. You should never get frustrated or upset. If So, anybody says sonething to yoI have pity on him for he is blind and don't get fanatics against Sahaja Yoga because they are not You have to show your patience and complete forbearance, Its. There may be SOme angry. wanting Reality.You very important not to get frustered, for, whatever numbers we have you should try to perfect, as it will strenghten our foundation, which has to be very strong and once the foundation is strong, you can go ahead with it. To begin with, you should not talk about me much. You should say that at the moment we should't discuss her. Por let us know ourselves, then you will know m understand that it is for their benevolence, their own they you make them fher. If energy their own maneouvering and they should keep it to theselves will be happy. But do not tell them about me mich. Now the mirsculous things of Sahaja Yoga should not be described or talked of. Normally you should show them any miracie photographs. They will always say you have managed it or maneourvered it. You should 1limit yourself to telling about Sahaja Yoga, about Kundalini, know Bot etc. Keep it in a general way. And also everybody need not can tell is about chakras and bos they have about a puja. But what you be kept in balance and you have to raise the Kundalini. And you just say let's use Mothers photograph for the time being but later you don't have Or they will fight for it. to on when you are experts to use Mother's photograph. Then they will never give it up. And thirdly they are afraid of collectivity. So you have to say thet because frightened and if good and righteous people ali not collective we are are we collect together, they wont be afraid of being collective. You see only the thugs and theeves combine. The good people dont combine. So we have to combine. Then they will understand and they wont be angry. Otherwise if you say we have to have collectivity then they get suspicious. As you always see that nobody combines for love. of sinister stuff. of story this love is. If they combine it is for hatred or to fight or some sort If you say we are for love they will say we know what kind If you have to really bring them round through discussion and argument, you tmust first of all be well equipped with the knowledge of Sahaja Yoga. You should be of such a mood and such a state and such a personality that they should see there's something special about this you much better. Do not get frustrated. Its just fun thats all. If we dont get this one we will get another one-it doesnt matter. person. And then they will accept I've been going to countries and countries. The first time I went to Italy, which is today a a big meeting and press conference was going to be held. When we went there there was all things, Went and did all great Sahaja Yogi nstion, I paid for a very big hall where not a single cockroach went to even for the meeting. And before that I of Because we were the only people there the postering. Despite that not a single soul cane. It Was do the postering. I fun, you see, because it happened at that time so today you could laugh. So that is what they will enjoy it them selves. So, all events are importantin Sahaja Yoga because how they will realize 1t later on when they come to Sahaja Yoga doing and how stupid they were, what kinds, they were and they have been that gives variety and an interesting theme. Everything has to be as fun. I wish you people could understand this and relax campletely this point. Never get frustated. If somebody is not alright or does not not get vibrations, you should just smile alittle bit and say alright next time. taken on May god Bless you.



----------------------

1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9.pdf-page-0.txt 
 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
INDIA SUPPLEMENT
VOL. 1, No. 9.
HER HOLINESS SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
"When your attention has got the compassion and love of another person then only
you can work out the realization of others. "
JHRI MATAJI.
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9.pdf-page-1.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze-
Buddha did not understand this and perverted His teachings, but Sahaja Yogis carinot
spoil Sahaja Yoga because if they do they lose their vibrations. We should be baware,
however, because the ego can fool us, even to the point of convincing us that we have
vibrations when we don't.
Shri Buddha's message of truth is known through our right side, through our attention:
We should realize our own "I-ness as Sahaja Yogis, recognizing that we have lelt this
universal religion innately and fully believe in it. We must be aware that our lives are
for the work of God, and for that we must be pure and watch ourselves. We must not
be hypocritical nor cheat ourselves through ego
compassion, hard work, dedication and sacrifice taught by Shri Buddha. The trulh is
going to make us beautiful."
. We should remember the quallties of
Shri Athena Puja Synopsis
Athens, Greece, May 24, 1989
The themes of the first Shri Athena Puja in the history of Sahaja Yoga were integration
and
respect. Both individuals and entire nations must manifest these qualities in order
to evolve.
qualities in her history and will now lead the rest of the world In these areas.
Greece, as the center of the Nabhi of the universe, has shown these
Shri Athena is Adi Shakti, the One who unites and integrates. To do this, Shri Matalji
said She came on this earth in material form in Greece, as Shri Athena, to "oreate an
integrated force which will have the whole chaitanya spread like an Integrated force.
Adi Shakti created the Devaloka, the area where the Deves were created, in Gr9ace.
(The Ganas were created on the left-hand side in the region of Nepal.) Greek
mythology shows that the Greeks knew of the Devas; however, the Greeks brought the
Devas down to human level, whlch was the reason for their downfall.
Greece provides the balance of the universe through dharma in the Nabhi. The special
job of the Greeks is to integrate left and right-sided people. The Greek quality of
integration can be seen in the life of Alexander who set out to conquer India but turned
back. To move towards a goal but recede back
integrating force at work.
if the goal is not pure shows the
The Primordial Masters had the specific task of creating balance. Abraham, Moses
and Mohammad, confronted by ignorance and immorality in people who had gone into
the lett, had to move to the right. They couldn't let the people try to understand
dharma in their freedom. They had to lay down the law and use punishmant as an
incentive. By the time of Socrates, people had evolved to the point where He could
talk about wisdom, honesty, righteousness, peace and other eternal quallties. Fie was
the Master of Logic. Logic is pure, whereas "rationality is blindness."
In Sahaja Yoga, Shri Mataji first gives realization and then talks so that we are able to
understand. Shri Mataji explained that there are two types of people: Sahaja Yogis
and non-Sahaja Yogis. Some Sahaja Yogis may not be worthy, they may go back, but
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9.pdf-page-2.txt 
 1.
The Divine Cool Breeze
Shri Buddha Puja Synopsis
Spain, May 20, 1989
Shri Buddha was Guatama, who was born in a royal familly and became an ascetic to
see mankind's problems arising out of desires. As an incarnatlon, Shri Buddha had to
reach His enlightenment so that His whole potential could open out in a diferent way
than an ordinary seeker. After that, He realized that one must become desireless.
Shri Buddha taught that man's greatest problems come from ego, which leads a person
to extremes. He worked on the Pingala Nadi and stationed Hirmself on the ego to
control it. Christ, Mahavira and Buddha are the Lords, the rulers, of the Agnya chakre,
which relates to tapas (penance); They have already done austeritles for us so there is
no need fof us to do them.
The essence of Shri Buddha's teaching was truthlulness, Including honesty wun
Shri Mataji explained that many people try to escape the truth by giving
Sahaja Yogis should know
arguments or explanations to others and to thernselves.
that they are real Brahmans because they have felt the truth of the Brahma, the all-
pervading power. As such, they must lead spartan lives.
Those with ego get easily dominated by others with ego. Going bllndly along with the
latest fashion is an example of this. If the ego is all right, we should have our own
character, personality and temperament. When one plays into the hands of ego, the
left side is weakened. Then a
the chastity also gats spoiled. This is why Shri Buddha advocated celibacy. Those
who are to much on the right side develop complications. It starts with a "What's
wrong?" attitude, which leads to dryness, speediness and inabllty to have chlldren.
bring down ego we must worship Shrl Buddha, and to do this we must first respect our
own chastity. This can be done in the context of marriage and family life.
person has no braking function in the subtle systern so
To
Shri Mataji explained that there are three types of people. First, those who are not
bothered about others and are overly invoived in themselves.
even cruel, and feel they are the best and the cleverest, but no one likes them. The
second type of person is always complaining, thinks he has lots of diseases, and
always tells about things in a negative way. The first type of person Is over-satisfled,
the second type is never satistied, and the third type is a saint who doesn't know if he
is salistied or not; he just cares
exemplitied in Shri Buddha.
They can be very harsh,
about otherS' satisfaction. This last type was
Shri Buddha addressed the problems of all three types of people in three mantras.
Buddham sharanam gachami, I bow to all those who are realized souls. All Sahaja
Yogis must be respected and surrendered to as Buddhas, regardless of their situation
in life. The next is Dhammam sharanam gachami, I bow myself to my dharma, which
is Vishwa Nirmala Dharma. For this, we should ask what we can do for Sahaja Yoga.
Each person should do every type of work and not criticize others, especially without
examining one's own abilities first. The third mantra is Sangam sharanam gachami, I
bow to collectivity.
Self-reallization is the
Delachment from within is central to Shri Buddha's teachings.
goal, rather than misdirected worship of outside forms. The later followers of Shri
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9.pdf-page-3.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze-
3.
they can become worthy of understanding the knowledge. The Kundalini makes us
capable; the Sahasrara enables us to absorb the knowledge, see the logic, and verify
the truth. All past religions have made money and pulled their adherents towards hel
in the name of the incarnation. Sahaja Yogis must pull others out Instead of going
down themselves.
Greece, as well as Egypt and China, have embodied the qualities of integration,
balance, and respect in their cultures and these qualities are still manifesting in places
in these countries. But the depth of awareness that India has is lacking. Shri Mataji
has come to Greece only now, as Greece has now to grow up to the Sahasrara oolnt3;
Shri Athena is now in Sahasrara.
worthlessness of indulgence. Immorality has come from copying westerners, an effect
of the Kali Yuga. But they are still solid and have a respect for women of character,
and for the Mother.
The Greeks have an understanding of the
Shri Mataji then spoke of respect. Because of the Greek sense of respect, Alexander
went to India and grew spiritually. The English, however, were there for 300 years and
gained nothing. One must have respect for others, their culture. Once the British
sense evolves into true respect, the worlid will transform. We must "positively respect"
other Sahaja Yogis. Respect which comes from the heart indicates a high state of
understanding of God. We must respect Adi Shakti from the heart, not in an artifical
way.
respect Adi Shakti as the Deities do. Greeks will lead us in this respect.
When that happens, we will be transformed completely.
We must learn to
On the individual level, Sahaja Yogis need to balance themselves by integrating the
qualities of left and right. The integrating force of Athena must evolve within the yogis,
and Athena must awaken in Greece; then Greece will be purified and will help work out
the balance for the rest of the world.
PROTOCOL FOR SAHAJA YOGIS
The following advice was given by Shri Mataji for all Sahaja Yogis.
These are certain points to be kept in mind relating to Shri Mataji's public programmes:
The photograph of Shri Mataji is not to be sold to anyone. It is only to be given
free to genuine seekers at follow-ups but not at any public programmes..
2. No person (Sahaja Yogi or press reporter) should take any photographs during Shri
Mataji's talks at pujas or public programmes unless allowed by Shri Mataji.
Yogis should be alert to spot and stop anyone doing so without prior permissioni.
Sahaj
3. No printed materials are to be sold at public programmes unless they are approved
by Shri Mataji and intended for public sale. Other books on Sahaja Yoga which are
approved by Shri Mataji can only be sold at the centers to genuine seekers.
printed material should state curatíve attributes of mantras.)
(No
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9.pdf-page-4.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Ata public programme no trading activity should be undertaken in rings, pendants,
stc. They may be sold only to Sahaja Yogis at cost (without charging any profit.)
ENo unauthorized recording (audio or video) is permitted during Har talks at pujas or
public programmes. Audio and video cassettes are not to be copied by individuals.
These should be bought from the official distribution center.
E During a puja or public programme no ane should extend their feet towards Shri
Mataji, t is very disrespectful.
7. Do not close your eyes or give yourself a bhandan in a public programme or puja
unless Shri Mataji asks you to do so.
3. Shri Mataji's chair should only be covered (wherever She sits) with an asana (silk
brocade cloth) bought for Her for this purpose. No Sahaj Yogi should use any of
their personal sarees or shawls for Her to sit on, walk on, or use lIn any other way.
Anything used by Her should be kept aside for Her and not used again by anyane
else.
On the stage, to the right of Shri Mataji's chair (tacing the audience) keep a table
with a pitcher of water and a glass (covered). On Her left side keep a candle on a
stand. Keep the Virata Chart on a stand on Her lett. Keep enough chana ready to be
vibrated and distributed as prasad after the programme. No one should sit, stand,
walk, or remain on stage during Her talk during pujas or public programmes. To the
right of Her chair on the stage, have a table witha cloth and a framed photograph of
Shri Mataji. It should preferably be a regular meditation photograph (the black and
white one from Indla in the 'Abhay-Daan mudra) or any other one; we should be
careful not to use any puja photographs. Incense, in a holder, can be lit in front of the
photograph. A candle and some flowers or a garland may also be offered.
1t The following are the colors of the chakras to be shown on the chart:
Coral red
Yellow
Emerald green
Ruby red
Sapphire blue
Pearl white
All colors
Mooladhara
Swadisthan
Manipura
Anahata
Vishuddhi
Agnya,
Sahastrara
|General:
Shri Mataji's photograph should not be used as a wall decoration, as a protocol
35to be observed with every displayed photo of Hers. On a daily basis, one should
an Ihe photograph (if possible) with rosewater, apply perfume and kumkum, offer
lowers, light incense and do puja f the photo is not being respected Her attention is
TReto recde trom it.
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9.pdf-page-5.txt 
 5.
The Divine Coo! Breeze -
12. If one finds some consurnable item left over after use by Shri Mataji one should
not have It alone. Only that which is shared equally amongst all present is prasad.
13. Sahaj Yogis should not leave to represent their center or country to visit another
one without prior sanction from their leader. They should not stay in any ashram; their
stay should be arranged independentiy or with a relative or triend
carrying a letter of request from their leader as a reference may stay in an ashram if
the host leader is willing to accommodate the person conveniently, and the daily
expenses are met by the visiting yogi.
Only persons
For Indians
Snri Hutaji.
"Genda (marigold) flowers should not be offered to
NEWS & NOTES
Shri Mataji has asked all professional Sahaja Yogis to write on their letterheads
about the scientific and logical method of Sahal Yoga and how they came to
Sahaja Yoga and improved, She has also advised that all Sajaja yogis whose
jobs have improved or have had better married lives since they have come to
Sahaja Yoga, or have got out of possessions or traps of false gurus, should write
about it to their center leader. All those who have been physically cured of any
diseases should write about their experiences with all medical documentation and
doctors' opinions, if possible, from diagnosis to cure.
benefited in any way financially, emotionally, mentally, or spiritually should also
write a letter of thanks to Her and give it to the leader.
All others who have
Dr. Deepak Chugh, an Indian Sahaja Yogi, has just received his M.D. degree
based on the physiological effects of Sahaja Yoga.
A new ashram has just been established in Queens, one of the five boroughs of
New York City.
Dr. Nigam and Dr. Rai have recently gone to Moscow for followup programes
with the Health inin istry under our joint agreenent.
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9.pdf-page-6.txt 
 6.
The Divine Cool Breeze
Brahma Chaitanya Puja Synopsis
Munich Germany, July 1989
This was the first puja in which Sahaja Yogis worshipped Shri Mataji in the form of
Paramchaitanya, "the all-pervading power of God's love." Shri Mataji explained that
Paramchaitanya does everything. It is the power of Adi Shakti and contains everything
within itselt. It may appear separated or dislocated, In the same way as we feel that
there are differences between countries, but it is actually continuous, working within
itself.
It pays special attention to Sahaja Yogis; whatever is desired comes from the
Paramchaitanya if we are one with it. This formless energy has all the intelligence,
coordination and organization, and above all, it is the love of God and the love of our
divine Mother.
To become one with this Paramchaitanya, we have to become the reality. Shri Mataji
explained that others' photographs cannot work out Sahaja Yoga because they have
nol become the reality. A painting of rain will not make anything wet, nor can it make
flowers grow. In the same way, we must know that in reality we don't do anything,
and that everything is done by the Paramchaitanya. A Sahaja Yogl feels this as truth
in his heart, while a non-Sahaja Yogi may understand it, but not feel it as part and
parcel of his being.
The Paramchaitanya is divine love. Shri Mataji explained that to us, love means mad
behavior. We love our family, our children, which is unreal and unpredictable. But the
Paramchaitanya knows how to express its love, and the essence of love is concern or
Theet," benevolence.
appearing cruel or affectionate. It works for the benevolence of the individual and the
collective, "and it knows very well what is to be done." It behaves differently with
different people. If Sahaja Yogis understand that it is always working for their
correction, they will never be disappointed in their lives. Shrl Mataji noted that since
Sahaja Yogis have found this Paramchaitanya and the connection within, they should
stop thinking and worrying, simply jump into it and become part of this reality.
It always corrects us, in whatever form is required, whether
Shri Mataji also explained that horrible things have happened in the past, such as wars
and the massacres that took piace in Germany, for example, but through them a lesson.
is taught which makes us more collective and helps to overcome nationalism and
racism.
knowledge that something is wrong within us. Shri Mataji discussed modern problems
such as AIDS, drugs, poverty and ecological problems. She said that leaders do not
know how to solve these problems, and that most people are unwilling to recognize,
face and correct their mistakes. In this time of Kall Yuga, everything that is Ignoble,
detested and useless becomes good for people
After every war there has been a kind of explosive movement toward the
At the end of Her talk, Shri Mataji asked Sahaja yogis to pray that "we be more and
more aware that we are part and parcel of the Paramchaitanya and we .can feel it, we
can use it, we can work it out."
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Helsinki, Finiand
17.08.1989
Devi Puja
How to deal with newcomers
It is the end of lands
and settle in the end. There are so many seekers here so there is more attraction
in Finland.
all the problems come
So, here we
for the negative forces to come and attack the seekers.
When you Come to Sahnja Yoga, you have to know that Saha ja Yogis
shows you gradually everything that you have. For example
like the light that
In
the darkness you are carrying a snake in your hand, which you do not want
to throw away.
fright, so throw the snake away.
the snake has come from Sahaja Yoga.
But vhen the light
on you see the snake and you get a
But somebody might run away thinking that
comes
SO
come to Saha ja Yoga may also be like that and wiil
to face reality. So you have
to be very patient with them, and careful, for he is coming from complete darkness
not know what his mental condition is. Maybe he is half
from some horrible disease or has some horrible guru. Or,
much that they cannot feel it. So it is very
So the people who
be upset about themselves. They, will not
THEI
want
and ignorance. You may
mad or is suffering
maybe they are suffering so
complicated.
The first principle of Sahaja Yoga is never get disappointed Sometimes
I've worked on peopie for twenty hours and found they
would'nt work out Just like a stone. At least out of stones I could have created
out of all that hard work you put
about in Saha ja Yoga. WHatever we
we have to do. We should'nt worry about the fruits of it. This
the main Principles of Gita. 'Do the Karma but do not worry about
the right track. Otherwise you might get
you have to work hard.
a Ganesha. You may, find nothing has
is nothing to feel
cOme
in. So there
to do,
of
frustated
have
is one
the fruits.' This will keep you on
frustrated.
Once in Boston they were very worried and asked if all of them will
I said that at least you should not give up hopes. intil the
them, and it has started working out there. In the
the beginning you never get many people.
want us to have too many people because there would
to be hel11.
go
end we should try
to
save
way you have
the Divine does not
many useless people joining us. First of all we have to have real good
to know that in
same
Also
be so
Saha ja Yogis. And those who call themselves Sahaja Yogis have to build themselves
very good Saha ja Yogis. And there are no
attention is good. Once they are established, then
them. Otherwise if the foundation is
up in such
catches nothing , and their
that they are
Manner
the whole building on
can build
up
weak, the whole building can collapse.
we
few Sahaja Yogis. We cannot afford to
go there's a flood of people. In Italy
seen my face, or knew who I was, but
So we
have
to bave, have
LO
have many-though you see whenever
when I
to Milano,
they had never
I went
full. So many thousands of people came that you had to just
I could see
the whole hall was
wade through it.
out of all those thousands. Then ten people more, and ten more and that's how
it started gathering.
you are no good for Sahaja Yoga.
the future also. So
we got about ten people
Because in Sahaja Yoga you have to become. Otherwise
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9.pdf-page-8.txt 
 8.
this is a very big problem. You should never get frustrated or upset. If
So,
anybody says sonething to yoI have pity on him for he is blind and don't get
fanatics against Sahaja Yoga because they are not
You have to show your patience and complete forbearance, Its.
There may be
SOme
angry.
wanting Reality.You
very important not to get frustered, for, whatever numbers we have you should try
to perfect, as it will strenghten our foundation, which has to be very strong
and once the foundation is strong, you can go ahead with it.
To begin with, you should not talk about me much. You should say that at the
moment we should't discuss her.
Por let us know ourselves, then you will know
m understand that it is for their benevolence, their own
they
you make them
fher.
If
energy their own maneouvering and they should keep it to theselves
will
be happy. But do not tell them about me mich. Now the mirsculous things
of Sahaja Yoga should not be described or talked of. Normally you should
show them any miracie photographs. They will always say you have managed
it or maneourvered it. You should 1limit yourself to telling about Sahaja Yoga,
about Kundalini,
know
Bot
etc. Keep it in a general way. And also everybody need not
can tell is about chakras and bos they have
about
a puja. But what you
be kept in balance and you have to raise the Kundalini. And you just say
let's use Mothers photograph for the time being but later
you don't have
Or they will fight for it.
to
on when you are experts
to use Mother's photograph. Then they will never give it up.
And thirdly they are afraid of collectivity. So you have to say thet because
frightened and if good and righteous people ali
not collective we
are
are
we
collect together, they wont be afraid of being collective. You see only the
thugs and theeves combine. The good people dont combine. So we have to combine.
Then they will understand and they wont be angry. Otherwise if you say we have
to have collectivity then they get suspicious. As you always see that nobody
combines for love.
of sinister stuff.
of story this love is.
If they combine it is for hatred or to fight or some sort
If you say we are for love they will say we know what kind
If you have to really bring them round through discussion and argument, you
tmust first of all be well equipped with the knowledge of Sahaja Yoga. You should
be of such a mood and such a state and such a personality that they should
see there's something special about this
you much better. Do not get frustrated. Its just fun thats all. If we dont
get this one we will get another one-it doesnt matter.
person. And then they will accept
I've been going to countries and countries. The first time I went to Italy,
which is today a
a big meeting and press conference was going to be held. When we went there
there was
all things,
Went and did all
great Sahaja Yogi nstion, I paid for a very big hall where
not a single cockroach
went to
even for the meeting. And before that I of
Because we were the only people there
the postering. Despite that not a single soul cane. It Was
do the postering.
I
fun, you see,
because it happened at that time so today you could laugh.
So that is
what
they will enjoy it them selves. So, all events are importantin Sahaja Yoga
because
how they will
realize 1t later on when they come to Sahaja Yoga
doing and how stupid they were, what kinds, they were and
they have been
that gives
variety and an interesting theme. Everything has to be
as fun. I wish you people could understand this and relax campletely
this point. Never get frustated. If somebody is not alright or does not
not get vibrations, you should just smile alittle bit and say alright next
time.
taken
on
May god Bless you.
