THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE India Supplement VOL.1 NO.10 AB "You may not eat your food one day, You may not sleep one day, You may not go to your office one đay, Tou may not do anything that you are doing everyday, But you must meditate everyday." --Shri Mataji

 Morning Prayer May I this day, be what You'd have me be May I this day, say what You'd have me say May I this day, be part and parcel of the whole And may my though ts be of a realised soul May I this day, have love for all mankind Shri. Mother, be in my heart and in my mind. Prayer Mother, please come ifn "my heart Leb me clean my heart so that You are there Put Your Feet into my heart Let Your Feet be worshipped in my heart Let me not be in delusion Take me away from illusions keep me in Reality Take away the sheen of superfictality Let ine enjoy Your Feet in my heart Let me see Your Feet in my heart. Shri Mataji

 Shri Mataji on Meditation tho morning In the morning you get up, have your bath, you get up, have your bath, sit down, take some don't talk, Don't talk in the morning sit down, meditate - tea; because at that time the Divine rays come in, the sun comes af terwards. That's how the birds get up. That's how the flowers get up. They're all awakened by that, and if you are sensitive you will feel that by getting up in the morning you will look at least ten years younger. Really, it's such a good thing to get up in the morning and then, automatically you sleep early. This is for getting up, for sleeping I need not tell because that you'll manage yourself. Then, in morning time you should just meditate. In meditation try to stop your thoughts. Watch my photograph with- open eye and see that "you stop your though ts. You should stop your though ts, then you go into meditation. The simple thing to stop your thoughts is the Lord's Prayer, because that's the Agnya state. So in the morning you remember Lord's Prayer or Ganesha's mantra. It's just the same. Or you even say "I forgive". So you can start with Ganesha's mantra, say Lord's Prayer and then say "I forgive". It works out. Then you are in thoughtless awareness. Now you meditate. Before that, there's no meditation. When the thoughts are coming or "I have to take tea", 'what shall I do", now what have "I to do". who's this and who's that". all this will be there, So first you become thoughtlessly aware, then the grow th of spirituality starts af ter thoughtless awareness, that. On not before. One should know rational plane you cannot grow in Sahaja Yoga. So first thing is to establish your though tless awareness; still you might feel little Chakra blockages here and there; forget it. Just forget about it.

 Now start your surrendering. Now if a Chakra is catching, you should say "Mother, I surrender this to you". Instead of doing any of these sày things you can just say that. But, that surrendering should not be rationalised. If you're still rationalising and worrying why should I say this, it will never work out. If there's pure love and purity in your heart that's the best thing: that to do so is to surrender. Leave all the worries to your Mother. Everything to your Mother. But surrendering is one point that is very difficult in ego-oriented Even talking about that, I feel a little bit worried. But societies. if there's any thoughts coming in to you or any chakra catching. just Surrender. And you'll see that the chakras are cleared up. In the morning time you do not go on putting this way, that way. nothing: don't move your hands too much in the morning. You'll find most of your chakras will clear out in the meditation. Try to put your love in your heart. Just try in your heart, and there, try to put your Guru, in the core of it. After establishing in the heart, we must bow to that with full devotion and dedication. Now whatever you do with your mind after realisation is not imagination because now your mind, you imagination, is itself Enligh tened. So project youurself in such a way that you humble down at the feet of your Guru, your Mother. And now ask for the necessary temperament needed for meditation, or atmosphere needed for meditation . Meditation is when you are One with Divine.

 Meditation with Her Holiness Shri Mataji Seminar at Shudy Camps 18th June 1988. Now we all Please close your eyes. All of you close your eyes. will do the meditation the way we have been doing in the halls, wherever we had public programs. We will work on the left hand side and the left hand towards Me. Now first of all you put your hand on your heart. In the heart resides Shiva, is the Spirit. So you have to thank your Spirit that it has brought light to your attention because you are a saint and the light that has come in your hearts has to enlighten the whole world. So please now in your heart you pray. Let this light of my love of the Divine spread to the whole work. With all sincerity and understanding that you are connected with the Divine and whatever you desire will happen with full confidence in yourself. Now put your right hand in the upper part of your abdomen on the left hand side. And now here is the center of your dharma. Here you have to pray : Let Vishwa Nirmala Dharma spread in the whole world. the light through our dharmic life, through our Let people see righ teousness. Let people see that and accept the Vishwa Nirmala Dharma by which they get enligh tenment and a benevolent higher life and a desire to ascend. Now take your right hand in the lower portion of your abdomen, of stomach on the left hand side. Press it, Now this is the center

 of pure knowledge. Here you have to say as Sahaja Yogis that our Mother has given us the full idea hoW the Divine works. She has given us all the mantras and all the pure knowledge that we could Let all of us bear and understand. Us be fully knowledgeable about that. I have seen if the man is a leader, the wife does not know a word about Sahaja Yega, the husbandi doesn't know anything about it. Let me be proficient and an expert in this knowledge. So that I can give realisation to people, make them understand what is Divine law, what is Kundalini and what are the Chakras. Let my attention be more on Sahaja Yoga than on all this mundane things. Now put your right hand on the upper part of your abdomen and close your eyes. Now here on the left hand side press it. Mother has given me the Spirit and I have my own Guru which is the Spirit. I am master of my own. Let there be no abandonement. Let there be dignity in my character. Let there be generosity in my behaviour. Let there be compassion and love for cther Sahaja Yogis. Let me not show off, but have a deep knowledge about God's love and his doing, so that when people come to me, I should be able to tell them about Sahaja Yoga and give them this great knowledge with humality and love. Now raise your right hand on your heart. Here you have to thank God that you have felt the ocean of joy and you have felt the ocean of forgiveness and the capacity to forgive as our Mother has, which we have seen is so tremendous. Let my heart expand and encompass the whole Universe and my love

 should resound the name of God. The heart every moment should express the beauty of God's love. Take now your right hand on the left Vishuddhi between the neck and the shoulder in the corner. I will not indulge into the falsehood of guilt because I know it is falsehood. I will not escape my faul ts but face them and eradicate them. I will not try to find fault with others, but in my own knowledge of Sahaja Yoga let me remove their faul ts. We have so many ways secretly we can remove the laul ts of others. Let my collectivity become so great that the whole Sahaja Yoga race is my own family, my own children, my home, my everything. me get that feeling completely, innately built within myself Let that I am part and parcel of the whole because we all have one Mother and let my concern go to the whole world to know what are their problems and how can my true desire power solve them Let me feel the problems of the world in my heart and let me try innately to remove all of them from the basis of which they are generated. Let me go to the principles of all this problems and try to remove them through my Sahaja Yoga powers, through my saintly powers. But voim Now put your right hand on your forehead across. Now here you have to say first: I have to forgive all those who have not come to Sahaja Yoga, those who are on the peripheri, who come and go, who jump in and out. But first of all and foremost I have to forgive all the Sahaja Yogis because they are all better than me. I am the one who tries to find fault with them but I am at the lowest end and I have to forgive

 them because I must know that i still have to go very much fur ther. I am still much less, I have to improve myself. This humanity has to come within us. So you have to say here: Let there be the humility in my heart in the true sense, not hypo- critical. Work out this feeling of forgiveness so that I bow to reality, to God and to Sahaja Yoga. Now you have to put back your hand on the back side of your head and push back your head and you have to say here: Oh Mother, whatever wrong we have done to You so far or whatever wrong goes in our minds, whatever smallness we have shown to You, whatever way we have troubled You and challenged You, please forgive. us. You should ask for forgiveness. In your intelligence you should know what I am. I don't have to tell you again and again, not at Sahasrara. You have to thank Me at Sahasrara, put your hand, move it seven times and thank Me seven times. Mother, thank You very much for the realization, Mother, thank you very much for making us understand how great we are and thank you very mnuch for bringing all the blessing of the Divine and thank You very much for raising us higher, much higher than from where we were and also thank You very much for t sustaining us and for helping us to improve ourselves and correct ourselves. And thank You very much ultimately that, Mother, You have come on this earth, taken Your birth, and that You are working so hard for us, for all of us. Press it hard. And move it hard. Now take down your hands. Heads

 ar al very hot. So now let us give ourselves a nice bandhan. In handhan of Mother let us move our left to the right. One Nicely. Understand what you are. What are your auras. Now again second Now the third one. Now the fourth one. Now the fifth. Now one the sixth one, And now the seventh. Now raise your Kundalini slowly, very slowly, raise it first time, you h ve to do it very slowly. Now push back your head and give I a knot, one knot. Second one, let's do it very slowly and knowing wh you are, you are a saint. Do it properly, not in a haste. Push back your head and give it two knots there, one and two. Now iet s do the other one. Again the third one you have to give three knots. Very slowly do it. Very slowly. Now do it properly.. Now push back your head. Now give it the third knot. Three times. Now See our Vibrations. See your vibration 1ike this. All the children see vo ibraione ike this, put your hands. Beautiful. I am getting v bra May Gua bic vou. Thank vou very much.

 108 Names of Shri Maha Devi These are 108 out of the 1000 names of the Maha Devi given in the The Great Goddess is, at the same t me, Shri Lalita Sahasranama. simple and innocent asa little child and unfathomable, all-porvading, totally elusive, transcending all categories of perception, all known and unknown universes. The names simnply expose some aspects of Her field. She is to be worshipped. The names can be recited through the following mantras, while keeping the attention on Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi. " Om Sakshat Shri Mata namoh namah." Amen. Salutation to the one who verily is the Sacred Mother. "Om Sakshat Shri Maharagyi namoh namah." Amen. Salutation to the one who verily is the Great Empress. These imantras should remind us that, ultimately, it is only through the devotion and worship of the heart that the true nature of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi can be exposed. May She, the Ocean of Mercy, bless us all. Sacred Mother. She not only gives every Shri Mata good thing that a loving Mothe gives the highest child, but also to her knowledge, 3rahman Vidya, the kncwledge of Divine vibrations. to Her devotees. Shri Maharagyi The Great Empress. She Deva Karya Samudyata Divine Emerges for purpose. a in Her great splendour when

 10 all the Divine forces are helpless and unable to eradicate wickedness. Akula One who is beyond kula, that is measura- resides ble dimensionality: i.e. who in the head in Sahasrara. Vishnu Granthi Vibhedini She cuts the knot of Maya (1llusion) of Shri Vishnu. Then the devotee per- ceives the unreality of his individuality as body,. mind, incarnation. present he loses the consciousness of the linited "I" - ness. Bhavani Queen of Bhava, i.e. Shiva; giver of life to the whole Universe. Bhakti Priya Fond of devotees. Bhak ti Gamya She is realised by devotion. Sharma Dayini Giver of happiness i.e. including Divine bliss. Niradhara Unsupported. She is the support of the Universe. is pure She consicousness, unformulated, undifferentiated. Niranjana Unstained by any limitations whatsoever. Nirlepa Untouched by various karmas and dualismus Nirmala Pure. Nishkalanka Faultless brilliance. Nitya Eternal Nirakara She is formless. Nirakula Unruffled. Nirguna Attributeless. the Beyond three gunas

 - 11 - three nadis (ida, pingala and and the shushumna). She is consciousness devoid of the qualities and attributes of the mind. Niskala complete. Indivisible every thing. Nishkama Nothing to desíre, Nirupaplaya Indestructible. Nitya Mukta Ever free; and Her devotees are ever free. Nirvikara She is changeless. but is the unchanging basis of all changes. Nirashraya She has no basis. as She is everything. Nirantara Undifferentiated. Nishkarana Causeless, i.e.cause of all causes. Nirupadhih Alone; without maya, the basis of plura- lity. Nirishvara Supreme. Niraga Unattached. Nirmada Prideless. Without any anxiety. Nishchinta Without Ego. Nirahamkara Nirmoha any illusion such as mistaking the unreal for real. Without Selfishness. Nirmama Nishpapa Papam is ignorance or avidya; She is devoid of that. Nihsamshaya Having no doubts.

 12 Nirbhava Unborn. Nirvikalpa She has no mental activities. Nirabadha Untroubled. Nirnasha Deathless. Nishkriya Beyond all actions; not involved in any action. Nishparigraha Taking nothing, since She needs nothing as She is the Purnakamaor has every thing. Devotees also become Nishparigraha. Nistula Unequalled. Nilachikura Dark - haired. Nirapaya Beyond dangers. Niratyaya Impossible to cross or transgress. Sukhaprada Confers happiness or bliss or moksha which is the bliss of liberation. Sandra Karuna Intensely compassionate to Her devotees. Mahadevi The greatest of Goddessess: infinite. Maha Pujya i.e. the Worshipped by the highest, i.e. Trimurtis: Brahma, Vishnu, Shiva, Maha Pataka Nahini Destroys the greatest of sins. Maha Shaktih The great power. Maha Maya of illusion and The supreme creator confusion even to the greatest of Gods. Maharatih The greatest bliss - that is beyond all sensepleasures. Vishvarupa is Her also the Universe and form; individual Self "Vishwa" in the wakeful state which is Her form.

 13 She is seated in the lotuses. Paamasana i. e. in the Chakras. The matrix of the Universe. Bhagavati worshipped by all including Gods. The Saviour. Rakshakari Rakshasaghní Slayer of evil forces who are Rakshasas (demons) Parameshwari The ultimate ruler. Nitya-Yauvana Ever young, untouched by time as it is Her creation. Punya - Labhya Attained by the meritious or righteous. She is worshipped as a result of good. actions in previous births. Achinta Rupa mind, Inaccessible to thought since the instrument of thought is Her creation. Para Shak tih The ultimate power. The energy manifested the in every partícle, as well as Primordial vibration, is She. Of the form of guru. Gurumurtih Every guru is the Goddess Herself. Primal power, Adi Shakti being the first cause. Yogada One who gives Union of the Yoga or Union with "Para- individual soul "Jeevatma" matma" the cosmic Spirit. Ekakini Alone. The uni tary basis of the plurality of the Universe. Sukharadhya Can be worshipped comfortably by Antar inner Yoga, without putting the Yoga. body to great strain.

 14 - self-realisation. easiest path The to Shobhana-Sulabha-Gatih " Sat" is absolute truth. "Chit" is the Sarchitananda Rupini is the bliss. "Ananda" consciousness. These are the three components of ultimate; they are therefore Her forms. in all Lajja She resides Bashful modesty. beings as modest chastity. is The greatest good Shubhakari The beneficent. the realisation of the ultimate and She that to devotees. grants Chandika Angry with evil forces. Trigunatmika When She the creation. She becomes assumes the form of three gunas (moods): Guna, o Guna, Guna, Rajo Tamo Sattva which correspond in the human body to three channels of the autonomic nervous system. Mahati The great, immeasurable, supreme object of attention and worship. Prana Rupini Of the form of the Divine Breath of Life. Paramanuh The ultimate atom, minute to be too comprehended. Pashahantri One who destroys "Pasha" or bonds and gives Liberation or moksha. Vira Mata "Vira" means devotees who are competent can lead the battle against who and the human forces. She is their Mother. Shri Ganesha is also called "Vira".

 15 - Bottomless depth. In the scriptures the Gambhira a great Great Mother is visualised as and bottomless lake of consciousness, time. and враce by uncomprehended Proud, as the Creatrix of the Universe. Garvita Kshipra prasadini showers grace her devotees Who on very quickly. Ambrosial stream or flow of bliss result- Sudha Srutih ing from meditation on the Great Goddess in the Sahasrara. Dharma is the code of right conduct Dharmadhara handled down by tradition in each age. She is the support of right conduct. Vishvagrasa the Universe at the time of Devours Pralaya, the ultimate dissolution. Svastha established. "Sta" "Sva" Self. means in Herself; also, She is established Self in the devotee. She establishes Svabhava-Madhura Natural sweetness i.e.Anand. She resides in the heart of Her devotees as bliss. Dhira-Samarchita Worshipped by the wise and the brave, be worshipped by meaning She cannot the cowardly and the stupid. Paramodara гeadily Who generosity. Of supreme responds to the prayers of Her devotees. Shashvati Ever present, continuous. Lokatita Transcends all created universes. She is seated above Sahasrara. Shamatmika Peace is Her Devotees with essenre.

 16 their minds Her abode. at peace вге реаce aге sport is the Universe: 1.e. the Leela Vinodini Whose entire act of creation is Her play. The sacred spouse of Sadashiva. Shri Sadashíva Nourishment. It is She who nourishes Pushtih the Jeeva by Divine vibrations. Luminous like the moon. Chandranibha Ravi Prakhya Effulgent like the sun. Sacred from. The purest which washes Pavanakritih away all sins. The entire Universe is in Her as She Vishwa-Garbha is the Mother of the Universe. Chitshakti The power of consciousness that dispels ignorance and confusion. The silent action of Vishvasakshini witness of the the Universe. Vimala Clean, pure, untouched. Giver of bonus to the Trimurtis. Varada Vilasini The Universe is for Her pleasure, or She, at Her pleasure, either opens or closes the way to Self-realisation. Vijaya The element of success in all actions. Vandaru-Jana-Vatsala as Her children. devotees Loves Her Sahajayoga Dayini Grants spontaneous Self-realisation.

 17 - Shri Mataji's Navratri Puja Message Pratishthan 1988 How to Worship The attitude to the Puja should be that you are enamoured by the Devi. That you are praising the Goddess. Its not an inteilectual exercise. It is, you are saying all these things just to please. Like if you love someone then you say something just to please that person. In the same way you are addressing the Goddess. These sayings were written by saints just to express themselves - that you are Goddess, you are like this, you are like that. Some of the letters I receive are also like that, so full of expression of their feeling. But it is not a sort of a lecture course or any thing. Its just the feeling of that attitude. So in complete Bhakti it should be done. Try to feel it in your heart, whatever is said with complete humility, Its the expression, like a prayer, it is a prayer, it should be It is not some sort of an intellectual discussion. It is a prayer. a prayer to the Goddess. Unless and until you develop that attitude you cannot go very far. From your heart, completely pouring out - open your heart - pour it out in your prayer. There is nothing to analyze, if it does not come from your heart then what you say is only lip service. To enlighten your heart you have to praise the Goddess. Express yourself: should be such that you feel like saying these things. You should become one with it when you are saying all these things.

 18 When you meditate before the photograph try to put the photograph in your heart. Say Mother I love you, please come in my heart. This heart has all the intelligence, it has all the capacities, every- thing is born out of the heart. But if you close the heart then the brain becomes arbitrary and you go outside. The heart is the throne of the Spirit. It controls every thing - autonomous, sympathetic. . So the first evolution, knowledge,everything. para-sympathetic, e thing is to try to develop your heart. The Divine Cool Breeze wishes you a VERY HAPPY DIWALI Diwali Puja will be in Florence on the 29th Oct. 89



----------------------

1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_10.pdf-page-0.txt 
 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
India Supplement
VOL.1 NO.10
AB
"You may not eat your food one day,
You may not sleep one day,
You may not go to your office one đay,
Tou may not do anything that you are doing everyday,
But you must meditate everyday."
--Shri Mataji
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_10.pdf-page-1.txt 
 Morning Prayer
May I this day, be what You'd have me be
May I this day, say what You'd have me say
May I this day, be part and parcel of the whole
And
may my though ts be of a realised soul
May I this day, have love for all mankind
Shri. Mother, be in my heart and in my mind.
Prayer
Mother, please come ifn "my heart
Leb me clean my heart so that You are there
Put Your Feet into my heart
Let Your Feet be worshipped in my heart
Let me not be in delusion
Take me away from illusions
keep me in Reality
Take away the sheen of superfictality
Let ine enjoy Your Feet in my heart
Let me see Your Feet in my heart.
Shri Mataji
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_10.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Shri Mataji on Meditation
tho morning
In the morning you get up, have your bath,
you get up, have your bath, sit down, take some
don't talk, Don't talk in the morning sit down, meditate -
tea;
because at that time the Divine rays come in, the sun comes af terwards.
That's how the birds get up. That's how the flowers get up. They're
all
awakened by that, and if you are sensitive you will feel that
by getting up in the morning you will look at least ten years younger.
Really, it's such a good thing to get up in the morning and then,
automatically you sleep early. This is for getting up, for sleeping
I need not tell because that you'll manage yourself. Then, in
morning time you should just meditate.
In meditation try
to stop your thoughts. Watch my photograph with-
open eye and see that "you stop your though ts. You should stop your
though ts, then you go into meditation. The simple thing to stop
your thoughts is the Lord's Prayer, because that's the Agnya state.
So in the morning you remember Lord's Prayer or Ganesha's mantra.
It's just the same. Or you even say "I forgive". So you can start
with Ganesha's mantra, say Lord's Prayer and then say "I forgive".
It works out. Then you are in thoughtless awareness. Now you meditate.
Before that,
there's no meditation. When the
thoughts are coming
or "I have to take tea", 'what shall I do", now what have "I to
do". who's this and who's that". all this will be there, So first
you become thoughtlessly aware, then the grow th of spirituality starts
af ter thoughtless awareness,
that. On
not before. One should know
rational plane you cannot grow in Sahaja Yoga. So first thing is
to establish your though tless awareness; still you might feel little
Chakra blockages here and there; forget it. Just forget about it.
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_10.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Now start your surrendering. Now if a Chakra is catching, you should
say "Mother, I surrender this to you". Instead of doing any of these
sày
things you can just say that. But, that surrendering should not be
rationalised. If you're still rationalising and worrying
why should
I say this, it will never work out. If there's pure love and purity
in your heart that's the best thing: that to do so is to surrender.
Leave all the worries to your Mother. Everything to your Mother.
But surrendering is one point that is very difficult in ego-oriented
Even talking about that, I feel a little bit worried. But
societies.
if there's any thoughts coming in to you or any chakra catching.
just Surrender. And you'll see
that the chakras are cleared up.
In the morning time you do not go on putting this way, that way.
nothing: don't move your hands
too much in the morning. You'll
find most of your chakras will clear out in the meditation.
Try to put your love in your heart. Just try in your heart, and
there, try to put your Guru, in the core of it. After establishing
in the heart, we must bow to that with full devotion and dedication.
Now whatever you do with your mind after realisation is not imagination
because now your mind, you imagination, is itself Enligh tened.
So
project youurself in such a way that you humble down at the feet
of your Guru, your Mother.
And now ask for the necessary temperament needed for meditation,
or atmosphere needed for meditation .
Meditation is when you are
One with Divine.
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_10.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Meditation with Her Holiness Shri Mataji
Seminar at Shudy Camps
18th June 1988.
Now we all
Please close your eyes. All of you close your eyes.
will do the meditation the way we have been doing in the halls,
wherever we had public programs.
We will work on the left hand side and the left hand towards Me.
Now first of all you put your hand on your heart. In the heart
resides Shiva, is the Spirit. So you have to thank your Spirit that
it has brought light to your attention because you are a saint and
the light that has come in your hearts has to enlighten the whole
world. So please now in your heart you pray.
Let this light of my love of the Divine spread to the whole work.
With all sincerity and understanding that you are connected with
the Divine and whatever you desire will happen with full confidence
in yourself.
Now put your right hand in the upper part of your abdomen on the
left hand side. And now here is the center of your dharma. Here
you have to pray :
Let Vishwa Nirmala Dharma spread in the whole world.
the light through our dharmic life,
through our
Let people see
righ teousness.
Let people see that and accept the Vishwa Nirmala Dharma by which
they get enligh tenment and a benevolent higher life and a desire
to ascend.
Now take your right hand in the lower portion of your abdomen,
of stomach on the left hand side. Press it, Now this is the center
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_10.pdf-page-5.txt 
 of pure knowledge. Here you have to say as Sahaja Yogis that our
Mother has given us the full idea hoW the Divine works. She has
given us all the mantras and all the pure knowledge that we could
Let all of us
bear and understand.
Us be fully knowledgeable about
that. I have seen if the man is a leader, the wife does not know
a word about Sahaja Yega, the husbandi doesn't know anything about it.
Let me be proficient and an expert in this knowledge. So that I
can give realisation to people, make them understand what is Divine
law, what is Kundalini and what are the Chakras.
Let my attention be more on Sahaja Yoga than on all this mundane
things.
Now put your right hand on the upper part of your abdomen and
close your eyes. Now here on the left hand side press it. Mother
has given me the Spirit and I have my own Guru which is the Spirit.
I am master of my own.
Let there be no abandonement.
Let there be dignity in my character.
Let there be generosity in my behaviour.
Let there be compassion and love for cther Sahaja Yogis.
Let me not show off, but have a deep knowledge about God's love
and his doing, so that when people come to me, I should be able
to tell them about Sahaja Yoga and give them this great knowledge
with humality and love.
Now raise your right hand on your heart. Here you have to thank
God that you have felt the ocean of joy and you have felt the ocean
of forgiveness and the capacity to forgive as our Mother has, which
we have seen is so tremendous.
Let my heart expand and encompass the whole Universe and my love
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_10.pdf-page-6.txt 
 should resound the name of God. The heart every moment should
express the beauty of God's love.
Take now your right hand on the left Vishuddhi between the neck
and the shoulder in the corner.
I will not indulge into the falsehood of guilt because I know it is
falsehood.
I will not escape my faul ts but face them and eradicate them.
I will not try to find fault with others, but in my own knowledge
of Sahaja Yoga let me remove their faul ts. We have so many ways
secretly
we can remove the laul ts of others.
Let my collectivity become so great that the whole Sahaja Yoga race
is my own family, my own children, my home, my everything.
me get that feeling completely, innately built within myself
Let
that I am part and parcel of the whole because we all have one
Mother and let my concern go to the whole world to know what are
their problems and how can my true desire power solve them
Let me feel the problems of the world in my heart and let me try
innately to remove all of them from the basis of which they are
generated.
Let me go to the principles of all this problems and try to remove
them through my Sahaja Yoga powers, through my saintly powers.
But voim
Now put your right hand on your forehead across. Now here you
have to say first:
I have to forgive all those who have not come to Sahaja Yoga, those
who are on the peripheri, who come and go, who jump in and out.
But first of all and foremost I have to forgive all the Sahaja Yogis
because they are all better than me. I am the one who tries to
find fault with them but I am at the lowest end and I have to forgive
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_10.pdf-page-7.txt 
 them because I must know that i still have to go very much fur ther.
I am still much less, I have to improve myself.
This humanity has to come within us. So you have to say here:
Let there be the humility in my heart in the true sense, not hypo-
critical.
Work out this feeling of forgiveness so that I bow to reality, to
God and to Sahaja Yoga.
Now you have to put back your hand on the back side of your head
and push back your head and you have to say here:
Oh Mother, whatever wrong we have done to You so far or whatever
wrong goes in our minds, whatever smallness we have shown to You,
whatever way we have troubled You and challenged You, please forgive.
us.
You should ask for forgiveness. In your intelligence you should know
what I am. I don't have to tell you again and again, not at Sahasrara.
You have to thank Me at Sahasrara, put your hand, move it seven
times and thank Me seven times.
Mother, thank You very much for the realization,
Mother, thank you very much for making us understand how great
we are and thank you very mnuch for bringing all the blessing of
the Divine and thank You very much for raising us higher, much
higher than from where we were and also thank You very much for
t
sustaining us and for helping us to improve ourselves and correct
ourselves.
And thank You very much ultimately that, Mother, You have come
on this earth, taken Your birth, and that You are working so hard
for us, for all of us.
Press it hard. And move it hard. Now take down your hands. Heads
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_10.pdf-page-8.txt 
 ar al very hot. So now let us give ourselves a nice bandhan. In
handhan of Mother let us move our left to the right. One Nicely.
Understand what you are.
What are your auras. Now again second
Now the third one. Now the fourth one. Now the fifth. Now
one
the sixth one, And now the seventh.
Now raise your Kundalini slowly, very slowly, raise it first time,
you h ve to do it very slowly. Now push back your head and give
I a knot, one knot. Second one, let's do it very slowly and knowing
wh
you are, you are a saint. Do it properly, not in a haste.
Push back your head and give it two knots there, one and two.
Now iet s do the other one. Again the third one you have to give
three knots. Very slowly do it. Very slowly. Now do it properly..
Now push back your head. Now give it the third knot. Three times.
Now See
our Vibrations. See your vibration 1ike this. All the children
see vo ibraione ike this, put your hands. Beautiful. I am getting
v bra
May Gua bic vou.
Thank vou very much.
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_10.pdf-page-9.txt 
 108 Names of Shri Maha Devi
These are 108 out of the 1000 names of the Maha Devi given in the
The Great Goddess is, at the same t me,
Shri Lalita Sahasranama.
simple and innocent asa little child and unfathomable, all-porvading,
totally elusive, transcending all categories of perception, all known
and unknown universes. The names simnply expose some aspects of
Her field. She is to be worshipped.
The names can be recited through the following mantras, while keeping
the attention on Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi.
" Om Sakshat Shri Mata namoh namah."
Amen. Salutation to the one who verily is the Sacred Mother.
"Om Sakshat Shri Maharagyi namoh namah."
Amen. Salutation to the one who verily is the Great Empress.
These imantras should remind us that, ultimately, it is only through
the devotion and worship of the heart that the true nature of Shri
Mataji Nirmala Devi can be exposed.
May She, the Ocean of Mercy, bless us all.
Sacred Mother. She not only gives every
Shri Mata
good thing that a loving Mothe gives
the highest
child, but also
to her
knowledge, 3rahman Vidya, the kncwledge
of Divine vibrations. to Her devotees.
Shri Maharagyi
The Great Empress.
She
Deva Karya Samudyata
Divine
Emerges for
purpose.
a
in Her great splendour when
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_10.pdf-page-10.txt 
 10
all the Divine forces are helpless and
unable to eradicate wickedness.
Akula
One who is beyond kula, that is measura-
resides
ble dimensionality: i.e. who
in the head in Sahasrara.
Vishnu Granthi Vibhedini
She cuts the knot of Maya (1llusion)
of Shri Vishnu. Then the devotee per-
ceives the unreality of his individuality
as body,.
mind,
incarnation.
present
he loses the consciousness
of the linited
"I" - ness.
Bhavani
Queen of Bhava, i.e. Shiva; giver of
life to the whole Universe.
Bhakti Priya
Fond of devotees.
Bhak ti Gamya
She is realised by devotion.
Sharma Dayini
Giver of happiness i.e. including Divine
bliss.
Niradhara
Unsupported. She is the support of the
Universe.
is pure
She
consicousness,
unformulated, undifferentiated.
Niranjana
Unstained by any limitations whatsoever.
Nirlepa
Untouched by various karmas and dualismus
Nirmala
Pure.
Nishkalanka
Faultless brilliance.
Nitya
Eternal
Nirakara
She is formless.
Nirakula
Unruffled.
Nirguna
Attributeless.
the
Beyond
three
gunas
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_10.pdf-page-11.txt 
 - 11 -
three nadis (ida, pingala and
and the
shushumna). She is consciousness devoid
of the qualities and attributes of the
mind.
Niskala
complete.
Indivisible
every thing.
Nishkama
Nothing to desíre,
Nirupaplaya
Indestructible.
Nitya Mukta
Ever free;
and Her devotees are ever free.
Nirvikara
She is changeless. but is the unchanging
basis of all changes.
Nirashraya
She has no basis.
as She is everything.
Nirantara
Undifferentiated.
Nishkarana
Causeless, i.e.cause of all causes.
Nirupadhih
Alone; without maya, the basis of plura-
lity.
Nirishvara
Supreme.
Niraga
Unattached.
Nirmada
Prideless.
Without any anxiety.
Nishchinta
Without Ego.
Nirahamkara
Nirmoha
any illusion such as mistaking
the unreal for real.
Without Selfishness.
Nirmama
Nishpapa
Papam is ignorance or avidya;
She is devoid of that.
Nihsamshaya
Having no doubts.
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_10.pdf-page-12.txt 
 12
Nirbhava
Unborn.
Nirvikalpa
She has no mental activities.
Nirabadha
Untroubled.
Nirnasha
Deathless.
Nishkriya
Beyond all actions;
not involved in any action.
Nishparigraha
Taking nothing, since She needs nothing
as She is the Purnakamaor has every thing.
Devotees also become Nishparigraha.
Nistula
Unequalled.
Nilachikura
Dark - haired.
Nirapaya
Beyond dangers.
Niratyaya
Impossible to cross or transgress.
Sukhaprada
Confers happiness or bliss or moksha
which is the bliss of liberation.
Sandra Karuna
Intensely compassionate
to Her devotees.
Mahadevi
The greatest of Goddessess: infinite.
Maha Pujya
i.e. the
Worshipped by
the highest, i.e.
Trimurtis: Brahma, Vishnu, Shiva,
Maha Pataka Nahini
Destroys the greatest of sins.
Maha Shaktih
The great power.
Maha Maya
of illusion and
The supreme creator
confusion even to the greatest of Gods.
Maharatih
The greatest bliss -
that is beyond all sensepleasures.
Vishvarupa
is Her
also the
Universe
and
form;
individual Self "Vishwa" in the wakeful
state which is Her form.
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_10.pdf-page-13.txt 
 13
She is seated in the lotuses.
Paamasana
i. e. in the Chakras.
The matrix of the Universe.
Bhagavati
worshipped by all including Gods.
The Saviour.
Rakshakari
Rakshasaghní
Slayer of evil forces
who are Rakshasas (demons)
Parameshwari
The ultimate ruler.
Nitya-Yauvana
Ever young,
untouched by time
as it
is Her creation.
Punya - Labhya
Attained by the meritious or righteous.
She is worshipped as a result of good.
actions in previous births.
Achinta Rupa
mind,
Inaccessible to
thought since
the instrument of thought is Her creation.
Para
Shak tih
The ultimate power. The energy manifested
the
in every partícle,
as well as
Primordial vibration, is She.
Of the form of guru.
Gurumurtih
Every guru is the Goddess Herself.
Primal power,
Adi Shakti
being the first
cause.
Yogada
One who gives
Union of the
Yoga or Union
with "Para-
individual soul "Jeevatma"
matma" the cosmic Spirit.
Ekakini
Alone. The uni tary basis of the plurality
of the Universe.
Sukharadhya
Can be worshipped comfortably by Antar
inner Yoga, without putting the
Yoga.
body to great strain.
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_10.pdf-page-14.txt 
 14 -
self-realisation.
easiest path
The
to
Shobhana-Sulabha-Gatih
" Sat" is absolute truth. "Chit" is the
Sarchitananda Rupini
is the bliss.
"Ananda"
consciousness.
These are the three components of ultimate;
they are therefore Her forms.
in all
Lajja
She resides
Bashful
modesty.
beings as modest chastity.
is
The greatest good
Shubhakari
The beneficent.
the realisation of the ultimate and She
that to devotees.
grants
Chandika
Angry with evil forces.
Trigunatmika
When She
the creation.
She
becomes
assumes the form of three gunas (moods):
Guna,
o Guna,
Guna, Rajo
Tamo
Sattva
which correspond in the human body
to three channels of the autonomic nervous
system.
Mahati
The great, immeasurable, supreme object
of attention and worship.
Prana Rupini
Of the form of the Divine Breath of Life.
Paramanuh
The ultimate atom,
minute to be
too
comprehended.
Pashahantri
One who destroys "Pasha" or bonds and
gives Liberation or moksha.
Vira Mata
"Vira" means devotees who are competent
can lead the battle against
who
and
the human forces.
She is their Mother.
Shri Ganesha is also called "Vira".
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_10.pdf-page-15.txt 
 15 -
Bottomless depth. In the scriptures the
Gambhira
a great
Great Mother is visualised as
and bottomless lake of consciousness,
time.
and
враce
by
uncomprehended
Proud, as the Creatrix of the Universe.
Garvita
Kshipra prasadini
showers grace
her devotees
Who
on
very quickly.
Ambrosial stream or flow of bliss result-
Sudha Srutih
ing from meditation on the Great Goddess
in the Sahasrara.
Dharma is the code of right conduct
Dharmadhara
handled down by tradition in each age.
She is the support of right conduct.
Vishvagrasa
the Universe at the time of
Devours
Pralaya, the ultimate dissolution.
Svastha
established.
"Sta"
"Sva"
Self.
means
in Herself; also,
She is established
Self in the devotee.
She establishes
Svabhava-Madhura
Natural sweetness i.e.Anand. She resides
in the heart of Her devotees as bliss.
Dhira-Samarchita
Worshipped by the wise and the brave,
be worshipped by
meaning She cannot
the cowardly and the stupid.
Paramodara
гeadily
Who
generosity.
Of
supreme
responds to the prayers of Her devotees.
Shashvati
Ever present, continuous.
Lokatita
Transcends all created universes.
She
is seated above Sahasrara.
Shamatmika
Peace is Her
Devotees with
essenre.
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_10.pdf-page-16.txt 
 16
their minds
Her abode.
at peace
вге
реаce aге
sport is the Universe: 1.e. the
Leela Vinodini
Whose
entire act of creation is Her play.
The sacred spouse of Sadashiva.
Shri Sadashíva
Nourishment. It is She who nourishes
Pushtih
the Jeeva by Divine vibrations.
Luminous like the moon.
Chandranibha
Ravi Prakhya
Effulgent like the sun.
Sacred from. The purest which washes
Pavanakritih
away all sins.
The entire Universe is in Her as
She
Vishwa-Garbha
is the Mother of the Universe.
Chitshakti
The power of consciousness that dispels
ignorance and confusion.
The silent
action of
Vishvasakshini
witness of the
the Universe.
Vimala
Clean, pure, untouched.
Giver of bonus to the Trimurtis.
Varada
Vilasini
The Universe is for Her pleasure,
or
She, at Her pleasure, either opens or
closes the way to Self-realisation.
Vijaya
The element of success in all actions.
Vandaru-Jana-Vatsala
as Her children.
devotees
Loves Her
Sahajayoga Dayini
Grants spontaneous Self-realisation.
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_10.pdf-page-17.txt 
 17 -
Shri Mataji's Navratri Puja Message
Pratishthan 1988
How to Worship
The attitude to the Puja should be that you are enamoured by the
Devi.
That you are praising the Goddess. Its not an inteilectual
exercise. It
is, you are saying all these things just to please.
Like if
you love someone
then you say something just to please
that person. In the same way you are addressing the Goddess.
These sayings
were written by saints just to express themselves
- that you are Goddess, you are like this, you are like that. Some
of the letters I receive are also like that, so full of expression
of their feeling. But it is not a sort of a lecture course or any thing.
Its just the feeling of that attitude. So in complete Bhakti it should
be done.
Try to feel it in your heart, whatever is said with complete humility,
Its the expression, like a
prayer, it is a prayer, it should be
It is not some sort of an intellectual discussion. It is
a prayer.
a prayer to the Goddess. Unless and until you develop that attitude
you cannot go very far.
From your heart, completely pouring out -
open your heart - pour
it out in your prayer. There is nothing to analyze, if it does not
come from your heart then what you say is only lip service. To
enlighten your heart you have to praise the Goddess. Express yourself:
should be such that you feel like saying these things. You should
become one with it when you are saying all these things.
 1989_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_10.pdf-page-18.txt 
 18
When you meditate before the photograph try to put the photograph
in your heart. Say Mother I love you, please come in my heart.
This heart has all the intelligence, it has all the capacities, every-
thing is born out of the heart. But if you close the heart then
the brain becomes arbitrary and you go outside. The heart is the
throne of the Spirit. It controls every thing - autonomous, sympathetic.
. So the first
evolution, knowledge,everything.
para-sympathetic, e
thing is to try to develop your heart.
The Divine Cool Breeze wishes you a VERY HAPPY DIWALI
Diwali Puja will be in Florence on the 29th Oct. 89
