The Divine Cool Breeze 00 Volume 2 No. 9-10 SHRI RAJA JANAKA SHRI SHIRDI SAINATI DHARMA VISHWANIRMALA DHARMA VIS SHRI HATIAK SHR1 ABRAHAH MOHAMMED SHRI MOSES |HRI SOCRATER ズし SHRI ZARATIHUSTRA SHRI CONFUCIUS SHRI LADISE ..When you are worshipping your Guru, then this master within you is also noh worshipped. You respect it, you glorify it, you awaken it and you manifest it. -Shri Mataji, Shn Guru Puja, France 1990 A DHARMA NIRMALA VISHWA NIRMALA DHARMA VISHWA NIRMALA OHAF A DHARMA VISHWA NIRMALA DHARMA VISHWA

 GURU PUJA AVIGNON. (FRANCE) SHRI MATAJI'S TALK 8.7.1990 different significance Sahaja Yoga the Guru Puja has a verY In from any other Guru Puja. When you worship your Guru, you are also worshipping the Guru within you. This is not in any other Guru-Disciple system, because in you the Guru-the Master has been So when awakened. you are worshipping your then this Guru within you is also worshipped. Master You respect it, glorify it, awaken it and manifest it. The quality of a Guru first and foremost is that he makes you It means he raises the Kundalini and establishes the God. meet between the all prevading power. relation is the As your Guru Adi Shakti, we make that person also meet the Adi Shakti. Then have another advantage that when you give them realisation, you not only make them feel the union with the Divine Power but you can also make them meet the Divinity itself the source of you Divine Power. Your responsibility as Sahaja Yogis is very great, because in you is the Guru. there In our mantras we say 'Mother, I am own my this Guru'. But "I" and "my Guru", between have we achieved? Where am I? Have I got the light Can I guide myself? of the Spirit on my attention so well established and manifested that I can guide myself and guide others later on? In the Guru principle it is important that you to see yourself introspection. Have I become my own Guru?

 In So it has your case, your Guru is a mother, a woman. be to among women that the development of the Guru qualities have to be well manifested. But for the women such is not very the case. They are still the mother's or the wives, or Sahaja Yoginis. But you dont realise that you are also the Gurus, because your Mother is a Guru, because She is a woman and you have to be also of that quality that people should say 'Look at this woman, she is such a I hear from the leaders that the ladies are Guru'. still very much far away and very few can be called as real Sahaja Yoginis. If you still keep all these things of womanhood and these draw backs of woman-hood formed out of domination because they were always shown to be something low. In the Christian religion they regarded something holy. diffidence in them that they do not understand that Dharma can be were never have They this as established more from within than from without. Guru's work is to establish Dharma in the society, The in the family, in relationships. All these Gurus have done nothing but But before establishing Dharma we establish the Dharma. should watch ourselves. Have we got Dharma within ourselves not. First is that quality of a person who has all of Dharma he to others, he obeys. With Western women what has gone wrong is that they have forgotten how to listen to others; how to That is why their children also do not obey. obey. If you do not have obedience, nobody is going to obey you. First you must learn to obey. A person like Kabir was born of an unknown caste and he could not go directly to anybody. Ramdas used to go to the river Ganges every morning to have his bath. One day on his steps Kabir kept lying and in the darkness the Guru could not see touched him with his feet. He asked and who are you'? Kabir replied I am your đisciple' and caught hold of his feet. Then Ramdas's disciple and a great saint. he became People know him In humility than his Guru. The basic thing is humility. more only you can receive the blessings. You can receive the quality that is of your Guru. 2.

 life First of all Guru has to come up in my own image. your should be absolutely transparent. Transparency is the essence of Sahaja Yoga. Everybody should know what you are doing, where you are going; what is the way you live, what is the way you People who are Gurus, also called Leaders, one finds behave. they that their body. very fussy type of people. Always think about are As if they suffer They grumble that nobody looked after them. Or they will grumble that they đid not from persecution mania. For a Guru it is better eat food for one day. Doesn't matter. this to starve for about three to four days so that you get over hunger because it is in of hunger. The Guru has no idea your so much that you do not feel like stomach and the vibrations are If leaders have this nonsense in their head eating anything. like do you is it that what get to eat, how you eat, etc. tourists in Sahaja Yoga. This is not the manisfestation of Guru I do not know principle. have seen your Guru as She is. I do You what I eat, what they give me, what I want. They go on giving me Do not choices. There should be no they think I like. what attention on choices. should be All your choices waste your on vibrations and not on material things. You should based not kind Eating of tasty food is a have taste for any special food. is addiction. Zen started the system of tea ceremony, which of which In this ceremony they serve tea quite a test of people. It is a great ritual. They tell you watch is to very bitter. thoughtless the cup without thinking. They were trying to reach is Once you take that tea, your tongue awareness through a cup. To compensate it they give you something for anything. good This is just It is so sweet that it becomes bitter. to sweet. shocks This ceremony gives such the to tongue. your conquer That is why tongue that after that you can eat whatever you get. the Japanese can eat anything. The fussiest people about food are the Indians. That is because They know how to their handle have spoiled them. their women Even if they travel abroad, they husbands by cooking very well.

 Indian food. They cannot get over their tongues because it eat boiled is big conditioning. Gandhiji used to give horrible a with oil and mustard on top, which no one could food He eat. tried that people should get over their taste for food. Thus he would make of the their W.C.s etc to people clean get rid sensitivity People spend in to Smells. forty five minutes to decide what they are going just to eat. For restaurants Sahaji Yogis it is important to give up this idea. First of all nobody should ask what will you have. Do not ask me also what to think about it and will have, have be want to as We must understand how much we are attached to food. Nirvichara. It goes in our stomachs and thus spoils our Guru system and also spoils our physical system. We should try not to look at food. to develop why fasting was told to people who wanted That their Guru Principle. Fasting means that you go into Nirvichara do not think of fasting or food. But they are all the time and thinking of food, so it has no meaning and you are just the same whether you eat or not; your mind is eating the food. You are thinking when you will end the fast and you can eat busy again. We should get rid of our habits of our conditionings. should also be given a The children it. proper training about Sometimes there is no salt, sometimes there is no sugar, does not Nothing important for Sahaja Yogis who can live without matter. For a Sahaja Yogi there is nothing like food for days together. There is only one hunger. It is to be taste of food and hunger. to be clean. purified, This is one of the things that dirties our mind, that we think of food all the time. To get over taste is an experiment you have to do. Unless and until we introspect because though ourselves and do experiments we cannot overcome the Kundalini is trying Her level best but the conditionings are great that it cannot make you into the Guru. If you see the SO of children and all these Gurus; they were married, had life But in their own personal life they lived a normal life. were absolutely detached. The first detachment should come from food.

 icecream One who is fond of Whatever you like just do not eat. must have already spoiled his liver. If you like pasta then give Learn to give up things that you like so that your up pasta. this mind will get detached from it. It is very easy to achieve detachment if you work it out in a sensible way. If you are your then you better take hold of your body and conditionings. Guru Adjust yourself to any You must treat your body with respect. kind of food. If you cannot get rid of this little thing then you cannot be called a Sahaja Yogi. One of the manifestations of is just self is a satisfied soul. that Guru is He contained. part of the body is that you need comforts. The Western Second Sahaja Yogis may come from any position or status but all of them comfort of the Spirit when they travel on the India enjoy the In this way you They do not ask for a chair or a bed etc. tour. will realise that the body comfort is of no importance. The body will sleep anyway. The third point is the materialistic attitude and their fondness Sahaja Yogis have to have very the eyes i.e., a roving eye. In Sahaja Yogo may Then there is th lust and greed. clean eyes. be the lust part is over, but the greed is still there; and one have lust problems but they still Indians do not gets lost. have greed. For a Westerner he would not like to give up his For furniture which his great grandmother had; even if no one can sit on it, because it is so old. He keeps it to show off. According to Indian standards its junk. a very subtle material attitude towards matter, that it There's Such junk is like a grave in the house, re-sale value. has as Antique is an addiction of knows how many people used it. who the Western people. Indians cannot understand how people are mad writer There is a torn, broken, filthy and dirty things. after India who wrote about two Englishmen on the road of in Benares

 were hit by a brass pot which fell at The feet. their who So the Indian told them that English were very angry at this. this Lota (pot) is very valuable because it was used by Akbar the were very impressed and The Englishmen that we said Great. give us this antique Lota forgive you for one thousand the Indian to The whole thing was a joke played by rupees. punishment. The madness of antique shoula go escape One should encourage revival of the old our minds. rather arts It has ruined our creativity and running after antiques. than Because something is antique it the quality of our life. should intrinsic because of its be respected, but value or The most important thing is to see its vibrations. aesthetics. If the vibrations are good then you should accept because we have the language of vibrations and we have to use it. do Once you this then you will understand what is to be done. The worst thing for Sahaja Yogis is to think that he is sick, it tarnishs the name of Sahaja Yoga. If you still feel you are sick Either you get well you better get out of Sahaja Yoga or you are not a Sahaja Yogi. If you are a Sahaja Yogi then you have to If there are certain problems also, you get well. see that For example I as the Mother, the Adi Shakti have doesn't matter. certain problems, certain physical things I have to face. But You have You have to accept your body ais it is. go through it. think not to say that I am not wellI and go on complaining. Never Never feel that you are no good. Look old. at your you are I never feel that that way. So if you have a Guru, then Mother MLOOK at our Mother, image should be within you. is, how much She travels, how much She does'. old how that Alright, you She might say She is the Adi Shakti, but 1iEtle bit of Shakti you too If you That Shakti has to be shown through your dynamism. have. have no dynamism and still feel weak, that means that you are not Just ask for any amount andđ it can ocome to you. Sahaja Yogi. Hot with You are younger and younger but the stupidity of youth but the gravity of age.

 do born realised are very Children and who are won't great talk đignified. anything is that They will not never unnecessarily. By just wearing saris and bindis you do not become First of all where is the gravity? Sahaja Yogi. should You The born realised souls say very only speak when it is necessary. They are they speak., such beautifyl words few words, but The way their Guru principla is acting, extremely obedient. are we also acting the same way? Or are doing some thing that is not Even after coming to Sahaja Yoga if you do good for ascent. not the point to introspect then you of missed have try hard comparison with your Guru all the time. Everything has to be understood in the right perspective that we Sahaja Yogis. For a Sahaja Yogi the first and foremost are thing is that he has to have love for others,. If you are always about yourself then you dont love others. worried Do you seek for other comfort of others? Do you feel the compassiorn the Sahaja Yogis? Do you go out of your way to help them? Many Sahaja Yogis take side of non Sahaja Yogis and try to the Sahaja Yogis. You belong to this new The disgrace race. is who do not belong to this new race attack anybody. It ones to help a Sahaja Yogi as he is your hands and your duty your May be something is wrong with him doesn't matter. head. You should Sahaja Yogi out and out. support Later on you may correct him. This dignity and this understanding comes only through silence. a deeper you are talking all the time it can never make you If mauna.i.e. keep women its best that they take to For person. All the leaders have have told me that its a big problem quiet. But if you with women. They go on talking or spreading stories. ask them to come up to the stage and start speaking they will start shivering. How many can give speeches? Understand that if You should be you cannot give a speech then you better not talk. able to and She give a speech, because your Mother is a woman

 As your Guru I must tell you that you gives speeches. to have an the best thing for you is to stop murmuring. "Maunam ascend If someboy is talking too Just keep quiet. Sarvaath Sadhanam'. just keep quiet. If somebody criticizes, keep quiet. If much, somebody is trying to attack then just keep silent. This silence has to be established and it can be established by not talking too much. In a church people observe such discipline, which is an artificial place. They dont keep walking in and out. In the has to be now that kind of silence place where you are that kind of understanding, that awe has to be there. observed, because we have not yet developed that Guru principle it is But If you have developed it then immediately it will missing. work Your gravity will show in your behaviour. To discuss out. somebody, to discuss about others' character, will discuss you the character of one hand to another? In Sahaja Yoga marriage is not such an important thing. Some The marriage becomes people pay too much attention to marriage. a headache. The whole attention goes on how you are going to get married. You have come to Sahaja Yoga, you are sanyasins. You are married only to Sahaja Yoga. The so called husband and wife if there, they are not Sahaja Yogis then but are you are Before Sahaja Yoga marriage was a joke, every finished. third day there was a divorce. Then when they got married after Sahaja Yoga, they were the greatest romantic people ever known. of people Even in the Indian villages people complain what sort are these they That saintliness have no sense of modesty at all. that Sanyasi, that asceticism has to be expressed in our married I don't mean that you don't have relationship with your life. husband but If you in a very private way. will ruin the whole of Sahaja Yoga. start going into romanticism, In the you is an idea that you fall in love, there West, then you won't will only fall rise, you This attachment and about worry etc is nonsense. You have to have witness state and husband be watch the state of husband or the state wife. detached of to 81

 honeymoons etc. organise after marriage, people want to Soon after conditionings and are coming from the old These ideas honeymoon they come and say 'Mother this marriage is not going to decide. out'. It is better to go slow and steady and then work and Husband learn the sense of shame from Indians,. nust You It is regarded bad wife together in public. never sit as What is the need to show your relationship in blic? manners., Men should be with men in the public and Its only in private. women should be with the women. have jealousies, power orientation and they discuss about Men They get a shock if you tell them that you are leadership. not They think that leadership is something going to be a leader. There's the greatest myth ever Its very concrete. nothing 1ike leaders in Sahaja Yoga. Its just a joke and your So be Mother is careful. very good at playing serious jokes. I test a testing point. level and just that Its on you immediately I know when the person gets on to the horse of ego. priorities So the mental attitude has to be different and our rnust change. The first priority is for our ascent. For your ascent if you have have punish your whole body, or yourself or if to you then get conditioning rid of it. Just introspect yourself. Self-realisation is to know yourself. When you know yourself and is clinging on to it, just remove it completely, work know what it out It is very important that the body, the way you like. everything should be your mind, and Nothing should slaves. dominate you. How dare your body ask for anything. dare How tell you anything. You have so many proofs Inind your mind show to that you are realised souls. my presence if you become the The only way light you must carry the light also. you can to realise that when is Mother about talks penetrate within anything, to see that Mother is talking about me, correcting me, and telling me, then only it will penetrate and work out.

 is the faith that this All Prevading Power is looking Second after us. The musicians were told to travel by train from Moscow As they had no visa for Hungary they were taken off to Milan. They were sitting at the Hungary border. the train the on did platform, knowing not what to do as they had no visas, not know the language, and not much money. They were stranded there. But they were all laughing and enjoying and no one felt that he Then the custom people started So surrendered. was in trouble. During the course of conversation they gave them. questioning of Can you believe the power custom offficers realisation. the take them officers gave their own carB to The custom Love? Then a vacant bus arrived with two Yugoslavs across the border. the driver asked their problem, and allso realisation. and got driver then drove them right to Milan Ashram. So you must The have complete faith in yourself and in that power which surrounds Once you have that faith you realise that though it is SO you. helpful and kind to you, on the same level if you disrespect it, If "Ninda'. So never listen to Guru it be very harmful. can on anyone talks ill about your Guru, just put your hands your talk ears and refuse to listen. People who are materialistic and easy about the money part, you should tell them that it was by curing for Mother earn money from cancer patients and to But she has never charged anything. If She lives it is not She who lives but Sahaja Yogis. in people. Sahaja large house, still lack that complete faith in themselves and complete Yogis If anyone says anything wrong assertion, where you must assert. against your Guru, you have to assert. to spirituality. Some We must see how much we are sensitive Sahaja Yogis will support a person who is so negative. Whats the A person who is good in when your computer is so faulty. use Sahaja Yoga, who has vibrations, he may be simple and unassuming, he may not be rich or educated but you must see the vibrations of because Then you can judge. Do you judge a person that person. he talks well or is scholarly? You must see his vibrations. The 10

 who sees the vibrations of a person and then judges is ore I have seen that sometimes the leaders also support Sahaja Yogi. who is completely negative. They will tell me how good someone that person is, because he donated so much money. So what? Gurus themselves are caught up. Mostly They have ambitions and A Guru has their They are very hot-tempered. to ego comes up. first of all himself a very mild, gentle and a good person. be should not demand and should not ask for anything. He Respect has to be commanded and not to be demanded, in Once you rise ascent, your wisdom, in your awareness and in your Spirit, your You dont have to ask or everything works out well. then plead for anything. You dont have complain about anything. Everything works out and you are looked after by all the Ganas and Angels. If you are half baked then they play tricks with They will make you falter. You go here and They there. you. 1so jokers and they play jokes with you. They make problems are the for We realise that have to we are here for you. emancipation realise of the world. hope you your adou I responsibility. One must understand how one has to be as a Guru, how one has to act and how it has to work out. You must have maturity to be a Guru. With me be very careful I. am too simple and I am Mahamaya. You cannot take liberties with If you try to take too much liberties then it means that you me. not a disciple. A disciple has to keep a distance from the are You cannot just walk into my room everytime, sit there for Guru. You have no right. Only hours together and chit chat with me. You should when I call you or ask for you, you should come. not force things on the Guru- 'please come and listen to this or do this' that should not be there. Everything should be transparent. each should know Everyone Gurus should not have jealousies The each other. other. for Enjoy each other's company fully and appreciate each other 11

 than more else, then they should know anyone they have that become Gurus. All the Gurus never fought with each other. They supported one another. Actually it was one Principle born again again. Only Satanic people talk against a realised soul or an incarnation. We all are sitting in an aeroplane and we all have to land in a beautiful area but first of all we have to develop that complete Unless and until you have that surrender humility and surrender. and humility in your heart, Guru Principle cannot the be awakened. First you have to be the disciple and then the Guru. That humility comes very easily if you love me and respect me. May God Bless You. 30 3. 12 3:

 The Divine Cool Breeze NORTH AMERICAN NATIONAL PUJA SYNOPSIS San Diego, May 28 1990 America is a very important country in the field of spirituality because it is the Vishuddhi in the plan of Virata. The Vishuddhl has a very important subsidiary chakra, which is the Hamsa Chakra. In Germany there was a Hamsa Chakra puja, and It has acted: the discretion of the Germans improved and they realized past mistakes. They were the first ones to go to Russia to give self-realisation and they welcomed the East Germans with the breaking of the Berlin Wall. Due to hardships, fear and sacrifice, the people of the Eastern Bloc have bacome wise and have developed their discretion. Americans, however, have no 'Divine Discretion.' Their blessings have spoiled them and they cannot see what is dharma and what is adharma. "In that terror, in that fear, it is surprising how this wisdom has grown in all the people, much more than in countries where we have the greatest affluence, greatest comfort of life." Shri Krishna supported the Pandavas because they were dharmic, yet America always supports the wrong thing, such as dictatorships in other countries. False gurus settled here because they knew that the people had so little divine discretion. The democracy of Abraham Lincoln, democracy which should be "for the people gone. The government looks after Its own interests, and so does the populace. Those who were crooks, who cheated others were able to succeed, to become elected, and this trend spread throughout the worid; the leaders of every country became money- oriented. Democracy can only work out with realization: "If you do not become the collective being, you cannot enjoy the beautiful virtue of generosity. is In order for Sahaja Yoga to spread in America, it is very important for Sahaja Yogis here to become very deep so that they can trigger it off. If they fail in this, they will be held accountable. country's freedom. The Sahaja Yogis have to realize they are the foundation, so they have to be very deep, sensible and open-hearted. They are still sticking on to the past. and to aggressive conditionings. "Loving someone, being kind, should be so natural because that is what your Spirit is. It loves. It enjoys the love, giving love. One Sahaja Yogi in Hungary was sufficient to bring about that To let our Spirit manifest we have to understand its nature and rid ourselves of everything contrary to its nature through honest introspection. When the depth grows, then it is tremendous because the Divine power flows; the Divine power needs a medium which is absolutely clean, egoless and conditionless to flow. Many of the problems of America do not exist anywhere else in the world. The only solution is to go on a warpath, making Sahaja Yoga our only concern. The quality of Sahaja Yogis needs to be improved, and for that the first requirement is "COLLECTIVITY. America stands for the Vishuddhi chakra which manifests collectivity. In order to have the purity of Divine Discretion, which is the second most important quality to be manifested in America, and which sees everything clearly, we need to be collective and to meditate honestly. Meditation is not to sit before the photograph, but 13

 The Divine Cool Breeze It should activate the Param Chaitanya, making should be such that it works. everything work miraculously. If this is not happening then something is wrong. Americans are used to a very smooth, comfort-loving life, where everything is tailormade. This type of a life is boring. A challenging situation changes monotony into an event. For example it is more interesting to have so many people sharing a small room that it becomes an adventure to cross the room or get a bath. People who are very comfort-loving have no vision. This temperament is dangerous: in their boredom, Americans do destructive things. The basic reason why there are quarrels and divorces between husband and wife is because they are constantly comparing: " did this much work and he did this much. However, if they work with the goal of pleasing one other, the sheer joy of making someone happy will neutralize all the discomfort and fatigue. accomplish anything is not to think about it, but leave it at the Lotus Feet of Shri Mataji, because when we surrender, the Divine power starts flowing through our being. This was the message of Mohammed and also of Shri Krishna who said clearly, "Forget every dharma, just surrender yourself to Me.' And once that surrendering by Sahaja Yogis in America is developed, the Divine will take care of everything, but for that we have to leave it to Her. The best way to But still we are ambitious and have wrong priorities. There is no need to have ambition. Ambition is an imaginary thing. But Sahaja Yoga is reality. Things work out the way the Divine will have it. To have everything smooth, the way we want it to be, is not the way of Sahaja Yoga. Whatever we get, we should see the Hand of the Divine in it. Only a few Sahaja Yogis of a very deep quality are needed in order to trigger Sahaja Yoga in America. The negativity, the false gurus would not be able to take root if the American people were not so easily befooled. "If we understand one thing that we are living on the soil, or on the soil of the country which is blessed by Shri Krishna who is called as Yogeshwara, so the first part was the one when He destroyed all these things, He was Yogeshwara, He was the Divine energy for yoga, for union with the Divine Power. He was the Ishwara, He is the Deity. If He was the Deity and He was ruling this area, then what should you be? In yoga we should be masters. Not mentally but at that state of the higher state. If that could be achieved then you people should become the highest of highest yogis. Because you have that power existing in this place. It is there. So many have told me that Mother, now don't You worry about America, forget it. It's not going to work out." But I know such a lot of power exists in this country of the Yogeshwara. And if you can use that power of Yogeshwara, you can do so much good to the whole humanity at this juncture where the history is taking another form. *.Everybody is talking about spirituality and you are the ones who have it with you. You're the ones who have powers with you, you're the ones who can spread it, and once you start spreading it you'll be surprised how you will achieve tremendous heights in every sphere...You have to use the power of Yogeshwara who is the presiding Deity of this country. I bless you all that you have that wisdom, that depth, that you touch that depth somehow. Try to work it out, stop all nonsensical fights and things, become collective, try to understand each other, try to open your hearts. You have such depth3; you are born in this country because the Yogeshwara wanted you to be here, and He has blessed you with all the bounties of His love." "The embodiment of madhurya, sweetness, that madhurya you have to imbibe and that madhurya you have to spread. The relationship of enjoying each other, the relation of knowing each other has to be full of sweetness just like honey...l am sure it will work out. It should work out for all, so those who run away from collectivity should be very careful." 14

 SHRI MATAJI VISITS THE SOVIET UNION 25th June to 2nd July 1990 Shri Mataji's public programmes were held in huge sport stadiums in Moscow, Leningrad and Kiev. The public response was beyond imagination. In MoscoW. and Leningrad over Ten Thousand seekers to each programme.- After Shri Mataji gave realisation we came in ecstasy as nearly all the seekers raised were their hands affirming their We would have loved for al1 realisation. our brothers and sisters to have witnessed the magical spectacle of their shining eyes, radiant faces and the volley of vibrations dancing to a crescendo, They would listen to Shri Mataji with rapt attention and bring beautiful flowers. When it was time for handing out photographs there would always be such stampede the police had to regulate the crowd. that Over Twenty five thousand photographs were distributed in the Soviet Union and even they were not enough ! MOSCOW PUBLIC PROGRAMME SHRI MATAJI'S TALK- 25.6.1990 We must first know what is absolute truth. have human We we also have freedom to form our own mental awareness, ideas. truth cannot be known through human awareness. But has One to become a separate personality. All the knowledge which is outside is known has created a civlization which is which like a big But you have to find out about the roots which are going tree. to nourish this civilisation. If you do not knOW the absolute truth, Any type of mental projection or you cannot be saved. ideology ultimately will recoil back, because it to be substantiated by reality. What is the reality? It is that you 15

 are not only this body mind, ego, intellect or this conditioning, but you are the pure Spirit. Another thing is that we take all human work for granted. For we take all these flowers for granted without finding example differentE from a seed they became flowers and also out how which times. physical body There So many things in our are human body always be explained; one of them is that a cannot throws out whatever is foreign. When a child is conceived, it is retained, nourished, looked after and thrown out at the proper They do not time. mango tree grows upto a certain level. is What limits. Every animal has its limits too. the cross that energy that does all this work ? - the energy that nourishes This energy us, looks after us, gives us this balance ? resides in the Mother Earth, resides in the sun, resides everywhere. It definitely exists but we have never felt it before. Keep your minds open and accept it if it is proved. Every human extremely potential and is capable of creating very being is If the instrument is not connected then it is dynamic lives. In the same way unless we are connected to the useless. energy Divine Love, we are not yet fEulfilled, is our manifestation of not complete. We get limited. beauty, dynamism and compassion is All our easily frustrated, đisappointed and feel that this life is really Human life once enlightened is the highest life in the a misery. whole universe. You must get your realisation, feel this Divine Power, then you know yourself what this mechanism is and what is As the Kundalini rises she passes through technique. the seven cater to mental and emotional side. Then which the centres Spirit which is in your attention awakes this attention. is It so powerful that when you put your attention to anything it acts for the benevolence of your being, your fellow being and for the that it understands such in whole world. It actS way 16

 everything, knows everything and knows the method how to work it out. The Spirit is a collective being within us, like the sun on every thing. But if the reflection is like a reflects stone it doesn't any reflection. Once you show realize and start the Spirit reflecting the Spirit, the qualities of start manifesting themselves through you The first quality of the Spirit is that you become collectively conscious. Your awareness widens. That is, it receives another dimension by which you can feel on your finger tips your centres and the centres of others. If only you know how to correct these centres you can help yourself or others. Spirit is the source of Even if you talk of peace, people have peace foundations peace. but is there's no peace within themselves. who A person enlightened by the Spirit emits peace. Spirit is the source of Power You become so powerful that no habit can overpower you. I have seen people giving up drugs and alcoholism overnight. The Spirit is the source of Wisdom. Even small children who are troublesome, studies; no good in their they become once enlightened they become extremely wise children. The sense of the Spirit comes to them and they learn to respect themselves. The Spirit is the source of knowledge. Whatever knowledge we have about anything is very superficial. Self realisation is the real knowledge. absolute and Unless and until your eyes are opened and you see the knowledge, you believe in anything. Its blind faith. Blind faith leads you to destruction. It becomes like an addiction and a person goes on destroying himself till the whole community is destroyed. Unlss you have the of sense reality within you, you are following blindly. You all could be very knowledgeable. every thing about You learn and understand the problems of You can know each and yourself and others. 17

 You can judge yourself very society and how to solve them. well because you can feel yourself, you can feel centres. your When you say this is 'mine', my', what is this 'I'? It is the If the Divine Power awakens in you, you become what Spirit. you We have to just say that we want to be the Spirit because are. Kundalini is the Power of Pure Desire. All this desires other impure. Today you want a car, then you want a house and go are and on. You are never satisfied. be The pure Desire is to on one with that Divine Power. It is possible when you become the Spirit. Sahaja Yoga is going to work out and is the only thing that is going to transform the whole world. When you ascend you have be careful because the more you ascend to the the worse fall. MEDICAL CONFERENCE 29.6.1990 MOSCOW- SHRI MATAJI'S TALK In the medical studies whatever we have discovered is SO far available there already. Whatever we can discover with human awareness has its own limitations. Supposing it is said that the human body does not accept any foreign thing into its body, but the foetus is implanted, it is not thrown out when but looked and thrown out at the right time. after Also the adreline and acetocholine in our body, its mode of action cannot be explained because sometimes they they augment and sometimes they relax. We cannot explain so many things through medical achievements. has to be known and much to be found out. Much 18

 I would like you all to know something of the beyond which is not known so for So have an open mind of a scientist to see yourself if its true or not. Till then it is like a hypothesis. Sahaja Yoga gives you the complete picture of the totality of consciousness. As you grow higher and higher in Sahaja Yoga you First we yourself understand and can work out this great system. to accept that we are not only this human body, nor are have we emotions, neither are we ego and conditionings, but we Pure Spirit. are the There is an all prevading power of Love which does all this living work of creating flowers, fruits, and making us human beings. In science they do not talk of love but even the Eor doctors the patients otherwise they have love cannot dedicate. First the doctor has to become the Spirit. He has to feel the his head which are the fruit of this all vibrations on Cool This is the instrument which you prevading power of love. have for cleansing first of all for cleansing yourself and to use the medical science we In that the others. say can parasympathetic system is looked after by the central channel and right is looked after left and channels. by two more the to Sahaja Yoga, left and right sympathetic two are one is the one which comforts separate energies. The left us, the right one is the one which counsels us and the centre one is All this happens one which redeems us. after realisation, the because you have to have the correction. in In human beings the centres are in the spinal cord and also They are formed from the left and the right and the brain. both put together is the central system. The triangular bone in which the Kundalini resides is called as Sacrum means sacred sacrum. and the Greeks knew about it and put that word in the medical to Sahaja Yoga we are basically or to According terminology. three of people. Firstly we either go to the left the Left side is our desires and also whatever doesn't work right. 19

 goes into our collective subconscious. out We can say it looks after our psyche. It starts from down below at first centre and goes upward and crosses over at the optic chaisma and creates the super-ego in psychological terms is the conditioning. The lower centre also nourishes the pelvic plexus. This is responsible for excretion and sex. So one has to have sane ideas about our sex because this channel originates from the last centre. When Freud talked of psyche he preverted the whole thing Instead of telling people how to safeguard this centre which is the centre innocence by looking after the sex habits, he just of told the other way round. He related everything to sex as if human beings just sex points. He formed a self opiniated idealogy, that are feelings for his has Teveryman On this mother. sex mental projection he based all his theories and people thought it was so called 'freedom' to have sex the way they like. They didn't even challenge him. He became more than Christ to them in the West. result we As now the disease like AIDS, gnnorhrea, syphilis, etc. All related to sex organs. It was always called private parts but it was never understood what it means. Left side is the physhic problem and the right side is the psychosomatic problems. Psychosomatic problems are when you work too hard and think too much. In the second centre all the energy goes to the brain which thinks too much and is futuristic. Right sided problems caused by over active liver are one gets or diabetes because pancreas is not looked after. You get leukamia because spleen is not lookeđ after. You get high blood pressure because kidneys are in trouble. As the heat of the liver ascends get asthma. brain is like a The you it and spongy matter So the heat goes to kidneys. They cannot pass urine coagulates and the urine circulates in the body and blood. Also it causes constipation. Heat is the symptom of disease and coolness is the 20

 good health. The experiment with helium that when given heat, all the molecules were fighting with each system of s showed gas other. when they removed the heat they found And all the molecules were united. The third type of diseases are psychosomatic. Those who are have more problem with the psyche than with the physical. Cancer is psychosomatic. All viruses are dead plants animals, may be microscopic which have gone out or of circulation of They reside in the area called collective sub-conscious. have reached certain Doctors understanding that they say are protein 53 and protein 58 which trigger the cancer. Also they say that this cancer is caused to a person when he goes into a shock and the attack comes from the left in the area which was built within us since the creation. This is the collective sub-conscious where same area as the everything that is dead is there. So there are humans who are dead hanging around there. In physical science you may have never heard of something. There is a soul which is playing on the causal of all elements. It is attached in loops on the back side of our body. In all the seven It makes seven plus the sacrum bone it resides. loops. centres realisation you can see many loops like going round After and Sometimes many int o it round like chakras and one into another. together and sometimes only one. Also you can see little sparks like commas, which is chaitainya of the vibrations. These are Now this soul is reflected on ourselves in dead souls. the the Recently in America they have taken photographs receptor area. of the receptor of It looks exactly like what a cell. you see after realisation. But when another soul sits on the being then is It affects reflected on the cells. it the also. receptor This new soul might get attached to anyone of the centres or to all of them. It affects the cells also and they give all this depomine series which causes epilepsy, mental problems, cancer 21

 Only one may go in and If its a etc. If they are viruses its not so bad. but it can travel from one to another. affect human possession then its very difficult. Heart diseases, epilepsy come from the left side. Hypertension, sick headache could be from both sides. Migraine All bone or diseases Leukemia,r Fibrosis is Tumors, are psychosomatic. is not disease. psychosomatic. normal Menopause Its a a condition. Inflamation of could also the be pancreas Sciatica could be somatic or psychsomatic. All psychosomatic. mental diseases are left sided. Schizophernia is left sided. Alchoholism in sided the right side and left starts creates Arthiritis is psychosomatic. Drug addiction, smoking problems. homo-sexuality and preverted sex, too much indulgence in sex is all left sided or psychosomatic. guilty. Smoking creates left-sided problems because one feels sex habits and flirting of the eyes, AIDS, too much Perverted rigidity is due to left side. It is some sort of sex, centre problem. Multiple sclerosis is Neurosis possession. Parkinson's đisease is from both sides. could be side. Rhematicism comes from the Nabhi. Muscular distrophy comes from the left side. Yuppie's disease is where you are extremely hard working, and use your conscious mind too much. very futuristic absolutely Studying Then the conscious mind becomes too much. suddenly you walking alright paralyzed. and You are are conscious that you are walking then you will suddenly fall down. I had told eight years back in America that it will come. I told them about AIDS about fourteen years back. But nobody listened, now its very serious. is mostly right-sided. Diabetes When you use too much of right then the exhaustion takes place here. So you are vulnerable and suddenly happens from the left side as the connection from the left side as the connection with the whole is lost. These proteins like 53, 58 are very ego-oriented 22

 malignant. and arbitrary. Whatever cell they touch that becomes So women suffer from Thus malignancy sets in. breast cancer. When the mother- The centre of the heart is the Mother's centre. hood of a woman is challenged, say a husband is a flirt and keeps this insecure insecure, or if she's then centre gets affected. This centre produces anti-bodies to fight the diseases in the sternum bone till the age of twelve years. Then they are distributed all over. bone Whenever there is fear the sternum shakes and it is like a remote control that sends messages to all the anti-bodies to fight. If you establish the security of a lady through Kundalini awakening then her cancer be such can cured. have When they are in very advance stages they do not will power left, then its better to remove the breast that and then establish your security. lethargic organs. There diseases which are caused by the are When heart is lethargic one gets angina. When the left vishuddhi catches you feel very guilty and then there's a block and the blood cannot flow to the head, then it has to go to the heart and such a heart becomes tired and lethargic. In Sahaja Yoga we have two of organs : One is lethargic and the is ove other active. The doctors should first of all establish themselves properly and protect themselves, then they can also learn to cure others. Use the photographs which have the vibrations in them. Psychosomatic must be dealt only first on the left side. Some children suffer from hyper-activity. Diabetes also comes from the same reason. At the time when the mother is pregnant she should not work very She should take rest more. hard. She should not think too much but read something soothing, something nice. Best is to meditate. the mother is At that time if over-active and thinking of futuristic things, children are born with diseases. Or if she's child may hectic the is for get leukemia. The spleen all But if you emergencies because it produces red blood corpuscles. 23

 are hectic, panicked all the time, rushing about then the poor It becomes errati c and understand. It spleen cannot crazy. could happen to children or adults. When something triggers from the left side and there's sudden shock, may be sadness, accident anything, it triggers leukemia. The worst thing which is very difficult for anyone to understand there are negative forces working. They work through is that is They work through some false Guru, or parapsychology negativity. All these things are done by putting some sort or mesmerism etc. of a dead soul on your soul. One has to be very clear. For this It is a living process. cannot charge money. example For you You don't pay money to Mother Earth. Sow a seed. does She you It is built in the seed as well as Mother Earth. it. also We the living processes take all for There's granted. no But all these horrible people are obligation. oriented. money no purity of heart or purity of f eyes. They have They are interested in women, men or all kinds of dirty things. They are They cannot relate it to to explain how they do it. not able medical science or any science. In Sahaja Yoga Hatha Yoga exercises eboga there whenever we do some we is a chakra When damaged because of necessary. some Hatha Yoga try to give that particular physical problem, we But the way people do Hatha Yoga is to take al1 exercise. the medicines at once. -- Ha and Tha both the nadis have to In Hatha But now-a-days its only Ha used. This be used. can cause a imbalance within People who do this become great you. can extremely dry, hot tempered and may divorce his wife or leave his children. in the centre and be We should Kundalini should be fixed permanently with that All Prevading Power and flow all the time within you. But apart from physical, mental and emotional life, 24

 you have the Spiritual life, which is much more miraculous, which is very blissful and when you understand how this power of Love looks after everything, you are amazed. WE NEED SAHAJA YOGA. SAHAJA YOGA DOES NOT NEED US. SHRI MATAJI 25

 The Divine Cool Breeze Shri Mataji's Advice on Childcare In Miami, Mother spoke about child care in the United States and India. When asked about the problems non-Sahaja Yogis are having with their children in schools and day care, Shri Mataji answered immediately that all chldren should go to India, both Sahaja Yogi children and non-Sahaja yogi chilidren. She then spoke about the Indian Sahaja Yoga school. A sense of security and self-esteem would be established in the children there. Activities would be both formal and informal. Different teachers would lead the different activities. Security is established through the personal qualities of the care providers. It is not necessary to have one consistent care provider. Shri Mataji shared that in India, child raising is just known, established in the culture. Many things known as common sense in India are unknown here in the West. Examples are eating large, cold coca-colas with oily french fries (very indigestible); swimming in very cold water (a shock to the system); drinking cold drinks when coming in from extreme heat. These are Just little examples of things people do in the West which can make them sick. Mothers in India talk to their children constantly, explaining why and how things are done. Shri Mataji stressed this several times emphasizing the importance of talking to children. important to talk to them at their age level explaining things they can understand. In the United States, we give children toys and want them to be quiet. When asked how to handle children who say no, for example, "No, I don't want to eat my lunch, "Shri Mataji suggested not to make them eat lunch -- just wait until the next meal. They will learn that they will get hungry unless they eat their lunch. She said children can be quite sensible and should be listened to. It is Shri Mataji said parents in the United States say no all the time to the children instead of explaining things. This causes problems with the chlldren's development of self- esteem. Children should be ignored when they are doing something wrong. If they break something, ignore it. When the children do things right they should receive a lot of attention. Talking and explaining things to children gives them the direction. When asked about the frequency of illnesses in young children in day care, Shri Mataji said, "Yes, people in the United States are quite sickly." She said this is a problem with the mother's center heart. Establishing a strong center heart is important for mothers. She said I am sitting right there in your heart. Shri Mataji spoke at length about the great sense of God in India. She told several stories showing how people in India recognize the power of God, acknowledge and fear it. In the United States, the blind faith in Christianity is terrible. Church Teaders are stealing money from people in the name of God. How people in the West do not see the falsehood of Christiarilty is shocking to Shri Mataji. Shri Mataji spoke at length about the relationship of the mother and the father, in marriage and as parents. The role of the father and the mother is quite distinct and defined in India. husband will not make decisions without her. He depends totally on her. Indian husbands do not know how to do anything around the house and they do not know how to fix anything. An Indian Sahaja Yogi explained that when he got married Shri Mataji said her She said The husband depends totally on the wife. 26

 The Divine Cool Breeze in India, he was given advice politics and economics. Your wite will make decisions about the unimportant things of running the household and raising the children. We all laughed. motherhood is recognized. you make decisions about the inmportant things in The power of Shri Mataji said that the mother and father should never fight in front of the children. A child cannot develop respect for the mother or father if there is fighting. Children develop respect when they see the parents respect each other. Shri Mataji stated we need a school for parents in the United States. She will be speaking extensively on child care in Russia this tour. Shri Mataji suggested some ways to bring knowledge of raising children to the United States. These are being pursued. 3- Shri Mataji's advice for conducting Sahaja Yoga programmes. A Sahaja Yogi represents the Collective Sahaja Yoga when speaks from novice impression also bears the conviction of his faith. he The the but a public platform to introduce Sahaja Yoga. tends to form their initial opinion the speaker leaves. They not only listen to him his manners, dress, poise and whether audience his observe speech Rhetoric the spirit of the audience. feel upliftment of the spirit. without the hands flying in all directions. to or pompous speeches void of vibrations fail arouse and the but One should speak from the heart for There should be genuine The face may express that concern what one says. concern Too often Remember to speak to refrain from making long speeches. gets lost in his own oratory. a mental approach only arouses the ego. exude joy, bear a happy countenance without being He should conduct himself with dignity, grace, the Onie should speaker point, as should serious. be formally dressed with well groomed hair. the speaker overly poise, The should avoid preaching long Centre leaders Yogis at collective meetings. play Shri Mataji's medium sermons to Sahaja They should minimize lecturing and Centre leaders tapes instead. Shri Mataji and a Sahaja Yogi. Mataji's audio not We should not tapes have her are a between video and and spontaneously clear out all negativity allowing experience the joy of his several centres have not so far acquired tapes forget that vibrations Sahaja Surprisingly not Shri own Spirit. and and Video Yogi each to showing the videos of Shri Mataji. Audio are information was sent in the last issue. Shri Mataji has strictly prohibited any individual or make copies of any video, audio or publish any literature booklet. centre to or 27



----------------------

1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
00
Volume 2 No. 9-10
SHRI RAJA JANAKA
SHRI SHIRDI SAINATI
DHARMA VISHWANIRMALA DHARMA VIS
SHRI HATIAK
SHR1 ABRAHAH
MOHAMMED
SHRI MOSES
|HRI SOCRATER
ズし
SHRI ZARATIHUSTRA
SHRI CONFUCIUS
SHRI LADISE
..When you are worshipping your Guru, then this master within you is also
noh
worshipped. You respect it, you glorify it, you awaken it and you manifest it.
-Shri Mataji, Shn Guru Puja, France 1990
A DHARMA
NIRMALA
VISHWA NIRMALA DHARMA VISHWA NIRMALA OHAF
A DHARMA VISHWA NIRMALA DHARMA VISHWA
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-1.txt 
 GURU PUJA
AVIGNON. (FRANCE)
SHRI MATAJI'S TALK
8.7.1990
different significance
Sahaja Yoga the Guru Puja has a verY
In
from
any other Guru Puja. When you worship your Guru,
you
are
also worshipping the Guru within you.
This is not in any other
Guru-Disciple system, because in you the Guru-the Master has been
So when
awakened.
you are worshipping your
then
this
Guru
within you is also worshipped.
Master
You respect it, glorify
it, awaken it and manifest it.
The quality of a Guru first and foremost is that he
makes you
It means he raises the Kundalini and establishes the
God.
meet
between the all prevading power.
relation
is
the
As your Guru
Adi Shakti, we make that person also meet the Adi Shakti.
Then
have another advantage that when you give them
realisation,
you
not only make them feel the union with the Divine Power but
you
can also make them meet the Divinity itself
the source
of
you
Divine Power.
Your responsibility as Sahaja Yogis is very great, because in you
is the Guru.
there
In our mantras we say 'Mother, I am
own
my
this
Guru'.
But
"I" and "my Guru",
between
have
we
achieved? Where am I?
Have I got the light
Can I guide myself?
of the Spirit on my attention so well established and
manifested
that I can guide myself and guide others later on?
In the
Guru
principle
it
is
important that
you
to
see
yourself
introspection.
Have I become my own Guru?
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-2.txt 
 In
So it has
your case, your Guru is a mother, a woman.
be
to
among women that the development of the Guru qualities have to be
well manifested.
But for the women such is not
very
the case.
They are still the mother's or the wives, or Sahaja Yoginis.
But
you dont realise that you are also the Gurus, because your Mother
is a Guru, because She is a woman and you have to be also of that
quality that people should say 'Look at this woman, she is such a
I hear from the leaders that the ladies are
Guru'.
still
very
much far away and very few can be called as real Sahaja Yoginis.
If you still keep all these things of womanhood and
these draw
backs of woman-hood formed out of domination because
they
were
always shown to be something low.
In the Christian religion they
regarded
something holy.
diffidence in them that they do not understand that Dharma can be
were
never
have
They
this
as
established more from within than from without.
Guru's work is to establish Dharma in the society,
The
in the
family, in relationships.
All these Gurus
have done nothing but
But before establishing Dharma we
establish
the Dharma.
should
watch ourselves.
Have we got Dharma within ourselves
not.
First
is that
quality of a person who has
all
of
Dharma
he
to others, he obeys. With Western women what has
gone
wrong is that they have forgotten how to listen to others; how to
That is why their children also do not obey.
obey.
If
you do
not have obedience, nobody is going to obey you.
First you
must
learn to obey.
A person like Kabir was born of an unknown
caste
and
he could not go directly to anybody. Ramdas used to
go to
the river Ganges every morning to have his bath.
One day on
his
steps Kabir kept lying and in the darkness the Guru could not see
touched him with his feet. He asked
and
who are you'?
Kabir
replied I am your đisciple' and caught hold of his feet.
Then
Ramdas's disciple and a great saint.
he became
People know him
In humility
than his Guru.
The basic thing is humility.
more
only you can receive the blessings. You can receive the quality
that is of your Guru.
2.
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-3.txt 
 life
First of all
Guru has to come up in my own image.
your
should be absolutely transparent.
Transparency is the essence of
Sahaja Yoga. Everybody should know what you are doing, where you
are going; what is the way you live, what is the way you
People who are Gurus, also called Leaders, one finds
behave.
they
that
their
body.
very fussy type of people. Always think about
are
As if they suffer
They grumble that nobody looked after them.
Or they will grumble that they đid
not
from persecution mania.
For a Guru it is better
eat food for one day. Doesn't
matter.
this
to starve for about three to four days so that you get over
hunger because it is in
of hunger. The Guru has no
idea
your
so much that you do not feel like
stomach and the vibrations are
If leaders have this nonsense in their head
eating anything.
like
do you
is
it
that what
get to eat, how you eat,
etc.
tourists in Sahaja Yoga.
This is not the manisfestation of
Guru
I do not
know
principle.
have seen your Guru as She is. I do
You
what I eat, what they give me, what I want.
They go on giving me
Do not
choices.
There should be no
they think I like.
what
attention on choices.
should
be
All your choices
waste your
on vibrations and not on material things.
You should
based
not
kind
Eating of tasty food is a
have taste for any special food.
is
addiction.
Zen started the system of tea ceremony, which
of
which
In this ceremony they serve
tea
quite a test of people.
It is a great ritual. They tell you
watch
is
to
very bitter.
thoughtless
the cup without thinking. They were trying to reach
is
Once you take that tea, your tongue
awareness through a cup.
To compensate it they give you something
for anything.
good
This is just
It is so sweet that it becomes bitter.
to
sweet.
shocks
This ceremony gives such
the
to
tongue.
your
conquer
That is why
tongue that after that you can eat whatever you get.
the Japanese can eat anything.
The fussiest people about food are the Indians.
That is
because
They know how to
their
handle
have spoiled them.
their
women
Even if they travel abroad, they
husbands by cooking very well.
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Indian food. They cannot get over their tongues because
it
eat
boiled
is
big conditioning. Gandhiji used to give horrible
a
with oil and mustard on top, which no one could
food
He
eat.
tried that people should get over their taste for food.
Thus
he
would make
of the
their W.C.s etc to
people clean
get rid
sensitivity
People spend
in
to Smells.
forty five minutes
to decide what they are going
just
to
eat.
For
restaurants
Sahaji Yogis it is important to give up this idea. First of all
nobody should ask what will you have.
Do not ask me also what
to think about it and
will
have,
have
be
want
to
as
We must understand how much we are attached to food.
Nirvichara.
It goes in our stomachs and thus spoils our Guru system and
also
spoils our physical system.
We should try not to look at
food.
to develop
why fasting was told to people who wanted
That
their Guru Principle.
Fasting means that you go into Nirvichara
do not think of fasting or food.
But they are all the time
and
thinking of food, so it has no meaning and you are just the
same
whether
you eat or not; your mind is eating the food.
You
are
thinking when you will end the fast and you can eat
busy
again.
We should get rid of our habits of our conditionings.
should also be given a
The children
it.
proper training about
Sometimes there is no salt, sometimes there is no sugar, does not
Nothing important for Sahaja
Yogis who can live without
matter.
For a Sahaja Yogi there is nothing like
food for days together.
There is only one hunger.
It is to be
taste of food and hunger.
to be clean.
purified,
This is one of the things that dirties
our mind, that we think of food all the time.
To get over
taste
is an experiment you have to do.
Unless and until we
introspect
because though
ourselves and do experiments we cannot overcome
the Kundalini is trying Her level best but the conditionings
are
great that it cannot make you into the Guru.
If you see the
SO
of
children and
all these Gurus; they were married, had
life
But in their own personal life they
lived a normal life.
were
absolutely detached.
The first detachment should come from food.
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-5.txt 
 icecream
One who is fond of
Whatever
you like just do not eat.
must have already spoiled his liver.
If you like pasta then give
Learn to give up things that you like so
that
your
up pasta.
this
mind will get detached from it.
It is very easy to achieve
detachment if you work it out in a sensible way.
If you are your
then you better take hold of your body and conditionings.
Guru
Adjust yourself to any
You must treat your body with respect.
kind of food.
If you cannot get rid of this little thing then
you cannot be called a Sahaja Yogi.
One of the manifestations of
is just self
is a satisfied soul.
that
Guru is
He
contained.
part of the body is that you need comforts.
The
Western
Second
Sahaja Yogis may come from any position or status but all of them
comfort of the Spirit when they travel on
the India
enjoy the
In this way you
They do not ask for a chair or a bed etc.
tour.
will realise that the body comfort is of no importance. The body
will sleep anyway.
The third point is the materialistic attitude and their fondness
Sahaja Yogis have to have very
the eyes i.e., a roving eye.
In Sahaja Yogo may
Then there is th lust and greed.
clean eyes.
be the lust part is over, but the greed is still there;
and
one
have lust problems but they still
Indians do not
gets lost.
have greed.
For a Westerner he would not like to give up
his
For
furniture which his great grandmother had; even if no one can sit
on it, because it is so old.
He keeps it to show off. According
to Indian standards its junk.
a very subtle material attitude towards matter, that
it
There's
Such junk is like a grave in the house,
re-sale value.
has
as
Antique is an addiction of
knows how many people used it.
who
the Western people.
Indians cannot understand how people are mad
writer
There is a
torn, broken, filthy and dirty things.
after
India who wrote about two Englishmen on the road
of
in
Benares
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-6.txt 
 were hit by a brass pot which fell at
The
feet.
their
who
So the Indian told
them
that
English were very angry at this.
this Lota (pot) is very valuable because it was used by Akbar the
were very impressed and
The Englishmen
that we
said
Great.
give us this antique Lota
forgive you
for one
thousand
the Indian to
The
whole thing was a joke played by
rupees.
punishment. The madness of antique shoula go
escape
One should encourage revival of the old
our minds.
rather
arts
It has ruined our creativity and
running after antiques.
than
Because something is antique it
the quality of our life.
should
intrinsic
because of its
be respected, but
value
or
The most important thing is to see its vibrations.
aesthetics.
If the vibrations are good then you should accept because we have
the language of vibrations and we have to use it.
do
Once
you
this then you will understand what is to be done.
The worst thing for Sahaja Yogis is to think that he is sick,
it
tarnishs the name of Sahaja Yoga. If you still
feel you are sick
Either you get well
you better get out of Sahaja Yoga
or
you
are not a Sahaja Yogi. If you are a Sahaja Yogi then you have to
If there are certain
problems also,
you get well.
see that
For example I as the Mother, the Adi Shakti have
doesn't matter.
certain problems, certain physical things I have to face.
But
You have
You have to accept your body ais it is.
go through it.
think
not to say that I am not wellI and go on complaining. Never
Never feel that you are no good.
Look
old.
at
your
you are
I never feel that that way. So if you have a Guru,
then
Mother
MLOOK at our Mother,
image should be within you.
is, how much She travels, how much She does'.
old
how
that
Alright, you
She
might say She is the Adi Shakti, but 1iEtle bit of Shakti you too
If you
That Shakti has to be shown through your dynamism.
have.
have no dynamism and still feel weak, that means that you are not
Just ask for any amount andđ it can ocome to you.
Sahaja Yogi.
Hot with
You are
younger and younger but
the
stupidity of youth but the gravity of age.
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-7.txt 
 do
born realised are very
Children
and
who are
won't
great
talk
đignified.
anything
is
that
They will
not
never
unnecessarily. By just wearing saris and bindis you do not become
First of all where is the gravity?
Sahaja Yogi.
should
You
The born realised souls say very
only speak when it is necessary.
They are
they speak.,
such beautifyl words
few
words, but
The way their Guru principla is acting,
extremely obedient.
are
we also acting the same way?
Or are doing some thing that is not
Even after coming to Sahaja Yoga if you do
good for ascent.
not
the point
to introspect then you
of
missed
have
try hard
comparison with your Guru all the time.
Everything has to be understood in the right perspective that
we
Sahaja Yogis.
For a Sahaja Yogi the
first
and
foremost
are
thing is that he has to have love for others,.
If you are always
about yourself then you dont love others.
worried
Do you seek
for other
comfort of others?
Do you feel the compassiorn
the
Sahaja Yogis?
Do you go out of your way to help them?
Many
Sahaja Yogis take
side of non Sahaja Yogis and
try
to
the Sahaja Yogis.
You belong to this new
The
disgrace
race.
is
who do not belong to this new race attack anybody.
It
ones
to help a Sahaja Yogi as he is your
hands and
your duty
your
May be something is wrong with him doesn't matter.
head.
You
should
Sahaja Yogi out and out.
support
Later
on
you
may
correct him.
This dignity and this understanding comes only through silence.
a deeper
you are talking all the time it can never make you
If
mauna.i.e. keep
women its best that they take to
For
person.
All the leaders have have told me that its a big problem
quiet.
But if you
with women.
They go on talking or spreading stories.
ask
them
to come up to the stage and start speaking they will
start shivering.
How many can give speeches? Understand that if
You should be
you cannot give a speech then you better not talk.
able to
and She
give a speech, because your Mother is a
woman
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-8.txt 
 As your Guru I must tell you that you
gives speeches.
to
have
an the best thing for you is to stop murmuring.
"Maunam
ascend
If someboy is talking too
Just keep quiet.
Sarvaath Sadhanam'.
just keep quiet. If somebody criticizes, keep quiet.
If
much,
somebody is trying to attack then just keep silent.
This silence
has to be established and it can be established by not talking
too much.
In a church people observe such discipline, which
is
an artificial place. They dont keep walking in and out.
In
the
has to be
now that kind of
silence
place where
you are
that kind of understanding, that awe has to be there.
observed,
because we have not yet developed that Guru principle it is
But
If you have developed it then immediately it will
missing.
work
Your gravity will show in your
behaviour.
To discuss
out.
somebody,
to discuss about others' character, will
discuss
you
the character of one hand to another?
In Sahaja Yoga marriage is not such an important thing.
Some
The marriage becomes
people pay too much attention to marriage.
a headache. The whole attention goes on how you are going to
get
married.
You have come to Sahaja Yoga, you are sanyasins.
You
are married only to Sahaja Yoga.
The so called husband and
wife
if
there,
they are not Sahaja Yogis then
but
are
you
are
Before Sahaja Yoga marriage was a joke, every
finished.
third
day there was a divorce.
Then when they got married after Sahaja
Yoga, they were the greatest romantic people ever known.
of people
Even in
the Indian villages people complain
what sort
are
these they
That saintliness
have no sense of modesty at all.
that Sanyasi, that asceticism has to be expressed in our
married
I don't mean that you don't have relationship with your
life.
husband but
If you
in
a very private way.
will ruin the whole of Sahaja Yoga.
start going into
romanticism,
In the
you
is an idea that you fall in love,
there
West,
then you won't
will only fall
rise, you
This
attachment and
about
worry
etc is nonsense.
You have to have witness state and
husband
be
watch the state of husband or the state
wife.
detached
of
to
81
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-9.txt 
 honeymoons etc.
organise
after marriage, people want to
Soon
after
conditionings and
are coming from the old
These ideas
honeymoon they come and say 'Mother this marriage is not going to
decide.
out'.
It is better to go slow and steady and then
work
and
Husband
learn the sense of shame from Indians,.
nust
You
It is regarded
bad
wife
together in public.
never sit
as
What is the need to show your relationship in
blic?
manners.,
Men should be with men in the public and
Its only in private.
women should be with the women.
have jealousies, power orientation and they
discuss
about
Men
They get a shock if you tell them that you are
leadership.
not
They think that leadership is something
going to be a leader.
There's
the greatest myth ever
Its
very concrete.
nothing 1ike leaders in Sahaja Yoga.
Its just a joke and
your
So be
Mother is
careful.
very good at playing serious jokes.
I test
a testing point.
level
and
just
that
Its
on
you
immediately
I know when the person gets on to the horse of
ego.
priorities
So the mental attitude has to be different and
our
rnust change.
The first
priority is for our ascent.
For your ascent if
you
have
have
punish your whole body, or yourself or if
to
you
then get
conditioning
rid of it.
Just introspect yourself.
Self-realisation is to know yourself.
When you know yourself and
is clinging on to it, just remove it completely, work
know what
it out
It is very important that the body,
the way you like.
everything should be your
mind, and
Nothing
should
slaves.
dominate you.
How dare your body ask for anything.
dare
How
tell you anything.
You have so many proofs
Inind
your mind
show
to
that
you are realised souls.
my presence if you become the
The only way
light you
must
carry the light also.
you
can
to realise that when
is
Mother
about
talks
penetrate within
anything, to see that Mother is talking about me, correcting
me,
and telling me, then only it will penetrate and work out.
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-10.txt 
 is the faith that this All Prevading Power is looking
Second
after us. The musicians were told to travel by train from
Moscow
As they had no visa for Hungary they were
taken
off
to Milan.
They were sitting
at the Hungary border.
the
train
the
on
did
platform, knowing not what to do as they had no visas,
not
know the language, and not much money.
They were stranded there.
But they were all laughing and enjoying and no
one felt that
he
Then the custom people started
So surrendered.
was in trouble.
During the course of conversation they gave
them.
questioning
of
Can you believe the power
custom offficers realisation.
the
take them
officers gave their own carB
to
The
custom
Love?
Then a vacant bus arrived with two Yugoslavs
across the border.
the driver asked their problem, and allso
realisation.
and
got
driver then drove them right to Milan Ashram.
So you must
The
have complete faith in yourself and in that power which surrounds
Once you have that faith you realise that though it is
SO
you.
helpful and kind to you, on the same level if you disrespect it,
If
"Ninda'.
So never listen to Guru
it
be very harmful.
can
on
anyone talks ill about your Guru, just put your hands
your
talk
ears and refuse to listen. People who are materialistic and
easy
about
the money part, you should tell them that it was
by curing
for
Mother
earn money from cancer patients and
to
But she has never charged anything. If She lives
it is not She who lives but Sahaja Yogis.
in
people.
Sahaja
large house,
still lack that complete faith in themselves and complete
Yogis
If anyone says anything wrong
assertion, where you must assert.
against your Guru, you have to assert.
to spirituality.
Some
We must
see how much we are sensitive
Sahaja Yogis will support a person who is so negative. Whats the
A person who is good in
when
your computer is so faulty.
use
Sahaja Yoga, who has vibrations, he may be simple and unassuming,
he may not be rich or educated but you must see the vibrations of
because
Then you can judge.
Do you judge a person
that person.
he talks well or is scholarly? You must see his vibrations.
The
10
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-11.txt 
 who sees the vibrations of a person and then judges is
ore
I have seen that sometimes the leaders also support
Sahaja Yogi.
who is completely negative. They will tell me how
good
someone
that person is, because he donated so much money. So what?
Gurus themselves are caught up.
Mostly
They have ambitions and
A Guru has
their
They are very hot-tempered.
to
ego comes up.
first of all himself a very mild, gentle and a good person.
be
should not demand and should not ask for anything.
He
Respect
has to be commanded and not to be demanded,
in
Once you
rise
ascent, your wisdom, in your awareness and in your Spirit,
your
You dont have to ask or
everything works out well.
then
plead
for anything.
You dont have
complain about
anything.
Everything works out and you are looked after by all
the Ganas
and Angels.
If you are half baked then they play
tricks with
They will make you falter. You go here and
They
there.
you.
1so jokers and they play jokes with you. They make problems
are
the
for
We
realise that
have to
we are here for
you.
emancipation
realise
of
the
world.
hope
you
your
adou I
responsibility.
One must understand how one has to be as a Guru,
how one has to act and how it has to work out.
You must have maturity to be a Guru. With me be very careful
I.
am too simple and I am Mahamaya.
You cannot take liberties
with
If you try to take too much liberties then it means that you
me.
not a disciple.
A disciple has to keep a distance from
the
are
You cannot just walk into my room everytime, sit there for
Guru.
You have no right.
Only
hours
together and chit chat with me.
You should
when I call you or ask for you, you should come.
not
force things on the Guru- 'please come and listen to this or
do
this'
that should not be there.
Everything should
be transparent.
each
should know
Everyone
Gurus should not have jealousies
The
each other.
other.
for
Enjoy
each other's company fully and appreciate each other
11
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-12.txt 
 than
more
else, then they should know
anyone
they have
that
become Gurus.
All the Gurus never fought with each other.
They
supported one another. Actually it was one Principle born
again
again. Only Satanic people talk against a realised soul
or
an incarnation.
We
all are sitting in an aeroplane and we all have to land in
a
beautiful area but first of all we have to develop that
complete
Unless and until you have that surrender
humility and surrender.
and humility in your
heart,
Guru Principle cannot
the
be
awakened.
First you have to be the disciple and then the
Guru.
That humility comes very easily if you love me and respect me.
May God Bless You.
30
3.
12
3:
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-13.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
NORTH AMERICAN NATIONAL PUJA
SYNOPSIS
San Diego, May 28 1990
America is a very important country in the field of spirituality because it is the
Vishuddhi in the plan of Virata. The Vishuddhl has a very important subsidiary chakra,
which is the Hamsa Chakra.
In Germany there was a Hamsa Chakra puja, and It has acted: the discretion of the
Germans improved and they realized past mistakes. They were the first ones to go to
Russia to give self-realisation and they welcomed the East Germans with the breaking
of the Berlin Wall.
Due to hardships, fear and sacrifice, the people of the Eastern Bloc have bacome wise
and have developed their discretion. Americans, however, have no 'Divine Discretion.'
Their blessings have spoiled them and they cannot see what is dharma and what is
adharma. "In that terror, in that fear, it is surprising how this wisdom has grown in all
the people, much more than in countries where we have the greatest affluence,
greatest comfort of life." Shri Krishna supported the Pandavas because they were
dharmic, yet America always supports the wrong thing, such as dictatorships in other
countries. False gurus settled here because they knew that the people had so little
divine discretion.
The democracy of Abraham Lincoln, democracy which should be "for the people
gone. The government looks after Its own interests, and so does the populace. Those
who were crooks, who cheated others were able to succeed, to become elected, and
this trend spread throughout the worid; the leaders of every country became money-
oriented. Democracy can only work out with realization: "If you do not become the
collective being, you cannot enjoy the beautiful virtue of generosity.
is
In order for Sahaja Yoga to spread in America, it is very important for Sahaja Yogis
here to become very deep so that they can trigger it off. If they fail in this, they will be
held accountable.
country's freedom. The Sahaja Yogis have to realize they are the foundation, so they
have to be very deep, sensible and open-hearted. They are still sticking on to the
past. and to aggressive conditionings. "Loving someone, being kind, should be so
natural because that is what your Spirit is. It loves. It enjoys the love, giving love.
One Sahaja Yogi in Hungary was sufficient to bring about that
To let our Spirit manifest we have to understand its nature and rid ourselves of
everything contrary to its nature through honest introspection. When the depth grows,
then it is tremendous because the Divine power flows; the Divine power needs a
medium which is absolutely clean, egoless and conditionless to flow.
Many of the problems of America do not exist anywhere else in the world. The only
solution is to go on a warpath, making Sahaja Yoga our only concern. The quality of
Sahaja Yogis needs to be improved, and for that the first requirement is
"COLLECTIVITY. America stands for the Vishuddhi chakra which manifests collectivity.
In order to have the purity of Divine Discretion, which is the second most important
quality to be manifested in America, and which sees everything clearly, we need to be
collective and to meditate honestly. Meditation is not to sit before the photograph, but
13
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-14.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
It should activate the Param Chaitanya, making
should be such that it works.
everything work miraculously. If this is not happening then something is wrong.
Americans are used to a very smooth, comfort-loving life, where everything is
tailormade. This type of a life is boring. A challenging situation changes monotony into
an event. For example it is more interesting to have so many people sharing a small
room that it becomes an adventure to cross the room or get a bath. People who are
very comfort-loving have no vision. This temperament is dangerous: in their boredom,
Americans do destructive things.
The basic reason why there are quarrels and divorces between husband and wife is
because they are constantly comparing: " did this much work and he did this much.
However, if they work with the goal of pleasing one other, the sheer joy of making
someone happy will neutralize all the discomfort and fatigue.
accomplish anything is not to think about it, but leave it at the Lotus Feet of Shri
Mataji, because when we surrender, the Divine power starts flowing through our being.
This was the message of Mohammed and also of Shri Krishna who said clearly,
"Forget every dharma, just surrender yourself to Me.' And once that surrendering by
Sahaja Yogis in America is developed, the Divine will take care of everything, but for
that we have to leave it to Her.
The best way to
But still we are ambitious and have wrong priorities. There is no need to have
ambition. Ambition is an imaginary thing. But Sahaja Yoga is reality. Things work out
the way the Divine will have it. To have everything smooth, the way we want it to be,
is not the way of Sahaja Yoga. Whatever we get, we should see the Hand of the
Divine in it.
Only a few Sahaja Yogis of a very deep quality are needed in order to trigger Sahaja
Yoga in America. The negativity, the false gurus would not be able to take root if the
American people were not so easily befooled.
"If we understand one thing that we are living on the soil, or on the soil of the country
which is blessed by Shri Krishna who is called as Yogeshwara, so the first part was
the one when He destroyed all these things, He was Yogeshwara, He was the Divine
energy for yoga, for union with the Divine Power. He was the Ishwara, He is the Deity.
If He was the Deity and He was ruling this area, then what should you be? In yoga
we should be masters. Not mentally but at that state of the higher state. If that could
be achieved then you people should become the highest of highest yogis. Because
you have that power existing in this place. It is there. So many have told me that
Mother, now don't You worry about America, forget it. It's not going to work out." But
I know such a lot of power exists in this country of the Yogeshwara. And if you can
use that power of Yogeshwara, you can do so much good to the whole humanity at
this juncture where the history is taking another form.
*.Everybody is talking about spirituality and you are the ones who have it with you.
You're the ones who have powers with you, you're the ones who can spread it, and
once you start spreading it you'll be surprised how you will achieve tremendous heights
in every sphere...You have to use the power of Yogeshwara who is the presiding Deity
of this country. I bless you all that you have that wisdom, that depth, that you touch
that depth somehow. Try to work it out, stop all nonsensical fights and things, become
collective, try to understand each other, try to open your hearts. You have such depth3;
you are born in this country because the Yogeshwara wanted you to be here, and He
has blessed you with all the bounties of His love."
"The embodiment of madhurya, sweetness, that madhurya you have to imbibe and that
madhurya you have to spread. The relationship of enjoying each other, the relation of
knowing each other has to be full of sweetness just like honey...l am sure it will work
out. It should work out for all, so those who run away from collectivity should be very
careful."
14
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-15.txt 
 SHRI MATAJI VISITS THE SOVIET UNION
25th June to 2nd July 1990
Shri Mataji's public programmes were held in huge sport
stadiums
in
Moscow, Leningrad and Kiev.
The public response
was beyond
imagination.
In MoscoW. and Leningrad over Ten Thousand
seekers
to each programme.-
After Shri Mataji gave
realisation we
came
in ecstasy as nearly all the seekers raised
were
their
hands
affirming their
We would have loved for al1
realisation.
our
brothers and sisters to have witnessed the magical spectacle of
their shining eyes, radiant faces and the volley of
vibrations
dancing to a crescendo, They would listen to Shri Mataji with
rapt attention and bring beautiful flowers.
When it was time for
handing out photographs there would always be such
stampede
the police had to regulate the crowd.
that
Over Twenty five
thousand photographs were distributed in the Soviet
Union
and
even they were not enough !
MOSCOW PUBLIC PROGRAMME
SHRI MATAJI'S TALK-
25.6.1990
We must
first
know what is absolute
truth.
have
human
We
we also have freedom to form our own mental
awareness,
ideas.
truth cannot be known through human awareness.
But
has
One
to
become a separate personality. All the knowledge which is outside
is
known has created a civlization which is
which
like a
big
But you have to find out about the roots which are going
tree.
to nourish this civilisation.
If you do not knOW the
absolute
truth,
Any type of mental projection or
you cannot be saved.
ideology ultimately will
recoil back, because
it
to be
substantiated by reality. What is the reality?
It is that
you
15
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-16.txt 
 are not only this body mind, ego, intellect or this conditioning,
but you are the pure Spirit.
Another thing is that we take all human work for granted.
For
we take all these flowers for granted without finding
example
differentE
from a seed they became flowers and also
out how
which
times.
physical body
There
So many things in our
are
human body always
be explained; one of them is that a
cannot
throws out whatever is foreign.
When a child is conceived, it is
retained,
nourished, looked after and thrown out at
the
proper
They do not
time.
mango tree grows upto a certain level.
is
What
limits.
Every animal has its limits too.
the
cross
that energy that does all this work ? - the energy that nourishes
This energy
us, looks after us, gives us this balance ?
resides
in the Mother Earth, resides in the sun, resides everywhere.
It
definitely exists but we have never felt it before.
Keep your minds open and accept it if it is proved.
Every human
extremely potential and is capable of creating very
being is
If the instrument is not connected then it is
dynamic lives.
In the same way unless we are connected to the
useless.
energy
Divine Love, we are not yet fEulfilled,
is
our manifestation
of
not complete.
We get
limited.
beauty, dynamism and compassion is
All
our
easily frustrated, đisappointed and feel that this life is really
Human life once enlightened is the highest life in the
a misery.
whole universe.
You must get your realisation, feel this Divine
Power, then you know yourself what this mechanism is and what
is
As the Kundalini rises she passes through
technique.
the
seven
cater to mental and emotional side.
Then
which
the
centres
Spirit which is in your attention awakes this attention.
is
It
so powerful that when you put your attention to anything it acts
for the benevolence of your being, your fellow being and for
the
that it understands
such
in
whole world.
It actS
way
16
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-17.txt 
 everything, knows everything and knows the method how to work
it
out.
The Spirit is a collective being within us, like
the sun
on every thing. But if the reflection is like a
reflects
stone
it doesn't
any reflection. Once you
show
realize and start
the Spirit
reflecting the Spirit,
the qualities
of
start
manifesting themselves through you
The
first quality of the Spirit is that you become collectively
conscious.
Your awareness widens.
That is, it receives
another
dimension by which you can feel on your finger tips your centres
and the centres of others.
If only you know how to correct these
centres you can help yourself or others.
Spirit is the source of
Even if you talk of peace, people have peace foundations
peace.
but
is
there's
no peace within themselves.
who
A person
enlightened by the Spirit emits peace.
Spirit is the source of Power
You become so powerful
that no
habit can overpower you.
I have seen people giving up drugs and
alcoholism overnight.
The Spirit is the source of Wisdom.
Even small children who
are
troublesome,
studies;
no good in their
they
become
once
enlightened they become extremely wise children. The sense
of
the Spirit comes to them and they learn to respect themselves.
The Spirit is the source of knowledge.
Whatever knowledge
we
have about anything is very superficial.
Self realisation is the
real knowledge.
absolute and
Unless and until
your
eyes
are
opened and you see the knowledge, you believe in anything.
Its
blind faith. Blind faith leads you to destruction.
It becomes
like an addiction and a person goes on destroying himself
till
the
whole community is destroyed. Unlss you have the
of
sense
reality within you, you are following blindly. You all could
be
very knowledgeable.
every thing about
You learn and understand the problems of
You can know each and
yourself and others.
17
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-18.txt 
 You can judge yourself very
society and how to solve them.
well because you can feel yourself, you can feel
centres.
your
When you say this is 'mine', my', what is this 'I'?
It is the
If the Divine Power awakens in you, you become what
Spirit.
you
We have to just say that we want to be the Spirit because
are.
Kundalini is the Power of Pure Desire. All
this
desires
other
impure. Today you want a car, then you want a house and
go
are
and on.
You are never satisfied.
be
The pure Desire is
to
on
one with that Divine Power.
It is possible when you become the
Spirit.
Sahaja Yoga is going to work out and is the only thing
that is going to transform the whole world. When you ascend
you
have
be careful because the more you ascend
to
the
the
worse
fall.
MEDICAL CONFERENCE
29.6.1990
MOSCOW-
SHRI MATAJI'S TALK
In the medical studies whatever we have discovered
is
SO far
available there
already.
Whatever we can discover
with
human
awareness has its own limitations.
Supposing it is said that the
human body does not accept any foreign thing into its body, but
the foetus is implanted, it is not thrown out
when
but
looked
and thrown out at the right time.
after
Also the adreline
and
acetocholine in our body, its mode of action cannot be explained
because sometimes they they augment and sometimes they relax. We
cannot explain so many things through medical achievements.
has to be known and much to be found out.
Much
18
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-19.txt 
 I would like you all to know something of the beyond which is not
known so
for
So have an open mind of a scientist to
see
yourself if its true or not. Till then it is like a
hypothesis.
Sahaja Yoga gives you the complete picture of the totality of
consciousness. As you grow higher and higher in Sahaja Yoga
you
First we
yourself understand and can work out this great system.
to accept that we are not only this human body, nor are
have
we
emotions, neither are we ego and conditionings, but we
Pure Spirit.
are the
There is an all prevading power of Love which
does
all this living work of creating flowers, fruits, and making
us
human beings.
In science they do not talk of love but even
the
Eor
doctors
the patients otherwise they
have love
cannot
dedicate.
First
the doctor has to become the Spirit. He has to
feel
the
his head which are the fruit of this all
vibrations on
Cool
This is the instrument which you
prevading power of love.
have
for cleansing
first of all for cleansing yourself and
to use
the medical science we
In
that
the
others.
say
can
parasympathetic system is looked after by the central channel and
right is looked after
left
and
channels.
by
two more
the
to Sahaja Yoga, left and right sympathetic
two
are
one is the one which comforts
separate energies. The left
us,
the right one is the one which counsels us and the centre one
is
All this happens
one which redeems us.
after realisation,
the
because you have to have the correction.
in
In human beings the centres are in the spinal cord and also
They are formed from the left and the right and
the brain.
both
put together is the central system.
The triangular bone in which
the Kundalini resides is called as
Sacrum means
sacred
sacrum.
and the Greeks knew about it and put that word in
the medical
to Sahaja Yoga we are basically
or to
According
terminology.
three
of people. Firstly we either go to the left
the
Left side is our desires and also whatever doesn't
work
right.
19
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-20.txt 
 goes into our collective subconscious.
out
We can say it looks
after our psyche.
It starts from down below at first centre and
goes upward and crosses over at the optic chaisma and creates the
super-ego in psychological terms is the conditioning.
The
lower
centre also nourishes the pelvic plexus.
This is responsible for
excretion and sex.
So one has to have sane ideas about
our
sex
because this channel originates from the last centre.
When Freud
talked
of
psyche he preverted the whole thing
Instead of
telling people how to safeguard this centre which is the
centre
innocence by looking after the sex habits, he just
of
told
the
other way round.
He related everything to sex as if human beings
just sex points. He formed a self opiniated idealogy, that
are
feelings
for his
has
Teveryman
On this
mother.
sex
mental
projection he based all his theories and people thought it was so
called 'freedom' to have sex the way they like.
They didn't even
challenge him.
He became more than Christ to them in the
West.
result we
As
now the disease
like AIDS,
gnnorhrea,
syphilis, etc.
All related to sex organs.
It was always
called
private parts but it was never understood what it means.
Left
side is
the physhic problem and the
right side is
the
psychosomatic problems. Psychosomatic problems are when you work
too hard and think too much.
In the second centre all the energy
goes to the brain which thinks too much and is futuristic. Right
sided problems
caused by over active liver
are
one gets
or
diabetes because pancreas is not looked after.
You get leukamia
because spleen is not lookeđ after.
You get high blood
pressure
because kidneys are in trouble.
As the heat of the liver ascends
get asthma.
brain is like a
The
you
it
and
spongy matter
So the heat goes to kidneys. They cannot pass urine
coagulates
and the urine circulates in the body and blood. Also it
causes
constipation.
Heat is the symptom of disease and coolness is the
20
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-21.txt 
 good health. The experiment with helium
that when given heat, all the molecules were fighting with each
system of
s showed
gas
other.
when they
removed the heat they found
And
all
the
molecules were united.
The third
type of diseases are psychosomatic.
Those who
are
have more problem with the psyche than
with
the
physical. Cancer is psychosomatic.
All viruses are dead
plants
animals, may be microscopic which have gone out
or
of
circulation of
They reside in the
area called
collective
sub-conscious.
have
reached
certain
Doctors
understanding that they say are protein 53 and protein 58
which
trigger the cancer.
Also they say that this cancer is caused
to
a person when he goes into a
shock and the attack comes from the
left
in the area which was built within us since the
creation.
This
is
the
collective sub-conscious where
same area as the
everything that is dead is there.
So there are humans
who are
dead hanging around there.
In physical science you may have never heard of something.
There
is a soul which is playing on the causal of all elements.
It is
attached in loops on the back side of our body.
In all the seven
It makes seven
plus the sacrum bone it resides.
loops.
centres
realisation you can see many loops like going round
After
and
Sometimes many int o it
round like chakras and one into another.
together and sometimes only one.
Also you can see little sparks
like
commas, which is chaitainya of the vibrations.
These
are
Now this soul is reflected on ourselves in
dead souls.
the
the
Recently in America they have taken photographs
receptor
area.
of the receptor of
It looks exactly like what
a cell.
you
see
after realisation.
But when another soul sits on the being
then
is
It affects
reflected on the cells.
it
the
also.
receptor
This
new soul might get attached to anyone of the centres or
to
all of them.
It affects the cells also and they give all this
depomine series which causes epilepsy, mental
problems,
cancer
21
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Only one may go in and
If its a
etc. If they are viruses its not so bad.
but it can travel from one to another.
affect
human
possession then its very difficult.
Heart diseases, epilepsy come from the left
side.
Hypertension,
sick headache could be from both sides.
Migraine
All
bone
or
diseases
Leukemia,r
Fibrosis
is
Tumors,
are psychosomatic.
is not
disease.
psychosomatic.
normal
Menopause
Its a
a
condition.
Inflamation
of
could
also
the
be
pancreas
Sciatica could be somatic or psychsomatic.
All
psychosomatic.
mental
diseases
are left sided. Schizophernia is
left sided.
Alchoholism
in
sided
the right side and
left
starts
creates
Arthiritis is psychosomatic. Drug addiction, smoking
problems.
homo-sexuality and preverted sex, too much indulgence in sex
is
all left sided or psychosomatic.
guilty.
Smoking creates
left-sided problems because one feels
sex habits and flirting of the eyes, AIDS,
too much
Perverted
rigidity is due to left side.
It is some
sort of
sex,
centre problem.
Multiple sclerosis is
Neurosis
possession.
Parkinson's đisease is
from both sides.
could be
side.
Rhematicism comes from the Nabhi.
Muscular distrophy comes from
the left side.
Yuppie's disease is where you are extremely hard
working,
and use your conscious mind too much.
very futuristic
absolutely
Studying
Then the conscious mind
becomes
too much.
suddenly you
walking alright
paralyzed.
and
You
are
are
conscious that you are walking then you will suddenly fall
down.
I had told eight years back in America that it will come.
I told
them about AIDS about fourteen years back.
But nobody listened,
now its very serious.
is mostly right-sided.
Diabetes
When you use too much of right
then the exhaustion takes place here.
So you are vulnerable
and
suddenly
happens from the left side as the connection
from the left side as the connection with
the
whole is lost.
These proteins like 53, 58 are very ego-oriented
22
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-23.txt 
 malignant.
and arbitrary. Whatever cell they touch that becomes
So women suffer from
Thus malignancy sets in.
breast cancer.
When the mother-
The centre of the heart is the Mother's centre.
hood of a woman is challenged, say a husband is a flirt and keeps
this
insecure
insecure, or if
she's
then
centre
gets
affected.
This centre produces anti-bodies to fight the diseases
in the sternum bone till the age of twelve years.
Then they are
distributed all over.
bone
Whenever there is fear the
sternum
shakes and it is
like a remote control that sends messages to
all
the anti-bodies to fight. If you establish the security of
a lady through Kundalini awakening then her cancer
be
such
can
cured.
have
When they are in very advance stages they do
not
will power left, then its better to remove the breast
that
and
then establish your security.
lethargic organs.
There
diseases which are caused by the
are
When heart is lethargic one gets angina.
When the left vishuddhi
catches you
feel very guilty and then there's a block
and
the
blood cannot flow to the head, then it has to go to the heart and
such a heart becomes tired and lethargic. In Sahaja Yoga we have
two
of organs : One is lethargic and the
is ove
other
active.
The doctors should first of all establish themselves properly and
protect themselves, then they can also learn to cure others.
Use
the photographs which have the vibrations in them.
Psychosomatic
must be dealt only first on the left side. Some children suffer
from hyper-activity.
Diabetes also comes from the same
reason.
At the time when the mother is pregnant she should not work
very
She should take rest more.
hard.
She should not think too
much
but read something soothing, something nice. Best is to meditate.
the mother is
At that
time
if
over-active
and thinking of
futuristic things, children are born with diseases.
Or if
she's
child may
hectic the
is for
get leukemia.
The
spleen
all
But if you
emergencies because it produces red blood corpuscles.
23
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-24.txt 
 are hectic, panicked all the time, rushing about then
the
poor
It becomes errati c and
understand.
It
spleen
cannot
crazy.
could happen to children or adults.
When something triggers from the left side and
there's sudden
shock,
may be sadness, accident anything, it triggers leukemia.
The worst thing which is very difficult for anyone to understand
there are negative forces working. They work through
is
that
is
They work through some false Guru, or parapsychology
negativity.
All these things are done by putting some sort
or mesmerism etc.
of a dead soul on your soul.
One has to be very clear.
For this
It is a living process.
cannot charge money.
example
For
you
You don't pay money to Mother Earth.
Sow a seed.
does
She
you
It is built in the seed as well as Mother Earth.
it.
also
We
the living processes
take
all
for
There's
granted.
no
But all these horrible people are
obligation.
oriented.
money
no purity of heart or purity of
f eyes.
They have
They
are
interested in women, men or all kinds of dirty things. They
are
They cannot relate it to
to explain how they do it.
not able
medical science or any science.
In
Sahaja Yoga
Hatha Yoga exercises
eboga
there
whenever
we do
some
we
is a chakra
When
damaged because of
necessary.
some
Hatha Yoga
try to give that particular
physical
problem,
we
But the way people do Hatha Yoga is to take al1
exercise.
the
medicines at once.
-- Ha and Tha both the nadis have to
In Hatha
But now-a-days its only Ha used.
This
be
used.
can
cause
a
imbalance within
People who do this
become
great
you.
can
extremely dry, hot tempered and may divorce his wife or leave his
children.
in the centre and
be
We should
Kundalini
should
be
fixed
permanently with that All Prevading Power and flow all the
time
within you.
But apart from physical, mental and emotional
life,
24
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-25.txt 
 you have the Spiritual life, which is much more miraculous, which
is
very blissful and when you understand how this power of
Love
looks after everything, you are amazed.
WE NEED SAHAJA YOGA. SAHAJA YOGA DOES NOT NEED US.
SHRI MATAJI
25
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-26.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Shri Mataji's Advice on Childcare
In Miami, Mother spoke about child care in the United States and India. When asked
about the problems non-Sahaja Yogis are having with their children in schools and day
care, Shri Mataji answered immediately that all chldren should go to India, both Sahaja
Yogi children and non-Sahaja yogi chilidren. She then spoke about the Indian Sahaja
Yoga school. A sense of security and self-esteem would be established in the children
there. Activities would be both formal and informal. Different teachers would lead the
different activities. Security is established through the personal qualities of the care
providers. It is not necessary to have one consistent care provider.
Shri Mataji shared that in India, child raising is just known, established in the culture.
Many things known as common sense in India are unknown here in the West.
Examples are eating large, cold coca-colas with oily french fries (very indigestible);
swimming in very cold water (a shock to the system); drinking cold drinks when coming
in from extreme heat. These are Just little examples of things people do in the West
which can make them sick.
Mothers in India talk to their children constantly, explaining why and how things are
done. Shri Mataji stressed this several times emphasizing the importance of talking to
children.
important to talk to them at their age level explaining things they can understand. In
the United States, we give children toys and want them to be quiet. When asked how
to handle children who say no, for example, "No, I don't want to eat my lunch, "Shri
Mataji suggested not to make them eat lunch -- just wait until the next meal. They will
learn that they will get hungry unless they eat their lunch.
She said children can be quite sensible and should be listened to. It is
Shri Mataji said parents in the United States say no all the time to the children instead
of explaining things. This causes problems with the chlldren's development of self-
esteem.
Children should be ignored when they are doing something wrong. If they break
something, ignore it. When the children do things right they should receive a lot of
attention. Talking and explaining things to children gives them the direction.
When asked about the frequency of illnesses in young children in day care, Shri Mataji
said, "Yes, people in the United States are quite sickly." She said this is a problem
with the mother's center heart.
Establishing a strong center heart is important for mothers.
She said I am sitting right there in your heart.
Shri Mataji spoke at length about the great sense of God in India. She told several
stories showing how people in India recognize the power of God, acknowledge and fear
it. In the United States, the blind faith in Christianity is terrible. Church Teaders are
stealing money from people in the name of God. How people in the West do not see
the falsehood of Christiarilty is shocking to Shri Mataji.
Shri Mataji spoke at length about the relationship of the mother and the father, in
marriage and as parents. The role of the father and the mother is quite distinct and
defined in India.
husband will not make decisions without her. He depends totally on her.
Indian husbands do not know how to do anything around the house and they do not
know how to fix anything. An Indian Sahaja Yogi explained that when he got married
Shri Mataji said her
She said
The husband depends totally on the wife.
26
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-27.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
in India, he was given advice
politics and economics. Your wite will make decisions about the unimportant things of
running the household and raising the children. We all laughed.
motherhood is recognized.
you make decisions about the inmportant things in
The power of
Shri Mataji said that the mother and father should never fight in front of the children. A
child cannot develop respect for the mother or father if there is fighting. Children
develop respect when they see the parents respect each other. Shri Mataji stated we
need a school for parents in the United States. She will be speaking extensively on
child care in Russia this tour. Shri Mataji suggested some ways to bring knowledge of
raising children to the United States. These are being pursued.
3-
Shri Mataji's advice for conducting Sahaja Yoga programmes.
A Sahaja Yogi represents the Collective Sahaja Yoga when
speaks from
novice
impression
also
bears the conviction of his faith.
he
The
the
but
a public platform to introduce Sahaja Yoga.
tends to form their initial opinion
the speaker leaves. They not only listen to him
his manners, dress, poise and whether
audience
his
observe
speech
Rhetoric
the spirit of the audience.
feel
upliftment of the spirit.
without the hands flying in all directions.
to
or pompous speeches void of vibrations fail
arouse
and
the
but
One should speak from the heart
for
There should be genuine
The face may express that concern
what one says.
concern
Too often
Remember to speak to
refrain from making long speeches.
gets lost in his own oratory.
a mental approach only arouses the ego.
exude joy, bear a happy countenance without being
He should conduct himself with dignity, grace,
the
Onie
should
speaker
point, as
should
serious.
be formally dressed with well groomed hair.
the
speaker
overly
poise,
The
should avoid preaching long
Centre leaders
Yogis at collective meetings.
play Shri Mataji's
medium
sermons to Sahaja
They should minimize lecturing and
Centre leaders
tapes instead.
Shri Mataji and a Sahaja Yogi.
Mataji's audio
not
We should not
tapes have her
are
a
between
video
and
and spontaneously clear out all negativity allowing
experience the joy of his
several centres have not so far acquired tapes
forget that
vibrations
Sahaja
Surprisingly
not
Shri
own Spirit.
and
and Video
Yogi
each
to
showing the videos of Shri Mataji.
Audio
are
information was sent in the last issue.
Shri Mataji has strictly prohibited any individual or
make copies of any video, audio or publish any literature
booklet.
centre
to
or
27
