THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE VOL.2 No.8 IF YOU DO NOT HAVE A LARGE HEART, YOU CANNOT HAVE A GOOD AGYA. Shri Mataji

 1 The Divine Cool Breeze EASTER PUJA TALK SYNOPSIS Eastbourne, England April 22, 1990 During the Easter Puja, H.H. Shri Mataji prepared us for a big jump forward to be taken on the 21st Sahasrara Day. She told us that it is our opportunity to worship the resurrection of Shri Jesus Christ and thank Him for providing us an ideal of dedicated, intense and saintly life. tremendous surrender to Jesus Christ. This surrender, however, has to be enlightened. Even before realization people believe in some higher being. However, their belief is without the connection and becomes a sort of falsehood. romantic idea that they have a special relationship to God. What is worse, this blind faith often gives people ideas that they have a right over God which they win by their act of belief and that God is obligated to provide for their material well-being. Christ has warned such people, "You will be calling Me Christ, Christ, but I won't recognize you." However, when Sahaja Yogis lack depth, this connection also degenerates to the same level, in a subtle way. Sahaja Yogis then feel that Sahaja Yoga is obliged to provide for their well-being. Especially among the western Sahaja Yogis there is a They have a mythical, It is only after realization that we get the connection with all the Deities. Shri Mataji explained that after realization when we get connected with Christ, our attitude should change completely. We have to imbibe the qualities of Christ within ourselves. Christ's life should inspire us to lead a life "that could be enshrined, that could be called as a reflection of Christ's life." Christ felt responsible for the world. He is described as the support of the whole universe in the Devi-Purana. Sahaja Yogis also have to feel responsible for the emancipation of the whole humanity and for the collective ascent of human beings. responsibilities. We have to be alert and be aware of our Christ was concerned all the time with the benevolence of the world. knowledge. He knew His goal. He spoke the truth with complete courage, intensity, and dedication. Sahaja Yogis also have to be knowledgeable about Sahaja Yoga and speak about Sahaja Yoga with courage and dedication without being pretentious. The truth has the capacity to express itself through a personality. If we really believe that we are Sahaja Yogis we should be able to speak about Sahaja Yoga in the same way Christ spoke about the truth. If we cannot do it then we are lacking in the intensity which Christ has. Christ valued His work and did not waste His precious time on any frivolity. We also have to value our self-realization, and have intensity and dedication about our work in Sahaja Yoga. We can not waste our attention on useless things. Christ was When we imbibe these qualities of Christ we will onjoy meditation. Shri Mataji explained that a person who cannot enjoy his meditation cannot be a Sahaja Yogi. The first sign of a Sahaja Yogi is that he looks forward to the time when he can meditate. "That is the time you are really in connection with the Divine and you enjoy the most." If Sahaja Yogis cannot get up for meditation and cannot keep awake, it is because Christ is not awakened in them. If His blessings are there on the Agnya chakra, we enjoy meditation and cannot get out of a meditative mood. To see our connection with the Divine with an awakening within is "Nirananda," absolute joy. Sahaja Yogis cannot

 The Divine Cool Breeze give up this joy for anything. Shri Mataji said this joy is like ambrosia trickling down on the tongue. To enjoy this we have to touch our depth. All Sahaja Yogis have depth, but they have to touch it. Christ lived a life of complete sacrifice and He had to achieve His resurrection. He was dedicated to His goal; Sahaja Yogis also have to have complete dedication. Moreover, every step we move forward is so joy-giving. Yogis also have to sacrifice their láziness. There is a subtle kind of lethargy working out among Sahaja Yogis when they say that they have done their jobs and it is for younger people to do it now. We have a lot of work ahead of us. Shri Mataji said, "You have to work very hard to develop yourselves vertically in balance with your horizontal growth." time you have to think that you are a Sahaja Yogi and you have to know what you have to do in Sahaja Yoga and how to achieve it. You should not be satisfied unless and until you have achieved that excellence..."Mediocrity has no place in Sahaja Yoga. Only through excellence you will enjoy. Only through excellence you will really become Sahaja Yogis." Sahaja "All the Christ knew that He was an instrument. He was the one who had to open the Agnya Chakra. He had to achieve that through His resurrection and He did it. Chakra not opened, it would never have been possible to open the Sahasrara. Sahaja Yogis also have to realize that they are the instruments for Param Chaitanya Shakti to work out. The argument that 'Param Chaitanya will do everything and look after us' is absolutely absurd. If this were so, there was no need to create human beings. Sahaja Yogis should now count their deeds instead of counting their blessings. They have to reach their depth. "Unless and until you become deep, it (Param Chaitanya) cannot trigger. It is helpless. It is only through you it is going to work out. Chaitanya has its own style. It can only work if you people want to work it out. It is the energy and you are the instrument." intense and deep instruments of Sahaja Yoga and see "...how best you can reach people, how many people you can give realization, how many people you are going to help to improve their health, their mental condition, and then how much you are going to talk about Sahaja Yoga." Shri Mataji said that this is how Sahaja Yoga is going to work out the collective ascent of human beings. Had Agnya ...So Param Shri Matají said we have to be dedicated, XXXx I++++++ 2.

 The Divine Cool Breeze SAHASRARA PUJA SYNOPSIS Rome, Italy May 6, 1990 "All these years I have been waiting for this 21st Sahasrara day. Now a new change has to come and you can see the announcement (big roar of thunder). We have so far been dealing with collective consciousriess, chakras, nadis but perhaps we do not know how many powers are developed in past 21 years within yourself... The all-pervading power knows everything and the whole nature works for your benefit and progress and at the right time. Now be confident that you have powers. This is the new change that is going to come within your own understanding. So far you know that you could feel the vibrations, cure the people, feel the Param Chaitanya, but you do not know what dynamic forces are working in you and this new change is going to come ANNOUNCEMENT (big roar of thunder). So far I told you not to talk about Sahaja Yoga openly, but now the time has come to start talking, announcing, telling about it to everyone; otherwise, the world would say that we never knew about it. So far we have kept Sahaja Yoga at a low ebb because I wanted, first of all, you to develop into really very beautiful Sahaja Yogis, so that from your lifestyle, behavior, understanding and thoughts, people would realize that these people are very unique - a very different type of people. You have to understand that all these powers are bubbling in you -but you are hiding it for some reasons. a new character With this new change, you have to assume Now those days are gone where Mother has to cure your headache, look after your family, wife and children... is all finished now. Now you are responsible, not only for yourself but for your ashrams, cities, countries and for the whole world. Now you are all in the "Royal Court." Take up your responsibility. ASSUME WHAT YOU ARE. KNOW YOUR POWERS - WHAT YOU CAN DO. Now the days are gone when you have to count your blessings and miracles. Now YOU HAVE TO COUNT YOUR POWERS, AND HÓW I CAN USE THEM? This is the new era we are starting from today. This is the day I was waiting for all of you to realize that you are not Sahaja Yogis for only your selfish ends nor for your families, communities, countries BUT FOR THE WHOLE WORLDI EXPAND YÓUR SELF. You must have that vision before you that I have put many a times before you people that you have to emancipate the humanity. Now don't have diffidence. This work is not going to be done by special people because they suffer from ego. This is going to be done by the people who don't have that ego of great success or of achievements or riches. Christ said that a camel can pass through an eye of a needle but a rich man can not enter in the kingdom of God because their ego is bigger than an elephant. As we are entering in new conditionings. There is only one confession, that 'I am a Sahaja Yogi and now after 21st Sahasrara, I am a Maha Yogi. awareness, let us not worry about our negative

 The Divine Cool Breeze. 4. Now we have to openly say and tell these fundamentalists, 'You don't know about the truth, or the power that is working. You are stupid people running after something that is a mirage and all of you will end up in hell. You may tell people that the new announcement has to come to say that running after falsehood is not going to take you to God. We believe in the power of Love, and not in the power of hatred. We believe that everyone is capable of finding the truth and getting to the heaven of that paradise which is promised to us, the kingdom of God. These nonsensical problems of my family, my wife, my children, my house, my property, my money -- all these "Mys" should be finished first, because you belong to the whole world like a noble king belongs to his kingdom. Now you are absolutely free and the source of your joy is your Spirit. You are detached fron everything. In that detachment you are going to nourish everyone. Detachment comes through thoughtless awareness. When you look at anyone, get to your state of thoughtless awareness. Immediately you will feel detached and you will know the solution to the whole problem. THE GREATEST POWER YOU HAVE IS IN YOUR BRAIN, THAT YOU ARE KNOWLEDGEABLE. Just you have to get inta thoughtless awareness and the whole library of knowledge can open to you. Also in every field you have advanced so much, but these are very mundane things which may give us little pleasures here and there but the main thing is how many people we give realization to, how much we can announce about Sahaja Yoga. Sahaja Yoga is not "by the way." Sahaja Yoga is committment and complete involvement; otherwise you are really useless for Sahaja Yoga. It's better to have few people who are committed than to have thousands who are just useless. see what you have decided for yourself and what you have decided for Sahaja Yoga. If you have decided to opt for Sahaja Yoga, then just know that this is the main thing which you have to do. THE WHOLE ATTENTION SHOULD BE ON SAHAJA YOGA. WHAT IS HAPPENING IN SAHAJA YOGA? WHERE ARE WE? WHERE ARE WE GOING? WHERE IS MOTHER? WHAT PART SHE IS IN? WHAT IS SHE DOING? If you put your attention to it, your negativity will absolutely disappear. So now you are Maha Yogis, we have to make it a MAHA YOGA. achieved by you, then you should think that you are still backdated and I don't know in the turning of the wheel, how many will be left. So let us Unless and until that level is Now don't doubt about yourself and just go full ahead with all the mariadas of Sahaja Yoga. (boundaries of conduct) have to be there, and also the behavioral mariadas. There are not many mariadas in Sahaja Yoga. BUT THE MAIN MARIADA IS THAT YOU SHOULD BE VERY MORAL PEOPLE, and also you should be, in appearance, in behavior, such a person that you do not become obnoxious. So the MARIADAS have to be there. Except that the moral mariadas Today we have people here from all over the world and you go and tell this message to all the rest of the people whom I have not met that, MOTHER HAS ALREADY ANNOUNCED, THROUGH THE VISHNUMAYA ALSO, THAT YOU ALL HAVE BECOME NOW MAHA YOGIS AND TRY TO EXPRESS THAT, MANIFEST THAT. WITH FULL CONFIDENCE IN YOURSELF AND WITH THIS POWER CF LOVE, I AM SURE WE'LL ALL WIN OVER."

 OPENING OF THE AGYA CHAKRA OF PLANET EARTH U.S.S.R. 12 MAY TO 17 MAY the fourth time Shri Adi Shak ti blessed the Soviet Union within THIS was six months. The resul ts are tremendous. There is a core of over 2000 Sahaja Yogis medita ting regularly in the major ci ties of Moscow, Kiev and Leningrad. a Yogis, so finally a The thousand seat halls were jam packed with just Sahaja stadium of 4000 capaci ty had to be hired to accomodate the long queus of public. The national T.V. interviewed Shri Mataji at the airport and again in the studios. Thus it would be possible for millions to get their realisation through the cinemedia. Photographs of Shri Mataji would be mailed to interes ted seekers thus allowing them to practice Sahaja Yoga. The head of the communist party and several ministers received their realisation. The ministry of Educa tlon has introduced Sahaja Yoga in one of their schools in Moscow and would gradually take it up on the na tional level. The minis try of heal th has set t up a Sahaja Yoga centre for medico-biological problems. Shri Mataji addressed a special conference of 300 doctors from all over the Soviet Union and gave them realisation. Their interest was so aroused that Sahaja Yoga doctors were invited to participate in a medical conference from Ist June to 9th June, Shri Ma taji was so pleased with the Russian seekers that She agreed to bless Soviet Union again at the end of June. We pray that the Agya would certainly open. She praised the wisdom of the Russian seekers and said that without wisdom you cannot handle freedom, Look what has happened to the Americans! SHRI MATAJI'S ADDRESS TO THE MEDICAL CONFERENCE MOSCOW To cure patients is very simple. If a tree is sick and you try to cure the roots then it will not work. If cure the roots then you become subtle and it will work out. If we can get to the roots then we nurture their centres that would make every thing so wonderful through and achieve the balance the connection wi th the energy called 'Kundalini'. Liver and Spleen The heat from the liver af ter sometime collapses the lungs leading to asthma. When the liver does not get enough nourishment then it becomes overactive.

 of overactivi ty of the intestines dry up causing constipation. Because The If a pregnant brain cells, the pancreas gets affected leading to diabetes. woman is over thinking then the child may have diabetes. Similarly if the pregnant woman is overactive then the child can have spleen sends the spleen in turmoil. The spleen produces problems. Shocking news red blood corpulses for all emergencies. Modern life is always an emergency. it crazy and vulnerable to cancer. At Constant shocks to the spleen make such a moment of vulnerability if something tri ggers from the left side then blood cancer accrues. Virus Viruses come from the left side. They are dead enti ties that settle into the collective subconscious. Soul Our soul is at the back. It goes in seven loops, the eighth one is in the sacrum bone. Its cons ti tution is all the elements plus. It looks after all the endocrine and ductless glands. It acts for all our reflex actions. It is like science has discoVered that in every Now a computer programme. 'loop style' description. When a Depomine Is created in the recep tor then it leads to epilepsy, lunacy depression, etc. cell of the same are recep tors This depomine is produced when another soul si ts on the back and over the personality and one starts behaving in a peculiar manner called possession. This possession can also take place from the right side where there are many dead spirits like Hitler. 14

 SHRI BUDDHA PUJA TALK LENINGRAD 14 MAY 1990 (synopsis) Russia is the front Agya and China is the back Agya. The puja to Shri Buddha is being performed today to open this chakra. At the level of the Agya chakra there are though ts. Because you are all connected wi th the same Divine Force of opinion. If there is a difference of opinion there can be no difference then you are not a Sahaja Yogi. You must remember that in the realm of truth you are looked af ter. At each step there is someone who takes care of vou. When I entered Moscow Airport I realised that the visa was not in my purse. smiled and without asking any ques tion just issued me a visa. All the Sahaja The immigration officer just Yogis were amazed at this niracle. The sub tle power looks af ter all the details and does miracles to show you that it exists. There should be no fear in Sahaja Yoga. Throw out all fear. If anyone tries to intimidate you, he will be thrown out of Sahaja Yoga. No one should try to control you but your Spirit. There is no power stronger than the power of Love. Sahaja Yoga is not serious: it is pleasant mirth. It is a state. Time is your slavo now. You are beyond time. Nabody can harm you. Anyone who tries to play tricks will fall into his own trick. In the light of Sahaja Yoga you see the snake in your hand and Just throw it out. You are not young, you are not old; you simply exist joyfully IF YOU D0 NOT HAVE A LARGE HEART, YOU CANNOT HAVE A GOOD AGYA. the mantra of the Agya is 'Ksham' 'I forgive'. The mantra of the back Agya is 'HUM' I am'. Thus 'HUM KSHAM'. May God Dless You.

 VISHUD DHI CHAKRA *****************#*******1 Quali tles Left Vishuddhi : Brother-sis ter relationship, Selfrespect. Causes of catch guil ty. immorali ty, Feeling insidious way of speaking, sarcasm, lack of selfrespect, being poor in words TREATMENT Use Mantra of "Shri Vishnumaya (Sister of Sri Krishna) Use affirmation: "Mother I am not gullty at all, as I am the spirit, by thy grace, how can I be gullty". 13 Give vibrations to the Vishuddhi Chakra. Avoid excusing your ego by feeling guilty after doing something wrong 4. or indulging your ego. Development the quality of purity in brother and sister relation. Face any Inmorality or other sins of the past and know, that Mother forglves you and that you should not feel guilty. Evaluate yourself as an expression of the love of GOD don't feel "useless" 7 or inadequa te. Don't be dominated by others. Talk about Sahaja Yoga to 8. others with conffdence Sing wi th your whole heart bhajans Use your voice for worshipping Shri Mataji. Be not sancastical or cynical. 10 11 If you have been using a mantra by a False guru, it has to be neutralised by affirming: "Shri Mataji, you are the Source of all the great Mantras" or "Sarva Mantra Siddhi" Centre Vishuddhi QUALITIES Divine diplomacy, playful wi tness, omnipresence, collective concsiousness, (Thyroid gland) Causes of catch: Agression, arrogance, lack of collectivity, lack of witnesspower .

 TREAT MENT Use the Mantra: "Shri Radha Krishna" Use affirmna tion: "Mother make me a detached wi tness" 2. "Shri Mataji make me part and parcel of the whole" " Shri Mataji inake me discriminating and selfcorrecting person" the Vishuddhi chakra. 3 Give vibra tions to ex tend neck backwards, looking Put your index finger in your ears, 4, towards the sky, sing "Allah hu Akbar" 16 times. Develop quality of detchment and wi tness sta te. 5 Massage the Vishuddhi area with oil, ghee or butter, and take butter in your throat. 7. Take saltwater gargle night and morning. Use tulsi tea, and burn camphor. clear nasal passages, sinuses, and bronchi tis Ajwan dhuni to 8. Press your chin to the chestbone, roll the tongue back, like swallowing it, do not touch the gum, and breathe relaxed and slowly in and out for 1 minute. Breathe in with your nose, keep the breath for a while and breathe 10 while. With every inbreathing you should take in out and keep a a i ttle less air, untill you reach zero Repeat 3 times. Sip a little vibrated salt water through the nose. 11 Right Vishuddhi QUAL ITIE S: sweetness in sound, words, Wi tness of self, though ts and behaviour Causes of catch: Cold, excessive responsibility, smoking, swearing, harsh talking sinuses, too much singing and talking. TREAT MENT Use the Mantra "Shri Yeshoda" Use Affirma tion "Shri Mataji, verily You are the sweet countenance of my words and deeds. "Shri Mataji please take away all my aggression and dominance, give Ime a sweet voice, and make me a sweet & collective person. Give vibra tions to the right Vishuddhi. Speak less, and if you do, try 4. to avoid any tendency to domina te others by your voice. 5. Develop the quali ty of speaking sweetly to others. Pay less attention to the taste of food. 6. 7. Forgive everyone and dissolve your anger. 8. Don' argue wi th people or spend a lot of time canvincing people of your point of view.

 10 - HOW TO INFLUENCE PEOPLE H.H. SHRI MATAJI The Hauge, Holland 17.9.86 To influence other people we must know how much cantro! we have upon ourselves also. That is very important. For example some people have no proper image and they try to influence others, so its a mockery. Nobody gets influenced by such a person So before working out the exterior, the interior must wha has no image of his own. be worked out. It is very important that when you are talking to people you shauld have a proper style of You should all be trimmed down properly, dont walk in a languid talking & walking. manner, or in a manner of throwing your legs here and there, but straight, and sit down Let people see that you have faith in yourself first of all. If you dont have straight. faith in yourself you cannot influence others. Your self confidence must be shown through all your behaviour like talking, walking, sitting and communicating. There should be a feeling of eonfidence. But the confidence comes in a person when he realises that he is completely secure. In Sahaja Yoga you know if your centre heart is secure, tell yourself, * Mother is with me. Mother is helping me and l'm with Mather. Ihave nothing to worry ". Then your centre heart will be alright. But if you are diffident about yourself then yau cannot do it. Confidence is to be established first of all within yourself. For Sahaja Yogis its very easy to say "I am the Spirit, and I am the child, I am the one who has been chosen by the Adi Shakt So there should be a tremendous amount of self confidence in you. Herself ". Like when somebody comes in you should talk to him in a very gentle manner knowing that there is another God who is coming in. If there is Spirit in me, there is Spirit in him also. You must see that he sits properly, that he is comfortable, and ask him if he wants any tea, etc. Make him feel that you are not in any way disturbed, or that you are irritated, but are happy to meet him and you settle down with kindness. Sometimes also in diffidence one might feel nervoUS about a person. That nervousness is a sign of insecurity. One should not be nervous if one is talking to some one. One should be in a way that another person should feel absolutely confident and should feel that this gentleman is very pleasant. Another way is to ällow others to talk. Listen to them properly, and do not talk yourself. Listen to them, and once they've said something say. " That is true no doubt. I agree

 11 - Dont just stun by your " No! Not at then you can start. but .. %3D with him I do that But on the contrary, you see what they say. You can watch me all! "Oh, that is true, you see, this is When somebody says: something. many times. So they dont mind. They think that you have seen the other side, that you * it... " have a balance, you dont just impress your idea upon others. In B way you are, but you do it in such a way that nobody feels the impact that you are doing something of the kind. Dress is very important, supposing you are conneeted with somebody in an official The best thing is to wear a business dress, like a deep blue suit with a lot way. and the hair nicely dane, of stripes, a proper three-piece smart suit, clean shoes, may be a little bit oiled. Look like a smart business person. When you have to talk, say, about your organisation, You shouldnt say 1' you should always say refer to the organisation and never to yourself. Twe'. Always "I would not do such a thing. I hate it. I believe in it." That is absolutely absurd. " What we have to do. That we believe. We think this way; - and what is your We have this kind of a thing." Or anything that you want to tell them opinion. about your own organisation or your own product or anything. You have to tell " Now see, this is what is available. Now it is here, and we have seen that them. it has done a lot of good, and it works this way. And we have got very good reports about it. You can see the reports. We have the reports here, you ean see what it is. And, if you please, you can try it, and see for your self." You should be well equipped. Suppose you are having some product, then you should know all about it. "Here it is. The brochures should be there. Please have it. You can see yourself." Explain to him what it is. The market doesnt capture so much because of the product, but because of the way it is put forward. If somebody is not alright, in a mild way you should say what the problem is. "We are facing this problem. Now, tell me what is the solution " then the person does not feel bad. You wont you tell a person directly he does not like it. If like it, if I tell you so directly, but 1 tell you everything, But I tell you in a way that is mild, that is congenial, that is easily understood and assimilated.

 PNCW 300 - 12 That is very important, that you have a style that people understand, and proper kind of behaviour. Art lies in hiding art Actually by not influancing others, you influence others. There should be no de liberation exposed about it. When talking to someone also, even if you dont understand what they are talking, you should show that you are understanding and listening. When you have to deal with three or five or ten persons, then you should understand Like now for that you should always try to create a good feeling among them. example, would like you to marry. Then i will tell you about her, what she is, in a way that will not hurt her, but prepare you. Because later on you may hear about her, that somebody was saying so, and Mather never told. So, in a very "You see, she has a little of these things, but i ts gentle way you should say, And it depends on you, She can manage it." She can be very gentle. alright. So that you feel informed knowledgeable about a person, how you mianage it. and also responsible about it, 'that now it is my responsibility'. I use certain tricks, which 1 have naturally. But you can imbibe them also. When they It Such little, little things make a di fference you see. is not difficult. are sick you must look after them. Find out if their children are sick, if their You should be concerned. An organisation you must treat like wi' ves are sick. a family. What's wrong with her? Is she alright? Do you need any help. Send flowers sometimes, when the husband or the wife is sick. Or make enquiries about the children. All these things mean a lot. is the You dont have to stoop down; you have to rise higher to attract. This But, when rising higher, you should not suggest that you are rising difference. higher, create any jealously, so that they think that he thinks no end of himself. Be very gentle. If you are lower than them, or of their style, then how will they follow ? Editor : Shri Yagi Mahajan Printed & Published by: Shri P.C. Kulkarni al Vishwa Nirmala Dharma, 9 Bhagya Chintamani Society, Paud Road, Kathrud, Pune 411 029.



----------------------

1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8.pdf-page-0.txt 
 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
VOL.2 No.8
IF YOU DO NOT HAVE A LARGE HEART, YOU CANNOT HAVE A GOOD AGYA.
Shri Mataji
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8.pdf-page-1.txt 
 1
The Divine Cool Breeze
EASTER PUJA TALK SYNOPSIS
Eastbourne, England
April 22, 1990
During the Easter Puja, H.H. Shri Mataji prepared us for a big jump forward to be
taken on the 21st Sahasrara Day. She told us that it is our opportunity to worship the
resurrection of Shri Jesus Christ and thank Him for providing us an ideal of dedicated,
intense and saintly life.
tremendous surrender to Jesus Christ. This surrender, however, has to be enlightened.
Even before realization people believe in some higher being. However, their belief is
without the connection and becomes a sort of falsehood.
romantic idea that they have a special relationship to God. What is worse, this blind
faith often gives people ideas that they have a right over God which they win by their
act of belief and that God is obligated to provide for their material well-being. Christ
has warned such people, "You will be calling Me Christ, Christ, but I won't recognize
you."
However, when Sahaja Yogis lack depth, this connection also degenerates to the same
level, in a subtle way. Sahaja Yogis then feel that Sahaja Yoga is obliged to provide
for their well-being.
Especially among the western Sahaja Yogis there is a
They have a mythical,
It is only after realization that we get the connection with all the Deities.
Shri Mataji explained that after realization when we get connected with Christ, our
attitude should change completely. We have to imbibe the qualities of Christ within
ourselves. Christ's life should inspire us to lead a life "that could be enshrined, that
could be called as a reflection of Christ's life." Christ felt responsible for the world. He
is described as the support of the whole universe in the Devi-Purana. Sahaja Yogis
also have to feel responsible for the emancipation of the whole humanity and for the
collective ascent of human beings.
responsibilities.
We have to be alert and be aware of our
Christ was concerned all the time with the benevolence of the world.
knowledge. He knew His goal. He spoke the truth with complete courage, intensity,
and dedication. Sahaja Yogis also have to be knowledgeable about Sahaja Yoga and
speak about Sahaja Yoga with courage and dedication without being pretentious. The
truth has the capacity to express itself through a personality. If we really believe that
we are Sahaja Yogis we should be able to speak about Sahaja Yoga in the same way
Christ spoke about the truth. If we cannot do it then we are lacking in the intensity
which Christ has. Christ valued His work and did not waste His precious time on any
frivolity. We also have to value our self-realization, and have intensity and dedication
about our work in Sahaja Yoga. We can not waste our attention on useless things.
Christ was
When we imbibe these qualities of Christ we will onjoy meditation. Shri Mataji explained
that a person who cannot enjoy his meditation cannot be a Sahaja Yogi. The first sign
of a Sahaja Yogi is that he looks forward to the time when he can meditate. "That is
the time you are really in connection with the Divine and you enjoy the most." If
Sahaja Yogis cannot get up for meditation and cannot keep awake, it is because Christ
is not awakened in them. If His blessings are there on the Agnya chakra, we enjoy
meditation and cannot get out of a meditative mood. To see our connection with the
Divine with an awakening within is "Nirananda," absolute joy. Sahaja Yogis cannot
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8.pdf-page-2.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
give up this joy for anything. Shri Mataji said this joy is like ambrosia trickling down on
the tongue. To enjoy this we have to touch our depth. All Sahaja Yogis have depth,
but they have to touch it.
Christ lived a life of complete sacrifice and He had to achieve His resurrection. He
was dedicated to His goal; Sahaja Yogis also have to have complete dedication.
Moreover, every step we move forward is so joy-giving. Yogis also have to
sacrifice their láziness. There is a subtle kind of lethargy working out among Sahaja
Yogis when they say that they have done their jobs and it is for younger people to do
it now. We have a lot of work ahead of us. Shri Mataji said, "You have to work very
hard to develop yourselves vertically in balance with your horizontal growth."
time you have to think that you are a Sahaja Yogi and you have to know what you
have to do in Sahaja Yoga and how to achieve it. You should not be satisfied unless
and until you have achieved that excellence..."Mediocrity has no place in Sahaja
Yoga. Only through excellence you will enjoy. Only through excellence you will really
become Sahaja Yogis."
Sahaja
"All the
Christ knew that He was an instrument. He was the one who had to open the Agnya
Chakra. He had to achieve that through His resurrection and He did it.
Chakra not opened, it would never have been possible to open the Sahasrara. Sahaja
Yogis also have to realize that they are the instruments for Param Chaitanya Shakti to
work out. The argument that 'Param Chaitanya will do everything and look after us' is
absolutely absurd. If this were so, there was no need to create human beings. Sahaja
Yogis should now count their deeds instead of counting their blessings. They have to
reach their depth. "Unless and until you become deep, it (Param Chaitanya) cannot
trigger. It is helpless. It is only through you it is going to work out.
Chaitanya has its own style. It can only work if you people want to work it out. It is
the energy and you are the instrument."
intense and deep instruments of Sahaja Yoga and see "...how best you can reach
people, how many people you can give realization, how many people you are going to
help to improve their health, their mental condition, and then how much you are going
to talk about Sahaja Yoga." Shri Mataji said that this is how Sahaja Yoga is going to
work out the collective ascent of human beings.
Had Agnya
...So Param
Shri Matají said we have to be dedicated,
XXXx
I++++++
2.
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8.pdf-page-3.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
SAHASRARA PUJA SYNOPSIS
Rome, Italy
May 6, 1990
"All these years I have been waiting for this 21st Sahasrara day. Now a new change
has to come and you can see the announcement (big roar of thunder). We have so
far been dealing with collective consciousriess, chakras, nadis but perhaps we do not
know how many powers are developed in past 21 years within yourself...
The all-pervading power knows everything and the whole nature works for your benefit
and progress and at the right time. Now be confident that you have powers. This is
the new change that is going to come within your own understanding. So far you
know that you could feel the vibrations, cure the people, feel the Param Chaitanya, but
you do not know what dynamic forces are working in you and this new change is going
to come
ANNOUNCEMENT (big roar of thunder). So far I told you not to talk about Sahaja
Yoga openly, but now the time has come to start talking, announcing, telling about it to
everyone; otherwise, the world would say that we never knew about it. So far we have
kept Sahaja Yoga at a low ebb because I wanted, first of all, you to develop into really
very beautiful Sahaja Yogis, so that from your lifestyle, behavior, understanding and
thoughts, people would realize that these people are very unique - a very different type
of people. You have to understand that all these powers are bubbling in you -but you
are hiding it for some reasons.
a new character
With this new change, you have to assume
Now those days are gone where Mother has to cure your headache, look after your
family, wife and children... is all finished now.
Now you are responsible, not only for yourself but for your ashrams, cities,
countries and for the whole world.
Now you are all in the "Royal Court." Take up your responsibility. ASSUME WHAT
YOU ARE. KNOW YOUR POWERS - WHAT YOU CAN DO. Now the days are gone
when you have to count your blessings and miracles. Now YOU HAVE TO COUNT
YOUR POWERS, AND HÓW I CAN USE THEM?
This is the new era we are starting from today. This is the day I was waiting for all of
you to realize that you are not Sahaja Yogis for only your selfish ends nor for your
families, communities, countries BUT FOR THE WHOLE WORLDI EXPAND YÓUR
SELF.
You must have that vision before you that I have put many a times before you people
that you have to emancipate the humanity. Now don't have diffidence. This work is
not going to be done by special people because they suffer from ego. This is going to
be done by the people who don't have that ego of great success or of achievements or
riches. Christ said that a camel can pass through an eye of a needle but a rich man
can not enter in the kingdom of God because their ego is bigger than an elephant.
As we are entering in new
conditionings. There is only one confession, that 'I am a Sahaja Yogi and now after
21st Sahasrara, I am a Maha Yogi.
awareness, let us not worry about our negative
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8.pdf-page-4.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze.
4.
Now we have to openly say and tell these fundamentalists, 'You don't know about the
truth, or the power that is working. You are stupid people running after something that
is a mirage and all of you will end up in hell.
You may tell people that the new announcement has to come to say that running after
falsehood is not going to take you to God. We believe in the power of Love, and not
in the power of hatred. We believe that everyone is capable of finding the truth and
getting to the heaven of that paradise which is promised to us, the kingdom of God.
These nonsensical problems of my family, my wife, my children, my house, my
property, my money -- all these "Mys" should be finished first, because you belong to
the whole world like a noble king belongs to his kingdom.
Now you are absolutely free and the source of your joy is your Spirit. You are
detached fron everything. In that detachment you are going to nourish everyone.
Detachment comes through thoughtless awareness. When you look at anyone, get to
your state of thoughtless awareness. Immediately you will feel detached and you will
know the solution to the whole problem. THE GREATEST POWER YOU HAVE IS IN
YOUR BRAIN, THAT YOU ARE KNOWLEDGEABLE. Just you have to get inta
thoughtless awareness and the whole library of knowledge can open to you. Also in
every field you have advanced so much, but these are very mundane things which may
give us little pleasures here and there but the main thing is how many people we give
realization to, how much we can announce about Sahaja Yoga.
Sahaja Yoga is not "by the way." Sahaja Yoga is committment and complete
involvement; otherwise you are really useless for Sahaja Yoga. It's better to have few
people who are committed than to have thousands who are just useless.
see what you have decided for yourself and what you have decided for Sahaja Yoga.
If you have decided to opt for Sahaja Yoga, then just know that this is the main thing
which you have to do. THE WHOLE ATTENTION SHOULD BE ON SAHAJA YOGA.
WHAT IS HAPPENING IN SAHAJA YOGA? WHERE ARE WE? WHERE ARE WE
GOING? WHERE IS MOTHER? WHAT PART SHE IS IN? WHAT IS SHE DOING?
If you put your attention to it, your negativity will absolutely disappear. So now you are
Maha Yogis, we have to make it a MAHA YOGA.
achieved by you, then you should think that you are still backdated and I don't know in
the turning of the wheel, how many will be left.
So let us
Unless and until that level is
Now don't doubt about yourself and just go full ahead with all the mariadas of Sahaja
Yoga.
(boundaries of conduct) have to be there, and also the behavioral mariadas. There are
not many mariadas in Sahaja Yoga. BUT THE MAIN MARIADA IS THAT YOU
SHOULD BE VERY MORAL PEOPLE, and also you should be, in appearance, in
behavior, such a person that you do not become obnoxious.
So the MARIADAS have to be there. Except that the moral mariadas
Today we have people here from all over the world and you go and tell this message
to all the rest of the people whom I have not met that, MOTHER HAS ALREADY
ANNOUNCED, THROUGH THE VISHNUMAYA ALSO, THAT YOU ALL HAVE
BECOME NOW MAHA YOGIS AND TRY TO EXPRESS THAT, MANIFEST THAT.
WITH FULL CONFIDENCE IN YOURSELF AND WITH THIS POWER CF LOVE, I AM
SURE WE'LL ALL WIN OVER."
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8.pdf-page-5.txt 
 OPENING OF THE AGYA CHAKRA OF PLANET EARTH
U.S.S.R.
12 MAY TO 17 MAY
the fourth time Shri Adi Shak ti blessed the Soviet Union within
THIS was
six months. The resul ts are tremendous. There is a core of over 2000 Sahaja
Yogis medita ting regularly in the major ci ties of Moscow, Kiev and Leningrad.
a Yogis, so finally a
The thousand seat halls were jam packed with just Sahaja
stadium of 4000 capaci ty had to be hired to
accomodate the long queus of
public. The national T.V. interviewed Shri Mataji at the airport and again
in the studios. Thus it would be possible for millions to get their realisation
through the cinemedia. Photographs of Shri Mataji would be mailed to interes ted
seekers thus allowing them to practice Sahaja Yoga. The head of the communist
party and several ministers received their realisation. The ministry of Educa tlon
has introduced Sahaja Yoga in one of their schools in Moscow and would gradually
take it up on the na tional level.
The minis try of heal th has set
t up a Sahaja
Yoga centre for medico-biological problems. Shri Mataji addressed a special
conference of 300 doctors from all over the Soviet Union and gave them realisation.
Their interest was so aroused that Sahaja Yoga doctors were invited to participate
in a medical conference from Ist June to 9th June, Shri Ma taji was so pleased
with the Russian seekers that She agreed to bless Soviet Union again at the
end of June. We pray that the Agya would certainly open. She praised the
wisdom of the Russian seekers and said that without wisdom you cannot handle
freedom, Look what has happened to the Americans!
SHRI MATAJI'S ADDRESS TO THE MEDICAL CONFERENCE MOSCOW
To cure patients is very simple. If a tree is sick and you try to cure the
roots then it will not work. If
cure the roots then
you become subtle and
it will work out. If we can get to
the roots then we nurture their centres
that would make every thing so
wonderful through
and achieve the balance
the connection wi th the energy called 'Kundalini'.
Liver and Spleen
The heat from the liver af ter sometime collapses the lungs leading to asthma.
When the liver does not get enough nourishment then it becomes overactive.
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8.pdf-page-6.txt 
 of overactivi ty of the
intestines dry up causing constipation. Because
The
If a pregnant
brain cells,
the pancreas gets affected leading to diabetes.
woman is over thinking then the child may have diabetes.
Similarly if the pregnant woman is overactive then the child can have spleen
sends the spleen in turmoil. The spleen produces
problems. Shocking news
red blood corpulses for all emergencies. Modern life is always an emergency.
it crazy and vulnerable to cancer. At
Constant shocks to the spleen make
such a moment of vulnerability if something tri ggers from the left side then
blood cancer accrues.
Virus
Viruses come from the left side. They are dead enti ties that settle into the
collective subconscious.
Soul
Our soul is at the back. It goes in seven loops, the eighth one is in the
sacrum bone. Its cons ti tution is all the elements plus. It looks after all the
endocrine and ductless glands. It acts for all our reflex actions. It is like
science has discoVered that in every
Now
a computer programme.
'loop style' description. When a Depomine
Is created in the recep tor then it leads to epilepsy, lunacy depression, etc.
cell
of the same
are recep tors
This depomine is produced when another soul si ts on the back and over the
personality and one starts behaving in a peculiar manner called possession.
This possession can also take place from the right side where there are many
dead spirits like Hitler.
14
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8.pdf-page-7.txt 
 SHRI BUDDHA PUJA TALK
LENINGRAD 14 MAY 1990
(synopsis)
Russia is the front Agya and China is the back Agya. The puja to Shri Buddha
is being performed today to open this chakra. At the level of the Agya chakra
there are though ts. Because you are all connected wi th the same Divine Force
of opinion. If there is a difference of opinion
there can be no difference
then you are not a Sahaja Yogi.
You must remember that in the realm of truth you are looked af ter. At each
step there is someone who takes care of vou. When I entered Moscow Airport
I realised that the visa
was not in my purse.
smiled and without asking any ques tion just issued me a visa. All the Sahaja
The immigration officer just
Yogis were amazed at this niracle. The sub tle power looks af ter all the details
and does miracles to show you that it exists.
There should be no fear in
Sahaja Yoga. Throw out all fear. If anyone tries
to intimidate you, he will be thrown out of Sahaja Yoga. No one should try
to control you but your Spirit. There is no power stronger than the power
of Love. Sahaja Yoga is not serious: it is pleasant mirth. It is a state.
Time is your slavo now. You are beyond time. Nabody can harm you. Anyone
who tries to play tricks will fall into his own trick. In the light of Sahaja
Yoga you see the snake in your hand and Just throw it out. You are not young,
you are not old; you simply exist joyfully
IF YOU D0 NOT HAVE A LARGE HEART, YOU CANNOT HAVE A GOOD AGYA. the
mantra of the Agya is 'Ksham'
'I forgive'. The mantra of the back Agya
is 'HUM'
I am'. Thus 'HUM KSHAM'.
May God Dless You.
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8.pdf-page-8.txt 
 VISHUD DHI CHAKRA
*****************#*******1
Quali tles
Left Vishuddhi :
Brother-sis ter relationship, Selfrespect.
Causes of catch
guil ty. immorali ty,
Feeling
insidious way of speaking, sarcasm,
lack
of selfrespect, being poor in words
TREATMENT
Use Mantra of "Shri Vishnumaya (Sister of Sri Krishna)
Use affirmation: "Mother I am not gullty at all, as I am the spirit,
by
thy grace, how can I be gullty".
13
Give vibrations to the Vishuddhi Chakra.
Avoid excusing your ego by feeling guilty after doing something wrong
4.
or indulging your ego.
Development the quality of purity in brother and sister relation.
Face any Inmorality or other sins of the past and know, that Mother
forglves you and that you should not feel guilty.
Evaluate yourself as an expression of the love of GOD don't feel "useless"
7
or inadequa te.
Don't be dominated by others.
Talk about Sahaja Yoga to
8.
others with conffdence
Sing wi th your whole heart bhajans
Use your voice for worshipping Shri Mataji.
Be not sancastical or cynical.
10
11
If you have been using a mantra by a False guru, it has to be neutralised
by affirming: "Shri Mataji, you are the Source of all the great Mantras"
or "Sarva Mantra Siddhi"
Centre Vishuddhi
QUALITIES
Divine diplomacy, playful wi tness, omnipresence, collective concsiousness,
(Thyroid gland)
Causes of catch:
Agression, arrogance,
lack of collectivity, lack of witnesspower
.
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8.pdf-page-9.txt 
 TREAT MENT
Use the Mantra: "Shri Radha Krishna"
Use affirmna tion: "Mother make me a detached wi tness"
2.
"Shri Mataji make me part and parcel of the whole"
" Shri Mataji inake me discriminating and selfcorrecting person"
the Vishuddhi chakra.
3
Give vibra tions to
ex tend neck backwards, looking
Put your index finger in your ears,
4,
towards the sky, sing "Allah hu Akbar" 16 times.
Develop quality of detchment and wi tness sta te.
5
Massage the Vishuddhi area with oil, ghee or butter, and take butter
in your throat.
7.
Take saltwater gargle night and morning. Use tulsi tea, and burn camphor.
clear nasal passages, sinuses, and bronchi tis
Ajwan dhuni to
8.
Press your chin to the chestbone, roll the tongue back, like swallowing
it, do not touch the gum, and breathe relaxed and slowly in and out for 1
minute.
Breathe in with your nose, keep the breath for a while and breathe
10
while. With every inbreathing you should take in
out and keep a
a
i ttle less air, untill you reach zero Repeat 3 times.
Sip a little vibrated salt water through the nose.
11
Right Vishuddhi
QUAL ITIE S:
sweetness in sound, words,
Wi tness of self,
though ts and behaviour
Causes of catch: Cold, excessive responsibility, smoking, swearing, harsh talking
sinuses, too much singing and talking.
TREAT MENT
Use the Mantra "Shri Yeshoda"
Use Affirma tion "Shri Mataji, verily You are
the sweet countenance of
my words and deeds.
"Shri Mataji please take away all my aggression and dominance, give
Ime a sweet voice, and make me a sweet & collective person.
Give vibra tions to the right Vishuddhi.
Speak less, and if you do, try
4.
to avoid any tendency to domina te others
by your voice.
5.
Develop the quali ty of speaking sweetly to others.
Pay less attention to the taste of food.
6.
7.
Forgive everyone and dissolve your anger.
8.
Don' argue wi th people or
spend a lot of time canvincing people of your
point of view.
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8.pdf-page-10.txt 
 10 -
HOW TO INFLUENCE PEOPLE
H.H. SHRI MATAJI
The Hauge, Holland 17.9.86
To influence other people we must know how much cantro! we have upon ourselves
also. That is very important. For example some people have no proper image and they
try to influence others, so its a mockery.
Nobody gets influenced by such a person
So before working out the exterior, the interior must
wha has no image of his own.
be worked out.
It is very important that when you are talking to people you shauld have a proper style of
You should all be trimmed down properly, dont walk in a languid
talking & walking.
manner, or in a manner of throwing your legs here and there, but straight, and sit down
Let people see that you have faith in yourself first of all. If you dont have
straight.
faith in yourself you cannot influence others.
Your self confidence must be shown through all your behaviour like talking, walking,
sitting and communicating. There should be a feeling of eonfidence. But the confidence
comes in a person when he realises that he is completely secure. In Sahaja Yoga you
know if your centre heart is secure, tell yourself,
* Mother is with me.
Mother is
helping me and l'm with Mather.
Ihave nothing to worry ". Then your centre heart
will be alright. But if you are diffident about yourself then yau cannot do it. Confidence
is to be established first of all within yourself. For Sahaja Yogis its very easy to say
"I am the Spirit, and I am the child, I am the one who has been chosen by the Adi
Shakt
So there should be a tremendous amount of self confidence in you.
Herself ".
Like when somebody comes in you should talk to him in a very gentle manner knowing
that there is another God who is coming in.
If there is Spirit in me,
there is Spirit
in him also.
You must see that he sits properly, that he is comfortable, and ask him
if he wants any tea, etc.
Make him feel that you are not in any way disturbed, or
that you are irritated, but are happy to meet him and you
settle down with kindness.
Sometimes also in diffidence one might feel nervoUS about a person. That nervousness
is a sign of insecurity.
One should not be nervous if one is talking to some one.
One
should be in a way that another person should feel absolutely confident and should feel
that this gentleman is very pleasant.
Another way is to ällow others to talk. Listen to them properly, and do not talk yourself.
Listen to them, and once they've said something say. " That is true no doubt.
I agree
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8.pdf-page-11.txt 
 11 -
Dont just stun by your " No! Not at
then you can start.
but ..
%3D
with him
I do that
But on the contrary, you see what they say. You can watch me
all!
"Oh, that is true, you see, this is
When somebody says: something.
many times.
So they dont mind. They think that you have seen the other side, that you
*
it... "
have a balance, you dont just impress your idea upon others.
In B way you are,
but you do it in such a way that nobody feels the impact that you are doing something
of the kind.
Dress is very important, supposing you are conneeted with somebody in an official
The best thing is to wear a business dress, like a deep blue suit with a lot
way.
and the hair nicely dane,
of stripes, a proper three-piece smart suit, clean shoes,
may be a little bit oiled. Look like a smart business person.
When you have to talk, say, about your organisation, You shouldnt say 1' you should
always say
refer to the organisation and never to yourself.
Twe'.
Always
"I would not do such a thing. I hate it. I
believe in it." That is absolutely absurd.
" What we have to do.
That we believe. We think this way;
- and what is your
We have this kind of a thing."
Or anything that you want to tell them
opinion.
about your own organisation or your own product or anything.
You have to tell
" Now see, this is what is available. Now it is here, and we have seen that
them.
it has done a lot of good, and it works this way. And we have got very good reports
about it.
You can see the reports. We have the reports here, you ean see what
it is. And, if you please, you can try it, and see for your self."
You should be well equipped.
Suppose you are having some product, then you should
know all about it.
"Here it is.
The brochures should be there.
Please have it.
You can see yourself." Explain to him what it is.
The market doesnt capture
so much because of the product, but because of the way it is put forward.
If somebody is not alright, in a mild way you should say what the
problem is.
"We are facing this problem.
Now, tell me what is the solution " then the person
does not feel bad.
You wont
you tell a person directly he does not like it.
If
like it, if I tell you so directly, but 1 tell you everything,
But I tell you in a
way that is mild, that is congenial, that is easily understood and assimilated.
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8.pdf-page-12.txt 
 PNCW 300
- 12
That is very important, that you have a style that people understand, and proper
kind of behaviour.
Art lies in hiding art
Actually by not influancing others, you influence others.
There should be no de liberation exposed about it. When talking to someone also,
even if you dont understand what they are talking, you should show that you are
understanding and listening.
When you have to deal with three or five or ten persons, then you should understand
Like now for
that you should always try to create a good feeling among them.
example, would like you to marry. Then i will tell you about her, what she is,
in a way that will not hurt her, but prepare you. Because later on you may hear
about her, that somebody was saying so, and Mather never told. So, in a very
"You see, she has a little of these things, but i ts
gentle way you should say,
And it depends on you,
She can manage it."
She can be very gentle.
alright.
So that you feel informed knowledgeable about a person,
how you mianage it.
and also responsible about it, 'that now it is my responsibility'.
I use certain tricks, which 1 have naturally. But you can imbibe them also.
When they
It
Such little, little things make a di fference you see.
is not difficult.
are sick you must look after them. Find out if their children are sick, if their
You should be concerned.
An organisation you must treat like
wi' ves are sick.
a family. What's wrong with her? Is she alright? Do you need any help. Send
flowers sometimes, when the husband or the wife is sick. Or make enquiries about
the children. All these things mean a lot.
is the
You dont have to stoop down; you have to rise higher to attract. This
But, when rising higher, you should not suggest that you are rising
difference.
higher, create any jealously, so that they think that he thinks no end of himself.
Be very gentle. If you are lower than them, or of their style, then how will they
follow ?
Editor : Shri Yagi Mahajan
Printed & Published by: Shri P.C. Kulkarni
al Vishwa Nirmala Dharma, 9 Bhagya Chintamani Society, Paud Road,
Kathrud, Pune 411 029.
