Vol. Il Issue 1 & 2 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE 1990 SPECIAL POOJA ISSUE "We are on the cusp of a wave from where we are going to jump onto another wave which will be much higher than this, but you must have the worthiness. If you are not seaworthy, you will be drowned." Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi

 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE Issue 1 & 2 1990 VOL II This new year heralds the Golden Age of Sahaja Yoga. By the Grace of our Divine Morther the Param Chaitan ya has worked out many global changes so miraculousl y to usher the new age. We could not have not visioned all this but the Divine Mother's attention penetrating the iron curtain in 1989 brought many delightful surprises. As prophesised in the ancient scriptures people are getting realisation in thousands in the Soviet Union and from there it is spreading so fast to the East Block. The Portals of the Middle East have been blessed by our Divine Mother in Turkey. As Her attention is moving towards Africa and China, the planet earth will become another joyous cell in the Universal body. This is our New Year and we pray to you O DIVINE MOTHER. The pilgrimage of our seeking started with a gracious showering of Param Chaitan ya by our DIVINE MOTHER at Alibagh where she gave such valuable advice to all the pilgrims. From there the pilgrimage progressed to Aurangabad and there to Sirampur. Christmas Puja at Pune by the lake was a rare treat. Shri Mataji explained the significance of Christ's advent and how to become pure like Christ. It was so powerful that many of us experienced our rebirth during the talk. At the Brahm- puri Puja, She emphasised that as saints have to work hard for the emanicipation of humanit y. The New Year was celebrated at a joyous Sangli Puja where the marriages were announced and Shri Mataji spoke so deeply on marriage relationships. What followed at Ganpatipule was an ethereal experience that can only be narrated in the poetry of Rabindra Nath Tagore. "on the Shores of Bharat, the Mother is Aware " dancing in nad exultation.

 ALIBAGH PUJA TALK - 17.12.1989 By Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Welcome to you all. So now we have all arrived here and we are going to start this pilgrimage by travelling together. The journey is of a ver y subtle nature and if you realize why we are here, you will realize that all the nation is watching you all, is trying to help you that you should ascend and that you should feel your depth and thus enjoy yourself. The travel may not be very cornfortable. The roads are bad etc. It is a journey of our ascent. In the West we have become very speedy and to bring down this speed we have to use meditative process so that we feel our peace within ourselves. Also the thoughts are bombarding our minds and we react very fast to others and to these thoughts. So one has to be aware, one has to know what is happening within yourself. That the thoughts are bombarding you., You are trying to ascend and you find it very difficult to get rid of the thoughts. The thought process can start by your conditioning or by your ego. These are the onl y two problems. You are the one who is under the challenge. So you have got these simple people in the village who start watching ever ything but they do not react. If you do not react then your thoughts will give up. So the first thing should be to watch yourself that you are not reacting. But you are experiencing and enjoying the silence, the subtleties, the beauty, the glory of your being as well as, whatever is around you. You don't have to force yourself to break this habit but just to be on the watch out. It is not necessar y to talk too much about it also. Nor is it necessary to think about anything, because supposing you see a tree, so it is a tree only. What are we going to think about it? And whatever we may think about it, its going to be the tree. So there's no harm in appearing a little bit stuipid we start anal yzing we are breaking our own nerves and poisoning our own rmind and brain. So to watch something without analysis, without is Reality. doesn't matter. The basic thing is that when thinking about it, If you can achieve that point, where you watch everything without reacting, you are in Reality. And then only the penetration into the subtleties of your surroundings, of your relationships, your friendships, the whole universe dawns upon you. That's why 1 have said that in this pilgrimage, the first thing that we have to remember is that we have to be aware ourselves. But when you are only thinking about others, how others have to behave, they should do like this or that, leave it to your leaders to break their heads. That's not your job. It is a headache for them I know but they have to do it. Why do you want to break your heads for nothing at all? So to judge others, to think of others, what the y are doing - what's wrong with them, about anything whatsoever you may think is wrong - is not going to be corrected. Like I know sorne people who are specially bureaucrats. They are travelling, supposing, by the car. Then they will say "I think, you see this road should have gone this way, or I think it should have been nice if this house was facing the other way round." But it's not going to change. It is going to be the way it is. So what is the use of wasting your brain, your mind, your thoughts

 Alibagh Puja -2 in suggesting something which doesn't work out? And is never going to work out either. So when we start like "I think these trees should have been little taller". But they are not. So just accept it. Acceptance is the way we are going to enjoy. But acceptance doesn't inean tolerance. Because tolerance means you have to work very hard to accept thất the trees are of the same height. It is too much for you. When you say I have to tolerate it because, you see my mind doesn't accept. So accept as it is, whatever you see; that is how people grow. have seen those who start accepting, that's the sign of their strength and their depth. Like the propensity of this Mother Earth. She is what she is. And she bears whatever is there. If you put a heavy thing on her, She will put an equal and opposite force and bear it. She doesn't say I am tolerating it. But she is just accepting it. So the witnessing and awareness develops when we start just accepting things as they are. "I think", doesn't work out. "I think it would have been better like this," doesn't work out. Then the second problem is "I like". Now 1 like to eat a cake, but there is no cake so what to do. Now whatever is there, enjoy it as a cake. But if you go on thinking like that "I like". What is there, you can never be happy. As simple as that. You have to say that "whatever is there I like". I enjoy whatever is there. Then that's the Reality. Whatever doesn't exist, if you like it, so what can an ybody do about it. It works out in so many ways, in so many facets in life, that advantage is taken by people because we become so vulnerable to our likes and dislikes that the entre- preneur takes over and they create likes and dislikes in our heads and put ideas ever yda y. 1 have seen it how they do it. Thr ough television, through newspapers, through this and that. So when you say, now I like this. But from where this liking has come is the conditioning which is put into your head. So you are a slave of that conditioning. I Why don't you like any other flower? By this conditioning, we miss the joy. onl y like roses and 1 don't like an y other flower. Well, why? The second part should be that enjoy within. Why am 1 here? It's not a very comfor- table place by any chance, so why am 1 here? To enjoy each other. To enjoy your own being. The more diversions you have outside, appealing to your ego and your conditioning, the more your mind is bus y with that, then you cannot enjoy anything. So we come to the other conditioning which is ver y subtle, that I am an Englishman or 1 am American or 1 am from another city and then better form a group. The grouping starts in a sutble way. It is a kind of insecurity. So we start clubbing. Animals do that very often. They have to do it because their sense of insecurity is quite a lot and then human beings also do it but not the Saints, not the Angels. The y don't form groups because the y have no nationalit y. Nationality is also a conditioning. They do not belong to any one country. So now those who have cone by plane, had to come because from every country there's one plane by which

 Alibagh Puja - 3 the y come., You must know one thing. That now we have landed and we are all Sahaja Yogis here and forget your countries Mix up with other people. Please do not formn groups. There is no need at all to form groups. I would request you that in the buses because it starts from the airport we start forming groups and it continues till the end, till you go back. I think it would be a nice idea to break that and let people sit together of different countries and different nationalities. And talk to each other. Try to know about each other. Try to find out about each other, and not just what you know from the newspapers but different problems of Sahaja Yoga. What are the problems of Sahaja Yoga in a particular country? What happens in a particular country? Worst of all is the conditioning of reading also. Reading without light is useless and sorne people still may have a and a kind of "show off" as the y say. It's better to listen to others. Let others talk. habit of renermbering something they have read In Sahaja Yoga, on what subject you will discuss? 1 don't know. How can you discuss on anything? Now you see this one as a green thing. Now what can you discuss about it? Let's see, it is green but there is - green, But". One may go on like that. There is no need to discuss in Sahaja Yoga. I just don't know what are we going to discuss. You knoW ever ything. You know how Kundalini rises. You know how Chakras are cleared out. You know how you get realisation. You all know who cataches what and you know that how it effects. Now if that is the fact, if that is the Truth, that is what it is. What are we going to discuss about it? Discussions are over now. You are gnostics. You are knowledge- able people. You have the knowledge but the knowledge that you have is shared by ever yone of you. At the most you can talk about your experience. You can talk about your relationships, how you have enjoyed but there is nothing to discuss in Sahaja Y oga. I have heard about people who are discussing. I just don't know how can there be a discussion about Sahaja Yoga. another one who says "No, this is Discussion is just trying to show that you know better than the other or you can give another opinion. In Sahaja Yoga, there is no other opinion. If someone has a Nabhi catch, he has a Nabhi catch. What other opinion can you have? So then we finish with different kinds of arguments and discussions and things. Maybe sornebody goes off the track may be. But you all know he is going off the track, so what's the use of discussing ? you all know that what he is talking is opposite the track so it's all right. You come to the conclusion. Yes, we know, we know. But to discuss it out, there is no need. Once you know and it is in your awareness, the Param Chaitanya will take care of it and you won't have to bother at all, how to correct, how to mend it or what to do. That is not your work. You just leave it to Param Chaitan ya and it will work out. So here we have come because this country has been very much blessed by so many Saints and Yogis and you can see it in the people how they are and that's why despite all poverty, despite all kinds of disconforts, and despite the fact that they have not known any Western great things, they are not bothered. I went to Russia, of course Russia was great and so many got realisation and I was really surprised how these people have come to Sahaja Yoga and accepted it.

 Alibagh Puja - 4 The villagers in India may not be Sahaja Yogis, but they respect the Saints. To them a Saint is more important than anything else. Nobody wil ask you for an ything. Even if you want to give them, they will not accept. So that basically I think there is difference which we should understand, that materialism works much faster in the West than in india. And one has to be careful on that point. I am bringing you down to that point now, that are we getting list into materialisin? Of course, you know that I am a great shopper. 1 have to go on shopping. And I shop for all of you. But the difference between my shopping is that if I arm shopping for all of you, I am going there because 1 know I will get things much cheaper, and of a better quality. All the good things will be there available, because I am there. wil be able to get things for all the people because I love all of them for whom 1 have to buy. It always happens like that. When I go out for: shopping, even if I have to find things for 400 people, 1 get the things there all right. That's why I have to go. When you go then you have to think what we are going to buy. I have seen that Sahaja Yogis will buy things for non-Sahaja Yogis. We have to know that we are one body and as this hand must look after the other hand, when we go out shopping or do anything, we should always think what we are going to buy for other Sahaja Yogis. You must remember that you are on a pilgrimage and shoud be able to grow in your awareness. If you cannot grow in your awareness, it is useless. Once you start thinking like that, you'll be surprised how much you will gain and how much you will achieve. There are no do's and don'ts in Sahaja Yoga. And 1 don't think we have much discipling of any kind either but it is Sahaja Yoga which somehow or the other disciplines you. I don't have to tell you anthing. It's like the fire. If you put your hand into the fire, it will burn it whether you like it or not. In the same way, if you do an ything against Sahaja Yoga, you will have to pay for it. You definitely don't want to lose your vibrations. You don't want to become unhappy but this time with a much deeper understanding and reverence to yourself and to your ascent, you have to take a very joyful serious attitude. May God Bless You.

 AURANGABAD PUJA TALK - 19 DECEMBER, 1989 By Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Aurangabad has a special significance in my own life because my came from a place ver y near from here called as Paithan but originall y known as Prathisthan. And is the place where the Rishi Valmiki wrote the great epic of Rama yana, lived here. So there is a big quarrel going on because Valmiki had his ashram in different places. But actually Valmiki lived here in this area. On the other side of Godavari which was going on to Paithan or Prathisthan was the kingdorn of Shalvahanas. forefathers Sita stayed here. Her one son went to Russia and another to China. The name of the one who went to China was Kush and the one who went to Russia was known as Lav. Those who went to Russia are called as Slavs or Lev. And those who went to China are called as Kushans. Around here was a ver y big struggle of evolution between the big animals like mammoths and the others who were ver y quick and very clever, intelligent and supple. They destroyed most of these big animals and in that river there were lots of crocodiles. When the King of the elephants known as Gajendra was drinking water, one of the big crocodiles in the water attacked him. He wanted to kill him so that the whole genes of these elephants would be destroyed. That's where Shri Vishnu appeared and he killed the crocodile and saved the elephant. Out of all these big animals, only the elephant was saved and that's why that place is called as Gajendra Moksha. Valmiki used to plunder people. He belonged to the fisherman caste. Then Narada came as a saint and he plundered him also. So Narada asked why are you plundering me? Valmiki said because I have to feed my children, my wife and a I am the onl y earning member. Then Narada said "Do you think your children will sacrifice everything for you?" Valmiki said "I'm sure they will". Narada said "Now you becorne like a dead man" and they took his dead body, so called, and four saints put it in the house and told the family that this fellow died while plundering us. But there is a way to again bring him to life. You have to promise that somebody from you has to die in his place. They tried. All of them made one excuse or the other, for they did not want to die. So Valmiki got up and realised that so far he has been really doing something wrong. He said then I will say Maraa, Maraa, means I am dead. So repeating it, it came to Rama, Rama. So Narada said it won't work out, and you have to do penance as you have done lots of bad things in your life, and you have hurt many people. So he sat down for penance on a big mountain here which is called as Valmiki Mountain. And the termites ate up his body. Only his neck was saved and the whole body was eaten up by termites. So then Shri Vishnu appeared before him and removed his termites and gave him realisation. A termite in Sanskrit language is called as Valmi. That's how he was called Valmiki. large family.

 Aurangabad Puja - 2 Then the story afterwards leads to be coming of Sita there. So a very important part of Rana yana was played here and he said that Shalivahana helped this Valmiki temple and treated him with great respect as their master. But actually their master long time back was one Chandil ya, where we have taken some land near the river Neera. The people here are very God-fearing and they respect saints and they also know who is a real saint mostly. I hope you will understand that when we think of the comfort of our spirit, the whole life is penetrated with the light of the spirit and we start changing our attitude towards light. Not only that but also we have a kind of tremendous confidence in our virtues and we enjoy them. Though we can say in a way that in this culture there is not much of finesse, not much of artificiality. They won't say thank you hundred times. They don't say sorry. They won't even fold their hands normally. The women specially to men and say namaskar. Only to God the y fold their hands. May God Bless You. SHRIRAMPUR PUJA TALK 21.12.1989 By Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi It is not necessar y how many things you give me. It's not necessary how many offers are there. It's more important how many people you give realisation to. And secondly, how are you? Have you evolved? Have you really become independent? And can you get rid of all your conditionings? Y our Ego? And have you become a very mild, beautiful, compassionate, collective personality? The question of introspection to see yourselves, is very important. If we do not have a proper car, we cannot drive. In the same way, if your being is in a funny situation, then you cannot ascend. That's a fact. So we enjoy, every thing, is the sign how much we have achieved. If there's a cup, then a very little joy can go into it. But if it is a like an ocean, all the rivers of joy fall into it. So, it is the amount of enjoyment you have, not fun, I mean enjoyment. I am not sa ying frivolousness, cheapness but a very meditative deep enjoyment that you have within yourself. It just bubbles into you, makes you very happy and you don't know why you are happy, just enjoying your happiness. Then one has to say that you really have become a Sahaja Yogi. At that state, you want to share it. You don't want to keep it to yourself. You will work very hard and do ever ything that is possible under the sun. Your mind will think how to spread it, how to give this joy to others. You wont't be happy unless and until you communicate with others. So first you become the capitalist and then you become a communist.

 The first thing is, how far we have enjoyed. Second is what have we got in our mind now? How are we going to expand Sahaja Yoga outside? First, the light has to improve. Then automatically the light has to spread. What is the relation- ships we have with ourselves? Which I have told you also don't form groups. Another thing is some people have developed a habit of moving their neck too much. While singing, they move their neck and their bod y. You can move body but the neck should be moved with the body. Before meditation, you can check yourself - what's wrong with you - before my photograph and then you should go into meditation. As we were coming I just said, now this is the wrong road. They said how do you. know Mother? Just I know. Just find out. Just to know everything, you need not know ever ything about it. But that is the sign that you have become very aware. To be aware of everything. It is not like sitting down here that you should say "That's very beautiful or it's very grand". That's not the point. Not to certify, not to criticize but how much do you know - feel it in the atmosphere. Because we have a ver y big brain and we have two lobes in our head. It's not one brain but two lobes and when the awareness starts giving you light, you start knowing within yourself, everything and you are silent. You don't have to assert, manipulate or to exert yourself but just to know and that's a very beautiful thing one has to do. Another thing which 1 can tell you is very important. In India, you must comb your hair properly because they think you are all beggars. Only the beggars have hair like this. Please put oil and make your hair properly. You should be proud of your forehead. It is the Ekadasha. You have to fight the whole world Shrirampur Puja 2 with this Ekadasha of yours. So please see that you keep your forehead absolutely open. Hair properly done and oiled. In the night, you can put some oil and it will soothe you. You will find it very much better, specially for liver patients, is very important. They must put oil in their heads because they are dried out people. There's no fat in their hair and the hair do not grow. They become immediately bald. You have to bring out what Sahaj culture is, through manifesting it, without my telling you so what is the Sahaja Culture, how we work it out ourselves, our things. Also, try to judge where is your attention? All the time keep an attention? All the time keep attention on your attention. Where is my attention? Mr. Attention where are you lost ? And that will work out for you. May God Bless You.

 CHRISTMAS PUJA TALK - 25. 12.1989 - PUNE By Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Today, we have asseinbled here to celebrate the birth of Christ. When you think of his birth, one knows that he was born in a very humble place and all his life he lived in a very humble way. Also as Sahaja Yogis you know that he was the incarnation of Shri Ganesh, which in a sense, is innocence. And he was crucified due to stupid understanding of blind people. He was the eternal child. it is so sad that when we talk about Christ and Christianity, we feel that Christianity has gone just the other way round. On the other side of Christ. If one is construction, the other is destruction, if one is innocence, the other is cunning. Where there is Christianity; in its practices, its very surprising that innocence has no place and respect. Chastit y has no place, no respect which was the essence of Christ. He was made of it. It is sonetimes shocking how these so called Christian Nations have maligned Christ to that extent and how they ruined so many people with their stupid ideas of allowing people to indulge into all kinds of filthy things. The second point is very important to see how he was born in a very humble way. He was a son of a carpenter so he lived like a carpenter. But in the Western life, people are so materialistic and to them, to live lavishl y, to show off their wealth, and to plunder people, plunder countries after countries for material gains is a common thing. They do not think that it is wrong. In fact, they are quite proud of it. The great thing about Christ was that he wanted people to love each other and be humble but the arrogance and the cruelty that one has seen of the Christian nations, one cannot understand how the y are anywhere near Christ. He has said "Blessed are those who are meek". Where are those meek people living? Not in the Western countries. Not in the countries where Christ is worshipped, where churches are raised in his honour and have been worshipping the Virgin Mother for so many years. What a sinful thing to do to Christ. Is the greatest sin that we say we are following Christ and to do all these horrible things. All such people have to go to hell. They may not realise but they are already getting into it. They are already having this problem. They are worse than the people who crucified Christ. There's an everyday crucification. He was bearing all the brunt of the people, ever ything. But the outcome of that life is so horrif ying that sometimes 1 something out of me like that. get worried that I hope they don't make Now you people are born again. As Christ has said, you are to be born again. You have achieved that state which Christ was talking about. You are special t ype of people. I never had such hopes. The first encounter was so horrible, 1 did not think that many would come out of it. But so many of you have come out of it and have really glorified the name of Christ. I would request you now

 Christmas Puja - 2 to know that you are Sahaja Yogis and that you are the followers of Christ. You are the gnostics as described "The one who knows" and that's how you have to help people to emanicipate. It is very surprising that I saw that the Western life, the stupid destructive ideas, did not kill the innocence. But still I would say that this kind of lovey dovey stuff must be given up. It is just most un-Christian because if you see his life was a life of a "Tapasvi'. A man who lived in a very detached manner. So for Sahaya Yogis who are coming from Christian life, have to understand, if the y have to get rid of it, they should be like that. Among the Christians marriage dominates the whole life style. Its absurd in Sahaja Yoga. If one of the partners is not alright, it affects the other spouse. It covers the whole personality. It's not the case with Muslims and Hindus. I mean, I am married too. It doesn't cover my whole entire being wwith it. How can it? And that the problem is that once marriage system starts, anything starts, it becomes so important that I am faced with problems all the time. The marriages are perfor- med and then the letters start pouring in that "This has happened to my marriage'. It is a headache. They will ruin their wives, they will ruin their husbands, they will ruin Sahaja Yoga. The importance of Sahaja Yoga is so minimized by this Christian mind. It is a juxtapositon as you can call it. There is no similarit y between the life Christ must have thought people would lead and the one people are leading. So it is necessar y for Sahaja Yogis to have a dignity and a sense and to know that they are grounded in Sahaja Yoga and marriage and all those things are just subsidiar y. It's not the end of life. 1 have to marry people because 1 believe that one should lead a proper married life, because if you just take up san yasa without going through this närried life, you can become very much hypocritical. But that doesn't mean that marriage is ever ythiung. It's not so important. It's just something that has to happen. It's not more important than praying. It's not even important than meditating. It's not important at all than even eating your food. The more ado you start making of it, you start falling into the same trap from where I pulled you out. We have come out from hell. Now be dignified, be sensible and over importance to such unimportant things will not allow you to rise high. But I don't say you don't marry. Of course, you must marry. Of course, if you are Sahaja Yogini and know about Sahaja Yoga, then of course you are helped mnuch more. You get much more power, much more joy, much more understanding, and it is ver y good. But the inter-relationships is so important, on small things, is be yond me to understand. Then I see that the girls fall in love with the man that they marry Finished. The man is finished. The woman is finished. I amn taking this great occasion to tell you that Christ was born to immaculate Today, eption and that's how 1 have given you your second birth and you are so pure. So all the impurities, you must see them clearly. I know you don't like them but they will creep from here and there. If you have to come up to this stage, you have to keep up the staircase. You think that you have achieved a lot because now you have a settled family, settled

 Christmas Puja 3 children and you are worried about your own children all the time. No, it's another temptation. It's a very big temptation. So on the great occasion of the birth of Christ, we have to say to ourselves that we are dedicated to Sahaja Yoga. That's the main thing. Ever ything is subsidiar y. We are on the cusp of a wave from where we are going to jump on to another wave which will be much higher than this, but you must have the worthiness. If you are not sea worthy, you will be drowned. So we have to develop that worthi- ness and we have Christ before us. What a life it was. He lived like a human being in a humble way. And how truthfully forthright he was to say everything so clearly. In the same way, you will have your strength where you will know that you are much more than your nationality. You are a higher personality. A Sahaja Yogi who is dwelling in the kingdom of God. That's the bliss. Not the family bliss and the children bliss but the bliss of God. May God Bless You. 14 %23

 BRAHMAPURI TALK - 30.12.1989 Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Like Brahmapuri, there are many small little places where the saints have worked for the betterment of people, because you see, the y are so collective. They could not bear the poverty of this country. The way some people are claiming that we are making All the saints have made them work very hard and to work out their problens. The y have also pointed the evils of societ y. They did not go and sit in the Himal yas. They went from place to place working for the einanicipation of the society. people fatalist is absolutely wrong because no saint has done that. May God Bless You. SANKRANTI PUJA Kalwe 14 January 1990 H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Today is the day for us to celebrate in India very much. Because the sun is now in Capricon and irom Capricon it then comes to Tropic of Cancer.When the sun comes back to this earth then all the creativity of Mother Earth starts acting and she creates such beautiful things like flowers, nice nourishing things and fulfilling things like fruits and she makes our eyes cool down with the greenery she has and the way she blesses us is mnanifold with the advent of the sun. In the same way now that the sun of Sahaja Yoga has risen and is coining to the zenith and it has definitely shown you the result on the first principal that is your Muladhar and your creative power of that Muladhar which is the Kundalini, has been rising and rising and opening your being, and showing the results in your lives. It has made your lives very beautiful. It has made your life very joyous and very happy. Now we are at a point where you have to trigger a new jump, a new flight. And for this flight, we have to see that we become very light in our ideas, thoughts and in our conditionings. You are so inuch full of conditionings. All types of conditionings are on us. I don't understand how we get struck to things which are of no value, which are of no sense and they get lost.

 In this higher jump, which you are going to take many will be left behind as a result, those who will not be able to corne out of that. So at this stage, 1 have to request you that you should really fully dedicate yourself to meditation and surrender yourself to collectivety. Everyda y, you must ask yourself what have I done for Sahaja Y oga? What have I done for myself? Please try to understand that there's a very big jump you have to undertake. It has to be triggered and for that 1 would like you to be read y. To be absolutel y prepared because in this jump you might be lost, and many might be left because the y could not get over their conditionings. The conditionings are of various types - of ignorance, blind faith and all other things that we have gone through. Also we have conditionings of our country, of our race, of our styles and so many other things by which we judge others. But we have to judge ourselves, that are we in a Sahaj culture. Otherwise it's going to be very difficult that you will board the ship which is going to take us off. I have to just warn you that later were left behind. If you find anybody left behind, please try to help that person. Please try to correct that person and with clear idea and clear voice and clear cut instructions. If you really find that somebody is going wrong, you better warn him. I'm telling you all today that this is a very crucial time and none of us should just take for granted Sahaja Yoga. on if you say that Mother so many All other things are just a kind of an illusion that you feel that your wordly things are alright and worldly things you can manage. God doesn't care for people who are rich and well-off or people who are poor. What he sees is what richness you have got of spiritualit y. He doesn't bother about your education, of your degrees, of pompousness etc. What he sees is how innocent you are. How much you have worked for Sahaja Yoga. What you have done for God's work. So all these priorities you must change. I must tell you that Sahaja Yoga judges you on a very subtle point. So in this last judgement now as you people have been judged as good people. But still for the second jump that you are going to have, we have to be ver y careful that those of you who think you are Sahaja Yogis in your heart but are not ma y be left behind in this big jump we are going to take. So it is important that the sun has risen and gone to the zenith and at the time of its zenith, one has to be very careful because the same sun which has started making its beautiful greenery all round us may scorch with its heat. So be careful and one has to be aware and all the time under the guidance of Sahaja Yoga. What is wrong with us, what is making us so heavy, what is making us so difficult.

 So far l'm very happy that whatever I have been telling you and whatever 1 have been guiding you, you have accepted it very calmly and sweetly. And that you have tried to imbibe it in your life style. Actuall y, after some time, I don't think I will have to tell you anything. You will get your own light to see for yourself what is right and what is wrong. But still I would say that you must open your heart in the puja, in the music, in ever ything. Just see that you open your heart. If you cannot open your heart, it won't work. Because it works through Spirit which resides in our heart. All your conditionings, all your ego will disappear when you decide that I have to open my heart for Sahaja Yoga. May God Bless You.



----------------------

1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Vol. Il Issue 1 & 2
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
1990
SPECIAL POOJA ISSUE
"We are on the cusp of a wave from where we are going to jump onto another
wave which will be much higher than this, but you must have the worthiness.
If you are not seaworthy, you will be drowned."
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-1.txt 
 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
Issue 1 & 2
1990
VOL II
This new year heralds the Golden Age of Sahaja Yoga. By the Grace of our Divine
Morther the Param Chaitan ya has worked out many global changes so miraculousl y
to usher the new age. We could not have not visioned all this but the Divine Mother's
attention penetrating the iron curtain in 1989 brought many delightful surprises.
As prophesised in the ancient scriptures people are getting realisation in thousands
in the Soviet Union and from there it is spreading so fast to the East Block. The
Portals of the Middle East have been blessed by our Divine Mother in Turkey.
As Her attention is moving towards Africa and China, the planet earth will become
another joyous cell in the Universal body. This is our New Year and we pray to
you O DIVINE MOTHER.
The pilgrimage of our seeking started with a gracious showering of Param Chaitan ya
by our DIVINE MOTHER at Alibagh where she gave such valuable advice to all
the pilgrims. From there the pilgrimage progressed to Aurangabad and there to
Sirampur. Christmas Puja at Pune by the lake was a rare treat. Shri Mataji explained
the significance of Christ's advent and how to become pure like Christ. It was
so powerful that many of us experienced our rebirth during the talk. At the Brahm-
puri Puja, She emphasised that as saints have to work hard for the emanicipation
of humanit y. The New Year was celebrated at a joyous Sangli Puja where the
marriages were announced and Shri Mataji spoke so deeply on marriage relationships.
What followed at Ganpatipule was an ethereal experience that can only be narrated
in the poetry of Rabindra Nath Tagore.
"on the Shores of Bharat, the Mother is Aware " dancing in nad exultation.
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-2.txt 
 ALIBAGH PUJA TALK - 17.12.1989
By Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Welcome to you all. So now we have all arrived here and we are going to start
this pilgrimage by travelling together. The journey is of a ver y subtle nature and
if you realize why we are here, you will realize that all the nation is watching
you all, is trying to help you that you should ascend and that you should feel
your depth and thus enjoy yourself. The travel may not be very cornfortable. The
roads are bad etc. It is a journey of our ascent.
In the West we have become very speedy and to bring down this speed we have
to use meditative process so that we feel our peace within ourselves. Also the
thoughts are bombarding our minds and we react very fast to others and to these
thoughts. So one has to be aware, one has to know what is happening within yourself.
That the thoughts are bombarding you., You are trying to ascend and you find
it very difficult to get rid of the thoughts. The thought process can start by your
conditioning or by your ego. These are the onl y two problems. You are the one
who is under the challenge. So you have got these simple people in the village
who start watching ever ything but they do not react. If you do not react then
your thoughts will give up. So the first thing should be to watch yourself that
you are not reacting.
But you are experiencing and enjoying the silence, the subtleties, the beauty,
the glory of your being as well as, whatever is around you. You don't have to
force yourself to break this habit but just to be on the watch out. It is not necessar y
to talk too much about it also. Nor is it necessary to think about anything, because
supposing you see a tree, so it is a tree only. What are we going to think about it?
And whatever we may think about it, its going to be the tree. So there's no harm
in appearing a little bit stuipid
we start anal yzing we are breaking our own nerves and poisoning our own rmind
and brain. So to watch something without analysis, without
is Reality.
doesn't matter. The basic thing is that when
thinking about it,
If you can achieve that point, where you watch everything without reacting, you are
in Reality. And then only the penetration into the subtleties of your surroundings,
of your relationships, your friendships, the whole universe dawns upon you.
That's why 1 have said that in this pilgrimage, the first thing that we have to
remember is that we have to be aware ourselves. But when you are only thinking
about others, how others have to behave, they should do like this or that, leave
it to your leaders to break their heads. That's not your job. It is a headache for
them I know but they have to do it. Why do you want to break your heads for
nothing at all? So to judge others, to think of others, what the y are doing - what's
wrong with them, about anything whatsoever you may think is wrong - is not going
to be corrected. Like I know sorne people who are specially bureaucrats. They
are travelling, supposing, by the car. Then they will say "I think, you see this
road should have gone this way, or I think it should have been nice if this house
was facing the other way round." But it's not going to change. It is going to be
the way it is. So what is the use of wasting your brain, your mind, your thoughts
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Alibagh Puja -2
in suggesting something which doesn't work out? And is never going to work out
either. So when we start like "I think these trees should have been little taller".
But they are not. So just accept it.
Acceptance is the way we are going to enjoy. But acceptance doesn't inean tolerance.
Because tolerance means you have to work very hard to accept thất the trees
are of the same height. It is too much for you. When you say I have to tolerate
it because, you see my mind doesn't accept. So accept as it is, whatever you
see; that is how people grow.
have seen those who start accepting, that's the sign of their strength and their
depth. Like the propensity of this Mother Earth. She is what she is. And she bears
whatever is there. If you put a heavy thing on her, She will put an equal and opposite
force and bear it. She doesn't say I am tolerating it. But she is just accepting
it. So the witnessing and awareness develops when we start just accepting things
as they are. "I think", doesn't work out. "I think it would have been better like
this," doesn't work out.
Then the second problem is "I like". Now 1 like to eat a cake, but there is no
cake so what to do. Now whatever is there, enjoy it as a cake. But if you go
on thinking like that "I like". What is there, you can never be happy. As simple
as that. You have to say that "whatever is there I like". I enjoy whatever is there.
Then that's the Reality. Whatever doesn't exist, if you like it, so what can an ybody
do about it.
It works out in so many ways, in so many facets in life, that advantage is taken
by people because we become so vulnerable to our likes and dislikes that the entre-
preneur takes over and they create likes and dislikes in our heads and put ideas
ever yda y. 1 have seen it how they do it. Thr ough television, through newspapers,
through this and that. So when you say, now I like this. But from where this liking
has come is the conditioning which is put into your head. So you are a slave of
that conditioning. I
Why don't you like any other flower? By this conditioning, we miss the joy.
onl y like roses and 1 don't like an y other flower. Well, why?
The second part should be that enjoy within. Why am 1 here? It's not a very comfor-
table place by any chance, so why am 1 here? To enjoy each other. To enjoy your
own being. The more diversions you have outside, appealing to your ego and your
conditioning, the more your mind is bus y with that, then you cannot enjoy anything.
So we come to the other conditioning which is ver y subtle, that I am an Englishman
or 1 am American or 1 am from another city and then better form a group. The
grouping starts in a sutble way. It is a kind of insecurity. So we start clubbing.
Animals do that very often. They have to do it because their sense of insecurity
is quite a lot and then human beings also do it but not the Saints, not the Angels.
The y don't form groups because the y have no nationalit y. Nationality is also a
conditioning. They do not belong to any one country. So now those who have cone
by plane, had to come because from every country there's one plane by which
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Alibagh Puja - 3
the y come., You must know one thing. That now we have landed and we are all
Sahaja Yogis here and forget your countries Mix up with other people. Please
do not formn groups. There is no need at all to form groups. I would request you
that in the buses because it starts from the airport we start forming groups and
it continues till the end, till you go back. I think it would be a nice idea to break
that and let people sit together of different countries and different nationalities.
And talk to each other. Try to know about each other. Try to find out about each
other, and not just what you know from the newspapers but different problems
of Sahaja Yoga. What are the problems of Sahaja Yoga in a particular country?
What happens in a particular country?
Worst of all is the conditioning of reading also. Reading without light is useless
and sorne people still may have a
and a kind of "show off" as the y say. It's better to listen to others. Let others
talk.
habit of renermbering something they have read
In Sahaja Yoga, on what subject you will discuss? 1 don't know. How can you discuss
on anything? Now you see this one as a green thing. Now what can you discuss
about it? Let's see, it is green but there is -
green, But". One may go on like that. There is no need to discuss in Sahaja Yoga.
I just don't know what are we going to discuss. You knoW ever ything. You know
how Kundalini rises. You know how Chakras are cleared out. You know how you
get realisation. You all know who cataches what and you know that how it effects.
Now if that is the fact, if that is the Truth, that is what it is. What are we going
to discuss about it? Discussions are over now. You are gnostics. You are knowledge-
able people. You have the knowledge but the knowledge that you have is shared
by ever yone of you. At the most you can talk about your experience. You can
talk about your relationships, how you have enjoyed but there is nothing to discuss
in Sahaja Y oga. I have heard about people who are discussing. I just don't know
how can there be a discussion about Sahaja Yoga.
another one who says "No, this is
Discussion is just trying to show that you know better than the other or you can
give another opinion. In Sahaja Yoga, there is no other opinion. If someone has
a Nabhi catch, he has a Nabhi catch. What other opinion can you have? So then
we finish with different kinds of arguments and discussions and things. Maybe
sornebody goes off the track may be. But you all know he is going off the track,
so what's the use of discussing ? you all know that what he is talking is opposite
the track so it's all right. You come to the conclusion. Yes, we know, we know.
But to discuss it out, there is no need. Once you know and it is in your awareness,
the Param Chaitanya will take care of it and you won't have to bother at all,
how to correct, how to mend it or what to do. That is not your work. You just
leave it to Param Chaitan ya and it will work out. So here we have come because
this country has been very much blessed by so many Saints and Yogis and you
can see it in the people how they are and that's why despite all poverty, despite
all kinds of disconforts, and despite the fact that they have not known any Western
great things, they are not bothered. I went to Russia, of course Russia was great
and so many got realisation and I was really surprised how these people have come
to Sahaja Yoga and accepted it.
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Alibagh Puja - 4
The villagers in India may not be Sahaja Yogis, but they respect the Saints.
To them a Saint is more important than anything else. Nobody wil ask you for
an ything. Even if you want to give them, they will not accept. So that basically
I think there is difference which we should understand, that materialism works
much faster in the West than in india. And one has to be careful on that point.
I am bringing you down to that point now, that are we getting list into materialisin?
Of course, you know that I am a great shopper. 1 have to go on shopping. And
I shop for all of you. But the difference between my shopping is that if I arm shopping
for all of you, I am going there because 1 know I will get things much cheaper,
and of a better quality. All the good things will be there available, because I
am there. wil be able to get things for all the people because I love all of them
for whom 1 have to buy. It always happens like that. When I go out for: shopping,
even if I have to find things for 400 people, 1 get the things there all right. That's
why I have to go. When you go then you have to think what we are going to buy.
I have seen that Sahaja Yogis will buy things for non-Sahaja Yogis. We have to
know that we are one body and as this hand must look after the other hand, when
we go out shopping or do anything, we should always think what we are going
to buy for other Sahaja Yogis.
You must remember that you are on a pilgrimage and shoud be able to grow in
your awareness. If you cannot grow in your awareness, it is useless. Once you
start thinking like that, you'll be surprised how much you will gain and how much
you will achieve.
There are no do's and don'ts in Sahaja Yoga. And 1 don't think we have much
discipling of any kind either but it is Sahaja Yoga which somehow or the other
disciplines you. I don't have to tell you anthing. It's like the fire. If you put your
hand into the fire, it will burn it whether you like it or not. In the same way,
if you do an ything against Sahaja Yoga, you will have to pay for it. You definitely
don't want to lose your vibrations. You don't want to become unhappy but this
time with a much deeper understanding and reverence to yourself and to your
ascent, you have to take a very joyful serious attitude.
May God Bless You.
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-6.txt 
 AURANGABAD PUJA TALK - 19 DECEMBER, 1989
By
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Aurangabad has a special significance in my own life because my
came from a place ver y near from here called as Paithan but originall y known
as Prathisthan. And is the place where the Rishi Valmiki wrote the great epic of
Rama yana, lived here. So there is a big quarrel going on because Valmiki had
his ashram in different places. But actually Valmiki lived here in this area. On
the other side of Godavari which was going on to Paithan or Prathisthan was the
kingdorn of Shalvahanas.
forefathers
Sita stayed here. Her one son went to Russia and another to China. The name
of the one who went to China was Kush and the one who went to Russia was
known as Lav. Those who went to Russia are called as Slavs or Lev. And those
who went to China are called as Kushans.
Around here was a ver y big struggle of evolution between the big animals like
mammoths and the others who were ver y quick and very clever, intelligent and
supple. They destroyed most of these big animals and in that river there were
lots of crocodiles. When the King of the elephants known as Gajendra was drinking
water, one of the big crocodiles in the water attacked him. He wanted to kill
him so that the whole genes of these elephants would be destroyed. That's where
Shri Vishnu appeared and he killed the crocodile and saved the elephant. Out of
all these big animals, only the elephant was saved and that's why that place is
called as Gajendra Moksha.
Valmiki used to plunder people. He belonged to the fisherman caste. Then Narada
came as a saint and he plundered him also. So Narada asked why are you plundering
me? Valmiki said because I have to feed my children, my wife and a
I am the onl y earning member. Then Narada said "Do you think your children
will sacrifice everything for you?" Valmiki said "I'm sure they will". Narada said
"Now you becorne like a dead man" and they took his dead body, so called, and
four saints put it in the house and told the family that this fellow died while
plundering us. But there is a way to again bring him to life. You have to promise
that somebody from you has to die in his place. They tried. All of them made
one excuse or the other, for they did not want to die. So Valmiki got up and realised
that so far he has been really doing something wrong. He said then I will say
Maraa, Maraa, means I am dead. So repeating it, it came to Rama, Rama. So
Narada said it won't work out, and you have to do penance as you have done lots
of bad things in your life, and you have hurt many people. So he sat down for
penance on a big mountain here which is called as Valmiki Mountain. And the
termites ate up his body. Only his neck was saved and the whole body was eaten
up by termites. So then Shri Vishnu appeared before him and removed his termites
and gave him realisation. A termite in Sanskrit language is called as Valmi. That's
how he was called Valmiki.
large family.
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Aurangabad Puja - 2
Then the story afterwards leads to be coming of Sita there. So a very important
part of Rana yana was played here and he said that Shalivahana helped this Valmiki
temple and treated him with great respect as their master. But actually their
master long time back was one Chandil ya, where we have taken some land near
the river Neera.
The people here are very God-fearing and they respect saints and they also know
who is a real saint mostly. I hope you will understand that when we think of the
comfort of our spirit, the whole life is penetrated with the light of the spirit
and we start changing our attitude towards light. Not only that but also we have
a kind of tremendous confidence in our virtues and we enjoy them. Though we
can say in a way that in this culture there is not much of finesse, not much
of artificiality. They won't say thank you hundred times. They don't say sorry.
They won't even fold their hands normally. The women specially to men and say
namaskar. Only to God the y fold their hands.
May God Bless You.
SHRIRAMPUR PUJA TALK 21.12.1989
By
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
It is not necessar y how many things you give me. It's not necessary how many
offers are there. It's more important how many people you give realisation to.
And secondly, how are you? Have you evolved? Have you really become independent?
And can you get rid of all your conditionings? Y our Ego? And have you become
a very mild, beautiful, compassionate, collective personality? The question of
introspection to see yourselves, is very important.
If we do not have a proper car, we cannot drive. In the same way, if your being
is in a funny situation, then you cannot ascend. That's a fact. So we enjoy, every
thing, is the sign how much we have achieved. If there's a cup, then a very little
joy can go into it. But if it is a like an ocean, all the rivers of joy fall into it.
So, it is the amount of enjoyment you have, not fun, I mean enjoyment. I am not
sa ying frivolousness, cheapness but a very meditative deep enjoyment that you
have within yourself. It just bubbles into you, makes you very happy and you don't
know why you are happy, just enjoying your happiness. Then one has to say that
you really have become a Sahaja Yogi. At that state, you want to share it. You
don't want to keep it to yourself. You will work very hard and do ever ything that
is possible under the sun. Your mind will think how to spread it, how to give this
joy to others. You wont't be happy unless and until you communicate with others.
So first you become the capitalist and then you become a communist.
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-8.txt 
 The first thing is, how far we have enjoyed. Second is what have we got in our
mind now? How are we going to expand Sahaja Yoga outside? First, the light
has to improve. Then automatically the light has to spread. What is the relation-
ships we have with ourselves? Which I have told you also don't form groups. Another
thing is some people have developed a habit of moving their neck too much. While
singing, they move their neck and their bod y. You can move body but the neck
should be moved with the body. Before meditation, you can check yourself - what's
wrong with you - before my photograph and then you should go into meditation.
As we were coming I just said, now this is the wrong road. They said how do you.
know Mother? Just I know. Just find out. Just to know everything, you need not
know ever ything about it. But that is the sign that you have become very aware.
To be aware of everything. It is not like sitting down here that you should say
"That's very beautiful or it's very grand". That's not the point. Not to certify,
not to criticize but how much do you know - feel it in the atmosphere. Because
we have a ver y big brain and we have two lobes in our head. It's not one brain
but two lobes and when the awareness starts giving you light, you start knowing
within yourself, everything and you are silent. You don't have to assert, manipulate
or to exert yourself but just to know and that's a very beautiful thing one has
to do. Another thing which 1 can tell you is very important. In India, you must
comb your hair properly because they think you are all beggars. Only the beggars
have hair like this. Please put oil and make your hair properly. You should be
proud of your forehead. It is the Ekadasha. You have to fight the whole world
Shrirampur Puja 2
with this Ekadasha of yours. So please see that you keep your forehead absolutely
open. Hair properly done and oiled. In the night, you can put some oil and it will
soothe you. You will find it very much better, specially for liver patients, is very
important. They must put oil in their heads because they are dried out people.
There's no fat in their hair and the hair do not grow. They become immediately
bald.
You have to bring out what Sahaj culture is, through manifesting it, without
my telling you so what is the Sahaja Culture, how we work it out ourselves, our
things.
Also, try to judge where is your attention? All the time keep an attention? All
the time keep attention on your attention. Where is my attention? Mr. Attention
where are you lost ? And that will work out for you.
May God Bless You.
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-9.txt 
 CHRISTMAS PUJA TALK - 25. 12.1989 - PUNE
By
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Today, we have asseinbled here to celebrate the birth of Christ. When you think
of his birth, one knows that he was born in a very humble place and all his life
he lived in a very humble way. Also as Sahaja Yogis you know that he was the
incarnation of Shri Ganesh, which in a sense, is innocence. And he was crucified
due to stupid understanding of blind people. He was the eternal child. it is so
sad that when we talk about Christ and Christianity, we feel that Christianity
has gone just the other way round. On the other side of Christ. If one is construction,
the other is destruction, if one is innocence, the other is cunning.
Where there is Christianity; in its practices, its very surprising that innocence
has no place and respect. Chastit y has no place, no respect which was the essence
of Christ. He was made of it. It is sonetimes shocking how these so called Christian
Nations have maligned Christ to that extent and how they ruined so many people
with their stupid ideas of allowing people to indulge into all kinds of filthy things.
The second point is very important to see how he was born in a very humble way.
He was a son of a carpenter so he lived like a carpenter. But in the Western life,
people are so materialistic and to them, to live lavishl y, to show off their wealth,
and to plunder people, plunder countries after countries for material gains is a
common thing. They do not think that it is wrong. In fact, they are quite proud
of it.
The great thing about Christ was that he wanted people to love each other and
be humble but the arrogance and the cruelty that one has seen of the Christian
nations, one cannot understand how the y are anywhere near Christ. He has said
"Blessed are those who are meek". Where are those meek people living? Not in
the Western countries. Not in the countries where Christ is worshipped, where
churches are raised in his honour and have been worshipping the Virgin Mother
for so many years. What a sinful thing to do to Christ. Is the greatest sin that
we say we are following Christ and to do all these horrible things. All such people
have to go to hell. They may not realise but they are already getting into it.
They are already having this problem. They are worse than the people who crucified
Christ. There's an everyday crucification.
He was bearing all the brunt of the people, ever ything. But the outcome of that
life is so horrif ying that sometimes 1
something out of me like that.
get worried that I hope they don't make
Now you people are born again. As Christ has said, you are to be born again.
You have achieved that state which Christ was talking about. You are special
t ype of people. I never had such hopes. The first encounter was so horrible, 1
did not think that many would come out of it. But so many of you have come
out of it and have really glorified the name of Christ. I would request you now
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Christmas Puja - 2
to know that you are Sahaja Yogis and that you are the followers of Christ. You
are the gnostics as described "The one who knows" and that's how you have to
help people to emanicipate. It is very surprising that I saw that the Western life,
the stupid destructive ideas, did not kill the innocence. But still I would say that
this kind of lovey dovey stuff must be given up. It is just most un-Christian because
if you see his life was a life of a "Tapasvi'. A man who lived in a very detached
manner. So for Sahaya Yogis who are coming from Christian life, have to understand,
if the y have to get rid of it, they should be like that.
Among the Christians marriage dominates the whole life style. Its absurd in Sahaja
Yoga. If one of the partners is not alright, it affects the other spouse. It covers
the whole personality. It's not the case with Muslims and Hindus. I mean, I am
married too. It doesn't cover my whole entire being wwith it. How can it? And
that the problem is that once marriage system starts, anything starts, it becomes
so important that I am faced with problems all the time. The marriages are perfor-
med and then the letters start pouring in that "This has happened to my marriage'.
It is a headache. They will ruin their wives, they will ruin their husbands, they
will ruin Sahaja Yoga. The importance of Sahaja Yoga is so minimized by this
Christian mind. It is a juxtapositon as you can call it. There is no similarit y between
the life Christ must have thought people would lead and the one people are leading.
So it is necessar y for Sahaja Yogis to have a dignity and a sense and to know
that they are grounded in Sahaja Yoga and marriage and all those things are just
subsidiar y. It's not the end of life.
1 have to marry people because 1 believe that one should lead a proper married
life, because if you just take up san yasa without going through this närried life,
you can become very much hypocritical. But that doesn't mean that marriage
is ever ythiung. It's not so important. It's just something that has to happen. It's
not more important than praying. It's not even important than meditating. It's
not important at all than even eating your food. The more ado you start making
of it, you start falling into the same trap from where I pulled you out.
We have come out from hell. Now be dignified, be sensible and over importance
to such unimportant things will not allow you to rise high. But I don't say you
don't marry. Of course, you must marry. Of course, if you are Sahaja Yogini and
know about Sahaja Yoga, then of course you are helped mnuch more. You get much
more power, much more joy, much more understanding, and it is ver y good. But
the inter-relationships is so important, on small things, is be yond me to understand.
Then I see that the girls fall in love with the man that they marry Finished.
The man is finished. The woman is finished.
I amn taking this great occasion to tell you that Christ was born to immaculate
Today,
eption and that's how 1 have given you your second birth and you are so pure.
So all the impurities, you must see them clearly. I know you don't like them but
they will creep from here and there.
If you have to come up to this stage, you have to keep up the staircase. You
think that you have achieved a lot because now you have a settled family, settled
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Christmas Puja 3
children and you are worried about your own children all the time. No, it's another
temptation. It's a very big temptation. So on the great occasion of the birth of
Christ, we have to say to ourselves that we are dedicated to Sahaja Yoga. That's
the main thing. Ever ything is subsidiar y.
We are on the cusp of a wave from where we are going to jump on to another
wave which will be much higher than this, but you must have the worthiness.
If you are not sea worthy, you will be drowned. So we have to develop that worthi-
ness and we have Christ before us. What a life it was. He lived like a human
being in a humble way. And how truthfully forthright he was to say everything
so clearly. In the same way, you will have your strength where you will know
that you are much more than your nationality. You are a higher personality. A
Sahaja Yogi who is dwelling in the kingdom of God. That's the bliss. Not the family
bliss and the children bliss but the bliss of God.
May God Bless You.
14
%23
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-12.txt 
 BRAHMAPURI TALK - 30.12.1989
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Like Brahmapuri, there are many small little places where the saints have worked
for the betterment of people, because you see, the y are so collective. They could
not bear the poverty of this country. The way some people are claiming that we
are making
All the saints have made them work very hard and to work out their problens.
The y have also pointed the evils of societ y. They did not go and sit in the Himal yas.
They went from place to place working for the einanicipation of the society.
people fatalist is absolutely wrong because no saint has done that.
May God Bless You.
SANKRANTI PUJA
Kalwe 14 January 1990
H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Today is the day for us to celebrate in India very much. Because the sun is
now in Capricon and irom Capricon it then comes to Tropic of Cancer.When
the sun comes back to this earth then all the creativity of Mother Earth starts
acting and she creates such beautiful things like flowers, nice nourishing things
and fulfilling things like fruits and she makes our eyes cool down with the greenery
she has and the way she blesses us is mnanifold with the advent of the sun.
In the same way now that the sun of Sahaja Yoga has risen and is coining to
the zenith and it has definitely shown you the result on the first principal that
is your Muladhar and your creative power of that Muladhar which is the Kundalini,
has been rising and rising and opening your being, and showing the results in
your lives. It has made your lives very beautiful. It has made your life very
joyous and very happy. Now we are at a point where you have to trigger a
new jump, a new flight. And for this flight, we have to see that we become
very light in our ideas, thoughts and in our conditionings. You are so inuch
full of conditionings. All types of conditionings are on us. I don't understand
how we get struck to things which are of no value, which are of no sense and
they get lost.
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-13.txt 
 In this higher jump, which you are going to take many will be left behind as
a result, those who will not be able to corne out of that. So at this stage, 1
have to request you that you should really fully dedicate yourself to meditation
and surrender yourself to collectivety. Everyda y, you must ask yourself what
have I done for Sahaja Y oga? What have I done for myself?
Please try to understand that there's a very big jump you have to undertake.
It has to be triggered and for that 1 would like you to be read y. To be absolutel y
prepared because in this jump you might be lost, and many might be left because
the y could not get over their conditionings.
The conditionings are of various types - of ignorance, blind faith and all other
things that we have gone through. Also we have conditionings of our country,
of our race, of our styles and so many other things by which we judge others.
But we have to judge ourselves, that are we in a Sahaj culture. Otherwise it's
going to be very difficult that you will board the ship which is going to take
us off. I have to just warn you that later
were left behind. If you find anybody left behind, please try to help that person.
Please try to correct that person and with clear idea and clear voice and clear
cut instructions. If you really find that somebody is going wrong, you better
warn him. I'm telling you all today that this is a very crucial time and none
of us should just take for granted Sahaja Yoga.
on if you say that Mother so many
All other things are just a kind of an illusion that you feel that your wordly
things are alright and worldly things you can manage. God doesn't care for
people who are rich and well-off or people who are poor. What he sees is what
richness you have got of spiritualit y. He doesn't bother about your education,
of your degrees, of pompousness etc. What he sees is how innocent you are.
How much you have worked for Sahaja Yoga. What you have done for God's
work. So all these priorities you must change. I must tell you that Sahaja Yoga
judges you on a very subtle point. So in this last judgement now as you people
have been judged as good people. But still for the second jump that you are
going to have, we have to be ver y careful that those of you who think you
are Sahaja Yogis in your heart but are not ma y be left behind in this big jump
we are going to take.
So it is important that the sun has risen and gone to the zenith and at the
time of its zenith, one has to be very careful because the same sun which has
started making its beautiful greenery all round us may scorch with its heat.
So be careful and one has to be aware and all the time under the guidance
of Sahaja Yoga. What is wrong with us, what is making us so heavy, what is
making us so difficult.
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-14.txt 
 So far l'm very happy that whatever I have been telling you and whatever 1
have been guiding you, you have accepted it very calmly and sweetly. And that
you have tried to imbibe it in your life style. Actuall y, after some time, I don't
think I will have to tell you anything. You will get your own light to see for
yourself what is right and what is wrong. But still I would say that you must
open your heart in the puja, in the music, in ever ything. Just see that you open
your heart. If you cannot open your heart, it won't work. Because it works
through Spirit which resides in our heart. All your conditionings, all your ego
will disappear when you decide that I have to open my heart for Sahaja Yoga.
May God Bless You.
