Vol. II 1ssue 3 & 4 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE 1990 SPECIAL BIRTHDAY ISSUE PM AIRTHDAY HAR *"Truth cannot be sold, it camat be manufactured, it cannot be orgnised and it cannot be mentally or emotionally understood. thing that can tell you what is absolute truth." Vibrations are the only SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI.

 SOUTH INDIA TOUR OF SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI The Adi Shakti blessed Hyderabad, Madras, Bangalore, and Ahmedabad. The Param- chaitan ya organised ever ything so beautifull y as waves of joy and love opened the hearts of thousands seekers of diverse cultures and conditionings. After the programme, she would spend several hours correcting each individual problem. Many people were cured of serious diseases and fatal ailments. In Hyderabad, we suddenl y came upon a prominent statue of a great Shalivahana king who was an ancestor of Shri Mataji. Shri Mataji revealed that the Shalivahanas also reigned in this region for a long time. lo Madras, she expressed that Sahaja Yoga was the fulfillment of their Bhakti and now the time had come for thousands of seekers to get their realisation. A spontaneous puja to Maheshasura Mardini flowed in Bangalore as we all pra yed for His destruction. She was pleased with Gujrat, the land of Shri Krishna where people had such open hearts - they got their realisation so easily. Shri Mataji poured so much love and said many wonderful things which are reported in this issue of the Divine Cool Breeze. HYDERABAD POOJA TALK 25.2.1990 By Shri Mata Ji Nirmala Devi [Translated from Hindi to English] I am joyed to see all of you. I did not even imagine that in H yderabad so many people have become Sahaj the characteristic of Hyderabad. Now we have to approach Sahaja Yoga in a new way. It is important to know that Sahaja Yoga is Truth and we are firmly rooted in it. We have to, therefore, discard the untrue, otherwise we cannot attain purity. Matter-of-fact untruth is an illusion and we should decide to get out of it. Withjust pure desire for this end, our awakened Kundalini puts us in a state where we could discern as to what is truth and what is untruth and we start longing to attain only the Truth. Giving up all our miscon- ceptions we have to take to Truth. Gita's line that 'Birth will decide your caste' is incorrect because V yasa, the writer of Gita, was himself the son of a fisher-wornan; no one knew who his father was. How could he write such a thing as this? It is said that 'YA DEVI SARVA BHUTESHU JATI RUPEN SAMSTHITA'. It means that the Innate Shakti (Devi) is the caste of a human being. Some people wish to attain material wealth, some desire to achieve power and there are some others who are in search of the God Almight y. Those who are keen to know the Parama will be the first to come to Sahaja. After getting established in Sahaj Yoga one is, at times, pained to see the Yogies. Mixing up of different type of people is

 4 slow pace of Sahaja spreading. But we should understand that a living thing develops slowly; e.g. slow growth of a tree, blooming of a few at first and graduall y man y flowers, on it. Sahaja Voga is a living process; we cannot force it on any one. No one will get realized by just sa ying, until it happens. We can give false certificate to none. And we cannot say it for certain that every one will get realization; for a number of reasons many people do not get realized. There are some who think that for sakshshatkara one had to do Tapas ya in the Himala yas. How could it be so easy now? For want of self-confidence they fail to believe it. They do not have the capacit y to see that it is the blossom time and realization could be got enmasse. After realization when one is connected with the Param-Chaitan ya, one comes to know that the Param chaitan ya does every thing for us; we get detached and become 'Akarmi'. Nothing worries us. On coming to Sahaja Yoga, due to short-sightedness, in the beginning one considers oneself the doer. Slowly, as one gets experienced, one udnerstands that man does nothing. Param Chaitan ya does everything. Everything gets done smoothl y.Sometimes, if something goes against our desires, even then we should not think that God has not helped us. In fact we could neither think nor do more than God; so we have to accept that Param chaitan ya has done the appropriate and what is coming up is very beautiful. Sahaja Yogi has to be very careful; There are two aspects about whom a Firstly Through individual meditation we should know our faults; The state of our instrument : whether we are right sided or left sided? Which of our Chakras are obstructed? By putting up our attention on the Photograph we could know all this. Then in meditation we should clear all the negativit y. In Sahaja Yoga Meditatiorn system is very easy. Sitting up for 10-15 minutes in the mornings and evenings we can meditate. After clearing ourselves we should get into collectivit y. Opening of heart is essential for this. A narrow minded person could never be collective. We should not put our attention on the faults of others for by doing so these shortcomings grab us. We should take note of the qualities and inherent beauty of others. It will serve doube purpose i.e. beautif y our personalit y and remove fault of others. We have to remember that others are not separted from their selves and as such we should correct their faults with the power of Divine love. Love is Truth and Truth is Love. One who uses the power of love ascends very high. With open hearts you have to see people with love. This is how you develop individuall y and collectivel y. We should be beware of the person who is not collective. Listening to the ill of others is a guilt in Sahaja Yoga. We should observe how softly we could speak and how much power of forgiveness we possess. We should regard all Sahaja Yogis as our relatives. The second aspect of Sahaja Yoga is the knowledge of Sahaja Yoga and its spreading. We should have the knowledge that which finger of hand or foot indicates the cataches of which Chakra; which catch could cause which disease

 and how could it be cured. How could we cure others and all concerned know- ledge about Kundalini we must acquire. Ladies, being Shaktis, must attain this knowledge. With the help of this knowledge, ladies will be able to understand Sahaja children and their behavioural pattern. Achieverment of this knowledge is most important. Spreading of Sahaja Yoga is another significant thing. As without cross-ventilation the room could not be air y, in the same way if you do not pass on the experi- ence of Sahaja to others; do not help them, do not give them self-realization, do not spread Sahaja Yoga, then you, yourself, cannot progress. When a tree grows, its branches should also grow and number of people should sit under the shade of these branches. It is the case of an ordinar y tree; but you are the Ban yan Trees. Therefore, you have to, whole-heartedly, help Sahaja Yoga spread. There are some Sahaja Yogies who keep dreaming all the times the heaven of Sahaja Yoga dawn on the whole of the Globe. Such sahaja yogies become sans questions and they always remain in the state of bliss. A great responsibilit y has fallen on our shoulders; the responsibilit y of builing up a pure-hearted society in which we could place our faith and remain established in that faith. May God Bless You All! SHRI KRISHNA PUJA TALK Madras - 9.2.1990. By Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi SYNOPSIS You are the people chosen by God to do his work. First and foremost is to work for Him, then he works for you. and other problems can be worked out. Those who can leave things to God are best able to resolve their problems. It is the power of Param Chaitan ya that nourishes and guides us and organises everything. When you are not expecting something to happen, it just works. He looks after you. All your personal, social In some people Sahaja Y oga takes time go grow. So have patience and full confidence in yourself. When we are bound in the eternal love of God, why should we worry about anything? Ever ything works out so beautifull y, the first thing is to believe in ourselves and to have a clean heart and a sincere love for the Divine. The Divine loves you much more. But it loves you in a different way, like a father who loves you. Supposing you make a mistake then he corrects you. In the sa ne way, the Param Chaitan ya also corrects you. It clears you in a way that you learn your lesson. We have to remernber all the time that we are a part and parcel of that great power which we call as Param Chaitan ya which has now becorne ver y active.

 MADRAS PUBLIC PROGRAMME TALK Madras 11.2.1990 By Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi SYNOPSIS Truth cannot be sold; it cannot be manufactured; it cannot be organised, and it cannot be mentally or emotionall y understood. Whatever is the truth we have felt in our evolutionary process has been alwa ys felt on our central nervous system. For example, 1 1 feel something is cold or hot. You can feel it. Similarly, you can feel the truth even on your central nervous system. It has to manifest on your central nervous system. It cannot be just a mental idea-"This is the truth, that is the truth". Everybody must feel that truth because it is an absolute thing. Whatever is absolute cannot be argued, cannot be differently decoded. If we understand this primafacie understand that we have to go be yond this human awareness to feel the truth, and the truth is the alI prevading power of God's love. Love is truth and truth is love, but this love is Divine love. Divine love is not limited. Like the sap in the tree goes to various parts of the tree and then goes back. Supposing it gets attached to a flower then the whole tree will suffer and die. Ultimatel y the flower will also die. So it is a detached love. This love is the one which has organised this universe, this mother earth, and all the distances between the planets. It has organised our evolution, and it has redeemed us up to this level of human awareness. But human awareness is not sufficient. If it was, then there would not have been any difference of opinions. Ever ybod y thinks that the y are correct. That's not the way to self certif y oneself. see this pattern here with my eyes, and then we will In these modern times if somebody talks of God's love, then they think it is soine- thing out of date. That it is something of eternal existence. It may subside for a while, but it has to come back again for us, for our benevolence and for us to achieve our goal. After all why are we on this earth ? What are we be-n for? What is our goal ? Is it all the time to struggle for mone y, power, relations and other emotional things, or is it soImething higher. all Prevading Power around us, you have to have a scientific attitude towards it to understand that this is a hypothesis at this stage, but later on if prove it, then you have to accept this as the truth. As honest people, you have to accept it. If it is for the emanicipation of all the human beings, if it is for the benevolence of the whole human race, then why not have it ? If 1 am saying there is this At the very outset, I told you that truth cannot be sold. There are many people in the market selling the truth, selling God, selling all kinds of things. Truth has nothing to do with mone y. Money is a human creation. So to feel this all prevading Power, the thing lacking in us is that we have not felt so far the connection, and this connection has to be established. That is possible. Built within us is the power what we call as Kundalini, which is coiled in three and a hali, and which rises through six centres to pierce through your fontanelle bone area, and you

 start feeling the cool breeze in your hand, and also the cool breeze starts corning out of your head, so you have to certify yourself. Nobody is going to certif y you. This is the first sprouting of the seed. It is a living process and a living energy of a living God. it sprouts, spontaneOusl y as a seed sprouts spontaneousl y. Then you start seeing the effects of it on your physical, mental, ernotional and spiritual self, which is tremendous, fantastic. It is such a vision that even the flight of your imagination cannot reach it. But you are that. You are that glorious thing. You have that glory within yourself. you are made for that glory, to enjoy that beauty, and you have to enjoy it. It is your right to have your yoga, the union with this Divine Power. Not only that, it is sa spontaneous. Is Sahaja also means very simple, easy, but actuall y it means 'saha' means with gerin, is born, with you. which The Kundalini is the Pure Desire within us. The law of economics states that wants are not satiable in general. That means toda y we want to have something and tomorrow we want to have something else. We are never satisfied with what we have. The reason is whatever we ask for or desire for, is not the Pure Desire. So what is the Pure Desire? Whether you are conscious or unconscious about it, your pure desire is to become one with the Divine Power. And unless and until that desire is fulfilled, you will never feel satisfied in your life. This power of pure desire resides in the triangular bone. It is very important to know that the Kundalini lies above the Mooladhar Chakra in the Mooladhar. So those people who say that sex can awaken the Kundalini are absolutel y wrong and against the realit y. They are misleading people and are trying to play upon our weaknesses. Because Mooladhar Chakra looks after the pelvic plexus which is responsible for our: organs of excretion as well as for sex. At this time, all such activities stop and a person becornes innocent and then the Kundalini rises. Now this rising of the Kundalini takes place in the presence of somebody who is like the Mother Earth. Or somebody who is raise the Kundalini and how to give realisation. Kundalini is your individual Mother. She has recorded ever ything about you. She knows each and everything. She knows your heart and she is settled down nicely, waiting for the mornent when she can be awakened. To say that it gives. trouble shows that the people who are doing this kind of work are not authorised, or they do not have any knowledge about it. Supposing somebody puts his fingers into a plug and says I got a shock from che plug. Naturall y, because yau do not know what to do about it. a Sahaja Yogi and knows how to When we think too much we use the grey cells from our brain but how do they get replaced? How they multiply and how they grow, nobody can explain. The Swadhisthan Chakra converts the fat cells for the use of the brain. It also looks after your liver, pancreas, spleen, part of intestines and kidne ys. So much work it has to do. If you are ver y futuristic, all the time planning, thinking too much, then this poor chakra has to do this job of converting your lat cells for the use of your brain. As a result all these organs get neglected and such people develop liver trouble. The second thing is diabetes. You develop diabetes because of neglect of your pancreas. The job of the pancreas is to absorb the sugar in the proper proportions. But when you make this poor Swadhisthan work too hard, it just does not know what to do, and pancreas is neglected.

 8. The third one is the spleen. The spleen is the speedometer. It gives the rythm all the time. Now-a-da ys we are very busy people. Bus y doing nothing. The spleen is for emergencies. It starts producing more red blood corpuscles for ernergencies. When we read the news papers, emergency arises, because there is such a shocking news always. Somebody dead, or somebody killed, somebody butchered, or theft. They are not supposed to give you any good news. This abnormal attention towards all these absurdities of life gives shocks. As result, the spleen has to supply more Red blood corpscles and it comes into action. Then in the morning we have no time. Just eating and nibbling without any rhythm, then rushing to the of fice. If there's any problem with the boss then we've had it. If we lead this kind of a hectic life then the poor spleen does not know how to cope with a hectic persona- lity like this. It does not know when to produce RB Cs or to stop it, so it goes on hecticall y producing RB Cs, and as a result it becomes really hectic and really maddening for that organ. Plus it is neglected. It cannot keep its own rhythm and it becomes vulnerable to cancer, blood cancer especially. When the connection with the main is lost, there is no control. In a cancer patient, the cell goes arbitrary. It starts working on its own, so malignancy sets in and cancer starts. When the Kundalini rises she passes through these centres and awakens them, nourishes them, and puts them right and that's how your attention comes to the centre and problems are solved. Like this, blood pressure which comes from bad kidne ys is also solved and many other problems are solved of the people who are futuristic. The worst enemy of futuristic people is that future never exists. The y have hopes of the future and the y feel disappointed when the y do not work out. With this: kind of dangling between hope and disappointment they develop a funny kind of a personalit y. In that kind of personalit y, the y can develop some other diseases which we call as psychosomatic, which are of a very serious nature. Moreover, a very dangerous enemy of these futuristic people waiting at their door is heart attack. If your attention is so much outside, planning, fighting for this or that, no attention on your heart, no attention to your emotional side, like people who are very busy, workaholics having no time for their wife, for their families, no time for any emotional expression; they become very dry people. They may look nice from outside, but the y are not. They are extremely dry and vulnerable to a massive heart attack. The reason is that in the heart resides the Spirit, and if you neglect the Spirit so much, heart attack is inevitable. There are two kinds of hearts. One is the lethargic heart, and another is an active heart. The one who is a futuristic has an active heart and he gets massive heart attacks, while the person who has a lethargic heart gets Angina. So all the diseases, whether it is mental, emotional or spiritual, come from disturbances in the Chakras. money making, power,

 MAHISHASURA MARDINI PUJA Bangalore- 13.2. 1990 By Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Firstly, in every place one has to establish Shri Ganesha. Shri Ganesha, as you know, is the source of auspiciousness, of holiness, of innocence and all these three things come from the wisdon of Shri Ganesha. So first and foremost is the wisdorn within you. With wisdom, you will know what is auspicious, what is holiness. This wisdom is not a wordl y-wise wisdoin but divine wisdorm which comes to us with our ascent. So the duty of every Sahaja Yogi is to establish this source of wisdom. Now for Sahaja Yogis this source of wisdorn is Paramchaitan ya or pure vibrations itself. Whenever you have trouble or whatever you feel caught or when ever you feel you should accept this or that, whether this is good or that is good, then the first thing of wisdom is that you must test it on vibrations. Because we alwa ys forget that we have a new awareness. We forget that we are higher beings. We forget that we are saints and that God has given us a special awareness all the time. When we just start using our own style of judgement we go wrong. Vibrations are the onl y thing that can tell you whether what you are doing is correct or not. The wisdom is that you have to develop this habit and not the habits you have had before of juding anything emotionally or mentall y. Sorne people always say I s a I thought it must be like that. For us there is onl y one source i.e. Paramchaitanya, or vibrations and understanding them. mental attitude. Sorne people say that logically felt very nice. This is The first wisdom is the coimplete reliance on integration of the vibrations and the second is to establish your vibrations. If they are not alright, if you do not feel them properly, then you will have to judge mentall y or emotionall y. But if you have got vibrations and you can feel the vibrations then it is very easy to judge whether this is right or wrong. The third thing one has to know, is that we have entered into the kingdom of God. It is not a blind faith because you have felt the cool breeze. You have felt the Parinchaitan ya. And you have got experiences. To believe that we have entered into the kingdom of God is the best way to leave things with this Paramchaitanya. it will work it out. Supposing I am going somewhere and the driver says we have lost the way, 1 feel peaceful. 1 think I have to go this way. I have to be positive. If you leave everything to Paramchaitan ya, such tremendous things will work out, you will be amazed. How it works out our problems, how it guides us. You are trying to do something, struggling for it. And you just say now I have given up. It works. But if you want to do something then this Paramchaitan ya sa ys alright go ahead, and do it, you want to work it out so work it out. If youwant to see your own efforts working it out, you can go ahead. So this graduall y disappears in your behaviour. Then all people told me, Mother with your Gface ! got this, and that. have The fourth wisdom is that you have to be completely surrendered and deep faith in Sahaja Yoga. How deepl y you are in Sahaja Yoga is very important.

 10 If you have that depth within yourself, it works out. Because after all you have your parents, your famil y, your children, your problems, but to solve these problems you don't have to exert. Onl y thing you have to exert is to develop your vibrations. Now how do you develop? You have to becone Nir- Vichara. Without Nirvichara (thoughtless awareness) you cannot work it out. When you are sitting before my photograph and there are thoughts coming, you should say the matra of Nirvichara "Om Twameva Saakshaat Shri Nirvichara Sakshaat...". Establish that stăte of Nirvichara. This is how your mental depth will develop. Then you have another problem of how to develop the depth of your heart. Before sitting for meditation, you have to say "Mother, please corne into my heart. Mother please - and put your hand on your heart. Some people can just say 'Mother I am the Spirit'. The best thing is to say 'Mother, please open my heart'. Heart opening is very important. Without opening your heart, you cannot reall y have ascent. Say I don't want anything, I just want a very large heart. Open your heart to yourself. Do not worry all the time so much about yourself. I did this, I did that. All these things should not worry you. Sometimes people boast about their hard nature or of their strictress or their discipline. I got up at 4 a.m. and had my bath, then I did this puja etc. etc. All this is going to kill your heart. In Sahaja Yoga, no body has to boast of their discipline. You are doing this tor your own pleasure. You are doing medita- tion also for your own pleasure, and not for any kind of a big penance, just out of joy. You get up in the morning in a very happy mood, have your bath and begin the day with great expectations and joy. You don't have to cruelly discipline yourself. But you have to love yourself and you have to enjoy yourself. seen people who do my puja, they are in a very happy mood, enjoying making the garland and singing. Another type is disciplining all the time. Alwa ys saying don't do this, don't do that, or are all the time thinking, O Mother has to come, time has passed, this and that. Puja is not for any kind of a ceremony or so. It is just to drench worry. I don't see what you have put here. What you have done there. You have done it out of your love. I never see any defects in whatever you do. Whatever you do is beautiful. Because I see your heart and what you did from your heart. As you know about the old lady Shabri. She collected some berries and tasted each one of them with her teeth. When Rama cama, she said "please eat, because you don't like sour things. I have tasted all of them, and the sweet ones 1 have kept for you." But Laxmana who was the other kind was very angry, that how dare this low caste woman offer Rama in Sucha manner. Whereas Shri Rama had tears in his e yes and started eating and said 1 have never eaten such tasty and sweet berries. Sita Ji understood the whole thing and said "may I have some". When Sita Ji ate them she described them as amruta. Then Laxmana asked for some but Sita Ji said "no you can't have any as you were so angr y." After pleading with her, he also ate some and found them sweet. So the proof of love is the greatest joy. come in mny head." Then sit down for meditation I have into the joy of our love. So there's no need to hurry up or Ever ything has to be done with love, very smoothl y and beautifull y. Ever ything has to be done in a ver y sweet wa y. If there is no sweetness or madhuri ya then the puja is not joyful. As it is in ever y puja, I have to tell you do this, do that. Nothing is so serious. And men start organising goes smoothl y, it is not enjo yable. There should be some interesting events, some the y don't understand. If ever ything

 11 mistakes, that add to the drama. One should not take so seriousl y everything. It's all perfectly alright, whichever way we are, whatever we are, we are in love. In love, you forget ever ything else. Only important thing is love. If that is the situation, then we reall y enjoy everything. The climax of wisdom is "are we enjo ying Sahaja Yoga or not?". This is the criteria. Or are we finding it rather too heavy or difficult. If we are enjo ying then my work is done. I work to make you enjoy ever ything - every little part of it. Ever ything that you see beautiful you should be able to enjoy. Sahaja Yoga is like a flower. It's just full of fragrance. When 1 see them my heart fills up. It's so nice to see people who are happy, joyous, righteous and so good. Where do you find such a sight! Like Shri Ganesha who is a child, dancing, making us happy and trying to make us wise. Such a tremendous personalit y in a little child. He is a child of eternal childhood. We must establish that beauty of Shri Ganesha. You see children; they play with a toy and then throw it away. They don't get possessed by anything. If children get possessed by anthing that this is mine then they are not children. Nothing is so important. This is how you have to understand Sahaja Yoga. To begin with, we should understand that let us please the Devi. If she is happy then all the other deities are happ y. Onl y one thing makes me happy, when I find all of you in one famil y, all of you loving each other with love and understanding. that togetherness May God Bless You. SHIVRATRI PUJA TALK Pune 23.2.1990 By Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi [Translated from Hindi] Today is Shivratri and toda y is the day we pray to Lord Shiva. On the outside, we can gain mastery on our bnody, its movements, the mind, ego and various functions. Whatever is there in the universe, we can know it and use it like whatever elements there are in the earth, and what grows, we can use them. We can gain complete supremacy over all this. But this is all an outside manifes- tation. What we are within is the spirit. We are Shiva. What is on the outside is destructible. What is born will die. What is created will be destroyed. But what is within, is our Atma, who is our Shiva, who is a reflection of Sadashiva, is indestructible, desireless and free. It is not stuck to anything. It is stainless. By obtaining that Shiva, and getting the Light of that Shiva, we also slowly get renounced. The outside remains as it is, but within, is the atma - and industructible, alwa ys emitting its Light.

 12 After self realization our life becomes Divine, auspicious and sacred. That is extremely important for human beings to attain. Without that we cannot lead a balanced life and be truly collective. Now can we have real love. Also we cannot know the truth. The pure knowledge can be known only in the light of the spirit. When one becomes enlightened by the spirit, then his attention also becomes pure. He does not get involved in anything. Just by his attention, he gets the whole knowledge of that thing. But when a person is not self-realized fully, then he always thinks about himself. He thinks what he will eat today, when will he get good food, what kind of food should he cook. Or he thinks where should T go today? Where will my importance be felt more, when will people give me respect. In what gathering will I gain prominence. The other st yle of person will think about how to make more money, gain the entire wealth of the world and put the world right. Another kind of person thinks, only about his children, grandchildren, relatives etc. These kind of thoughts which are self-centred like what is my position. What great advantage I will get out of this, what clothes should 1 wear. How should I impress people so they think how clever 1 am, how great I himself ver y humble and keeps bowing before ever yone to show how he respects ever yone ? How culturedI am? The third person sa ys, I am so learned and will have a discussion with intellectuals and read many books to show off his knowledge. And another thinks like this about his music or art. How best to impress others is what man thinks about mostl y. People do lots of social work also, or sacrifice for their country. My country should be happy and pros- perous. Some think that my art should spread all over the world so that my country gets a name. In this way man becones happy seeing himself mixing in the collective. But in all this, there is the desire for victor y, recognition and praise. He is always looking for something and that is why he gets stuck in the cycle of joy and sorrow. His attention remains stuck to this sense of "". am? Another person is one who cosiders But when he is one with his spirit, then he thinks differently like he will think how to use this thing so that humanity is benefitted. People are suffering so much. What can be done to help them. His whole thinking shifts from self- Iriterest. When he sees a tree, he thinks how beautifull y God made it. "If only I vould be like this and give shade to others. But I am not like this and I must becone like this tree." If he sees the Himala yas then he will start singing praises of the Himalayas. But the one who does not know his spirit will keep singing his own praises. "That I went to Himala yas. I did this and that, make iny grave on the Himala yas. Put the flag of my countr y there." So there are two levels of hurnan beings. The first who are realized souls and by the Light of the Spirit, the y see ever ything. The y never think that by doingthis or that, they will get a great name, or people will praise them. The y may even be killed, tortured or criticized but they will never be dettered. Like Jesus Christ who was crucified. But while being crucified, he prayed that "O God, forgive them for they do not know what they do." A realized soul is be yond any temptations and pulls - that this should happen, this should get made. He does not desire. If it gets done, it's fine. If it does not get done, it's alright. He does not seek praise or fame. So he does not

 13 get stuck int he cycle of joy and sorrow. They are alike for him. He can witness both sorrow and joy, as he understands that it is like day and night. He is himself drowned in thejoy of the Spirit. He does not have to control his mind, Tor his mind and senses are fully in control. There are such people who run after something or the other as if their whole life depends on it. When they attain it, then they start moving af ter something else. Supposing the y cannot get it, then they feel so upset, that the y think their entire life is finished. But a realized Soul's attention is such that he moves through life knowing ever ything. There is so much power in his attention (Chitta) that wherever his attention goes, it starts working. "Chitta' or attention is the gift of Shri Brahamdev. When only the Brahma remains of Brahmadev, then this attention becomes so powerful, so loving, so knowledgeable and so clever that it does its work in a ver y easy wa y. Which means that such a person's attention becomes one with the Param Chaitan ya or Divine vibrations. When this happens then the Param Chaitan ya does all. So all the work of this world is done by the Brahma Shakti and Param Chaitan ya. When such a person does anything he does not think that he is doing it. He does not ever feel the need to think like this. He just thinks that it is happening. it is being made. It means to become Non-doer, because Param chaitanya does ever ything. So he is just a medium through which Param Chaitan ya works. it is happening through the light of the Spirit. Otherwise a person who thinks he does ever ything but sa ys, leave it to God, is unable to leave it to God in realit y. The truth is that Param easil y. So beautiful is its skill and commands that man is left wonderstruck as to how it happened. We do not do anything. All deeds are performed by vibrations. We can only take some dead thing and make dead things from it - like from silver we make jewellery and then think what a great thing we have done. But all the living work is done by the Param Chaitan ya and the experience of the Param Chaitan ya is possible only through self-realization. Because Param Chaitan ya is the Adi Shakti who is the Po ver of the Desire of Shri Shiva. It is His light. By the grace of this, Param Chaitan ya only will you do ever ything and when this happens within you, you become unique people. Chaitan ya does ever ything, very simply and Whenever the idea cormes "I" am doining this, "I" have done this, "I" want to do this or any kind of aggressive behaviour, then know that uptill now, you have not got the light of the Spirit within yu. When you come into the freedom froin action and you do not do an ything, like if this bulb says that I am giving electricit y, so it is wrong. Within you who are realized souls, it is the Param chaitan ya that is doing everything, which has made you, every part of your body, and made you grow. And now after becoming human beings, you have become realized souls, that is also the blessings of Param Chaitan ya. So how can such a person be egoistical when he knows that "I do nothing" I am playing. For I The flute of Shri Krishna said that why do people say, am hollow. This hollowness means egolessness and when this gets established within us fully then we think that what I thought that 'I am doing this or that' is so painful and so troublesome. Because I thought I was doing this work and it failed to materialize. So now I am so unhappy and "I" did this and got such a great name that it went to my head. But a realized Soul knows "I"

 14 have done nothing. It is the skill of the Param Chaitan ya, so whatever happened is alright. Supposing we lose our way, one person will think that I have gone to a wrong way and now I made a mistake. But a Realized Soul thinks that perhaps 1 had to come this way, so he does not feel unhappy. You keep him in a palace and he can live like a king. You keep him in the forests and he will live there. How can he complain when he knows that Param Chaitan ya places him in these various situations. You can hit or garland such a person, it is the same for him, because the Spirit does not get attached to an ything. He can be in any kind of crowd or meeting, he will never be effected as he is satisfied in his Spirit. If he needs to talk, he talks, otherwise he does not. If someone said something, he listens, whether it is words of knowledge and wisdorn or folly. Others may talk about the good or bad qualities of people, but he will never say "I hate so and so". Because to hate is a sin. Whatever he will do will be auspicious. For example, the Devi kills the Bhoots. It is not a sin. If she does not kill therm, sin will spread. So he does not back out of doing his dut y, because it is the Param Chaitan ya that is killing and not him. However, before talking about Param Chaitanya, he should at least be one with the Param Chaitan ya. When you achieve oneness with the Pararn Chaitan ya, then whatever you consider wrong, you can speak against it. Great sages and saints were forthright and spoke openl y about the untruth. Socrates was poisoned for speaking the Truth, because Param Chaitan ya will make him speak the Truth. He will firmly adhere to Truth. His intelligence will be able to recognize Truth and Untruth, because the light of the spirit has come on to his brain and enlightened it. With a single glance he can know who is at what level. Param Chaitan ya informs him of ever ything as the Param Chaitan ya does ever ything. We are not concerned with results. Its results only God enjoys. We can only watch this pla y. The only thing we can enjoy is the play of the Spirit.. It's working, it's play is a science of the Light of the Spirit. The one who can understand this, that the entire science of this universe cornes from the Spirit. That till the knowledge of this science does not come within us, the outside Science is aboslutely useless, because there is very little of science that can explain about the material things outside. There is no cormparison in this outside science. No collectivity, no humanit y, no love, no art, no poem no respect. There is nothing alive init. It becomes like a machine. To understand science also, man needs the Light of the Spirit. By this Light of the Spirit, you can open many shores of Science, which uptill now have not been revealed. But in a way everything is known. And it is not necessary that the one who knows all, may reveal it to all. Because ever yone must know how to understand it also. When the time comes, then only one should reveal. Even in Sahaja Yoga, many people get upset. My father is not in Sahaja Yoga, my mother, sister, brother etc. are not in Sahaja Yoga. Let it be. At least you are in Sahaja Yoga. You remain joyful with yourself. Because as much as a person remains joyful with himself, he cannot remain with anyone else, because everything is within you. To think he is not in it, he is not in that, to think like this means that doors of your heart are still not fully open. This question arises

 15 only with those people who are still half in darkness and half in light. They keep thinking about their families. Leave them alone. The y will come into Sahaja Yoga by themselves. You cannot force anyone. A Realized Soul does not think like this. He keeps watching everything and enjoys it. He even enjo ys the madness of hunan beings and also enjoys their wisdom. If someone speaks foolishl y, he also watches and enjoys that and if someone speaks sensibl y, he also enjoys that. In everything he sees only joy. If someone lives in à strange manner, then he says what a drama this is. When a Realised Soul sees an angry person, he thinks "O what anger" see how it has climbed. Now it's about the agya, he does not worry. His sight is not an entangled vision but an unstained and pure sight, or a witness state. In such a state, he can explain society in a humerous way. When the compassion and anxiousness will come within us, then through Realized Souls, the Param Chai- tan ya will immediatel y know, and then those who are spreading terrorism, will be finished. That compassion ana anxiousness also in a way starts getting manifested. It's alright if something is joy giving, but something which creates a grieved state where a person thinks why such terrible things happen, and immediatel y its solution will start working. When I went to Russia, there was to be a Yoga Seminar. So in my home it was said that why do you want to go there onl y for two da ys? I said, I have to go there because I have to break the Eastern Block. People of the Eastern Block will come to that conference and when these people get realisation and go back to their countries, then the Param chaitanya will start doing its work there. I spoke onl y for forty five minutes there and in fifteen minutes gave realization and then these people went to their countries, the work got done there. So far the work of Param Chaitan ya, it is very necessary that the people should be self-realized. Because the work of Param Chaitan ya gets done through the desire of self-realized people. The desire should be pure and not selfish, because this work gets done on the strength of the Atma. The Atma is our Shiva, who is absolutely free, perpetual, constant and eternal. These qualities will come into a person after self-realization. If these qualities are in you, you may be a king, or anything but from within you are free and detached. From within, you do not curse an yone, nor do you crave for an ything. The greatest Light of Spirit is that you do not have to try for anything,, you do not have to control an ybod y. As you keep going deeper in the self-realized state, the darkness keeps getting eliminated in that light. This is the real gain. The one who has not gained this should know that as yet his self-realized state has not fully matured. If it has matured, then we should realize that in our lives, in the society around us, in our Sahaj Yoga communit y, a new type of person should be ready, who is a form of the spirit, one who is over- flowing with the Light of Spirit, in whom one can see Shiva. When Shiva got married, he went to his wedding in just the wa y he was. This means that when you have the Light of the Spirit within you, then you could be of any face, any body, any type, but when you have that light, then Shiva will recognise you. HOP He has two forms, on the ourside is the Vishnu form and within is Shiva form. We have to be like Shiva, free, independent and detached. Then outwardly,

 16 you may be Shiva, Krishna or anyone, but the Shiva within you shall remain steady and established. When you have become the spirit form, then the outside part does not remain important an ymore. Then your feelings for such things will completel y change. When Shri Eknath went to Dwarka, he filled a pitcher with water. But then he saw a donkey almost dying of thirst and so he gave the water to him, which was meant to offer in the temple. People said, what are you doing ? You have walked so far, barefoot to fill this water and now you have given it to this donke y? Eknath replied that my Krishna himself came down to drink this water. This subtle feeling of Bhakti, onl y a realized Soul can uniderstand. To see the outside that how "We" took the pitcher and Wel" offered it to God. Who are this "We". When this feeling of "We" is not there, the Param Chaitan ya has done this work. When Eknath came on this earth, nobody understood him, people troubled him, but because he was the image of the Spirit and he was settled in Shiva, so he was of the form of Shiva. Such a person may be anything on the outside, but his Shiva State gives light even on the outside. The greatest thing is to be magnanimous. This magna- nimity is the power of Shiva.. Shiva is so generous hearted that he gives boons even to Rakshasas knowlingl y. In the sarne way, the one who is lirm in Shiva is very deep and at peace with himself. He will not say, but he knows everything. The greatest power of Shiva is love. It is nirvaj ya love that is where there is no expectation. it is flowing. This power of compassion is so great that it surpasses ever ything. Similarly, in a self-realized person, the power of compa- ssion grows and it is so ecstatic that you do not enjoy alone. His very nature becomes like this, that he becomes extremely powerful. His fear, doubts all vanish. He is able to do beautiful works in a very beautiful wa y. He also under- stands ever ything beautifull y. Some Sahaj Yogis will say on the face that you have a Bhoot. It should not be said like that. If you have to break some one's ego for ever, you just think about it that he is full his Ego. But first of all, a realized soul has to think that now 1 have taken refuge in Shiva. I have taken refuge in my Spirit. Through my Spirit only will the Param Chaitanya do all this work, that is why I am not worried about an vthing. Who is my enemy? Who can kill me? i am living in the Divine. He is doing ever ything, so what am I doing. When one starts feeling this way, then one can say that we have recognized Shiva within. We understand the outer, our body etc. but we should understand this Shiva which is within us, which is the support of our entire power and which we can call Sat-Chitt-Ananda we should believe in that Shiva. of Ego, then the Param Chaitanya will itself break May God Bless You!



----------------------

1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3,4.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Vol. II 1ssue 3 & 4
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
1990
SPECIAL BIRTHDAY ISSUE
PM AIRTHDAY
HAR
*"Truth cannot be sold, it camat be manufactured,
it cannot be orgnised and it cannot be mentally
or emotionally understood.
thing that can tell you what is absolute truth."
Vibrations are the only
SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI.
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3,4.pdf-page-1.txt 
 SOUTH INDIA TOUR OF SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
The Adi Shakti blessed Hyderabad, Madras, Bangalore, and Ahmedabad. The Param-
chaitan ya organised ever ything so beautifull y as waves of joy and love opened
the hearts of thousands seekers of diverse cultures and conditionings.
After the programme, she would spend several hours correcting each individual
problem. Many people were cured of serious diseases and fatal ailments.
In Hyderabad, we suddenl y came upon a prominent statue of a great Shalivahana
king who was an ancestor of Shri Mataji. Shri Mataji revealed that the Shalivahanas
also reigned in this region for a long time.
lo Madras, she expressed that Sahaja Yoga was the fulfillment of their Bhakti
and now the time had come for thousands of seekers to get their realisation.
A spontaneous puja to Maheshasura Mardini flowed in Bangalore as we all pra yed
for His destruction.
She was pleased with Gujrat, the land of Shri Krishna where people had such open
hearts - they got their realisation so easily. Shri Mataji poured so much love and
said many wonderful things which are reported in this issue of the Divine Cool
Breeze.
HYDERABAD POOJA TALK
25.2.1990
By Shri Mata Ji Nirmala Devi
[Translated from Hindi to English]
I am joyed to see all of you. I did not even imagine that in H yderabad so many
people have become Sahaj
the characteristic of Hyderabad. Now we have to approach Sahaja Yoga in
a new way. It is important to know that Sahaja Yoga is Truth and we are
firmly rooted in it. We have to, therefore, discard the untrue, otherwise we
cannot attain purity. Matter-of-fact untruth is an illusion and we should decide
to get out of it. Withjust pure desire for this end, our awakened Kundalini
puts us in a state where we could discern as to what is truth and what is
untruth and we start longing to attain only the Truth. Giving up all our miscon-
ceptions we have to take to Truth. Gita's line that 'Birth will decide your
caste' is incorrect because V yasa, the writer of Gita, was himself the son
of a fisher-wornan; no one knew who his father was. How could he write such
a thing as this? It is said that 'YA DEVI SARVA BHUTESHU JATI RUPEN
SAMSTHITA'. It means that the Innate Shakti (Devi) is the caste of a human
being. Some people wish to attain material wealth, some desire to achieve
power and there are some others who are in search of the God Almight y.
Those who are keen to know the Parama will be the first to come to Sahaja.
After getting established in Sahaj Yoga one is, at times, pained to see the
Yogies. Mixing up of different type of people is
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3,4.pdf-page-2.txt 
 4
slow pace of Sahaja spreading. But we should understand that a living thing
develops slowly; e.g. slow growth of a tree, blooming of a few at first and
graduall y man y flowers, on it. Sahaja Voga is a living process; we cannot force
it on any one. No one will get realized by just sa ying, until it happens. We
can give false certificate to none. And we cannot say it for certain that every
one will get realization; for a number of reasons many people do not get realized.
There are some who think that for sakshshatkara one had to do Tapas ya in
the Himala yas. How could it be so easy now? For want of self-confidence
they fail to believe it. They do not have the capacit y to see that it is the
blossom time and realization could be got enmasse.
After realization when one is connected with the Param-Chaitan ya, one comes
to know that the Param chaitan ya does every thing for us; we get detached
and become 'Akarmi'. Nothing worries us. On coming to Sahaja Yoga, due
to short-sightedness, in the beginning one considers oneself the doer. Slowly,
as one gets experienced, one udnerstands that man does nothing. Param Chaitan ya
does everything. Everything gets done smoothl y.Sometimes, if something goes
against our desires, even then we should not think that God has not helped
us. In fact we could neither think nor do more than God; so we have to accept
that Param chaitan ya has done the appropriate and what is coming up is very
beautiful.
Sahaja Yogi has to be very careful;
There are two aspects about whom a
Firstly Through individual meditation we should know our faults; The state
of our instrument : whether we are right sided or left sided? Which of our
Chakras are obstructed? By putting up our attention on the Photograph we
could know all this. Then in meditation we should clear all the negativit y.
In Sahaja Yoga Meditatiorn system is very easy. Sitting up for 10-15 minutes
in the mornings and evenings we can meditate. After clearing ourselves we
should get into collectivit y. Opening of heart is essential for this. A narrow
minded person could never be collective. We should not put our attention on
the faults of others for by doing so these shortcomings grab us. We should
take note of the qualities and inherent beauty of others. It will serve doube
purpose i.e. beautif y our personalit y and remove fault of others. We have to
remember that others are not separted from their selves and as such we should
correct their faults with the power of Divine love. Love is Truth and Truth
is Love.
One who uses the power of love ascends very high. With open hearts you have
to see people with love. This is how you develop individuall y and collectivel y.
We should be beware of the person who is not collective. Listening to the
ill of others is a guilt in Sahaja Yoga. We should observe how softly we could
speak and how much power of forgiveness we possess. We should regard all
Sahaja Yogis as our relatives.
The second aspect of Sahaja Yoga is the knowledge of Sahaja Yoga and its
spreading. We should have the knowledge that which finger of hand or foot
indicates the cataches of which Chakra; which catch could cause which disease
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3,4.pdf-page-3.txt 
 and how could it be cured. How could we cure others and all concerned know-
ledge about Kundalini we must acquire. Ladies, being Shaktis, must attain
this knowledge. With the help of this knowledge, ladies will be able to understand
Sahaja children and their behavioural pattern. Achieverment of this knowledge
is most important.
Spreading of Sahaja Yoga is another significant thing. As without cross-ventilation
the room could not be air y, in the same way if you do not pass on the experi-
ence of Sahaja to others; do not help them, do not give them self-realization,
do not spread Sahaja Yoga, then you, yourself, cannot progress. When a tree
grows, its branches should also grow and number of people should sit under
the shade of these branches. It is the case of an ordinar y tree; but you are
the Ban yan Trees. Therefore, you have to, whole-heartedly, help Sahaja Yoga
spread. There are some Sahaja Yogies who keep dreaming all the times the
heaven of Sahaja Yoga dawn on the whole of the Globe. Such sahaja yogies
become sans questions and they always remain in the state of bliss. A great
responsibilit y has fallen on our shoulders; the responsibilit y of builing up a
pure-hearted society in which we could place our faith and remain established
in that faith.
May God Bless You All!
SHRI KRISHNA PUJA TALK
Madras - 9.2.1990.
By Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
SYNOPSIS
You are the people chosen by God to do his work. First and foremost is to work
for Him, then he works for you.
and other problems can be worked out. Those who can leave things to God are
best able to resolve their problems. It is the power of Param Chaitan ya that
nourishes and guides us and organises everything. When you are not expecting
something to happen, it just works.
He looks after you. All your personal, social
In some people Sahaja Y oga takes time go grow. So have patience and full confidence
in yourself. When we are bound in the eternal love of God, why should we worry
about anything? Ever ything works out so beautifull y, the first thing is to believe
in ourselves and to have a clean heart and a sincere love for the Divine. The
Divine loves you much more. But it loves you in a different way, like a father
who loves you. Supposing you make a mistake then he corrects you. In the sa ne
way, the Param Chaitan ya also corrects you. It clears you in a way that you learn
your lesson. We have to remernber all the time that we are a part and parcel
of that great power which we call as Param Chaitan ya which has now becorne
ver y active.
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3,4.pdf-page-4.txt 
 MADRAS PUBLIC PROGRAMME TALK
Madras 11.2.1990
By Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
SYNOPSIS
Truth cannot be sold; it cannot be manufactured; it cannot be organised, and
it cannot be mentally or emotionall y understood. Whatever is the truth we have
felt in our evolutionary process has been alwa ys felt on our central nervous system.
For example, 1 1 feel something is cold
or hot. You can feel it. Similarly, you can feel the truth even on your central
nervous system. It has to manifest on your central nervous system. It cannot
be just a mental idea-"This is the truth, that is the truth". Everybody must feel
that truth because it is an absolute thing. Whatever is absolute cannot be argued,
cannot be differently decoded. If we understand this primafacie
understand that we have to go be yond this human awareness to feel the truth,
and the truth is the alI prevading power of God's love. Love is truth and truth
is love, but this love is Divine love. Divine love is not limited. Like the sap in
the tree goes to various parts of the tree and then goes back. Supposing it gets
attached to a flower then the whole tree will suffer and die. Ultimatel y the flower
will also die. So it is a detached love. This love is the one which has organised
this universe, this mother earth, and all the distances between the planets. It
has organised our evolution, and it has redeemed us up to this level of human
awareness. But human awareness is not sufficient. If it was, then there would
not have been any difference of opinions. Ever ybod y thinks that the y are correct.
That's not the way to self certif y oneself.
see this pattern here with my eyes, and
then we will
In these modern times if somebody talks of God's love, then they think it is soine-
thing out of date. That it is something of eternal existence. It may subside for
a while, but it has to come back again for us, for our benevolence and for us
to achieve our goal. After all why are we on this earth ? What are we be-n for?
What is our goal ? Is it all the time to struggle for mone y, power, relations and
other emotional things, or is it soImething higher.
all Prevading Power around us, you have to have a scientific attitude towards
it to understand that this is a hypothesis at this stage, but later on if prove
it, then you have to accept this as the truth. As honest people, you have to accept
it. If it is for the emanicipation of all the human beings, if it is for the benevolence
of the whole human race, then why not have it ?
If 1 am saying there is this
At the very outset, I told you that truth cannot be sold. There are many people
in the market selling the truth, selling God, selling all kinds of things. Truth has
nothing to do with mone y. Money is a human creation. So to feel this all prevading
Power, the thing lacking in us is that we have not felt so far the connection,
and this connection has to be established. That is possible. Built within us is the
power what we call as Kundalini, which is coiled in three and a hali, and which
rises through six centres to pierce through your fontanelle bone area, and you
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3,4.pdf-page-5.txt 
 start feeling the cool breeze in your hand, and also the cool breeze starts corning
out of your head, so you have to certify yourself. Nobody is going to certif y you.
This is the first sprouting of the seed. It is a living process and a living energy
of a living God. it sprouts, spontaneOusl y as a seed sprouts spontaneousl y. Then
you start seeing the effects of it on your physical, mental, ernotional and spiritual
self, which is tremendous, fantastic. It is such a vision that even the flight of
your imagination cannot reach it. But you are that. You are that glorious thing.
You have that glory within yourself. you are made for that glory, to enjoy that
beauty, and you have to enjoy it. It is your right to have your yoga, the union
with this Divine Power. Not only that, it is sa spontaneous. Is Sahaja
also means very simple, easy, but actuall y it means 'saha' means with gerin, is
born, with you.
which
The Kundalini is the Pure Desire within us. The law of economics states that
wants are not satiable in general. That means toda y we want to have something
and tomorrow we want to have something else. We are never satisfied with what
we have. The reason is whatever we ask for or desire for, is not the Pure Desire.
So what is the Pure Desire? Whether you are conscious or unconscious about
it, your pure desire is to become one with the Divine Power. And unless and until
that desire is fulfilled, you will never feel satisfied in your life. This power of
pure desire resides in the triangular bone. It is very important to know that the
Kundalini lies above the Mooladhar Chakra in the Mooladhar. So those people
who say that sex can awaken the Kundalini are absolutel y wrong and against the
realit y. They are misleading people and are trying to play upon our weaknesses.
Because Mooladhar Chakra looks after the pelvic plexus which is responsible for
our: organs of excretion as well as for sex. At this time, all such activities stop
and a person becornes innocent and then the Kundalini rises.
Now this rising of the Kundalini takes place in the presence of somebody who
is like the Mother Earth. Or somebody who is
raise the Kundalini and how to give realisation. Kundalini is your individual Mother.
She has recorded ever ything about you. She knows each and everything. She knows
your heart and she is settled down nicely, waiting for the mornent when she can
be awakened. To say that it gives. trouble shows that the people who are doing
this kind of work are not authorised, or they do not have any knowledge about
it. Supposing somebody puts his fingers into a plug and says I got a shock from
che plug. Naturall y, because yau do not know what to do about it.
a Sahaja Yogi and knows how to
When we think too much we use the grey cells from our brain but how do they
get replaced? How they multiply and how they grow, nobody can explain. The
Swadhisthan Chakra converts the fat cells for the use of the brain. It also looks
after your liver, pancreas, spleen, part of intestines and kidne ys. So much work
it has to do. If you are ver y futuristic, all the time planning, thinking too much,
then this poor chakra has to do this job of converting your lat cells for the use
of your brain. As a result all these organs get neglected and such people develop
liver trouble.
The second thing is diabetes. You develop diabetes because of neglect of your
pancreas. The job of the pancreas is to absorb the sugar in the proper proportions.
But when you make this poor Swadhisthan work too hard, it just does not know
what to do, and pancreas is neglected.
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3,4.pdf-page-6.txt 
 8.
The third one is the spleen. The spleen is the speedometer. It gives the rythm
all the time. Now-a-da ys we are very busy people. Bus y doing nothing. The spleen
is for emergencies. It starts producing more red blood corpuscles for ernergencies.
When we read the news papers, emergency arises, because there is such a shocking
news always. Somebody dead, or somebody killed, somebody butchered, or theft.
They are not supposed to give you any good news. This abnormal attention towards
all these absurdities of life gives shocks. As result, the spleen has to supply more
Red blood corpscles and it comes into action. Then in the morning we have no
time. Just eating and nibbling without any rhythm, then rushing to the of fice.
If there's any problem with the boss then we've had it. If we lead this kind of
a hectic life then the poor spleen does not know how to cope with a hectic persona-
lity like this. It does not know when to produce RB Cs or to stop it, so it goes
on hecticall y producing RB Cs, and as a result it becomes really hectic and really
maddening for that organ. Plus it is neglected. It cannot keep its own rhythm
and it becomes vulnerable to cancer, blood cancer especially.
When the connection with the main is lost, there is no control. In a cancer patient,
the cell goes arbitrary. It starts working on its own, so malignancy sets in and
cancer starts. When the Kundalini rises she passes through these centres and awakens
them, nourishes them, and puts them right and that's how your attention comes
to the centre and problems are solved. Like this, blood pressure which comes
from bad kidne ys is also solved and many other problems are solved of the people
who are futuristic.
The worst enemy of futuristic people is that future never exists. The y have hopes
of the future and the y feel disappointed when the y do not work out. With this:
kind of dangling between hope and disappointment they develop a funny kind of
a personalit y. In that kind of personalit y, the y can develop some other diseases
which we call as psychosomatic, which are of a very serious nature. Moreover,
a very dangerous enemy of these futuristic people waiting at their door is heart
attack. If your attention is so much outside, planning,
fighting for this or that, no attention on your heart, no attention to your emotional
side, like people who are very busy, workaholics having no time for their wife,
for their families, no time for any emotional expression; they become very dry
people. They may look nice from outside, but the y are not. They are extremely
dry and vulnerable to a massive heart attack. The reason is that in the heart
resides the Spirit, and if you neglect the Spirit so much, heart attack is inevitable.
There are two kinds of hearts. One is the lethargic heart, and another is an active
heart. The one who is a futuristic has an active heart and he gets massive heart
attacks, while the person who has a lethargic heart gets Angina. So all the diseases,
whether it is mental, emotional or spiritual, come from disturbances in the Chakras.
money making, power,
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3,4.pdf-page-7.txt 
 MAHISHASURA MARDINI PUJA
Bangalore- 13.2. 1990
By Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Firstly, in every place one has to establish Shri Ganesha. Shri Ganesha, as you
know, is the source of auspiciousness, of holiness, of innocence and all these three
things come from the wisdon of Shri Ganesha. So first and foremost is the wisdorn
within you. With wisdom, you will know what is auspicious, what is holiness. This
wisdom is not a wordl y-wise wisdoin but divine wisdorm which comes to us with
our ascent. So the duty of every Sahaja Yogi is to establish this source of wisdom.
Now for Sahaja Yogis this source of wisdorn is Paramchaitan ya or pure vibrations
itself. Whenever you have trouble or whatever you feel caught or when ever you
feel you should accept this or that, whether this is good or that is good, then
the first thing of wisdom is that you must test it on vibrations. Because we alwa ys
forget that we have a new awareness. We forget that we are higher beings. We
forget that we are saints and that God has given us a special awareness all the
time. When we just start using our own style of judgement we go wrong. Vibrations
are the onl y thing that can tell you whether what you are doing is correct or
not. The wisdom is that you have to develop this habit and not the habits you
have had before of juding anything emotionally or mentall y. Sorne people always
say I s a
I thought it must be like that. For us there is onl y one source i.e. Paramchaitanya,
or vibrations and understanding them.
mental attitude. Sorne people say that logically
felt very nice. This is
The first wisdom is the coimplete reliance on integration of the vibrations and
the second is to establish your vibrations. If they are not alright, if you do not
feel them properly, then you will have to judge mentall y or emotionall y. But
if you have got vibrations and you can feel the vibrations then it is very easy
to judge whether this is right or wrong.
The third thing one has to know, is that we have entered into the kingdom of
God. It is not a blind faith because you have felt the cool breeze. You have felt
the Parinchaitan ya. And you have got experiences. To believe that we have entered
into the kingdom of God is the best way to leave things with this Paramchaitanya.
it will work it out. Supposing I am going somewhere and the driver says we have
lost the way, 1 feel peaceful. 1 think I have to go this way. I have to be positive.
If you leave everything to Paramchaitan ya, such tremendous things will work
out, you will be amazed. How it works out our problems, how it guides us. You
are trying to do something, struggling for it. And you just say now I have given
up. It works. But if you want to do something then this Paramchaitan ya sa ys
alright go ahead, and do it, you want to work it out so work it out. If youwant
to see your own efforts working it out, you can go ahead. So this graduall y disappears
in your behaviour. Then all people told me, Mother with your Gface ! got this,
and that.
have
The fourth wisdom is that you have to be completely surrendered and
deep faith in Sahaja Yoga. How deepl y you are in Sahaja Yoga is very important.
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3,4.pdf-page-8.txt 
 10
If you have that depth within yourself, it works out. Because after all you have
your parents, your famil y, your children, your problems, but to solve these problems
you don't have to exert. Onl y thing you have to exert is to develop your vibrations.
Now how do you develop? You have to becone Nir- Vichara. Without Nirvichara
(thoughtless awareness) you cannot work it out. When you are sitting before my
photograph and there are thoughts coming, you should say the matra of Nirvichara
"Om Twameva Saakshaat Shri Nirvichara Sakshaat...". Establish that stăte of
Nirvichara. This is how your mental depth will develop.
Then you have another problem of how to develop the depth of your heart. Before
sitting for meditation, you have to say "Mother, please corne into my heart. Mother
please - and put your hand on
your heart. Some people can just say 'Mother I am the Spirit'. The best thing
is to say 'Mother, please open my heart'. Heart opening is very important. Without
opening your heart, you cannot reall y have ascent. Say I don't want anything,
I just want a very large heart. Open your heart to yourself. Do not worry all
the time so much about yourself. I did this, I did that. All these things should
not worry you. Sometimes people boast about their hard nature or of their strictress
or their discipline. I got up at 4 a.m. and had my bath, then I did this puja etc.
etc. All this is going to kill your heart. In Sahaja Yoga, no body has to boast
of their discipline. You are doing this tor your own pleasure. You are doing medita-
tion also for your own pleasure, and not for any kind of a big penance, just out
of joy. You get up in the morning in a very happy mood, have your bath and begin
the day with great expectations and joy. You don't have to cruelly discipline
yourself. But you have to love yourself and you have to enjoy yourself.
seen people who do my puja, they are in a very happy mood, enjoying making
the garland and singing. Another type is disciplining all the time. Alwa ys saying
don't do this, don't do that, or are all the time thinking, O Mother has to come,
time has passed, this and that. Puja is not for any kind of a ceremony or so.
It is just to drench
worry. I don't see what you have put here. What you have done there. You have
done it out of your love. I never see any defects in whatever you do. Whatever
you do is beautiful. Because I see your heart and what you did from your heart.
As you know about the old lady Shabri. She collected some berries and tasted
each one of them with her teeth. When Rama cama, she said "please eat, because
you don't like sour things. I have tasted all of them, and the sweet ones 1 have
kept for you." But Laxmana who was the other kind was very angry, that how
dare this low caste woman offer Rama in Sucha manner. Whereas Shri Rama had
tears in his e yes and started eating and said 1 have never eaten such tasty and
sweet berries. Sita Ji understood the whole thing and said "may I have some".
When Sita Ji ate them she described them as amruta. Then Laxmana asked for
some but Sita Ji said "no you can't have any as you were so angr y." After pleading
with her, he also ate some and found them sweet. So the proof of love is the
greatest joy.
come in mny head." Then sit down for meditation
I have
into the joy of our love. So there's no need to hurry up or
Ever ything has to be done with love, very smoothl y and beautifull y. Ever ything
has to be done in a ver y sweet wa y. If there is no sweetness or madhuri ya then
the puja is not joyful. As it is in ever y puja, I have to tell you do this, do that.
Nothing is so serious. And men start organising
goes smoothl y, it is not enjo yable. There should be some interesting events, some
the y don't understand. If ever ything
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3,4.pdf-page-9.txt 
 11
mistakes, that add to the drama. One should not take so seriousl y everything.
It's all perfectly alright, whichever way we are, whatever we are, we are in love.
In love, you forget ever ything else. Only important thing is love. If that is the
situation, then we reall y enjoy everything. The climax of wisdom is "are we enjo ying
Sahaja Yoga or not?". This is the criteria. Or are we finding it rather too heavy
or difficult. If we are enjo ying then my work is done. I work to make you enjoy
ever ything - every little part of it. Ever ything that you see beautiful you should
be able to enjoy.
Sahaja Yoga is like a flower. It's just full of fragrance. When 1 see them my
heart fills up. It's so nice to see people who are happy, joyous, righteous and
so good. Where do you find such a sight! Like Shri Ganesha who is a child, dancing,
making us happy and trying to make us wise. Such a tremendous personalit y in
a little child. He is a child of eternal childhood. We must establish that beauty
of Shri Ganesha. You see children; they play with a toy and then throw it away.
They don't get possessed by anything. If children get possessed by anthing that
this is mine then they are not children. Nothing is so important. This is how you
have to understand Sahaja Yoga.
To begin with, we should understand that let us please the Devi. If she is happy
then all the other deities are happ y. Onl y one thing makes me happy, when I
find all of you in one famil y, all of you loving each other
with love and understanding.
that togetherness
May God Bless You.
SHIVRATRI PUJA TALK
Pune 23.2.1990
By Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
[Translated from Hindi]
Today is Shivratri and toda y is the day we pray to Lord Shiva. On the outside,
we can gain mastery on our bnody, its movements, the mind, ego and various
functions. Whatever is there in the universe, we can know it and use it like
whatever elements there are in the earth, and what grows, we can use them.
We can gain complete supremacy over all this. But this is all an outside manifes-
tation. What we are within is the spirit. We are Shiva. What is on the outside
is destructible. What is born will die. What is created will be destroyed. But
what is within, is our Atma, who is our Shiva, who is a reflection of Sadashiva,
is indestructible, desireless and free. It is not stuck to anything. It is stainless.
By obtaining that Shiva, and getting the Light of that Shiva, we also slowly
get renounced. The outside remains as it is, but within, is the atma -
and industructible, alwa ys emitting its Light.
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3,4.pdf-page-10.txt 
 12
After self realization our life becomes Divine, auspicious and sacred. That
is extremely important for human beings to attain. Without that we cannot
lead a balanced life and be truly collective. Now can we have real love. Also
we cannot know the truth. The pure knowledge can be known only in the light
of the spirit. When one becomes enlightened by the spirit, then his attention
also becomes pure. He does not get involved in anything. Just by his attention,
he gets the whole knowledge of that thing. But when a person is not self-realized
fully, then he always thinks about himself. He thinks what he will eat today,
when will he get good food, what kind of food should he cook. Or he thinks
where should T go today? Where will my importance be felt more, when will
people give me respect. In what gathering will I gain prominence. The other
st yle of person will think about how to make more money, gain the entire
wealth of the world and put the world right. Another kind of person thinks,
only about his children, grandchildren, relatives etc. These kind of thoughts
which are self-centred like what is my position. What great advantage I will
get out of this, what clothes should 1 wear. How should I impress people so
they think how clever 1 am, how great I
himself ver y humble and keeps bowing before ever yone to show how he respects
ever yone ? How culturedI am? The third person sa ys, I am so learned and
will have a discussion with intellectuals and read many books to show off
his knowledge. And another thinks like this about his music or art. How best
to impress others is what man thinks about mostl y. People do lots of social
work also, or sacrifice for their country. My country should be happy and pros-
perous. Some think that my art should spread all over the world so that my
country gets a name. In this way man becones happy seeing himself mixing
in the collective. But in all this, there is the desire for victor y, recognition
and praise. He is always looking for something and that is why he gets stuck
in the cycle of joy and sorrow. His attention remains stuck to this sense of
"".
am? Another person is one who cosiders
But when he is one with his spirit, then he thinks differently like he will
think how to use this thing so that humanity is benefitted. People are suffering
so much. What can be done to help them. His whole thinking shifts from self-
Iriterest. When he sees a tree, he thinks how beautifull y God made it. "If only
I vould be like this and give shade to others. But I am not like this and I
must becone like this tree." If he sees the Himala yas then he will start singing
praises of the Himalayas. But the one who does not know his spirit will keep
singing his own praises. "That I went to Himala yas. I did this and that, make
iny grave on the Himala yas. Put the flag of my countr y there."
So there are two levels of hurnan beings. The first who are realized souls
and by the Light of the Spirit, the y see ever ything. The y never think that
by doingthis or that, they will get a great name, or people will praise them.
The y may even be killed, tortured or criticized but they will never be dettered.
Like Jesus Christ who was crucified. But while being crucified, he prayed
that "O God, forgive them for they do not know what they do."
A realized soul is be yond any temptations and pulls - that this should happen,
this should get made. He does not desire. If it gets done, it's fine. If it does
not get done, it's alright. He does not seek praise or fame. So he does not
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3,4.pdf-page-11.txt 
 13
get stuck int he cycle of joy and sorrow. They are alike for him. He can witness
both sorrow and joy, as he understands that it is like day and night. He is
himself drowned in thejoy of the Spirit. He does not have to control his mind,
Tor his mind and senses are fully in control. There are such people who run
after something or the other as if their whole life depends on it. When they
attain it, then they start moving af ter something else. Supposing the y cannot
get it, then they feel so upset, that the y think their entire life is finished.
But a realized Soul's attention is such that he moves through life knowing
ever ything. There is so much power in his attention (Chitta) that wherever
his attention goes, it starts working.
"Chitta' or attention is the gift of Shri Brahamdev. When only the Brahma
remains of Brahmadev, then this attention becomes so powerful, so loving,
so knowledgeable and so clever that it does its work in a ver y easy wa y. Which
means that such a person's attention becomes one with the Param Chaitan ya
or Divine vibrations. When this happens then the Param Chaitan ya does all.
So all the work of this world is done by the Brahma Shakti and Param Chaitan ya.
When such a person does anything he does not think that he is doing it. He
does not ever feel the need to think like this. He just thinks that it is happening.
it is being made. It means to become Non-doer, because Param chaitanya
does ever ything. So he is just a medium through which Param Chaitan ya works.
it is happening through the light of the Spirit. Otherwise a person who thinks
he does ever ything but sa ys, leave it to God, is unable to leave it to God in
realit y. The truth is that Param
easil y. So beautiful is its skill and commands that man is left wonderstruck
as to how it happened. We do not do anything. All deeds are performed by
vibrations. We can only take some dead thing and make dead things from it
- like from silver we make jewellery and then think what a great thing we
have done. But all the living work is done by the Param Chaitan ya and the
experience of the Param Chaitan ya is possible only through self-realization.
Because Param Chaitan ya is the Adi Shakti who is the Po ver of the Desire
of Shri Shiva. It is His light. By the grace of this, Param Chaitan ya only will
you do ever ything and when this happens within you, you become unique people.
Chaitan ya does ever ything, very simply and
Whenever the idea cormes "I" am doining this, "I" have done this, "I" want
to do this or any kind of aggressive behaviour, then know that uptill now,
you have not got the light of the Spirit within yu. When you come into the
freedom froin action and you do not do an ything, like if this bulb says that
I am giving electricit y, so it is wrong. Within you who are realized souls, it
is the Param chaitan ya that is doing everything, which has made you, every
part of your body, and made you grow. And now after becoming human beings,
you have become realized souls, that is also the blessings of Param Chaitan ya.
So how can such a person be egoistical when he knows that "I do nothing"
I am playing. For I
The flute of Shri Krishna said that why do people say,
am hollow. This hollowness means egolessness and when this gets established
within us fully then we think that what I thought that 'I am doing this or
that' is so painful and so troublesome. Because I thought I was doing this work
and it failed to materialize. So now I am so unhappy and "I" did this and got
such a great name that it went to my head. But a realized Soul knows "I"
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3,4.pdf-page-12.txt 
 14
have done nothing. It is the skill of the Param Chaitan ya, so whatever happened
is alright. Supposing we lose our way, one person will think that I have gone
to a wrong way and now I made a mistake. But a Realized Soul thinks that
perhaps 1 had to come this way, so he does not feel unhappy. You keep him
in a palace and he can live like a king. You keep him in the forests and he
will live there. How can he complain when he knows that Param Chaitan ya
places him in these various situations.
You can hit or garland such a person, it is the same for him, because the
Spirit does not get attached to an ything. He can be in any kind of crowd or
meeting, he will never be effected as he is satisfied in his Spirit. If he needs
to talk, he talks, otherwise he does not. If someone said something, he listens,
whether it is words of knowledge and wisdorn or folly. Others may talk about
the good or bad qualities of people, but he will never say "I hate so and so".
Because to hate is a sin. Whatever he will do will be auspicious. For example,
the Devi kills the Bhoots. It is not a sin. If she does not kill therm, sin will
spread. So he does not back out of doing his dut y, because it is the Param
Chaitan ya that is killing and not him.
However, before talking about Param Chaitanya, he should at least be one
with the Param Chaitan ya. When you achieve oneness with the Pararn Chaitan ya,
then whatever you consider wrong, you can speak against it. Great sages and
saints were forthright and spoke openl y about the untruth. Socrates was poisoned
for speaking the Truth, because Param Chaitan ya will make him speak the
Truth. He will firmly adhere to Truth. His intelligence will be able to recognize
Truth and Untruth, because the light of the spirit has come on to his brain
and enlightened it. With a single glance he can know who is at what level.
Param Chaitan ya informs him of ever ything as the Param Chaitan ya does
ever ything. We are not concerned with results. Its results only God enjoys.
We can only watch this pla y. The only thing we can enjoy is the play of the
Spirit.. It's working, it's play is a science of the Light of the Spirit. The one
who can understand this, that the entire science of this universe cornes from
the Spirit. That till the knowledge of this science does not come within us,
the outside Science is aboslutely useless, because there is very little of science
that can explain about the material things outside. There is no cormparison
in this outside science. No collectivity, no humanit y, no love, no art, no poem
no respect. There is nothing alive init. It becomes like a machine. To understand
science also, man needs the Light of the Spirit. By this Light of the Spirit,
you can open many shores of Science, which uptill now have not been revealed.
But in a way everything is known. And it is not necessary that the one who
knows all, may reveal it to all. Because ever yone must know how to understand
it also. When the time comes, then only one should reveal. Even in Sahaja
Yoga, many people get upset. My father is not in Sahaja Yoga, my mother,
sister, brother etc. are not in Sahaja Yoga. Let it be. At least you are in Sahaja
Yoga. You remain joyful with yourself. Because as much as a person remains
joyful with himself, he cannot remain with anyone else, because everything
is within you. To think he is not in it, he is not in that, to think like this
means that doors of your heart are still not fully open. This question arises
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3,4.pdf-page-13.txt 
 15
only with those people who are still half in darkness and half in light. They
keep thinking about their families. Leave them alone. The y will come into
Sahaja Yoga by themselves. You cannot force anyone.
A Realized Soul does not think like this. He keeps watching everything and
enjoys it. He even enjo ys the madness of hunan beings and also enjoys their
wisdom. If someone speaks foolishl y, he also watches and enjoys that and if
someone speaks sensibl y, he also enjoys that. In everything he sees only joy.
If someone lives in à strange manner, then he says what a drama this is. When
a Realised Soul sees an angry person, he thinks "O what anger" see how it
has climbed. Now it's about the agya, he does not worry. His sight is not an
entangled vision but an unstained and pure sight, or a witness state. In such
a state, he can explain society in a humerous way. When the compassion and
anxiousness will come within us, then through Realized Souls, the Param Chai-
tan ya will immediatel y know, and then those who are spreading terrorism,
will be finished. That compassion ana anxiousness also in a way starts getting
manifested. It's alright if something is joy giving, but something which creates
a grieved state where a person thinks why such terrible things happen, and
immediatel y its solution will start working.
When I went to Russia, there was to be a Yoga Seminar. So in my home it
was said that why do you want to go there onl y for two da ys? I said, I have
to go there because I have to break the Eastern Block. People of the Eastern
Block will come to that conference and when these people get realisation
and go back to their countries, then the Param chaitanya will start doing its
work there. I spoke onl y for forty five minutes there and in fifteen minutes
gave realization and then these people went to their countries, the work got
done there. So far the work of Param Chaitan ya, it is very necessary that
the people should be self-realized. Because the work of Param Chaitan ya gets
done through the desire of self-realized people. The desire should be pure
and not selfish, because this work gets done on the strength of the Atma.
The Atma is our Shiva, who is absolutely free, perpetual, constant and eternal.
These qualities will come into a person after self-realization. If these qualities
are in you, you may be a king, or anything but from within you are free and
detached. From within, you do not curse an yone, nor do you crave for an ything.
The greatest Light of Spirit is that you do not have to try for anything,, you
do not have to control an ybod y. As you keep going deeper in the self-realized
state, the darkness keeps getting eliminated in that light. This is the real
gain. The one who has not gained this should know that as yet his self-realized
state has not fully matured. If it has matured, then we should realize that
in our lives, in the society around us, in our Sahaj Yoga communit y, a new
type of person should be ready, who is a form of the spirit, one who is over-
flowing with the Light of Spirit, in whom one can see Shiva. When Shiva got
married, he went to his wedding in just the wa y he was. This means that when
you have the Light of the Spirit within you, then you could be of any face,
any body, any type, but when you have that light, then Shiva will recognise you.
HOP
He has two forms, on the ourside is the Vishnu form and within is Shiva form.
We have to be like Shiva, free, independent and detached. Then outwardly,
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3,4.pdf-page-14.txt 
 16
you may be Shiva, Krishna or anyone, but the Shiva within you shall remain
steady and established. When you have become the spirit form, then the outside
part does not remain important an ymore. Then your feelings for such things
will completel y change. When Shri Eknath went to Dwarka, he filled a pitcher
with water. But then he saw a donkey almost dying of thirst and so he gave
the water to him, which was meant to offer in the temple. People said, what
are you doing ? You have walked so far, barefoot to fill this water and now
you have given it to this donke y? Eknath replied that my Krishna himself
came down to drink this water. This subtle feeling of Bhakti, onl y a realized
Soul can uniderstand. To see the outside that how "We" took the pitcher and
Wel" offered it to God. Who are this "We". When this feeling of "We" is not
there, the Param Chaitan ya has done this work. When Eknath came on this
earth, nobody understood him, people troubled him, but because he was the
image of the Spirit and he was settled in Shiva, so he was of the form of
Shiva. Such a person may be anything on the outside, but his Shiva State gives
light even on the outside. The greatest thing is to be magnanimous. This magna-
nimity is the power of Shiva.. Shiva is so generous hearted that he gives boons
even to Rakshasas knowlingl y. In the sarne way, the one who is lirm in Shiva
is very deep and at peace with himself. He will not say, but he knows everything.
The greatest power of Shiva is love. It is nirvaj ya love that is where there
is no expectation. it is flowing. This power of compassion is so great that
it surpasses ever ything. Similarly, in a self-realized person, the power of compa-
ssion grows and it is so ecstatic that you do not enjoy alone. His very nature
becomes like this, that he becomes extremely powerful. His fear, doubts all
vanish. He is able to do beautiful works in a very beautiful wa y. He also under-
stands ever ything beautifull y.
Some Sahaj Yogis will say on the face that you have a Bhoot. It should not
be said like that. If you have to break some one's ego for ever, you just think
about it that he is full
his Ego. But first of all, a realized soul has to think that now 1 have taken
refuge in Shiva. I have taken refuge in my Spirit. Through my Spirit only will
the Param Chaitanya do all this work, that is why I am not worried about
an vthing. Who is my enemy? Who can kill me? i am living in the Divine. He
is doing ever ything, so what am I doing. When one starts feeling this way,
then one can say that we have recognized Shiva within. We understand the
outer, our body etc. but we should understand this Shiva which is within us,
which is the support of our entire power and which we can call Sat-Chitt-Ananda
we should believe in that Shiva.
of Ego, then the Param Chaitanya will itself break
May God Bless You!
