Christmas Puja 25th December 1990 Date : Ganapatipule Place Type Puja Speech Language English & Hindi CONTENTS | Transcript | 02 - 05 English 06 - 11 Hindi Marathi || Translation English Hindi Marathi

 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT ENGLISH TALK Today we have such a great opportunity to celebrate the birth of Christ. He was born in a manger. All these things are already pre-planned. That He should be born in a manger in difficult situations, to show that whether you are born poor or rich, whether you are born in difficulties or in problems, if you have Divinity within you it shines by itself. As the Christianity took a very wrong deviated line, they have never been able to understand the significance of Christ. To them Immaculate Conception is absolutely not possible. Most of the people think that it's some sort of a mythical story. But in India we do believe that Gauri created Shri Ganesha out of Her own vibrations and that He became the Deity of Mooladhara. We accept it. But not in the West. They will never accept such a thing because their mental side is over-developed and dominates them. Maybe they are not so very old like Indians to understand that above all He is God. Even the concept of God is quite mental. Moreover, the way Christianity has been, it has not provided any proper guidance. On the contrary wherever they have failed they said: "It's a mystery." But it's very simple to understand for Indians, that anything is possible for God. After all He is God. He is God Almighty. Because of this mental attitude which is much lower than the knowledge of your spirit, the ordinary, mundane type of the superficial knowledge can never allow the personality to accept the greatness of God. I had a grandma. She was My father's aunt and she used to tell us a nice story about somebody who was going to meet God. Of course this - in India everybody understands all these things. They will not say: "How he is going to meet God?" but they accept. All right, he is going to meet God. So when he was going on the way, on the road, he found one gentleman sitting there nicely singing songs, bhajans of God, doing nothing on the roadside. So he said: "Oh, so you are going to meet God?" "Yes, I am going to meet Him. So have you any message for Him?" "Yes, please tell Him that I'm all right, but He should arrange for my food, because I think the food is now finishing." He said: "Really, that's what you want me to tell Him?" "Yes, yes, please tell Him. Oh, of course He'll arrange, but please tell Him." So he went ahead and he met another gentleman who was standing on his head, or in a Christian way I would say he was going to church every day with nice suits, and singing hymns every day, listening to the pastor's sermons, or whatever you may say; and in the Indian way we can say he was going to the temple every day, standing on his head, doing all kinds of yoga asanas and everything. And he asked him: "Please go and ask God - I've tried everything. When is He going to meet me? I would like to see Him. I would like to have His darshan." He said: "All right." So he went to God, and whatever work he had he finished with it, and then God asked him: "Have you got anything to tell Me?" He said: "Nothing much, but I met one gentleman while coming and he said that 'I'm doing all kinds of things, I have tried everything, and when will God meet me? I am standing on my head, and I am doing also all kinds of yoga asanas, and all kinds of things, and also I am going to church and mosque, I am praying, doing all sorts of prayers, but when will God meet me?" So God said: "Tell him he has to do a little more. See, it's not easy. When Sahaja Yoga will come we'll see!" So then even he said: "And there is another one who was on the road, You see. As he was just enjoying himself singing songs, he suddenly saw me, and he told me: 'You see, my food is now finishing, ask God to arrange it for me." He said: "Really, is the food just finishing?" Immediately God said: "What are you doing, why don't you go and look after him? His food is finishing." "No, no, Sir, we yesterday only, we arranged it, all that." He said: "All right, all right, doesn't matter." You see, he couldn't understand, you know, that this fellow who is trying all these things and God

 Original Transcript : English is still saying that he has to wait. And while this fellow is just singing songs of God and all that, and why is it so much impressed by this another fellow who is doing nothing to seek God? So then God realized that he is in some sort of an illusion. So He told him: "All right, you go and tell them one thing. To both of them the same thing, that 'When I went to God what I saw there was that He made a camel pass through the eye of a needle." So he said: "Really, I should tell them?" "Yes, yes, you just tell them, and see the reaction." So he went down. So this is, the first one met him, he said: "What God has said?" He said that God has said: "Wait till Sahaja Yoga comes in, then I'll meet you. Before that you'll go around like this." "Oh God, when will this Sahaja Yoga come?" And he said: "So, but He'll meet me sometime. I hope Sahaja Yoga also comes some time." And he was quite disappointed. So he went. And he asked him that: "What did you see with, there when you went to see God?" He said: "I saw that, you know, He passed a camel through the eye of an, of a needle." He said: "What? How is it possible? It's impossible!" (Now mental.) "How is it possible, that a camel gets passed through the eye, it's not possible, see the volume of this one and such a little thing. How can he pass? No, no, no, no you are just telling me a story because you have been to God, you are trying to show off, that's all. I, I don't believe in all this nonsense. It's.. you are just telling me lies, and don't try to befool me." So he went to another person who was on the street eating nicely. He said: "How are you?" "I know He had arranged before you reached there, I know it was all right after all. You see He looks after me all the time. So what did you see when you went there?" He said: "I saw that God Almighty passed a camel through an eye of a needle. It's a very amazing thing." He said: "What, amazing? He is God, do you know He is God? Do you know He is God? God can do anything. He can do anything!" That's made him understand, that if you understand that God is all-powerful, all-powerful, it doesn't mean that He can move Himalayas to Maharashtra. It doesn't mean that! But it means He is all powerful. Means He can do subtlest and subtlest thing, and such things which our brain, this mental side cannot understand. It's beyond the conception of a human mind. This is what God is. He's the One who has created human beings. He has to be beyond us if He is creating. If a potter creates a pot that means he is beyond the pot. Pot cannot create God.. the potter. And the potter has created the pot, so that means that this pot which is created by him has to be something which is made by him, so he has to be much more powerful than the pot is. But it is unbelievable, or say beyond the conception of human beings, that what a God it must be Who has made this great computer. We take everything for granted. We cannot even make a particle of clay ourself. We cannot make anything, human beings cannot make. Ha, if there is some stone, all right you can put this up. If there is some clay you can make some sort of a house out of it. That's all dead from the dead. But can you make a candle which will burn badhas? You have seen it with your own eyes that before My photograph the badhas burn. Can you do that? Now you, we have no, also the idea of the complete, intricate working, delicate machinery, and also very dynamic explosive machinery, how it works to create human beings, to create all this universe, to create all these beautiful flowers and trees and everything. Look at the stars. Look at how many they are. Out of that He has chosen this Mother Earth to create human beings. How He has made it? When He wants to send His own Son, He can send it the way He wants to send it. Even to challenge this shows the mental mind which is in, absolutely in mud. So to accept it is only possible when you have saints, real saints who tell you, that this is how Shri Ganesha was born out of Gauri. But to jump into it, into faith, when you come to Sahaja Yoga you start seeing miracles taking place. Then you can understand that these miracles are taking place and if there is another miracle that has to take place it will take place in any case. We are not doing anything, it is all done. And we don't doubt it. Once you doubt you become again the same human being which is just embedded in the mud. I always say that you are like lotuses now opened out. You are not flying in the air. Your roots are down there. But you are now lotuses, and that's what is on top of the lotus, this Mahalakshmi principle 3

 Original Transcript : English is born. Mahalakshmi principle is the One which came on this earth as Sitaji, as Radha and also as Mary, as Mother Mary. It's said that Mahalakshmi is born out of the sea. What is the meaning of "Mary"? Maria means, you know, Mare means "the sea". She was born out of the sea. So She being a Mahalakshmi Herself, She could create a child. What's the harm? She could do anything, and this is the thing you have to rise above. Christians have to rise above this Christianity, and has to understand that it's such a great thing that was Christ Who came on this earth, Who was the Incarnation of the principle of Ganesha. Ganesha becoming Mahavishnu is a very big thing which one should try to understand. Ganesha is the Son of Shiva. Shri Ganesha is the One Who was first created before creating anything, any atmosphere, anything, because He is the Omkara, and the Omkara is the first breaking of Adi Shakti from Shiva. That sound, "Tan-kar", as they call it. From there started Omkara and He is the One Who is the embodiment of that Omkara. So this sound is Shri Ganesh, is His power, was created first foremost thing, just to create holiness [pavitrada]. When this holiness was created, this [pavitrada] was created, then everything was created in the sea of that holiness. And then He incarnated as Christ, but as Mahavishnu, not as Shiva's Son, but as Mahavishnu. And who is Vishnu? Is an uncle of Shri Ganesh. His Mother's brother is Shri Vishnu. So He was brought up, we should say, by Mahavishnu, we can say, but Mahalakshmi adopted the principle of Shri Ganesh. In the Kundalini chart you can see that the Shri Ganesha is connected on the left hand side to the Ida Nadi, and the Kundalini is above that. So now what has happened is this, that He transcended that part, and if He had to come for the redemption, He had to come as the Son of Mahalakshmi. So it was Mahalakshmi who adopted Him, or we should say really, conceived Him within Himself as Christ, and He became Mahavishnu. Anything is possible in the family of Gods and Goddesses, because they are Gods. It is beyond human mind to understand how these things are working out in that realm. Very difficult. But now you have got Realization you can feel in the cool breeze, so many new things are happening to you. So now believe Me, that there is no unholy alliances among the Gods and Goddesses, no unholy alliances. There is nothing that is human in them. They're all divine, pure people. Once you understand this point then you will understand why Shri Ganesha had to accept to be a Son of Mahalakshmi, was born to Him as Christ. Because He had to come on Agnya, and for the redemption as Ganesha, He doesn't do the redemption part, because at that stage He is for the innocence, for the holiness, for the wisdom or also for destroying the negativity. But He had to come up, only He, only Ganesha could be brought to this very constricted chakra, Agnya chakra. Now why is it constricted? It's quite a scientific thing which I would not like to discuss today. But it had to be constricted and it goes on getting more constricted, this Agnya chakra, the more, the more we think, the more we go into the left or right, it goes on really becoming like this, absolutely like this. So in this very subtle area only Christ could be subtle, because He's the subtlest of subtle. He's even subtler than an atom, because in the atom those vibrations which move asymmetric and symmetric movements are subtler than the atom. And this is the subtler of that also. So in that little very constricted area, only a personality like Christ, which is nothing but purity. There is no other element in Him but purity. All other Incarnations have all the five elements in it. He has nothing. He is nothing but pure vibrations. That's why He could walk on the water, because there was no mass in His body, no matter in His body. No matter. No element, except for Chaitanya itself. Omkara becoming Ganesha in the mud, or the what you can say, the thing that came out of Her body. Only the Chaitanya. So at Ganesha's stage we can say that the Chaitanya was kept in that form, but in the state of Christ it was not there. But the whole drama was played later on, of His death and resurrection, because He is the One who is responsible for our resurrection, because He is the Gate. He's the Path because He's Shri Ganesh. Omkara is the Path, and He's the Gate, but He is not the destination. His Mother is the destination. Even Mahalakshmi is not the Destination. Even Mahakali, Mahasaraswati. It's the Adi Shakti is the destination where you have to reach. All these things were never told in the Bible, 4

 Original Transcript : English because He could hardly live for four years with public life. Nor did they want to tell about it because they did not know, also there was a definite suppression of all Divine things, for these people are all commercialized institutions, as we have also in India all kinds of commercial institutions. But the only advantage in India is that religion is not organized. Thank God for that! But they organized it, they organized Christ, they organized all His principles, everything, and now they think He was a good human being. What a certificate to give Him! So today we are here to celebrate the birth of Omkara. It's a very big thing. I don't know if you can realize it, what it is, which moves into everything, whether it is Aanu, paramanu, is the atom, molecules, into all the organizing of chemicals and also the periodic laws, and also in the gravity, into everything that moves is this Omkara, and your vibrations are nothing but Omkaras. Actually, in My photograph the vibrations have come as Omkaras. On the head of the people there is Omkara written. How is it happening, these lights look like Omkara? How is it on top of the heads of the Sahaja Yogis, there's all the Sahaja Yogis' heads, there is Omkara? - or Allah in Arabic language - My name also, in Arabic. Who is doing this? It is He who is doing all this. So Omkara itself takes a form to do things to convince you of Adi Shakti. He's the One who is handling all these powers. He doesn't enter into the photograph, no, He does not, but He plays a trick. After all you see, if you go into details, how do get a photograph? Through the light. The light passes straight, a straight line. But if He wants He can make the light pass another way round. He can just transform the light into something else. He can do whatever He likes. And that's what He does to convince you. And He said that: "Anything against Me I'll tolerate, but nothing against the Holy Ghost." And this Holy Ghost is the Adi Shakti. Without Him you cannot go to the Sahasrara. So that in the whole play He is like the Sutradhara, He's the One who is the conductor, the One moves the strings in a puppet show. And so it is very important to pray to Shri Ganesha every time we have Puja. We have to pray to Him and we, that's how we are praying to Lord Jesus Christ. Every time. Without His auspiciousness, without His help, we cannot do Sahaja Yoga. He's the Manager. See I'm sitting here and He's the manager. Supposing there's no management how will I speak here? Nothing can happen. But He is so efficient, and you never see Him working out everything, doing everything. you 5

 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT HINDI TALK आपमें से लोग मेरी बात इंग्लिश में नहीं समझ पाये होंगे। ईसामसीह का आज जन्म दिन है और मैं कुछ समझा रही थी कि ईसामसीह कितने महान हैं। हम लोग गणेश जी की प्रार्थना और स्तुति करते हैं क्योंकि हमें ऐसा करने को बताया गया है। पर यह है क्या? गणेशजी क्या चीज़ हैं? हम कहते हैं कि वो ओंकार हैं, ओंकार क्या है? सारे संसार का कार्य इस ओंकार की शक्ति से होता है। इसे हम लोग चैतन्य कहते हैं, जिसे ब्रह्म चैतन्य कहते हैं। ब्रह्म चैतन्य का साकार स्वरूप ही ओंकार है और उसका मूर्त-स्वरूप है या विग्रह श्री गणेश हैं। इसका जो अवतरण ईसामसीह हैं। इस चीज़ को समझ लें तो जब हम गणेश की स्तुति करते हैं तो बस पागल जैसे गाना शुरू कर देते हैं। एक-एक शब्द में हम क्या कह रहे हैं? उनकी शक्तियों का वर्णन हम कर रहे हैं। पर क्यों? ऐसा करने की क्या जरूरत है? इसलिए कि वो शक्तियाँ हमारे आ जायें और हम भी शक्तिशाली हो जायें । इसलिए हम गणेश जी की स्तुति करते हैं। 'पवित्रता' उनकी सबसे बड़ी शक्ति है। जो चीज़ पवित्र होती है वो सबसे ज़्यादा शक्तिशाली होती हैं। उसको कोई छू नहीं सकता। जैसे साबुन से जो मर्जी धोइए वो गन्दा नहीं हो सकता। एक बार साबुन भी गन्दा हो सकता पर यह ओंकार अति पवित्र और अनन्त का कार्य करने वाली शक्ति है। इस शक्ति की उपासना करते हुए हमें याद रखना है कि इसे हम अपने अन्दर उतार लेना चाहते हैं जिससे हमारे अन्दर पूरी शुद्धता आ जाये। हमारे चक्र सारे शुद्ध हो जायें, हमारा जीवन शुद्ध हो जाये, हमारे समाज, देश और सारे विश्व में शुद्धता आ जाए। उस शुद्धता में ही आनन्द है । शुद्ध होने पर बड़ा अच्छा लगता है। जैसे नहा-धो कर साफ कपड़े पहन लेना । जब आपका पूरा जीवन इस ओंकार से स्वच्छ हो जाता है तब आत्मानन्द मिलता है। आत्मा में भी जो शक्ति है वो भी ओंकार ही की शक्ति है। लेकिन हम यह नहीं समझते कि ओंकार क्या चीज़ है, केवल यह कह देने से कि यह ओम है और अर्ध मात्रा है हम इसे समझ नहीं पाते। यह चार शक्तियाँ (चत्वारी) श्री गणेश की है । ईसामसीह के जीवन में उन्हीं का प्राद्र्भाव आप पाते हैं। ईसामसीह चार साल तक ही जीवित रहे और पता नहीं उनके बारे में हिन्दुस्तान में बहुत कम जानकारी रही पर पाश्चिमात्य देशों में लोग उन्हें मानने लगे। पर अब ये लोग केवल खोपड़ी मात्र है । उनमें हृदय तो है ही नहीं । अर्थात् उसके अन्दर संवेदन शक्ति आनी चाहिए जिससे वह प्रकाश के पुंज बन जाये। आप देखिये कि ये प्रकाश जो आँखों पर पड़ रहा है इससे आँखें धुंधला जाती हैं। परन्तु अन्दर के प्रकाश से सब कुछ दिखाई देने लग जाता है। उस आत्मा के प्रकाश को पाने के लिए आज्ञा चक्र पर ये आप देखिये मेधा है जिसे हम ब्रेन प्लेट कहते हैं। इसपे यहाँ आज्ञा चक्र है। जब मेधा खुलती है, तभी आज्ञा चक्र खुलता है। जब इसके अन्दर से कुण्डलिनी ऊपर आती है तो मेधा के ऊपरी हिस्से में छा जाती है तो मनुष्य की बुद्धि से परे की, एक विलक्षण दैवीय शक्ति प्लावित होती है और इस दैवीय शक्ति से आप समझने लग जाते हैं कि सत्य क्या है और असत्य क्या है। इस शक्ति का प्रवाह आपके हाथों में आ जाता है और धीरे-धीरे अच्छे-बुरे की पहचान के लिए आपको हाथों की भी आवश्यकता नहीं

 Original Transcript : Hindi रहती। आप फौरन से जान जाते है कि ये झूठा है या अच्छा है। कुछ लोग बहुत जल्दी इस गहनता में उतर आते हैं, मैं कहती हूँ उनमें ईसामसीह का आशीर्वाद हो गया। पर कुछ लोग अब भी बुद्धि के चक्कर में रहते हैं जैसे बेकार के धर्म-अधर्म, जाति-पाति में फँसना, संकुचित विचार तथा अनुदारिता की बुराईयाँ। हमारे देश में जैसे कहीं और न मिलने वाले पराश्रयी जीव मच्छर, खटमल आदि मिलते हैं वैसे ही कहीं अन्य न मिलने वाली बहुत सी बुराईयाँ भी हैं। मनुष्य कहाँ तक गड्ढे में जा सकता है। वह यहीं देखा जा सकता है कभी -कभी आश्चर्य होता है कि जिस देश में इतने बड़े-बड़े अवतरण हुए, जिस देश की संस्कृति परमात्मा को मानने वाली है, वहीं ये मैला-कुचैलापन तथा रूढ़िवादी से लोग सड़ते जा रहे हैं। जाति-पाति आदि बुराईयाँ मानव को कीड़े-मकोड़े सम बनाये जा रही है । | 'विश्व निर्मल धर्म' ओंकार का धर्म है, पवित्रता का धर्म है। इसमें ये बुराईयाँ यदि आप चला रहे हैं तो आप गहराई में नहीं उतर सकते हैं। जितना मर्जी आप कहिये कि हम तो माताजी की पूजा करते हैं, फोटो लगाते हैं, उनको मनाते हैं आदि, इससे न आपको कुछ फायदा हो सकता है न दुनिया को। इस तरह जो हम अपने से ठगी कर रहे हैं। सहजयोगियों को पहले विश्वास कर लेना चाहिए कि हम सब अपने को ठगने वाले नहीं हैं। ठगी छोड़कर सहजयोग में पूरी तरह उतरने से ही आपको इसका लाभ होगा। आधे-अधूरे लोगों को कभी किसी गुरुओं के पास जाने से या गलत लोगों की संगति से तकलीफ हो जाती है क्योंकि आज कृत - युग है। आज ब्रह्म चैतन्य कार्यान्वित है। अब आप न तो खुद को ठग सकते हैं न मुझे ठग सकते हैं। जिसने ठगी का रास्ता लिया उसको उसकी ठगी का फल मिल गया। एक साहब आकर कहने लगे कि, 'माँ, मैं 'ध्यान' करता हूँ। तो मेरा मुँह इतना बड़ा हो जाता है। 'कैसा हो जाता है?' 'हनुमान जी जैसा।' तो मैंने कहा, 'अच्छा है, तुम हनुमान हो गये। तो कहने लगा, 'नहीं माँ, मुझे घबराहट हो रही है। मेरा मुँह फट जाएगा।' 'आप तम्बाकू खाते हैं न?' 'यह बात तो है,' कहने लगा। मैंने कहा, 'फिर तम्बाकू ही खाओ, काहे का ध्यान करते हो।' तम्बाकू भी खायेंगे और ध्यान भी करेंगे तो मुँह तो ऐसे बढ़ेगा ही। एक और साहब आये और कहने लगे, 'माँ, मेरी अंगुली कट गयी। इसमें चोट आ गई।' 'अच्छा, सिगरेट तुम पी रहे थे ?' कहने लगा, 'हाँ।' एक और साहब की मोटर की दुर्घटना हुई। उन्होंने आकर बताया कि, 'माँ, सिर्फ यही अंगुली गयी। इसी में चोट आई क्योंकि मैं सिगरेट पीता था।' सहजयोग में आकर भी सिगरेट पीते हैं, शराब पीते हैं। दुनिया भर के छेद हैं आपमें और सहजयोग का इतना बड़ा बैज आप लगा लेते हैं। तो यह बैज ही आपकी खोपड़ी तोड़ेगा। मैं बता दे रही हूँ कि बैज लगाना इतनी सरल चीज़ नहीं है। जिस बैज को आपने लगाया है, मर्यादा विहीनता की अवस्था में यही आकर आपकी खोपड़ी तोड़ेगा। मैं न ऐसा चाहती हूँ न करती हूँ। पर यह बैज कोई कम चीज़ नहीं है, एक विग्रह है। इसकी महत्वपूर्ण भूमिका है। मतलब यह कि इसमें से चैतन्य बहता है। वही चैतन्य घोल घूमा कर आपका गला अगर धोटे तो कहेंगे, 'माँ, मैं तो बैज लगाये सो रहा था फिर ऐसा कैसे हो गया ? वो जो बैज था न वही निकल के आया और खोपड़ी तोड़ दी। १ इसलिए बैज मत लगाओ-अगर लगाना है तो उसके योग्य रहो । लौकेट आदि यदि पहनना है तो पहनो पर सम्हाल | के-नहीं तो मुझे दोष न लगाना कि, 'माँ मैं यह पहन कर गया था तो भी फिसल पड़ा और पैर टूट गया। तो उससे कुछ मिला तुमको? इसको यदि पहनना है तो आपमें पात्रता होनी चाहिए। यदि वह योग्यता नहीं है तो ईसामसीह

 Original Transcript : Hindi से भगवान बचाए और गणेश जी तो उनसे भी बढ़कर हैं। वो तो सदा अपने बायें हाथ में फरसा लिये होते हैं और इस मामले में मेरी कोई सुनते हैं? बैज, लौकेट, अंगूठी जो भी पहनना हो पहनो , पर बहुत ही सम्भल के रहिये। गुसलखाने आदि जाते हुए इसे उतार कर रखिये। इसे बहुत सम्हालिए, मेरे बालों को भी। मेहरबानी करके जहाँ भी मिलें वापिस कर दीजिए । क्योंकि मेरे बाल यम के दिये हुए हैं और यम इनके पीछे रहता है। मैं नहीं कहती कि आपको कोई कष्ट हो। अत: बहुत सम्भल के रहिये क्योंकि मैं माँ भी तो हूँ, पर ये लोग तुम्हारे माँ-बाप नहीं हैं, ये तो तुम्हारे भाई लोग हैं और डंडा लिये घूमते हैं आपके पीछे-पीछे | इसलिए सहजयोगी की विशेषता को समझ लीजिए। यह परमात्मा का घर है और परमात्मा माँ नहीं है। माँ तो प्रेममयी है और बच्चों की छोटी- मोटी गलतियों को अनदेखा करती हैं। कितनी मेहनत करके आपकी माँ ने आपको सहजयोग दिया है। आपका पाँव कहाँ डगमगा रहा है? आप कौन सा गलत काम कर रहे हैं? सम्भल के रहना चाहिए। मैं यह जरूर कहँगी कि आदिशक्ति परमात्मा की शक्ति है, उनकी इच्छा है। लेकिन परमात्मा देख रहे हैं कि ये सारी मेहनत जो हो रही है, इतना नाटक जो इन लोगों ने बना रखा है, इसमें सत्य-असत्य कितने लोग हैं और उन्हें किस-किस को ठिकाने लगाना है। वो इसका हिसाब जोड़ रहे हैं। जो अच्छे हैं उनको भी कभी देखना चाहिए न, वैसा नहीं है। जो झूठे हैं उनको पकड़े बैठे हैं और सबको डंडा मारेंगे। इसलिए मेहरबानी से जो भी करना है शुद्ध मन से और दिल खोलकर कीजिए। हमने आपसे जो बातें बताईं कि यदि आपके अन्दर अंधश्रद्धा हो, जातिवाद हो, हम हिन्दुस्तानी बहुत उँचे हैं-यह या कोई और झुठी भावना हो-तो इसमें पावित्र्य नहीं है। यह सारी भावनायें निकाल करके कृपया मेरा लौकेट पहनिये क्योंकि हर लौकेट, बैज या अंगूठी के साथ एक-एक गण लगा हुआ है आपके आगे पीछे, उतनी आपकी वो रक्षा करते हैं, उतनी ही रक्षा एक तरह से करते हैं कि आप कोई गलत काम न करें-क्योंकि वो अन्दर-बाहर से जानते हैं। इसलिए आज के दिन ये भी आपके लिए चेतावनी सी हो जाती है। अगर ईसामसीह इस संसार में न आते और अपने को आज्ञा चक्र में बिठा कर तारण का मार्ग, पुनर्जीवन का मार्ग न बनाते तो सहजयोग साध्य न हो सकता। उनका आना अति आवश्यक था। लेकिन इन सब अवतरणों में आपस में कोई झगड़ा नहीं। एक जीवंत पेड़ पर इन सब लोगों की उत्पत्ति हुई इस पेड़ को पनपाया गया और अन्त में सहस्रार पर आना हुआ और इस सहस्रार से कार्य हुआ। यदि पेड़ ही नहीं होता तो सहस्रार कहाँ से आता। इस पेड़ ने ही सहस्तर बनाया है। इस पेड़ की भी जिम्मेदारी है कि सहस्र को देखे, सम्हाले और इसकी पूरी रक्षा करे और इसके विरोध में जाने वालों को ठिकाने लगाये। तो आज का दिन आप लोगों के लिए समझने का है कि अगर ईसामसीह नहीं आते तो हम लोगों का पुनर्जीवन (रिजरक्शन) न होता। श्री गणेश से प्रार्थना की जाती है कि हमारे मोक्ष के समय हमारा रक्षण करें। मोक्ष के समय वे साक्षात आज्ञा चक्र पर पधारते हैं और आपका रक्षण करते हैं। इसलिए आज का दिन हम सबके लिए बड़ा शुभ है। बहुत प्रसन्नता देने वाला है और इसी तरह चेतावनी भी देता है कि सम्भल के रहिये। यदि आज्ञा चक्र पर आप पिछ्ड़ गये तो पागलखाने में चले जाएंगे या कोई और बीमारी हो जाएगी। आज्ञा चक्र की पवित्रता रखनी चाहिए यानि की हमारे विचार हमेशा पवित्र होने चाहिए। अपवित्र विचार यदि आ जायें तो उसको क्षमा कर देना चाहिए| जैसे-जैसे आपकी उन्नति होगी आपके अन्दर अपवित्र विचार आयेंगे ही नहीं। सहजयोग सिर्फ आपके आनन्द, आपकी महानता, आपके गौरव और आपकी पूर्ण प्रगति के लिए बना हुआ है। लेकिन इस महान कार्य में पूर्ण हृदय से संलग्न लोगों के साथ जो सहयोग न देंगे उन पर आफत भी आ ০

 Original Transcript : Hindi सकती है। पूर्ण हृदय से आपको कार्य करना चाहिए। कुछ लोगों में कंजूसी की बीमारी भी मैं देखती हूँ कंजूसीपना कर रहे हैं। किसी तरह चार रूपये यदि बेचते हैं तो बचा लो। चार रूपये की बचत आप करेंगे तो आपके कम से कम चार सौ रूपये जाएंगे। सहजयोग में दिया हआ एक रूपया भी लाख रूपये के बराबर हो सकता है। ये बात मैं आपसे कह तो रही हूँ। हमें सोचना है कि हम कुछ नहीं दे रहे हैं। सब कुछ माँ का ही है। माँ का माँ को दे रहे हैं। और हम कुछ लेते नहीं है। आप तो जानते हैं कि सुबह शाम झगड़ा हो रहा है कि हमको कोई चीज़ नहीं चाहिए, हमें साड़ियाँ मत दो। सुबह से शाम तक पाँच साल से झगड़ा चल रहा है कोई सुनता नहीं है। कुछ भी चीज़ नहीं चाहिए हमको। लेकिन सहजयोग के लिए तो पैसा लगता है। लेकिन यहाँ तो लोग हैं जो मुफ्त में खाना बड़ी मर्दानगी समझते हैं। बाद में उनके पेट में यदि शिकायत हो जाय तो मैं इसके लिए जिम्मेदार नहीं हूँ। यह जगह भिखारियों के लिए नहीं, रईसों के लिए है। तबीयत-तबीयत चाहिए। राजा की तरह आपकी तबीयत है तो आइए । कोई जरूरी थोड़े है कि आपके पास पैसा होना चाहिए। बहुत से पैसे वाले महाकंजूस होते हैं और बहुत से मेरे जैसे गरीब उनको देते रहने में ही मजा आता है। एक हाथ खुलने पर यदि दूसरा हाथ खुलेगा तभी दूसरे हाथ से आएगा नहीं तो वहीं पर रूक जाएगा। इसलिए कंजूसी की बातें सुनकर मुझे बहुत घिन चढ़ती है। उस दिन का नज़ारा मुझे बहुत अच्छा लगा जब कुछ नहीं रहा तो मेरे फोटो ही लोगों ने बड़े प्रेम से लिए। माँ, हमें फोटो दे रहे हैं। सब आए, बड़ा अच्छा लगा। तो समाधान पहले आना चाहिए। ईसामसीह जैसा त्याग तो कोई नहीं कर सकता पर समाधान के बाद त्याग को सहर्ष स्वीकार करना चाहिए। थोड़ी सी तकलीफ हो जाएगी। लेकिन बहत बड़े महान कार्य जो पड़े हैं जिन्हें हम अपने लिए ही नहीं सबके लिए कर रहे हैं। अगले साल मैं सबकी लिस्ट मंगाऊंगी। मैं देखना चाहती हूँ, खास कर बम्बई वालों की यह शिकायत है कि वो पैसा देने से बिल्कुल इन्कार कर देते हैं । बम्बई में महालक्ष्मी का मंदिर है । क्या फायदा उस बेचारे मंदिर का जहाँ महालक्ष्मी स्वयं ही जमीन से ऊपर आ गई। वहाँ के लोग इस कदर कंजूस हैं कि वे कुछ भी पैसा नहीं देना चाहते, सोचते हैं सब तो माँ कर ही रही है। आराम से रहो, बस मजा आ रहा है । ऐसे तो सब हो ही जाएगा चाहे वो पैसा दें चाहे न दें। लेकिन उनका क्या होगा यह सोच लेना चाहिए। महालक्ष्मी तत्व तभी जागृत होता है जब हम अपने अन्दर समाधान प्राप्त कर लेते हैं, लक्ष्मी-तत्व जब पूरा हो जाता है और हम सत्य को खोजने लगते हैं। अगर आपमें समाधान नहीं है तो आप महालक्ष्मी के तत्व में उतर नहीं सकते। देखिये सीता जी का जीवन प्रभु रामचन्द्र जी के साथ कितना दिव्य है, राधा जी का जीवन और उनके बाद ईसामसीह की माँ का जीवन तीनों में कितना त्याग है। बगैर महान समाधान के ये हो ही नहीं सकता। महालक्ष्मी तत्व से तो मनुष्य समाधान हो जाता है, इस तत्व से वो सत्य को ढूंढता है और सत्य को ढूंढते हुए असत्य को छोड़ता जाता है। तो आज के इस महालक्ष्मी पूजन में जहाँ कि ईसामसीह और उनकी माँ मैरी को भी पूज रहे हैं, हमको समाधान में उतरना चाहिए। सांसारिक तथा भौतिक चीज़ों से जब हमारे अन्दर समाधान आ जाता है तभी महालक्ष्मी का तत्व हमारे अन्दर जागृत हो जाता है। फिर महालक्ष्मी तत्व, लक्ष्मी तत्व को संवारता है और लक्ष्मी तत्व अपने आप बनने लग जाता है, अपने आप कार्यान्वित हो जाता है, अपने आप इसका लाभ दे देता है। अपने आप सारी चीजें बन कर खड़ी हो जाएंगी। 9.

 Original Transcript : Hindi तो कहना यह है कि अपने दिल को बड़ा करें, दिल बड़ा करें और दिल के अन्दर उस ओंकार को बसायें, उस आत्मतत्व को बसायें, ईसामसीह को, श्री गणेश को बसायें जिनके कारण हमारे बिगड़े काम ठीक हो जाएंगे | आपको मेरे ऊपर अधिकार आ जाए क्योंकि उन लोगों के बगैर मैं आपको अधिकार नहीं दे सकती। कुण्डलिनी के जागरण में भी जब तक मूलाधार से आज्ञा नहीं आती है, जब तक मूलाधार में बैठे गणेश जी हाँ नहीं करते हैं, मैं क्या कोई भी कुण्डलिनी को जगा नहीं सकता। उनके अधिकार अपने हैं। अगर कोई सोचता हो कि हम माँ के बहुत नजदीक हैं तो ये समझ लें कि अगर वो नजदीक हैं और वास्तविकता में नजदीक हैं तो यह भी श्री गणेश जी की ही इजाजत से हो रहा है, ईसामसीह की इजाजत से हो रहा है। उनकी इजाजत के बगैर मैं किसी को नहीं मान सकती। यह एक बन्धन है हम पर। इसलिए मैं बार-बार कहती हूँ कि सम्भल के रहिए, सनके बन्धन को मानना ही पड़ेगा । ये जो भी आपके बारे में सोचते हैं उसकी ओर मुझे जरूर देखना पड़ता है। मैं कितना भी माफ कर दें, माँ की दृष्टि से | कुछ भी कह दूं लेकिन इनके आगे मैं हारी हुई हँ। यह भी जान लेना चाहिए कि ये लोग स्वयं आपकी मदद के लिए हैं, आपको स्वच्छ करने वाले हैं, आपके लिए सबकुछ करने वाले हैं। पर एक चीज़ की इनको उम्मीद नहीं 'मैं निर्वाज्य हूँ।' मैं आपसे कुछ नहीं चाहती हं, लेकिन अगर आपने मेरे प्रति कोई गलत बात कही या की, या सहजयोग में किसी तरह का ओछापन आपने किया, या किसी तरह की ठगी की तो ये आपके पीछे पड़ जाएंगे । इसलिय मैं बार-बार आपसे कह रही हूँ कि आज के शुभ अवसर पर हमें ये जानना चाहिए कि हमारे साथ कितनी बड़ी शक्तियाँ खड़ी हुई हैं। क्यों न हम उस शक्ति को स्वीकार करके शहंशाह जैसे रहे ? क्यों हम छोटे से बन कर रहें? जब हमारे पास इतना बड़ा सिंहासन है तो हम शान से सिंहासन पर बैठे, शान से रहें। अब आप सहजयोगी हो गये हैं। योगीजन हैं, बहुत बड़ी चीज़ हैं। इतने योगी थे ? आरै इतने योगी इस गणपतिपुले में आए हैं जहाँ पर कि महागणेश बैठे हुए हैं। इन महागणेश के कभी हुए परिवार में हम लोग यहाँ आए हुए हैं। इनके इस प्रांगण में हम आ पहुंचे हैं और इनके आशीर्वाद से हमारे अन्दर उन्हीं के जैसी महाशक्तियाँ आ सकती हैं। पर सबसे पहले शक्ति को भी सहन करने के लिए उनकी पवित्रता होनी चाहिए, उनकी भक्ति होनी चाहिए । जिस तरह उनकी भक्ति नि:स्वार्थ है। हमारी भक्ति भी अगर वैसे ही हो जाये तो आपके चाकर बन कर तो आपको सम्भाले रहते हैं। यदि आप उल्टे तरह से चलें तो आपकी हानि भी कर सकते हैं। एक सूझबूझ की बात मैं समझा रही हूँ क्योंकि एक माँ को ऐसा लगता है कि ये मेरे बड़े प्यारे बेटे हैं और इनसे आप लोगों का लाभ ही होना चाहिए। ये भी लगता है कि कहीं ये तुम लोगों के कान न पकड़ लें। इसलिए आप लोगों को यह भी समझा रही हूँ कि जब इतना सुन्दर समागम हम लोगों ने बिठाया है, इतने सुन्दर परिवार के लोग यहाँ आ गये हैं तो ये जो आपके बड़े भाई लोग हैं इनको आप लोगों को थोड़ा सा मानना पड़ेगा। इनकी पूजा करके यदि आप इन्हें खुश कर लें तो बड़ा अच्छा रहेगा। परन्तु हम जानते हैं कि यह जल्दी खुश नहीं होते। हममें जब तक अन्दर की स्वच्छता नहीं होगी ये खुश नहीं होंगे। इसलिए स्वच्छ हृदय से आज प्रण कीजिए कि सब तरह की क्षुद्रता तथा ओछापन हम त्याग देंगे और इनकी महानता और शुद्धता की ओर नजर करके इन्हें अपना आदर्श मान कर अपनी जिन्दगी बनायेंगे। यह करने से हमारा लाभ ही लाभ है। 10

 Original Transcript : Hindi आपको अनन्त आशीर्वाद हैं हमारे। आप लोग इतने प्यार से यहाँ आये। माँ आपको धन्यवाद तो नहीं कह सकती। पर यही है कि मेरा हृदय भरा हुआ है और इस हृदय में आप सन्त समाये हुए हैं। मैं आपसे अत्यन्त प्यार करती हूँ। नितान्त प्यार से मैं आपको देखती हूँ। हमेशा आपकी रक्षा के विचार में रहती हूैँ, आपके प्रति मेरा पूरा चित्त है, तवज्जो है। किसी भी प्रकार की तकलीफ हो आप मुझे लिख सकते हैं। पर आप स्वयं स्वच्छ हो जाएं, शुद्ध हो जाएं और मंगलमय हो करके इस आनन्द को अनन्त तक भोगें। 11



----------------------

19901225_Christmas Puja_Ganpatipule.pdf-page0.txt 
 Christmas Puja
25th December 1990
Date
:
Ganapatipule
Place
Type
Puja
Speech
Language
English & Hindi
CONTENTS
| Transcript
|
02 - 05
English
06 - 11
Hindi
Marathi
|| Translation
English
Hindi
Marathi
 19901225_Christmas Puja_Ganpatipule.pdf-page1.txt 
 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT
ENGLISH TALK
Today we have such a great opportunity to celebrate the birth of Christ. He was born in a manger.
All these things are already pre-planned. That He should be born in a manger in difficult situations, to
show that whether you are born poor or rich, whether you are born in difficulties or in problems, if you
have Divinity within you it shines by itself. As the Christianity took a very wrong deviated line, they
have never been able to understand the significance of Christ. To them Immaculate Conception is
absolutely not possible. Most of the people think that it's some sort of a mythical story.
But in India we do believe that Gauri created Shri Ganesha out of Her own vibrations and that He
became the Deity of Mooladhara. We accept it. But not in the West. They will never accept such a
thing because their mental side is over-developed and dominates them. Maybe they are not so very old
like Indians to understand that above all He is God. Even the concept of God is quite mental.
Moreover, the way Christianity has been, it has not provided any proper guidance. On the
contrary wherever they have failed they said: "It's a mystery." But it's very simple to understand for
Indians, that anything is possible for God. After all He is God. He is God Almighty.
Because of this mental attitude which is much lower than the knowledge of your spirit, the
ordinary, mundane type of the superficial knowledge can never allow the personality to accept the
greatness of God.
I had a grandma. She was My father's aunt and she used to tell us a nice story about somebody
who was going to meet God. Of course this - in India everybody understands all these things. They
will not say: "How he is going to meet God?" but they accept. All right, he is going to meet God. So
when he was going on the way, on the road, he found one gentleman sitting there nicely singing songs,
bhajans of God, doing nothing on the roadside. So he said: "Oh, so you are going to meet God?" "Yes,
I am going to meet Him. So have you any message for Him?" "Yes, please tell Him that I'm all right,
but He should arrange for my food, because I think the food is now finishing." He said: "Really, that's
what you want me to tell Him?" "Yes, yes, please tell Him. Oh, of course He'll arrange, but please tell
Him." So he went ahead and he met another gentleman who was standing on his head, or in a Christian
way I would say he was going to church every day with nice suits, and singing hymns every day,
listening to the pastor's sermons, or whatever you may say; and in the Indian way we can say he was
going to the temple every day, standing on his head, doing all kinds of yoga asanas and everything.
And he asked him: "Please go and ask God - I've tried everything. When is He going to meet me? I
would like to see Him. I would like to have His darshan." He said: "All right."
So he went to God, and whatever work he had he finished with it, and then God asked him: "Have
you got anything to tell Me?" He said: "Nothing much, but I met one gentleman while coming and he
said that 'I'm doing all kinds of things, I have tried everything, and when will God meet me? I am
standing on my head, and I am doing also all kinds of yoga asanas, and all kinds of things, and also I
am going to church and mosque, I am praying, doing all sorts of prayers, but when will God meet
me?" So God said: "Tell him he has to do a little more. See, it's not easy. When Sahaja Yoga will come
we'll see!" So then even he said: "And there is another one who was on the road, You see. As he was
just enjoying himself singing songs, he suddenly saw me, and he told me: 'You see, my food is now
finishing, ask God to arrange it for me." He said: "Really, is the food just finishing?" Immediately
God said: "What are you doing, why don't you go and look after him? His food is finishing." "No, no,
Sir, we yesterday only, we arranged it, all that." He said: "All right, all right, doesn't matter."
You see, he couldn't understand, you know, that this fellow who is trying all these things and God
 19901225_Christmas Puja_Ganpatipule.pdf-page2.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
is still saying that he has to wait. And while this fellow is just singing songs of God and all that, and
why is it so much impressed by this another fellow who is doing nothing to seek God? So then God
realized that he is in some sort of an illusion. So He told him: "All right, you go and tell them one thing.
To both of them the same thing, that 'When I went to God what I saw there was that He made a camel
pass through the eye of a needle." So he said: "Really, I should tell them?" "Yes, yes, you just tell
them, and see the reaction."
So he went down. So this is, the first one met him, he said: "What God has said?" He said that God
has said: "Wait till Sahaja Yoga comes in, then I'll meet you. Before that you'll go around like this."
"Oh God, when will this Sahaja Yoga come?" And he said: "So, but He'll meet me sometime. I hope
Sahaja Yoga also comes some time." And he was quite disappointed. So he went. And he asked him
that: "What did you see with, there when you went to see God?" He said: "I saw that, you know, He
passed a camel through the eye of an, of a needle." He said: "What? How is it possible? It's
impossible!" (Now mental.)
"How is it possible, that a camel gets passed through the eye, it's not possible, see the volume of
this one and such a little thing. How can he pass? No, no, no, no you are just telling me a story because
you have been to God, you are trying to show off, that's all. I, I don't believe in all this nonsense. It's..
you are just telling me lies, and don't try to befool me."
So he went to another person who was on the street eating nicely. He said: "How are you?" "I
know He had arranged before you reached there, I know it was all right after all. You see He looks after
me all the time. So what did you see when you went there?" He said: "I saw that God Almighty passed
a camel through an eye of a needle. It's a very amazing thing." He said: "What, amazing? He is God, do
you know He is God? Do you know He is God? God can do anything. He can do anything!" That's
made him understand, that if you understand that God is all-powerful, all-powerful, it doesn't mean
that He can move Himalayas to Maharashtra. It doesn't mean that! But it means He is all powerful.
Means He can do subtlest and subtlest thing, and such things which our brain, this mental side cannot
understand. It's beyond the conception of a human mind.
This is what God is. He's the One who has created human beings. He has to be beyond us if He is
creating. If a potter creates a pot that means he is beyond the pot. Pot cannot create God.. the potter.
And the potter has created the pot, so that means that this pot which is created by him has to be
something which is made by him, so he has to be much more powerful than the pot is. But it is
unbelievable, or say beyond the conception of human beings, that what a God it must be Who has
made this great computer. We take everything for granted. We cannot even make a particle of clay
ourself. We cannot make anything, human beings cannot make. Ha, if there is some stone, all right you
can put this up. If there is some clay you can make some sort of a house out of it. That's all dead from
the dead. But can you make a candle which will burn badhas? You have seen it with your own eyes that
before My photograph the badhas burn. Can you do that?
Now you, we have no, also the idea of the complete, intricate working, delicate machinery, and
also very dynamic explosive machinery, how it works to create human beings, to create all this
universe, to create all these beautiful flowers and trees and everything. Look at the stars. Look at how
many they are. Out of that He has chosen this Mother Earth to create human beings. How He has made
it? When He wants to send His own Son, He can send it the way He wants to send it. Even to challenge
this shows the mental mind which is in, absolutely in mud. So to accept it is only possible when you
have saints, real saints who tell you, that this is how Shri Ganesha was born out of Gauri. But to jump
into it, into faith, when you come to Sahaja Yoga you start seeing miracles taking place. Then you can
understand that these miracles are taking place and if there is another miracle that has to take place it
will take place in any case. We are not doing anything, it is all done. And we don't doubt it. Once you
doubt you become again the same human being which is just embedded in the mud.
I always say that you are like lotuses now opened out. You are not flying in the air. Your roots are
down there. But you are now lotuses, and that's what is on top of the lotus, this Mahalakshmi principle
3
 19901225_Christmas Puja_Ganpatipule.pdf-page3.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
is born. Mahalakshmi principle is the One which came on this earth as Sitaji, as Radha and also as
Mary, as Mother Mary. It's said that Mahalakshmi is born out of the sea. What is the meaning of
"Mary"? Maria means, you know, Mare means "the sea". She was born out of the sea. So She being a
Mahalakshmi Herself, She could create a child. What's the harm? She could do anything, and this is
the thing you have to rise above. Christians have to rise above this Christianity, and has to understand
that it's such a great thing that was Christ Who came on this earth, Who was the Incarnation of the
principle of Ganesha.
Ganesha becoming Mahavishnu is a very big thing which one should try to understand. Ganesha
is the Son of Shiva. Shri Ganesha is the One Who was first created before creating anything, any
atmosphere, anything, because He is the Omkara, and the Omkara is the first breaking of Adi Shakti
from Shiva. That sound, "Tan-kar", as they call it. From there started Omkara and He is the One Who
is the embodiment of that Omkara. So this sound is Shri Ganesh, is His power, was created first
foremost thing, just to create holiness [pavitrada]. When this holiness was created, this [pavitrada]
was created, then everything was created in the sea of that holiness. And then He incarnated as Christ,
but as Mahavishnu, not as Shiva's Son, but as Mahavishnu. And who is Vishnu? Is an uncle of Shri
Ganesh. His Mother's brother is Shri Vishnu. So He was brought up, we should say, by Mahavishnu,
we can say, but Mahalakshmi adopted the principle of Shri Ganesh.
In the Kundalini chart you can see that the Shri Ganesha is connected on the left hand side to the
Ida Nadi, and the Kundalini is above that. So now what has happened is this, that He transcended that
part, and if He had to come for the redemption, He had to come as the Son of Mahalakshmi. So it was
Mahalakshmi who adopted Him, or we should say really, conceived Him within Himself as Christ,
and He became Mahavishnu. Anything is possible in the family of Gods and Goddesses, because they
are Gods. It is beyond human mind to understand how these things are working out in that realm. Very
difficult. But now you have got Realization you can feel in the cool breeze, so many new things are
happening to you. So now believe Me, that there is no unholy alliances among the Gods and
Goddesses, no unholy alliances. There is nothing that is human in them. They're all divine, pure
people.
Once you understand this point then you will understand why Shri Ganesha had to accept to be a
Son of Mahalakshmi, was born to Him as Christ. Because He had to come on Agnya, and for the
redemption as Ganesha, He doesn't do the redemption part, because at that stage He is for the
innocence, for the holiness, for the wisdom or also for destroying the negativity. But He had to come
up, only He, only Ganesha could be brought to this very constricted chakra, Agnya chakra. Now why
is it constricted? It's quite a scientific thing which I would not like to discuss today. But it had to be
constricted and it goes on getting more constricted, this Agnya chakra, the more, the more we think,
the more we go into the left or right, it goes on really becoming like this, absolutely like this. So in this
very subtle area only Christ could be subtle, because He's the subtlest of subtle. He's even subtler than
an atom, because in the atom those vibrations which move asymmetric and symmetric movements are
subtler than the atom. And this is the subtler of that also. So in that little very constricted area, only a
personality like Christ, which is nothing but purity. There is no other element in Him but purity. All
other Incarnations have all the five elements in it. He has nothing. He is nothing but pure vibrations.
That's why He could walk on the water, because there was no mass in His body, no matter in His body.
No matter. No element, except for Chaitanya itself. Omkara becoming Ganesha in the mud, or the
what you can say, the thing that came out of Her body. Only the Chaitanya. So at Ganesha's stage we
can say that the Chaitanya was kept in that form, but in the state of Christ it was not there.
But the whole drama was played later on, of His death and resurrection, because He is the One
who is responsible for our resurrection, because He is the Gate. He's the Path because He's Shri
Ganesh. Omkara is the Path, and He's the Gate, but He is not the destination. His Mother is the
destination. Even Mahalakshmi is not the Destination. Even Mahakali, Mahasaraswati. It's the Adi
Shakti is the destination where you have to reach. All these things were never told in the Bible,
4
 19901225_Christmas Puja_Ganpatipule.pdf-page4.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
because He could hardly live for four years with public life. Nor did they want to tell about it because
they did not know, also there was a definite suppression of all Divine things, for these people are all
commercialized institutions, as we have also in India all kinds of commercial institutions. But the
only advantage in India is that religion is not organized. Thank God for that! But they organized it,
they organized Christ, they organized all His principles, everything, and now they think He was a
good human being. What a certificate to give Him!
So today we are here to celebrate the birth of Omkara. It's a very big thing. I don't know if you can
realize it, what it is, which moves into everything, whether it is Aanu, paramanu, is the atom,
molecules, into all the organizing of chemicals and also the periodic laws, and also in the gravity, into
everything that moves is this Omkara, and your vibrations are nothing but Omkaras. Actually, in My
photograph the vibrations have come as Omkaras. On the head of the people there is Omkara written.
How is it happening, these lights look like Omkara? How is it on top of the heads of the Sahaja Yogis,
there's all the Sahaja Yogis' heads, there is Omkara? - or Allah in Arabic language - My name also, in
Arabic.
Who is doing this? It is He who is doing all this. So Omkara itself takes a form to do things to
convince you of Adi Shakti. He's the One who is handling all these powers. He doesn't enter into the
photograph, no, He does not, but He plays a trick. After all you see, if you go into details, how do
get a photograph? Through the light. The light passes straight, a straight line. But if He wants He can
make the light pass another way round. He can just transform the light into something else. He can do
whatever He likes. And that's what He does to convince you. And He said that: "Anything against Me
I'll tolerate, but nothing against the Holy Ghost." And this Holy Ghost is the Adi Shakti. Without Him
you cannot go to the Sahasrara. So that in the whole play He is like the Sutradhara, He's the One who is
the conductor, the One moves the strings in a puppet show. And so it is very important to pray to Shri
Ganesha every time we have Puja. We have to pray to Him and we, that's how we are praying to Lord
Jesus Christ. Every time. Without His auspiciousness, without His help, we cannot do Sahaja Yoga.
He's the Manager. See I'm sitting here and He's the manager. Supposing there's no management how
will I speak here? Nothing can happen. But He is so efficient, and you never see Him working out
everything, doing everything.
you
5
 19901225_Christmas Puja_Ganpatipule.pdf-page5.txt 
 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT
HINDI TALK
आपमें से
लोग मेरी बात इंग्लिश में नहीं समझ पाये होंगे। ईसामसीह का आज जन्म दिन है और मैं
कुछ
समझा रही थी कि ईसामसीह कितने महान हैं।
हम लोग गणेश जी की प्रार्थना और स्तुति करते हैं क्योंकि हमें ऐसा करने को बताया गया है। पर यह है क्या?
गणेशजी क्या चीज़ हैं? हम कहते हैं कि वो ओंकार हैं, ओंकार क्या है? सारे संसार का कार्य इस ओंकार की शक्ति
से होता है। इसे हम लोग चैतन्य कहते हैं, जिसे ब्रह्म चैतन्य कहते हैं। ब्रह्म चैतन्य का साकार स्वरूप ही ओंकार है
और उसका मूर्त-स्वरूप है या विग्रह श्री गणेश हैं। इसका जो अवतरण ईसामसीह हैं। इस चीज़ को समझ लें तो
जब हम गणेश की स्तुति करते हैं तो बस पागल जैसे गाना शुरू कर देते हैं। एक-एक शब्द में हम क्या कह रहे हैं?
उनकी शक्तियों का वर्णन हम कर रहे हैं। पर क्यों? ऐसा करने की क्या जरूरत है? इसलिए कि वो शक्तियाँ हमारे
आ जायें और हम भी शक्तिशाली हो जायें । इसलिए हम गणेश जी की स्तुति करते हैं। 'पवित्रता' उनकी सबसे बड़ी
शक्ति है। जो चीज़ पवित्र होती है वो सबसे ज़्यादा शक्तिशाली होती हैं। उसको कोई छू नहीं सकता। जैसे साबुन से
जो मर्जी धोइए वो गन्दा नहीं हो सकता। एक बार साबुन भी गन्दा हो सकता पर यह ओंकार अति पवित्र और
अनन्त का कार्य करने वाली शक्ति है। इस शक्ति की उपासना करते हुए हमें याद रखना है कि इसे हम अपने अन्दर
उतार लेना चाहते हैं जिससे हमारे अन्दर पूरी शुद्धता आ जाये। हमारे चक्र सारे शुद्ध हो जायें, हमारा जीवन शुद्ध हो
जाये, हमारे समाज, देश और सारे विश्व में शुद्धता आ जाए। उस शुद्धता में ही आनन्द है । शुद्ध होने पर बड़ा
अच्छा लगता है। जैसे नहा-धो कर साफ कपड़े पहन लेना । जब आपका पूरा जीवन इस ओंकार से स्वच्छ हो
जाता है तब आत्मानन्द मिलता है। आत्मा में भी जो शक्ति है वो भी ओंकार ही की शक्ति है। लेकिन हम यह नहीं
समझते कि ओंकार क्या चीज़ है, केवल यह कह देने से कि यह ओम है और अर्ध मात्रा है हम इसे समझ नहीं पाते।
यह चार शक्तियाँ (चत्वारी) श्री गणेश की है । ईसामसीह के जीवन में उन्हीं का प्राद्र्भाव आप पाते हैं।
ईसामसीह चार साल तक ही जीवित रहे और पता नहीं उनके बारे में हिन्दुस्तान में बहुत कम जानकारी रही पर
पाश्चिमात्य देशों में लोग उन्हें मानने लगे। पर अब ये लोग केवल खोपड़ी मात्र है । उनमें हृदय तो है ही नहीं ।
अर्थात् उसके अन्दर संवेदन शक्ति आनी चाहिए जिससे वह प्रकाश के पुंज बन जाये। आप देखिये कि ये प्रकाश जो
आँखों पर पड़ रहा है इससे आँखें धुंधला जाती हैं। परन्तु अन्दर के प्रकाश से सब कुछ दिखाई देने लग जाता है।
उस आत्मा के प्रकाश को पाने के लिए आज्ञा चक्र पर ये आप देखिये मेधा है जिसे हम ब्रेन प्लेट कहते हैं। इसपे
यहाँ आज्ञा चक्र है। जब मेधा खुलती है, तभी आज्ञा चक्र खुलता है। जब इसके अन्दर से कुण्डलिनी ऊपर आती है
तो मेधा के ऊपरी हिस्से में छा जाती है तो मनुष्य की बुद्धि से परे की, एक विलक्षण दैवीय शक्ति प्लावित होती है
और इस दैवीय शक्ति से आप समझने लग जाते हैं कि सत्य क्या है और असत्य क्या है। इस शक्ति का प्रवाह
आपके हाथों में आ जाता है और धीरे-धीरे अच्छे-बुरे की पहचान के लिए आपको हाथों की भी आवश्यकता नहीं
 19901225_Christmas Puja_Ganpatipule.pdf-page6.txt 
 Original Transcript : Hindi
रहती। आप फौरन से जान जाते है कि ये झूठा है या अच्छा है। कुछ लोग बहुत जल्दी इस गहनता में उतर आते हैं,
मैं कहती हूँ उनमें ईसामसीह का आशीर्वाद हो गया। पर कुछ लोग अब भी बुद्धि के चक्कर में रहते हैं जैसे बेकार के
धर्म-अधर्म, जाति-पाति में फँसना, संकुचित विचार तथा अनुदारिता की बुराईयाँ। हमारे देश में जैसे कहीं और न
मिलने वाले पराश्रयी जीव मच्छर, खटमल आदि मिलते हैं वैसे ही कहीं अन्य न मिलने वाली बहुत सी बुराईयाँ भी
हैं। मनुष्य कहाँ तक गड्ढे में जा सकता है। वह यहीं देखा जा सकता है कभी -कभी आश्चर्य होता है कि जिस देश में
इतने बड़े-बड़े अवतरण हुए, जिस देश की संस्कृति परमात्मा को मानने वाली है, वहीं ये मैला-कुचैलापन तथा
रूढ़िवादी से लोग सड़ते जा रहे हैं। जाति-पाति आदि बुराईयाँ मानव को कीड़े-मकोड़े सम बनाये जा रही है ।
|
'विश्व निर्मल धर्म' ओंकार का धर्म है, पवित्रता का धर्म है। इसमें ये बुराईयाँ यदि आप चला रहे हैं तो आप
गहराई में नहीं उतर सकते हैं। जितना मर्जी आप कहिये कि हम तो माताजी की पूजा करते हैं, फोटो लगाते हैं,
उनको मनाते हैं आदि, इससे न आपको कुछ फायदा हो सकता है न दुनिया को। इस तरह जो हम अपने से ठगी कर
रहे हैं। सहजयोगियों को पहले विश्वास कर लेना चाहिए कि हम सब अपने को ठगने वाले नहीं हैं। ठगी छोड़कर
सहजयोग में पूरी तरह उतरने से ही आपको इसका लाभ होगा। आधे-अधूरे लोगों को कभी किसी गुरुओं के पास
जाने से या गलत लोगों की संगति से तकलीफ हो जाती है क्योंकि आज कृत - युग है। आज ब्रह्म चैतन्य कार्यान्वित
है। अब आप न तो खुद को ठग सकते हैं न मुझे ठग सकते हैं। जिसने ठगी का रास्ता लिया उसको उसकी ठगी का
फल मिल गया। एक साहब आकर कहने लगे कि, 'माँ, मैं 'ध्यान' करता हूँ। तो मेरा मुँह इतना बड़ा हो जाता है।
'कैसा हो जाता है?' 'हनुमान जी जैसा।' तो मैंने कहा, 'अच्छा है, तुम हनुमान हो गये। तो कहने लगा, 'नहीं माँ,
मुझे घबराहट हो रही है। मेरा मुँह फट जाएगा।' 'आप तम्बाकू खाते हैं न?' 'यह बात तो है,' कहने लगा। मैंने
कहा, 'फिर तम्बाकू ही खाओ, काहे का ध्यान करते हो।' तम्बाकू भी खायेंगे और ध्यान भी करेंगे तो मुँह तो ऐसे
बढ़ेगा ही।
एक और साहब आये और कहने लगे, 'माँ, मेरी अंगुली कट गयी। इसमें चोट आ गई।' 'अच्छा,
सिगरेट
तुम
पी रहे थे ?' कहने लगा, 'हाँ।' एक और साहब की मोटर की दुर्घटना हुई। उन्होंने आकर बताया कि, 'माँ, सिर्फ
यही अंगुली गयी। इसी में चोट आई क्योंकि मैं सिगरेट पीता था।'
सहजयोग में आकर भी सिगरेट पीते हैं, शराब पीते हैं। दुनिया भर के छेद हैं आपमें और सहजयोग का इतना
बड़ा बैज आप लगा लेते हैं। तो यह बैज ही आपकी खोपड़ी तोड़ेगा। मैं बता दे रही हूँ कि बैज लगाना इतनी सरल
चीज़ नहीं है। जिस बैज को आपने लगाया है, मर्यादा विहीनता की अवस्था में यही आकर आपकी खोपड़ी
तोड़ेगा। मैं न ऐसा चाहती हूँ न करती हूँ।
पर यह बैज कोई कम चीज़ नहीं है, एक विग्रह है। इसकी महत्वपूर्ण भूमिका
है। मतलब यह कि इसमें से चैतन्य बहता है। वही चैतन्य घोल घूमा कर आपका गला अगर धोटे तो कहेंगे, 'माँ, मैं
तो बैज लगाये सो रहा था फिर ऐसा कैसे हो गया ? वो जो बैज था न वही निकल के आया और खोपड़ी तोड़ दी।
१
इसलिए बैज मत लगाओ-अगर लगाना है तो उसके योग्य रहो । लौकेट आदि यदि पहनना है तो पहनो पर सम्हाल
|
के-नहीं तो मुझे दोष न लगाना कि, 'माँ मैं यह पहन कर गया था तो भी फिसल पड़ा और पैर टूट गया। तो उससे
कुछ मिला तुमको? इसको यदि पहनना है तो आपमें पात्रता होनी चाहिए। यदि वह योग्यता नहीं है तो ईसामसीह
 19901225_Christmas Puja_Ganpatipule.pdf-page7.txt 
 Original Transcript : Hindi
से भगवान बचाए और गणेश जी तो उनसे भी बढ़कर हैं। वो तो सदा अपने बायें हाथ में फरसा लिये होते हैं और
इस मामले में मेरी कोई सुनते हैं? बैज, लौकेट, अंगूठी जो भी पहनना हो पहनो , पर बहुत ही सम्भल के रहिये।
गुसलखाने आदि जाते हुए इसे उतार कर रखिये। इसे बहुत सम्हालिए, मेरे बालों को भी। मेहरबानी करके जहाँ भी
मिलें वापिस कर दीजिए । क्योंकि मेरे बाल यम के दिये हुए हैं और यम इनके पीछे रहता है। मैं नहीं कहती कि
आपको कोई कष्ट हो। अत: बहुत सम्भल के रहिये क्योंकि मैं माँ भी तो हूँ, पर ये लोग तुम्हारे माँ-बाप नहीं हैं, ये
तो तुम्हारे भाई लोग हैं और डंडा लिये घूमते हैं आपके पीछे-पीछे | इसलिए सहजयोगी की विशेषता को समझ
लीजिए। यह परमात्मा का घर है और परमात्मा माँ नहीं है। माँ तो प्रेममयी है और बच्चों की छोटी- मोटी गलतियों
को अनदेखा करती हैं। कितनी मेहनत करके आपकी माँ ने आपको सहजयोग दिया है। आपका पाँव कहाँ डगमगा
रहा है? आप कौन सा गलत काम कर रहे हैं? सम्भल के रहना चाहिए। मैं यह जरूर कहँगी कि आदिशक्ति
परमात्मा की शक्ति है, उनकी इच्छा है। लेकिन परमात्मा देख रहे हैं कि ये सारी मेहनत जो हो रही है, इतना नाटक
जो इन लोगों ने बना रखा है, इसमें सत्य-असत्य कितने लोग हैं और उन्हें किस-किस को ठिकाने लगाना है। वो
इसका हिसाब जोड़ रहे हैं। जो अच्छे हैं उनको भी कभी देखना चाहिए न, वैसा नहीं है। जो झूठे हैं उनको पकड़े बैठे
हैं और सबको डंडा मारेंगे। इसलिए मेहरबानी से जो भी करना है शुद्ध मन से और दिल खोलकर कीजिए। हमने
आपसे जो बातें बताईं कि यदि आपके अन्दर अंधश्रद्धा हो, जातिवाद हो, हम हिन्दुस्तानी बहुत उँचे हैं-यह या
कोई और झुठी भावना हो-तो इसमें पावित्र्य नहीं है। यह सारी भावनायें निकाल करके कृपया मेरा लौकेट पहनिये
क्योंकि हर लौकेट, बैज या अंगूठी के साथ एक-एक गण लगा हुआ है आपके आगे पीछे, उतनी आपकी वो रक्षा
करते हैं, उतनी ही रक्षा एक तरह से करते हैं कि आप कोई गलत काम न करें-क्योंकि वो अन्दर-बाहर से जानते हैं।
इसलिए आज के दिन ये भी आपके लिए चेतावनी सी हो जाती है।
अगर ईसामसीह इस संसार में न आते और अपने को आज्ञा चक्र में बिठा कर तारण का मार्ग, पुनर्जीवन का
मार्ग न बनाते तो सहजयोग साध्य न हो सकता। उनका आना अति आवश्यक था। लेकिन इन सब अवतरणों में
आपस में कोई झगड़ा नहीं। एक जीवंत पेड़ पर इन सब लोगों की उत्पत्ति हुई इस पेड़ को पनपाया गया और अन्त में
सहस्रार पर आना हुआ और इस सहस्रार से कार्य हुआ। यदि पेड़ ही नहीं होता तो सहस्रार कहाँ से आता। इस पेड़ ने
ही सहस्तर बनाया है। इस पेड़ की भी जिम्मेदारी है कि सहस्र को देखे, सम्हाले और इसकी पूरी रक्षा करे और
इसके विरोध में जाने वालों को ठिकाने लगाये। तो आज का दिन आप लोगों के लिए समझने का है कि अगर
ईसामसीह नहीं आते तो हम लोगों का पुनर्जीवन (रिजरक्शन) न होता। श्री गणेश से प्रार्थना की जाती है कि हमारे
मोक्ष के समय हमारा रक्षण करें। मोक्ष के समय वे साक्षात आज्ञा चक्र पर पधारते हैं और आपका रक्षण करते हैं।
इसलिए आज का दिन हम सबके लिए बड़ा शुभ है। बहुत प्रसन्नता देने वाला है और इसी तरह चेतावनी भी देता है
कि सम्भल के रहिये। यदि आज्ञा चक्र पर आप पिछ्ड़ गये तो पागलखाने में चले जाएंगे या कोई और बीमारी हो
जाएगी। आज्ञा चक्र की पवित्रता रखनी चाहिए यानि की हमारे विचार हमेशा पवित्र होने चाहिए। अपवित्र विचार
यदि आ जायें तो उसको क्षमा कर देना चाहिए| जैसे-जैसे आपकी उन्नति होगी आपके अन्दर अपवित्र विचार
आयेंगे ही नहीं। सहजयोग सिर्फ आपके आनन्द, आपकी महानता, आपके गौरव और आपकी पूर्ण प्रगति के लिए
बना हुआ है। लेकिन इस महान कार्य में पूर्ण हृदय से संलग्न लोगों के साथ जो सहयोग न देंगे उन पर आफत भी आ
০
 19901225_Christmas Puja_Ganpatipule.pdf-page8.txt 
 Original Transcript : Hindi
सकती है।
पूर्ण हृदय से आपको कार्य करना चाहिए। कुछ लोगों में कंजूसी की बीमारी भी मैं देखती हूँ कंजूसीपना कर रहे
हैं। किसी तरह चार रूपये यदि बेचते हैं तो बचा लो। चार रूपये की बचत आप करेंगे तो आपके कम से कम चार
सौ रूपये जाएंगे। सहजयोग में दिया हआ एक रूपया भी लाख रूपये के बराबर हो सकता है। ये बात मैं आपसे कह
तो
रही हूँ। हमें सोचना है कि हम कुछ नहीं दे रहे हैं। सब कुछ माँ का ही है। माँ का माँ को दे रहे हैं। और हम
कुछ
लेते नहीं है। आप तो जानते हैं कि सुबह शाम झगड़ा हो रहा है कि हमको कोई चीज़ नहीं चाहिए, हमें साड़ियाँ मत
दो। सुबह
से शाम तक पाँच साल से झगड़ा चल रहा है कोई सुनता नहीं है। कुछ भी चीज़ नहीं चाहिए हमको।
लेकिन सहजयोग के लिए तो पैसा लगता है। लेकिन यहाँ तो लोग हैं जो मुफ्त में खाना बड़ी मर्दानगी समझते हैं।
बाद में उनके पेट में यदि शिकायत हो जाय तो मैं इसके लिए जिम्मेदार नहीं हूँ। यह जगह भिखारियों के लिए नहीं,
रईसों के लिए है। तबीयत-तबीयत चाहिए। राजा की तरह आपकी तबीयत है तो आइए । कोई जरूरी थोड़े है कि
आपके पास पैसा होना चाहिए। बहुत से पैसे वाले महाकंजूस होते हैं और बहुत से मेरे जैसे गरीब उनको देते रहने में
ही मजा आता है। एक हाथ खुलने पर यदि दूसरा हाथ खुलेगा तभी दूसरे हाथ से आएगा नहीं तो वहीं पर रूक
जाएगा। इसलिए कंजूसी की बातें सुनकर मुझे बहुत घिन चढ़ती है। उस दिन का नज़ारा मुझे बहुत अच्छा लगा जब
कुछ नहीं रहा तो मेरे फोटो ही लोगों ने बड़े प्रेम से लिए। माँ, हमें फोटो दे रहे हैं। सब आए, बड़ा अच्छा लगा।
तो समाधान पहले आना चाहिए। ईसामसीह जैसा त्याग तो कोई नहीं कर सकता पर समाधान के बाद त्याग
को सहर्ष स्वीकार करना चाहिए। थोड़ी सी तकलीफ हो जाएगी। लेकिन बहत बड़े महान कार्य जो पड़े हैं जिन्हें हम
अपने लिए ही नहीं सबके लिए कर रहे हैं। अगले साल मैं सबकी लिस्ट मंगाऊंगी। मैं देखना चाहती हूँ, खास कर
बम्बई वालों की यह शिकायत है कि वो पैसा देने से बिल्कुल इन्कार कर देते हैं । बम्बई में महालक्ष्मी का मंदिर है ।
क्या फायदा उस बेचारे मंदिर का जहाँ महालक्ष्मी स्वयं ही जमीन से ऊपर आ गई। वहाँ के लोग इस कदर कंजूस हैं
कि वे कुछ भी पैसा नहीं देना चाहते, सोचते हैं सब तो माँ कर ही रही है। आराम से रहो, बस मजा आ रहा है । ऐसे
तो सब हो ही जाएगा चाहे वो पैसा दें चाहे न दें। लेकिन उनका क्या होगा यह सोच लेना चाहिए। महालक्ष्मी तत्व
तभी जागृत होता है जब हम अपने अन्दर समाधान प्राप्त कर लेते हैं, लक्ष्मी-तत्व जब पूरा हो जाता है और हम
सत्य को खोजने लगते हैं। अगर आपमें समाधान नहीं है तो आप महालक्ष्मी के तत्व में उतर नहीं सकते। देखिये
सीता जी का जीवन प्रभु रामचन्द्र जी के साथ कितना दिव्य है, राधा जी का जीवन और उनके बाद ईसामसीह की
माँ का जीवन तीनों में कितना त्याग है। बगैर महान समाधान के ये हो ही नहीं सकता। महालक्ष्मी तत्व से तो
मनुष्य
समाधान हो जाता है, इस तत्व से वो सत्य को ढूंढता है और सत्य को ढूंढते हुए असत्य को छोड़ता जाता है। तो
आज के इस महालक्ष्मी पूजन में जहाँ कि ईसामसीह और उनकी माँ मैरी को भी पूज रहे हैं, हमको समाधान में
उतरना चाहिए। सांसारिक तथा भौतिक चीज़ों से जब हमारे अन्दर समाधान आ जाता है तभी महालक्ष्मी का तत्व
हमारे अन्दर जागृत हो जाता है। फिर महालक्ष्मी तत्व, लक्ष्मी तत्व को संवारता है और लक्ष्मी तत्व अपने आप
बनने लग जाता है, अपने आप कार्यान्वित हो जाता है, अपने आप इसका लाभ दे देता है। अपने आप सारी चीजें
बन कर खड़ी हो जाएंगी।
9.
 19901225_Christmas Puja_Ganpatipule.pdf-page9.txt 
 Original Transcript : Hindi
तो कहना यह है कि अपने दिल को बड़ा करें, दिल बड़ा करें और दिल के अन्दर उस ओंकार को बसायें, उस
आत्मतत्व को बसायें, ईसामसीह को, श्री गणेश को बसायें जिनके कारण हमारे बिगड़े काम ठीक हो जाएंगे |
आपको मेरे ऊपर अधिकार आ जाए क्योंकि उन लोगों के बगैर मैं आपको अधिकार नहीं दे सकती। कुण्डलिनी के
जागरण में भी जब तक मूलाधार से आज्ञा नहीं आती है, जब तक मूलाधार में बैठे गणेश जी हाँ नहीं करते हैं, मैं
क्या कोई भी कुण्डलिनी को जगा नहीं सकता। उनके अधिकार अपने हैं। अगर कोई सोचता हो कि हम माँ के बहुत
नजदीक हैं तो ये समझ लें कि अगर वो नजदीक हैं और वास्तविकता में नजदीक हैं तो यह भी श्री गणेश जी की ही
इजाजत से हो रहा है, ईसामसीह की इजाजत से हो रहा है। उनकी इजाजत के बगैर मैं किसी को नहीं मान सकती।
यह एक बन्धन है हम पर। इसलिए मैं बार-बार कहती हूँ कि सम्भल के रहिए, सनके बन्धन को मानना ही पड़ेगा ।
ये जो भी आपके बारे में सोचते हैं उसकी ओर मुझे जरूर देखना पड़ता है। मैं कितना भी माफ कर दें, माँ की दृष्टि से
|
कुछ भी कह दूं लेकिन इनके आगे मैं हारी हुई हँ।
यह भी जान लेना चाहिए कि ये लोग स्वयं आपकी मदद के लिए हैं, आपको स्वच्छ करने वाले हैं, आपके
लिए सबकुछ करने वाले हैं। पर एक चीज़ की इनको उम्मीद नहीं 'मैं निर्वाज्य हूँ।' मैं आपसे कुछ नहीं चाहती हं,
लेकिन अगर आपने मेरे प्रति कोई गलत बात कही या की, या सहजयोग में किसी तरह का ओछापन आपने किया,
या किसी तरह की ठगी की तो ये आपके पीछे पड़ जाएंगे । इसलिय मैं बार-बार आपसे कह रही हूँ कि आज के शुभ
अवसर पर हमें ये जानना चाहिए कि हमारे साथ कितनी बड़ी शक्तियाँ खड़ी हुई हैं। क्यों न हम उस शक्ति को
स्वीकार करके शहंशाह जैसे रहे ? क्यों हम छोटे से बन कर रहें? जब हमारे पास इतना बड़ा सिंहासन है तो हम
शान से सिंहासन पर बैठे, शान से रहें। अब आप सहजयोगी हो गये हैं। योगीजन हैं, बहुत बड़ी चीज़ हैं। इतने योगी
थे ? आरै इतने योगी इस गणपतिपुले में आए हैं जहाँ पर कि महागणेश बैठे हुए हैं। इन महागणेश के
कभी
हुए
परिवार में हम लोग यहाँ आए हुए हैं। इनके इस प्रांगण में हम आ पहुंचे हैं और इनके आशीर्वाद से हमारे अन्दर
उन्हीं के जैसी महाशक्तियाँ आ सकती हैं।
पर सबसे पहले शक्ति को भी सहन करने के लिए उनकी पवित्रता होनी चाहिए, उनकी भक्ति होनी चाहिए ।
जिस तरह उनकी भक्ति नि:स्वार्थ है। हमारी भक्ति भी अगर वैसे ही हो जाये तो आपके चाकर बन कर तो आपको
सम्भाले रहते हैं। यदि आप उल्टे तरह से चलें तो आपकी हानि भी कर सकते हैं। एक सूझबूझ की बात मैं समझा
रही हूँ क्योंकि एक माँ को ऐसा लगता है कि ये मेरे बड़े प्यारे बेटे हैं और इनसे आप लोगों का लाभ ही होना
चाहिए। ये भी लगता है कि कहीं ये तुम लोगों के कान न पकड़ लें। इसलिए आप लोगों को यह भी समझा रही हूँ
कि जब इतना सुन्दर समागम हम लोगों ने बिठाया है, इतने सुन्दर परिवार के लोग यहाँ आ गये हैं तो ये जो आपके
बड़े भाई लोग हैं इनको आप लोगों को थोड़ा सा मानना पड़ेगा। इनकी पूजा करके यदि आप इन्हें खुश कर लें तो
बड़ा अच्छा रहेगा। परन्तु हम जानते हैं कि यह जल्दी खुश नहीं होते। हममें जब तक अन्दर की स्वच्छता नहीं होगी
ये खुश नहीं होंगे। इसलिए स्वच्छ हृदय से आज प्रण कीजिए कि सब तरह की क्षुद्रता तथा ओछापन हम त्याग देंगे
और इनकी महानता और शुद्धता की ओर नजर करके इन्हें अपना आदर्श मान कर अपनी जिन्दगी बनायेंगे। यह
करने से हमारा लाभ ही लाभ है।
10
 19901225_Christmas Puja_Ganpatipule.pdf-page10.txt 
 Original Transcript : Hindi
आपको अनन्त आशीर्वाद हैं हमारे। आप लोग इतने प्यार से यहाँ आये। माँ आपको धन्यवाद तो नहीं कह
सकती। पर यही है कि मेरा हृदय भरा हुआ है और इस हृदय में आप सन्त समाये हुए हैं। मैं आपसे अत्यन्त प्यार
करती हूँ। नितान्त प्यार से मैं आपको देखती हूँ। हमेशा आपकी रक्षा के विचार में रहती हूैँ, आपके प्रति मेरा
पूरा
चित्त है, तवज्जो है। किसी भी प्रकार की तकलीफ हो आप मुझे लिख सकते हैं। पर आप स्वयं स्वच्छ हो जाएं, शुद्ध
हो जाएं और मंगलमय हो करके इस आनन्द को अनन्त तक भोगें।
11
