Vol II. Issue 5,6, 7 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE 1990 A new age is starting, where the ques ti on of ourselves is not there. The question of the whole world nas become our concern. For this a strength, a magnanimity and a height is required. The responsibility lies with you. You have to take Sahaja Yoga to the home of each one. You have to give that joy to all. You have to distribute the light which you have got. with full confidence, to everyone.

 NORTH INDIA TOUR 1990 Nou th tour of Shri Mataji commenced wi th a rousing welcome at Jaipur. Two successful programmes followed at the famous Govind Ji Mandir, where such a meeting was allowed for the first time by the Maharani of Jaipur. The greatest celebration in Jaipur is the festival of Gangauri, which Shri Mataji explained ls the worship of Shri Ganesh and Shri Gauri Mata. Traditionally the idol of the Del ty is worshipped by the Jaipur Maharani and then taken out in a colorful procession of ceremoniously attired elephants and horses throughout the city. Hundred thousand people throng to recelve the blessin gs of the Deity during the procession. the commencement of the procession the Jaipur Royal family Worshi pped Shri Mataji in a beautiful tradi tional ceremony, , Then Shri Mataji the Idol of the Delty which was to be taken in the processlon, vibrated thus blessing the people of Jaipur with Param Chai tanya. HARYANA Thereafter two programmes were held at Karnal and Yam una Nagar, in Haryana, for the first time. Shri Mataji explained that Karnal was named af ter Karna of Mahabharata fame who had camped here, near the battle fHeld of Kurukshetra. The temple Hall of the programme overflowed as there were so many people within as well as outside. After the realisation session a deaf and dumb boy came on stage to seek Shri Mataji's blessings. Shri Mataji cleared his Vishuddhi chakra and Lol the boy found his voice and hearing. This miracle at Karnal has become a byend spreading Sahaja Yoga like wild fire in the region. DELHI Ramlila grounds of Delhi has been a scene of many his toric events. exqui si tely construocted dlas has been the platform for India's grea test An could char tered the nation's destiny. These his toric grounds sta tesman who

 never have been mnore blessed as they resounded with the vibra tlons thousands got realisa tion. Adi Shak ti and such multi tudes of several thrice blessed. First with the Birthday Puja celebration Delhi of Shri Mataji, then with the 70 th birthday celebration of Shri C.P.Srivas tava their wedding Anniversary celebration on 7th April. The Sahaja Yogis and asked permission to address Srivas tava Sahib as Papaji, to which he most In a very touching speech he added that "while the graciously consented. In love of the Mother is no doubt great, I want to assure you that the love of the father is no less." The delightlul music of Debu Chaudharl enhanced the evening. CALCUTTA The Devi is traditionaly worshipped with a silk saree woven in Bengal. that for the first time the The bhakti of Her children so pleased the Devi puja of the Adi Shak ti aspect was performed in Calcutta. By Her Divine Grace s0 deep in meditation and emerged transformed. Two public everyone went Park wi tnessed the deepening of the same experience. programmes at Tivoli The highlight was an exclusive launch tour with all the Sahaja Yogis on the river Hubli (the ganges is so named in Bengal ). The trip was li terally Ganga as all the Sahaja Yogls were cleansed by the purification dip in the all the way while the new Shri Mataji. The Sahaja Yogis sang and danced Sahaja Yogis were being introduced individually. BOMBAY prograinmes pf Bombay has perhaps: been blessed with the maximur Shri Mataji. But the quality and the quanti ty of seekers this time far surpassed than ever before, heralding the New Era of Sahaja Yoga. After their realisation all the seekers remained seated In deep meditation. No one stirred till Shri Mataji departed. It was Indeed a rare treat to share collectivly such a deep experience with such a large body of new seekers. The next day Shrt Matajl depar ted for Muscat to open New Horizons for the Enirates.

 BIRTHDAY PUJA TALK * 24-3-90.- Bombay (Transla ted from Hindi) Twenty years have passed doing Sahaja Yoga. I feel the kind of work that should have been done has not been possible. The reason is that we people do not have the awareness of how great and Divine this work is. Look at Sahaja Yoga from all angles. Even in society a difference has come. Af ter independence people who had got stuck, were saved. And in other nations whore poople were stuck and who would have been to tally destroyed were saved by Sahaja Yoga. Nothing like this has ever happened belore. Lots of incarna tions were born but none of them ever got such a power by which such a power could be established within. Some think of themselves as Hindus, Christians. And everyone thinks he is right. But there is not one Dharma from any of these, by which you become Dharmic from within. Anyone can commit any sins in the name of any religion. There is no light of Dharma. In Sahaja Yoga there is the light of the Atma. The enlightment of the Atma is a very great thing, which spreads light in our lives. The incarnations have also said that know yoursell. You cannot achieve it without knowing yourself. And now the ime come about which they spoke. But even now people are being blind. For we are not able to understand able to understand what a tremendous power we have get. ROW How much we should increase It and what is our responsibili ty. Even now we get stuck on little little things. Yes, we have become Dharmic but there are many little things which get us into trouble. Sahaja Yoga is a very ancient subtle. Our sight has also become subtle. We are yoga. It is so deep and not able to understand what has happened to us. US. And that is why even after so many years, people have not been able W. to grow in Sahaja Yoga so much as they should have. Nei ther outside nor a very subtle form. The quality within. Quarrels amongst ourselves have taken

 of a realised person is not there. While in Australia I was shocked to see that how much work I done there, where thousands of people had got their realisation. But now from each centre at least 50 percent have been thrown out. Upon seeing me everyone started crying, saying "Mother where had you gone away", WhereverI saw negativity had become very sub tle. TIll we do not love each other and have a clean relationship with each other we will not be able to enjoy the joy of Sahaja Yoga. Our self-relationships are so beautiful, so delica te and so wonderful, that if we do not understand them, it could be that they may break; because their thread is very delica tely woven. A ter working hard there it was seen that people were together again, and full of Joy again. All of them came went deep. So it is to gether and a very great thing that we are drowning in the ocean of bliss, and we have attained this bliss. Now we must share it. And we have to make it e ternal for ever. This joy and bliss can only become e ternal when we leave our narrowness and littleness. Like a drop of water when it reaches the ocean, then it loses its littleness and all its boundaries are broken. It rises and falls with the ocean and all its works are done as the works of the ocean. It means that we have surrendered every thing to the Param Chaltanya, the All pervading Power which we know, who watches us all the time, looks af ter us and all that we do. That Param Chai tanya is so efficient that its amazing. Whatever it does, it does for your benevolence and glory and all the time it is working. In its doing we have to do nothing. We have to only be fully Immersed in it, be one wi th it. We have to crea te a new world and in that world we will have ton come in thousands. Especially in Bombay I have worked very hard for many years. Every body must think every morning that what have I have done forSahaja Yoga and what am I going to do today for Sahaja Yoga. In the evening one must think what have I done for Sahaja Yoga today, and what am I doing to do When the thought process is always on Sahaja Yoga then for it in future.

 5 there is peace in it. Though we are not doing any thing. All this is belng done by Param Chaltanya. I dont know whetherthe Influence of this man made Dharma is so much. or ei ther we have too much ego. We should think whe ther we are ready for Sahaj Yoga or not. We are the soldiers of Sahaja Yoga, God Almi ghty has chosen us for this great work only, The Param Chai tanya needs such deep Block, where Just by getting people which were in Russia of the Eastern. realisation the Berlin Wall was broken. Even If we can get four-five deep daap BA people like that, . we can change this. country Over here it is not like that. That depth is not there. We are still s tuck on petty things. Somewhere or the other there d a block. We are always thinking we have to do this or that. Its alright, but its not the most important thing. You have come into this world so that you can do the work of Sahaja Yoga and that you are firmly grounded in Sahaja Yoga. That is why our country is not benefitting. Such great Sahaja Yogis are sitting here. But still It is not happening. What is the reason? In some countries just 3-4 people have changed their countries. In the making of Australla, In the beginning some prisoners were sent there and with them went the jailers. And now after so many centuries, the leaders have become jailers, and all the rest are prisoners, living in prisons. & will get alright. But In can unders tand that things went wrong There I India I cannot unders tand such petty behaviour. That why is he leader and who is he and small petty problems. These will fall down right here. Within you is the Self-born (Swambhu) Power of God. So much power you have within you. They will talk of Sahaja Yoga here and there, gossip. Some people think that we are great Sahaja Yogis. There are a lot of signs of a Sahaja Yogi. His first sign is that he mixes easily with people. He knows that those I know. Because I I am the 1light and people who are like me, only am so unique I am so humble. I feel compassion for the rest of the people

 that are they going to hell? What is going to happen to them? My relationship With them is only of this world.And if they do not get the sense then I cannot do any thing. So let them be. In this way a person who has unders tanding is called a Sahaja Yogi. у рагепts stuck on Mine' One who is not stuck on 'Mine'. My wife, my child, my parents, iny house etc. This mine... mine... My body, my e go, my mlnd, my face. If that Spirit(Atma). Till it is mine then who am I? Who Is that 'I'? I' am you do not reach that 'I', this 'mine' Inine' will continue. So such a person then Is not a Sahaja Yogl. They have come into Sahaja Yoga but are still not there. Secondly, his belief is on the Dharma within. Not the outside. One should not believe in any outslde Dharma. He belleves in the Dharma which is the Real, the Truth. He is sitting completely in that Dharma wi thin. He is humble in every way.He does not hurt or trouble anyone. He does not transgress anyone. He speaks the Truth. And where he has to not speak he is discreet. He things does not keep talking all the time. He does not take other people 's things. He lives in a carefree nor does he cast envious glances at other's manner. It is equal to him whe ther he gets: something or not. I should not say these things on my birthday, but twenty years have passed and I though t I should tell you how a real jewel is made. nothing outside its laws. I he lives wi thin limits, and does Then, have seen husbands and wives quarreling with each other, that why the other is not a Sahaja Yogi. If they are not, then they are not. Why fight? Leave it. He does not quarrel. His fight is actually his Power. It is his Love. If you stop fighting, fifty percent things get done. Sahaja Yogis do not quarrel or get angry with others. They are always s tanding in their peace. Like a Chinese King had two cocks., whom he wanted to train for cock-fighting. So he took them to a sage for training. After one month when he took them to the fightig arena, he left them among all the other cocks. All the cocks

 star ted killing each other. But these two stood peacefully and majestically. Upon seeing their peaceful nature all the other cocks cooled down and ran Wherever there is peace away. So such person is ex tremely peaceful. a manifest. And his or distur- bance, his peaceful nature at once becomes light starts spreading at once and everything becomes peaceful. To always , Is not the slgn of a Sahaja Yogl. One stould remain Ilght, arguO ovorywhere, peaceful. Lots of people who have to catch a train or plane become agi tated. You are settled down in the Param t is doing everything, s0 Chaitanya. It FLLL happen you are at peace. Just keep witnessing. What is to happen, will happen. To hate each other is a great sin in Sahaja Yoga. If you hate someone then give him love. Buy him presents. Yes, you can desire the des truotion of evil forces, as its alright to destroy evil people. But there is no love amongst Sahaja Yogis. I cant Imagine! There should be tremendous love for each other. Who else is like you. You are the real brothers and sis ters. When people come from foreign countries, you do not make friends with them. You are lost in your families, friends and chtldren. No ane their name. Everyone sits separataly. The Sahaja Yogis to them or asks of the entire world are also your brothers and sis ters, and to meet them, to love them and respect them is in itself a unique thing. You should wri te their letters to them. Keep children's their photographs, know names. Know how they are and what they are doing. Love for each other is a Na one can bend it. Sahaja is nothing but the Power great uni ting Power. of Love. The Power of Love Is so strong that it neutralises all other powers. We are working in forty contries and has it ever happened before that our brothers and sisters of forty countries care for each other and respect each other? A Sahaja Yogi is full of character. Women, men, lust and greed do He becomes completely desireless. All these man not tauch him. wohan

 B. relationships which were rubbish, he comes out of that rubbish and becomes the embodiment of Pure Spirit. And such a Soul has got tremendous Powers. One should descend into one's Purity. That does not mean agi ta tion. You do not become restless and unpeaceful with Purity. The thing that Purifies every thing, how can that be agita ted. But sometimes wi th Purity people become tyrants. That we are great. We are very disciplined. We are Sahaja Yogis. And the rest is useless. Never think like this. A Sahaja Yogi must thínk that everyone is my own. What is pure will absorb every thing in it. Loose talk breeds negativity. It is absurd behaviour. For Sahaja Yogis talk like this is to disrespectful. And talking behind someone's back, getting upset for just two paisa. When Shri Laxmi Herself is at yourservice, then why be so worried about money. On my birthday today I request you all to grow wi th me. in age, It means that you should become mature. You have become one- pointed. So that is alright. This one- pointedness means that you have the chakras and the enlightment of each one chakra. To raise the kundalini whereby it passes through the chakras and goes into the Sahasrara, just think what a great thing it is. No saint, sage, Rishi, Yogi, or any incarna- tHon has done what you people are doing. So much power has come wi thin you. But we should have the endurance to bear this Power. The greater will come within the voltage we can bear, the greater the voltage that increase this vol tage tremendously. And this year has us. We can come with a special significance. Thats why I have said all this to you that how you can blossom fully your life from within and outside. With meditation and contemplation the within gets cleaned. In that there is no madness that I have to bathe in the mornlng, I should have got up at 4 a.m. but I woke up at 4.30 a.m. There are no outside coverings. You Only you must medi ta te. You should be in medi ta tion all the time.

 6. should watch how long you can stay in a medi ta tive state. Even if something remain in this state. What is upsets or agi tates, even then one should the meaning of going into medita tion? It means you have got connected to the Param Chai tanya, the all Prevading power. The minute you are with the Param Chal tanya. in medita tion you have established oneness How to stay In meditation? II a thought comes. Say 'No' and medi ta te. Now you are in that sta te and it's light is mant fest in you. So now we e have have to Ind people and dis tribute it. We should talk to them. We them this light. Others will watch you closely to see whether to give or you are Just pretending. Thoy wLIl watch 11 watch you are really enllgh tened or your character, your nature. What is so special in you, what you have gained. And from amongst you, very great people can rise and uplift this Country and the whole world. In Sahaja Yoga, toworry about any thing is not Sahaj. Because It is the Param Chaitanya that does the worrying. We should have only one worry. That I should be in medi tation. I should be in joy and there should be no lacking In this joy. And I may always be carefree. Seeing your devotion, service, and love I am pleased. But you should also. Think about yourself also. Decorate do your service to the self that you are a jewel. Search yourself too and look after yoursell also, for it fully. We are from different countries following Vishva Nirmala Dharma. Though we from various countries in reali ty we live in come only one world and that is the kingdom of God. And we are living in joy and happiness, where we are giving joy to everyone. What a great thing it is. You are like the flowers in a garden looking at which great to every one. You are seeing which brings Joy poets get inspiration and the flowers from whom I have such hope. I want that you people should do something unique and special, in each village, in the towns, wherever

 can. One day will Dome when many Sahaj Yogis will be seen every you where. I request that you take a decision on this day, my birthday. With that O Mother humbleness this year we will enli ghten hundred people. one should try. It can happen. Call people for meals, At least every Talk to people that they should take to Sahaj Yoga. Tell them for tea. about the miracles of Sahaja Yoga. Now the greatest miracle is that we can cure AIDS. We can cure cancer. Even now many dont know what chakras are associated with which Fingers. We can cure emotional and physical problems but many of you people still dont knoW where the chakras are s. Every man and every catching. You should have full knowledge of this woman should know. From the men take the knowled ge of it and from the grasping of women take the vibrations and the understanding of it. The it is much more in women. The knowled ge from the Intellect is much more in men and the women have the knowled ge of the Heart. Both these should be known equally. we have established should groW much more. And this world that One should do as much Possible. Especially this year one has to work realised through you. The hard. Everyday, every moment thousands will get Even if way you are blissful, may the whole world become like that. we all can can take off, and a few become like that, this great work experience i ts joy. May God Bless You. CCO22

 11 SHRI MATAJI. BIRTHDAY TALK, EVENING ADDRESS. AT BHAIDAS HALL, BOMBAY 24-3-1990 I bow to all the seekers of truth. I feel the love and adoration you have for me. If I look at myself I wonder what have I done for them. Wha tever I am, I am, What's so special about it. I haven't achieved any thing in this life time. But I to you that you have achleved so much must say, I'm really thankful in Sahaj Yoga. It Is very important and imminent that it I should have happened. As we talk of countries and politics and sconomics and every thing it works on the essence. And all these sys tems have got basically in their air essence a problem, and if you know the essence of every thing then It is s as you know the Kundalini which is very easy to handle the situation, the essence within us. II you raise the Kundalini all the chakras can be enli ghtened and you can get physical, mental, emotional. and spiritual benevolence. In the same way in all these areas of human endeavours thhere is essentlally basically something gone Wrong. For example, if you see about democracy. That what is essentially wrong is that it is money orlented. Its not spirit oriented. Then ultimately every thing becomes commercialized. Because basically it has that problem inbuilt in Lt, which grows like a tree and flowers. In the same way demo- cracy has flowered into all these problems you see today. Second]y, we see communism. Its problem is that it is power oriented, And the essence of power-arlenta tion is that it becomes sa overpowering that, that person loses all his control and he becomes a very cruel and trynical person - Like Stalln. Because it is ot: Divine Power-orlentation. Take even the human laws. Basically bullt in the human laws there is one problem, It is the justice based on fundamental ideas of human value systems. The human value system is a valency within us. Like carbon

 12 has valency, in the same way there is valency within us. These valencies to put them into their fundamental number. And when we Cross these valencies or when we try to destroy or to misuse them, then we do somethiing that is illegal in the name of nature, in the name of humani ty and Divinity. But basic problem of human laws is that human beings are not enlightened people. Their valencies are not enligh tened. Unless and until their valencies are enligh tened, wha tever Dharma they may follow. whatever books they may read; whatever good they try to do: whatever may be their great ideas of peace, non-violence etc., Basically there is an inbullt problem that these valencies wi thin them are not enligh tened. But essentially the mistake is not human. It is the mistake of our ignorance. The ignorance within us is this, that we do not know that we are not yet the Spirit. All these laws are for Angels. They are not for human beings, whose valencies are yet not enlightened. That is why in Sahaj Yoga first you have to say 'I am not guilty' and that I have not 'I am Perfectly alright'. Give yourself confidence. done any mistakes. Because human laws can just make you a criminal for nothing at all. Because you don't know a particular law, you have to retain a lawyer and a chartered accountant, otherwise suddenly you find you are in jail. But if you are an enlightened personali ty , you never com mlt any thing which is criminal. Because in the essence all the valencies are already enlightened within yourself. And you know what is proper and improper. But still, Christ was crucifled. Socrates was poisoned. All these great people had to suffer at the hands of law givers or priests who responsible for religion or people who thought that they were very correct. Adi Shankaracharya had to suffer so much. Gyaneshwara, such a learned man had to suffer so much. So the basle problem within human beings is that they are not yet

 13 enli gh tened. Their central nervous sys tem is not filled wi th Dharma. There is no sustenance. If the Dharma is within you, you don't commit any crime. And maybe they might look criminal in the eyes of people who are dealing with law, because they who are incharge of the law, themselves are blind. The basic problems in human laws is that those who have formed the must know that human being are not enligh tened souls. Though of laws, course these laws have been formed through Divine Unconscious Knowled ge. So, whatever punishment you give them is not going to cure them at all. They will become even worse. Or out of fear they may abide by the law. But again this fear is of no use because they have not got it in their freedom, of understanding that they should be law abiding. So what is to be done is to give them the 'punishment!' of Sahaja Yoga. If you can get ali your criminals into Sahaja Yoga, somehow, you will find that they will be very beautiful people one day. We have the example of Valmiki who was a dacoit and he became such a great poet. So the essence of modern times ie. Kali Yuga is that it is under the influence of Krita Yuga. Krita Yuga is the time when the all prevading power of God, the DIvine Power of God is going to work out many things. And the essence of it is that it is going to work out the transformation Damyanti This is the greatness of Kall Yuga.In the Nal of human beings. Akhyan, it is said that Nal caught hold of Kali and was about to kill him. But Kali told him about his Mahatyam. That those people who are seeking the truth in their hills and caves will all be born as householders They will get the in Kali Yuga and they will all get their realisation. knowled ge. Because this is the essence of Kali Yuga where people will find all these things because the light of Krita Yuga is working on them. In the light of Kri ta Yuga, things start getting exposed. Every thing is not is getting exposed and people are understanding, though they are

 14 realised but they are aware that there is something very wrong with us. And at that stage, and in that state people will seek the Truth and they will get it. This is the essence of Kali yuga or modern times. I am born at this time where I have to do this job of telling you that you must get your transforma tion. This is a very different job from all others. At the time of the Devi when She came, she had to kill the Rakshasas. The Rakshasas were were separate. separate and human belngs So She could protect the human beings. But today the Rakshas have entered into the heads of human beings. Its a very difficult job to tell them that the rakshasas have now gone into your head. Then the Pashus who are Pasha ie, under the control of God, So their behaviour was alright. For eg. A lion cannot become a scorpion and a scorpion cannot become a snake. But in human beings in this Kali Yuga it is possible. You can find a lion, Tommorrow he becomes a snake and the third day he becomes a scorplon. The freedom given to human beings at the time of Adam and Eve has prospered into this kind of humanity today. And when it comes to such a stage, then only a person becomes aware of himself, that there is something wrong. What am I going to give my children? What am I doing? Where am I? And when such a question comes to mind, that is the time where Mahalaxmi starts showing Her light to you, that you have to seek the Truth. And when that seeking of Truth comes in as William Blake has said, that Men of God will seek the Truth and they will really become men of God. A special category of seekers will be born at this time and they will make others men of God. So Sahaja Yoga is being built slowly in an evolutionary process through many sages, scientists, and seers and through many incarnations. And its all within ourselves. The whole world Is within ourselves. All these great things are also wi thin us. The human being is not an ignoble being. He is the epitome of all evolution. He is not a person to be degraded.

 15 Only thing is his ignorance, In Ignorance a rope seems a Snake. Unluss there is light you cannot see the rope. So I would not call anybody r'ope. So guilty whatsoever. Whatever a person has done he can get his transformation because his Spirit is still there -- shining! Its just clouded with many things. And if sommebody can by any chance move those clouds the sun that is the Spirit wlll shine forth. Self reallsatlon is the awareness about yourself. Whats wrong with you. Where are you. Like a child. They become like children. They way they tell me things. These are such highly placed people in all walks of like. When they got their realisation, they became like children. And they could see their problems. They became fully aware of themselves and also aware of others. This great thing has happened because this is the essence of modern times when we all have to be aware of ourselves we have to be aware of others on our central nervous system. So and the happening is of the breakthrough of human awareness into a new dimension which has which Jung has written 1.e. collective consciousness, about to be actualisation and becoming and not just talking. They become real brothers and sisters in the sense they become one part and parcel of the whole being. The love just transforms you because you have it built within you and it just transforms you and you become so beautiful. Like, if you show some one a television who has not seen it before, he will say its just box. But when you tell him that you can see fllms etc. he wont belleve you. Because he is ignorant. But when you put it to the mains then he sees it, In the same way I see you all so fantastic so great. In Sahaja Yoga, we do not find corrupt people at all. Sahaja Yogis are ex tremely honest people. They dont tell lies. If they dont have to tell something they will keep quiet. They are very peaceful people. They are so alert a whirlwind the vhole thing. and so dynamic and Gompasslona te. Its 1lke

 16 triggering the changes everywhere. And when you are changing, you are When I gave realisation to people of Eastern Block countries and changing there. It to their countries all things started they went back is you who are triggering this because it is Krita Yuga and it is going to work out. And I am gratful to you for all this very much that you have accep ted, you have taken to this. But though Mother's lave is without expectation Nirvajya, but this Mother expects something. That we have to really transform this world. We have to go deep Into ourselves. Thats all. The deeper you are the better it is. The bigger the vessel the more pouring of this Divine Energy person. You we have to medita te and become deeper will be there. So have to do it for the sake of yourself. For the sake that you are born in this life. That while you are here, there must be a great responsibili ty on you that you are born at this time of such a great happening of the transformation of the whole humani ty. What a great thing it is and in that you are taking part. So what grea tness must be there in your punyas and that you have taken it up so seriously, working it out so seriously. Though you think Mother we are just enjoying. Actually you are enjoying because you have gone so deep into it. Your personali ty of that depth being will, know transformation that human is going to trigger that new that they are in the kingdom of God. Why there has to be depth is because it is your triggering not mine. I am a desireless person. You are the ones who have to desire and you have to trigger it out for the whole world. I am thankful to you again and I just make one humble request that there is no need to have a pled ge as that is also a compulsion. There no discipline in Sahaja yoga. It is understanding yourself, that you are born at a time that such a big transformation work has to take place,

 17 which Is very sub tle but is so dynamic and so impor tant and has to be done. May God bless you all and be more and more meditative and be aware of yourself. This is a tremendous work we have to do. It is the evolution of the highest type we have to bring forth the changa and transfor- mation of people. One Gorbachov is not sufficient. We need many of them and so we are going to work it out. May God bless You. 30/3/90 Delhi. BIRTHDAY PUJA TALK, To dispel darkness it is Today is the fourth day of Navratra. Important that we bring in the ligh tat night. Today is also speclal because you are celebrating my birthday. On this day Shri. Gaurl had oreated Ganesha. Shri Ganesha is the epitome of Purity and Holiness. The first thing that was spread in this world was Purity, by which all born things and all humans be pro tected and may keep away from unholy things. Af ter that only the rest of creation was created. So the most important work for us is to make Purity the highest thing within ourselves. Purity does We should keep not mean that we bathe, wash and keep ourselves cloan. our hearts clean. The greatest malady of the heart is anger. When anger enters a person then all purity ge ts destroyed. Because the other name of Purity is Love which is completely clean and straight forward, that wants nothing Nirvajya. Its satisfaction Love that flows eternally and is in the fact that it keeps flowing and when it cannot flow it becomes disturbed. Purity means that you fill your heart with love and not anger. Anger is our enemy and also the enemIy of the world. ALI the wars of this world, the fallures have been due to this collective anger, There Even a terrible thing ike waT comes excuses for anger. can be many

 18 Trom anger. If there is love in the heart, then anger cannot arise. And il one has to make a show of anger then even that is for love. Whenever any evil person or Raksha is killed, that is also done by the power of was worthy of being destroyed, by which he may not love because he commit more acts of sin. But this job is not for h umans. It is the job of the Devi who had destroyed them during these Navratris. So expand your heart and think whom do we love with this clean, honest love, (NIRVAJYA) t think and straigh tfor ward by which we do not that this is my son, my sister, my house, and my things. You have risen to a very much higher level than the level of human beings. Because you are Sahaja Yogis, so your union is with this sub tle Power of God's love. That power is flowing constantly through you and it is strengh tening. and coloring you with Its power. It is looking af ter you, making you rise, and is inspiring you. It is filling you with joy and sweet love. You have to such a beautiful Power. We have to see how much place we have , but you in our hear ts for it. You have love for your Mother. should have the two other types of love also, then only can the love for your Mother be complete. One type of love should be for yourself, that you are Sahaja Yogis. We have got these Powers in a Sahaj way Now we have to see how to increase it. Many people do lot of work for spreading Sahaja Yoga. It movement. Such people do not look within themselves. is a horizontal So they are not able to get the vertical movement. On the outside they can do a lot, run around, do this work or that, meet people. But they Now there are many people who pay do not increase the Power within. more attention to the Power wi thin but neglect the outward Shakti. So balance does not come to them.When people start developing on the outside ultimately they only then the power within starts diminishing. And then

 19 get drowned in the Ego, that we have done so much for Sahaja Yoga, we have worked so hard. Then a new life starts for them which is not at all Sahaja. They get full of self impor tance and try to show their individ- uali ty. But from within they are empty. Then they get sick, go crazy or some great misfortune befalls them. Then they say 'But Mother, we had surrendered to you completely. Then how did this happen.' The respo- nsibili ty 1ies with you, that you kept on getting lost. Such a person gets. off to one side and he is not able to associate with others. If they associate with others then it is only to bully others and show thelr superiority. They must always be in the front and they must be given all the importance. Then they forget that they must do something for Mother. I have seen people who came up Then they started feeling very superior at once. and self important. Then was no aarti performed there, nor wiping there my photograph. They were full of themselves, and never consulted anyone. Then groups started and quarrels started. The thread by which you are tied is your Mother's thread. You must always remain tied to that thread and remember that we are the children of Shri Mataji. No one is superior or inferior. Nor do we do any thing. This Param Chai tanya Is doing every thing. When this feeling we will do this of that, we did, comes that we are very great, then PIP the Param Chaitanya lets you do what you what. You can go to hell or destroy yourself. It won't stop you, because it respects your freedom. There is another fault with Sahaja Yogis. We are a collective being. A one collective Virat Shakti. We are all one body, We are not by ourselves. In that body If one person or a few persons start making their own group then like the malignancy of cancer, where one cell s tarts growing separately, in the same way one such person can grow and devour the whole of Sahaja Yoga. And all my effor ts will go to was te.

 20 We should learn from which is the lowest and which ga thers all the rivers into itself, then heats itself and becomes vapour and gives the blessing of rain to the whole world. Its humbleness is the si gn of its depth. When we will become extremely humble and loving then only will we become large like the ocean. But if you think only of your self importance and superiority then the problem will be that the Param Chai tanya will cut of, and you will get thrown aside which very painful to me. People who think I have done this or I have done that should immediately step into the background and see whether we medi ta te or not? Are we able to medi ta te? How deep are we? Whom all do we love and With In Sahaja how many do we love. With how many are we enemies? Yoga some people have gone very deep. And there are many who are stll hanging on the ed ge. When they can be thrown out cannot be said. I have said before that 1990 is a year which will open a new dimen- to take a great leap, by which you come out of these sion. You have a Yoga is surroundings and grasp the new thing. The progress of Sahaja to twenty years. To survive the first thing we have about to complete If imbibe wi thin ourselves is Purity, which is filled with Humbleness. you are completely clean and Pure then you can touch anyone and you will become impure, because you will purify every thing. Your nature never that of purifying, Whomsoever you meet, you will purify that becomes person. What is there to be frigh tened of or to condemn anyonen. If your Purity is absolute then that Purity has Power and Brillance and such a person is So powerful that he can suck any impurity. Now some other people think only of their own progress. They thhink what have we got to do with others. We sit within our four walls and we have nothing to do with the world. worship and follow Mother and But you are part and parcel of the whole. They remain cut off from others.

 23 one, then how can such a question arise? If mother has sald, Its alright. We are a part of Mo ther then how can we say no. Then you have not gut that sameness (Tadakari) with me. So the next Yukti is "Mather please come into my head, please come into my heart, please come intu my though ts. Please come into each drop of my life." Whereever you say I will come. But you will have to say so from your heart and without any other motive. the thought comes I am doing this work, I have done so much for Sahaja Yoga, I have done this decoration, I put this alright, I did' then know that you are not a Sahaja Yogi. In Sahaja Yoga, all your Karmas become Akarma, (non doing). Then you will see that-Do I think Ilke this? Why do I think that I am doing? Then it means that my union is not complete. When the union is complete then you become a non-doer. Then you start saying 'It is getting done. Only then you get the Yuk ti of complete sameness with me. The next Yukti you should understand is that I am not dolng. Till you keep identifying with your body (are) doing some thing, because you have the ego wi thin you. When you come into the collectivity then you stop doing any thing. You are the part and parcel and that work ls being done. I am telling you these Yuk tis because you have to take a leap. Always Look towards yourself and see what do assess yourself in this maner. I think. Do I think about others that they are better than me, so I must learn from them? Do I see the good points or the bad points in others? We must understand this Yukti that if you are still half-baked then it is due to your own self. Sahaja Yoga is a very great thing. But if something is wrong wi thin us or we cannot enjoy it fully then the reason Is that there is some defect within us. If you correct this Yuk ti then there is only joy. The Pure Joy - Neerananda and nothing else. Then what more do you want? Your whole countenance will change.

 24 I want that on my Bir thday, Your Birth Day should also be celebrated that you may unders tand these Yuk tis, and may you fill your life with Puri ty and lloliness liko Shri Ganesha. Wi th Purity comes Wisdom. Because Purity is the name of Love, and Wisdom means Love. If you cannot get Wisdom and you cannot love, then it is nIO Luse wasting your time in Sahaja Yoga. Now such a time is coming that everyone has to become firmly settled and you have to change yourself, and must change. We have a lot of faul ts. We have to make ourselves completely Pure. After this change you have the blessings of a life that cannot even be described. Kabir has said "When you are comple tely blissful then what more can you say." You all should now come into that Bliss (masti). And attain that sta te where you Bliss (mas t come intD become blissful in that. MAY GOD BLESS YOU. CALCUTTA 9/4/90 ADI SHAKTI PUJA (Tramslated from Hindi) I am very happy to see the progress of the people of Calcutta. I know that there are deep seekers in this city. But they do not know as yet that the timme has come, where they can get what they have been go to them and search for such people who seeking. You people should are seeking the truth. That is why it is important that we should ex pand HETE ourselves in all directions. But with that we should increase our own We should change our lives: We should also make our lives power also. a person shining like a firm Yogl, so that people will recogni ze that such medi tation and contemplation is very important. is special. And for this, Calcutta is a very busy city and people get drowned in being busy.

 25 They find very little time. This time which we have tied on our hands is meant for our own ascent and for our progress within. II we have to know ourselves from within it is important that we medi ta te for a while between daily, in the evening and morning. A lot of difference comes the ones who medita te and the ones who dont. Specially people who do a lot of work for Sahaja Yoga, go here d; In such unders tand and there, talk to people, give lectures, make others people the divine energy slowly gets depleted. That Is why It is even more important and necessary that such people should medi ta te everyday. In the morning after your bath and before sleeping, you must medl ta te for a while. This is enough. But when you meditate, how wouldd you recognize whether you were in meditation and it was alright. During medi tatlon you should first es tablish thoughtless awareness. At that moment you should keep saying 'not this' 'not this' and keep turning your though ts away taking a breath a manner. By dolng this you will see that by in such you will become though tless. You should keep the photo in front and light a candle. Put your feet in salt water and sit in front of it when though tlessness comes and vibrations start flowing In both hands then wipe your feet and sit on the earth in meditation. After going into meditation try to know its dep th. If thoughts arise then again say 'not this' 'not this' or say 'I forgive'. kshma is a very necessary word. Just by staying "Kshma' this your though ts can stop. When there is no peace how can you have internal progress? Like in an earthguake a tree cannot grow. So similarly man also gets stuck in an earthquake of thoughts and then his progress is impossible. That is why at that time it is important to establish the peace within. After a while you will be surprised, that you do not need to do so much exercise. You will become thoughtless at once.

 26 at once. Whenever you see ay beautiful thing or artistic thing you will at once become thoughtless. Slowly this habit will grow and your inner progress will also grow. You have entered a new threshold but you have to still enter another threshold and have to know your'self. That is why it is important that by medi tation you go deeper. The recognl tion is that when you get up is that when you get up af ter medi ta tion you dont feel Iike getting up. You feel like sitting in medi tation a li ttle longer. You feel very joyful and you cant get up at attentlon Immediately goes to other once. If af ter your medi ta tion your things, like I have to eat or have to sleep, or have to go out then know Because to leave the that you have not been in a you stage of medita tion. state of meditation is a lttle difficult. In this way you will slowly graw within and when you do any work outside then your power does not diminish, but on the contrary it Increases. It hasbeen seenthat those who af ter realisatlon immedlately want to give reallsation to others can get caught up. Actually there is nothing like catches. It is 1ike a barometer that tells you where the smoke is, where is the light. In a way an attitude of non-expectancy: should be there. A detachment should come. Then you will not get catches. It is like a barometer which tells you where the smoke is where is the light. In the same also know every thing within yourself. In a way there should be an attitude where there is a complete hones ty. A detachment should come. Then you will not get catches. You can touch any amount of people give realisation to any amount of people, do any work. You can cure any amount of diseases. You will not be affected. But if you do not get this detached state, then you can get into trouble. souls. You The second: thing is that you people are now realised

 27 have reached a very hi gh state, which is attainable after great difficul ties ta te, which is attainable after great difficul ties You will ind such people who have just come into Sahaja Yoga. You must understand that they have just come and you should not say any thing aggre- to them. You should win ssive with your love with effort, them over and care and unders tanding. And if possible by offering food and drink, so terrifying because saints and by which they may not think you are sages always seem to take a stick in their hands. Do not be like that, They should feel that all are our brothers and sis ters. By thts only will people stay in Sahaja Yoga. But I have seen that many people who come into Sahaja Yoga, start disciplining others too much. Dont do this, dont there etc. In Sahaja Yoga there is no discipline as such, because stand your Spirit is so full of light that in its glow, you can gradually see slowly yourself. And then you begin laughing at yourself. Just as you will progress. This light shines on progressed so similarly others your behaviour and the behaviiour of others also. n this witness state In Sahaja Yoga you get the witnessing sta te. In you only watch every thing. You do not think about it. You should have You should watch uns tained by any thing. To no reaction within yourself. be able to watch without reacting is the most joyful effort. For example, there is a beautiful carpet. If you think about it that it is mine, I hope it does not get burnt, or spoilt; or if it is another's then how much it cost where did it come from, and many such thoughts, then you cannot enjoy the beauty of it. Your mind should be placid and thoughtless 11ke the lake which is placid, with not a wave in it, which reflects the beautiful creation around it. Once a seeker came to my feet and at once his Kundalini arose and the vibrations started flowing. From the next room the Sahaja Yogis came running in, as they immediately felt the vibrations flowing. In the same

 way you will meet other Sahaja Yogis and you will feel that you have met yourself. When Namdev went to meet Gora Kumbhar he said, "I had here to see the formless but the entire formless I have seen in come your form". This kind of feeling only one saint can feel for another. Uptill now man only lives with jealously and envy. But when he becomes a Sahaja Yogt, then he feels that the formless which he knew has taken form in the other person. In this way love for each other becomes very suotle, very deep and very joy giving. We should understand that we are tied by a very subtle and strong thread and there is nothing greater than love for one another. But many people still think of 'my son', "my child', 'my house', etc. This mine should be cut away and made as less as possible. Once this goes, a lot of joy will come wi thin you. This feeling of 'mine' takes you away frum Spirit. Who am I? I am the Spirit. The Spirit stands alone by itself. and those who say that, It is my Spirit are not Sahaja Yogls. The Spirit with you Imine'. Its relationship is with God only. And does not have that, flows through a tree, which gives its relationship is like the sap sap to every part and does not stick to any thing. This mineness is the murder of love. From a drop you will become the ocean, and will break the boundaries of that drop as you will rise and fall with the ocean. When this 'mine ge ts broken, In this way man can live in the present then you become extremely powerful. And the same power becomes effective. It is going to do a very big job In collectivity and the salvation of mankind can also be accomplished by this Power. A new age has star ted. It is the age where we have entered a move- ment where the ques tion of ourselves is not there. The question of all this a strength concern. For the whole world has become our all the problems helght is required by which you can see a magnanimity, a

 29 in a balanced way and give their solutions. The responsibility of all Sahaja Yogis is tremendous. It is not only that you take advantage of Sahaja Yoga, and grow in it, but you have to take it to the house of everyone and you have to glve this joy to each one. And doing this job if you show any laxity or weakness then you will be held responsible And it will be a very wrong act. So that is why people who are settled in Sahaja Yoga should stand up strong like a tree. Calcutta is the place where the secret of success of entire India lies. That is why it is necessary that you people should stand up and come forward and progress. And also make others progress and make your personali ty great. Wherever you think that this is my son, my house, etc., then drive away this my ' thought. Only then will you become great. And we need such great people in this new movement, and the preparedness must be com plete for this. This year is a very important year. And I want that many people should come to Sahaja Yoga. So bring them in with love, with respect and understanding. Sometimes by a little pressure and sometimes by saying some things in a round about way, as everyone is stuck in something or the other. In Russia they have no Gurus or cul ts. They were like a clean slate, so to say. So it was very easy to give them realisation. Here, they are nei ther here nor there. I belong to this Guru'. Because they are not their own, so speak to them with great understanding. darshan' (audience) of Then the other disease here is of wanting the Guru. The duty of the guru is to give knowled ge and not to give darshan. Till he does not give He should enligh ten and give realisa tion to people. knowled ge how is he a Guru? Guru means one who gives knowled ge. And knowled ge which you know on your central nervous system and where you

 30 can feel the all prevading power of God on your central nervoUS system. If he has not given this, then to be stuck on such things is, in a way, to destroy yourself. You all were very great seekers and so you gained it, In the same way you should also give other people this blessing and make them happy. Whatever is of low quality is our own. It is there in the individual and also in the collective it is lacking. We should watch this lacking. The that me Hindus, Muslims, Christlans and people of various religions tell they were searching in these Dharmas, but they could not benefit. The reason is that these are man made Dharmas. The ones who made the Dharmas are no more. The Dharma that you people have to make is the real Dharma. There should be no artificiality In it. If man has made a religion it is bound to go wrong, because so far he has not got connected to God. Man and put it on the wrong path. But now you has taken the real rellglon people have to make the World Religion. There should be no human faul ts in it. because it is Divine and you all have attained sell-realisation. So with honesty you should make it pure which is an Inner Religion. When every person will see that what he has got is the truth, then whichever religion he belonged to before, he will get the essence of it in Sahaja Yoga. He will realise that what is in our religion has actually awakened within us. If you follow any man made rellgion then you can Gom mit any sin in the name of that religion. But after coming to Sahaja Yoga you yourself become Dharmic and think of the benevolence of all. new people, talk to them very carefully or they may feel that But with they are being aggressed. So you should make them understand very carefully that we have to awaken the Dharma within us. Like Christ said Thou shalt not have adul terous eyes'. But does any Christian have non-adulterous eyes? In the same way great saints spoke great things. But the followers

 31 did just the opposite. So you should make them understand gradually as they are slowly coming from darkness to li ght. By giving them the experi- you should take them out of this wrong understanding, andmake ence, them settled in this Dharma. That flow and retention of Dharma should be there in them. From wherever anyone comes, accept him, because there are many seekers of truth amnong them. And God can be found by those only, who tread the path of truth. What is the job of a lamp? Its job is to give the light. Till the lamp keeps burning, till then all works can be done. The light that you have got, you should give to others, and wi th full confidence. There is nothing to fear. Little children are full of confidence. They say what they think is right. They are not bothered about anyone. But when we grow up, our brains get filled with many other things and we get conditioned. and it becomes difficult gatting out of it. So we must unders tand we must deal s the with others with great unders tanding because this is Power of Love which you have to attain. This is the first time the Puja of the Adi Shak ti is being done. All the Shaktis arise from the Adi Shakti, And also the Shak tis of Maha Kali, Maha Laxmi, Maha Saraswati. All these Shak tis get absorbed back in Her. Only the Adi Shakti can do this work, because She has supremacy over all the chakras. She is the one who controls the various permutations and combinations of the chakras She knows the subtlest of the sub tle. All the incarnations who came on this earth were a milestone on the ladder of our evolution. But they all had one type of work to do. Like the Goddess had to kill the Rakshas and save the devotees. That is why Shri Krishna arranged this play. This as all a play. There is no need to be so serious about It. Shri Krishna won everyone with his sweetness. He explained all our faul ts in a sweet and roundabout way. It was a very beautiful incarna- tion of His.

 32 Af ter Him came Mahavir and Buddha, who took an incarnation of Seriousness. In this seriouness they spoke of oneness of the Spirit and the knowled ge of the Whole. Then seriousness developed and the people became serious-minded, and made their daily lives very difficult. Infact TE nei ther Buddha nor Mahavira had said so. self-realisation till then he cannot go Till mankind does not get straight for very long. After Lord Jesus Christ, the ordinary people started following the religion started by Paul and then every thing started going wrong. In this way in every reli gion things went wrong, because religion BuoJM became difficult and inaccessible. In modern times people spoke very Wrong things about Kundalini. Now the question arose how mankind should be told that there is God, there is Truth and it is in the form of the Spirit. So it was necessary for the Adi Shak ti, to incarna te, because only She could do this work. She knows each chakra. She had to come amongst mankind and take the birth of a human being, by which She could understand what are the problems and faul ts in human beings. How can the Kundalini be awakened despi te these faul ts. the And how to awaken the Kundalini through Brahmarandra, by which humans can see with a little light. And by wa tching thus. they would themselves understand by looking at themselves, and then the Shak ti would come into them by which they got cured. This new job was such that all the dei ties, the saints, the incanations and all great people had to come. They had to come into the bodily form of the Adi Shak ti who had to incarna te. And that is why this incarnation has come, so that the whole world can rise, can evolve. The Divine which made this universe, this world, would never want that His creation be is why this work is so destroyed at the hands of humans. And that tremendous.

 33 Now it canrniot be that you climb on the cross, or talk about it. In this, man will have to grow and make others grow. It is hard work. But this only a Mother can do, and only Her Shak ti can do, it And If She has no love, understanding and patlence, then She cannot do it. That is why this is such an Important incarnation. As you know She Is of the nature of Mahamaya. And there is a reason for this. If She was not Mahamaya then you cannot know Her. In reali ty, till there is the form of Mahamaya, only then you can come near me. Otherwise you cannot approach me. You will think She is the Shakti, how can I go near Her, how can I fouch Her feet? How can I talk to Her? By taking the form of Mahamaya all this has become possible. And because of this mildness of Her form we I remain in this form of Mahamaya are one today. It was necessary that and you all should attain that state and not get lost in it.Like a drop getting lost in the ocean. You all have to remain in that enlightened state and you have to give to others. I will not let you get lost in it. You have to be fully awakened in this joy. No one can get lost. Without sharing this joy I will not let you rest in peace. When something like this happens. Only then you will realise your responsibility. Your Job is in a way greater than the saints and sages. The saints and sages did not give realisation to anyone. They gave lectures, tried to make people understand. Your job is that you have to awaken the Kundalini resurrect the whole world. in people and make them self-realised and This is an extremely important and Divine job. And for this the Adi Shakti to come. This work started by Her advent and is happening in a very beautiful way. I hope you people will understand this. Lots of proof is coming by miraculous photographs. These should not be shown to non-Sahaja Yogis, because they will not believe it. These photographs are being made by the Param Chai tanya, and that also through

 34 an ordinary camera which has no Shakti in it. But if there is so m uch light coming out of my head then why is At you peuple cnuot So 1t? I Why is it that only the camera records it? Because I am Mahamaya fur you. but not for the camera perhaps. The atomic cells In the camera film know me. God has glven you freedom. But these Inanima te objects are not free. They move only throch His wi11. In this freedom there should be no disturbance or flaws, that is why She is the form of Mahamaya, I am like you. My en tire behaviour is like yours. May this Puja of Adi Shak ti be attained by you. May God Bless you. रपर

 35 Shri Mataji's Tour of Australia and New Zealand Coirns Australia Brisbane .Perth Helorurna Cenker Singapore Air-port On 28 th February, Shri Mataji stopped on Her way to Australla, at Singapore airport. She spoke to us. In Her talk She said that Sahaja Yoga is spreading fast because people are become more aware. Nothing the large number of Chinese in our group. Mother said that the Chinese ****** wlll talk to Sahaja Yoga easily. She said that the Chinese were wise people wi th an anclent tradi tion and that traditional people would take to Sahaja Yoga very easily. She cited as an example the Italians who are doing very well in Sahaja Yoga. Mother said that China had great philosophers like Lao Tse who taught clearcut ideas and what he preached is truly practised in the same manner as Sahaja Yoga. But one has reallsed to be to practise It. Mother spoke of a man who was the head of the Zen organisation

 36 who was very sick when he come to see Her. Mother asked him how he was a practitioner of Zen when he was not a realised soul, He explained that up to the twelv th century there were 16 realised souls called Kashyappas but there were no more af ter that. Since then, Zen has been practised without understanding and has been turned more soclal activity. into a Mother noted that Zen has cer tain practices that try to enable its followers to establish Nirvichara, but without vibrations the aspirants cannot get realisation. There is no more life in Zen and like every religion it has deviated. She also told us that in Islam there was a complete surah written about Her. In this surah it was stated that the Sent One! will give realls- ation, will make you you ' Pirs' and give callective consciousness. But you will be non-believers. Com menting on the si tua tion in China, Mother said that the Chinese follow Confucious who taught that humani ty was government claimed to impor tant, that collectivity was important. However, without realisation, how could one could unders tand collectivity, she asked Otherwise how they kill their own people. Mother said that if they were realised souls they would not have killed the student demons trators. Mother expressed regret that China has got a very bad name for this incident. Talking about the death of Rajneesh and how the money he has collected has vanished, Mother said that was an example of how falsehood would disappear just like that. TALK GIVEN AT PERTH 2/3/90 In Sahaja Yoga there are no hard and fast rules because you are awakened people and saints and you know what is good for you. But you keep that quality of saintliness wi thin you. Jud ge yourself, how must

 37 are your vibrations. Collectivity should grow. First of all we are all saints, so we cannot talk ill of each other at all. If we criticize somebody than we must know that there is something wrong with us. We should see the beauty and glory of another person, and praise the joy that you have. If you want to gather the thorns, you will get thorns and not flowers. If you find something wrong with the leader than you tell me dđirectly. Dont discuss amongst yourselves, and create a group against him or her. Because through him or her only I can talk to you or come to you. Dont try to harm the basic uni ty by all the time fighting. There ls no need to write very long letters. Just a few things of how you are, how you are in Sahaja Yoga. The subtler you become the less you talk. The less you write the deeper you say, There is a tendency among people to go to the person who is with me. They will tell him or her 'Go and tell Mother this or that'. They are not the channel. Your leader is the channel. Sa dont try to find out any other channel. Normally it is better to marry a person who is not from the same place or same collectivity. Because the relationship should be there of complete celibacy and puri ty. Also the eyes lose their Innocence and the Mooladhara might get caught up. Then you start seeking out girls and all the time the attention is on whom should I marry, and whom to choose. Mostly such marriages have turned out to be very funny. The important thing is that you try to keep yourself pure and your vibrations alright. Also if you want to keep a relationship outside Sahaja Yoga, then you must be very careful as one doesnt know what sort of Mooladhara they have or what kind of problem they have. And you might Jump Into something very serious.

 38 In Sahaja Yoga marria ge has to be respected and has to be monogamous. Other run af ter wise people get AIDS, or other diseases. It is not natural to so many different people. A husband and wife in privacy, want each other 50 to belang to one another only. If not, then they feel jealous and not happy So whats the use of doing such a thing. Marriage must make every one If it doesnt, then it is a curse on happy. Society and these dont stick. Because, children are better, and the society is better. Marriage is the best way to give happiness to eauh other, by having sweet children, a good family, and having a sensible life, giving joy to all the collectivity. So many souls are anxious to get born to Sahaja Yogis and they want good sensible pareats. There are no hard and fast rules and if you want to experiment you can, but when you suffer then Sahaja Yoga cannot help you. The idea of having a separate house affects collectivity. Indians will find out many excuses to have a house of their own. This is the nfce Ashram for them in Delhi, spending Worst part of Indians. We built a so much onny, and there's not even a rat living there. When you all live together my attention is there. We have some very good ashrams and they have done wanders, where the leader is kind, compassiona te, loving and also corrective. If you love somebody, then the person doesnt This love is the correcting point. We are here mind being corrected. for a fremendous task. No one has done such a work. The salnts were born one here and one there and they were killed, polsened, tortured. But you are not alone. You are so many all over the world. When you come to Ganapatipule, you should not form an Australian group. Once they said Australia is great, is good and it fell down. God created one world and then the human belngs talled it Australia, India, England. You should mingle with other people. You should write to them and have lots of fun. We should for get that we belong to any particular

 39 country. We belong to the country of God's kingdom. We have to be beautiful people. We have no business to be arrogant with anyone. We have to be ex tremely loving. The power of love is the stron gest thing. Have faith in yourself that you are loving and compassiona te. Thats why you are dynamic because love is dynamic. Why ruin yourself for any thing else but to ascend, In ascending you can never be in trouble. We have to help so many people who are suffering from alchoholism, drugs, mental problems, physical problems. Orie person can save so many people. When new people come in, don't immediately say you are a bhoot or this or that. They dont unders tand your language. Your langua ge is diferent, of the chakras. Talk to them sof tly and gradually tell them what is Sahaja Yoga. They thínk its a nee philosophy. Its not new. Its an ancient one. Dont be aggressive, AggressivenIeSS is not the sign of a salnt. You have to be very kind, gentle, unders tanding and sweet. They are not yet realised souls. They are not yet es tablished as Sahaja Yogls. have that quali ty and depth, then every thing works out When we the best. MELBOURNE Shri Mataji arrived on the evening of Sunday, 4th March. For many Yogis it had been three years since they had last seen Shri Mataji. And the ones who had not been on the tours it was five years since they last saw Her. in private conversation During Her visit, Shri Ma taji spent imuch time with local Sahaja Yogis sorting out the problems of the last few years. That night She spoke at great length about collectivity and the absolute necessi ty for Sahaja Yogis to live collectively. Much of what She said was related to the si tuation in Aus tralia over the previous years.

 40 Although the dictatorial leadership was remoyed in Australia last year, many of the Sahaja Yogis had become disillusioned af ter many yers of domination. In Sydney some of the ashrams were closed; in Melbourne all the ashrams were closed and people went to live by themselves. People did not trust leaders to run the ashrams and as they put it, to run tidir lives. Shri Mataji stressed that it was wrong to close the ashrams, that Sahaja Yogis should live together. She said that if Sahaja Yogis candot ive together, how can the whole world live together. When we lHve together. we protect each other. The negativity has less of an effect when wg are together, and the ashram is like a palace. Also, the children learn to respect adul ts which is very important. She said that outside the ashram is like a dungeon. When people live in a jail, it should not be bad -- they are fed, looked after, they have a clean room, everything is taken care of. But it is a punishment t because they are kept alone. Human beings are socíal, collective they Ii ke being together. Sahaja Yogis should be social, living and sharing together. Shri Mataji said that She knows every thing that we do. She spoke of some Individual Aus tralians who had enjoyed nuch success s becaus5e of Sahaja Yega. She sald that if you have got some talent, then Sahaja Yoga helps you a lot In that talent and you get success. But where are they now? She said that we should not get lost in that success. What Is that success? What is that money going to get us? Life af ter lile we have had success, but only in this one life we have got realisation, The unly reason we have got success is tahelp Sahaja Yoga. We should use it for Sahaja Yaga. She then spoke about our bashfulness in contacting Her. She said there were so many problems with the leaders here and no one wrote

 41 one letter to Her. She is here for us. She asked us all to tell what is happening wi th the collective, wi th Sahaja Yoga. All She gets are letters about our jobs, our familles, our wives etc. She said that She has asked us not to speak against the leaders, but if something is wrong. demonic, then we should speak. She said that Australia was far from the rest of the world, and covered big distances, This was all the more reason to live together. She spoke about the Russians. She said that She had broken the Eas tern Block, During a Yoga conference in Russia She gave realsation to ten dele- ga tes from each of the countries and lo ok at Eastern effect. The the Block is now broken. She spoke of the greatness of the Russians and their They humility., no matter what their posi tion was. all were so humble. She said that twenty Germans had gone to Russia to give realisation. She sald It has really touched Her heart, that rather than fl ghting, they were giving them enligh tenment. She said that the great quality of communism is that It has taught people how to share and to live together. Collectivity 1s the greatest asset of communism, and that is why they will be the best country for spirituali ty. The Public program mes were held two consecutive nigh ts to over the accompaniment of the Nagpur musicianis. Shri Ma taji spoke for a short time and answered ques tions from the crowd before giving realisation to the people. She worked until qui te late, on the new people. We also heard that She was up until early the next morning on most occasions getting rid of the negativity She had absorbed. In the evening She spoke to the Sahaja Yogis. She said that to be a Sahaja Yogi is very easy. We dont have to listen to anyone lecturing us. All we have to do is to love one another, 1lsten to Her tapes and meditate-thats all we need.

 42 Cairns. This was Shri Mataji's first visit to Cairns, a city in the far north of Autstalia, above the Tropic of Capricorn. Its a very beautiful, much visi ted by tourists. Some Sahaj Yogis recently moved there to start Sahaja Yoga and prepare the ground. During Her stay She visited the great Barrier two thousand mile coral reef 40 miles off the Queensland coast, Reef one of Her great natural creations of the world. Over the last ten years an alarning problem has been developing, which has had the whole country concerned. There is a particular creature called the Crown of Thorn starfish, which consumes small coral animals, which help thus killing the reef. Normally there are other preda tors keep the starfish under control, However, în the last few years the starfish has been In plague proportions, destroying vast areas of the reef. Due to the delicate nature of the eco-system, there is no chemical solution the authori ties can use to control the starfish, and it would be difficult to physically remove them. Shri Mataji met the Mayor of Cairns, who informed Her of this si tua- tion. Shri Mataji told him "Once your powers are awakened you can do was bit cynical. While Shri Ma taji was in something about it", but he time and said "Lets see what a Cairns, She waded into the water for a can be worked out". A few days later, we were on the plane to New Zealand, when the news came informing the passengers that something incredible was happening in Queens land on the Great Barrier Reef. Without warning, thousands of Crown of Thorn starfish had been found dead, Floating to the surface of the reef. When She heard this, Shri Mataji sald to tell the Mayor to have more fai th in his powers. BRISBANE Brisbane at 5.00 On Saturday, March IO, Shri Mataji arrived in



----------------------

1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5,6,7.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Vol II. Issue 5,6, 7
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
1990
A new
age is starting, where the ques ti on of ourselves is not there.
The question of the whole world nas become our concern. For this a strength,
a magnanimity and a height is required. The responsibility lies with you.
You have to take Sahaja Yoga to the home of each one. You have to give
that joy to all. You have to distribute the light which you have got. with
full confidence, to everyone.
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5,6,7.pdf-page-1.txt 
 NORTH INDIA TOUR 1990
Nou th
tour of Shri Mataji commenced wi th a rousing welcome at
Jaipur. Two successful programmes followed at the famous Govind Ji Mandir,
where such a meeting was allowed for the first time by the Maharani of
Jaipur. The greatest celebration in Jaipur is the festival of Gangauri, which
Shri Mataji explained ls the worship of Shri Ganesh and Shri Gauri Mata.
Traditionally the idol of the Del ty is worshipped by the Jaipur Maharani
and then taken out in a colorful procession of ceremoniously attired elephants
and horses throughout the city. Hundred thousand people
throng to recelve
the blessin gs of the Deity during the procession.
the commencement of the procession the Jaipur Royal family
Worshi pped Shri Mataji in a beautiful tradi tional ceremony,
, Then Shri Mataji
the Idol of the Delty which was to be taken in the processlon,
vibrated
thus blessing the people of Jaipur with Param Chai tanya.
HARYANA
Thereafter two programmes
were held at Karnal and Yam una Nagar, in
Haryana, for the first time. Shri Mataji explained that Karnal
was named
af ter Karna of Mahabharata fame
who had camped here, near the battle fHeld
of Kurukshetra. The temple Hall of the programme overflowed as there were
so many people within as well as outside. After the realisation session a
deaf and dumb boy came on stage to seek Shri Mataji's blessings. Shri Mataji
cleared his Vishuddhi chakra and Lol the boy found his voice and hearing.
This miracle at Karnal has become a byend spreading Sahaja Yoga like wild
fire in the region.
DELHI
Ramlila grounds of Delhi has been a
scene of many his toric events.
exqui si tely construocted dlas has been the platform for India's grea test
An
could
char tered the nation's destiny. These his toric grounds
sta tesman who
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5,6,7.pdf-page-2.txt 
 never have been mnore blessed as they resounded with the vibra tlons
thousands got realisa tion.
Adi Shak ti and such multi tudes of several
thrice blessed. First with the Birthday Puja celebration
Delhi
of Shri Mataji, then with the 70 th birthday celebration of Shri C.P.Srivas tava
their wedding Anniversary celebration on 7th April. The Sahaja Yogis
and
asked permission to address Srivas tava Sahib as Papaji, to which he most
In a very touching speech he added that "while the
graciously consented. In
love of the Mother is no doubt great, I want to assure you that the love
of the father is no less." The delightlul music of Debu Chaudharl enhanced
the evening.
CALCUTTA
The Devi is traditionaly worshipped with a silk saree woven in Bengal.
that for the first time the
The bhakti of Her children so pleased the Devi
puja of the Adi Shak ti aspect was performed in Calcutta. By Her Divine Grace
s0 deep in meditation and emerged transformed. Two public
everyone went
Park wi tnessed the deepening of the same experience.
programmes at Tivoli
The highlight was an exclusive launch tour with all the Sahaja Yogis on the
river Hubli (the ganges is so named in Bengal ). The trip was li terally
Ganga as all the Sahaja Yogls were cleansed by
the purification dip in the
all the way while the new
Shri Mataji. The Sahaja Yogis sang and danced
Sahaja Yogis were being introduced individually.
BOMBAY
prograinmes pf
Bombay has perhaps: been blessed with the maximur
Shri Mataji. But the quality and the quanti ty of seekers this time far surpassed
than ever before, heralding the New Era of Sahaja Yoga. After their realisation
all the seekers remained seated In deep meditation. No one stirred till Shri
Mataji departed. It was Indeed a rare treat to share collectivly such a deep
experience with such a large body of new seekers. The next day Shrt Matajl
depar ted for Muscat to open New Horizons for the Enirates.
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5,6,7.pdf-page-3.txt 
 BIRTHDAY PUJA TALK * 24-3-90.- Bombay
(Transla ted from Hindi)
Twenty years have passed doing Sahaja Yoga. I feel the kind of work
that should have been done has not been possible. The reason is that we
people do not have the awareness of how great and Divine this work is.
Look at Sahaja Yoga from all angles. Even in society a difference has come.
Af ter independence people who had got stuck, were saved. And in other nations
whore poople were stuck and who would have been to tally destroyed were
saved by Sahaja Yoga. Nothing like this has ever happened belore. Lots
of incarna tions were born but
none of them ever got such a power by which
such a power could be established within.
Some think of themselves as Hindus,
Christians. And
everyone thinks he is right. But there is not one Dharma from any of these,
by which you become Dharmic from within. Anyone can commit any sins in
the name of any religion. There is no light of Dharma. In Sahaja Yoga there
is the light of the Atma. The enlightment of the Atma is a very great thing,
which spreads light in our lives. The incarnations have also said that know
yoursell. You cannot achieve it without knowing yourself. And now the ime
come about which they spoke. But even now people are being blind.
For we are not able to understand
able to understand what a tremendous power we have get.
ROW
How much we should increase It and what is our responsibili ty. Even now
we get stuck on little little things. Yes, we have become Dharmic but there
are many little things which get us into trouble. Sahaja Yoga is a very ancient
subtle. Our sight has also become subtle. We are
yoga. It is so deep and
not able to understand what has happened to us.
US.
And that is why even after so many years, people have not been able
W.
to grow in Sahaja Yoga so much as they should have. Nei ther outside nor
a very subtle form. The quality
within. Quarrels amongst ourselves have taken
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5,6,7.pdf-page-4.txt 
 of a realised
person is not there. While in Australia I was shocked to see
that how much work I done there, where thousands of people had got their
realisation. But now from each centre at least 50 percent have been thrown
out. Upon seeing me everyone started crying, saying "Mother where had you
gone away", WhereverI saw negativity had become very sub tle. TIll we do
not love each other and have a clean relationship with each other we will
not be able to enjoy the joy of Sahaja Yoga. Our self-relationships are so
beautiful, so delica te and so wonderful, that if we do not understand them,
it could be that they may break;
because their thread is very delica tely
woven. A ter working hard there it was seen that people were together again,
and full of Joy again. All of them came
went deep. So it is
to gether and
a very great thing that we are drowning in the ocean of bliss, and we have
attained this bliss. Now we must share it. And we have to make it e ternal
for ever.
This joy and bliss can only become e ternal
when we leave our
narrowness and littleness. Like a drop of water when it reaches the ocean,
then it loses its littleness and all its boundaries are broken. It rises and
falls with the ocean and all its works are done as the works of the ocean.
It means that we have surrendered every thing to the Param Chaltanya, the
All pervading Power which we know,
who watches us all the time, looks
af ter us and all that we do. That Param Chai tanya is so efficient that its
amazing. Whatever it does, it does for your benevolence and glory and all
the time it is working. In its doing we have to do nothing. We have to only
be fully Immersed in it, be one wi th it. We have to crea te a new world
and in that world we will have ton come in thousands.
Especially in Bombay I have worked very hard for many years. Every
body must think every morning that what have I have done forSahaja Yoga
and what am I going to do today for Sahaja Yoga. In the evening one must
think what have I done for Sahaja Yoga today, and what am I doing to do
When the thought process is always on Sahaja Yoga then
for it in future.
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5,6,7.pdf-page-5.txt 
 5
there is peace in it. Though we are not doing any thing. All this is belng
done by Param Chaltanya.
I dont know whetherthe Influence of this man made Dharma is so much.
or ei ther we have too much ego. We should think whe ther we are ready for
Sahaj
Yoga or not. We are the soldiers of Sahaja Yoga, God Almi ghty has
chosen us for this great work only, The Param Chai tanya needs such deep
Block, where Just by getting
people which were in Russia of
the Eastern.
realisation the Berlin Wall was broken. Even If we can get four-five deep
daap BA
people like that, .
we can change this. country
Over here it is not like that. That depth is not there. We are still
s tuck on petty things. Somewhere or the other there d a block. We are
always thinking we have to do this or that. Its alright, but its not the
most important thing. You have come into this world so that you can do the
work of Sahaja Yoga and that you are firmly grounded in Sahaja Yoga. That
is why our country is not benefitting. Such great Sahaja Yogis are sitting
here. But still It is not happening. What is the reason? In some countries
just 3-4 people have changed their countries.
In the making of Australla, In the beginning some prisoners were sent
there and with them went the jailers. And now after so many centuries, the
leaders have become jailers, and all the rest are prisoners, living in prisons.
& will get alright. But In
can unders tand that things went wrong
There I
India I cannot unders tand such petty behaviour. That why is he leader and
who is he and small petty problems. These will fall down right here. Within
you is the Self-born (Swambhu) Power of God. So much power you have within
you. They will talk of Sahaja Yoga here and there, gossip. Some people
think that we are great Sahaja Yogis. There are a lot of signs of a Sahaja
Yogi. His first sign is that he mixes easily with people. He knows that
those I know. Because I
I am the 1light and people who are like me, only
am so unique I am so humble. I feel compassion for the rest of the people
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5,6,7.pdf-page-6.txt 
 that are they going to hell? What is going to happen to them? My relationship
With them is only of this world.And if they do not get the sense then I cannot
do any thing. So let them be. In this way a person who has unders tanding
is called a Sahaja Yogi.
у рагепts
stuck on Mine'
One who is not stuck on 'Mine'. My wife, my child, my parents, iny
house etc. This mine... mine... My body, my e go, my mlnd, my face. If
that Spirit(Atma). Till
it is mine then who am I? Who Is that 'I'? I' am
you do not reach that 'I', this 'mine' Inine' will continue. So such a person
then Is not a Sahaja Yogl. They have come into Sahaja Yoga but are still
not there.
Secondly, his belief is on the Dharma within. Not the outside. One should
not believe in any outslde Dharma. He belleves in the Dharma which is the
Real, the Truth. He is sitting completely in that Dharma wi thin. He is humble
in every way.He does not hurt or trouble anyone. He does not transgress anyone.
He speaks the Truth. And where he has to not speak he is discreet. He
things
does not keep talking all the time. He does not take other people 's
things. He lives in a carefree
nor does he cast envious glances at other's
manner. It is equal to him whe ther he gets: something or not. I should not
say these things on my birthday, but twenty years have passed and I though t
I should tell you how a real jewel is made.
nothing outside its laws. I
he lives wi thin limits, and does
Then,
have seen husbands and wives quarreling with each other, that why the other
is not a Sahaja Yogi. If they are not, then they are not. Why fight? Leave
it. He does not quarrel. His fight is actually his Power. It is his Love.
If you stop fighting, fifty percent things get done. Sahaja Yogis do not quarrel
or get angry with others. They are always s tanding in their peace. Like
a Chinese King had two cocks., whom he wanted to train for cock-fighting.
So he took them to a sage for training. After one month when he took them
to the fightig arena, he left them among all the other cocks. All the cocks
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5,6,7.pdf-page-7.txt 
 star ted killing each other. But these two stood peacefully and majestically.
Upon seeing their peaceful nature all the other cocks cooled down and ran
Wherever there is peace
away. So such
person is ex tremely peaceful.
a
manifest. And his
or distur- bance, his peaceful nature at once becomes
light starts spreading at once and everything becomes peaceful. To always
, Is not the slgn of a Sahaja Yogl. One stould remain
Ilght, arguO ovorywhere,
peaceful. Lots of people who have to catch a train or plane become agi tated.
You are settled down in the Param
t is doing everything, s0
Chaitanya. It
FLLL happen
you are at peace. Just keep witnessing. What is to happen, will happen.
To hate each other is a great sin in Sahaja Yoga. If you hate someone
then give him love. Buy him presents. Yes, you can desire the des truotion
of evil forces, as its alright to destroy evil people. But there is no love
amongst Sahaja Yogis. I cant Imagine! There should be tremendous love
for each other. Who else is like you. You are the real brothers and sis ters.
When people come from foreign countries, you do not make friends with
them. You are lost in your families,
friends and chtldren.
No ane
their name. Everyone sits separataly. The Sahaja Yogis
to them or asks
of the entire world are also your brothers and sis ters, and to meet them,
to love them and respect them is in itself a unique thing. You should wri te
their
letters to them. Keep
children's
their photographs, know
names.
Know how they are and what they are doing. Love for each other is a
Na one can bend it. Sahaja is nothing but the Power
great uni ting Power.
of Love. The Power of Love Is so strong that it neutralises all other powers.
We are working in forty contries and has it ever happened before that
our brothers and sisters of forty countries care for each other and respect
each other?
A Sahaja Yogi is full of character. Women, men, lust and greed do
He becomes completely desireless. All these man
not tauch him.
wohan
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5,6,7.pdf-page-8.txt 
 B.
relationships which were rubbish, he comes out of that rubbish and becomes
the embodiment of Pure Spirit. And such a Soul has got tremendous Powers.
One should descend into one's Purity. That does not mean agi ta tion. You
do not become restless and unpeaceful with Purity. The thing that Purifies
every thing, how can that be agita ted. But sometimes wi th Purity people
become tyrants. That we are great. We are very disciplined. We are Sahaja
Yogis. And the rest is useless. Never think like this. A Sahaja Yogi must
thínk that everyone is my own. What is pure will absorb every thing in
it. Loose talk breeds negativity. It is absurd behaviour. For Sahaja Yogis
talk like this is
to
disrespectful. And talking behind someone's back,
getting upset for just two paisa. When Shri Laxmi Herself is at yourservice,
then why be so worried about money.
On my birthday today I request you all to grow wi th me.
in age, It means that you should become mature. You have become one-
pointed. So that is alright. This one-
pointedness means that you have
the chakras and the enlightment of each one chakra. To raise the kundalini
whereby it passes through the chakras and goes into the Sahasrara, just
think what a great thing it is. No saint, sage, Rishi, Yogi, or any incarna-
tHon has done what you people are doing. So much power has come wi thin
you. But we should have the endurance to bear this Power. The greater
will come within
the voltage we can bear, the greater the voltage that
increase this vol tage tremendously. And this year has
us. We can
come with a special significance. Thats why I have said all this to you
that how you can blossom fully your life from within and outside.
With meditation and contemplation the within gets cleaned. In that
there is no madness that I have to bathe in the mornlng, I should have
got up at 4 a.m. but I woke up at 4.30 a.m. There are no outside coverings.
You
Only you must medi ta te. You should be in medi ta tion all the time.
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5,6,7.pdf-page-9.txt 
 6.
should watch how long you can stay in a medi ta tive state. Even if something
remain in this state. What is
upsets or agi tates,
even then one should
the meaning of going into medita tion? It means you have got connected
to
the Param Chai tanya, the all Prevading power. The minute you are
with the Param Chal tanya.
in medita tion you have established oneness
How to stay In meditation? II a
thought comes. Say 'No' and medi ta te.
Now you are in that sta te and it's light is mant fest in you. So now we
e have
have to
Ind people and dis tribute it. We should talk to them. We
them this light. Others will watch you closely to see whether
to give
or you are Just pretending. Thoy wLIl watch
11 watch
you are really enllgh tened
or
your character, your nature. What is so special in you, what you have
gained. And from amongst you, very great people can rise and uplift this
Country and the whole world.
In Sahaja Yoga, toworry about any thing is not Sahaj. Because It is
the Param Chaitanya that does
the worrying. We should have only one
worry. That I should be in medi tation. I should be in joy and there should
be no lacking In this joy. And
I may always be carefree.
Seeing your devotion, service, and love I am pleased. But you should
also. Think about yourself also. Decorate
do your service to the self
that you are a jewel. Search
yourself too
and look after yoursell also,
for it fully.
We are from different countries following Vishva Nirmala
Dharma. Though we
from various countries in reali ty we live in
come
only one world and that is the kingdom of God. And we are living in
joy and happiness, where we are giving joy to everyone. What a great
thing it is. You are like the flowers in a garden looking at which great
to every one. You are
seeing which brings Joy
poets get inspiration and
the flowers from whom I have such hope. I want that you people should
do something unique and special, in each village, in the towns, wherever
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5,6,7.pdf-page-10.txt 
 can. One day will Dome when
many Sahaj Yogis will be seen every
you
where.
I request
that you take a decision on this day, my birthday. With
that O Mother
humbleness
this year we will enli ghten hundred people.
one should try. It can happen. Call people for meals,
At least every
Talk to people that they should take to Sahaj Yoga. Tell them
for tea.
about the miracles of Sahaja Yoga. Now the greatest miracle is that we
can cure AIDS. We can cure cancer. Even now many dont know what chakras
are associated with which Fingers. We can cure emotional and physical
problems but many of you people still dont knoW where the chakras are
s. Every man and every
catching. You should have full knowledge of this
woman should know. From the men take the knowled ge of it and from the
grasping of
women take the vibrations and the understanding of it. The
it is much more in women. The knowled ge from the Intellect is much more
in men and the women have the knowled ge of the Heart. Both these should
be known equally.
we have established should groW much more.
And this world that
One should do as much Possible. Especially this year one has to work
realised through you. The
hard. Everyday, every moment thousands will get
Even if
way you are blissful, may the whole world become like that.
we all can
can take off, and
a few become like that, this great work
experience i ts joy.
May God Bless You.
CCO22
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5,6,7.pdf-page-11.txt 
 11
SHRI MATAJI. BIRTHDAY TALK, EVENING ADDRESS.
AT BHAIDAS HALL, BOMBAY
24-3-1990
I bow to all the seekers of truth.
I feel the love and adoration you have for me. If I look at myself
I wonder what have I
done for them. Wha tever
I am, I am, What's so
special about it. I haven't achieved any thing in this life time. But I
to you that you have achleved so much
must say, I'm really thankful
in Sahaj Yoga. It Is very important and imminent that it I should have happened.
As we talk of countries and politics and sconomics and every thing it
works on the essence. And all these sys tems have got basically in their
air
essence a problem, and if you know the essence of every thing then It is
s
as you know the Kundalini which is
very easy to handle the situation,
the essence within us. II you raise the Kundalini all
the chakras
can
be enli ghtened and you can get physical, mental, emotional. and spiritual
benevolence. In the same way in all these areas of human endeavours thhere
is essentlally basically something gone Wrong.
For example, if you see about democracy. That what is essentially
wrong is that it is money orlented. Its not spirit oriented. Then ultimately
every thing becomes commercialized. Because basically it has that problem
inbuilt in Lt, which grows like a tree and flowers. In the same way demo-
cracy has flowered into all these problems you see today.
Second]y, we see communism. Its problem is that it is power oriented,
And the essence of power-arlenta tion is that it becomes sa overpowering
that, that person loses all his control and he becomes a very cruel and
trynical person - Like Stalln. Because it is ot: Divine Power-orlentation.
Take even the human laws. Basically bullt in the human laws there
is one problem, It is the justice based on fundamental ideas of human
value systems. The human value system is a valency within us. Like carbon
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5,6,7.pdf-page-12.txt 
 12
has valency, in the same way there is valency within us. These valencies
to put them into their fundamental number. And when we
Cross
these valencies or when we try to destroy or to misuse them, then we
do somethiing that is illegal in the name of nature, in the name of humani ty
and Divinity. But basic problem of human laws is that human beings are
not enlightened people. Their valencies are not enligh tened. Unless and
until their valencies are enligh tened, wha tever Dharma they may follow.
whatever books they may read;
whatever good they try to do: whatever
may be their great ideas of peace, non-violence etc., Basically there
is an inbullt problem that these valencies wi thin them are not enligh tened.
But essentially the mistake is not human. It is the mistake of our
ignorance. The ignorance within us is this, that we do not know that we
are not yet the Spirit. All these laws are for Angels. They are not for
human beings, whose valencies are yet not enlightened. That is why in
Sahaj Yoga first you have to say 'I am not guilty' and that I have not
'I am Perfectly alright'. Give yourself confidence.
done any mistakes.
Because human laws can just make you a criminal for nothing at all. Because
you don't know a particular law, you have to retain a lawyer and a chartered
accountant, otherwise suddenly you find you are in jail.
But if you are an enlightened personali ty , you never com mlt any thing
which is criminal. Because in the essence all the valencies are already
enlightened within yourself. And you know what is proper and improper.
But still, Christ
was crucifled. Socrates
was poisoned. All these great
people had to suffer at the hands of law givers or priests who responsible
for religion or people who thought that they were very correct.
Adi
Shankaracharya had to suffer so much. Gyaneshwara,
such a learned man
had to suffer so much.
So the basle problem within human beings is that they are not yet
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5,6,7.pdf-page-13.txt 
 13
enli gh tened. Their central nervous sys tem is not filled wi th Dharma. There
is no sustenance. If the Dharma is within you, you don't commit any crime.
And maybe they might look criminal in the eyes of people who are dealing
with law, because they who are incharge of the law, themselves are blind.
The basic problems in human laws is that those who have formed the
must know that human being are not enligh tened souls. Though of
laws,
course these laws have been formed through Divine Unconscious Knowled ge.
So, whatever punishment you give them is not going to cure them at all.
They will become even worse. Or out of fear they may abide by the law.
But again this fear is of no use because they have not got it in their
freedom, of understanding that they should be law abiding. So what is
to be done is to give them the 'punishment!' of Sahaja Yoga. If you can
get
ali your criminals into Sahaja Yoga, somehow, you will find that they
will be very beautiful people one day. We have the example of Valmiki
who was a dacoit and he became such a great poet.
So the essence of modern times ie. Kali Yuga is that it is under
the influence of Krita Yuga. Krita Yuga is the time when the all prevading
power of God, the DIvine Power of God is going to work out many things.
And the essence of it is that it is going to work out the transformation
Damyanti
This is the greatness of Kall Yuga.In the Nal
of human beings.
Akhyan, it is said that Nal caught hold of Kali and was about to kill
him. But Kali told him about his Mahatyam. That those people who are
seeking the truth in their hills and caves will all be born as householders
They will get the
in Kali Yuga and they
will all get their realisation.
knowled ge. Because this is the essence
of Kali Yuga where people will
find all these things because the light of Krita Yuga is working on them.
In the light of Kri ta Yuga, things start getting exposed. Every thing is
not
is getting exposed and people are understanding, though
they are
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5,6,7.pdf-page-14.txt 
 14
realised but they are aware that there is something very wrong with us.
And at that stage, and in that state people will seek the Truth and they
will get it. This is the essence of Kali yuga or modern times.
I am born at this time where I have to do this job of telling you
that you must get your transforma tion. This is a very different job from
all others. At the time of the Devi when She came, she had to kill the
Rakshasas. The Rakshasas were
were separate.
separate and human belngs
So She could protect the human beings. But today the Rakshas have entered
into the heads of human beings. Its a very difficult job to tell them
that the rakshasas have now gone into your head. Then the Pashus who
are Pasha ie, under the control of God, So their behaviour was alright.
For eg. A lion cannot become a scorpion and a scorpion cannot become
a snake. But in human beings in this Kali Yuga it is possible. You can
find a lion, Tommorrow he becomes a snake and the third day he becomes
a scorplon. The freedom given to human beings at the time of Adam and
Eve has prospered into this kind of humanity today. And when it comes
to such a stage, then only a person becomes aware of himself, that there is
something wrong. What am I going to give my children? What am I doing?
Where am I? And when such a question comes to mind, that is the time
where Mahalaxmi starts showing Her light to you, that you have to seek
the Truth. And when that seeking of Truth comes in as William Blake
has said, that Men of God will seek the Truth and they will really become
men of God. A special category of seekers will be born at this time and
they will make others men of God.
So Sahaja Yoga is being built slowly in an evolutionary process
through many sages, scientists, and seers and through many incarnations.
And its all within ourselves. The whole world Is within ourselves. All
these great things are also wi thin us. The human being is not an ignoble
being. He is the epitome of all evolution. He is not a person to be degraded.
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5,6,7.pdf-page-15.txt 
 15
Only thing is his ignorance, In Ignorance
a rope seems a Snake. Unluss
there is light you cannot see the rope. So
I would not call anybody
r'ope. So
guilty whatsoever. Whatever a person has done he can get his transformation
because his Spirit is still there
-- shining! Its just clouded with many
things. And if sommebody can by any chance move
those clouds the sun
that is the Spirit wlll shine forth.
Self reallsatlon is the awareness about yourself.
Whats wrong with
you. Where are you. Like a child. They become like children. They way
they tell me things. These are such highly placed people in all walks
of like. When they got their realisation, they became like children. And
they could see
their problems. They became fully aware of themselves
and also aware
of others. This great thing has happened because this
is the essence of modern times when we all have to be aware of ourselves
we have to be aware of others
on our central nervous system. So
and
the happening is of the breakthrough of human awareness into a new dimension
which has
which Jung has written 1.e. collective consciousness,
about
to be actualisation and becoming and not just talking. They become real
brothers and sisters in the sense they become one part and parcel of
the whole being.
The love just transforms you because you have it built within you
and it just transforms you and you become so beautiful. Like, if you show
some one a television who has not seen it before, he will say its just
box. But when you tell him that you can see fllms etc. he wont belleve
you. Because he is ignorant. But when you put it to the mains then he
sees it, In the same way I see you all so fantastic so great. In Sahaja
Yoga, we do not find corrupt people at all. Sahaja Yogis are ex tremely
honest people. They dont tell lies. If they dont have to tell something
they will keep quiet. They are very peaceful people. They are so alert
a whirlwind the vhole thing.
and so dynamic and Gompasslona te. Its 1lke
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5,6,7.pdf-page-16.txt 
 16
triggering the changes everywhere.
And when you are changing, you are
When I gave realisation
to people of Eastern Block countries and
changing there. It
to their countries all things started
they went back
is you who are triggering this because it is Krita Yuga and it is going
to work out. And I am gratful to you for all this very much that you
have accep ted, you have taken to this.
But though Mother's lave is without expectation Nirvajya, but this
Mother expects something. That we have to really transform this world.
We have to go deep Into ourselves. Thats all. The deeper you are the
better it is. The bigger the vessel the more pouring of this Divine Energy
person. You
we have to medita te and become deeper
will be there. So
have to do it for the sake of yourself. For the sake that you are born
in
this life. That while you are here, there must be a great responsibili ty
on you that you are born at this time of such a great happening of the
transformation of the whole humani ty. What a great thing it is and in
that you are taking part. So what grea tness must be there in your punyas
and that you have taken it up so seriously, working it out so seriously.
Though you think Mother we are just enjoying. Actually you are enjoying
because you have gone so deep into it. Your personali ty of that depth
being will, know
transformation that human
is going to trigger that new
that they are in the kingdom of God. Why there has to be depth is because
it is your triggering not mine. I am a desireless person. You are the
ones who have to desire and you have to trigger it out for the whole
world.
I am thankful to you again and I just make one humble request that
there is no need to have a pled ge as that is also a compulsion. There
no discipline in Sahaja yoga. It is understanding yourself, that you
are born at a time that such a big transformation work has to take place,
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5,6,7.pdf-page-17.txt 
 17
which Is very sub tle but is so dynamic and so impor tant and has to be
done.
May God bless you all and be more and more meditative and be
aware of yourself. This is a tremendous work
we have to do. It is the
evolution of the highest type we have to bring forth the changa and transfor-
mation of people. One Gorbachov is not sufficient. We need many of them
and so we are going to work it out.
May God bless You.
30/3/90
Delhi.
BIRTHDAY PUJA TALK,
To dispel
darkness it is
Today is the fourth day of Navratra.
Important that we bring in the ligh tat night. Today is also speclal because
you are celebrating my birthday. On this day Shri. Gaurl had oreated
Ganesha. Shri Ganesha is the epitome of Purity and Holiness. The first
thing that was spread in this world was Purity, by which all born things
and all humans be pro tected and may keep away from unholy things. Af ter
that only the rest of creation was created. So the most important work
for us is to make Purity the highest thing within ourselves. Purity does
We should keep
not mean that we bathe, wash and keep ourselves cloan.
our hearts clean. The greatest malady of the heart is anger. When anger
enters a person then all purity ge ts destroyed.
Because the other name
of Purity is Love which is completely clean and straight forward, that
wants nothing Nirvajya. Its satisfaction
Love that flows eternally and
is in the fact that it keeps flowing and when it cannot flow it becomes
disturbed. Purity means that you fill your heart with love and not anger.
Anger is our enemy and also the enemIy of the world. ALI the wars
of this world, the fallures have been due to this collective anger, There
Even a terrible thing ike waT comes
excuses for anger.
can be many
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5,6,7.pdf-page-18.txt 
 18
Trom anger. If there is love in the heart,
then anger cannot arise. And
il one has to make a show of anger then even that is for love. Whenever
any evil person or Raksha is killed, that is also done by the power of
was worthy of being destroyed, by which he may not
love because he
commit more acts of sin. But this job is not for h umans. It is the job
of the Devi who had destroyed them during these Navratris.
So expand your heart and think whom do we love with this clean,
honest love, (NIRVAJYA)
t think
and
straigh tfor ward
by which we do not
that this is my son, my sister, my house, and my things. You have risen
to a very much higher level than the level of human beings. Because you
are Sahaja Yogis, so your union is with this sub tle Power of God's love.
That power is flowing constantly through you and it is strengh tening. and
coloring you with Its power. It is looking af ter you, making you rise,
and is inspiring you. It is filling you with joy and sweet love. You have
to such a beautiful Power. We have to see how much place
we have
, but you
in our hear ts for it. You have love for your Mother.
should have the two other types of love also,
then only can the love
for your Mother be complete.
One type of love should be for yourself, that you are Sahaja Yogis.
We have got these Powers in a Sahaj way
Now we have to see how to
increase it. Many people do lot of work for spreading Sahaja Yoga. It
movement. Such people do not look within themselves.
is a horizontal
So they are not able to get the vertical movement. On the outside they
can do a lot, run around, do this work or that, meet people. But they
Now there are many people who pay
do not increase the Power within.
more attention to the Power wi thin but neglect the outward Shakti. So
balance does not come to them.When people start developing on the outside
ultimately they
only then the power within starts diminishing. And then
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5,6,7.pdf-page-19.txt 
 19
get drowned in the Ego, that we have done so much for Sahaja Yoga, we
have worked so hard. Then a
new life starts for them which is not at
all Sahaja. They get full of self impor tance and try to show their individ-
uali ty. But from within they are empty. Then they get sick, go crazy
or some
great misfortune befalls them. Then they say 'But Mother,
we
had surrendered to you completely. Then how did this happen.' The respo-
nsibili ty 1ies with you, that you kept on getting lost. Such a person gets.
off to one side and he is not able to associate with others. If they associate
with others then it is only to bully others and show thelr superiority.
They must always be in the front and they must be given all the importance.
Then they forget that they must do something for Mother. I have seen
people who came up
Then they started feeling very superior
at once.
and self important. Then
was no aarti performed there, nor wiping
there
my photograph. They were full of themselves, and never consulted anyone.
Then groups started and quarrels started.
The thread by which you are tied is your Mother's thread. You
must always remain tied to
that thread and remember that we are the
children of Shri Mataji. No one is superior or inferior. Nor do we do
any thing. This Param Chai tanya Is doing every thing. When this feeling
we will do this of that, we
did,
comes that we
are very great,
then
PIP
the Param Chaitanya lets you do what you what. You can go to hell or
destroy yourself. It won't stop you, because it respects your freedom.
There is another fault with Sahaja Yogis. We are a collective being.
A one collective Virat Shakti. We are all one body, We are not by ourselves.
In that body If one person or a few persons start making their own group
then like the malignancy of cancer, where one cell s tarts growing separately,
in the same way one such person can grow and devour the whole of Sahaja
Yoga. And all my effor ts will go to was te.
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5,6,7.pdf-page-20.txt 
 20
We should learn from
which is the lowest and which
ga thers all the rivers into itself, then heats itself and becomes vapour
and gives the blessing of rain to the whole world. Its humbleness is the
si gn of its depth. When we will become extremely humble and loving then
only will we become large like the ocean. But if you think only of your
self importance and superiority then the problem will be that the Param
Chai tanya will cut of, and you will get thrown aside which very painful
to me. People who think I have done this or I have done that should
immediately step into the background and see whether we medi ta te or not?
Are we able to medi ta te? How deep are we? Whom all do we love and
With In Sahaja
how many do we love. With how many are
we enemies?
Yoga some people have gone very deep. And there are many who are stll
hanging on the ed ge. When they can be thrown out cannot be said.
I have said before that 1990 is a year which will open a new dimen-
to take a great leap, by which you come out of these
sion. You have
a Yoga is
surroundings and grasp the new thing. The progress of Sahaja
to
twenty years. To survive the first thing we have
about to complete
If
imbibe wi thin ourselves is Purity, which is filled with Humbleness.
you are completely clean and Pure then you can touch anyone and you will
become impure, because you will purify every thing. Your nature
never
that of purifying, Whomsoever you meet, you will purify that
becomes
person. What is there to be frigh tened of or to condemn anyonen. If your
Purity is absolute then that Purity has Power and Brillance and such a
person is So powerful that he can suck any impurity.
Now some other people think only of their own progress. They thhink
what have we got to do with others. We sit within our four walls and
we have nothing to do with the world.
worship and follow Mother and
But you are part and parcel of the whole.
They remain cut off from others.
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5,6,7.pdf-page-21.txt 
 23
one, then how can such a question arise? If mother has sald, Its alright.
We are a part of Mo ther then how can we say no. Then you have not gut
that sameness (Tadakari) with me. So the next Yukti is "Mather please
come into my head, please come into my heart, please come intu my though ts.
Please come into each drop of my life." Whereever you say I will come.
But you will have to say so from your heart and without any other motive.
the thought comes I am doing this work, I have done so much
for Sahaja Yoga, I have done this decoration, I put this alright, I did'
then know that you are not a Sahaja Yogi. In Sahaja Yoga, all your Karmas
become Akarma, (non doing). Then you will see that-Do I think Ilke this?
Why do I think that I am doing? Then it means that my union is not complete.
When the union is complete then you become a non-doer. Then you start
saying 'It is getting done. Only then you get the Yuk ti of complete sameness
with me.
The next Yukti you should understand is that I am not dolng. Till
you keep identifying with your body (are) doing some thing, because you
have the ego wi thin you.
When you come into the collectivity then you
stop doing any thing. You are the part and parcel and that work ls being
done.
I am telling you these Yuk tis because you have to take a leap. Always
Look towards yourself and see what do
assess yourself in this
maner.
I think. Do I think about others that they are better than me, so I must
learn from them? Do I see the good points or the bad points in others?
We must understand this Yukti that if you are still half-baked then it
is due to your own self. Sahaja Yoga is a very great thing. But if something
is wrong wi thin us or we cannot enjoy it fully then the reason Is that
there is some defect within us. If you correct this Yuk ti then there is
only joy. The Pure Joy - Neerananda and nothing else. Then what more
do you want? Your whole countenance will change.
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5,6,7.pdf-page-22.txt 
 24
I want that on my Bir thday, Your Birth Day should also be celebrated
that you may unders tand these Yuk tis, and may you fill your life with
Puri ty and lloliness liko Shri Ganesha. Wi th
Purity comes Wisdom. Because
Purity
is the name of Love, and Wisdom means Love. If you cannot get
Wisdom and you cannot love, then it is nIO Luse wasting your time in Sahaja
Yoga. Now such a time is coming that everyone has to become firmly settled
and you have to change yourself, and must change. We have a lot of faul ts.
We have
to make ourselves completely Pure. After this change you have
the blessings of a life that cannot even be described. Kabir has said
"When you are comple tely blissful then what more can you say." You all
should now
come into that Bliss (masti). And attain that sta te where you
Bliss (mas t
come intD
become blissful in that.
MAY GOD BLESS YOU.
CALCUTTA 9/4/90
ADI SHAKTI PUJA
(Tramslated from Hindi)
I am very
happy to see the progress of the people of Calcutta.
I know that there are deep
seekers in this city. But they do not know
as yet that the timme has come, where they can get what they have been
go to them and search for such people who
seeking. You people should
are seeking the truth. That is why it is important that we should ex pand
HETE
ourselves in all directions.
But with that we should increase our own
We should change our lives: We should also make our lives
power also.
a person
shining like a firm
Yogl, so that people will recogni ze that such
medi tation and contemplation is very important.
is special. And for this,
Calcutta is a very busy city and people get drowned in being busy.
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5,6,7.pdf-page-23.txt 
 25
They find very little time. This time which we have tied on our hands
is meant for our own ascent and for our progress within. II we have to
know ourselves from within it is important that we medi ta te for a while
between
daily, in the evening and morning. A lot of difference comes
the ones who medita te and the ones who dont.
Specially people who do a lot of work for Sahaja Yoga, go here
d; In such
unders tand
and there, talk to people, give lectures, make others
people the divine energy slowly gets depleted. That Is why It is even
more important and necessary that such people should medi ta te everyday.
In the morning after your bath and before sleeping, you must medl ta te
for a while. This is enough. But when you meditate, how wouldd you recognize
whether you were in meditation and it was alright. During medi tatlon you
should first es tablish thoughtless awareness. At that moment you should
keep saying 'not this' 'not this' and keep turning your though ts away
taking a breath
a manner. By dolng this you will see that by
in such
you will become though tless. You should keep the photo in front and light
a candle. Put your feet in salt water and sit in front of it when though tlessness
comes and vibrations start flowing In both hands then wipe your feet and
sit on the earth in meditation. After going into meditation try to know
its dep th. If thoughts arise then again say 'not this' 'not this' or say
'I forgive'. kshma is a very necessary word. Just by staying
"Kshma'
this your though ts can stop. When there is no peace how can you have
internal progress? Like in an earthguake a tree cannot grow. So similarly
man also gets stuck in an earthquake of thoughts and then his progress
is impossible. That is why at that time it is important to establish the
peace within. After a while you will be surprised, that you do not need
to do so much exercise. You will become thoughtless at once.
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5,6,7.pdf-page-24.txt 
 26
at once. Whenever you see ay beautiful thing or artistic thing you will
at once
become thoughtless. Slowly this habit will grow and your inner
progress will also grow.
You have entered a new threshold but you have to still enter another
threshold and have to know your'self. That is why it is important that
by medi tation you go deeper. The recognl tion is that when you get up
is that when you get up
af ter medi ta tion you dont feel Iike getting up. You feel like sitting in
medi tation a li ttle longer. You feel very joyful and you cant get up at
attentlon Immediately goes to other
once. If af ter your medi ta tion your
things, like I have to eat or have to sleep, or have to go out then know
Because to leave the
that you
have not been in a
you
stage of medita tion.
state of meditation is a lttle difficult. In this way you will slowly graw
within and when you do any work outside then your power does not diminish,
but on the contrary it Increases. It hasbeen seenthat those who af ter realisatlon
immedlately want to give reallsation to others can get caught up. Actually
there is nothing like catches. It is 1ike a barometer that tells you where
the smoke is, where is the light. In a way an attitude of non-expectancy:
should be there. A detachment should come.
Then you will not get catches. It is like a barometer which tells
you where the smoke is where is the light. In the same
also know every thing within yourself. In a way there should be an attitude
where there is a complete hones ty. A detachment should come. Then you
will not get catches. You can touch any amount of people give realisation
to any amount of people, do any work. You can cure any amount of diseases.
You will not be affected. But if you do not get this detached state, then
you can get into trouble.
souls. You
The second:
thing is that you people are now realised
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5,6,7.pdf-page-25.txt 
 27
have reached a very hi gh state, which is attainable after great difficul ties
ta te, which is attainable after great difficul ties
You will ind such people who have just come into Sahaja Yoga. You must
understand
that they have just come and you should not say any thing aggre-
to them. You should win
ssive
with your love with effort,
them over
and care and unders tanding. And
if possible by offering food and drink,
so terrifying because saints and
by which
they may not think you are
sages always seem to take a stick in their hands. Do not be like that,
They should feel that all are our brothers and sis ters. By
thts only will
people stay in Sahaja Yoga. But I have seen that many people who come
into Sahaja Yoga, start disciplining others too much. Dont do this, dont
there etc. In Sahaja Yoga there is no discipline as such, because
stand
your Spirit is so full of light that in its glow, you can gradually see
slowly
yourself. And then you begin laughing at yourself. Just as you
will progress. This light shines on
progressed so similarly others
your behaviour and the behaviiour of others also.
n this witness state
In
Sahaja Yoga you get the witnessing sta te. In
you only watch every thing. You do not think about it. You should have
You should watch uns tained by any thing.
To
no reaction within yourself.
be able to watch without reacting is the most joyful effort. For example,
there is a beautiful
carpet. If you think about it that it is mine, I
hope it does not get burnt, or spoilt; or if it is another's then how much
it cost where did it come from, and many such thoughts, then you cannot
enjoy the beauty of it. Your mind should be placid and thoughtless 11ke
the lake which is placid, with not a wave in it, which reflects the beautiful
creation around it.
Once a seeker came to my feet and at once his Kundalini arose and
the vibrations started flowing. From the next room the Sahaja Yogis came
running in, as they immediately felt the vibrations flowing. In the same
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5,6,7.pdf-page-26.txt 
 way you will meet other Sahaja Yogis and you will feel that you have
met yourself. When Namdev went to meet Gora Kumbhar he said, "I had
here
to see
the formless but the entire formless I have seen in
come
your form". This kind of feeling only one saint can feel for another. Uptill
now man only lives with jealously and envy. But when he becomes a Sahaja
Yogt, then he feels that the formless which he knew has taken form in
the other person. In this way love for each other becomes very suotle,
very deep and very joy giving.
We should understand that we are tied by a very subtle and strong
thread and there is nothing greater than love for one another. But many
people still think of 'my son', "my child', 'my house', etc. This mine
should be cut away and made as less as possible. Once this goes, a lot
of joy will come wi thin you. This feeling of 'mine' takes you away frum
Spirit. Who am I? I am the Spirit. The Spirit stands alone by itself.
and those who say that, It is my Spirit are not Sahaja Yogls. The Spirit
with you
Imine'. Its relationship is with God only. And
does not have
that, flows through a tree, which gives
its relationship is like the sap
sap to every part and does not stick to any thing. This mineness is the
murder of love. From a drop you will become the ocean, and will break
the boundaries of that drop as you will rise and fall with the ocean.
When this 'mine ge ts broken,
In this way man can live in the present
then you become extremely powerful. And the same power becomes effective.
It is going to do a very big job In collectivity and the salvation of mankind
can also be accomplished by this Power.
A new age has star ted. It is the age where we have entered a move-
ment where the ques tion of ourselves is not there. The question of all
this a strength
concern. For
the whole world
has
become our
all the problems
helght is required by which you can see
a magnanimity, a
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5,6,7.pdf-page-27.txt 
 29
in a balanced
way and give their solutions. The responsibility of all
Sahaja Yogis is tremendous. It is not only that you take advantage of
Sahaja Yoga, and grow in it, but you have to take it to the house of
everyone and you have to glve this joy to each one. And doing this job
if you show any laxity or weakness then you will be held responsible
And it will be a very wrong act. So that is why people who are settled
in Sahaja Yoga should stand up strong like a tree.
Calcutta is the place where the secret of success of entire India
lies. That is why it is necessary
that you people should stand up and
come forward and progress. And also make others progress and make your
personali ty great.
Wherever you think that this is my son, my house,
etc., then drive away this my
' thought. Only then will you become great.
And we need such great people in this new movement, and the preparedness
must be com plete for this.
This year is a very important year. And I want that many people
should come
to Sahaja Yoga. So bring them in with love, with respect
and understanding. Sometimes by a little pressure and sometimes by saying
some things in a round about way, as everyone is stuck in something or
the other. In Russia they have no Gurus or cul ts. They were like a clean
slate, so to say. So it was very easy to give them realisation. Here,
they are nei ther here nor there. I belong to this Guru'. Because they
are not their own, so speak to them with great understanding.
darshan' (audience) of
Then the other disease here is of wanting
the Guru. The duty of the guru is to give knowled ge and not to give darshan.
Till he does not give
He should enligh ten and
give realisa tion to people.
knowled ge how is he a Guru? Guru means one who gives knowled ge. And
knowled ge which you know on your central nervous system and where you
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5,6,7.pdf-page-28.txt 
 30
can feel the all prevading power of God on
your central nervoUS system.
If he has not given this, then to be stuck on such things is, in a way,
to destroy yourself.
You all were very great seekers and so you gained it, In the same
way you should also give other people this blessing and make them happy.
Whatever is of low quality is our own. It is there in the individual and
also in the collective it is lacking. We should watch this lacking. The
that
me
Hindus, Muslims, Christlans and people of various religions tell
they were searching in these Dharmas, but they could not benefit. The
reason is that these are man made Dharmas. The ones who made the Dharmas
are no more. The Dharma that you people have to make is the real Dharma.
There should be no artificiality In it. If man has made a religion it is
bound to go wrong, because so far he has not got connected to God. Man
and put it on the wrong path. But now you
has taken the real rellglon
people have to make the World Religion. There should be no human faul ts
in it. because it is Divine and you all have attained sell-realisation.
So with honesty you should make it pure which is an Inner Religion.
When every person will see that what he has got is the truth, then
whichever religion he belonged to before, he will get the essence of it
in Sahaja Yoga. He will realise that what is in our religion has actually
awakened within us. If you follow any man made rellgion then you can
Gom mit any sin in the name of that religion. But after coming to Sahaja
Yoga you yourself become Dharmic and think of the benevolence of all.
new people, talk to them very carefully or they may feel that
But with
they are being aggressed. So you should make them understand very carefully
that we have to awaken the Dharma within us. Like Christ said Thou
shalt not have adul terous eyes'.
But does any Christian have non-adulterous
eyes? In the same way great saints spoke great things. But the followers
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5,6,7.pdf-page-29.txt 
 31
did just the opposite. So you should make them understand gradually as
they are slowly coming from darkness to li ght. By giving them the experi-
you should take them out of this wrong understanding, andmake
ence,
them settled in this Dharma. That flow and retention of Dharma should
be there in them. From wherever anyone comes, accept him, because there
are many seekers of truth amnong them. And God
can be found by those
only, who tread the path of truth.
What is the job of a lamp? Its job is to give the light. Till the
lamp keeps burning, till then all works can be done. The light that you
have got, you should give to others, and wi th full confidence. There
is nothing to fear. Little children are full of confidence. They say what
they think is right. They are not bothered about anyone. But when we
grow up, our brains get filled with many other things and we get conditioned.
and it becomes difficult gatting out of it. So we must unders tand
we must deal
s the
with others with great unders tanding because this is
Power of Love which you have to attain.
This is the first time the Puja of the Adi Shak ti is being done.
All the Shaktis arise from the Adi Shakti, And also the Shak tis of Maha
Kali, Maha Laxmi,
Maha Saraswati. All these Shak tis get absorbed back
in Her. Only the Adi Shakti can do this work, because She has supremacy
over all the chakras.
She is the one who controls the various permutations
and combinations of the chakras She knows the subtlest of the sub tle.
All the incarnations who came on this earth were a milestone on the ladder
of our evolution. But they all had one type of work to do. Like the Goddess
had to kill the Rakshas and save the devotees. That is why Shri Krishna
arranged this play. This as all a play. There is no need to be so serious
about It. Shri Krishna won everyone with his sweetness. He explained all
our faul ts in a sweet and roundabout way. It was a very beautiful incarna-
tion of His.
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5,6,7.pdf-page-30.txt 
 32
Af ter Him came Mahavir and Buddha,
who took an incarnation of
Seriousness. In this seriouness they spoke of oneness of the Spirit and
the knowled ge of the Whole. Then seriousness developed and the people
became serious-minded, and made their daily lives very difficult. Infact
TE
nei ther Buddha nor Mahavira had said so.
self-realisation till then he cannot go
Till mankind does not get
straight for very long. After Lord Jesus Christ, the ordinary people started
following the religion started by Paul and then every thing started going
wrong. In this way in every reli gion things went wrong, because religion
BuoJM
became difficult and inaccessible. In modern times people spoke very Wrong
things about Kundalini.
Now the question arose how mankind should be told that there is
God, there is Truth and it is in the form of the Spirit. So it was necessary
for the Adi Shak ti, to incarna te, because only She could do this work.
She knows each chakra. She had to come amongst mankind and take the
birth of a human being, by which She could understand what are the
problems and faul ts in human beings. How can the Kundalini be awakened
despi te these faul ts.
the
And how to awaken the Kundalini through
Brahmarandra, by which humans can see with a little light. And by wa tching
thus.
they would themselves understand by looking at themselves, and
then the Shak ti would come into them by which they got cured. This
new job was such that all the dei ties, the saints,
the incanations and
all great people had to come. They had
to come into the bodily form
of the Adi Shak ti who had to incarna te. And that is why this incarnation
has come, so that the whole world can rise, can evolve. The Divine which
made this universe, this world, would never want that His creation be
is why this work is so
destroyed at the hands of humans.
And that
tremendous.
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5,6,7.pdf-page-31.txt 
 33
Now it canrniot
be that you climb on the cross, or talk about it.
In this, man will have to grow and make others grow. It is hard work.
But this only
a
Mother can do, and only Her Shak ti can do, it And If
She has no love, understanding and patlence, then She cannot do it. That
is
why this is such an Important incarnation. As you know She Is of the
nature of Mahamaya. And there is a reason for this. If She was not Mahamaya
then you cannot know Her. In reali ty, till there is the form of Mahamaya,
only then you can come near me. Otherwise you cannot approach me. You
will think She is the Shakti, how can I go near Her, how can I fouch
Her feet? How can I talk to Her? By taking the form of Mahamaya all
this has become possible. And because of this mildness of Her form we
I remain in this form of Mahamaya
are one today. It was necessary that
and you all should attain that state and not get lost in it.Like a drop
getting lost in the ocean. You all have to remain in that enlightened state
and you have to give to others. I will not let you get lost in it. You
have to be fully awakened in this joy. No one can get lost. Without sharing
this joy I will not let you rest in peace. When something like this happens.
Only then you will realise your responsibility.
Your Job is in a way greater than the saints and sages. The saints
and sages did not give realisation to anyone. They gave lectures, tried
to make people understand. Your job is that you have to awaken the Kundalini
resurrect the whole world.
in people and
make them self-realised and
This is an extremely important and Divine job. And for this the Adi Shakti
to come. This work started by Her advent and is happening
in a very beautiful way. I hope you people will understand this.
Lots of proof is coming by miraculous photographs. These should
not be shown to non-Sahaja Yogis, because they will not believe it. These
photographs are being made by the Param Chai tanya, and that also through
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5,6,7.pdf-page-32.txt 
 34
an ordinary camera which has no Shakti in it. But if there is so m uch
light coming out of my head
then why is At you peuple cnuot So 1t?
I
Why is it that only the camera records it? Because I am Mahamaya fur
you. but not for the camera perhaps. The atomic cells In the camera film
know
me. God has glven you freedom. But these Inanima te objects
are
not free. They move only throch His wi11. In this freedom there should
be no disturbance or flaws, that is why She is the form of Mahamaya,
I am like you. My en tire behaviour is like yours.
May this Puja of Adi Shak ti be attained by you.
May God Bless you.
रपर
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5,6,7.pdf-page-33.txt 
 35
Shri Mataji's Tour of Australia and New Zealand
Coirns
Australia
Brisbane
.Perth
Helorurna Cenker
Singapore Air-port
On 28 th February,
Shri Mataji stopped
on Her way
to Australla,
at Singapore airport. She spoke to us. In Her talk She said that Sahaja
Yoga is spreading fast because people are become more aware. Nothing
the large number of Chinese in our group. Mother said that the Chinese
******
wlll talk to Sahaja Yoga easily. She said that the Chinese were wise
people wi th an anclent tradi tion and that traditional people would take
to Sahaja Yoga very easily. She cited
as an example the Italians who
are doing very well in Sahaja Yoga.
Mother said that China had great philosophers like Lao Tse who
taught clearcut ideas and what he preached is truly
practised
in the same manner as Sahaja Yoga. But one has
reallsed
to be
to practise It.
Mother spoke of a man who was the head of the Zen organisation
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5,6,7.pdf-page-34.txt 
 36
who was very sick when he come to see Her. Mother asked him how he
was a practitioner of Zen when he was not a realised soul, He explained
that up to the twelv th century there were 16 realised souls called Kashyappas
but there were no more af ter that. Since then, Zen has been practised
without understanding and has been turned
more soclal activity.
into a
Mother noted that Zen has cer tain practices that try to enable its followers
to establish Nirvichara, but without vibrations the aspirants cannot get
realisation. There is no more life in Zen and like every religion it has
deviated.
She also told us that in Islam there was a complete surah written
about Her. In this surah it was stated that
the Sent One! will give realls-
ation, will make you
you '
Pirs' and give callective consciousness. But you
will be non-believers.
Com menting on the si tua tion in China, Mother said that the Chinese
follow Confucious who taught that humani ty was
government claimed
to
impor tant, that collectivity was important. However, without realisation,
how could one
could
unders tand collectivity, she asked Otherwise how
they kill their own people. Mother said that if they were realised souls
they would not have killed the student demons trators. Mother expressed
regret that China has got a very bad name for this incident.
Talking about the death of Rajneesh and how the money he has collected
has vanished, Mother said that was an example of how falsehood would
disappear just like that.
TALK GIVEN AT PERTH
2/3/90
In Sahaja Yoga there are no hard and fast rules because you are
awakened people and saints and you know what is good for you. But you
keep that quality of saintliness wi thin you. Jud ge yourself, how
must
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5,6,7.pdf-page-35.txt 
 37
are your vibrations.
Collectivity should grow. First of all we are all saints, so we cannot
talk ill of each other at all. If we criticize somebody than we must know
that there is something wrong with us. We should see the beauty and
glory of another person, and praise the joy that you have. If you want
to gather the thorns, you will get thorns and not flowers.
If you find something wrong with the leader than you tell me dđirectly.
Dont discuss amongst yourselves, and create a group against him or her.
Because through him or her only I can talk to you or come to you. Dont
try to harm the basic uni ty by all the time fighting. There ls no need
to write very long letters. Just a few things of how you are, how you
are in Sahaja Yoga. The subtler you become the less you talk. The less
you write the deeper you say,
There is a tendency
among people to go to the person who is with
me. They will tell him or her 'Go and tell Mother this or that'. They
are not the channel. Your leader is the channel. Sa dont try to find out
any other channel.
Normally it is better to marry a person who is not from the same
place or same collectivity. Because the relationship should be there of
complete celibacy and puri ty. Also the eyes lose their Innocence and the
Mooladhara might get caught up. Then you start seeking out girls and
all the time the attention is on whom should I marry, and whom to choose.
Mostly such marriages have
turned out to be very funny. The important
thing
is that you try to keep yourself pure and your vibrations alright.
Also if you want to keep a relationship outside Sahaja Yoga, then you
must be very careful as one doesnt know what sort of Mooladhara they
have or what kind of problem they have. And you might Jump Into something
very serious.
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5,6,7.pdf-page-36.txt 
 38
In Sahaja Yoga marria ge has to be respected and has to be monogamous. Other
run af ter
wise people get AIDS, or other diseases. It is not natural to
so many different people. A husband and wife in privacy, want each other
50
to belang to one another only. If not, then they feel jealous and not happy
So whats the use of doing such a thing. Marriage must make every one
If it doesnt, then it is a curse on
happy.
Society and these
dont stick. Because, children are better, and the society is better. Marriage
is the best way to give happiness to eauh other, by having sweet children,
a good family, and having a sensible life, giving joy to all the collectivity.
So many souls are anxious to get born to Sahaja Yogis and they want good
sensible pareats. There are no hard and fast rules and if you want to
experiment you can, but when you suffer then Sahaja Yoga cannot help you.
The idea of having a separate house affects collectivity. Indians
will find out many excuses to have a house of their own. This is the
nfce Ashram for them in Delhi, spending
Worst part of Indians. We built a
so much onny, and there's not even a rat living there. When you all
live together my attention is there. We have some very good ashrams
and they have done wanders, where the leader is kind, compassiona te,
loving and also corrective. If you love somebody, then the person doesnt
This love is the correcting point. We are here
mind being corrected.
for a fremendous task. No one has done such a work. The salnts were
born one here and one
there and they were killed, polsened, tortured.
But you are not alone. You are so many all over the world.
When you come to Ganapatipule, you should not form an Australian
group. Once they said Australia is great, is good and it fell down. God
created one world and then the human belngs talled it Australia, India,
England. You should mingle with other people. You should write to them
and have lots of fun. We should for get that we belong to any particular
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5,6,7.pdf-page-37.txt 
 39
country. We belong to the country of God's kingdom. We have to be beautiful
people. We have no business to be arrogant with anyone. We have to be
ex tremely loving. The power of love is the stron gest thing. Have faith
in yourself that you are loving and compassiona te. Thats why you are
dynamic because love is dynamic.
Why ruin yourself for any thing else but
to ascend, In ascending
you can never be in trouble. We have to help so many people who are
suffering from alchoholism,
drugs, mental problems, physical problems.
Orie person can save
so many people. When new people come in, don't
immediately say you are a bhoot or this or that. They dont unders tand
your language. Your langua ge is diferent, of the chakras. Talk to them
sof tly and gradually tell them what is Sahaja Yoga. They thínk its a nee
philosophy. Its not new. Its an ancient one. Dont be aggressive, AggressivenIeSS
is not the sign of a salnt. You have to be very kind, gentle, unders tanding
and sweet. They are not yet realised souls. They are not yet es tablished
as Sahaja Yogls.
have that quali ty and depth, then every thing works out
When we
the best.
MELBOURNE
Shri Mataji arrived on the evening of Sunday, 4th March. For many
Yogis it had been three years since they had last seen Shri Mataji. And
the ones who had not been on the tours it was five years since they
last saw Her.
in private conversation
During Her visit, Shri Ma taji spent imuch time
with local Sahaja Yogis sorting out the problems of the last few years.
That night She spoke at great length about collectivity and the absolute
necessi ty for Sahaja Yogis to live collectively. Much of what She said
was related to
the si tuation in Aus tralia over the previous years.
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5,6,7.pdf-page-38.txt 
 40
Although the dictatorial leadership was remoyed in Australia last
year, many of the Sahaja Yogis had become disillusioned af ter many yers
of domination. In Sydney some of the ashrams were closed; in Melbourne
all the ashrams were closed and people went to live by themselves. People
did not trust leaders to run the ashrams and as they put it, to run tidir
lives.
Shri Mataji stressed that it was wrong to close the ashrams, that
Sahaja Yogis should live together. She said that if Sahaja Yogis candot
ive together, how can the whole world live together. When we lHve together.
we protect each other. The negativity has less of an effect when wg are
together, and the ashram is like a palace. Also, the children learn to
respect adul ts which is very
important.
She said that outside the ashram is like a dungeon. When people
live in a jail, it should not be bad --
they are fed, looked after, they
have a clean room, everything is taken care of. But it is a punishment
t
because they are kept alone. Human beings are socíal, collective
they
Ii ke being together. Sahaja Yogis should be social, living and sharing
together.
Shri Mataji said that She knows every thing that we do. She spoke
of
some Individual Aus tralians who had enjoyed
nuch success
s becaus5e
of Sahaja Yega. She sald that if you have got some talent, then Sahaja
Yoga helps you a lot In that talent and you get success. But where are
they now? She said that we should not get lost in that success. What
Is that success? What is that money going to get us? Life af ter lile we
have had success, but only in this one life we have got realisation, The
unly reason we have got success is tahelp Sahaja Yoga. We should use it
for Sahaja Yaga.
She
then spoke about our bashfulness in contacting Her. She said
there
were so many problems with the leaders
here and no one wrote
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5,6,7.pdf-page-39.txt 
 41
one letter to Her. She is here for us. She asked us all to tell what is
happening wi th the collective, wi th Sahaja Yoga. All She gets are letters
about our jobs, our familles, our wives etc. She said that She has asked
us not to speak against the leaders, but if something is wrong. demonic,
then we should speak.
She said that Australia was far from
the rest of the world, and
covered big distances, This was all the more reason
to live together.
She spoke about the Russians. She said that She had broken the Eas tern
Block, During a Yoga conference in Russia She gave realsation to ten dele-
ga tes from each of the countries and lo ok at
Eastern
effect. The
the
Block is now broken. She spoke of the greatness of the Russians and their
They
humility., no matter what their posi tion was.
all were so humble.
She said that twenty Germans had gone to Russia to give realisation. She
sald It has really touched Her heart, that rather
than fl ghting, they
were giving them enligh tenment. She said that the great quality of communism
is that It has taught people how to share and to live together. Collectivity
1s the greatest asset of communism, and that is why they will be the
best country for spirituali ty.
The Public program mes were held
two consecutive nigh ts to
over
the accompaniment of the Nagpur musicianis. Shri Ma taji spoke for a short
time and answered
ques tions from the crowd before giving realisation to
the people. She worked until qui te late, on the new people. We also heard
that She was up until early the next morning on most occasions getting
rid of the negativity She had absorbed. In the evening She spoke to the
Sahaja Yogis. She said that to be a Sahaja Yogi is very easy. We dont
have to listen to anyone lecturing us. All we have to do is to love one
another, 1lsten to Her tapes and meditate-thats all we need.
 1990_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_5,6,7.pdf-page-40.txt 
 42
Cairns.
This was Shri Mataji's first visit to Cairns, a
city in the far north
of Autstalia, above
the Tropic of Capricorn. Its a very
beautiful, much
visi ted by tourists. Some Sahaj Yogis recently moved there to start Sahaja
Yoga and prepare the ground.
During Her stay She visited the great Barrier
two thousand mile coral reef 40 miles off the Queensland coast,
Reef
one of Her great natural creations of the world.
Over the last ten years an alarning problem has been developing,
which has had the whole country concerned. There is a particular creature
called the Crown of Thorn starfish, which consumes small coral animals,
which help
thus killing the reef. Normally there are
other preda tors
keep the starfish under control, However, în the last few years the starfish
has been In plague proportions, destroying vast areas of the reef. Due
to the delicate nature of the eco-system, there is no chemical solution
the authori ties can use to control the starfish, and it would be difficult
to physically remove them.
Shri Mataji met the Mayor of Cairns, who informed Her of this si tua-
tion. Shri Mataji told him "Once your powers are awakened you can do
was bit cynical. While Shri Ma taji was in
something about it", but he
time and said "Lets see what
a
Cairns, She waded into the water for a
can be worked out". A few days later, we were on the plane to New Zealand,
when the news
came informing the passengers that something incredible
was happening in Queens land on the Great Barrier Reef. Without warning,
thousands of Crown of Thorn starfish had been found dead, Floating to
the surface of the reef. When She heard this, Shri Mataji sald to tell
the Mayor to have more fai th in his powers.
BRISBANE
Brisbane at 5.00
On Saturday, March IO, Shri Mataji arrived in
