Shri Mahalakshmi Puja Date 29th December 1991 : Alibag Place Type Puja Marathi & English Speech Language CONTENTS | Transcript | Marathi 02 - 04 English Hindi || Translation English 05 - 06 Hindi 07 - 08 Marathi

 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT ENGLISH TALK We have come to this place many a times, it's a beautiful place, you all like it. It's very rustic, absolutely in the interior. Only thing is, coming all the way from Ganapatipule, you have to spend lot of time. All this you are doing just to enjoy the beauty of nature, and to be with the nature. I have told you already that this fruit of coconut is called as "shreephal", because it is the Sahasrara, and it's very surprising that this fruit knows and understands. It won't fall on any animal or on any person. If you are sleeping here, it will never fall on you. Nobody is hurt ever by this fruit. It is so sensible, more than human beings, because we do hurt others, we do trouble others, we don't think what we are doing. But in Sahaja Yoga there's a lot of sweetness, goodness, righteousness, and it's so encouraging. Also so many people are there, newly married. I congratulate them, all of them. (Applause) Now try to be kind to each other. If you are reserved in the beginning, you'll have to pay for it. Please try to be nice, kind and talkative; not that you'll just keep quiet and don't talk to someone, maybe there's sort of a way of impressing others: not in our Sahaja Yoga. In Sahaja Yoga I talk too much, that's why My throat is off today, and you also talk. Talking is very important, not hiding your feelings. I have told lots of things about it, how to make a marriage happy, that will make very happy also. If you have very good marriages we'll have very good children born to you, and then we'll have a new race of people in this world. These children will be the most powerful things for us, and they'll work out many things which we could not work out. Regarding our tour, I hope you have been happy about it, and then you enjoyed all the programs that we had. (Applause) Today I am going to tell you something about the Sea, because we are next to the Sea here, and must understand the feelings of a Sea. Sea is your Grandfather in a way, because He gave birth to Lakshmi, who becomes Mahalakshmi later on. So the Sea which is the Grandfather, we have to show all respect to Him. Normally the way people are living, in the West specially, also in India, people go and use it for bathrooms. But also in the West they use it in a very funny way, that they use it for swimming and all kinds of things, by which they wear funny dresses and lead a very licentious life. This is an insult to the Sea. We must respect the Sea. In India we worship the Sea. We have to worship the Sea. And in the Greek mythology also they had a, as we have Varuna, they too had a God for Sea. So this God for Sea has to be worshipped, and has to be understood and to be respected. We cannot be disrespectful. Before entering into Sea you must say "Namaskar" to the Sea, and coming out of it also you must say "Namaskar". The way we behave towards the Sea is not proper. As you know, because of Sea we get rain. If there was no Sea we would not have rain, we would not have anything. Sea is so important to our life. The greatest thing is, Sea is the Guru, is the Mahaguru which teaches us so many things. First of all, this Mahaguru is the one, creates salt for us. Christ has said: "You are the salt, salt of the universe"; meaning, you are the one which gives taste and all the qualities of the salt to the human being. So this Sea is there, we have to learn a lot from this Sea. The first of all is that it has its own maryadas. Supposing you try to press the Sea from this side, it will appear on the other side. It always keeps to its maryadas. Such a huge thing are these Oceans - are such huge, but they keep to their maryadas, they never cross their maryadas. While we just start encroaching on everybody's maryadas. So the maryadas of the Sea is very important - that it just keeps to its own line. You can draw the line when it is a high tide. Next day, whenever there will be high tide, it will be just there. So imagine such a huge thing like an Ocean can keep itself to the same maryadas, why can't we, with such

 Original Transcript : English a personality ofours, should keep to ourselves and to our maryadas? Then the second quality of the Sea is that it looks after all the animals that are in it. Somehow it is a saltish thing, but there are fishes and there are all kinds of animals which exist in the Sea, and that's why it is, we should say, the first life came into being in the Sea. So all our forefathers, long time back, must have been born in the Sea, and then we, now we have become human beings. So we have no right to insult the Sea, where our forefathers must have existed and then they started coming out, one by one as the fish came, as a reptile. Now the third quality of the Sea is that it is a deep thing, it is very deep. In some places it is extremely deep. If the depth of the Sea is reduced even by few, few feet, there will be problem all over. It keeps to its depth. It doesn't leave its depth. It keeps to its maryadas, and it keeps to its depth. In the same way, whatever depth we have got in Sahaja Yoga, we should keep to that. Normally we should not become cheap type people, we cannot afford. We have to be deep people with deep understanding of Sahaja Yoga, deep understanding of ourselves, because that's the sign of dignity. And that dignity you must have, that majestic nature of the Sea you must have. Now these trees as they are you see, are very surprisingly, they are getting all the wind from, from the Sea. But if you go nearer the Sea when they are planted, they all bend towards the Sea, never away. They give their, sort of, gratitude by bending towards the Sea. Though the wind is blowing the other way now, but they're not bothered about the wind. Their gratitude is to the Sea, so they bend towards the Sea. Even these trees understand what it is like. Without the Sea we could not have had any transport from places to places as we have been, and also there is a great lot of wealth inside the bed of the Sea which is not yet explored; but once explored, the whole world can be very rich. But they are fighting about it, which part is ours, which part is yours; that in that fight do you know, I think all this inside the Sea might shift from one place to another! And lots of wealth which is of, which is like gold, silver, diamonds, are all embedded in the Sea. And one day may be that this Lakshmi might be discovered, and we people will be enriched all over. Moreover when we carry the transport, we carry Lakshmi from one place to another, from another place to this place, so the Sea has given us that mobility and movement. I have seen the Sea reacts to Me very much. It reacts, because if there's a light in the Sea, or a sun in the, moon in the Sea reflecting, it moves with Me, I've seen it, it moves with Me. The Sea understands Me very well, because I have a special relationship and a respect for that Sea. Now when you are here, I hope you'll understand the value of the Sea; because of the Sea you are so much enjoying here, it is giving you such good feelings, and all spirituality. There is no need to go to Himalayas. The - whatever is covering is in the Himalayas, is what is nothing but the water from the Sea only. It's one of the circles, that water passes to the Himalayas, then comes back as rivers, again falls into the same Sea. They have to come to the Sea. So it is everything encircling. And then it is allowed, it goes through tapasya; it allows the Sun to create that cloud by suffering the heat, heat of the Sun, and becomes vapors, and then it goes as clouds and you get your rain. In the same way we have to be; we have to bear the heat of others, anger of others and create vapors, means the blessings, the vibrations for others. It is with Me, same thing. When I see somebody who is sick and I treat him, of course I have to bear a little bit, sometimes quite a lot. Then I absorb it and then they become vibrations. They just start flowing as vibrations. So this is what you have to learn from the Sea, which is very important for Sahaja Yogis, that you absorb everything, doesn't matter. But don't get attached to it, and let it become vapors, and the Sea can now become the vapors; as you all are here, all these vapors as vibrations should flow. This method you should try to understand by courage. Because the other day when I was coming, there was a lady sitting just on the way: "Mother, her feet are out of order, or something gone wrong. Please treat her." Why should I treat? Why can't you treat? Are you afraid to treat someone? Then there's another one who comes up to say: "Mother, You treat her." Why can't you treat? You all can treat them, you can help them, and you'll be surprised, the more you'll treat them the better you will be. 3

 Original Transcript : English You should venture, you should have that much courage to treat others. If you don't treat others you won't grow. Because that is what, like the Sea, as you have seen, you become the vibrations. When you treat others there are more vibrations. Why should God give you vibrations if you are not going to use it? Simple logic. Why should God give you light if you are not going to use it? Christ has said that, "You don't put light under a measure." That's what we are doing when we are not using our hands, our feet, our brains for Sahaja Yoga: we are not creating vibrations within ourselves. The same body that is yours can just become a bundle of vibrations, if you start using these vibrations. But if you don't use these vibrations you'll have problems, the problems, all the time, and you will not understand: "Why? I am doing everything, I am doing this": because you are not using your vibrations. You have to use your vibrations in every way possible, wherever is possible, to help others to get all right, to get well. You can at the most take a bandhan if you like, if you think that it might hurt you or something, but at least use My photograph. And after the photograph you can just touch the person, there's no harm. After all, if you are afraid even of any troubles, then what's the use of becoming a Sahaja Yogi? If the ship is not seaworthy, what's the use of making a ship? You have to be seaworthy. And that's what you have to decide, that: "We are going to be Sahaja Yoga worthy, and for that we are going to absorb all the vibrations, we are going to take up everything upon ourselves." Little trouble also they have, they'll tell Me ten times: "We went there, then this happened, then that happened, then this." I never tell you anything, what happens to Me, how I came here, what was there; nothing. Because I know that all this is, whatever I am doing, is created into vibrations. In the same way have faith, that you are all just like the Sea, like the Mahaguru, and that whatever you are doing is creating vibrations within you, by which you can save so many. 6. It's something like a cycle again, I said, that the more you give, the more you get. The more you use your vibrations, much more you'll get it. It's a very nice cycle that is acting as it has acted in the case of the Sea, as I told you, that the water goes to the Himalayas, comes back at rivers. In the same way manifold, manifold your vibrations will be growing, and I would say that we should always use our vibrations for helping others, for giving to many things, to the plant, to the anything. I mean there were some people who brought a plant: "Mother, give vibrations to that." I said: "Why don't you give the vibrations?" There's no need even to take vibrated water. You can vibrate yourself. That state has to come, that you can vibrate your own water, you can vibrate the whole waters everywhere, there's no need to take vibrated water from Me. Maybe Mine is a little more, but doesn't matter! (Laughter & applause) You are so many, so what - compared to Me, I'm only one. So all of you can work it out and do such a lot; but have faith in yourself. As the Sea has faith in itself, you should have complete faith in yourself. You must respect your Self Realization. Tell every day to yourself: "I am a Sahaja Yogi. I am a Yogi, I am a saint, I am a realized soul. I have to do this. How can I do these other nonsensical things? I have to do these good things. I have to talk to people in a sweet manner, I have to try to work it out this way." It is actually your faith in yourselfis going to help you. Your faith in yourself- that you are a great Sahaja Yogi, that you are absolutely surrendered to your Mother, works very fast. That faith you should have, that you are a Sahaja Yogi. Nothing else is needed. May God bless you all! So today we'll have a Lakshmi Puja, because ofthe Sea, and I think that will help everyone. 4

 HINDI TRANSLATION (English Talk) सारांश (Excerpt) Scanned from Hindi Chaitanya Lahari प्रकृति की सुन्दरता का आनन्द लंने का अर्थ है प्रकृति के प्रयोग करते हैं और इस प्रकार की हास्यास्पद पोशाकं पहनते साथ रहना। नारियल के फल को श्री फल कहते हैं क्योंकि हैं और अत्यन्त दुष्वरित्र जीवन जीते हैं। यह समुद्र का अपमान यह सहसार होता है। यह अचम्भ की बात है कि यह फल जानता और समझता है। यह किसी व्यक्ति या जानवर पर नहीं गिरता। इस फल से कोई आहत नहीं होता। यह मनुष्यों से पड़ती है तथा इसे समझना पड़ता है और आदर करना होता है। अधिक समझदार है। सहजयोग में बहुत मिठास, अच्छाई, भार्मिकता है और यह इतनी प्रोत्साहक है। नव किवाहितों को एक दूसरे के प्रति स्नेही होना चाहिए। आप यदि आरम्भ में अलगाव रखते हैं तो आपकी इससे हानि होगी। कृपया स्नेही सुखद और बातूनी बनें। यह नहीं है कि चुप रह कर आप दूसरों पर अपना प्रभाव डाल रहे हैं। बाते करना बहुत आवश्यक है। अपनी भावनाओं को छुपाना नहीं चाहिए। यदि आपके वैवाहिक संबंध बहुत अच्छे होंगे तो आपकी सन्तान भी बहुत अच्छी और दूसरी विशेषताएं प्रदान की। समुद्र की अपनी मर्यादा हाती होगी। तब इस संसार में एक नए प्रकार की जाति पैदा होगी। है। जब समुद्र में ज्वार उठता है तो वह एक स्थान तक आता यह बच्चे हमारे लिए सबसे प्रबल चीजें होंगी और वह ऐसे है और बापस लौट जाता है और दूसरे दिन फिर वह उसी बहुत से कार्य कर लेंगे जो हम नहीं कर सके। हम यहाँ अलीबाग में समुद्र के बहुत पास है और हमें अपने भीतर रहने वाले सभी प्राणियों की देखभाल करता है। समुद्र की भावनाओं को समझना चाहिए। एक प्रकार से समुद्र आपके नाना हैं क्योंकि समुद्र ने लक्ष्मी को जन्म दिया जो बाद जीवित रहते हैं। जोवन का प्रारम्भ ही समुद्र से हुआ हमारे सारे में महालक्ष्मी बनीं। हमें समुद्र को पूरा सम्मान देना चाहिए। पूर्वज जरूर पहले समुद्र में ही पैदा हुए होंगे और तब हम साधारणतया पश्चिमी देशों तथा भारत के लोग इसे संडास की तरह इस्तेमाल करते हैं। पश्चिमी देशों में वे इसे तैराकी के लिए करने का हमारे पास कोई अधिकार नहीं है। जब मछली है। जैसे हमारे यहाँ वरुण है, पौराणिक कथाओं में भी एक समुद्र देवता हैं- नेपचून। इस समुद्र देवता की आराधना करनी हम निरादर नहीं कर सकते। समुद्र में प्रवेश करने से पहले और समुद्र से निकलने के बाद हमें नमस्कार करना चाहिए। समुद्र के कारण हो हमें वर्षा मिलती है। समुद्र हमारे जीवन के लिए इतना आवश्यक है। समुद्र गुरु है, महागुरु है जो हमें बहुत सी बातें सिखाता है। सबसे पहले तो यह वह महागुरु है जों हमारे लिए नमक बनाता है। ईसा ने कहा है कि आप ही ब्रह्माण्ड के नमक हैं आप ही ने मनुष्यों को नमक का स्वाद मा है। समुद्र की दूसरी विशेषता यह हैं कि यह स्थान तक आता यह लवणमय है परन्तु मछलियां तथा दूसरे समुद्री जोव इसमें मनुष्य बने। हमारे पूर्वजों के रहने के स्थान समुद्र का अनादर एक

 Hindi Translation (English Talk) रेंगने वाला प्राणी बनकर बाहर आयी तो हमारे पूर्वज भी एक-एक करके समुद्र यह सहजयोग के लिए अत्यन्त आवश्यक है कि आप सब कुछ स्वयं में सोख लें। उससे जुड़े नहीं और उसे वाष्प बनने द। यह विधि हमें सुधार के द्वारा सीखनी चाहिए। सहजयोगी अब भी मेरे पास किसी के उपचार के लिए आते हैं। मैं क्या उपचार करू? आप क्यों नहीं उपचार कर सकते? क्या आप से बाहर आने लगे। समुद्र की तीसरी विशेषता यह है कि वह गहरा है । यदि इसकी गहराई केवल कुछ फुट ही कम कर दी जाए तो चारों ओर एक समस्या खड़ी हो जाएगी। इसी प्रकार जो कुछ भी गहराई हमने सहजायाग में पाई है हमें उसमें रहना चाहिए। साधारणतया हमें तुच्छ लोगों की तरह नहीं होना चाहिए। हम यह नहीं कर सकते। हमें गहरे बनना है जिससे हमें सहजयोग की और स्वयं की गहरी समझ हो। यह आत्मसम्मान की निशानी है। आपमें स्वयं तथा सहजयोग के लिए यह आत्मसम्मान होना चाहिए। यह आत्मसम्मान की निशानी है। आपमें समुद्र के समान आत्मसम्मान तथा राजसी प्रकृति होनी चाहिए। यह पेड़ सारी हवा समुद्र से लेते हैं, परन्तु यह सदा समुद्र की ओर ही झुके रहते हैं, कभी उसके विपरीत नहीं जाते। वह समुद्र की आर झुककर अपनी कृतज्ञता दर्शाते हैं। ये वृक्ष भी समझते हैं। बिना समुद्र के हमें यातायात संभव न होता और इसके अतिरिक्त किसी का उपचार करने से डरते हैं? आप सभी उनका उपचार कर सकते हैं, सहायता कर सकते हैं और जितना अधिक आप उपचार करेंगे उतने ही बढ़िया आप हो जायेंगे आपको साहस करना चाहिए। आपमें इतना साहस होना चाहिए कि दूसरों का उपचार कर सकें। यदि आप दूसरों का उपचार नहीं करते तो आपकी स्वयं की वृद्धि नहीं होगी। जब आप दूसरों का उपचार करते हैं तो अधिक चैतन्य लहरियां बहती हैं। यदि आप अपनी चैतन्य लहरियों का प्रयोग ही नहीं करने वाले तो परमात्मा आपको चैतन्य लहरियां क्यों देंगे? जब हम अपने हाथ-पैर और मस्तिष्क सहजयोग के लिए प्रयोग नहीं करते, तो हम अपने भीतर चैतन्य को पैदा नहीं करते हैं। यदि आप यह नहीं करते तो आप सबको सारे समय कोई न कोई समस्या रहेगी। आप कहंगे कि मैं ध्यान कर रहा हूँ, पूजा कर रहा हूँ, पर मैं पूर्णतय ठीक नहीं हूँ। आपको हर संभव तरीके से अपनी चैतन्य लहरियों का दूसरों को ठीक करने के लिए उपयोग करना है। यदि आप समझते हैं कि इससे तकलीफ हो सकती है तो आप की नीचे की सतह के अन्दर महान सम्पदा है समुद्र जिसकी अभी छानबीन नहीं हुई है परन्तु जब भी खोज की गई तो सारा विश्व बहुत समृद्ध हो जाएगा। परन्तु वह इस बात पर लड़ रहे हैं कि समुद्र के कोन से हिस्से पर किस का आधिपत्य है। सोना, चांदी और जवाहरात बहुत सी सम्पदा समुद्र तले में छुपी है और एक दिन शायद इस लक्ष्मी की खोज हो सके और हम सब लोग वैभवशाली बन सकें। इसके अलावा जब हम यातायात द्वारा कुछ चीजें ले जाते हैं, तो हम लक्ष्मी को एक स्थान से दूसरे स्थान पर ले जाते हैं समुद्र ने हमें यह गतिशीलता दी है। जैसी के बंधन ले सकते हैं। परन्तु कम से कम मेरे फोटो का प्रयोग अवश्य करें। इस फोटो के पश्चात आप उस व्यक्ति को केवल स्पर्श कर सकते हैं। कोई क्षति नहीं होगी। अन्ततः यदि आप किसी भी विपदा से डरते हैं तो सहजयोगी होने का क्या लाभ? यदि जहाज समुद्र में तैरने योग्य नहीं है तो जहाज बनाने का क्या लाभ? आपको समुद्र में तैरने योग्य होना चाहिए। आपको निश्चय करना है कि हम चैतन्य लहरियों को अपने अन्दर सोखेंगे और सब कुछ अपने ऊपर लेंगे। विश्वास रखें कि आप सब एक समुद्र की तरह महागुरु हो और जो कुछ भी आप कर रहे हो वह आपके भीतर चैतन्य फैला रहा है जिसके द्वारा आप इतने लोगों को बचा सकते हैं। मैंन देखा है कि समुद्र मेरे से बहुत प्रतिक्रिया करता है। यदि समुद्र में चाँद की रोशनी प्रतिबिम्बित हो रही हो तो वह मेरे साथ-साथ चलती है। समुद्र मुझे समझता है क्योंकि मेरा इसके साथ एक विशेष संबंध तथा आदर है। समुद्र के कारण ही आप यहाँ मजे ले रहे हैं। यह आपको इतना सुन्दर अनुभव और आध्यात्मिकता प्रदान कर रहा है। हिमालय पर जाने की जरूरत नहीं क्योंकि जिसने हिमालय को ढका हुआ वह इस ममुद्र का पानी ही है जो कि वर्षा और हिम के रूप में हिमालय पर जाता है और नदियों के रूप में वापस समुद्र में आ जाता है। यह एक परिक्रमा है। सभी कुछ समुद्र में आकर समाप्त हा जाता है और सूर्य की गर्मी को सहकर समुद्र बादलों की सृष्टि करता है तथा इस प्रकार तपस्या करता है। इसी प्रकार हमें भी दूसरा के ताप और गुस्से को सहन करना है और वाप्प बनाना है अर्थात् दूसरों को चैतन्य लहरियों का बरदान दंना है जब मैं किसी ऐसे व्यक्ति को देखती हूं जो रोगी है और में इसका इलाज करती हैँ तो निश्चय ही मुझे कष्ट सहना पड़ता है। उसके कष्टों को स्वयं लेकर मैं चैतन्य लहरी को बहात लगती हूँ। जितना अधिक आप देंगे उतना ही अधिक आप पायेंगे। अपनी चैतन्य लहरियों का आप जितना अधिक उपयोग करंगे, उतनी ही अधिक चैतन्य लहरियां पायंग। हमेशा दूसरों की मदद के लिए चैतऱ्य लहरियों का उपयोग करो। पेड़ों, जन्तुओं तथा प्रकृति को लहरियां दो। वह अवस्था आनी है कि आप स्वयं जल चैतन्यित कर सकें। आप सब इसका समाधान कर सकते और है है बहुत कार्य कर सकते हैं परन्तु अपने ऊपर विश्वास रखें जिससे सहायता मिले। स्वयं में विश्वास, कि आप अपनी माँ के प्रति पूर्णतया समर्पित महान सहजयोगी हैं, विश्वास ही आपका सहायक होगा। आप सबको अनन्त आशीर्वाद। 6.

 MARATHI TRANSLATION (English Talk) सारांश (Excerpt) Scanned from Marathi Chaitanya Lahari निसर्ग सोंदर्याचा आस्वाद घेणं म्हणजे त्यांच्या सानिच्यात रहाणं जीवन हे अस्तित्वात आलं, आपले सर्व पुर्वज सागरांत जन्सले असतील, आणि मग आपण मनुष्यप्राणी झालो. समुद्र जिथे आपले पुर्वज अस्तितव्वांत होते. त्याचा अपमान करण्याचा आपल्याला अधिकार नाही. तिसरी गोष्ट म्हणजे तो गहन असतो. जर समुद्राची महनता कांही फुटांनी कमी केली तर, संगळीकडेचं प्रश्न उमे राहतील. ते स्वतःची गहनता टिकवून घरतात त्याचप्रकारे सहजयोगांत आपल्याला जी गहनता मिळाली आहे, ती आपण टिकवून धरली पाहीजे. सर्वसाधारणरित्या आपण एकदम हलक्या प्रतीचे होता कामा नये. नारळाला श्रीफळ महणतात कारण, नारळ म्हणजे सहस्त्रार, ही फार আश्चर्यकारक गोष्ट आहे कीं, हे फळ सारं काही जाणतं, समजाबून घेतं कौणत्याही प्राण्यादर, माणसावर कोणालाडी इजा होत नाही. मानवप्राण्यापेक्षा ते जाए्त संवेदनाक्षम आहे. सहज योगामध्ये खूपच माधुर्य, चांगुलपणा, न्यायीपणा आहे आणि तो कितीतरी उत्तेजन देणारा आहे. ते पडत नाही. फळाकडून नूतन वधूवरांनी एकमेकांविषयी ममताळू असावं. प्रथमच तुम्ही जर आखडून असाल, तर तुम्हाला त्याची किंमत मोजाबी लागेल. कृपया इतरांशी बोलकेपणाने चांगले, दयाळू पद्धतीने वागण्याचा प्रयल करा. जापल्याला त्स बनून चालणार नाही, आपल्याला गहन व्यक्तीमत्वाचे लोक झालं पाहीजे. स्वतःची आणि सहजयोगाची गहन जाणीव असणारे. गपप बसून तुम्ही इतरांवर छाप पाडता असं नसतं. बोलणं फार महत्त्वावं | ते माननीयतेचं लक्षण आहे. आपल्याला स्वतःची आणि सहज योगाची आहे. आणि तुमच्या भावना लपदून ठेवूं नका. जर तुमची उग्न फार माननीयता हवी. सागराचं माननीय. राजेशाही स्वरूप तुमच्यामध्ये असले पाहीजे. ही झाडं यांना सगळा वारा समुद्राकडून मिळतो, पण ती समुद्राकडेच वाकतात व उलटीकडे नाही. त्याप्रकारे ते त्यांची कृतज्ञता दाखवितात, झाडांनाही समजतं. समुद्राशिवाय आपली वहातूक झाली नसती. याशिवाय समुद्रतळाशी अतोनात संपत्ी आहे, जिथे अजूनपर्यंत कसून पहाणी झाली नाही. एकदा कां तिचा पूर्ण अभ्यास झला की सर्व जग अंत्यंत समृद्ध होईल. पण समुद्राचा कोणता भाग कोणत्या देशाचा आहे, थाबाबत ते भांडत आहेत. सोने, चांदी, हिरे, अशी अनेक मूल्यवान रले समुद्राच्या तळाशी आहेत. कदाचित एके दिवशी ही लक्ष्मी संशोधनास सापडेल आपण लोक परत समृद्ध होऊ आणि त्याशिवाय ही लक्ष्मी आपण एका जागेहून दुसरीकडे नेऊ शकूं. बाहतूक होऊ शकेल. उत्तम झाली, तर तुम्हाला फार चांगली मुलं होतील आणि मग या जगतान नव्या जातीची लोक जन्माला येतील. ही मुलें आपल्यासाठी फार महत्वपूर्ण गोष्ट असेल, आणि आपण ज्या गोष्टी कार्यान्वित करूं शकलो नाही, त्यागोष्टी ही मुलं कार्यान्वित करतील. इये अलीबागला आपण समुद्रकिनान्याला आहांत. आणि समुद्राच्या भावना आपण जाणल्या पाहीजेत, एक प्रकारे, सागर हे तुमचे आजोबा आहेत. कारण स्यांनी लक्ष्मीला जन्म दिला जी नंतर महालक्ष्मी झाली, आपण त्यांना सर्व प्रकारे आदर दाखविला पाहीजे. इथे लोक स्नानगृहाची वापर करतात, पाश्चात्य देशांत ते समुद्राचा वापर पोहोण्यासाठी करतात. विचित्र कपड़े घालून उच्छूंखल जीवन व्यतीत करतात. हा सागराचा अपमान आहे. आपल्याकडे जसा वरुण आहे तसा | समुद्राने आपल्याला ते दळणवळण दिलं आहे. ग्रीक तत्वज्ञानांत नेपच्यून ही समुद्रदेवता आहे. या समुद्र देवतेची पुजा कैली पाहीजे. तिला जाणलं पाहीजे. तिचा आदर राखला पाहीजे. आपण अनादर करता कामा नये. समुद्रांत प्रवेश करताना आणि बाहेर येतांना आपण त्याला नमस्कार म्हटले पाहीजेत. शत समुद्राची माझ्याबरीबर खूप प्रतिक्रिया असते, हे मी पाहील आहे. जर उजेड असला, तर चंद्राचं प्रतिबिंब सागरांत पडलेलं असलं, तर ते माझ्या बरोबर हलतं. समुद्र मला चांगल्या तन्हेने जाणतो. कारण समुद्राबद्दल मला आदर आहे आणि त्याच्याशी माझं विशिष्ठ नातं आहे. समुद्रामुळे आपल्याला पाऊस मिळतो. आपल्या जीवनासाठी | समुद्रामुळे तुम्हाला इथे आनंद उपभोगता येतो आहे. तो तुम्हाला इतका चांगला आत्मिक आनंद आणि संवेदना देत आहे. हिमालयांत जाण्याची जरुर नाही. कारण हिमालयाला जे काही आच्छादन आहे, ते समुद्राचे पाणीच आहे. जे पाऊस म्हणून येतं, हिमालयावर बर्फ बनून जातं आणि परत नदी होऊन सागराला येऊन मिळतं. ते एक वर्तुळ आहे. सर्व कांही समुद्रात विलीन होतं. सुर्याकडून त्याच्या उन्हातून करपून मेघ बनताना तपस्येमधून जातं. त्याप्रकारे आपल्याला इतरांची उष्णता आणि राग सहन करावयाचा आहे. आणि वाफा तयार करायच्या आहेत, म्हणजे आशिर्वाद, इतरांसाठी व्हायब्रेशन्स, जेव्हां मी एखाद्या रोग्याला बधते आणि त्याच्या वर उपचार करते त्याचवेळी मला सहन करावयास लागते. समुद्र किती महत्वाचा आहे! सांगर म्हणजे गुरु. महागुरु जो आपल्याला अनेक गोष्टी शिकवितो प्रथमतः हा महागुरु आपल्यासाठी मीठ निर्माण करतो, खिस्ताने म्हटलं आले की, तुम्ही विश्वाचे मीठ आहांत मानवजातीला चव आणि मीठाचे सर्व गुणधर्म देणारे, ते तुम्ही आहात. समुद्राला त्याच्या स्वतःच्या मर्यादा आहेत जैव्हा त्याची भरती असते तेच्हा तो एका विंदूपर्यंत येतो आणि मग मागे जातो परत दुसन्या दिवशी तो त्या बिंदूकडे येतो. समुद्राची दुसरी गुणवत्ता म्हणजे त्याच्या आंत असलेल्या सर्व प्राण्यांची तो काळजी घेतो. तो खारट आहे, पण मासे आणि इतर जलचरांचे तिथे अस्तित्व असतं. आणि समुद्रांतच प्रथम

 Marathi Translation (English Talk) मी ते शोषून घेतो आणि मग व्हाय्रेशन्स तयार होतात. आणि व्हायब्रेशन्स म्हणून त्यांचा प्रवाह सुरू होतो. सहजयोगी म्हणून हे पण महत्वाचे आहे की, तुम्ही सर्व गोष्टींचं शोषण करणे. त्याला धरून चिकटून राहूं नका. आणि त्याची वाफ होऊ भिती दाटत असेल. तर सहजयोगी होण्याचा काय उपयोग आहे? जर घा चुका सुधारण्याची आपल्याला ही पद्धत जाणली पाहीजे. सहजयोगी अजून माझ्याकडे कोणावर तरी उपचार करण्यासाठी येतात. मी कशाला उपचार केले पाहीजेत? तुम्ही उपचार का करू शकत नाही? तुम्हाला | की, आम्ही व्हायग्रेशन्स शोपून घेत आहोत आणि सर्व कांही स्वतः वर कोणावर उपचार करण्याची भिती वाटते कों? तुम्ही सर्व त्यांच्यावर घेणार आहोत. हा विश्वास ठेवा की, तुम्ही सारे समुद्रासारखे आहात. उपचार करू शकता. त्यांना मदत क्ूं शकता. जेव्हा अधिक लोकांवर तुम्ही उपचार कराले, तेवदे तुम्ही चांगले काल. तुम्ही धाडस केले पाहीजे. इतरांवर उपचार करण्यासाठी तुम्हाला तेवढे धैर्य पाहीजे, इतरांवर तुही उपचार केले नाहीत, तर तुमची वाढ होणार नाही. जेव्हां तुम्ही इतरांना वरे बरता, त्यावेळी जास्त व्हायब्रेशन्स असतात, जर तुम्ही त्या व्हाय्ेशन्सचा उपयोग करणार नाही तर, देवाने तुम्हाला व्हायक्रेशन्स का द्यावी? आपले हात पाय, मेंद्, आपण सहजयोगांसाठी बापरत नसलो, स्वतःमध्ये आपण व्हायब्रेशन्स तयार करत नसलो तर, जर तुम्ही तसे करीत नसाल तर, सर्वांना सतत अडचणी बेत असतात. तुम्ही म्हणता मी ध्यान करतो. मी पुजा करतो, तरीही मला बरे बाटत नाही. व्हायब्रेशन्सची शक्य असेल त्या प्रत्येक प्रकारे तुम्हाला उपयोग केला पाहीजे. आणि इतरांना बरे करण्यासाठी शक्य ते केले पाहीजे. तुम्हाला त्रास होईल अशी भिती बाटली तर बंधन घ्या. पण कमीत कमी माझ्या फोटोचा उपयोग करा. फोटो नंतर तुम्ही त्या व्यक्तीला स्पर्श करू शकता. आणि त्यांत काही त्रास होणार नाही. आणि शेवटी जर तुम्हाला त्रासाची नाव सांगर तरून जाणार नसेल तर ती बनविण्यात काय अर्थ आहे? तुमच्यात सागर तरण्याची क्षमता हवी. तुम्ही हा निश्चय केला पाहीजे हा महागुरु आणि तुम्ही, जे कांही करीत आहांत ते, तुमच्यामध्ये व्हायब्रेशन्स तयार करीत आहेत, ज्यामुळे तुम्ही अनेकांना वाचवृं शकता. जेवढे जास्त तुम्ही देता तेवढे जास्त तुम्हाला मिळते. जेवढी जास्त व्हायब्रेशन्स तुम्ही ्याल, तेवदी जास्त तुम्हाला मिळतील. नेहमी इतरांना मदत करण्यासाठी व्हायब्रेशन्स बापरा. झाडना, प्राण्यांना, निसर्गाला व्हायब्रेशन्स द्या. तुम्ही स्वतः व्हायद्रेट करू शकता. ती स्थिती यायची आहे. जेव्हा तुम्ही तुमची स्वतःचं पाणी तुम्ही व्हायब्रेट करू शकाल. तुम्ही सर्व तसे कार्यान्वित करून बरंच काही करू शकता. पण स्वतःमध्ये विश्वास ठेवा. ज्यामुळे तुम्हाला मदत होईल. तुमचा स्वतःवरचा विश्वास की, तुम्ही महान सहजयोगी आहांत. आणि आईमध्ये पूर्णपणे विश्वास ठेवा. "ईश्बर तुम्हाला आशिर्वाद देवो.' तुमच्या ০



----------------------

19911229_Shri Mahalakshmi  Puja_Alibag.pdf-page0.txt 
 Shri Mahalakshmi Puja
Date
29th December 1991
:
Alibag
Place
Type
Puja
Marathi & English
Speech
Language
CONTENTS
| Transcript
|
Marathi
02 - 04
English
Hindi
||
Translation
English
05 - 06
Hindi
07 - 08
Marathi
 19911229_Shri Mahalakshmi  Puja_Alibag.pdf-page1.txt 
 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT
ENGLISH TALK
We have come to this place many a times, it's a beautiful place, you all like it. It's very rustic,
absolutely in the interior. Only thing is, coming all the way from Ganapatipule, you have to spend lot
of time. All this you are doing just to enjoy the beauty of nature, and to be with the nature.
I have told you already that this fruit of coconut is called as "shreephal", because it is the
Sahasrara, and it's very surprising that this fruit knows and understands. It won't fall on any animal or
on any person. If you are sleeping here, it will never fall on you. Nobody is hurt ever by this fruit. It is
so sensible, more than human beings, because we do hurt others, we do trouble others, we don't think
what we are doing. But in Sahaja Yoga there's a lot of sweetness, goodness, righteousness, and it's so
encouraging. Also so many people are there, newly married. I congratulate them, all of them.
(Applause)
Now try to be kind to each other. If you are reserved in the beginning, you'll have to pay for it.
Please try to be nice, kind and talkative; not that you'll just keep quiet and don't talk to someone,
maybe there's sort of a way of impressing others: not in our Sahaja Yoga. In Sahaja Yoga I talk too
much, that's why My throat is off today, and you also talk. Talking is very important, not hiding your
feelings. I have told lots of things about it, how to make a marriage happy, that will make very happy
also. If you have very good marriages we'll have very good children born to you, and then we'll have a
new race of people in this world. These children will be the most powerful things for us, and they'll
work out many things which we could not work out.
Regarding our tour, I hope you have been happy about it, and then you enjoyed all the programs
that we had. (Applause)
Today I am going to tell you something about the Sea, because we are next to the Sea here, and
must understand the feelings of a Sea. Sea is your Grandfather in a way, because He gave birth to
Lakshmi, who becomes Mahalakshmi later on. So the Sea which is the Grandfather, we have to show
all respect to Him. Normally the way people are living, in the West specially, also in India, people go
and use it for bathrooms. But also in the West they use it in a very funny way, that they use it for
swimming and all kinds of things, by which they wear funny dresses and lead a very licentious life.
This is an insult to the Sea. We must respect the Sea. In India we worship the Sea. We have to worship
the Sea. And in the Greek mythology also they had a, as we have Varuna, they too had a God for Sea.
So this God for Sea has to be worshipped, and has to be understood and to be respected. We cannot be
disrespectful. Before entering into Sea you must say "Namaskar" to the Sea, and coming out of it also
you must say "Namaskar". The way we behave towards the Sea is not proper.
As you know, because of Sea we get rain. If there was no Sea we would not have rain, we would
not have anything. Sea is so important to our life. The greatest thing is, Sea is the Guru, is the
Mahaguru which teaches us so many things. First of all, this Mahaguru is the one, creates salt for us.
Christ has said: "You are the salt, salt of the universe"; meaning, you are the one which gives taste and
all the qualities of the salt to the human being.
So this Sea is there, we have to learn a lot from this Sea. The first of all is that it has its own
maryadas. Supposing you try to press the Sea from this side, it will appear on the other side. It always
keeps to its maryadas. Such a huge thing are these Oceans - are such huge, but they keep to their
maryadas, they never cross their maryadas. While we just start encroaching on everybody's
maryadas. So the maryadas of the Sea is very important - that it just keeps to its own line. You can draw
the line when it is a high tide. Next day, whenever there will be high tide, it will be just there. So
imagine such a huge thing like an Ocean can keep itself to the same maryadas, why can't we, with such
 19911229_Shri Mahalakshmi  Puja_Alibag.pdf-page2.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
a personality ofours, should keep to ourselves and to our maryadas?
Then the second quality of the Sea is that it looks after all the animals that are in it. Somehow it is
a saltish thing, but there are fishes and there are all kinds of animals which exist in the Sea, and that's
why it is, we should say, the first life came into being in the Sea. So all our forefathers, long time back,
must have been born in the Sea, and then we, now we have become human beings. So we have no right
to insult the Sea, where our forefathers must have existed and then they started coming out, one by one
as the fish came, as a reptile.
Now the third quality of the Sea is that it is a deep thing, it is very deep. In some places it is
extremely deep. If the depth of the Sea is reduced even by few, few feet, there will be problem all over.
It keeps to its depth. It doesn't leave its depth. It keeps to its maryadas, and it keeps to its depth. In the
same way, whatever depth we have got in Sahaja Yoga, we should keep to that. Normally we should
not become cheap type people, we cannot afford. We have to be deep people with deep understanding
of Sahaja Yoga, deep understanding of ourselves, because that's the sign of dignity. And that dignity
you must have, that majestic nature of the Sea you must have.
Now these trees as they are you see, are very surprisingly, they are getting all the wind from, from
the Sea. But if you go nearer the Sea when they are planted, they all bend towards the Sea, never away.
They give their, sort of, gratitude by bending towards the Sea. Though the wind is blowing the other
way now, but they're not bothered about the wind. Their gratitude is to the Sea, so they bend towards
the Sea. Even these trees understand what it is like. Without the Sea we could not have had any
transport from places to places as we have been, and also there is a great lot of wealth inside the bed of
the Sea which is not yet explored; but once explored, the whole world can be very rich. But they are
fighting about it, which part is ours, which part is yours; that in that fight do you know, I think all this
inside the Sea might shift from one place to another! And lots of wealth which is of, which is like gold,
silver, diamonds, are all embedded in the Sea. And one day may be that this Lakshmi might be
discovered, and we people will be enriched all over. Moreover when we carry the transport, we carry
Lakshmi from one place to another, from another place to this place, so the Sea has given us that
mobility and movement.
I have seen the Sea reacts to Me very much. It reacts, because if there's a light in the Sea, or a sun
in the, moon in the Sea reflecting, it moves with Me, I've seen it, it moves with Me. The Sea
understands Me very well, because I have a special relationship and a respect for that Sea.
Now when you are here, I hope you'll understand the value of the Sea; because of the Sea you are
so much enjoying here, it is giving you such good feelings, and all spirituality. There is no need to go
to Himalayas. The - whatever is covering is in the Himalayas, is what is nothing but the water from the
Sea only. It's one of the circles, that water passes to the Himalayas, then comes back as rivers, again
falls into the same Sea. They have to come to the Sea. So it is everything encircling. And then it is
allowed, it goes through tapasya; it allows the Sun to create that cloud by suffering the heat, heat of the
Sun, and becomes vapors, and then it goes as clouds and you get your rain. In the same way we have to
be; we have to bear the heat of others, anger of others and create vapors, means the blessings, the
vibrations for others. It is with Me, same thing. When I see somebody who is sick and I treat him, of
course I have to bear a little bit, sometimes quite a lot. Then I absorb it and then they become
vibrations. They just start flowing as vibrations. So this is what you have to learn from the Sea, which
is very important for Sahaja Yogis, that you absorb everything, doesn't matter. But don't get attached
to it, and let it become vapors, and the Sea can now become the vapors; as you all are here, all these
vapors as vibrations should flow.
This method you should try to understand by courage. Because the other day when I was coming,
there was a lady sitting just on the way: "Mother, her feet are out of order, or something gone wrong.
Please treat her." Why should I treat? Why can't you treat? Are you afraid to treat someone? Then
there's another one who comes up to say: "Mother, You treat her." Why can't you treat? You all can
treat them, you can help them, and you'll be surprised, the more you'll treat them the better you will be.
3
 19911229_Shri Mahalakshmi  Puja_Alibag.pdf-page3.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
You should venture, you should have that much courage to treat others. If you don't treat others you
won't grow. Because that is what, like the Sea, as you have seen, you become the vibrations. When you
treat others there are more vibrations. Why should God give you vibrations if you are not going to use
it? Simple logic. Why should God give you light if you are not going to use it? Christ has said that,
"You don't put light under a measure." That's what we are doing when we are not using our hands, our
feet, our brains for Sahaja Yoga: we are not creating vibrations within ourselves. The same body that is
yours can just become a bundle of vibrations, if you start using these vibrations. But if you don't use
these vibrations you'll have problems, the problems, all the time, and you will not understand: "Why?
I am doing everything, I am doing this": because you are not using your vibrations. You have to use
your vibrations in every way possible, wherever is possible, to help others to get all right, to get well.
You can at the most take a bandhan if you like, if you think that it might hurt you or something, but at
least use My photograph. And after the photograph you can just touch the person, there's no harm.
After all, if you are afraid even of any troubles, then what's the use of becoming a Sahaja Yogi? If the
ship is not seaworthy, what's the use of making a ship? You have to be seaworthy.
And that's what you have to decide, that: "We are going to be Sahaja Yoga worthy, and for that we
are going to absorb all the vibrations, we are going to take up everything upon ourselves." Little
trouble also they have, they'll tell Me ten times: "We went there, then this happened, then that
happened, then this." I never tell you anything, what happens to Me, how I came here, what was there;
nothing. Because I know that all this is, whatever I am doing, is created into vibrations. In the same
way have faith, that you are all just like the Sea, like the Mahaguru, and that whatever you are doing is
creating vibrations within you, by which you can save so many.
6.
It's something like a cycle again, I said, that the more you give, the more you get. The more you
use your vibrations, much more you'll get it. It's a very nice cycle that is acting as it has acted in the
case of the Sea, as I told you, that the water goes to the Himalayas, comes back at rivers. In the same
way manifold, manifold your vibrations will be growing, and I would say that we should always use
our vibrations for helping others, for giving to many things, to the plant, to the anything. I mean there
were some people who brought a plant: "Mother, give vibrations to that." I said: "Why don't you give
the vibrations?"
There's no need even to take vibrated water. You can vibrate yourself. That state has to come, that
you can vibrate your own water, you can vibrate the whole waters everywhere, there's no need to take
vibrated water from Me. Maybe Mine is a little more, but doesn't matter! (Laughter & applause) You
are so many, so what - compared to Me, I'm only one. So all of you can work it out and do such a lot;
but have faith in yourself. As the Sea has faith in itself, you should have complete faith in yourself.
You must respect your Self Realization. Tell every day to yourself: "I am a Sahaja Yogi. I am a Yogi, I
am a saint, I am a realized soul. I have to do this. How can I do these other nonsensical things? I have to
do these good things. I have to talk to people in a sweet manner, I have to try to work it out this way." It
is actually your faith in yourselfis going to help you. Your faith in yourself- that you are a great Sahaja
Yogi, that you are absolutely surrendered to your Mother, works very fast. That faith you should have,
that you are a Sahaja Yogi. Nothing else is needed.
May God bless you all!
So today we'll have a Lakshmi Puja, because ofthe Sea, and I think that will help everyone.
4
 19911229_Shri Mahalakshmi  Puja_Alibag.pdf-page4.txt 
 HINDI TRANSLATION
(English Talk)
सारांश (Excerpt)
Scanned from Hindi Chaitanya Lahari
प्रकृति की सुन्दरता का आनन्द लंने का अर्थ है प्रकृति के प्रयोग करते हैं और इस प्रकार की हास्यास्पद पोशाकं पहनते
साथ रहना। नारियल के फल को श्री फल कहते हैं क्योंकि हैं और अत्यन्त दुष्वरित्र जीवन जीते हैं। यह समुद्र का अपमान
यह सहसार होता है। यह अचम्भ की बात है कि यह फल
जानता और समझता है। यह किसी व्यक्ति या जानवर पर नहीं
गिरता। इस फल से कोई आहत नहीं होता। यह मनुष्यों से पड़ती है तथा इसे समझना पड़ता है और आदर करना होता है।
अधिक समझदार है। सहजयोग में बहुत मिठास, अच्छाई,
भार्मिकता है और यह इतनी प्रोत्साहक है। नव किवाहितों को
एक दूसरे के प्रति स्नेही होना चाहिए। आप यदि आरम्भ में
अलगाव रखते हैं तो आपकी इससे हानि होगी। कृपया स्नेही
सुखद और बातूनी बनें। यह नहीं है कि चुप रह कर आप दूसरों
पर अपना प्रभाव डाल रहे हैं। बाते करना बहुत आवश्यक है।
अपनी भावनाओं को छुपाना नहीं चाहिए। यदि आपके वैवाहिक
संबंध बहुत अच्छे होंगे तो आपकी सन्तान भी बहुत अच्छी और दूसरी विशेषताएं प्रदान की। समुद्र की अपनी मर्यादा हाती
होगी। तब इस संसार में एक नए प्रकार की जाति पैदा होगी। है। जब समुद्र में ज्वार उठता है तो वह एक स्थान तक आता
यह बच्चे हमारे लिए सबसे प्रबल चीजें होंगी और वह ऐसे है और बापस लौट जाता है और दूसरे दिन फिर वह उसी
बहुत से कार्य कर लेंगे जो हम नहीं कर सके।
हम यहाँ अलीबाग में समुद्र के बहुत पास है और हमें अपने भीतर रहने वाले सभी प्राणियों की देखभाल करता है।
समुद्र की भावनाओं को समझना चाहिए। एक प्रकार से समुद्र
आपके नाना हैं क्योंकि समुद्र ने लक्ष्मी को जन्म दिया जो बाद जीवित रहते हैं। जोवन का प्रारम्भ ही समुद्र से हुआ हमारे सारे
में महालक्ष्मी बनीं। हमें समुद्र को पूरा सम्मान देना चाहिए। पूर्वज जरूर पहले समुद्र में ही पैदा हुए होंगे और तब हम
साधारणतया पश्चिमी देशों तथा भारत के लोग इसे संडास की
तरह इस्तेमाल करते हैं। पश्चिमी देशों में वे इसे तैराकी के लिए करने का हमारे पास कोई अधिकार नहीं है। जब मछली
है। जैसे हमारे यहाँ वरुण है, पौराणिक कथाओं में भी एक
समुद्र देवता हैं- नेपचून। इस समुद्र देवता की आराधना करनी
हम निरादर नहीं कर सकते। समुद्र में प्रवेश करने से पहले और
समुद्र से निकलने के बाद हमें नमस्कार करना चाहिए।
समुद्र के कारण हो हमें वर्षा मिलती है। समुद्र हमारे जीवन
के लिए इतना आवश्यक है। समुद्र गुरु है, महागुरु है जो हमें
बहुत सी बातें सिखाता है। सबसे पहले तो यह वह महागुरु है
जों हमारे लिए नमक बनाता है। ईसा ने कहा है कि आप ही
ब्रह्माण्ड के नमक हैं आप ही ने मनुष्यों को नमक का स्वाद
मा
है।
समुद्र की दूसरी विशेषता यह हैं कि यह
स्थान तक आता
यह लवणमय है परन्तु मछलियां तथा दूसरे समुद्री जोव इसमें
मनुष्य बने। हमारे पूर्वजों के रहने के स्थान समुद्र का अनादर
एक
 19911229_Shri Mahalakshmi  Puja_Alibag.pdf-page5.txt 
 Hindi Translation (English Talk)
रेंगने वाला प्राणी बनकर बाहर आयी तो हमारे पूर्वज भी
एक-एक करके समुद्र
यह सहजयोग के लिए अत्यन्त आवश्यक है कि आप सब
कुछ स्वयं में सोख लें। उससे जुड़े नहीं और उसे वाष्प बनने
द। यह विधि हमें सुधार के द्वारा सीखनी चाहिए। सहजयोगी
अब भी मेरे पास किसी के उपचार के लिए आते हैं। मैं क्या
उपचार करू? आप क्यों नहीं उपचार कर सकते? क्या आप
से बाहर आने लगे।
समुद्र की तीसरी विशेषता यह है कि वह गहरा है । यदि
इसकी गहराई केवल कुछ फुट ही कम कर दी जाए तो चारों
ओर एक समस्या खड़ी हो जाएगी। इसी प्रकार जो कुछ भी
गहराई हमने सहजायाग में पाई है हमें उसमें रहना चाहिए।
साधारणतया हमें तुच्छ लोगों की तरह नहीं होना चाहिए। हम
यह नहीं कर सकते। हमें गहरे बनना है जिससे हमें सहजयोग
की और स्वयं की गहरी समझ हो। यह आत्मसम्मान की
निशानी है। आपमें स्वयं तथा सहजयोग के लिए यह आत्मसम्मान
होना चाहिए। यह आत्मसम्मान की निशानी है। आपमें समुद्र के
समान आत्मसम्मान तथा राजसी प्रकृति होनी चाहिए। यह पेड़
सारी हवा समुद्र से लेते हैं, परन्तु यह सदा समुद्र की ओर ही
झुके रहते हैं, कभी उसके विपरीत नहीं जाते। वह समुद्र की
आर झुककर अपनी कृतज्ञता दर्शाते हैं। ये वृक्ष भी समझते हैं।
बिना समुद्र के हमें यातायात संभव न होता और इसके
अतिरिक्त
किसी का उपचार करने से डरते हैं? आप सभी उनका उपचार
कर सकते हैं, सहायता कर सकते हैं और जितना अधिक आप
उपचार करेंगे उतने ही बढ़िया आप हो जायेंगे आपको साहस
करना चाहिए। आपमें इतना साहस होना चाहिए कि दूसरों का
उपचार कर सकें। यदि आप दूसरों का उपचार नहीं करते तो
आपकी स्वयं की वृद्धि नहीं होगी। जब आप दूसरों का उपचार
करते हैं तो अधिक चैतन्य लहरियां बहती हैं। यदि आप अपनी
चैतन्य लहरियों का प्रयोग ही नहीं करने वाले तो परमात्मा
आपको चैतन्य लहरियां क्यों देंगे? जब हम अपने हाथ-पैर और
मस्तिष्क सहजयोग के लिए प्रयोग नहीं करते, तो हम अपने
भीतर चैतन्य को पैदा नहीं करते हैं। यदि आप यह नहीं करते
तो आप सबको सारे समय कोई न कोई समस्या रहेगी। आप
कहंगे कि मैं ध्यान कर रहा हूँ, पूजा कर रहा हूँ, पर मैं पूर्णतय
ठीक नहीं हूँ। आपको हर संभव तरीके से अपनी चैतन्य
लहरियों का दूसरों को ठीक करने के लिए उपयोग करना है।
यदि आप समझते हैं कि इससे तकलीफ हो सकती है तो आप
की नीचे की सतह के अन्दर महान सम्पदा है
समुद्र
जिसकी अभी छानबीन नहीं हुई है परन्तु जब भी खोज की गई
तो सारा विश्व बहुत समृद्ध हो जाएगा। परन्तु वह इस बात पर
लड़ रहे हैं कि समुद्र के कोन से हिस्से पर किस का आधिपत्य
है। सोना, चांदी और जवाहरात बहुत सी सम्पदा समुद्र
तले में छुपी है और एक दिन शायद इस लक्ष्मी की खोज हो
सके और हम सब लोग वैभवशाली बन सकें। इसके अलावा
जब हम यातायात द्वारा कुछ चीजें ले जाते हैं, तो हम लक्ष्मी
को एक स्थान से दूसरे स्थान पर ले जाते हैं समुद्र ने हमें यह
गतिशीलता दी है।
जैसी
के
बंधन ले सकते हैं। परन्तु कम से कम मेरे फोटो का प्रयोग
अवश्य करें। इस फोटो के पश्चात आप उस व्यक्ति को केवल
स्पर्श कर सकते हैं। कोई क्षति नहीं होगी। अन्ततः यदि आप
किसी भी विपदा से डरते हैं तो सहजयोगी होने का क्या लाभ?
यदि जहाज समुद्र में तैरने योग्य नहीं है तो जहाज बनाने का
क्या लाभ? आपको समुद्र में तैरने योग्य होना चाहिए। आपको
निश्चय करना है कि हम चैतन्य लहरियों को अपने अन्दर
सोखेंगे और सब कुछ अपने ऊपर लेंगे। विश्वास रखें कि आप
सब एक समुद्र की तरह महागुरु हो और जो कुछ भी आप कर
रहे हो वह आपके भीतर चैतन्य फैला रहा है जिसके द्वारा आप
इतने लोगों को बचा सकते हैं।
मैंन देखा है कि समुद्र मेरे से बहुत प्रतिक्रिया करता है।
यदि समुद्र में चाँद की रोशनी प्रतिबिम्बित हो रही हो तो वह
मेरे साथ-साथ चलती है। समुद्र मुझे समझता है क्योंकि मेरा
इसके साथ एक विशेष संबंध तथा आदर है। समुद्र के कारण
ही आप यहाँ मजे ले रहे हैं। यह आपको इतना सुन्दर अनुभव
और आध्यात्मिकता प्रदान कर रहा है। हिमालय पर जाने की
जरूरत नहीं क्योंकि जिसने हिमालय को ढका हुआ वह इस
ममुद्र का पानी ही है जो कि वर्षा और हिम के रूप में
हिमालय पर जाता है और नदियों के रूप में वापस समुद्र में आ
जाता है। यह एक परिक्रमा है। सभी कुछ समुद्र में आकर
समाप्त हा जाता है और सूर्य की गर्मी को सहकर समुद्र बादलों
की सृष्टि करता है तथा इस प्रकार तपस्या करता है। इसी
प्रकार हमें भी दूसरा के ताप और गुस्से को सहन करना है और
वाप्प बनाना है अर्थात् दूसरों को चैतन्य लहरियों का बरदान
दंना है जब मैं किसी ऐसे व्यक्ति को देखती हूं जो रोगी है
और में इसका इलाज करती हैँ तो निश्चय ही मुझे कष्ट सहना
पड़ता है। उसके कष्टों को स्वयं लेकर मैं चैतन्य लहरी को
बहात लगती हूँ।
जितना अधिक आप देंगे उतना ही अधिक आप पायेंगे।
अपनी चैतन्य लहरियों का आप जितना अधिक उपयोग करंगे,
उतनी ही अधिक चैतन्य लहरियां पायंग। हमेशा दूसरों की मदद
के लिए चैतऱ्य लहरियों का उपयोग करो। पेड़ों, जन्तुओं तथा
प्रकृति को लहरियां दो। वह अवस्था आनी है कि आप स्वयं
जल चैतन्यित कर सकें। आप सब इसका समाधान कर सकते
और
है
है बहुत कार्य कर सकते हैं परन्तु अपने ऊपर विश्वास
रखें जिससे सहायता मिले। स्वयं में विश्वास, कि आप अपनी
माँ के प्रति पूर्णतया समर्पित महान सहजयोगी हैं, विश्वास ही
आपका सहायक होगा।
आप सबको अनन्त आशीर्वाद।
6.
 19911229_Shri Mahalakshmi  Puja_Alibag.pdf-page6.txt 
 MARATHI TRANSLATION
(English Talk)
सारांश (Excerpt)
Scanned from Marathi Chaitanya Lahari
निसर्ग सोंदर्याचा आस्वाद घेणं म्हणजे त्यांच्या सानिच्यात रहाणं जीवन हे अस्तित्वात आलं, आपले सर्व पुर्वज सागरांत जन्सले असतील,
आणि मग आपण मनुष्यप्राणी झालो. समुद्र जिथे आपले पुर्वज
अस्तितव्वांत होते. त्याचा अपमान करण्याचा आपल्याला अधिकार नाही.
तिसरी गोष्ट म्हणजे तो गहन असतो. जर समुद्राची महनता
कांही फुटांनी कमी केली तर, संगळीकडेचं प्रश्न उमे राहतील. ते
स्वतःची गहनता टिकवून घरतात त्याचप्रकारे सहजयोगांत आपल्याला
जी गहनता मिळाली आहे, ती आपण टिकवून धरली पाहीजे.
सर्वसाधारणरित्या आपण एकदम हलक्या प्रतीचे होता कामा नये.
नारळाला श्रीफळ महणतात कारण, नारळ म्हणजे सहस्त्रार, ही फार
আश्चर्यकारक गोष्ट आहे कीं, हे फळ सारं काही जाणतं, समजाबून
घेतं कौणत्याही प्राण्यादर, माणसावर
कोणालाडी इजा होत नाही. मानवप्राण्यापेक्षा ते जाए्त संवेदनाक्षम आहे.
सहज योगामध्ये खूपच माधुर्य, चांगुलपणा, न्यायीपणा आहे आणि तो
कितीतरी उत्तेजन देणारा आहे.
ते पडत नाही. फळाकडून
नूतन वधूवरांनी एकमेकांविषयी ममताळू असावं. प्रथमच तुम्ही
जर आखडून असाल, तर तुम्हाला त्याची किंमत मोजाबी लागेल. कृपया
इतरांशी बोलकेपणाने चांगले, दयाळू पद्धतीने वागण्याचा प्रयल करा.
जापल्याला त्स बनून चालणार नाही, आपल्याला गहन व्यक्तीमत्वाचे
लोक झालं पाहीजे. स्वतःची आणि सहजयोगाची गहन जाणीव असणारे.
गपप बसून तुम्ही इतरांवर छाप पाडता असं नसतं. बोलणं फार महत्त्वावं | ते माननीयतेचं लक्षण आहे. आपल्याला स्वतःची आणि सहज योगाची
आहे. आणि तुमच्या भावना लपदून ठेवूं नका. जर तुमची उग्न फार माननीयता हवी. सागराचं माननीय. राजेशाही स्वरूप तुमच्यामध्ये असले
पाहीजे. ही झाडं यांना सगळा वारा समुद्राकडून मिळतो, पण ती
समुद्राकडेच वाकतात व उलटीकडे नाही. त्याप्रकारे ते त्यांची कृतज्ञता
दाखवितात, झाडांनाही समजतं. समुद्राशिवाय आपली वहातूक झाली
नसती. याशिवाय समुद्रतळाशी अतोनात संपत्ी आहे, जिथे अजूनपर्यंत
कसून पहाणी झाली नाही. एकदा कां तिचा पूर्ण अभ्यास झला की सर्व
जग अंत्यंत समृद्ध होईल. पण समुद्राचा कोणता भाग कोणत्या देशाचा
आहे, थाबाबत ते भांडत आहेत. सोने, चांदी, हिरे, अशी अनेक
मूल्यवान रले समुद्राच्या तळाशी आहेत. कदाचित एके दिवशी ही लक्ष्मी
संशोधनास सापडेल आपण लोक परत समृद्ध होऊ आणि त्याशिवाय ही
लक्ष्मी आपण एका जागेहून दुसरीकडे नेऊ शकूं. बाहतूक होऊ शकेल.
उत्तम झाली, तर तुम्हाला फार चांगली मुलं होतील आणि मग या
जगतान नव्या जातीची लोक जन्माला येतील. ही मुलें आपल्यासाठी फार
महत्वपूर्ण गोष्ट असेल, आणि आपण ज्या गोष्टी कार्यान्वित करूं
शकलो नाही, त्यागोष्टी ही मुलं कार्यान्वित करतील.
इये अलीबागला आपण समुद्रकिनान्याला आहांत. आणि
समुद्राच्या भावना आपण जाणल्या पाहीजेत, एक प्रकारे, सागर हे तुमचे
आजोबा आहेत. कारण स्यांनी लक्ष्मीला जन्म दिला जी नंतर महालक्ष्मी
झाली, आपण त्यांना सर्व प्रकारे आदर दाखविला पाहीजे. इथे लोक
स्नानगृहाची वापर करतात, पाश्चात्य देशांत ते समुद्राचा वापर
पोहोण्यासाठी करतात. विचित्र कपड़े घालून उच्छूंखल जीवन व्यतीत
करतात. हा सागराचा अपमान आहे. आपल्याकडे जसा वरुण आहे तसा | समुद्राने आपल्याला ते दळणवळण दिलं आहे.
ग्रीक तत्वज्ञानांत नेपच्यून ही समुद्रदेवता आहे. या समुद्र देवतेची पुजा
कैली पाहीजे. तिला जाणलं पाहीजे. तिचा आदर राखला पाहीजे. आपण
अनादर करता कामा नये. समुद्रांत प्रवेश करताना आणि बाहेर येतांना
आपण त्याला नमस्कार म्हटले पाहीजेत.
शत
समुद्राची माझ्याबरीबर खूप प्रतिक्रिया असते, हे मी पाहील
आहे. जर उजेड असला, तर चंद्राचं प्रतिबिंब सागरांत पडलेलं असलं,
तर ते माझ्या बरोबर हलतं. समुद्र मला चांगल्या तन्हेने जाणतो. कारण
समुद्राबद्दल मला आदर आहे आणि त्याच्याशी माझं विशिष्ठ नातं आहे.
समुद्रामुळे आपल्याला पाऊस मिळतो. आपल्या जीवनासाठी | समुद्रामुळे तुम्हाला इथे आनंद उपभोगता येतो आहे. तो तुम्हाला इतका
चांगला आत्मिक आनंद आणि संवेदना देत आहे. हिमालयांत जाण्याची
जरुर नाही. कारण हिमालयाला जे काही आच्छादन आहे, ते समुद्राचे
पाणीच आहे. जे पाऊस म्हणून येतं, हिमालयावर बर्फ बनून जातं आणि
परत नदी होऊन सागराला येऊन मिळतं. ते एक वर्तुळ आहे. सर्व कांही
समुद्रात विलीन होतं. सुर्याकडून त्याच्या उन्हातून करपून मेघ बनताना
तपस्येमधून जातं. त्याप्रकारे आपल्याला इतरांची उष्णता आणि राग
सहन करावयाचा आहे. आणि वाफा तयार करायच्या आहेत, म्हणजे
आशिर्वाद, इतरांसाठी व्हायब्रेशन्स, जेव्हां मी एखाद्या रोग्याला बधते
आणि त्याच्या वर उपचार करते त्याचवेळी मला सहन करावयास लागते.
समुद्र किती महत्वाचा आहे! सांगर म्हणजे गुरु. महागुरु जो आपल्याला
अनेक गोष्टी शिकवितो प्रथमतः हा महागुरु आपल्यासाठी मीठ निर्माण
करतो, खिस्ताने म्हटलं आले की, तुम्ही विश्वाचे मीठ आहांत
मानवजातीला चव आणि मीठाचे सर्व गुणधर्म देणारे, ते तुम्ही आहात.
समुद्राला त्याच्या स्वतःच्या मर्यादा आहेत जैव्हा त्याची भरती असते
तेच्हा तो एका विंदूपर्यंत येतो आणि मग मागे जातो परत दुसन्या
दिवशी तो त्या बिंदूकडे येतो. समुद्राची दुसरी गुणवत्ता म्हणजे त्याच्या
आंत असलेल्या सर्व प्राण्यांची तो काळजी घेतो. तो खारट आहे, पण
मासे आणि इतर जलचरांचे तिथे अस्तित्व असतं. आणि समुद्रांतच प्रथम
 19911229_Shri Mahalakshmi  Puja_Alibag.pdf-page7.txt 
 Marathi Translation (English Talk)
मी ते शोषून घेतो आणि मग व्हाय्रेशन्स तयार होतात. आणि
व्हायब्रेशन्स म्हणून त्यांचा प्रवाह सुरू होतो.
सहजयोगी म्हणून हे पण महत्वाचे आहे की, तुम्ही सर्व गोष्टींचं
शोषण करणे. त्याला धरून चिकटून राहूं नका. आणि त्याची वाफ होऊ भिती दाटत असेल. तर सहजयोगी होण्याचा काय उपयोग आहे? जर
घा चुका सुधारण्याची आपल्याला ही पद्धत जाणली पाहीजे. सहजयोगी
अजून माझ्याकडे कोणावर तरी उपचार करण्यासाठी येतात. मी कशाला
उपचार केले पाहीजेत? तुम्ही उपचार का करू शकत नाही? तुम्हाला | की, आम्ही व्हायग्रेशन्स शोपून घेत आहोत आणि सर्व कांही स्वतः वर
कोणावर उपचार करण्याची भिती वाटते कों? तुम्ही सर्व त्यांच्यावर घेणार आहोत. हा विश्वास ठेवा की, तुम्ही सारे समुद्रासारखे आहात.
उपचार करू शकता. त्यांना मदत क्ूं शकता. जेव्हा अधिक लोकांवर
तुम्ही उपचार कराले, तेवदे तुम्ही चांगले काल. तुम्ही धाडस केले पाहीजे.
इतरांवर उपचार करण्यासाठी तुम्हाला तेवढे धैर्य पाहीजे, इतरांवर तुही
उपचार केले नाहीत, तर तुमची वाढ होणार नाही. जेव्हां तुम्ही इतरांना
वरे बरता, त्यावेळी जास्त व्हायब्रेशन्स असतात, जर तुम्ही त्या
व्हाय्ेशन्सचा उपयोग करणार नाही तर, देवाने तुम्हाला व्हायक्रेशन्स का
द्यावी? आपले हात पाय, मेंद्, आपण सहजयोगांसाठी बापरत नसलो,
स्वतःमध्ये आपण व्हायब्रेशन्स तयार करत नसलो तर, जर तुम्ही तसे
करीत नसाल तर, सर्वांना सतत अडचणी बेत असतात. तुम्ही म्हणता
मी ध्यान करतो. मी पुजा करतो, तरीही मला बरे बाटत नाही.
व्हायब्रेशन्सची शक्य असेल त्या प्रत्येक प्रकारे तुम्हाला उपयोग केला
पाहीजे. आणि इतरांना बरे करण्यासाठी शक्य ते केले पाहीजे. तुम्हाला
त्रास होईल अशी भिती बाटली तर बंधन घ्या. पण कमीत कमी माझ्या
फोटोचा उपयोग करा. फोटो नंतर तुम्ही त्या व्यक्तीला स्पर्श करू शकता.
आणि त्यांत काही त्रास होणार नाही. आणि शेवटी जर तुम्हाला त्रासाची
नाव सांगर तरून जाणार नसेल तर ती बनविण्यात काय अर्थ आहे?
तुमच्यात सागर तरण्याची क्षमता हवी. तुम्ही हा निश्चय केला पाहीजे
हा महागुरु आणि तुम्ही, जे कांही करीत आहांत ते, तुमच्यामध्ये
व्हायब्रेशन्स तयार करीत आहेत, ज्यामुळे तुम्ही अनेकांना वाचवृं शकता.
जेवढे जास्त तुम्ही देता तेवढे जास्त तुम्हाला मिळते. जेवढी
जास्त व्हायब्रेशन्स तुम्ही ्याल, तेवदी जास्त तुम्हाला मिळतील. नेहमी
इतरांना मदत करण्यासाठी व्हायब्रेशन्स बापरा. झाडना, प्राण्यांना,
निसर्गाला व्हायब्रेशन्स द्या. तुम्ही स्वतः व्हायद्रेट करू शकता. ती स्थिती
यायची आहे. जेव्हा तुम्ही तुमची स्वतःचं पाणी तुम्ही व्हायब्रेट करू
शकाल. तुम्ही सर्व तसे कार्यान्वित करून बरंच काही करू शकता. पण
स्वतःमध्ये विश्वास ठेवा. ज्यामुळे तुम्हाला मदत होईल. तुमचा
स्वतःवरचा विश्वास की, तुम्ही महान सहजयोगी आहांत. आणि
आईमध्ये पूर्णपणे विश्वास ठेवा.
"ईश्बर तुम्हाला आशिर्वाद देवो.'
तुमच्या
০
