Bhavasagara Puja Address Brisbane, April 6, 1991 They talk about the propagation of Sahaja yoga and solve any problems of Sahaja Yoga. In the night, before sleeping, every single Yogi, including children, footsoaks. Then they meditate, and then sloep with ottention on the Sahasra. This is how they have come up so wel. In puja, Sahaja Yogis achleve heights in awareness but soon feel that they have again come down. The same thing happens after India tour. Luckily, there ore ashrams. Ashram living is the way Shri Ganesha is established. An ashram is a place of collective spiritual life and is not simply a place where people live together. We must understand the Importance of discipine: discipline within an ashram is essential and It can help IS Very much. The tapa is that the body must get used to this practice. Gefting up early will help for the whole day. and once we get this habit, we will go to sleep early. To have daily prayers and spiritual discipline is the normal routine in India and in the cultures of many devout people all over the world. The family passes down ihis tradition of proper worship, meditation and discipline. However, many parents here do not pass dewn information and about discipline, to ask the children to get up at a certain hour, to medifate, to pray, for fear of losing them. The children gre also very aggressive. At the school in India, the children wil be taught proper habits. There are two types of meditation: Antarmana and Bahirmana. Antarmana meditation is medita- tion Inside ourselves when we try to see what is wrong with us. Bahirmana meditation is outside how we have to live outside. We have to have a discipline that is not imposed on us but which we happily accept and imbibe. To master any art a rigorous triangle is requited. So we cannot take Sahaja Yoga lightly In Sahaja Yoga there is no severe "tapas (penance). It is all blessings, but we shouldn't get lost in the blessings. Because we do not meditate we get caught up. Day by day, we must rise to a higher state and understand that Sahaja Yogis are not here just to have good food and a nice tirme, but we have to become those unique personalities which are required to raise humanity to a higher state. We must be responsible and look after ourselves; oth- erwise, Sahaja Yoga will not help us much and may even be lost to us. We may have a large quantity of Sahaja yogis but we won't have qual- ity. One attack of negativity could then finish off a huge amount of Yogis. This has already happened Antarmana meditation is very important. Everyone should meditate morning and evening everyday. For lack of sufficient meditation people go on catching, clearing, again catching, again clear- ing. The conditioning, ego, and badhas come and go and do not detach permanently, Just as we bathe everyday, we have to wash ourselves within everyday. Meditation is antaratma tapa. To live in the Himalayas or do severe penance is not re- quired, but we have to do this meditation eaily in the morning. Sahaja Yoga is working the best among the Aus- trian's, the Germans and Romans. They all have ashrams of the same type : to them nothing is more important than achieving the heights of Sahaja Yoga. Invariably these people get up at 4,00 a.m. Shri Mataji also gets up at 4, but she may sleep later. They have a bath, get ready for puja, have a 5-10 minute puja, and then meditate. Afterward, they have breakfast. After work, they come home, and sit down together to meditate or discuss issues related to Sahaja Yoga collectively. once. Dedication s required to introspect and find out what is wrong with us and how to correct it. Shri Mataji gave the assurance that if we work this out everyday, our thoughts will stop, our problems will be solved and we will have no catches at all. but there should be no lethargy about meditation. If we leave these problems on our being. they will grow, In the beginning, we might have to firmly discipline ourselves to meditate, but in time we will BHAVASAGARA PUJA

 The first thing in the morning is to ask ourselves, "What is my tesponsibility as a Sahaja Yogi?" This will give us tremendous powers, tremendous expe- riences: Everyday we must bombard ourselves with, "Now get to meditation. Get to meditation." Then, in many situations, you will Immediately get into thoughtless awareness. Unless and until we cleanse ourselves everyday we will not know our- selves. Through antarmana we will really see inside ourselves. Ask: "Why am I like this?" "Why do I think like this?""Who am 1?" When these questions are answered, we will know our value, our worth. Shri Mataji sald that if we are washed and clean, then before touching something we will be careful not to get dirty again. When clothes are dirty, the stoins blend in. Clean clothes show spots very clearly. unless we clean ourselves, we will not know what is wrong with us. We must witness ourselves, and start understanding that our bad behaviorS derives from some funny thing in the brain. This brain has to be corrected. At the end of the day, we must ask ourselves: do it joyfully. We must clean the body, but more importantly, this mind and intellect must be cor- rect. "To be on instrument of God, you have to be a perfect personality: otherwise, we may not be able to communicate the message of Sahaja Yoga and they also affect the people who meet us, who will gradually find out that there is some- thing wrong with us. Once we get deep into our being we will develop amazing capacities. We should think of our ca- pacities : "How far am I able to do something about curing people?" There are a few Yogis in Bormbay and Pune that have developed great healing powers. They go to villages and help cure people. They want to go out fo the villages with music parties to spread Sahaja Yoga. but when they come back, they immediately footsoak. We must not think of ourselves as perfect or infoal- lible. We should fake precautions, and keep our- selves in bandhan. It is very important to give our- selves a bandhan before we go out, before we go to sleep, and sleep with the attention at Sahasrara. When there is complete understanding of ourselves and these vibrations, all this mastery can be ours. We have to develop the depth within ourselves, If we cannot, then know we are still me- diocre. The secrets about the Goddess were not told to anyaone until they had achieved oneness with God. Now Sahaja Yoga just works, just flows from the hand, so many forget that they have to work at it. There are some great Sahaja Yogis who have gone deep into it. These Yogis are all invari- ably the the ones who worship everyday, may be even twice a day, meditate, and footsoak. There may be 600 people at the airport, but Shri Mataji knows who has been meditating everyday. *What good things have I done for Sahaja Yoga?" "How have i Yoga?" not been up to the polnt in Sahoja "How far have I gone with these powers to spread Sahaja Yoga?" "How far can I go?" The deeper we go, we do not show off, we just emit. in this way a Sahaja Yogi will stand out. The depth will have an effect on the children, the surroundings, in every way. It isn't question of an individual doing it, but collectively we have to meditate. Don't worry about who is not coming to meditation. When those who do rise very high, the others will also do it. One must think :1 have to look after myself." It's very selfish, "Swartha." "Swa" means Self-Ishness. "Then you are net bothered whatsoever anybody might say, whatsOGver any- one may try to do. To you, this is the most impor- tant thing to do... And all those who have thought like this and have acted like this are above everything. Nothing can put them down." Some people have felt their responsibility as Sahaja Yogis from the moment they got their Fealization. Indian Sahaja Yogis who can impart everything without ego have been sent to help us. If we do not meditate, our ego can rise, and at- tention furris to gross things like how to become the leader, and from there it descends into anger and even vlolence. To avoid this, meditate every- day, morning and evening, and stay in caomplete bandhan. We can pray : "Mother, if I have any ego, please take it away." The Divine Cool Breeze www

 Shri Ganesha Puja Canberra, April 14, 1991 (Synopsis) had been defeated because the fire was not lit so their ownn chastity was In danger. To prevent an attack on their chastity, they decided to bulld a big pyre and kill themselves. Shti Mataji began by saying that we have to know the importance of the Mooladhara Chakra. We must be very careful and respectful of it. Most of the problems and strange behaviors in the West are due to possessions on the Mooladharas Chakra. "Shri Ganesha was created at the gate of hell to protect us from falling Into Hell, But actually when we insult Him and we do not care for Him, He just sleeps off. When that happens any kind of possession can come and really make people mad." She asked how it is possible that Christians do not know the importance of moality when they are following Christ. Christians are the worst as far as morality is concerned. Christians are re- sponsible for the maximum number of people killed in the world. Shri Mataji said a great sense of morality is very Important; otherwise we develop all kinds of funny Ideas and become mentally unbalanced. Then the children behave strangely and perverted, incestuous relations develop. This is hell we have created - in hell what else is there but no sanity and no wisdom" We have to now understand how to bulld ourselves as Sahaja Yogis. The essence of wisdom is innocence, the power of Shri Ganesha is Innocence which comes when we do not destroy it. Certain great Indian saints who understood the value of chqstity and innocence have made the culture of india. They have created a culture with such good conditioning (susamaskaras) that such ideas do not even enter people's heads, and possessions cannot come in. For example, people who dress up like witches or bhoots are attacked because the bhoots think they have found some- one like them. Possessions can enter into our Agnya chakra and then go Into our Mooladhara, Shri Mataji has sald many times not to let anything cover the Agnya Chakra, If we allow anything to cover it then we cannot be protected. The first quallty of Shri Ganesha is He gives us wis- dom, which glves us the balance and the sense of how to behave towards ourselves, how to pre- serve and how to respect ourselves. If Shti Ganesha is not there to watch us some horrible bhoots from hell can enter. In India women are extremely particular about their chastity : even looking at a woman with bad eyes is bad. Shri Mataji then related the story of Queen Padmini who was a very beautiful woman, A Muslim once wanted to see her, and if she did not agree, the sultan threatened to invade the kingdom. Once the sultan saw her he thought he must have her. He demanded that they hand thelr Queen over to him; otherwise, he would invade the kingdom. The people of the kingdom made a plan to save their queen because they knew the chastity of a woman was very important and the queen repre- sented the chastity of all the women. Their plan was to send 100 palanquin, each with armed warriors inside and each carried by four fully armed warriors. As it was a small kingdom there were only five hundred warriors. The men said that if they were victorious then they would light a fire. The first thing we should understand is that Shri Ganesha gives us maryadas, limits, which are in- nate within us, not imposed on us. Children are shy by nature, they innately try to protect themselves. but we try to flaunt that innate innocence be- cause the ego is there saying, "What's wrong?" We do not know how devasting this is. Basically we are good people, God has created us as good human beings, but with ego people have gone amuck, get caught up by bhoots and then behave in a manner no one can understand. She spoke of a boy who had come to her pro- gramme dressed as a primitive man. She asked The went and attacked, but the sultan's men were more numerous and better armed so the 500 were killed. The women came to know that the warriors GANESH PUJA

 him why he was dressed like this, to which the boy said that he wanted to be primitive again. Shri Mataji tesponded that this was not possible be- cause we all have modern brains. By changing all these external things just to get an identity, we cannot becorne primitive. The idea of creating an identity is a sign that we do not have our mary- adas, that we ore denying Shri Ganesho within us. Shri Ganesh has created the maryadas within us which provide a sense of morality. In the West it is so bad that we do not even know when some- thing is wrong. With a mad Mooladhara a wornan can become extremely aggressive with her hus- band. We have to understand what our maryadas are, and we have to live in them. To improve, it is best to meditate on some good grass with the left hand towards the light, right hand on the earth, and say the Atharva Sheersha, by heart is best, or read it, or say Shti Ganesh's mantra. This will also help our eyes, maryadas." Of course, the Kundalini will help. and Shri Ganesha will help, but we should try to watch ourselves, to introspect. "Are we still in the same category?" When we walk around we should have our eyes at three feet level so we see only chil- dren, flowers, grass, the Mother Earth, everything beautiful. There is nothing beautiful above that, or else we should look above people's heads. Shrl Mataji advised that Australians should not copy the French or the Arnericans because in doing that they can lose their own personality. Shri Ganesha gives us our personality because He gives us maryadas, and it is only through mary- ados that we get our personality. Shti Mataji fin- ished by saying that we have to develop Shri Ganesha within us so that people will see us as the Incarnations of innocence. Just like a lotus rises above everything, and makes everything fragrant, Sahaja Yogis in Australia are expected to have that beautiful personality of Shri Ganesha, to emit the fragrance of innocence among all the Sahaja Yagis and over all the world. Shri Mataji said, "If children start crying in front of my photograph or in my presence, then there is some sort of a possession Sahaja Yogis very, very serious. They have to revive their innocence, they have to revive their ... it is very serious for The Divine Cool Breeze

 Shri Mataji's Final Puja Talk Sydney, April 19, 1991 (Synopsis) In her final talk in Sydney, Shri Mataji explained that Sahaja Yoga is spreading and new people are now coming to Sahaja Yoga, In order to sus- tain them and spread Sahaja Yoga more, Sahaja Yogis have to concentrate on their inner growth, We have to meditate and increase our strength for spreading Sahaja Yoga. We have to go to different smaller places also to spread Sahaja Yaga. We should not look for the defects of others but focus on ourselves so that we become "Solid Sahaja Yogis." The reason why people keep catch- ing is because of lack of rmeditation. feel the same respect for their mother. They should give wives authority to control discipline and guide the children so that they develop obedience toward their mother. The family system is extremely important in Sahaja Yoga. Sahaja culture is to live happily together and It is the only culture in which people can live together happily. Whille the relations between husband and wife in Sahaja Yoga should be ten- der and loving, there should not be slavishness of any kind. When a wife or husband does anything against Sahaja Yoga, Sahaja Yogis should take a stand against their husband or wife. Sahaja Yoga is very precicous for us and we should guard it with our lives. In the past there have been some mishaps be- cause of unnecessary fear in the minds of some Sahaja Yogis. Shri Mataji emphasized that it is the law in Sahaja Yoga that no one can be thrown out of Sahaja yoga without permission from Shri Mataji. Sahaja Yogis should be fearless. They should tell anyone what they think is the truth and write to Shri Mataji directly. Sahaja culture has imbibed a lot of things from Indian cultures as well as from western culture. For example, Sahaja Yoga does allow the possibility for divorce, but divorce is not encouraged and neither is it a good thing. Divorce is allowed only if nothing else helps and there is not alternative. However, Sahaja Yoga marriages are the most stable ones. In the case of church weddings, for example, 9 out of 10 marriages fail in the first year. Sahaja Yoga marriages are much better than any other system of marriage or family. It is also part of Sahaja culture to be introspective. Sahaja Yogis should introspect about why they cannot enjoy the other person. The Introspection will reveal that their lack of enjoyment is mainly because of their own defects and expectations, rather than the defects of the wife or husband. Shri Mataji also emphasized that Sahaja Yogis, Sahaja Yoginis, and Sahaja children have to im- bibe Sahaja culture. The responsibility of Sahaja Yoginis in this respect, the woman's job, is to cre- ate peace in the family. Sahaja Yoginis should not aggress their husbands; they should not retort or answer back. Explosiveness on their part is abso- lutely wrong. In Sahaja culture women hove to have forbearance. Women also have the ability to wiggle out of problems and confrontations which men do not have, which helps women keep peace. They should also enjoy the companionship of their husbands. Real romance starts after mar- rlage. Sahaja Yogi children should have the Sahaja cul- ture of being gentle, obedient, loving and giving. If Sahaja children are not following this culture, they should be corrected. The correction has to be made with complete determination, but with- out anger. Sahaja Yogis and Yoginis should love all Sahaja children as their own and assume respon- sibility for them. Sahaja Yogi men also have to imbibe Sahaja cul- fure. They have to be very gentle and loving and avoid harshness and volcanic temper. Sahaja Yogis should respect their wives, especially in the presence of others and children. They should at- tend to their wives' comnforts so that the children 5) FINAL PUJA

 SAHASRARA PUJA Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Ischai, ITALY 5.5.91 (Synopsis) Today we have assembled here to celebrate the left side open out so mnore chaitanya can flow Sahasrara day which woas opened in 1970 on this day. We have to understand what happens when the Sahasrara opens. When the kundalini posses through the five centres, it enters into the limbic area. This area is surrounded by thousand nerves and when these nerves get enlighlened they look like flarmes of vibgyor colors and very nildly beau- tifully shining, emitting peace. But when the kun- dalini starts entitling vibrations on the sides all these nerves get enlightened gradually and start moving on all directions opening the Sahasrara and then the Kundalini emerges out through the fontanelle bone area which we call as the Brahmarandra. Randra means the whole. Brahma is the all prevail- ing power of God's love. It enters into the subtle energy which is all pervading which we do not feel normally, but then the chaitanya (vibrations) which are part and parcel of this all pervading power, the param chaitanya they start entering into our brain and showing their blessings. They assemble in the limbic area. The limbic area is connected to all the area of the brain and also to the nerves. So it starts flowing on to the nerves, giving you the new awareness of collective con- sciousness called as 'Samuhik Chetana". down all these centres but if your sahastara is not fully opened this process does not take place. As a lesult the chakras don't open: the kundalini only as very few strands is kept in the splnal cord and the new strands cannot rise because your chakias are not open. In Sahaja Yoga it is very important to keep your Sahasrara apen. In the Devi Mahatmyam at the Sahasrara Maha maya comes. She is the Mahamaya. Not easy to recognize Her or know Her. She lives just like you. She moves just like you and you can never make out Her real nature. At thie Sahasrara to recognize the Mahamaya is another viclous circle. You may say why should you be Mahamaya. It should have been better as starkingly some other form. But any other form could not have worked out Sahaja Yogo in modern times. Because people would have been frightened and upset and they would never have taken to Sahaja Yoga because they had no discretion within them to know what is right and what is wrong. That is why it had to be in the Mahamaya torm. In the Mahamaya you have to recognize although it is difficult to recognize this form you have to. But In Sahaja Yoga you have seen so many photo- graphs which should convince you people men- tally about this Mahamaya svarupa. Mentally you can understand that there is something very differ- You get a new chetana, a new awareness which is showered upon your limbic area. The working of these chaitanya rays is very interesting. They are normally formied like small commas, but then they go into different forms. They make themselves into Swastikas as the four imnbed symbol of Innocence, or they becorne the Aumkara which is the symbol of our being, our awareness. When they form the Swastika they try to nourish the left side and when they form the Aumkar they nourish the right side. They nourish left and tight sympathetic nervous system. ent. Another way is that you start seeing the blessings and you start seeing how you feel physically. emotionally and spiritually. Still on a mental level most of the people recognize but unless and until It is recognized in the heart it is no recognition. Already the heart is surrounded by seven auras of the seven chakras and the Spirit (Atma) resides in the heort. As it is on top of your head resides God Almighty Sadoshiva. When kundalini touches that point your splrit starts spreading and it starts acting on your central nervous system because automati- cally the vibrations, the chaitanya flow Into your For the Sahasrara to be kept open is rather difficult for people because its a vicious circle. Flist these vibrations should enter into your brain through the Brahrnarandra when it is opened out and they should nourish your nerves by which your right and The Divine Cool Breeze

 brain which enlightens your nerves. But still recog- nition of the heart is not there. Even without that and meditative, then you touch that divinity within you. When you touch that divinity you know you are a Divine person. In Sahasrara puja you have to recognize your own Divinify by experlencing your Divinify. How do you experience it? By giving reall- zation to others, telling about their chakras. you know what's Wrong with them You are quite con- fident and mentally you know. But you never intro- spect how It is t am warking it out. How I can feel? What has happened in me? What is the transfor- mation? Once you start thínking about it of your own being then a kind of a feeling towards the Mahamaya comes. This feeling of gratitude love, oneness, joy, all this starts working in your heart and then you feel the responses. If the sea re- sponds to the moon that means it has that mobility in it to respond. A stane will not react to the moon. in the same way in your heart, these waves of this feeling are created by the experlence of spiritual- ity, of your own being and then you start express- ing them and I can make it out. Such a person may not be too talkative or know much about Sahaja Yoga but In his heart he feels the response. you start feellng the cool breeze. You can raise the kundalini of others. You can cure people. You can do many things but still it is not recognition because recognition is a mental activity of the heart. How can heart have a mental activity? This is another problern you can face --Le, the mental activity of the heart. Say you are a Christian born in a Christian family, as soon as you see photo- graph of Christ you feel something in the heart. If you are a Hindu and you see a photograph of Shri Ram, immediately its a recognition in the heart. If you are a Hindu and you see a photograph of Shri Ram,. immediately its a recognition in the heart. But the recognition of somebody living with you is very very difficult and you live on the cusp of your mental activities only. But to go deep down into your heart, what should be done? How can the mental activity be performed through the heart. You must remember that heart is absolutely con- nected with the brain. When heart fails the brain also fals. The whole body goes out of order. So this mental activity of the heart is to be understood this way that as soon as you see the danger, without even thinking, in a reflex way your heart starts pumping more blood and you get palpitation. Its a reflex action. This activity takes place because it is built in within you. That as soon as you see emer- gency your syrmpathetic nervous systerm goes into you love sormebody from your heart, you are not activity and you start feeling the fear, the desire to do something about it, but you do not think, you just run. The fear is built in the central nervous sys- tem. Any reaction or response is Ebullt in, But the re- sponse to the spirituality is yet not manifested. It will manifest. Through your past you have learnt that you have to be afrald of this or that. With the experience gradually you built in the reaction of thing outwardly. In the upnishads it was sald that reflex within you so that you try to save yourself. What experiences should you have to build that in your heart, This experlence is of your own Divinity and Spirituality. Once you start developing that experience then you know that you are a Divine The seat of the heart is in the Brahmarandra. If your heart is not open and in the heart you do not have those responses built in, They need not be of aware or fear but a natural protocol that devel- ops, then you can never do wrong because you know whatever is good in your heart. Supposing going to ham that person. In the same way when you start feeling those responses in your heart you can never do wrong, because they are now manifesting which are built in within you. Because there was spirituality there was that Dlvinity which is bult in and now it is manifested. And then you do not worry about things. You do not do any- once you know the Broahma then all the outside things are not necessary because now you have got the sutra within yourself. There was a gentleman in Calcutta who feel down and got splinters in his brain. As he fell he called out my name. I heard of the accident and put my attention on him and gave him bandhan. The doctors had given him up. Next day he opened his eyes and recovered completely. After that he is absolutely into his divinity, He does not think about anything, about life, death etc. He just knows that he is under the protection of the Adi person. Unless arid until you are fully aware that you are a Divine person, whatsoever faith you may have in the recognition is not complete because the one who is recognizing me is a blind person. First have faith in yourself. if there is any problem or liness they will write to me. if you become introspective SAHASRARA PUJA

 Shakti. Another gentleman who had to have heart surgery, recovered. His divinity within him was there and his connection was so good that I could work on him. But if you mentally go on analyzing everything and mentally understand Sahaja Yoga you have not reached that state of divinity from where you receive all the blessings, which start pouring on you from everywhere. You are defi- nitely helped when your divinity is manifested in a very very big way. These are not miracles. For human beings they may be, but for God it is not. He has created worlds and universes so what is so great for him. This is the foith with experience and not blind faith and through introspection... Why do I do this? Why should I do like this? When you are introspeoting then this depth moves further but more through meditation. You must meditate early in the morning and before going to bed. That's the only way you can go deeper into your divinity which is the source of all the knowledge and the source of all the joy. and then to put yourself Into a position where it te- sponds to the divinity within you and to your Mother with full mental activity of the heart. We are so satisfied with a little of the Kundalini coming out of the head. So much divinity is there which had to come out. If you have to ascend and if you are the foundation of that new age which is going to transform the whole world you will have to work hard. We shouldn't say I don't know how to get up in the morning. You are on a war path. You are soldiers just now and you have to work it out if you have to fight the forces of ignorance and darkness, You have to absolutely decide within yourself that we are going to work it out in such a way that we all are going to be- come very powerful Sahaja Yogis and through us the whole world is going to be saved. It is very important thing for all of you to understand that you have to get to meditation where you become silent and your tree of life will grow in silence, not in a turmoil. If you understand that then please work it out in such a manner that you all become completely aware of your divinity by which you Now the quality of the Sahasrara has to go up. Quantity is qulte big and the Sahosrara is the only instrument which is going to work out Sahaja Yoga in the modern times if we tealize that heart plays the most important role in Sahasrara. can see. If you have to see the image you have to have a very good mnirror. In the same way if you have to feel the Mahamaya you have to have a complete pure Divinity manifesting in you. If you come to Sahaja Yoga for making some sort of power game, money or business you are fin- ished. But just to expand your heart, to spread your love to everyone, to feel that love within you heart May God Bless You. The Divine Cool Breeze

 JAI SHRI MATAJI By our good fortune, Shri Mataji is, aboue all, our Beloved Mother, She sustains us in our ascent and patiently solves all our prob- lems. However, if we truly desire complete ILLUMINATION we must recognize Her as our only Guru. the guru only if he had already giuen his personal problems and desires and dem- onstrated that he had put into practice all the advice offered by the Guru. up all Finally, we should make sure that all the new sahaja yoginis (married or unmarried) are instructed in the rudiments of how to perform a puja, since it is possible that they will be called onto the stage. This recognition, we feel, is necessarily re- flected in our behaviour towards Shri Ma- taji and therefore, we would ask you to consider the following. HOW SHOULD WE BEHAVE DURING HOW CAN WE PLEASE OUR GURU? THE PUJA? We should avoid crying babies and rowdy children disturbing the puja and the puja speech. Our Guru is only pleased by our ascent HOW SHOULD WE PREPARE TO PAR- TICIPATE IN A GURU PUJA? We should avoid setting up stalls to sell photos, badges and so on, while we are We should seek to develop within us as much light as possible (as opposed to igno- waiting for our Guru to arrive for the puja. rance). We should try to put into practice all the advice offered as by our Guru to aid us in our ascent (i.e. Introspection, Niskriya, etc.) advice that is often forgotten or put off Guru for the start of the puja and other We should be ready and waiting in medita- tion according to the timetable set by our events. for one reason or another. We should take photos only after our Guru has given us permission to do so. This should be done in an orderly manner, creat- ing one queue for men and another for women in respect of our Guru and those who still wish to meditate. HOW SHOULD WE BEHAVE OVER THE THREE DAYS OF THE PUJA? We should try to avoid disturbing our Guru with letters or meetings regarding personal or collective problems that, by now, we ought to be able to face and solve using the powers given to each and every one of us by our Guru. We should remember that the puja only ends after our Guru leaves the puja place, so we should maintain respectful behaviour until this moment. We should remember the situation before the advent of Sahaja Yoga. If a seeker desired il- lumination he would present himself before GURU PUJA

 GURU PUJA 1991 Though the lore of Vedas take up its dwelling on your tongue. Though you be learned in scripture, gifted in writing prose and verse, Yet if the mind be not absorbed in the guru's lotus feet, What will it avail you? What, indeed, will it avail? Though you become, at last, the emperor of the universe, Though you possess for servants the mightiest of the kings of earth, Yet if the mind be not absorbed in the guru's lotus feet, What will it avail you? What, indeed, will it avail? Even if you be ready to đwell in the forest as at home, No more attached to work, untrammeled by an ugly form, Yet if the mind be not absorbed in the guru's lotus feet, What will it avail you? What, indeed, will it avail? Of novices and monks, of rulers and of worldly men, The noble soul who ponders there verses in the guru's praise, And to the guru's teaching applies his mind with constant zeal- He will attain to Brahman, the treasure coveted by all. An extract from Adi Shankaracharya The Divine Cool Breeze 10

 The translation of Extracts from the Guru Geeta (This was told by Shri Shiva to Shri Parvati about the importance of Guru) In the word Guru, the first letter Gu highlights the attributes of Maya whereas the second letter Ru destroys the illusion caused by Maya. cause and actions in everything, brings oneness in the varlety of forms and objects. Salutations to Shri Guru whose two lotus feet dispel the heat of duality and save us from all calamities. Hence position of Guru is the most exalted and inaccessible even to Gods and Shri Guru is worshil- ped by all. Salutations to Shri Guru, with speech, with mind, with attention and with eyes, who is verily Shri Shiva and Shakti and whose two lotus feet, have red and white splendours. Salutations fo Shri Guru who pulls out those fallen into the ocean of hell while sitting on the tree of mundane world. I meditate upon, Shri Guru in whom, the letter Gu shows the state beyond the three Gunas and Ru shows the formless form; and who bestows on us, the form which is beyond the three Gunas. Salutations to Shri Guru, who is Shri Brahmadeva, Shri Vishnu, Shri Shiva and who alone is Supreme Brahma. Salutations to Shri Guru who has created all knowl- edge for benevolence of people so that they have the bridge to cross the acean of mundane world. Salutations to Shri Guru, for destroying through the Self-realization, the Karmas (fates) accumulated during the series of past existences. Salutations to Shri Guru, there is no principle, which is above Shri Guru, there is no penance which is above Shri Guru, and no knowledge can exist beyond the principle, which is Shri Guru. Salutations tfo Shri Guru, who opens the eyes one who has become blind due to the darkness of ignorance, by anointing them with the collyrium of knowledge. Salutation to Shri Guru, who has shown, the formn of uninterrupted canopy that has pervaded all living and non living things. Salutations to Shri Guru, for achieving the enlight- enment in the world 'you are my father, you are my mother, you are my brother and you are my God. Salutation to Shri Guru, whose lotus feet are be- decked with diamonds which are the Shrutis and the lustrous lotuses of Vedas. Salutations to Shri Guru who is the truth, in the light of which truth becomes manifest in the world and who is the joy that enchants the world. Salutation to Shri Guru whose mere remember- ance, spontaneously awakens the knowledge. Salutations to Shri Guru who is Sat, Le. pure exis- tence, having known which the world, of variety of forms and objects, ceases to appear as real. Salutations to Shri Guru, who is Chaitanya, exter- nally serene, beyond confusion and who is ex- tremely pure and beyond the Naad, bindu and Kala. Salutations to Shri Guru, whose form is cause and action, and who is present as the cause in all actions. The origin of meditation is the form of Shri Guru, the origin of Puja is the lotus feet of Shri Guru, the origin of Mantra is the speech of Shri Guru and the origin of liberation, is the grace of Shri Guru. Salutations to Shri Guru, whose presence as the GURU GEETA 11

 GURU PUJA TALK BY H. H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI CABALLA LEGURE ITALY 28-7-91 (Synopsis) Today we are all here to worship your Guru. It is a chosen and so whatever they will have to go common practice specially in India that you must worship your Guru. Guru principle is extremely strict and the strictness made many people not confirm to the ideais: In those days the Guru had to be absolutely the authority and it was the Guru who would decide which disciples he will have. One through was welcome. Wilh this idea they be- came the disciples. But in Sahaja Yoga its just the opposite. First of all your Guru is a Mother who suffers from' Sandra Karunall At the slightest this that happen to you GURU PUJA my eyes get filled with tears. So as a mother, to be a Guru is a very difficult thing. At the same time for you to achieve heights is also difficult because you get lost when I love you so much and in that love you forget sometimes that the progress in your being is very slow. It is irnportant that in Sahaja Yoga you have to be strict with yourself. You have to be your own Guru. It means you have to guide yourself. You have to treat yourself os your disciple. You have to trim yourself. If you do not understand the responsibility as Sahaja Yogis of working every- thing out yourself, you connot move very fast be- cause it is a difficult type of relationship between had to go into great fapasya (penance) to even become a disciple. This hardship was the anly way the Guru used to judge. Gurus would always live in Jungles and they would select very few disciples, and they had to go and beg for food from the nelghboring villages and cook food for their Guru with their own hands. Basically we must understand that the difference between these times of Guru ship is this that very few individuais wete given the chance to become the Guru and these few were also selected out of quife a lot of people. They felt that they are being really special that they are being selected and The Divine Cool Breeze 12

 the Guru and the disciple. First you become your own Guru. You have to do a lot of introspection and fix your ldeals, I can eat anything: I need not eat anything at all. for days together. I can sleep anywhere; I may not sleep at all. I tiavel for miles together, untiringly. I am Guru of myself. The first thing is that there should be a lots of intro- spection & fixing of ideals. What's wrong with me? Not what's wrong with others. Am I seeking the cornfort of my body?ls my aftention on my body or on my Spirit? The best thing is to write it down Can I Sleep on the grass? Can I sit on the street? You have to make this body work. Can I sleep anytime I like? Can I keep awake anytime I like? 1 have seen people doze off. The reason is not that they are bad or indisiplined but because inside they are tired. If you are tired inside then you feel tired all the fime. So introspect how you behave, When you start introspecting yourself you also start Introspecting your surroundings, your styles and your methods, and what you are doing to yourself because of the conditioning of the outside. you? What sort of personality you will have? We have to change this by changing ourselves. So arnong Sahaja Yogis there should be no insecuri- ties but maryadas. You must know how to respect each other's privacy. The second thing with the Western mind is that they are bombarded by criticism. There are so many critics that there are no more artists left. Only critics are critizing critics. All artists are finished. They are all the time criticized. They rnay not know how to play an instrument or sing, but they con critiaize alright. So all the time in your mind is a feeling that somebody will criticize you, If you do this. As Sahaja Yogis you should not worry about these people because they are blind. I they want to criticize then let then, it makes no difference, The third is even worse, that you must always see to the other side of the bank, even if you standing on this side, To be fair arıd never to say something that you are sure of. If you ask anyone "How are You" nobody will say that I am perfectly altight. They are not sure of themselves ail the time. This shaking Inside gives you a personality which can never progress. Progress comes when you put your step forward, you put your feet firmly on that point and then put the second step forwoard like as you climb a mountain but in the first place you are thinking that its half way through then how can you go further? This is also a very big psychological deterrent and detrimental for your progress. The conditioning that we have in the West are more psychological and that's why you cannot find out what's wrong with you. The physical con- ditioning are not so dangerous. You can get over them and you can manoge them. But if you intro- spect what you will find a very subtle thing. Firstly, because of the wars everybody is afraid of every- one. Specially because of Freud, even the mother Is afraid of the child. They won't touch of hug The fourth thing you have learnt that you must anybody. So the expression of love is not there. When there is no expression there is no love inside. That's how it goes on drying you up. There was a little girl in Sahaja Yoga and I had some present for that child. So I told a Sahaja Yogi to give it to her. He said he was afraid of her misunderstanding him. This has created the psychological Insecurity within you. From very childhood this insecurity has been working. And that is why you are ftightened of each other, your parents, brothers and sisters, The whole world is afraid of the Western world, And why are they suffering from Insecurity? They have made everyone insecure all over the world. They are insecure within them selves, in their own itself like a lawyer, So its a double personality in the family or groups. They ore so much frightened of each other, you should be fearless. You are a Sahaja Yogi and you are no more imrmoral. If all the tirne you keep on thinking you are immoral. If all the time you have to go and do some confes- sion somewhere then what is going to happen to argue out yourself. You have a problem and you come and tell me. I give you a solution. then you argue that this is the problem with this solution. Then I give you anather solution but you argue on that one also. Like this I go on giving you solutions but you go on arguing. You are standing against yourself all the time. Then I have to say thai this is your problem and not mine. I am glving you solu- tions and if you want to solve your problems belter take a positive attitude. If you are all the time arguing against yourself then how can you prog- ress? The western mind will not try to face any problem as its own, but will go on arguing with being. With enlightenment of your brain this should disappear. On the contrary in Sahaja Yoga it is very danger- aus. You are a Sahaja Yogl. You are connected with the all pervading power. Whatever you soy 13 GURU PUJA

 "Mother if you are very sure then we are putting up our ego." They are so much afraid of their ego. They feel their ego will bloat so much th take off. Another fear that people have that if we Osert that this is what is right thing to do and this is what we want then we will get an ego. With Sahaja Yoga also certain fears have crawied In. One of them is that Mother I should not have an gets connected and it acts. Its very dangerous for you people not to realize that you are realized Souls and not to assume your own powers. What- ever the Sahaja Yogis say, desire or want, there are people sitting there listening to you all the time. They are so anxious to do your work. So whatever you think, desire or say, we have to be extremely careful. With old people I can say that they are very conditioned and have problems etc. But the younger generation is capable of improv- ing itself and making the brain straight. at they will ego. Now what is the problem of ego? As a reaction to it people have developed a kind of a protesting character. But again these entrepreneurs have pampered your ego. Like in the morning you ask the child, "What will you have?" Then the child says "Pl have this." The mother has to run and get it, or she must keep everything in the fridge. In India that is not the case. Whatever is cooked in the house you better have, If there is no salt then doesn't matter.don't eat. If you are hungry in any case you will eat. So when the disciplining comes within yourself and you understand this, then you do not say I desire only this or that. What you desire you will say you will not have it for one month. Another psychological problem which you do not know is very surprising that whatever is to follow the entrepreneurs ideas you must act. Because the whole fundamental of western life is to see and be seen. To always follow the latest fashion especially with hairdos. They lose their hair so fast in these countries: Without using oil which they should use. I all look alike. You can dress up the way you like, live the way you lke, but you should not get yourselves enslaved by any entrepreneurs. You are free people now. Know that you are absolutely free and your freedom is absolutely in the light of your enlightment. You can never do wrong. But first of all have confidence within yourself that whatever you have to do you are not going to enslave yourself to entrepreneurs, what people have to say, how you will look, how you will appear before them. This isa very important point that half the fime we are labouring just to look tike others. Its very surprising how the entrepreneurs have be- fooled the western people. In India it won't work. Specially the Indian women. Sometime back they brought the mini sari to India. No Indian woman would wear a mini sari. Whatever clothes we have In India has been there traditionally tested through trial and error and we know that this is the best. You must be very careful that you do not take to stupid things which are being created by entre- preneurs, but take to sensible things which are required for you. don't say thot Sahaja Yogis should Once we had a transfer and had been glven a small bed where my husband slept and I slept just on the bare cement and next day I started getting the pain in the body. I sald alright. After that I slept on the cement floor for on month. Then the cement lost its power one me. You must master your mind. Now the problem is this ego will come up. That is because your ego is developed by the actions, by protesting against things and also by the pampering of the enitrepreneurs. How to get rid of this ego is to know that you are an enlight- ened soul, so respect yourself. Once you start re- specting yourself, you will not fall into any traps of ego. You have to say I am a Sahaja Yogl." How can I behave like this." A kind of dignity develops, then you start feeling shy of doing something that Is stupid, because ego makes you stupid. If you develop this respect that I am a Sahaja Yogl, then you will be amazed that the dignity of a Sahaja Yogi will definitely keep you down to earth. You will not get into the trap of your ego. In the introspection you find out what's gone wrong with you. How you are made this way. What's wrong in my own personality. It has come from all the surroundings and the way people have been putting ideas into my head. You should have your own ideas. You shouldn't worry what Plato said or Socrates said. What do you think? After all you are enlightened people. Another psy- chological thing is even the worst. And that is One side is the conditioning and another side is this ego. That dignity has to be developed. Among animals there are maryadas. Like a tiger won't behave like a snake and vice versa. We are now Sahaja Yogis. We are tigers among human The Divine Cool Breeze 14

 beings. It is not necessary to have the medals to show that you are something great. You are Maha Yogis. So develop that respect. And you wil be surprised that hurnility will immediately come into you. Like a bridegroom who knows he is dressed up like a bridegroom and cannot behave like the other boys at his wedding. Once we know we are Sahaja Yogis that dignity will develop within us and with that dignity we also see what is wrong in your own country and what is undignified. love is a source of energy that makes things grow in a living manner. Love does not mean that you hug somebody etc. But living energy that under- stands, that makes you. Like this flower. I cannot otder it to go straight. it is moving in its own way. Let it be. It looks nice because no flower should look like another flower, When it grows it is growing in its own way. So whatever is built in within you which is the living energy. it blossoms by itself. The water of pure love is to be given. In pure love what you see in another person as a Guru. What's the matter with rnyself where it is obstructing me to go further. In another person as a guru what you see is how to handle this man with love so that he comes closer to reality. Its a very gentle and loving process. Nothing like really enjoying your love. Just to know that I love so many people is itself so great. It should be 'Sarnadrishti', With the same eyes you should see everyone. Let your Guru principle come up and show itself. Specially the kind of a Guru you have. I am not strict with you. I am very gentle. Because it is not for an individual but it is for the collective. And if something has to be spread collectively then you have to understand that it is only love that is going to work it out. There is no other way we can spread Sahaja Yoga because we cannot be like Hitler giving wrong ideas of hatred, racialism, na- tionalism. When I say love, it is very different be- cause of our collective work we have to know that May God Bless you. 15 GURU PUJA

 Pledge taken by Sahaja Yogi at the Puja to the Guru We the Sahaja Yogis of the world do declare that we have experienced the Self-realization through Sahaja (Spontaneous) awakening of the Kundalini as discovered and taught by Sri Mataji Nirmala Devi. We do declare that these are the benefits we experienced in our Own lives and see in the lives of others who have had their Self-realisation. highs standard of balanced education. A school where proper moral conduct is taught and en- couraged, where they won't be abused or sub- jected to Imimoral and wrong behaviour. We love to watch their aptitudes develop and to support the flourishing of their Innate talents, and encourage them in other fields of development. We like them to understand us and all other Sahaja Yogis. Also all the cultures of the world, artistic, musical, literary, religious free from preju- dice. We like them to understand and enjoy the beauty of the world and the natural environment. Our life becomes one of purity and simplicity. Before martage we lead a very chaste life. We don't even like to listen to talk of sex. Sex we enjoy only in a sanctified and legal marriage. We enjoy monogamaus or monandrous marriage with a Sahaja Yogini of our choice. Husband and wife tespect each other. They understand each other fully. There is very deep love between hus- band and wife, but there is no public display of romance, as it upsets our modesty and privacy. We enjoy our new found knowledge that comes through wisdom and inspiration. When we mature we are no longer afrald of the horrible aggression of modern methods. We spontaneously enjoy all the arts, but only those works that are beautiful and soothing, that give Joy. Works that are traditional or classical, enduring works of great masters of art, music and literature. Works that inspire and praise the divine. Children are an important part of our martied life. Most Children of Sahaja Yogis are boin-realized. We love childreni, our own and those of others. We enjoy watching their growth and their play. We enjoy taking them on holidays. We do not enjoy things that are not respectable, that are vulgar, jarring on the nerves. We are not possessive of our children, and do not smother them with our affection and prevent the development of their own personality. We want them to be strong and settled within themselves so that they do not become impressed by wrong Ideas, wrong behavlour or fall under the Influence of wrong types of media arnd advertising. We love to read and understand all the scriptures and find the true message in them which we can verify through our new found vibratory awareness. We are very normal and we keep the company of all others who are abnormal or sub-nomal. We do not give up our jobs or our work but we enjoy the company of all the Sahaja Yogis, whatever work they may do or whatever country they may .come from. We enjoy this vast ocean of beautiful people. We are no longer only limited to the company of our colleagues, but have friends from all over the world. We do not spoil them by letting them dominate us with their demands. Children mostly like our cor- rection, and sometimes they correct us as well. We like to teach them proper manners and re- spect for others, to share with clhers. We like them to be clean, tidy and properly dressed. We do not let them be cheeky or insolent. We would love to write about and publish all the miracles that happen to us through Sahaja Yoga, and also the miraculous photos that we get spon- taneously, but Sri Mataji will not permit us to do so, We like to send them to registered Sahaja Yoga Schools, if they want to go, where they will get a The Divine Cool Breeze 16

 escape from reality using strong drink or drugs. We are so relaxed we don't need to smoke. This alsa causes us to vomit. because of her modesty. She says no one will believe they are real. We like to find out about the activities of the relig- lons, cults and anticult movements and why they are trying to mislead people away from the truth and away from the reality of the Divine. We like to speak openly about aur findings, without fear because we know we are speaking the truth. We travel to different cilies and towns, to mix with people and find out why they are só unhappy in their life. We have no worries about money. AIl our needs are catered for. Sri Mataji will not let us read the Guru Gita as it says that the disciple should give all his money and everything to the guru, We would happily do this as thanks to her for saving us from our own destruction, but she will not take a single paisa from us. We would love to give Her a garden of flowers. but she won't let us waste our money and says that one is sufficient. We love to create our own works of art. We enjoy the new inspiration we get from within to produce these works. We also enjoy mastering new sklls besides our innate ones and then to create some things that are uniquely splritual, We all would love to give her, individually, birthday presents, but stie will only accept one present that is given collectively, If we do forcibly glve her an individual present, she gives us a bigger one in return, so we have stopped giving her individual presents. She is always insisting we should not even give her collective presents. We enjoy our work, whatever it may be, and try to excel at it. So many Sahaja Yogis have reached high positions in their fields whether they be law- yers, judges, industrialists, ambassadors, bureau- crats, doctors, architects or artists, These achieve- ments they have reached through balance and respect for those who work around them. There is no aggressive ambition in Sahaja Yogis, we do not try to out do our colleagues so they are very re- lleved. We are promoted because of our talents, respectability and understanding and not be- cause we are always hankering after someone or doing sycophancy to any boss. She has only now allowed us to pay for half of her travelling expenses, Only now can we pay for our food and travel in India, previously she pald for all of us who went to India. She has bought houses to use as our ashrams which until recently were rent-free. She has never stayed in these ashrams without paying. Previously all books and tapes were sold without any royalty payments, now Sri Mataji has agreed to accept sorne, but so tar nothing has been sent. She always uses the money collected for the spreading of Sahaja Yoga. We love to keep our homes open to all kinds of families, We like our homes to be welcoming; to be clean and tidy. We like them to be decoratedi with artistic and handmade goods of a high quality. We ike to use natural materials for our homes, clothes and on our skins. We do not like man-made plastics, nylons etc. Houses which are in the name of some Sahoja Yoga leaders, were completely built by Sahaja Yogis but now they have taken their homes back. We love to help each other and are concerned for the weifare and well-belng of others. Alihough we cannot give any money for self-real- zation, or to Stl Mataji in persan, we do not object to giving some money, in trust, for the spreading of the teaching of Sahaja Yoga. We do not know of any organization or group that does not collect money for some reason, in most countries Sahaja Yoga is registered as a Charitable, non-profit soci- ety. Any money that is collected is kept in a bank with proper accounts. Sri Mataji is extremely trust- irng of all Sahaja Yogis, but some have taken advantaga of her confidence and taken large We enjoy our generosity. We enjoy feeding people and giving them presents. We eat any foods we like, or that are good for our well being, without greed or denial. We don't eat large animals (cows, horses etc.), or food cooked in alcohol. We don't toake alcohols as they cause us to vormit We are also so contented that we don't need to 17 PLEDGE AT GURU PUJA

 amounts of money from her personally. These people were asked to leave Sahaja Yoga. They were not even made to repay the monies they took from her. They were just forglven. Even if we want to feel guilty for our mistakes she will not allow us to feel that way on the grounds that we are only human beings and slowly we will all improve, by facing our mistakes. We only trust Sri Mataji, who has a great sense of public money, Whenever anyone makes money out of Sahaa Yogis and is found out, fhey turn against Sri Mataji. Most of these people are par- doned by Srl Mataji. They have mostly fallen under the influence of their half-baked wives who have mislead into these corrupt practices Even though we would Ilike Her to give us constant advice and guidance, She makes us become our own gurus, to becorne the masters of our own lives and spiritual ascent. (To know thyself) If we write to her confessing our past lives and sins, She won't read our letters. Instead she always tells us to be in the present. in the twenty one years of Sahaja Yoga hardly a dozen, people have been asked to leave. Apart from wrongfully collecting money, people were asked to leave for the following reasons; homo- sexuality, flirting and adultery, mental disease, aggresslon and domination of others, particularly towards women. These people were glven all opportunities to improve their behaviour before being asked to leave. Some of them have since overcame their problems and returned. Some of those that were asked to leave have turned against Sahaja Yoga, but they never say why they had to leave Sahaja Yoga. We do not discuss them or bother about them as they are like a rotten apple and we are glad to see them go. If they are lying it is their rnisfortune. We are happy that we are not so unfortunate as to come to Sahaja Yoga, see the truth and still misbehave and be sent awWway. A true Sahaja Yogi should not commit sins be- cause of his spiritual nature. This is very easy for us as we develop a great sensitivity to sin. We belleve in the unity of all religions, which we know as a fact through our vibratory awareness, are all from the one source of God Almighty. We worship all the incarnations and venerate all the seers, saints arid realized souls of the past and present. We enjoy all their writings, poetry and works of art. We have discovered many saintly people who were never recognized before as gieat, evolved souls. We are against fundamentalism and the Igno- rance of organized religion. We believe in the unity of one world and one God. We respect our wives and all women as the moth- ers of children. Thus Sahaja Yoga is a Mahayoga. Never before in the history of spirituality has such a mass awaken- ing of Truth been seen. It expects a very high Moral standard from its participants because these are the innate qualities of a spiritual person who wants to do spiritual work. We are not a money making concen so we do not require great numbers of people. We are only interested in people of spiritual depth and quality. Our pre- cepts must be expressed in our practices and our life. We cannot be hypocrites, We enjoy our virtue, faith and sense of security. We enjoy our peace, calm and forthright atli- tudes. We enjoy our responsibility for the awakening of the spiritualty in man. To work for the seekers of the world with love and patience. To see the ight In their eyes when they feel the actualization of Kundalini awakening. Enjoy to see thousands of people of every nation experlencing Self-realiza- tion. To see Germans, Russians, Jews and Arabs live in harmony together. There is no prejudice on the grounds of colour. race, religion, creed or financial standing. The only criteria is spiritual growth, which makes us feel Joyous. We enjoy the purity of relationships of men ad wornen as brothers and sisters. Any person in an Ashram or one of our groups who is found filirting or dating is asked to leave, thus we have no farmily complications. If we do make any mistake we would like Sri Mataji to punish us, as a guru does, but she punishes us by forgiving us. 18 The Divine Cool Breeze

 We enjoy speaking pure, correct language which is clearly expressed. how they affect the subtle centre of seekers and spoil their chances of ascent into higher aware- ness. We enjoy keeping silent and letting others speak. We enjoy the speeches of other Sahaja Yogis, also they enjoy ours. many new facts we lean can be verified scientifi- cally. We put this knowledge Into practical use for the betterment of society. We enjoy the sweet, loving nature of other people but avoid arrogance and aggression. We abhor vulgar, obscene and scandalous talk and gossip. We have become aware, alert, wise, dynamic, relaxed and above all, enlightened. We enjoy the achievements of our young people and how they are saved from the coruption and immorality that abounds in today's society: how they are transformed from a lethargic and depres- sive life into a new dynamic, youthful life. We enjoy their amazing meteoric progress in their sports, art and music and in their scholarly capacify through their ascent. We enjoy the fragrances of the flowers and na- ture. We enjoy food that satisfies the body and not the tongue. We love to discuss God AImighty and His compas- sion, and aiso His wrath for the people who are evil. Our ears love to hear words of wisdom and the pralses of God. To hear melodious music that soothes the mind. We love to sing songs in praise of the Divine in a proper language with correct pitch, harmony and rhythm. We enjoy knowing Sri Mataji as our Mother. We enjoy the example she sets for an ldeal life. She never demands. She is self-content and self-con- tained. Loving. caring, gently solving any problems we may have, always paying attention to our lives, She knows all of us and all the good things about us. She is the ideal housewife and rmother, caring for all Her relations. We enjoy the purity of non-adulterous eyes. We enjoy watching our ego and laughing at it. We try to remain in a state of thoughtless aware- ness because it is only in this state that we can grow spiritually, as we are in the present. The past is over and the future does not exist. Only the present is the reality. We enloy listening to her husband speaking of her many qualities as a wife and mother. How he describes Her capacity to do many things at the same time without any effort. How She has the love and respect of all the staff and officers of his work whatever office he has held, how even they called Her Mother. We do not rationalize our mistakes or our achleve- ments. It is God who is doing the work not us, we ore just the witnesses of His drama. Through Her own example She has shown us how to live as good householders, and has saved many marriages through this example. We are not disturbed by past conditioning or fu- ture ambitions. We enjoy expressing reality and Sahaja Yoga in words and deed. She will not permit us to escape our social respon- sibilities by taking sanyassa, or turning away from society no matter how decadent it may be. We enjoy our strength and wisdom and the free- dom we have from vanity, greed, hatred, jealousy and violence. Although She has so much power She has never used it to manipulate anyone. On the contrary She is so trusting that we fear She will become the vic- tim of manipulation. But we have learnt that She cannot be tricked or manipulated. We try to analyze and find out through discussion why all the religions have failed, why the scriptures have been mutilated and misrepresented. We want to find out why people give money for God when He has no understanding of money. We enjoy the knowledge She has in every subject, except money and banking. All Her accounts and cheque-books are kept by Sahaja Yogis. They We study the cults and anticult movements to see 19 PLEDGE AT GURU PUJA

 laugh at our own faults and enjoy the good points of others. write for Her and She just signs. Her knowledge is very, very deep as well as wide on the subtlest of subtle, Subjects, She explains these In simple words. She never has to read anything but has a and Spanish literature. She knows many lan- guages, especially Indian. Her mother tongue is Marathi. She has never studied English, Hindi or Sanskrit languages at school because she was a medical student but her mastery over these lan- guages is admirable. We enjoy knowing the absalute truth and absolute answers through vibratory awareness, free from doubts. knowledge of English. French We enjoy looking affer the needy, especially chil- dren and our elders, through our vibratory aware- ness, To diagnose diseases and cure the sick and the Incurable. We do not ridicule the weak, but try to uplift them to our level of strength, power and dynamism through our loving attention. She has never studied psychology but She was invited to speak on Jungian Psychology at the Junglan Soclety in New York. We enjoy the comfort of our Spirit and are not attached to the comforts of our body and mind as we are no langer the body, mind, conditioning ar ego but the Spirit. We enjoy giving realization and curing people without using our egos. We enjoy our knowledge like a cook enjoys a good meal he has cooked and we enjoy sharing it with otherS. We enjoy our enlightened altention. Our attention sees the good points of others, and doesn't go to violence and aggression. It works quietly and keeps quiet. We are gifted with a new dimension in our awareness of collective con- sciousness. It can penetrate Into any area of the subtle centre of any human being and we know the problemns as well as how to solve them. It also gives us knowledge of ourselves, judges us and cures us. It fills us with self confidence and humility. We enjoy the joy which hoas no duolity of happi- ness and unhappiness, which only can be enjoyed after Self-realization has matured. We enjoy the hurdles created by our enemies because they challenge us to rise higher. Every disadvantage becomes an advantage. We enjoy blind and stupid opposition as a joke. We leave the aggressive and cruel in the hands of the Di vine. We wish all the arrogant, scandalous liars are prosecuted, testing the validity of the laws in the name of God and also the laws of all the lands. Our attention can go to the problems in the home, of our family and friends, of our country and the world, it can go to internatlonal situotions. Wher- ever we put it, it can work things out by offering solution to bring freedom, prosperity and peace. We enjoy the great task of the emancipation of humanity put on our shoulders. We enjoy rectifying all the horible mistakes of the greedy, selfish, aggressive and cruel people, individually or co- lectively. Sahaja Yagis from all over the world enjoy commu- nicating with each other obout solving social, political and economic problems through their enlightened collective attention. We enjoy our powers because we never feel powerloss as this is the power of Divine love which is ever growing. Our attention goes to divine beauty, which is soothing and elevating and enjoys the best of all the world's cultures. This is how we enjoy the real Spiritual life of the Kingdom of God. We enjoy the love and compassion and innate virtues enlightened by Sahaja Yoga. We can The Divine Cool Breeze 20

 TALK "ON MEDITATION", New Delhi 1976, SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI We can not meditate, we can only be in medita- tion. When vwe say, we are going to meditate, it has no meaning. We have to be in meditation. Elther you ore inside the house of outside. You can not be inside the house and then say that now,I am outside the house. Or when you are oulside the house, you cannot say, I am inside the house. In the same way, you are moving in three dimen- sions of your life, of emotional physical and mental being. You are not inside yourself. But when you are inside that means, you are in thoughtless awareness, Then not only are you there, but you ate everywhere. Because that is the place, the point, where you are really universal. From there you are in contact with the principle, the shakti, and the power -That permeates into every par- ticle that is matter, into every thought that Is emation, into every planning and thinking of the whole world. You permeate into all the elements that have created this beautiful earth. You perme- ate into "Arkasha" Into "tesha", into sound, but your movement is very slow. have entered into you own kingdom, but you do not stay there, you come out of it, and again you go back and settle down. It doesn't matter, you should not feel so disappointed or frustrated. people have worked for thousands of years and they could not separate themselves from them+ selves. Only, the Sahaja Yogis, who are made after the pattern of Shri Ganesh himself, are so formed that they can give awakening and realization to other people. Even if you are caught up, you have seen you have powers. Even if you feel that the vibrations are not coming, you know, you have powers. You can give realization to others. In your presence, people get realization. But you have to be that power completely. Supposing, there is some thing wrong with your car, but as long as it is moving, it is all right. We have to repair it, we have to repair all the time all our wounds which we have caused to ourselves by our foalishness, lust, greeds, false identifications. We must have a complete atten- tion towards our weaknesses and not towards our achievements. If we know our weaknesses, then we can really swim across better. When you say. "Im meditating", that means you are moving in permutation with the universal being. But you are not moving youself, you are just unloading yourself to be free from the welght of things that do not allow you to move. When you are in meditation, you must allow yourself to be in thoughtless awareness. There the unconscious it- self, the chaitanya itself will take charge of you. You will start moving with the force of chaitanya. The unconscious is going to work it out, it is going to take you there where it wants you to go. Try to keep to thoughtless awareness as much as you can. When you are in thoughtless awareness you are in the kingdom of God. There His speed, His arrangements. His consclousness looks after you. Everybody is ascending individually, though you are collectively connected with each other and in communication. But the ascendence is absolutely individual. So wether it is your son, brother, sister, wife, friend, you must remember that you are not responsible for their ascendence. You cannot help them for their ascent. Onily Mother's grace and their own desire will help them. Sometimes a Sahaja Yogi will find an emotion will come into his mind. It will be an emotion of dejec- tion, frustration and he will be disgusted with him- self or with others. Both things are just the same. If you give vibrations in thoughtless awareness, you will not catch anything. Because all these entities and material problems that come into you enter, when you are in three dimensions. Through Sahaja Yoga you open the gates of your own being. You You might feel disgusted with yourself or others may be a passing phase, But If you go on, hanker- ing or lingering onto It, then you condition yourself. 21 MEDITATION

 have been to many gurus; they have read all kinds of books but they were seeking, They are seeking they can drink all kinds of water, develop all kinds of diseases. What can you do, you are seeking after all you are thirsty. But it has to be excused. That's how they developed lots of problems. Not only in their body also in their brain. It's a very delicate thing if you tell somebody that you have been to such and such guru. He doesn't want to hear. For him now the guru has become the last one. you cannot say anything against his guru. When he starts suffering then he may accept but you take it out that guru is also very delicate and if you want to take out that guru then. he might be hurt. doing was correct and were standing on their legs. The modern Sahaja Yogi is very different from the Sahaja Yogi of older times. because in the older timesit wasnoteasy to getrealization. One in a billion or in a trillion. And they had to work very hard. As they worked very hard, they got cleansed and build up themselves. Like any art plece which takes time is done with care is definitely a thousand times better than a modern artist just putting two or three lines. Today's hurnan being is likea modern artist. You put one line and you must see this into that person. You must have an identify. What identity can you have? With one line you see, you find out the identity. The Sahaja Yogis which are today have to realize that all these things are surrounding us. These evil forces are also there. There are some within us, and some are without. If looks to be a very difficult task but it is not. Because one condition if you can under- stand is that you have to recognize me. I know lam Mahamaya. I am really very clever at it. But I am truthful, I do nothave crocodile tears, Icannot have. But still I am Mahamaya. To recognize me what should we do? if you recognize me then you are protected. The cleansing is the simplest thing in Sahaja Yoga and is to be collective. If you are not collective then know that something's wrong with you. If you care collective then you are taking your bath in the river Ganges. You don't have to go to Himalayas, you don't have to do individual 'Sadana- mal, It you are enjoying the collective then know that you are clean. No blemish is there, you are absolutely alright. Then the modern society. The norms of modern society are given to us by people who are charac- terless like Freud who had no sense of morality, or by drunkards though they don't have any status of drunkards. There is no shame about it. With that drinking our value system started dropping down and people have accepted now the normal thing is abandonment. Formerly the parents used to support a person if he would take to God, righteous life or to something higher. If they saw these qualitfies in their child they used to be happy. Nowadays it's the other way round. The parents don't like it. As if the parents have lost everything in themselves so they want to hold on to their children, grandchildren and possess them, To fight the parents also is a big problem. This kind of a fearis also there, that my mother should not know, my father should not know this. You can see from all sides. The fear is burning like flames. The second part of this Mahamaya business, Ihad to beveryclose to you.to talk to you, to have a tapport, to tell you everything about Yoga, to make you absolutely aware of yourself. This had to be done and with all these complications within your mind, heart, and body, I had to work it out. To come close in the realforrm would havebeen very dangerous. So one had to be a Mahamaya. Despite that if you could recognize and understand me that I am DI- vine personality, an incarnation, That's all the Deities want. Then they look after you and give you all the powers, and the satisfaction, and protection. We are now here in Kali Yuga. We have started Sahaja Yoga. The way we have to work out our protection has to be mature. Mother of course is there to protect you. her powers are there to protect you. But surprisingly in the modern times there is one condition which has to be fulfilled. Because in those days good was good and evil was evil. There was no mixing up. Once they ask for Goddess they accept her, she came in her real form and she worked it out. But in modern fimes you must know that all these evil things are also lingering in your head a little but here and there. People are extremelysuperficial, they are very much pruned to the mass attitude, fashions, things like that. Sort of that personality is not that developed as that of those bhaktas who knew they wereright, righteous, who knew whatever they were This is the condition which for a rational mind is very difficult to understand that how can Adi Shokti be in one body, How can the infinite become finite. But human beings cannot do that. Only god can do it, he's God after all. If so you have seen so many The Divine Cool Breeze 22

 miracles, and photographs. This is what one has to recognize. WhenItalk to people they start talking to me litfle frivolously. Not with that depth, and feeling that I am Mahamaya. If I tell them something they are ready fo give an answer, or explanation. of course this freedom I have given you deliberately but you must understand that you have to talk to me In a way that you would talk to the Adl Skakti. Very important. Then how you behave is very important. Youshould not be artificial, or superficialbut best is to putyour hand on your heart, both the hands and just try to feel. Your mother is Adi Shakti She has created all this universe. And She is for your protection. Even Shri Krishna could not protect the Pandavas. They had to go in the forest, and suffer. But not Sahaja Yogis. As soon as I come to know about your prob- lems my attention can work. Shri Rama himself had to go to jungles. All this is given to you, this protection because you are seekers of truth. The truth is thatlam the Adi Shakti incarnated. Once this truth becomes one with your self there is nothing to fear because al! the Deities know this fact. They know about this incarnation very well. Theyare all prepared for it and they'll do anything to substantiate your belief. In every way they are trying to give you my photo- graph in the sky, this that. Idon't say, don't hate, don't drink, don't smoke. But autormatically once you know whom you are facing, in whose protection you are, automatically you will do that. Once you have rec- ognized you will have no fear from anyone.Themore you show that recognition, the more you realize it, you canget higher and higher, notonly spiritually everydaymentally, socially, economically, politic That is very remarkable that not only that you rec nize me as a mother who loves you very much 5 mother who is powerful to protect you. Very po ful. If you reallse that and if you feel that within y heart. Supposing I correct you sometime, is not f ing sad you should see how fortunate l am that Shakti herself is correcting me. She is taking intere me. How fortunate l am to be born at this time to with her in her great work. What have I done? recognition ifself will fulfill all the incarnationi Navaratri. Today we are worshipping Durga, Kali all these gr Goddesses, these powers, even Radha. It was ac who killed Kamsa, not Shri Krishna. He had to Radha to come and kill him. It is the power that! For today's Navaratti Puja I have to tell you that try to keep in mind that today you are worshipp the Adi Shakfi and not only Durga. You are worsl ping Durga and all these Goddesses to thank th because if they would not have saved you that ti you would have been so frightened, youwould hc become bad people and you would not have be here. That is why we are thankful to them for sav us and giving us this protection at that time wh an were very helpless. May God Bless You. Editor: Shri. Yogi Mahajan Printer & Publisher : P. C. Kulkarni Printed & Published at : The Divine Cool Breeze (Xerox M/cs.) 9, Bhagya Chintamani Soc. Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411 029. Navaratri Puja



----------------------

1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,_9.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Bhavasagara Puja Address
Brisbane, April 6, 1991
They talk about the propagation of Sahaja yoga
and solve any problems of Sahaja Yoga. In the
night, before sleeping, every single Yogi, including
children, footsoaks. Then they meditate, and then
sloep with ottention on the Sahasra. This is how
they have come up so wel.
In puja, Sahaja Yogis achleve heights in awareness
but soon feel that they have again come down.
The same thing happens after India tour. Luckily,
there ore ashrams. Ashram living is the way Shri
Ganesha is established. An ashram is a place of
collective spiritual life and is not simply a place
where people live together. We must understand
the Importance of discipine: discipline within an
ashram is essential and It can help IS Very much.
The tapa is that the body must get used to this
practice. Gefting up early will help for the whole
day. and once we get this habit, we will go to
sleep early. To have daily prayers and spiritual
discipline is the normal routine in India and in the
cultures of many devout people all over the world.
The family passes down ihis tradition of proper
worship, meditation and discipline. However,
many parents here do not pass dewn information
and about discipline, to ask the children to get up
at a certain hour, to medifate, to pray, for fear of
losing them. The children gre also very aggressive.
At the school in India, the children wil be taught
proper habits.
There are two types of meditation: Antarmana
and Bahirmana. Antarmana meditation is medita-
tion Inside ourselves when we try to see what is
wrong with us. Bahirmana meditation is outside
how we have to live outside. We have to have a
discipline that is not imposed on us but which we
happily accept and imbibe. To master any art a
rigorous triangle is requited. So we cannot take
Sahaja Yoga lightly In Sahaja Yoga there is no
severe "tapas (penance). It is all blessings, but we
shouldn't get lost in the blessings.
Because we do not meditate we get caught up.
Day by day, we must rise to a higher state and
understand that Sahaja Yogis are not here just to
have good food and a nice tirme, but we have to
become those unique personalities which are
required to raise humanity to a higher state. We
must be responsible and look after ourselves; oth-
erwise, Sahaja Yoga will not help us much and
may even be lost to us. We may have a large
quantity of Sahaja yogis but we won't have qual-
ity. One attack of negativity could then finish off a
huge amount of Yogis. This has already happened
Antarmana meditation is very important. Everyone
should meditate morning and evening everyday.
For lack of sufficient meditation people go on
catching, clearing, again catching, again clear-
ing. The conditioning, ego, and badhas come and
go and do not detach permanently, Just as we
bathe everyday, we have to wash ourselves within
everyday. Meditation is antaratma tapa. To live in
the Himalayas or do severe penance is not re-
quired, but we have to do this meditation eaily in
the morning.
Sahaja Yoga is working the best among the Aus-
trian's, the Germans and Romans. They all have
ashrams of the same type : to them nothing is
more important than achieving the heights of
Sahaja Yoga. Invariably these people get up at
4,00 a.m. Shri Mataji also gets up at 4, but she may
sleep later. They have a bath, get ready for puja,
have a 5-10 minute puja, and then meditate.
Afterward, they have breakfast. After work, they
come home, and sit down together to meditate or
discuss issues related to Sahaja Yoga collectively.
once.
Dedication s required to introspect and find out
what is wrong with us and how to correct it. Shri
Mataji gave the assurance that if we work this out
everyday, our thoughts will stop, our problems will
be solved and we will have no catches at all. but
there should be no lethargy about meditation. If
we leave these problems on our being. they will
grow, In the beginning, we might have to firmly
discipline ourselves to meditate, but in time we will
BHAVASAGARA PUJA
 1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,_9.pdf-page-1.txt 
 The first thing in the morning is to ask ourselves,
"What is my tesponsibility as a Sahaja Yogi?" This
will give us tremendous powers, tremendous expe-
riences: Everyday we must bombard ourselves
with, "Now get to meditation. Get to meditation."
Then, in many situations, you will Immediately get
into thoughtless awareness. Unless and until we
cleanse ourselves everyday we will not know our-
selves. Through antarmana we will really see inside
ourselves. Ask: "Why am I like this?" "Why do I think
like this?""Who am 1?" When these questions are
answered, we will know our value, our worth. Shri
Mataji sald that if we are washed and clean, then
before touching something we will be careful not
to get dirty again. When clothes are dirty, the
stoins blend in. Clean clothes show spots very
clearly. unless we clean ourselves, we will not know
what is wrong with us. We must witness ourselves,
and start understanding that our bad behaviorS
derives from some funny thing in the brain. This
brain has to be corrected. At the end of the day,
we must ask ourselves:
do it joyfully. We must clean the body, but more
importantly, this mind and intellect must be cor-
rect. "To be on instrument of God, you have to be
a perfect personality: otherwise, we may not be
able to communicate the message of Sahaja
Yoga and they also affect the people who meet
us, who will gradually find out that there is some-
thing wrong with us.
Once we get deep into our being we will develop
amazing capacities. We should think of our ca-
pacities : "How far am I able to do something
about curing people?" There are a few Yogis in
Bormbay and Pune that have developed great
healing powers. They go to villages and help cure
people. They want to go out fo the villages with
music parties to spread Sahaja Yoga. but when
they come back, they immediately footsoak.
We must not think of ourselves as perfect or infoal-
lible. We should fake precautions, and keep our-
selves in bandhan. It is very important to give our-
selves a bandhan before we go out, before we go
to sleep, and sleep with the attention at
Sahasrara. When there is complete understanding
of ourselves and these vibrations, all this mastery
can be ours. We have to develop the depth within
ourselves, If we cannot, then know we are still me-
diocre. The secrets about the Goddess were not
told to anyaone until they had achieved oneness
with God. Now Sahaja Yoga just works, just flows
from the hand, so many forget that they have to
work at it. There are some great Sahaja Yogis who
have gone deep into it. These Yogis are all invari-
ably the the ones who worship everyday, may be
even twice a day, meditate, and footsoak. There
may be 600 people at the airport, but Shri Mataji
knows who has been meditating everyday.
*What good things have I done for Sahaja Yoga?"
"How have i
Yoga?"
not been up to the polnt in Sahoja
"How far have I gone with these powers to spread
Sahaja Yoga?"
"How far can I go?"
The deeper we go, we do not show off, we just
emit. in this way a Sahaja Yogi will stand out. The
depth will have an effect on the children, the
surroundings, in every way. It isn't question of an
individual doing it, but collectively we have to
meditate. Don't worry about who is not coming to
meditation. When those who do rise very high, the
others will also do it. One must think :1 have to
look after myself." It's very selfish, "Swartha." "Swa"
means Self-Ishness. "Then you are net bothered
whatsoever anybody might say, whatsOGver any-
one may try to do. To you, this is the most impor-
tant thing to do... And all those who have
thought like this and have acted like this are
above everything. Nothing can put them down."
Some people have felt their responsibility as
Sahaja Yogis from the moment they got their
Fealization. Indian Sahaja Yogis who can impart
everything without ego have been sent to help us.
If we do not meditate, our ego can rise, and at-
tention furris to gross things like how to become
the leader, and from there it descends into anger
and even vlolence. To avoid this, meditate every-
day, morning and evening, and stay in caomplete
bandhan. We can pray : "Mother, if I have any
ego, please take it away."
The Divine Cool Breeze
www
 1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,_9.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Shri Ganesha Puja
Canberra, April 14, 1991 (Synopsis)
had been defeated because the fire was not lit so
their ownn chastity was In danger. To prevent an
attack on their chastity, they decided to bulld a
big pyre and kill themselves.
Shti Mataji began by saying that we have to know
the importance of the Mooladhara Chakra. We
must be very careful and respectful of it. Most of
the problems and strange behaviors in the West
are due to possessions on the Mooladharas
Chakra. "Shri Ganesha was created at the gate of
hell to protect us from falling Into Hell, But actually
when we insult Him and we do not care for Him,
He just sleeps off. When that happens any kind of
possession can come and really make people
mad." She asked how it is possible that Christians
do not know the importance of moality when
they are following Christ. Christians are the worst
as far as morality is concerned. Christians are re-
sponsible for the maximum number of people
killed in the world.
Shri Mataji said a great sense of morality is very
Important; otherwise we develop all kinds of funny
Ideas and become mentally unbalanced. Then
the children behave strangely and perverted,
incestuous relations develop. This is hell we have
created - in hell what else is there but no sanity
and no wisdom" We have to now understand how
to bulld ourselves as Sahaja Yogis. The essence of
wisdom is innocence, the power of Shri Ganesha is
Innocence which comes when we do not destroy
it.
Certain great Indian saints who understood the
value of chqstity and innocence have made the
culture of india. They have created a culture with
such good conditioning (susamaskaras) that such
ideas do not even enter people's heads, and
possessions cannot come in. For example, people
who dress up like witches or bhoots are attacked
because the bhoots think they have found some-
one like them. Possessions can enter into our
Agnya chakra and then go Into our Mooladhara,
Shri Mataji has sald many times not to let anything
cover the Agnya Chakra, If we allow anything to
cover it then we cannot be protected.
The first quallty of Shri Ganesha is He gives us wis-
dom, which glves us the balance and the sense of
how to behave towards ourselves, how to pre-
serve and how to respect ourselves. If Shti
Ganesha is not there to watch us some horrible
bhoots from hell can enter. In India women are
extremely particular about their chastity : even
looking at a woman with bad eyes is bad. Shri
Mataji then related the story of Queen Padmini
who was a very beautiful woman, A Muslim once
wanted to see her, and if she did not agree, the
sultan threatened to invade the kingdom. Once
the sultan saw her he thought he must have her.
He demanded that they hand thelr Queen over to
him; otherwise, he would invade the kingdom. The
people of the kingdom made a plan to save their
queen because they knew the chastity of a
woman was very important and the queen repre-
sented the chastity of all the women. Their plan
was to send 100 palanquin, each with armed
warriors inside and each carried by four fully
armed warriors. As it was a small kingdom there
were only five hundred warriors. The men said that
if they were victorious then they would light a fire.
The first thing we should understand is that Shri
Ganesha gives us maryadas, limits, which are in-
nate within us, not imposed on us. Children are shy
by nature, they innately try to protect themselves.
but we try to flaunt that innate innocence be-
cause the ego is there saying, "What's wrong?" We
do not know how devasting this is.
Basically we are good people, God has created
us as good human beings, but with ego people
have gone amuck, get caught up by bhoots and
then behave in a manner no one can understand.
She spoke of a boy who had come to her pro-
gramme dressed as a primitive man. She asked
The went and attacked, but the sultan's men were
more numerous and better armed so the 500 were
killed. The women came to know that the warriors
GANESH PUJA
 1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,_9.pdf-page-3.txt 
 him why he was dressed like this, to which the boy
said that he wanted to be primitive again. Shri
Mataji tesponded that this was not possible be-
cause we all have modern brains. By changing all
these external things just to get an identity, we
cannot becorne primitive. The idea of creating an
identity is a sign that we do not have our mary-
adas, that we ore denying Shri Ganesho within us.
Shri Ganesh has created the maryadas within us
which provide a sense of morality. In the West it is
so bad that we do not even know when some-
thing is wrong. With a mad Mooladhara a wornan
can become extremely aggressive with her hus-
band. We have to understand what our maryadas
are, and we have to live in them. To improve, it is
best to meditate on some good grass with the left
hand towards the light, right hand on the earth,
and say the Atharva Sheersha, by heart is best, or
read it, or say Shti Ganesh's mantra. This will also
help our eyes,
maryadas."
Of course, the Kundalini will help. and Shri
Ganesha will help, but we should try to watch
ourselves, to introspect. "Are we still in the same
category?" When we walk around we should have
our eyes at three feet level so we see only chil-
dren, flowers, grass, the Mother Earth, everything
beautiful. There is nothing beautiful above that, or
else we should look above people's heads.
Shrl Mataji advised that Australians should not
copy the French or the Arnericans because in
doing that they can lose their own personality. Shri
Ganesha gives us our personality because He
gives us maryadas, and it is only through mary-
ados that we get our personality. Shti Mataji fin-
ished by saying that we have to develop Shri
Ganesha within us so that people will see us as the
Incarnations of innocence. Just like a lotus rises
above everything, and makes everything fragrant,
Sahaja Yogis in Australia are expected to have
that beautiful personality of Shri Ganesha, to emit
the fragrance of innocence among all the Sahaja
Yagis and over all the world.
Shri Mataji said, "If children start crying in front of
my photograph or in my presence, then there is
some sort of a possession
Sahaja Yogis very, very serious. They have to
revive their innocence, they have to revive their
... it is very serious for
The Divine Cool Breeze
 1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,_9.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Shri Mataji's Final Puja Talk
Sydney, April 19, 1991 (Synopsis)
In her final talk in Sydney, Shri Mataji explained
that Sahaja Yoga is spreading and new people
are now coming to Sahaja Yoga, In order to sus-
tain them and spread Sahaja Yoga more, Sahaja
Yogis have to concentrate on their inner growth,
We have to meditate and increase our strength
for spreading Sahaja Yoga. We have to go to
different smaller places also to spread Sahaja
Yaga. We should not look for the defects of others
but focus on ourselves so that we become "Solid
Sahaja Yogis." The reason why people keep catch-
ing is because of lack of rmeditation.
feel the same respect for their mother. They should
give wives authority to control discipline and guide
the children so that they develop obedience
toward their mother.
The family system is extremely important in Sahaja
Yoga. Sahaja culture is to live happily together
and It is the only culture in which people can live
together happily. Whille the relations between
husband and wife in Sahaja Yoga should be ten-
der and loving, there should not be slavishness of
any kind. When a wife or husband does anything
against Sahaja Yoga, Sahaja Yogis should take a
stand against their husband or wife. Sahaja Yoga
is very precicous for us and we should guard it with
our lives.
In the past there have been some mishaps be-
cause of unnecessary fear in the minds of some
Sahaja Yogis. Shri Mataji emphasized that it is the
law in Sahaja Yoga that no one can be thrown
out of Sahaja yoga without permission from Shri
Mataji. Sahaja Yogis should be fearless. They
should tell anyone what they think is the truth and
write to Shri Mataji directly.
Sahaja culture has imbibed a lot of things from
Indian cultures as well as from western culture. For
example, Sahaja Yoga does allow the possibility
for divorce, but divorce is not encouraged and
neither is it a good thing. Divorce is allowed only if
nothing else helps and there is not alternative.
However, Sahaja Yoga marriages are the most
stable ones. In the case of church weddings, for
example, 9 out of 10 marriages fail in the first year.
Sahaja Yoga marriages are much better than any
other system of marriage or family. It is also part of
Sahaja culture to be introspective. Sahaja Yogis
should introspect about why they cannot enjoy
the other person. The Introspection will reveal that
their lack of enjoyment is mainly because of their
own defects and expectations, rather than the
defects of the wife or husband.
Shri Mataji also emphasized that Sahaja Yogis,
Sahaja Yoginis, and Sahaja children have to im-
bibe Sahaja culture. The responsibility of Sahaja
Yoginis in this respect, the woman's job, is to cre-
ate peace in the family. Sahaja Yoginis should not
aggress their husbands; they should not retort or
answer back. Explosiveness on their part is abso-
lutely wrong. In Sahaja culture women hove to
have forbearance. Women also have the ability to
wiggle out of problems and confrontations which
men do not have, which helps women keep
peace. They should also enjoy the companionship
of their husbands. Real romance starts after mar-
rlage.
Sahaja Yogi children should have the Sahaja cul-
ture of being gentle, obedient, loving and giving.
If Sahaja children are not following this culture,
they should be corrected. The correction has to
be made with complete determination, but with-
out anger. Sahaja Yogis and Yoginis should love all
Sahaja children as their own and assume respon-
sibility for them.
Sahaja Yogi men also have to imbibe Sahaja cul-
fure. They have to be very gentle and loving and
avoid harshness and volcanic temper. Sahaja
Yogis should respect their wives, especially in the
presence of others and children. They should at-
tend to their wives' comnforts so that the children
5)
FINAL PUJA
 1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,_9.pdf-page-5.txt 
 SAHASRARA PUJA
Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Ischai, ITALY 5.5.91 (Synopsis)
Today we have assembled here to celebrate the left side open out so mnore chaitanya can flow
Sahasrara day which woas opened in 1970 on this
day. We have to understand what happens when
the Sahasrara opens. When the kundalini posses
through the five centres, it enters into the limbic
area. This area is surrounded by thousand nerves
and when these nerves get enlighlened they look
like flarmes of vibgyor colors and very nildly beau-
tifully shining, emitting peace. But when the kun-
dalini starts entitling vibrations on the sides all these
nerves get enlightened gradually and start moving
on all directions opening the Sahasrara and then
the Kundalini emerges out through the fontanelle
bone area which we call as the Brahmarandra.
Randra means the whole. Brahma is the all prevail-
ing power of God's love. It enters into the subtle
energy which is all pervading which we do not
feel normally, but then the chaitanya (vibrations)
which are part and parcel of this all pervading
power, the param chaitanya they start entering
into our brain and showing their blessings. They
assemble in the limbic area. The limbic area is
connected to all the area of the brain and also to
the nerves. So it starts flowing on to the nerves,
giving you the new awareness of collective con-
sciousness called as 'Samuhik Chetana".
down all these centres but if your sahastara is not
fully opened this process does not take place. As
a lesult the chakras don't open: the kundalini only
as very few strands is kept in the splnal cord and
the new strands cannot rise because your chakias
are not open. In Sahaja Yoga it is very important to
keep your Sahasrara apen.
In the Devi Mahatmyam at the Sahasrara Maha
maya comes. She is the Mahamaya. Not easy to
recognize Her or know Her. She lives just like you.
She moves just like you and you can never make
out Her real nature. At thie Sahasrara to recognize
the Mahamaya is another viclous circle. You may
say why should you be Mahamaya. It should have
been better as starkingly some other form. But any
other form could not have worked out Sahaja
Yogo in modern times. Because people would
have been frightened and upset and they would
never have taken to Sahaja Yoga because they
had no discretion within them to know what is right
and what is wrong. That is why it had to be in the
Mahamaya torm.
In the Mahamaya you have to recognize although
it is difficult to recognize this form you have to. But
In Sahaja Yoga you have seen so many photo-
graphs which should convince you people men-
tally about this Mahamaya svarupa. Mentally you
can understand that there is something very differ-
You get a new chetana, a new awareness which
is showered upon your limbic area. The working of
these chaitanya rays is very interesting. They are
normally formied like small commas, but then they
go into different forms. They make themselves into
Swastikas as the four imnbed symbol of Innocence,
or they becorne the Aumkara which is the symbol
of our being, our awareness. When they form the
Swastika they try to nourish the left side and when
they form the Aumkar they nourish the right side.
They nourish left and tight sympathetic nervous
system.
ent.
Another way is that you start seeing the blessings
and you start seeing how you feel physically.
emotionally and spiritually. Still on a mental level
most of the people recognize but unless and until
It is recognized in the heart it is no recognition.
Already the heart is surrounded by seven auras of
the seven chakras and the Spirit (Atma) resides in
the heort. As it is on top of your head resides God
Almighty Sadoshiva. When kundalini touches that
point your splrit starts spreading and it starts acting
on your central nervous system because automati-
cally the vibrations, the chaitanya flow Into your
For the Sahasrara to be kept open is rather difficult
for people because its a vicious circle. Flist these
vibrations should enter into your brain through the
Brahrnarandra when it is opened out and they
should nourish your nerves by which your right and
The Divine Cool Breeze
 1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,_9.pdf-page-6.txt 
 brain which enlightens your nerves. But still recog-
nition of the heart is not there. Even without that
and meditative, then you touch that divinity within
you. When you touch that divinity you know you
are a Divine person. In Sahasrara puja you have to
recognize your own Divinify by experlencing your
Divinify. How do you experience it? By giving reall-
zation to others, telling about their chakras. you
know what's Wrong with them You are quite con-
fident and mentally you know. But you never intro-
spect how It is t am warking it out. How I can feel?
What has happened in me? What is the transfor-
mation? Once you start thínking about it of your
own being then a kind of a feeling towards the
Mahamaya comes. This feeling of gratitude love,
oneness, joy, all this starts working in your heart
and then you feel the responses. If the sea re-
sponds to the moon that means it has that mobility
in it to respond. A stane will not react to the moon.
in the same way in your heart, these waves of this
feeling are created by the experlence of spiritual-
ity, of your own being and then you start express-
ing them and I can make it out. Such a person
may not be too talkative or know much about
Sahaja Yoga but In his heart he feels the response.
you start feellng the cool breeze. You can raise
the kundalini of others. You can cure people. You
can do many things but still it is not recognition
because recognition is a mental activity of the
heart. How can heart have a mental activity? This
is another problern you can face --Le, the mental
activity of the heart. Say you are a Christian born
in a Christian family, as soon as you see photo-
graph of Christ you feel something in the heart. If
you are a Hindu and you see a photograph of Shri
Ram, immediately its a recognition in the heart. If
you are a Hindu and you see a photograph of Shri
Ram,. immediately its a recognition in the heart.
But the recognition of somebody living with you is
very very difficult and you live on the cusp of your
mental activities only. But to go deep down into
your heart, what should be done? How can the
mental activity be performed through the heart.
You must remember that heart is absolutely con-
nected with the brain. When heart fails the brain
also fals. The whole body goes out of order. So this
mental activity of the heart is to be understood this
way that as soon as you see the danger, without
even thinking, in a reflex way your heart starts
pumping more blood and you get palpitation. Its
a reflex action. This activity takes place because it
is built in within you. That as soon as you see emer-
gency your syrmpathetic nervous systerm goes into you love sormebody from your heart, you are not
activity and you start feeling the fear, the desire to
do something about it, but you do not think, you
just run. The fear is built in the central nervous sys-
tem. Any reaction or response is Ebullt in, But the re-
sponse to the spirituality is yet not manifested. It will
manifest. Through your past you have learnt that
you have to be afrald of this or that. With the
experience gradually you built in the reaction of thing outwardly. In the upnishads it was sald that
reflex within you so that you try to save yourself.
What experiences should you have to build that in
your heart, This experlence is of your own Divinity
and Spirituality. Once you start developing that
experience then you know that you are a Divine
The seat of the heart is in the Brahmarandra. If
your heart is not open and in the heart you do not
have those responses built in, They need not be of
aware or fear but a natural protocol that devel-
ops, then you can never do wrong because you
know whatever is good in your heart. Supposing
going to ham that person. In the same way when
you start feeling those responses in your heart you
can never do wrong, because they are now
manifesting which are built in within you. Because
there was spirituality there was that Dlvinity which
is bult in and now it is manifested. And then you
do not worry about things. You do not do any-
once you know the Broahma then all the outside
things are not necessary because now you have
got the sutra within yourself.
There was a gentleman in Calcutta who feel down
and got splinters in his brain. As he fell he called
out my name. I heard of the accident and put my
attention on him and gave him bandhan. The
doctors had given him up. Next day he opened
his eyes and recovered completely. After that he
is absolutely into his divinity, He does not think
about anything, about life, death etc. He just
knows that he is under the protection of the Adi
person.
Unless arid until you are fully aware that you are a
Divine person, whatsoever faith you may have in
the recognition is not complete because the one
who is recognizing me is a blind person. First have
faith in yourself. if there is any problem or liness
they will write to me. if you become introspective
SAHASRARA PUJA
 1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,_9.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Shakti. Another gentleman who had to have heart
surgery, recovered. His divinity within him was
there and his connection was so good that I could
work on him. But if you mentally go on analyzing
everything and mentally understand Sahaja Yoga
you have not reached that state of divinity from
where you receive all the blessings, which start
pouring on you from everywhere. You are defi-
nitely helped when your divinity is manifested in a
very very big way. These are not miracles. For
human beings they may be, but for God it is not.
He has created worlds and universes so what is so
great for him. This is the foith with experience and
not blind faith and through introspection... Why
do I do this? Why should I do like this? When you
are introspeoting then this depth moves further but
more through meditation. You must meditate early
in the morning and before going to bed. That's the
only way you can go deeper into your divinity
which is the source of all the knowledge and the
source of all the joy.
and then to put yourself Into a position where it te-
sponds to the divinity within you and to your
Mother with full mental activity of the heart.
We are so satisfied with a little of the Kundalini
coming out of the head. So much divinity is there
which had to come out. If you have to ascend
and if you are the foundation of that new age
which is going to transform the whole world you
will have to work hard. We shouldn't say I don't
know how to get up in the morning. You are on a
war path. You are soldiers just now and you have
to work it out if you have to fight the forces of
ignorance and darkness, You have to absolutely
decide within yourself that we are going to work it
out in such a way that we all are going to be-
come very powerful Sahaja Yogis and through us
the whole world is going to be saved. It is very
important thing for all of you to understand that
you have to get to meditation where you become
silent and your tree of life will grow in silence, not
in a turmoil. If you understand that then please
work it out in such a manner that you all become
completely aware of your divinity by which you
Now the quality of the Sahasrara has to go up.
Quantity is qulte big and the Sahosrara is the only
instrument which is going to work out Sahaja Yoga
in the modern times if we tealize that heart plays
the most important role in Sahasrara.
can see.
If you have to see the image you have to have a
very good mnirror. In the same way if you have to
feel the Mahamaya you have to have a complete
pure Divinity manifesting in you.
If you come to Sahaja Yoga for making some sort
of power game, money or business you are fin-
ished. But just to expand your heart, to spread your
love to everyone, to feel that love within you heart
May God Bless You.
The Divine Cool Breeze
 1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,_9.pdf-page-8.txt 
 JAI SHRI MATAJI
By our good fortune, Shri Mataji is, aboue
all, our Beloved Mother, She sustains us in
our ascent and patiently solves all our prob-
lems. However, if we truly desire complete
ILLUMINATION we must recognize Her as
our only Guru.
the guru only if he had already giuen
his personal problems and desires and dem-
onstrated that he had put into practice all
the advice offered by the Guru.
up all
Finally, we should make sure that all the
new sahaja yoginis (married or unmarried)
are instructed in the rudiments of how to
perform a puja, since it is possible that they
will be called onto the stage.
This recognition, we feel, is necessarily re-
flected in our behaviour towards Shri Ma-
taji and therefore, we would ask you to
consider the following.
HOW SHOULD WE BEHAVE DURING
HOW CAN WE PLEASE OUR GURU?
THE PUJA?
We should avoid crying babies and rowdy
children disturbing the puja and the puja
speech.
Our Guru is only pleased by our ascent
HOW SHOULD WE PREPARE TO PAR-
TICIPATE IN A GURU PUJA?
We should avoid setting up stalls to sell
photos, badges and so on, while we are
We should seek to develop within us as
much light as possible (as opposed to igno- waiting for our Guru to arrive for the puja.
rance). We should try to put into practice all
the advice offered as by our Guru to aid us
in our ascent (i.e. Introspection, Niskriya,
etc.) advice that is often forgotten or put off Guru for the start of the puja and other
We should be ready and waiting in medita-
tion according to the timetable set by our
events.
for one reason or another.
We should take photos only after our Guru
has given us permission to do so. This
should be done in an orderly manner, creat-
ing one queue for men and another for
women in respect of our Guru and those who
still wish to meditate.
HOW SHOULD WE BEHAVE OVER
THE THREE DAYS OF THE PUJA?
We should try to avoid disturbing our Guru
with letters or meetings regarding personal
or collective problems that, by now, we ought
to be able to face and solve using the powers
given to each and every one of us by our
Guru.
We should remember that the puja only ends
after our Guru leaves the puja place, so we
should maintain respectful behaviour until
this moment.
We should remember the situation before the
advent of Sahaja Yoga. If a seeker desired il-
lumination he would present himself before
GURU PUJA
 1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,_9.pdf-page-9.txt 
 GURU PUJA 1991
Though the lore of Vedas take up its dwelling on your tongue.
Though you be learned in scripture, gifted in writing prose and verse,
Yet if the mind be not absorbed in the guru's lotus feet,
What will it avail you? What, indeed, will it avail?
Though you become, at last, the emperor of the universe,
Though you possess for servants the mightiest of the kings of earth,
Yet if the mind be not absorbed in the guru's lotus feet,
What will it avail you? What, indeed, will it avail?
Even if you be ready to đwell in the forest as at home,
No more attached to work, untrammeled by an ugly form,
Yet if the mind be not absorbed in the guru's lotus feet,
What will it avail you? What, indeed, will it avail?
Of novices and monks, of rulers and of worldly men,
The noble soul who ponders there verses in the guru's praise,
And to the guru's teaching applies his mind with constant zeal-
He will attain to Brahman, the treasure coveted by all.
An extract from Adi Shankaracharya
The Divine Cool Breeze
10
 1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,_9.pdf-page-10.txt 
 The translation of Extracts from the Guru Geeta
(This was told by Shri Shiva to Shri Parvati about the importance of Guru)
In the word Guru, the first letter Gu highlights the
attributes of Maya whereas the second letter Ru
destroys the illusion caused by Maya.
cause and actions in everything, brings oneness in
the varlety of forms and objects.
Salutations to Shri Guru whose two lotus feet dispel
the heat of duality and save us from all calamities.
Hence position of Guru is the most exalted and
inaccessible even to Gods and Shri Guru is worshil-
ped by all.
Salutations to Shri Guru, with speech, with mind,
with attention and with eyes, who is verily Shri
Shiva and Shakti and whose two lotus feet, have
red and white splendours.
Salutations fo Shri Guru who pulls out those fallen
into the ocean of hell while sitting on the tree of
mundane world.
I meditate upon, Shri Guru in whom, the letter Gu
shows the state beyond the three Gunas and Ru
shows the formless form; and who bestows on us,
the form which is beyond the three Gunas.
Salutations to Shri Guru, who is Shri Brahmadeva,
Shri Vishnu, Shri Shiva and who alone is Supreme
Brahma.
Salutations to Shri Guru who has created all knowl-
edge for benevolence of people so that they
have the bridge to cross the acean of mundane
world.
Salutations to Shri Guru, for destroying through the
Self-realization, the Karmas (fates) accumulated
during the series of past existences.
Salutations to Shri Guru, there is no principle, which
is above Shri Guru, there is no penance which is
above Shri Guru, and no knowledge can exist
beyond the principle, which is Shri Guru.
Salutations tfo Shri Guru, who opens the eyes
one who has become blind due to the darkness of
ignorance, by anointing them with the collyrium of
knowledge.
Salutation to Shri Guru, who has shown, the formn of
uninterrupted canopy that has pervaded all living
and non living things.
Salutations to Shri Guru, for achieving the enlight-
enment in the world 'you are my father, you are
my mother, you are my brother and you are my
God.
Salutation to Shri Guru, whose lotus feet are be-
decked with diamonds which are the Shrutis and
the lustrous lotuses of Vedas.
Salutations to Shri Guru who is the truth, in the light
of which truth becomes manifest in the world and
who is the joy that enchants the world.
Salutation to Shri Guru whose mere remember-
ance, spontaneously awakens the knowledge.
Salutations to Shri Guru who is Sat, Le. pure exis-
tence, having known which the world, of variety of
forms and objects, ceases to appear as real.
Salutations to Shri Guru, who is Chaitanya, exter-
nally serene, beyond confusion and who is ex-
tremely pure and beyond the Naad, bindu and
Kala.
Salutations to Shri Guru, whose form is cause and
action, and who is present as the cause in all
actions.
The origin of meditation is the form of Shri Guru, the
origin of Puja is the lotus feet of Shri Guru, the origin
of Mantra is the speech of Shri Guru and the origin
of liberation, is the grace of Shri Guru.
Salutations to Shri Guru, whose presence as the
GURU GEETA
11
 1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,_9.pdf-page-11.txt 
 GURU PUJA
TALK BY H. H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
CABALLA LEGURE
ITALY 28-7-91 (Synopsis)
Today we are all here to worship your Guru. It is a chosen and so whatever they will have to go
common practice specially in India that you must
worship your Guru. Guru principle is extremely strict
and the strictness made many people not confirm
to the ideais: In those days the Guru had to be
absolutely the authority and it was the Guru who
would decide which disciples he will have. One
through was welcome. Wilh this idea they be-
came the disciples.
But in Sahaja Yoga its just the opposite. First of all
your Guru is a Mother who suffers from' Sandra
Karunall At the slightest this that happen to you
GURU
PUJA
my eyes get filled with tears. So as a mother, to be
a Guru is a very difficult thing. At the same time for
you to achieve heights is also difficult because you
get lost when I love you so much and in that love
you forget sometimes that the progress in your
being is very slow. It is irnportant that in Sahaja
Yoga you have to be strict with yourself. You have
to be your own Guru. It means you have to guide
yourself. You have to treat yourself os your disciple.
You have to trim yourself. If you do not understand
the responsibility as Sahaja Yogis of working every-
thing out yourself, you connot move very fast be-
cause it is a difficult type of relationship between
had to go into great fapasya (penance) to even
become a disciple. This hardship was the anly way
the Guru used to judge. Gurus would always live in
Jungles and they would select very few disciples,
and they had to go and beg for food from the
nelghboring villages and cook food for their Guru
with their own hands.
Basically we must understand that the difference
between these times of Guru ship is this that very
few individuais wete given the chance to become
the Guru and these few were also selected out of
quife a lot of people. They felt that they are being
really special that they are being selected and
The Divine Cool Breeze
12
 1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,_9.pdf-page-12.txt 
 the Guru and the disciple. First you become your
own Guru. You have to do a lot of introspection
and fix your ldeals, I can eat anything: I need not
eat anything at all. for days together. I can sleep
anywhere; I may not sleep at all. I tiavel for miles
together, untiringly. I am Guru of myself.
The first thing is that there should be a lots of intro-
spection & fixing of ideals. What's wrong with me?
Not what's wrong with others. Am I seeking the
cornfort of my body?ls my aftention on my body
or on my Spirit? The best thing is to write it down
Can I Sleep on the grass? Can I sit on the street?
You have to make this body work. Can I sleep
anytime I like? Can I keep awake anytime I like? 1
have seen people doze off. The reason is not that
they are bad or indisiplined but because inside
they are tired. If you are tired inside then you feel
tired all the fime. So introspect how you behave,
When you start introspecting yourself you also start
Introspecting your surroundings, your styles and
your methods, and what you are doing to yourself
because of the conditioning of the outside.
you? What sort of personality you will have? We
have to change this by changing ourselves. So
arnong Sahaja Yogis there should be no insecuri-
ties but maryadas. You must know how to respect
each other's privacy.
The second thing with the Western mind is that
they are bombarded by criticism. There are so
many critics that there are no more artists left. Only
critics are critizing critics. All artists are finished.
They are all the time criticized. They rnay not know
how to play an instrument or sing, but they con
critiaize alright. So all the time in your mind is a
feeling that somebody will criticize you, If you do
this. As Sahaja Yogis you should not worry about
these people because they are blind. I they want
to criticize then let then, it makes no difference,
The third is even worse, that you must always see
to the other side of the bank, even if you standing
on this side, To be fair arıd never to say something
that you are sure of. If you ask anyone "How are
You" nobody will say that I am perfectly altight.
They are not sure of themselves ail the time. This
shaking Inside gives you a personality which can
never progress. Progress comes when you put your
step forward, you put your feet firmly on that point
and then put the second step forwoard like as you
climb a mountain but in the first place you are
thinking that its half way through then how can
you go further? This is also a very big psychological
deterrent and detrimental for your progress.
The conditioning that we have in the West are
more psychological and that's why you cannot
find out what's wrong with you. The physical con-
ditioning are not so dangerous. You can get over
them and you can manoge them. But if you intro-
spect what you will find a very subtle thing. Firstly,
because of the wars everybody is afraid of every-
one. Specially because of Freud, even the mother
Is afraid of the child. They won't touch of hug The fourth thing you have learnt that you must
anybody. So the expression of love is not there.
When there is no expression there is no love inside.
That's how it goes on drying you up. There was a
little girl in Sahaja Yoga and I had some present for
that child. So I told a Sahaja Yogi to give it to her.
He said he was afraid of her misunderstanding
him. This has created the psychological Insecurity
within you. From very childhood this insecurity has
been working. And that is why you are ftightened
of each other, your parents, brothers and sisters,
The whole world is afraid of the Western world,
And why are they suffering from Insecurity? They
have made everyone insecure all over the world.
They are insecure within them selves, in their own itself like a lawyer, So its a double personality in the
family or groups. They ore so much frightened of
each other, you should be fearless. You are a
Sahaja Yogi and you are no more imrmoral. If all
the tirne you keep on thinking you are immoral. If
all the time you have to go and do some confes-
sion somewhere then what is going to happen to
argue out yourself. You have a problem and you
come and tell me. I give you a solution. then you
argue that this is the problem with this solution.
Then I give you anather solution but you argue on
that one also. Like this I go on giving you solutions
but you go on arguing. You are standing against
yourself all the time. Then I have to say thai this is
your problem and not mine. I am glving you solu-
tions and if you want to solve your problems belter
take a positive attitude. If you are all the time
arguing against yourself then how can you prog-
ress? The western mind will not try to face any
problem as its own, but will go on arguing with
being. With enlightenment of your brain this should
disappear.
On the contrary in Sahaja Yoga it is very danger-
aus. You are a Sahaja Yogl. You are connected
with the all pervading power. Whatever you soy
13
GURU PUJA
 1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,_9.pdf-page-13.txt 
 "Mother if you are very sure then we are putting up
our ego." They are so much afraid of their ego.
They feel their ego will bloat so much th
take off. Another fear that people have that if we
Osert that this is what is right thing to do and this
is what we want then we will get an ego. With
Sahaja Yoga also certain fears have crawied In.
One of them is that Mother I should not have an
gets connected and it acts. Its very dangerous for
you people not to realize that you are realized
Souls and not to assume your own powers. What-
ever the Sahaja Yogis say, desire or want, there
are people sitting there listening to you all the
time. They are so anxious to do your work. So
whatever you think, desire or say, we have to be
extremely careful. With old people I can say that
they are very conditioned and have problems etc.
But the younger generation is capable of improv-
ing itself and making the brain straight.
at they will
ego.
Now what is the problem of ego? As a reaction to
it people have developed a kind of a protesting
character. But again these entrepreneurs have
pampered your ego. Like in the morning you ask
the child, "What will you have?" Then the child says
"Pl have this." The mother has to run and get it, or
she must keep everything in the fridge. In India
that is not the case. Whatever is cooked in the
house you better have, If there is no salt then
doesn't matter.don't eat. If you are hungry in any
case you will eat. So when the disciplining comes
within yourself and you understand this, then you
do not say I desire only this or that. What you
desire you will say you will not have it for one
month.
Another psychological problem which you do not
know is very surprising that whatever is to follow
the entrepreneurs ideas you must act. Because
the whole fundamental of western life is to see
and be seen. To always follow the latest fashion
especially with hairdos. They lose their hair so fast
in these countries: Without using oil which they
should use. I all
look alike. You can dress up the way you like, live
the way you lke, but you should not get yourselves
enslaved by any entrepreneurs. You are free
people now. Know that you are absolutely free
and your freedom is absolutely in the light of your
enlightment. You can never do wrong. But first of
all have confidence within yourself that whatever
you have to do you are not going to enslave
yourself to entrepreneurs, what people have to
say, how you will look, how you will appear before
them. This isa very important point that half the
fime we are labouring just to look tike others. Its
very surprising how the entrepreneurs have be-
fooled the western people. In India it won't work.
Specially the Indian women. Sometime back they
brought the mini sari to India. No Indian woman
would wear a mini sari. Whatever clothes we have
In India has been there traditionally tested through
trial and error and we know that this is the best.
You must be very careful that you do not take to
stupid things which are being created by entre-
preneurs, but take to sensible things which are
required for you.
don't say thot Sahaja Yogis should
Once we had a transfer and had been glven a
small bed where my husband slept and I slept just
on the bare cement and next day I started getting
the pain in the body. I sald alright. After that I slept
on the cement floor for on month. Then the
cement lost its power one me. You must master
your mind. Now the problem is this ego will come
up. That is because your ego is developed by the
actions, by protesting against things and also by
the pampering of the enitrepreneurs. How to get
rid of this ego is to know that you are an enlight-
ened soul, so respect yourself. Once you start re-
specting yourself, you will not fall into any traps of
ego. You have to say I am a Sahaja Yogl." How
can I behave like this." A kind of dignity develops,
then you start feeling shy of doing something that
Is stupid, because ego makes you stupid. If you
develop this respect that I am a Sahaja Yogl, then
you will be amazed that the dignity of a Sahaja
Yogi will definitely keep you down to earth. You
will not get into the trap of your ego.
In the introspection you find out what's gone
wrong with you. How you are made this way.
What's wrong in my own personality. It has come
from all the surroundings and the way people
have been putting ideas into my head. You should
have your own ideas. You shouldn't worry what
Plato said or Socrates said. What do you think?
After all you are enlightened people. Another psy-
chological thing is even the worst. And that is
One side is the conditioning and another side is
this ego. That dignity has to be developed.
Among animals there are maryadas. Like a tiger
won't behave like a snake and vice versa. We are
now Sahaja Yogis. We are tigers among human
The Divine Cool Breeze
14
 1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,_9.pdf-page-14.txt 
 beings. It is not necessary to have the medals to
show that you are something great. You are Maha
Yogis. So develop that respect. And you wil be
surprised that hurnility will immediately come into
you. Like a bridegroom who knows he is dressed
up like a bridegroom and cannot behave like the
other boys at his wedding. Once we know we are
Sahaja Yogis that dignity will develop within us and
with that dignity we also see what is wrong in your
own country and what is undignified.
love is a source of energy that makes things grow
in a living manner. Love does not mean that you
hug somebody etc. But living energy that under-
stands, that makes you. Like this flower. I cannot
otder it to go straight. it is moving in its own way.
Let it be. It looks nice because no flower should
look like another flower, When it grows it is growing
in its own way. So whatever is built in within you
which is the living energy. it blossoms by itself. The
water of pure love is to be given. In pure love what
you see in another person as a Guru. What's the
matter with rnyself where it is obstructing me to go
further. In another person as a guru what you see
is how to handle this man with love so that he
comes closer to reality. Its a very gentle and loving
process. Nothing like really enjoying your love. Just
to know that I love so many people is itself so
great. It should be 'Sarnadrishti', With the same
eyes you should see everyone.
Let your Guru principle come up and show itself.
Specially the kind of a Guru you have. I am not
strict with you. I am very gentle. Because it is not
for an individual but it is for the collective. And if
something has to be spread collectively then you
have to understand that it is only love that is going
to work it out. There is no other way we can
spread Sahaja Yoga because we cannot be like
Hitler giving wrong ideas of hatred, racialism, na-
tionalism. When I say love, it is very different be-
cause of our collective work we have to know that
May God Bless you.
15
GURU PUJA
 1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,_9.pdf-page-15.txt 
 Pledge taken by Sahaja Yogi at the
Puja to the Guru
We the Sahaja Yogis of the world do declare that
we have experienced the Self-realization through
Sahaja (Spontaneous) awakening of the Kundalini
as discovered and taught by Sri Mataji Nirmala
Devi. We do declare that these are the benefits
we experienced in our Own lives and see in the
lives of others who have had their Self-realisation.
highs standard of balanced education. A school
where proper moral conduct is taught and en-
couraged, where they won't be abused or sub-
jected to Imimoral and wrong behaviour.
We love to watch their aptitudes develop and to
support the flourishing of their Innate talents, and
encourage them in other fields of development.
We like them to understand us and all other
Sahaja Yogis. Also all the cultures of the world,
artistic, musical, literary, religious free from preju-
dice. We like them to understand and enjoy the
beauty of the world and the natural environment.
Our life becomes one of purity and simplicity.
Before martage we lead a very chaste life. We
don't even like to listen to talk of sex. Sex we enjoy
only in a sanctified and legal marriage.
We enjoy monogamaus or monandrous marriage
with a Sahaja Yogini of our choice. Husband and
wife tespect each other. They understand each
other fully. There is very deep love between hus-
band and wife, but there is no public display of
romance, as it upsets our modesty and privacy.
We enjoy our new found knowledge that comes
through wisdom and inspiration. When we mature
we are no longer afrald of the horrible aggression
of modern methods.
We spontaneously enjoy all the arts, but only those
works that are beautiful and soothing, that give
Joy. Works that are traditional or classical, enduring
works of great masters of art, music and literature.
Works that inspire and praise the divine.
Children are an important part of our martied life.
Most Children of Sahaja Yogis are boin-realized.
We love childreni, our own and those of others. We
enjoy watching their growth and their play. We
enjoy taking them on holidays.
We do not enjoy things that are not respectable,
that are vulgar, jarring on the nerves.
We are not possessive of our children, and do not
smother them with our affection and prevent the
development of their own personality. We want
them to be strong and settled within themselves so
that they do not become impressed by wrong
Ideas, wrong behavlour or fall under the Influence
of wrong types of media arnd advertising.
We love to read and understand all the scriptures
and find the true message in them which we can
verify through our new found vibratory awareness.
We are very normal and we keep the company of
all others who are abnormal or sub-nomal. We do
not give up our jobs or our work but we enjoy the
company of all the Sahaja Yogis, whatever work
they may do or whatever country they may .come
from. We enjoy this vast ocean of beautiful
people. We are no longer only limited to the
company of our colleagues, but have friends from
all over the world.
We do not spoil them by letting them dominate us
with their demands. Children mostly like our cor-
rection, and sometimes they correct us as well.
We like to teach them proper manners and re-
spect for others, to share with clhers. We like them
to be clean, tidy and properly dressed. We do not
let them be cheeky or insolent.
We would love to write about and publish all the
miracles that happen to us through Sahaja Yoga,
and also the miraculous photos that we get spon-
taneously, but Sri Mataji will not permit us to do so,
We like to send them to registered Sahaja Yoga
Schools, if they want to go, where they will get a
The Divine Cool Breeze
16
 1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,_9.pdf-page-16.txt 
 escape from reality using strong drink or drugs. We
are so relaxed we don't need to smoke. This alsa
causes us to vomit.
because of her modesty. She says no one will
believe they are real.
We like to find out about the activities of the relig-
lons, cults and anticult movements and why they
are trying to mislead people away from the truth
and away from the reality of the Divine. We like to
speak openly about aur findings, without fear
because we know we are speaking the truth. We
travel to different cilies and towns, to mix with
people and find out why they are só unhappy in
their life.
We have no worries about money. AIl our needs
are catered for. Sri Mataji will not let us read the
Guru Gita as it says that the disciple should give all
his money and everything to the guru, We would
happily do this as thanks to her for saving us from
our own destruction, but she will not take a single
paisa from us.
We would love to give Her a garden of flowers.
but she won't let us waste our money and says
that one is sufficient.
We love to create our own works of art. We enjoy
the new inspiration we get from within to produce
these works. We also enjoy mastering new sklls
besides our innate ones and then to create some
things that are uniquely splritual,
We all would love to give her, individually, birthday
presents, but stie will only accept one present that
is given collectively, If we do forcibly glve her an
individual present, she gives us a bigger one in
return, so we have stopped giving her individual
presents. She is always insisting we should not even
give her collective presents.
We enjoy our work, whatever it may be, and try to
excel at it. So many Sahaja Yogis have reached
high positions in their fields whether they be law-
yers, judges, industrialists, ambassadors, bureau-
crats, doctors, architects or artists, These achieve-
ments they have reached through balance and
respect for those who work around them. There is
no aggressive ambition in Sahaja Yogis, we do not
try to out do our colleagues so they are very re-
lleved. We are promoted because of our talents,
respectability and understanding and not be-
cause we are always hankering after someone or
doing sycophancy to any boss.
She has only now allowed us to pay for half of her
travelling expenses, Only now can we pay for our
food and travel in India, previously she pald for all
of us who went to India.
She has bought houses to use as our ashrams
which until recently were rent-free. She has never
stayed in these ashrams without paying.
Previously all books and tapes were sold without
any royalty payments, now Sri Mataji has agreed
to accept sorne, but so tar nothing has been sent.
She always uses the money collected for the
spreading of Sahaja Yoga.
We love to keep our homes open to all kinds of
families, We like our homes to be welcoming; to
be clean and tidy. We like them to be decoratedi
with artistic and handmade goods of a high
quality. We ike to use natural materials for our
homes, clothes and on our skins. We do not like
man-made plastics, nylons etc.
Houses which are in the name of some Sahoja
Yoga leaders, were completely built by Sahaja
Yogis but now they have taken their homes back.
We love to help each other and are concerned
for the weifare and well-belng of others.
Alihough we cannot give any money for self-real-
zation, or to Stl Mataji in persan, we do not object
to giving some money, in trust, for the spreading of
the teaching of Sahaja Yoga. We do not know of
any organization or group that does not collect
money for some reason, in most countries Sahaja
Yoga is registered as a Charitable, non-profit soci-
ety. Any money that is collected is kept in a bank
with proper accounts. Sri Mataji is extremely trust-
irng of all Sahaja Yogis, but some have taken
advantaga of her confidence and taken large
We enjoy our generosity. We enjoy feeding people
and giving them presents.
We eat any foods we like, or that are good for our
well being, without greed or denial. We don't eat
large animals (cows, horses etc.), or food cooked
in alcohol.
We don't toake alcohols as they cause us to vormit
We are also so contented that we don't need to
17
PLEDGE AT GURU PUJA
 1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,_9.pdf-page-17.txt 
 amounts of money from her personally. These
people were asked to leave Sahaja Yoga. They
were not even made to repay the monies they
took from her. They were just forglven.
Even if we want to feel guilty for our mistakes she
will not allow us to feel that way on the grounds
that we are only human beings and slowly we will
all improve, by facing our mistakes.
We only trust Sri Mataji, who has a great sense of
public money, Whenever anyone makes money
out of Sahaa Yogis and is found out, fhey turn
against Sri Mataji. Most of these people are par-
doned by Srl Mataji. They have mostly fallen under
the influence of their half-baked wives who have
mislead into these corrupt practices
Even though we would Ilike Her to give us constant
advice and guidance, She makes us become our
own gurus, to becorne the masters of our own
lives and spiritual ascent. (To know thyself)
If we write to her confessing our past lives and sins,
She won't read our letters. Instead she always tells
us to be in the present.
in the twenty one years of Sahaja Yoga hardly a
dozen, people have been asked to leave. Apart
from wrongfully collecting money, people were
asked to leave for the following reasons; homo-
sexuality, flirting and adultery, mental disease,
aggresslon and domination of others, particularly
towards women. These people were glven all
opportunities to improve their behaviour before
being asked to leave. Some of them have since
overcame their problems and returned. Some of
those that were asked to leave have turned
against Sahaja Yoga, but they never say why they
had to leave Sahaja Yoga. We do not discuss
them or bother about them as they are like a
rotten apple and we are glad to see them go. If
they are lying it is their rnisfortune. We are happy
that we are not so unfortunate as to come to
Sahaja Yoga, see the truth and still misbehave and
be sent awWway.
A true Sahaja Yogi should not commit sins be-
cause of his spiritual nature. This is very easy for us
as we develop a great sensitivity to sin.
We belleve in the unity of all religions, which we
know as a fact through our vibratory awareness,
are all from the one source of God Almighty. We
worship all the incarnations and venerate all the
seers, saints arid realized souls of the past and
present. We enjoy all their writings, poetry and
works of art. We have discovered many saintly
people who were never recognized before as
gieat, evolved souls.
We are against fundamentalism and the Igno-
rance of organized religion.
We believe in the unity of one world and one God.
We respect our wives and all women as the moth-
ers of children.
Thus Sahaja Yoga is a Mahayoga. Never before in
the history of spirituality has such a mass awaken-
ing of Truth been seen. It expects a very high
Moral standard from its participants because
these are the innate qualities of a spiritual person
who wants to do spiritual work. We are not a
money making concen so we do not require
great numbers of people. We are only interested
in people of spiritual depth and quality. Our pre-
cepts must be expressed in our practices and our
life. We cannot be hypocrites,
We enjoy our virtue, faith and sense of security.
We enjoy our peace, calm and forthright atli-
tudes.
We enjoy our responsibility for the awakening of
the spiritualty in man. To work for the seekers of
the world with love and patience. To see the ight
In their eyes when they feel the actualization of
Kundalini awakening. Enjoy to see thousands of
people of every nation experlencing Self-realiza-
tion. To see Germans, Russians, Jews and Arabs
live in harmony together.
There is no prejudice on the grounds of colour.
race, religion, creed or financial standing. The only
criteria is spiritual growth, which makes us feel
Joyous.
We enjoy the purity of relationships of men ad
wornen as brothers and sisters. Any person in an
Ashram or one of our groups who is found filirting or
dating is asked to leave, thus we have no farmily
complications.
If we do make any mistake we would like Sri Mataji
to punish us, as a guru does, but she punishes us
by forgiving us.
18
The Divine Cool Breeze
 1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,_9.pdf-page-18.txt 
 We enjoy speaking pure, correct language which
is clearly expressed.
how they affect the subtle centre of seekers and
spoil their chances of ascent into higher aware-
ness.
We enjoy keeping silent and letting others speak.
We enjoy the speeches of other Sahaja Yogis, also
they enjoy ours.
many new facts we lean can be verified scientifi-
cally. We put this knowledge Into practical use for
the betterment of society.
We enjoy the sweet, loving nature of other people
but avoid arrogance and aggression. We abhor
vulgar, obscene and scandalous talk and gossip.
We have become aware, alert, wise, dynamic,
relaxed and above all, enlightened.
We enjoy the achievements of our young people
and how they are saved from the coruption and
immorality that abounds in today's society: how
they are transformed from a lethargic and depres-
sive life into a new dynamic, youthful life. We enjoy
their amazing meteoric progress in their sports, art
and music and in their scholarly capacify through
their ascent.
We enjoy the fragrances of the flowers and na-
ture. We enjoy food that satisfies the body and not
the tongue.
We love to discuss God AImighty and His compas-
sion, and aiso His wrath for the people who are
evil.
Our ears love to hear words of wisdom and the
pralses of God. To hear melodious music that
soothes the mind. We love to sing songs in praise
of the Divine in a proper language with correct
pitch, harmony and rhythm.
We enjoy knowing Sri Mataji as our Mother. We
enjoy the example she sets for an ldeal life. She
never demands. She is self-content and self-con-
tained. Loving. caring, gently solving any problems
we may have, always paying attention to our lives,
She knows all of us and all the good things about
us. She is the ideal housewife and rmother, caring
for all Her relations.
We enjoy the purity of non-adulterous eyes.
We enjoy watching our ego and laughing at it.
We try to remain in a state of thoughtless aware-
ness because it is only in this state that we can
grow spiritually, as we are in the present. The past
is over and the future does not exist. Only the
present is the reality.
We enloy listening to her husband speaking of her
many qualities as a wife and mother. How he
describes Her capacity to do many things at the
same time without any effort. How She has the
love and respect of all the staff and officers of his
work whatever office he has held, how even they
called Her Mother.
We do not rationalize our mistakes or our achleve-
ments. It is God who is doing the work not us, we
ore just the witnesses of His drama.
Through Her own example She has shown us how
to live as good householders, and has saved
many marriages through this example.
We are not disturbed by past conditioning or fu-
ture ambitions.
We enjoy expressing reality and Sahaja Yoga in
words and deed.
She will not permit us to escape our social respon-
sibilities by taking sanyassa, or turning away from
society no matter how decadent it may be.
We enjoy our strength and wisdom and the free-
dom we have from vanity, greed, hatred, jealousy
and violence.
Although She has so much power She has never
used it to manipulate anyone. On the contrary She
is so trusting that we fear She will become the vic-
tim of manipulation. But we have learnt that She
cannot be tricked or manipulated.
We try to analyze and find out through discussion
why all the religions have failed, why the scriptures
have been mutilated and misrepresented. We
want to find out why people give money for God
when He has no understanding of money.
We enjoy the knowledge She has in every subject,
except money and banking. All Her accounts and
cheque-books are kept by Sahaja Yogis. They
We study the cults and anticult movements to see
19
PLEDGE AT GURU PUJA
 1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,_9.pdf-page-19.txt 
 laugh at our own faults and enjoy the good points
of others.
write for Her and She just signs.
Her knowledge is very, very deep as well as wide
on the subtlest of subtle, Subjects, She explains
these In simple words. She never has to read
anything but has a
and Spanish literature. She knows many lan-
guages, especially Indian. Her mother tongue is
Marathi. She has never studied English, Hindi or
Sanskrit languages at school because she was a
medical student but her mastery over these lan-
guages is admirable.
We enjoy knowing the absalute truth and absolute
answers through vibratory awareness, free from
doubts.
knowledge of English. French
We enjoy looking affer the needy, especially chil-
dren and our elders, through our vibratory aware-
ness, To diagnose diseases and cure the sick and
the Incurable. We do not ridicule the weak, but try
to uplift them to our level of strength, power and
dynamism through our loving attention.
She has never studied psychology but She was
invited to speak on Jungian Psychology at the
Junglan Soclety in New York.
We enjoy the comfort of our Spirit and are not
attached to the comforts of our body and mind as
we are no langer the body, mind, conditioning ar
ego but the Spirit.
We enjoy giving realization and curing people
without using our egos.
We enjoy our knowledge like a cook enjoys a
good meal he has cooked and we enjoy sharing
it with otherS.
We enjoy our enlightened altention.
Our attention sees the good points of others, and
doesn't go to violence and aggression. It works
quietly and keeps quiet. We are gifted with a new
dimension in our awareness of collective con-
sciousness. It can penetrate Into any area of the
subtle centre of any human being and we know
the problemns as well as how to solve them. It also
gives us knowledge of ourselves, judges us and
cures us. It fills us with self confidence and humility.
We enjoy the joy which hoas no duolity of happi-
ness and unhappiness, which only can be enjoyed
after Self-realization has matured.
We enjoy the hurdles created by our enemies
because they challenge us to rise higher. Every
disadvantage becomes an advantage. We enjoy
blind and stupid opposition as a joke. We leave
the aggressive and cruel in the hands of the Di
vine. We wish all the arrogant, scandalous liars are
prosecuted, testing the validity of the laws in the
name of God and also the laws of all the lands.
Our attention can go to the problems in the home,
of our family and friends, of our country and the
world, it can go to internatlonal situotions. Wher-
ever we put it, it can work things out by offering
solution to bring freedom, prosperity and peace.
We enjoy the great task of the emancipation of
humanity put on our shoulders. We enjoy rectifying
all the horible mistakes of the greedy, selfish,
aggressive and cruel people, individually or co-
lectively.
Sahaja Yagis from all over the world enjoy commu-
nicating with each other obout solving social,
political and economic problems through their
enlightened collective attention.
We enjoy our powers because we never feel
powerloss as this is the power of Divine love which
is ever growing.
Our attention goes to divine beauty, which is
soothing and elevating and enjoys the best of all
the world's cultures.
This is how we enjoy the real Spiritual life of the
Kingdom of God.
We enjoy the love and compassion and innate
virtues enlightened by Sahaja Yoga. We can
The Divine Cool Breeze
20
 1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,_9.pdf-page-20.txt 
 TALK "ON MEDITATION",
New Delhi 1976, SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
We can not meditate, we can only be in medita-
tion. When vwe say, we are going to meditate, it
has no meaning. We have to be in meditation.
Elther you ore inside the house of outside. You can
not be inside the house and then say that now,I
am outside the house. Or when you are oulside
the house, you cannot say, I am inside the house.
In the same way, you are moving in three dimen-
sions of your life, of emotional physical and mental
being. You are not inside yourself. But when you
are inside that means, you are in thoughtless
awareness, Then not only are you there, but you
ate everywhere. Because that is the place, the
point, where you are really universal. From there
you are in contact with the principle, the shakti,
and the power -That permeates into every par-
ticle that is matter, into every thought that Is
emation, into every planning and thinking of the
whole world. You permeate into all the elements
that have created this beautiful earth. You perme-
ate into "Arkasha" Into "tesha", into sound, but your
movement is very slow.
have entered into you own kingdom, but you do
not stay there, you come out of it, and again you
go back and settle down. It doesn't matter, you
should not feel so disappointed or frustrated.
people have worked for thousands of years and
they could not separate themselves from them+
selves.
Only, the Sahaja Yogis, who are made after the
pattern of Shri Ganesh himself, are so formed that
they can give awakening and realization to other
people.
Even if you are caught up, you have seen you
have powers. Even if you feel that the vibrations
are not coming, you know, you have powers. You
can give realization to others. In your presence,
people get realization. But you have to be that
power completely. Supposing, there is some thing
wrong with your car, but as long as it is moving, it
is all right. We have to repair it, we have to repair
all the time all our wounds which we have caused
to ourselves by our foalishness, lust, greeds, false
identifications. We must have a complete atten-
tion towards our weaknesses and not towards our
achievements. If we know our weaknesses, then
we can really swim across better.
When you say. "Im meditating", that means you
are moving in permutation with the universal
being. But you are not moving youself, you are
just unloading yourself to be free from the welght
of things that do not allow you to move. When you
are in meditation, you must allow yourself to be in
thoughtless awareness. There the unconscious it-
self, the chaitanya itself will take charge of you.
You will start moving with the force of chaitanya.
The unconscious is going to work it out, it is going
to take you there where it wants you to go. Try to
keep to thoughtless awareness as much as you
can. When you are in thoughtless awareness you
are in the kingdom of God. There His speed, His
arrangements. His consclousness looks after you.
Everybody is ascending individually, though you
are collectively connected with each other and in
communication. But the ascendence is absolutely
individual. So wether it is your son, brother, sister,
wife, friend, you must remember that you are not
responsible for their ascendence. You cannot help
them for their ascent. Onily Mother's grace and
their own desire will help them.
Sometimes a Sahaja Yogi will find an emotion will
come into his mind. It will be an emotion of dejec-
tion, frustration and he will be disgusted with him-
self or with others. Both things are just the same.
If you give vibrations in thoughtless awareness, you
will not catch anything. Because all these entities
and material problems that come into you enter,
when you are in three dimensions. Through Sahaja
Yoga you open the gates of your own being. You
You might feel disgusted with yourself or others
may be a passing phase, But If you go on, hanker-
ing or lingering onto It, then you condition yourself.
21
MEDITATION
 1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,_9.pdf-page-21.txt 
 have been to many gurus; they have read all kinds
of books but they were seeking, They are seeking
they can drink all kinds of water, develop all kinds of
diseases. What can you do, you are seeking after all
you are thirsty. But it has to be excused. That's how
they developed lots of problems. Not only in their
body also in their brain. It's a very delicate thing if you
tell somebody that you have been to such and such
guru. He doesn't want to hear. For him now the guru
has become the last one. you cannot say anything
against his guru. When he starts suffering then he
may accept but you take it out that guru is also very
delicate and if you want to take out that guru then.
he might be hurt.
doing was correct and were standing on their legs.
The modern Sahaja Yogi is very different from the
Sahaja Yogi of older times. because in the older
timesit wasnoteasy to getrealization. One in a billion
or in a trillion. And they had to work very hard. As they
worked very hard, they got cleansed and build up
themselves. Like any art plece which takes time is
done with care is definitely a thousand times better
than a modern artist just putting two or three lines.
Today's hurnan being is likea modern artist. You put
one line and you must see this into that person. You
must have an identify. What identity can you have?
With one line you see, you find out the identity.
The Sahaja Yogis which are today have to realize
that all these things are surrounding us. These evil
forces are also there. There are some within us, and
some are without. If looks to be a very difficult task
but it is not. Because one condition if you can under-
stand is that you have to recognize me. I know lam
Mahamaya. I am really very clever at it. But I am
truthful, I do nothave crocodile tears, Icannot have.
But still I am Mahamaya. To recognize me what
should we do? if you recognize me then you are
protected. The cleansing is the simplest thing in
Sahaja Yoga and is to be collective. If you are not
collective then know that something's wrong with
you. If you care collective then you are taking your
bath in the river Ganges. You don't have to go to
Himalayas, you don't have to do individual 'Sadana-
mal, It you are enjoying the collective then know
that you are clean. No blemish is there, you are
absolutely alright.
Then the modern society. The norms of modern
society are given to us by people who are charac-
terless like Freud who had no sense of morality, or by
drunkards though they don't have any status of
drunkards. There is no shame about it. With that
drinking our value system started dropping down
and people have accepted now the normal thing is
abandonment. Formerly the parents used to support
a person if he would take to God, righteous life or to
something higher. If they saw these qualitfies in their
child they used to be happy. Nowadays it's the other
way round. The parents don't like it. As if the parents
have lost everything in themselves so they want to
hold on to their children, grandchildren and possess
them,
To fight the parents also is a big problem. This kind of
a fearis also there, that my mother should not know,
my father should not know this. You can see from all
sides. The fear is burning like flames.
The second part of this Mahamaya business, Ihad to
beveryclose to you.to talk to you, to have a tapport,
to tell you everything about Yoga, to make you
absolutely aware of yourself. This had to be done
and with all these complications within your mind,
heart, and body, I had to work it out. To come close
in the realforrm would havebeen very dangerous. So
one had to be a Mahamaya. Despite that if you
could recognize and understand me that I am DI-
vine personality, an incarnation, That's all the Deities
want. Then they look after you and give you all the
powers, and the satisfaction, and protection.
We are now here in Kali Yuga. We have started
Sahaja Yoga. The way we have to work out our
protection has to be mature. Mother of course is
there to protect you. her powers are there to protect
you. But surprisingly in the modern times there is one
condition which has to be fulfilled. Because in those
days good was good and evil was evil. There was no
mixing up. Once they ask for Goddess they accept
her, she came in her real form and she worked it out.
But in modern fimes you must know that all these evil
things are also lingering in your head a little but here
and there. People are extremelysuperficial, they are
very much pruned to the mass attitude, fashions,
things like that. Sort of that personality is not that
developed as that of those bhaktas who knew they
wereright, righteous, who knew whatever they were
This is the condition which for a rational mind is very
difficult to understand that how can Adi Shokti be in
one body, How can the infinite become finite. But
human beings cannot do that. Only god can do it,
he's God after all. If so you have seen so many
The Divine Cool Breeze
22
 1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,_9.pdf-page-22.txt 
 miracles, and photographs. This is what one has to
recognize. WhenItalk to people they start talking to
me litfle frivolously. Not with that depth, and feeling
that I am Mahamaya. If I tell them something they
are ready fo give an answer, or explanation. of
course this freedom I have given you deliberately
but you must understand that you have to talk to me
In a way that you would talk to the Adl Skakti. Very
important. Then how you behave is very important.
Youshould not be artificial, or superficialbut best is to
putyour hand on your heart, both the hands and just
try to feel. Your mother is Adi Shakti She has created
all this universe. And She is for your protection. Even
Shri Krishna could not protect the Pandavas. They
had to go in the forest, and suffer. But not Sahaja
Yogis. As soon as I come to know about your prob-
lems my attention can work. Shri Rama himself had
to go to jungles. All this is given to you, this protection
because you are seekers of truth. The truth is thatlam
the Adi Shakti incarnated. Once this truth becomes
one with your self there is nothing to fear because al!
the Deities know this fact. They know about this
incarnation very well. Theyare all prepared for it and
they'll do anything to substantiate your belief. In
every way they are trying to give you my photo-
graph in the sky, this that. Idon't say, don't hate, don't
drink, don't smoke. But autormatically once you know
whom you are facing, in whose protection you are,
automatically you will do that. Once you have rec-
ognized you will have no fear from anyone.Themore
you show that recognition, the more you realize it,
you canget higher and higher, notonly spiritually
everydaymentally, socially, economically, politic
That is very remarkable that not only that you rec
nize me as a mother who loves you very much 5
mother who is powerful to protect you. Very po
ful. If you reallse that and if you feel that within y
heart. Supposing I correct you sometime, is not f
ing sad you should see how fortunate l am that
Shakti herself is correcting me. She is taking intere
me. How fortunate l am to be born at this time to
with her in her great work. What have I done?
recognition ifself will fulfill all the incarnationi
Navaratri.
Today we are worshipping Durga, Kali all these gr
Goddesses, these powers, even Radha. It was ac
who killed Kamsa, not Shri Krishna. He had to
Radha to come and kill him. It is the power that!
For today's Navaratti Puja I have to tell you that
try to keep in mind that today you are worshipp
the Adi Shakfi and not only Durga. You are worsl
ping Durga and all these Goddesses to thank th
because if they would not have saved you that ti
you would have been so frightened, youwould hc
become bad people and you would not have be
here. That is why we are thankful to them for sav
us and giving us this protection at that time wh an
were very helpless.
May God Bless You.
Editor: Shri. Yogi Mahajan
Printer & Publisher : P. C. Kulkarni
Printed & Published at : The Divine Cool Breeze (Xerox M/cs.)
9, Bhagya Chintamani Soc. Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411 029.
Navaratri Puja
