THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE VOL. II NO. 4 & 5

 NAVARATRI PUJA LECTURE BY H.H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI GENEVA SWITZERLAND 23.9.90 ( SYNOPSIS ) According to the calendar this year there are ten days of Navaratri and not Nine are the days and nights when the Goddess had nine. to fight the demons and save the children from negativity. On the one side she protecting them like a tigress because times were such that nobody could meditate, take the name of God, or even think of realisation, But those who are sitting here today, have been there in those days and were all saved for today, so that you could achieve your self realisation. was The form of the Goddess in those days was not Mayaswaroopi. She was in her real form and that created a great awe even question of giving self realisation was not there. to be saved. Like for nine months the mother has to keep the child in her womb, in the tenth month you are given birth. The celebrate actually the Adi Shakti. On one side she is Mahakali, on the other side she is Mahasaraswati and in the centre she is Mahalaxmi. She is also the Amba, the one who is the Kundalini. But she is beyond all that. She is the generator of power. Today we worship Her in all those forms. the disciples. The among First of all they were in the same way you all have been for nine yugas saved properly and tenth Navaratri is to When we say that there is only one God, but that God has got a head, liver stomach, nose, in fact everything that a human being has, because they say God made human beings in his own image. and he has to run those different parts. He has to have different deities and unless and until you understand those deities you cannot awaken them within yourself as they are all part and parcel of the Adi Shakti. are all completely under the control of the Adi Shakti. The powers of the Adi Shakti are like a tortoise who draws his whole body inside his shell. You cannot discover them easily, except for those modern cameras when the vibrations are emitted you start seeing them in those cameras. so many miraculous photographs. what you have to understand, that we have entered into a new He has different parts in the body They There аге You don 't know what 's happening. This is realm. Of sometimes you get lost, because of your previous problems you get dragged down, tempted, dominated by negative forces and fall down. This is a very sad thing that should happen to any Sahaja Yogi, because perhaps you don't know your past, you do not know how you have struggled, how you have worked hard to come up to this level. After coming up to this level if you do not try to go higher then either you will be stuck at the same place or course You must know that you are a Sahaja Yogi. you will be thrown down. You are not a wife, husband, mother or father. You should say my main job is to give realisation to others and because all my relationships are already fixed properly, I don 't have to worry about any God, any deity, because they work out everything very effectively.

 In the descrintinn.of. the Gadtsas you read that her hands were throwing arrows wi th such speed that one felt she was dancing. Every hair of mine is just like an arrow and it works so tremendously but to you I am sitting here quietly, just as you are sitting, but its not so, its something much When they show a lion or a tiger as my 'vahana then you should know that they are actually so. Even to get a vahana of this kind had to be evolved from amoeba stage to this stage otherwise he would not have been In the same way you are evolved and in you all these vahanas You desire something and you will be surprised, immediately it works out but there should be complete dedication to Sahaja Yoga. When I say Sahaja Yoga you More. here. are also there and they work out very quickly al1 that you want. know its the yoga of your attenti on at my feet. If you are still moving within your egos, thinking on those lines that we are something and we can start our own Sahaja Yoga, we can work out this way, that way, my wife is like this, my child is like that or my husband is like that, you have to give up those problems on one side otherwise vou will nat. ARCend. because you were just ready for that but to keep your light on you have to work hard. Now a tiger remains at his own position. He doesn 't change in this position. their own qualities. In the same way you must remain in your own position of a Sahaja Yogi. The Was not difficult for me to give you realisation All the dieties and Gods are in their own position with Now the problems we have in the West suitable to any Sahaja Yogis i.e. attachment. First they were not attached to their wife or children, now they are attached like glue. I do not say that you give up your children or wife, but your attachment should be to Sahaja Yoga. Once the blessings of Sahaja Yoga come to you, they will flow to your wife, children , to everyone in your country and the whole world. Supposing this attachment is a very simple electrical thing, if are stupid problems which are not the attachment is not to the mains but elsewhere, then whats the use ? It cannot give electricity. Its si mple logic that you should be attached to the source of energy first, then that energy can flow to others. If you yourself are not attached to that source of energy then how can that power flow anywhere ? understand what has happened to us. We are not attached to the main source and that 's the only attachment you need and then the whole thing will flow to the other end. We are attached to so many miserable things we like which make us miserable, for example we are attached to some sort of stupid entrepreneur fashion. All these attachments are not the source of joy, knowledge, and energy which ascends you. This is the reason why our situation of collective ascent is spoilt. Our attachments start getting rusted and we don 't The Adi Shakti's work is to give you realisation first, Second is to give you life, to comfort you. If you have physical problems She will look after them, she will go all out, if you have mental problems she will solve them. She is the comforter, She gi ves you comfort. At the same time She protects you. I have seen many people even now get frightened at the slightest thing. Why should we get frightened now that there is a tiger standing. She is. Your Mother is so powerful you have to understand how powerful 2.

 The energy is not allowed to flow and if you are still worried about wife, house, This shnuld not be taken in the way that I say you become ascetics, no way. No saints attention that a little boy is playing with his kite. The kite is going all over; he is talking with his friends, joking but his attention is on the kite. There is a lady who is cleaning the house and a little child is on her waist. She attention is on the child. There are ladies in India who have three, pitchers of water laughing, making fun, but the attention is on the pitcher. My attention is always on your Kundalini. who tries to play tricks will be very badly punished. You have to be very careful not to be di shonest. the teeth of the tiger, the Vahanas. They are all fixed quantities. They all your when this my drops then it can children, my', work out. wife and children. Their They all had ascetics. were a at the lotus feet of the Mother. As Guru Nanaka has said was 15 is cleaning the house, brooming, doing everything, but her four their heads. to each other, They are talking to on You cannot play tricks in Sahaja Yoga. Anybody I won t do anything but here there all are know what to do and they will do it. Such negative things come into your head, I would say they are demonic ideas, because they will destroy you completely. On one side Sahaja Yoga is an absolute blessing for the ascent to go ahead. You go up to a point but you must also know you have reached a height. have You to be very careful there, if you fall from that height you will fall There you are having al1 the blessi ngs, the beauty, love, joy, If you are playing tricks than it is not you are immediately very low. knowledge, friends, al1 the care. possible to thrown out , One has to know that the deities are extremely alert, they are watching all of you because they have to guard you, look after and help you. create flowers for you. They are the ones who do all sorts of good things for you. But at the same time they are only attached to me and not to you. Because you are my children they are looking after you. misbehave you are finished. that she always tries to forgive and give chances. She tells those deities to keep quiet and of course they obey up to a point. However if you want to be nasty, cruel, sinful and yet stay in Sahaja Yoga, you cannot. not like any religion where you go on committing mistakes, like, kill and cheat. Here you have to be a Sahaja Yogi in the real of the word and this is what one has to understand. remain there, that does not work out, They have to work out everything for you. They are the ones who Once you try to But the compassion of your Mother is so great Its do what you sense Don't take things for granted. I have told you to write what I have done for Sahaja Yoga today. For ourself we do everything, paint our home, have sarees etc. but one should ask oneself what have I done for Sahaja nice Yoga, how many presents have I given to others, how many letters have I written to others narrating my experience of the love I felt for Mother in my heart'. Today you have had this Puja of Adi Shakti, that's a dangerous one its like yourself. To dominate your husband is a stupid nonsense because you don 't know how to handle your husband. who are like the Mother Earth. because a mirror where you will have to see yourself, clearly face We have to grow as wise women, as women When you ask me "Mother, you work so hard, 3. .

 yet you look so fresh'"? me, so coling. Everything is a music to me. On the contrary you feel fresh. Please have introspection, soul searching, find out whats wrong with you. Do not pamper your ego because ego makes you idiotic. We have some people like that in Sahaja Yoga, it is like have some buffoons in a circus but we have to have lions and tigers. impresses people are the lions and tigers, not the buffoons. It is because I enjoy it. Doing work is musie to Do you get tired of music? we What whole power of your Mother is Love. Whatever she does is out of love for her creations and the introspection starts. It should not be too late. I have been saying since long the way that they are exhausting the Earth. The Mother Now the ecological problems are standing like a Rakshasa before us. yourself, your what do you do with it? Vou have to face destruction. If you do not face it now, then you will have to face it at a time when it will be very late. So don't just be satisfied wi th yourselves that you are Sahaja Yogis. You have come to fall into the sea, it has the power to absorb you but also has the power to throw you back on the shore. It acts both ways. So why can't I go deep into Saha ja Yoga? There are excuses also, "I haven "t got the time; very busy; I am working in the office, I am doing that", Sahaja Yogi. Yoga gives you sufficient time to do everything. I knaw of people whom I find suddenly in Puja's all over the world. They say that business has brought them there. great, to realise it, to know how great it is, then you leave everything to this power. Now Puja of course, like if you I 'm Then you are not All your ti me is for Sahaja Yoga. Because of that Sahaja you here?n is so I say, "how are When this power It works out everything for you. Today we are talking about the Shakti, about the powers of the Goddess s very well , Whatever work these powers have done Please try to assimilate them and I have got pregnancy, you perfect Then you don t ask You are more to be discovered and to implicate, which is and extremely efficiient. which balanced within you, please try to respect them. let children, jobs. yourselves. Everything is related to your perfection. me questions. What job I have to do Mother? What I have to achieve? just see your way through and everything works out. your being grow. Don't say '1 am married, Everything becomes perfect as as soon All the demons were killed but they are again back into their own seats; worst thing is that they have entered into the heads of the seekers because the Catholic Church, They look If you look at them they influence you and go into your heads, but after you come to Sahaja Yoga even these heads are cleansed. This cleansing and joy, you have to give to others. This is your responsibility. First of all your character, behaviour and relationships should be so pure that by itself will emit light. Like if you have a very they have Protestant Church, like Rakshasas as gurus now. They have come kinds of temples and fundamentalists etc. as clean glass the light can pass through but also Kundalini being the pure desire, you should be extremely fervent, bubbling, absolutely pouring out desire; when to give vibrations, whom to gi ve realisation. Whatever you are doing keep attention on your connection. If you are doing Sahaja Yoga and the connection is loose then you are only giving darkness, ignorance or With this powerful Shakti you must all the time keep connection madness.

 all these and keep her pleased by the protocol. Its very important, deities you see have the protocols because they are fixed. You should also fix your protocol properly. and Unless and until you know what powers you have, how you got them remember it and unless this truth becomes part and parcel of you, your like growth is going to be difficult, You will be neither here nor there a pendulum going from right to left, left to right. Sahaja Yogis should be ashamed to see they are going from right to left, left to right. How can You have to be like the rock of Gibralter. How can you catch? If you think someone is extremely But you cannot become dainty You are my children, you are You have to be brave, righteous, I hope that after this Puja you will sit down, meditate and do introspection and find out why I do you be so vulnerable? Because you have not grown. negative then don 't go near that person. darlings. My children are Viras, chivalrous. more Hindus, Muslims, Christians. good, compassionate, dynamic, that's the minimum. по is the problem? If you are really connected with this divine IE it? power you may keep awake for three days and nights and not be tired. has happened with you sometimes, but the attention should be on the power. The attention should be connected, that you have this power otherwise you will be exhausted naturally. Thank God, that there is someone like your Mother who can tell you wrong with you. Even your own mothers didn 't tell you because they were so frightened of you and didn't say that when your heart catches what can you do then? will work it out. It is not so much of mental understanding but understanding of a higher level where it becomes just a part and parcel of your awareness. HoW can it be wrong, it all has to be good. Last but not the least, one must understand that as all the seven Chakras I am working what's then you If you understand that this is out of love, concern, is the in a collective way held by me, by Virata. The quality of the on, Viratangana is that She creates this universal awareness within collectivity and in modern times we are in a spiritual path in a collective way only. us, reached to the stage of Sahasrara and here we have to have the to be Anybody who tries to harm the collective by bad We have This has collective working only. absolutely realised. behaviour or by anything will be thrown out but will also fall into wrong hands. Sahasrara is the rule of the Virata and the power is the Viratangana. This is the most important point we must know that if we cannot be collective because of anything, may be jealousy, fear complex, anything that is coming from behind like a worm crawling up, then know that something is wrong with you and not with the collective. Don 't criticise the collectivity til11 I myself find it out. Keep to the collectivity wisely, earnestly and try to keep together. enjoy together. Don 't criticise each other. Only criticise yourself if you are in the habit of criticiam; it is better because these are habits also. There is no other way out. The collectivity is the work of the Adi Shakti because at the Try to help the people to get together collectively, to

 Adi Shaktis work is the most important in the whole creation. Killing of the demons was over when Shri Saraswati 's work was done. work was done when she brought it to human level. The climax is now you got your realisation. You have got the special quality. entered the Kingdom of God, so now behave yourself. Shri Mahalaxmi 's that Now you have DIWALI PUJA TALK BY H.H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI GHOGGIA, ITALY H 2 I - I 0-90 The word Diwali comes from two words - Deep and Aawali. Deep means and Aawali means rows. Rows of 1ights. It is a very ancient idea and over the world whenever they have to celebrate something then joy and happiness. To ignorance we have to enlighten ourselves and that is why it is important should get self realisation to feel lights all they put the darkness of lights. Lights give overcome that everybody themselves sparkle. There is light in the eyes of every Sahaja Yogi. the light within and you must have noticed that after realisation the eyes also is the day when we worship the Laxmi principle, i.e. our Nabhi. benevolent Today is so normally you find that anybody who has money will try to put pressure others. Even in Sahaja Yoga, if they are a 1ittle better off they try to push other people, organise and control them. They think that this is power they have got out of the money. But Laxmi herself stands on a lotus, the beauty of her being is shown in that she does not trouble anyone though she stands on a flower. Those who worship Laxmi have to remember that they shouldn't push or pressurise, anyone, control or destroy anyone. Her feet She and so kind that she does not pressurise but anyone, on the the lotuses and in two hands she has lotuses. Lotus is a sign of агe beauty and their pink colour is love. It symbolises that a person who has Laxmi, Wealth should be extremely geerous like a lotus little beetle to come into it and sleep, It covers him with its petals and makes him comfortable and protected. on which allows a For person who has money that should be his temperament, otherwise he loses his money very fast or he is always insecure about his money. He wants to hide his money here or there. There is no grace about such person. His house is not comfortable because all the time they are worried that the carpet will be spoilt or this or that will be spoilt. should be where you can live freely. As soon as we get materialistic, out of the Laxmi principle. All the beauty of wealth we a A house we get finished. I have seen that even a rat does not enter such a house leave aside human beings. This is materialism that we get so much worried everything. The Laxmi principle is to be understood that matter is for the expression of your love; how much you can do tor others, how much comfort have is about can give to others. I have seen in some people where the Grihalaxmi, you woman in the house will not even offer tea to the people. She is just the enjoying herself and bothering about the carpets, etc. So low level it It is not even a human thing. The Laxmi principle means love. This very people few understand. To them Laxmi means money in the bank. principle means to express your love. is. The Laxmi Another symbolic thing about Her is that she is your Mother and a Mother just gives. Her enjoyment is giving. I always think what I can give you. Diwali is a good day for me that I can buy so What present I can give you. 6.

 many things that I want to give you and I love it. Nothing like the joy of When you think that I have to buy this thing now, or wi11 this fit this person, it relates to the collective feeling, a very beautiful feeling. We have to realise in al1 That does not we should not make money, not work, be lethargic, or say, giving. If you have more things its a headache. introspecti on that we have gone too much into materiali sm. mean that Mother has said that let us be Lotus eaters'. oh if Try to understand that you are making money it is just to give, otherwise your situation will be You will always be insecure about money and those who have the money What is the use of enjoy Sahaja Yoga. bad. instead of feeling secure will be shaking like that. that money which shakes you. Better to have 1ittle but tattwa is not money oriented. Supposing you take a dog or a donkey Laxmi and put lots of notes on that, will you call him a Laxmipati? (A rich man). Ог take another person who has ten cars but is nervous, twitchy; will you call him Laxmipati ? There is no grace in this kind of money Its There are no traditions. They have no sweetness, nothing on are dry, as if the whole juice has been taken out of the sugarcane. are like that and nobody wants to go to their houses and if I eat there I get vomiting. My Laxmi does 'nt like it. You should feel what you can give to others, what to do for others. That is the first sign of a Sahaja Yogi. I have heard that people do not 1ike to spend for Sahaja Yoga. to know that Sahaja Yoga is for the emancipation of the whole world. is spending so much on ,cosmetics going to do for the whole world ? Or what is this watch going to do for the world ? Or the way you dress up or off is it going to help the whole world ? You are here to help the world and not to decorate yourself and just to take advantage of Sahaja Yoga. Sahaja Yoga is extremely peaceful. Laxmi, then it gives temptation and you can fall away and go down. crazy. They They them. You You have What show It gives you tirst the glimpse of It is the first you money. You are blessed. Then there are two other symbols that we see with her hand. She gives. If You have to open the other one. She must give, So all those who have Laxmi tattwa developed in them, they think what they have to give, but they don 't give the worst thing they have, just like the waste paper basket. "0, this is useless so I can give to this friend", All friends are used as waste paper baskets. Whatever is open one door the air won't come in. you the worst is given. How can you touch your depth like this ? Whatever is the best, you should give. if you are free to give then you should give the One of the snags is that we have never learnt the art of giving. If we learn the art of giving, it is so joyous so beautiful. Because we are best. аге understand what will gi ve joy to us. We don 't understand what will give joy to others and when we understand this then very ego oriented we that joy reflects on us thousand times more. On the periphery both the forces work on. On the one side are the misers on the other side are the exploiters. If you and the exploiters are there. So there is an antithesis. Another type of people Sometimes you are exploited, Thats not your look out. You have not committed the sins. has exploited has committted the sins and he is going become nervous who don 't know what to do. The who one to So why to worry ? With the help of this Divine Power the one who suffer. 7.

 exploits will suffer. You get more than what you suffered and you will get ten times more than you lost. This is what is to be understood by Sahaja Yogis that we are now blessed by this Divine Power. We are not alone. All the time it is blessing us. So giving means nothing is mine. "My" has to go. Even in Saha ja Yoga I was surpri sed that people get very much attached to their children and think of nothing else. selfishness. Just to think of your own children only and no one else, then the same children wi11 become devils and teach you a lesson. "O God, next time don 't give me any children I've had enough". If you make that child collective and teach the child to give to others and enjoy it then from childhood that child will become extremely generous. is a quality of an incarnation. Aishwarya. money, wealth, but generosity. It excels the money and that is the sign of an incarnation and a Sahaja Yogi This is another kind of You will pгау Generosity Aishwarya does not mean only Say, you are working in an office, hospital or a factory, you have to feel You have to trust your office like your family. When my husband's colleagues used to arrive early morning from Calcutta I would myself cook their breakfast and serve them. They were just ordinary clerks but this is how through the protection, care can make them so dynamic that their Laxmi tattwa will why a person who is a capitalist must understand that his capital means nothing if he doesnt know how to use his Laxmi Tattwa, thats why they end up that you are working like a family, try this. love, you there will be strikes, fights etc. Otherwise increase.- Thats jail, lunatic asylum, become smugglers or some thing happens. respectable. I have never seen a statue of a man who They are is garlanded If you are rich nobody is going to respect you, unless you never for being rich. are generous and do something substantial for the society. How the Laxmi tattwa comes in. First the Laxmi is born out of the sea. Now why was she born out of the sea ? She was born out of the sea her father is a generous personality. Look at the sea, it spreads it wings all over, gets itself heated up completely so that the clouds are made and these clouds go bang at high mountains where it rains, they form the rivers and come back to the sea. because All the while the sea contains al1 the salt and Christ has said that you are the salt. What is the salt ? The salt which gives taste to your food is your Guru principle, If you are a miserly then you cannot become a guru or a leader. How horrible you would person look, just imagine. Laxmi is born out of the Guru principle and this Guru principle starts in you when this Laxmi principle is awakened, not just money; when you start thinking what sweet thing I can give to others, what I should do for others, how to express my love. The first thing is that the sea spreads its wings and says ok let the take away my water, let me heat up, get clouds. In the same way you have to understand that unless and until I allow the sun that is the Spirit to evaporate this water from me, means to give to others, how will I develop this Guru principle within myself. You cannot have salt in the sea water unless and until it evaporates so you cannot become a Guru unless and sun

 until you allow the evaporation of water which is this wealth, this money. But if you are not mature like the sea then you will remain like at a level that like the muck of mud and ending in a lunatic asylum because maryadas are lost, dharma is lost. Without Guru principle there is no dharma. do not think of anybody else, your father, mother collective work, world. So you become smaller and smaller. But when the Laxmi tattwa starts thats the first inkling of love for others. but its not a complete reflection of your mother. other and share everything with each other with love. light of love starts showing you, in that light you move, you become deeply generous and enjoy your generosity. You I know you all love me very much, You have to love each When this first You have to come to the centre as this love has to start showing itself, mani festing itself in all humility. for others. myself because I cant bear obligation, I am secretive, I don t want to talk about it. I am enjoying myself". You are doing it for yourself and "If I have tried to help somebody wi th money I am helping So no not to see that person in trouble. We must understand, are we allowing the children to grow big ? Are they ? Are they saints ? Are they beautiful ? How do they talk to generous others ? Ary they confi dent ? Tomorrow they ere going to leaders of Sahaja Yogis. the mother who makes children great. If she wants all the time to grab the child and the child wants to grab her, its suicidal. Suicidal for you suicidal for the children. duty of every Sahaja Yogi to see that their children grow up to be great people. Greater than you. They have to look after the world. Spend time with your children, see that you mould and nourish them with love, them that they should give love to others. a manner that others will feel the love through them. Otherwise they will become devils like Ravana. mother he became a devil. First of all understand that they are not your children, they are my children under your trust and you are not them dwarfed and smal1. Like Shivaji 's mother, Jijamata, how she made her son great. Its and What have we done about our children ? Its the tell That they should behave in such Ravana was realised soul, but spoilt by his to make We have to make our children like lights. Light burns for others and not Are for itself. In Diwali, what are we burning lights for ? For others. we learning from these lights ? Are our children going to burn for others ? So many thousands of children are going to come and even if they are born realised, you spoil them. If you take the of children you'll spoil them with this idea that this is my child, this is "mine". Expose your child to good things, tell them what is how to feed the You are making them selfish. di amond and put it in the gutter, it will be ruined. Even if you get best kind how to be good to others, how to press the feet of others, the hair. Let them carry little trays and feed others, comb Let them give water to the flowers. Don 't make them petty. Some ruining - The birds. of the children are really dynamic who are born to you but you are them. The last of the Mahalaxmi principle came as Fatima. Fatima Grihalaxmi; she stayed at home, she didnt go out. She looked after children and huaband who fought for the right and the truth. her 6.

 What is the principle of Mahalaxmi ? First is that of saerifice - sacrifice one 's own children at the altar of truth. Of course that is not needed in Sahaja Yoga. whatsoever, but if you do not develop your children with proper ways, will hold you responsible and will say why did you not give us full to develop ? If you find your child is obstinate, does 'nt know how to share his love with others or is dominating then try to curb it down immediately. Children You don 't have to sacrifice they You don't You are all blessed people. Scope are very clever, the moment they realise they are going to lose your love, they behave themselves. We have three principles of Mahalaxmi and the fourth one is myself. Mine is a majestic work, much wider and tremendous patience is needed. It won't have to sacrifice myself, my family I have to sacrifice my sleep, comforts and everything possible your Mahalaxmi to work out if I sacrifice anyone, I S0 I under the have to sacrifice for reason, sun. ane principle should be manifested. It should have its roots. So you come Sahaja Yoga as seekers of truth, blessed by Mahalaxmi Principle already and We love our Mother why ? Why do we if that is so, let us feel it's love. feel it ? Because she loves us. But love does without not come Bny I don 't feel the sacrifice. Outwardly many people say "Mother, sacrifice. how much you are travelling, how much you are doing this;" I don 't feel at all anything like that because I am enjoying it important. t and that 's what is If we have to develope our full personality, we have our love should not be only a lip service. We have to work. I seen people, when it comes to working for Sahaja Yoga they just run Where are they ? Nobody is available. All around, only five or six people working "Where are the rest of them ? - "Oh Mother they 11 only come to know have away. are What work have you put in ? What effort have you when you wi11 come". put in ? We are just enjoying ourselves, but work without any effort, enjoyment without any sacrifice can not be complete. If you are attached to your laziness, selfishness and all that of course that will be there, but you cannot enjoy. You cannot enjoy when you care only for enjoyment can bring complete If you someone without any expectations then this power of love floods you with things, ideas, everything. Just try to understand that it should be This enjoyment is not possible for a person who has not become the pure love. comfort, rest of it is finished. and the The power of love command over everything; over your body, mind, ego, everything. love pure love without thinking, just a feeling that I am enjoying it. The which does not have love. source of enjoyment is the power of love and it won 't fill the 10

 PUNE PUJA AT SHERE TALK BY H.H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI 3-12-1990 (SYNOPSIS) foundation has to be strong of spirituality and then you whatever type of building you want on it. But if you do not have that foundation then the whole thing collapses. doesn 't touch the souree of its nourishment then it wil1 definitely collapse. This is what Sahaja Yoga is, that you are touching the source of your nourishment, nourishment to your civilisation. Once this nourishment starts growing you see whats wrong in those countries where people have gone headlong into extremes, and what they are suffering. The can build you can Like the tree grows and if it Source Firstly, ask for the blessings of spirituality. But also the promise that you will help others who are getting drowned into the dry materialism. You are all enjoying this beautiful life and are at peace with yourself this wine of spirituality has to be shared, otherwise life becomes very selfish, think you may catch from them. You have to become Baddha proof, fearless and touch your depth. If you live with superficiality of any kind, it must be thrown away, otherwise you will sink. which civilisation. but You are frightened of those people because you self-centred. There are many superficialities Western to us because of the blessings of this come First of all we have our norms and ideas. Actually it activity. is all mental we cannot have Rembrandt, or Michaelangelo anymore. The reason is that criticism of this has become so much in the modern times that nobody wants to produce Now the only situation left is that the critics are criticizing the critics. This mental activity of putting everybody down is extremely dangerous and destructive. It is happening in every field-industry, music, art, architecture, business and even politics. so superficial that you have to be prepared for facing all kinds of oppositions and troubles. Still as you have your The art of the West is finished, þecause art anything that will be criticised. Everything has become Own depth, you can master them all by your own tranquillity, temperanent and by your powers which you have got. When you are not afraid of that society, you have that tranqui 1lity within you and the courage, I am sure you when can do a lot. Of course, we have some very dynamic people in Sahaja What may come, they never deter and they have worked very hard to see that Sahaja Yoga is established. Yoga. 11

 SHRI LALITA AND SRI CHAKRA PUJA BRAHMAPURI 17-12-1990 (SYNOPSIS) When the left side reaches up to Vishuddhi, then it uses on the right side the Sri Chakra and on the left side the Lalita Chakra, to mani fest These two chakras are the ones who manifest all chakras emit vibrations of different kinds because of their angularities. Like if you have some kind of a cardboard attached with small holes of different permutations and combinations. In the same way, different permutations and combinations are Sahaja Yoga. itself. These that you you see. the time, you colours which rotates all different get created and that is why you get all the advantages of Today, together. we are worshipping Maha Saraswati Power and Mahakali Power both Now we have started combining things. These two energies are very important. Without the energy and power nothing exists. For example, if this light had no power to give light or to burn then it is useless. In the same way without getting your realisation you are useless because your Whatever you see created in this world is done power is not available - by these two chakras of the Adi Shakti. Here the power doesn't move. in the human being the power starts moving. can say it is creating another world. But When it starts moving then we The movement is not the only thing. This power acts, gives you intelligence, gi ves you all kinds of things the power itself becomes Means the left and the right side both become enlightened. which a human bei ng. Later on you have as enlightened. You get this enlightenment when you get your realisation. j mmediately. For example, if you have pain or if your chakra is catching, you have within me, so its alright, I can manage it. to use your hands to impart that power to yourself or to others. have pain in the stomach, you can say, "I have energy in my stomach, why should I have pain in the stomach? But the play of these chakras has to come and that is why you have to use the power of your hands. But not to use your hands. You cannot Say that the energy is flowing It is not like that. You have If you If you cannot use your hands, then you cannot impart this energy. Many Mother when will it move horizontally? It will move people ask horizontally. me It does, but even these horizontal movements guided by these two very important chakras. Don 't move your head all the With many people it's a style of talking. That's another way, have to be time. not respecting your chakras. You should not move your are shoulders too Those who move their shoulders too much do not feel the vibrations much. much because the chakras are not alright. They are chakras we have and whatever is to be used out of this Param Chaitanya, they have to be used by these two centres. Even supposing some chakra is catching on your spinal cord, you have to use your hands. You cannot just put your attention. attention has not yet reached that stage where these two chakras obey it. Unless and until materialistic life takes you to a very partial development. To get a the most important It doesn't work out that well. Because as yet your there is the foundation of the spiritual 1ife, life, the full 12

 development, spirituality has to be deep, fully equipped and absolutely perfect. the whole building can be built. on spirituality. you must have your foundation That Then When you go beyond thought these because a thought puts pressure on them and because of the pressure, movement of these tWo chakras is very slow and ineffective. get out of your thoughts, and go into thoughtless awareness, chakras start working it out and you start maving much deeper into your own being. chakras become extremely efficient, the Once you can then these MAHALAXMI PUJA TALK GIVEN BY H.H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI, KOLHAPUR 21.12.1990 In Indian Shastra and scriptures, Shakti is the most important thing, say- The power of fire Supposing it does not have its power, then who will care for fire? So anybody who hasn't got the power of being the Spirit, is useless. This power, this Shakti has to be awakened within us because we do not have the power of the Spirit. We have to have the power of the Spirit. That 's only possible if your self-realisation. It is therefore very important that we should pay attention to our Power. This power is made as the power of a if you have a light or fire, what is the power of fire? be that it can give you light, it can burn away things. can that Mother is the most loving relationship and through mother. that relationship all the love is expressed. That is why the Shakti is that of for a Mother. her children, Shakti can never The affection, the love and the patience that a mother has Shakti too has the same powers and that is how the is the Kundalini is the highest because without her you cannot get realisation. the Out of all these powers, Shakti harm you. to that is the Mahalaxmi Power. Without the Mahalaxmi Complementary cannot rise. This is the ladder through which this power of Kundalini can rise. Both the powers are very important and very much related to each we other. Mahalaxmi principle starts when we have finished with Laxmi principle Like in the West, people are fed up with affluence, they are thinking wnat have we achieved? We have gone into imbalance. have to balance ourselves. How do we balance ourselves? We have to the knowledge of the spirit, that is called as Adhyatma. knowledge, this all pervading power. energy and get transformation within yourself. When there is light you can see all your problems and defects in it. Also if you know how to connect with it, it is the easiest thing to do is to get your transformation in Sahaja Yoga. So what should we do? We have To know this Kundalini has to awakened and that you are to be connected to Once that happens, you just become one with that Today, seems to be Mahalaxmi is being thoughtless awareness. When you are in the centre you don't think, you are in meditation, that is why Mahalaxmi is very important. up and you can feel that there is something missing then you Mahalaxmi principle. In India, because of so many saints we feel we should short circuit. First let us develop our knowledge of Atma and then take to Science, of Adhyatma (knowledge of the Spirit), if you take to any kind of progress you can topple down. That is why, all the Western enterprises and also projections of religions have gone to waste, because there balance. Here in Mahalaxmi temple, a special day for me. awakened and I am feeling really in that state of When you are fed so there is no more jmbalance within us. Without the foundation It is important that we must have balance within ourselves. 13

 In India, we have people who have this idea at least that you have to higher than materiali sm and become one with the Virata the whole. rise - part and parcel of they grow very "The depth we have achieved with this faith that " we have to be this conviction By knowing that, once they get Sahaja Yoga, deeply. self-realised, we have to feel the all pervading power, itself gives them the depth and s0 when they achieve realisation, they go down very deeply. Ganesha, deep than the people who know all these things by heart. One can deduce that outside. They have nothing to tell us because they have had no of the self. That experience is only possible when your kundalini rises and breaks your brahmarandra; that is the time the first experience to you of all pervading power. All these people who have only praying to Mahalaxmi, doing a lot of penances, fastings etc have no what Mahalaxmi wants, Most surprising that people who have never heard about about Kolhapur or Mahalaxmi, are sometimes much better and more those who know outwardly through books, or from gurus are absolutely experience comes just been ideas Such people are very religious. They are doing you do пок to all kinds of ritualism; what we call as Karma Kande but wi th that not reach have to reach. People may know in words but in experience, they do not know. Sahaja Yoga is very important to give them this experience. We have 5ri Chakra on the right side and Shri Lalita Chakra on hand side. All the things that we do with our hands after realisation are worked through these two chakras. the Chakra knows how to work it out. It works by itself, as if it is an in built mechanism within us which knows what sort of vibrations have given to a certain defects these chakras know what is to be emitted, out. If you have vishuddhi problems then you can find that your hands are stiff and realisation because vibrations. These Chakras are like a complete programming. put your hands on a person, the programming starts working it out. this programming is done by God almighty, it can never be wrong. the left As soon as you put your hand on somebody to be particular person for a particular cause. If a person has how to work it you cannot feel guidance or we can say Divine Intentions of when you start using your hands you don t don't feel any As soon as you Because The people here think that all this talk of God is wrong. progress of the West is effective, more apparent. There it can be seen in material progress. in the area of physical or mental development. where we realise this, it is very important for Western people to have foundation of Adhyatma. For that it is important to give up some of your conditioning because this knowledge is coming definitely from India. Indians, had all the knowledge of medical science, etc. God's science is in India and understood with full dedication and devotion. Because of the conditioning of the Western influence and progress, sometimes we do not know grasp this knowledge within ourselves. If you can understand that had To them the They can't understand how people progress with Adhyatma a point the Now we come to a The for that what are you going to do? God 's science has to be as we to accept science from the West, you have to accept the knowledge of the Self from the East. You have to be ready to receive it. If you are still in your arrogance, conditioning then you cannot do it. Like a boy who comes from a village who has never known about science, and suddenly put him ina science college, he '11 say what is this nonsense, you why 14

 should I use a test-tube? Why should I go in the laboratory? That is the conditioning which turns away many people from Sahaja Yoga after some time. We must watch our conditioning. The Indians have conditioning of so called religious beliefs, ritualism etc. But its easy to overcome them - for example, in India everybody has a Kul-devta (the family god/goddess), if they just ask Mother are you that goddess, the vibrations start flowing and conditioning get easily eradicated. But the something is very difficult to overcome. mental acceptance of I've also seen when a marriage is arranged they go mental. If you go mental, then you cannot understand many things. But if you are spiritual then you can understand. For example we the Mother Earth giving us these flowers. How can we can go mental A sage will say - alright this is Mother she wants to give the children these flowers, fruits, trees - so see about it? It's a living process. Earth, she is working it out. In matter energy never moves, it is stationary, i.e. electricity etc. аге absolutely blank. If there's electricity flowing and someone stops it, You start seeing within yourself that you've become mindless and becoming absolutely like robots. People have very fi xed ideas. Its difficult for them to get out of it, because they dan 't have that movement towards spiritual subtlety The Mother Earth has got the Nobody will believe that this Mother Earth thinks, and produces these things. Logically, you can say that a tree has a certain height, the fruits have certain shape, colours, etc. Who changes al1 these seasons? That is the it will stop. It has no mind. In materialism you become mindless. where they can use the mind to do something. mind, she produces these vigrahas, (Svyambhu Forms) and deities. which is a lady, she thinks, decides and works out everything. one This concept is doubly denied in the West. First, they cannot accept a Goddess. Woman has no part. From Socrates onwards, nobody has talked much about a Greek Goddesses were just like human beings so except Athena. Woman that also gets ruled out. When Christianity came, the Christians saw to it that there should be no mention of the Mother. Despite that they worshipped the Mother of Christ like a Goddess. Though in the Bible she is addressed as a woman in a very derogatory style. The conditioning in the West is about the power of God who hangs somewhere in the air. That he 's here and that he gives us everything. But what the communication? explain? believe conditioning because they just took out Christ's Mother; though the painters and artists couldn 't do that. They had the mother there. Despite all that the motherhood has not been respected as it should have been in the Bible. While Mahalaxmi herself incarnated as Mother Mary. You cannot expect any spiritual growth, unless and until you Shakti, the Mother who is the only communication between Divinity. is How to can people Jew is the justification or the logic? What So you have to say that God is a mystery. in it? The Christian conditioning has been even worse than How can accept its the and the US 15

 as the Shakti and that the whole thing is done by the movement of the Shakti, by the thinking of Shakti, by the co-ordination, understanding and planning of spectator. She does everything. Once that concept can fit into your head properly Because religion was organised and in an organised religion, you can put whatever you like the way you want it was such a big mistake. By that people developed lots of ego and things And also the first sin, they call the Original Sin, blamed on woman. They really ill-treated women, and had no respect for So the women changed their role and instead of becoming Mothers or But you can understand that without the power, there is no sense in anything. This is This is the power of Truth. Once you get that power which has It is very big blessing in India that they respect the Mother It is not done by God Almighty. He is just a the Shakti only. then so many condtionings will drop. and against women. was them. goddesses, they tried to become something like actresses. the power of love. you should humble down and know that this power is within us, given us all this knowledge and this ability to raise the Kundalini. this is because of energy within us, the Shakti within us, without that All we are nothing and that too is the Mother who does everything. 16

 CHRISTMAS PUJA TALK BY SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI GANPATIPULE 25-12-1990 (SYNOPSIS) Today, we have such a great opportunity to celebrate the birth of Christ. He was born in a manger. All these things were already preplanned, to show that whether you are born poor or rich, in difficulties or in problems, if you have dignity within you then it shines by itself. a very wrong deviated line, they have never been able to understand the significance of Christ. To them immaculate conception is absolutely not possible. Most of the people think that its some sort of a mythical story. But in India we do believe that Gauri created Shri Ganesha out of Her vibrations and that he became the deity of the Moola-dhara. they will never accept such a thing because their mental side developed and dominates. May be they are not so very ancient like Indians to understand that above all is God. Even the concept of God is quite mental. As Christianity took OWn In the West over- 15 Moreover, guidance. mystery. possible for God. After all he is God Almighty. Because of this attitude which the way Christianity has been jt has not On the contrary wherever they have failed they said It is very simple to understand for Indians that anything is provided any proper mental is much 1ower than the knowledge of type of the superficial your Spirit, the ordinary mundane the personality to accept the greatness of God. knowledge can never allow There is a story of a seer who was going to meet God. a devotee singing bhajans. The seer asked if he had any message for God. The Devotee suid, "P1ease tell God I am alright but he should arrange for my food, as it is finishing". another devotee who was very religious singing hymns, prayers, going to the temple daily. The Devotee told the seer that I have tried everything, when will he meet me? On the way he found Then the seer went further ahead and found "I would like to have His darshan". Then the seer went to God and gave the message of both the devotees. God said that the second devotee wil1l still have to do more practises as its not easy. Yoga comes i mmediately food should be given to him. devotee who prayed, went to temple daily whereas God is impressed by other devotee who is doing nothing to seek God only singing bhajans. God seeing the perplexed state of the seer him to tel1 both the devotees that he saw God pass a camel through the eye When Sahaja God said that that the God saying that he has to wait; then will see! About the first devotee we The seer was puzzled, told a needle. When he returned to the second devotee and gave the message of to wait till Sahaja Yoga comes and then God would meet him and that he saw the camel passing through the eye of a needle, the devotee started arguing that how can that be possible. He went mental. Then he went to the first devotee and told him the same thing, the devotee said "What is so amazing, He is God. He can do anything? That made the seer realise that God is all It doesn't mean that he can move the Himalayas to Maharashtra. powerful. It means that he can do the subtlest things, and such things our brain, our 17

 mental side cannot understand. God is beyond the conception of human He is the one who has created human beings. He has to be beyond us if he is creating. If a potter creates a pot that means he is beyond the mind. pot. The pot cannot create the potter. It is beyond the conception of human beings what a God it must be who has made this great computer. We take everything for granted. We cannot make even a particle of clay. Human beings can take a stone or clay and make Can you make photograph Can you do that? We have no idea of the complete, sort of a house. But it's all dead from the dead. some candle the badhas burn. which will burn budhis ? You have seen that before my intricate, delicate, very dynamic, explosive machinery. How it create human beings, all this universe, beautiful flowers, trees and everything. has chosen this Mother Earth to create human beings. When he wants to send his own son, he can send him the way he wants. to challenge this shows the mental mind which is absolutely in mud. Look at the stars, how many there are. Out of all these he How he has made it. Even Mother Mary being the Mahalaxmi herself, she could create a child. What 's the harm? She could do anything. Christians have above Christianity to understand that Christ was such a great thing, Who came to rise to this earth, who was the incarnation of the principle of Ganesha. becoming Maha Vishnu is a big thing. Ganesha Ganesha is the son of Shiva. Ganesha is the one who was first created before any other creation, atmosphere, He is the 0mkara. that sound Tankara ', Omkara is the first breaking of Adi from there started This sound is Shri Ganesha is his power. etc. Shakti from Omkara. He is the He Shiva, embodiment of that Omkara. was created first and foremost to create holiness (Pavitrata). When holiness was created then everything was created in the sea of that Holiness. He incarnated as Christ; but as Mahavishnu, not as Shiva's son. Vishnu is the Uncle of Shri Ganesha, His mother's brother. up by Mahavishnu but Mahalaxmi adopted the principle of Shri Ganesha. this Shri Ganesha is connected on the left hand side to the Ida Nadi and the Kundalini is above that. He transcended that part and then he had to come for the redemption. He had to come as the son of Mahalaxmi. It Mahalaxmi who conceived him within herself es Christ and he became It is beyond human mi nd to understand how these things are Working out in that realm. After realisation you can feel the cool breeze, There are no unholy alliances There is nothing that is human in them. Once you understand this point then you will Mahavishnu. so many things now are happening to you. among the gods and Goddesses. They are all Divine and pure. know why Shri Ganesha had to accept to be the son of Mahalaxmi and a5 Christ. Because he had to come on Agnya for the redemption. As Ganesha he do the redemption part because at that stage he is for the innocence, holiness, wisdom and also for destroying negativity. He had does not to Only Ganesha could be brought into this very constricted Chakra come. Agnya Chakra. constricted; the more we think, the more we go into the right or left and it goes on becoming constricted. could be settled, because he 's the subtlest of the Subtle. He is even subtler than an atom. It had to be constricted and it goes on getting more In this very subtle area only Christ The vibrations which move in isometric and symmetric 18

 are subtler than the atom and this is the subtler of that also, movements so in that very constricted area only a personality like Christ, which is nothing but purity could come. There is no other element in him but purity. All other incarnations have all the five elements in them. He has nothing. the water. He is nothing but pure vibrations, that is why he could walk on Omkar became Ganesha from the thing that came out of Mahalaxmi 's body, the Chaitanya. Christ 's resurrection because he is the one who is responsible for our resurrection%; he is the gate. He is the path because he is Shri Ganesh. Omkara is path but he 's not the destination. His mother is the destination. Mahalaxmi, Mahakali, Mahasaraswati is not the destination. Adi Shakti is the destination where you have to reach. At Ganesh 's stage that Chaitanya was kept in that form but at stage the whole drama was played later on, his death and of the Even Today, we are here to celebrate the birth of Omkara - its a very big thing. It moves into everything, I don 't know if you can realise what it is. atoms molecules, into all the organising of chemical and the anuparmanu, periodic laws, also in the gravity, into everything that moves Omkara. vibrations have come as Omakaras. like Omkaras. is this Your vibrations are nothing but Omkaras. In my photograph the How is it happening these lights look How is it on the top of the heads of Sahaja Yogis there's Omkaras or Allah in Arabic language. Who is doing this? It is he, who is Omkara itself takes the form to do things to convince you doing all this. of Adi Shakti. He 's the one who is handling all these powers. He doesn't enter into the photograph but he plays a trick. You see if you go into details how you get a photograph through the light. The light passes in a line. But if he wants he can make the light pass another transform the light into something else. to convince you. In the whole play, he straight around. whatever Sutradhara. He 's the conductor, the one who moves the strings in a way do the Не he likes He can can is like puppet It is very important to pray to Shri Ganesha everytime we have a are praying to Lord Jesus Christ. show. Puja. auspiciousness, his help, we cannot do Sahaja Yoge. Thats how Without his we 19

 KULWE PUJA TALK BY SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI 01-01-1991 (SYNOPSIS) In this yuga Krutha Yoga has started now Kaliyuga Paramchaitanya is absolutely effective and very efficient. anything wrong it will punish you. will give you a suggestion. something is footsteps about that. There are two forces working - one which attracts you and the other which throws you out. In Kruthayuga, this Paramchaitanya ever active. Also you are rewarded. You have told me so many stories Sahaja Yoga worked it out, how Sahaj it has happened. It is part of plan and that 's your place is in the Kingdom of God. there, you try to dislocate yourself from this joy or break this connection by the is over. If you do It may not punish immediately but it that J5 It will give you a proper signal going wrong with you but if you do not try to mend your very careful then you may go down very fast, You have to 15 how You are already If the only thing you have to do is to enjoy the kingdom of God. of thinking which is not reality then you are responsible Keep the connection and also try to some sort yourself. stronger and become one with that Divine force permanently, which will flow through you. powers that you will see new life in the New Year. make it stronger and It will not only enlighten you but will give you 80 many We have to go all out to see that we spread Sahaja Yoga and talk about On this day, I give you complete freedom to do what you like to spread Sahaja Yoga. anything but it should be something decent. which is not behoving a Sahaja Yogi. Even if you have to write letters or answers, even if you have to show anger, it should be done in a very decent and beautiful manner and it should show that it is a Yogi who 's talking. All your problems will be solved in no time. The main problem is yourself which should be solved by you through meditative methods. attention it. You need not ask me any permission and you can try It should not be something indecent So much we have paid to all our extra - curricular activities, but will definitely fail. It will boomerang on you if you do not have the foundation of Sahaja Yoga. It's very important to keep attention on your Spirit all the time so that whatsoever you are doing or projecting, that base. Without the nourishment from the roots you cannot grow, so this nourishment must be kept alive. May God Bless you. has NEWS FROM PUBLIC PROGRAMME AT TAIWAN 1990. At the programme a Chinese lady recognised Mother as Kwan Yin and said I bow to my Kwan yin. Mother was asking the Chinese to say, Kwan Yin". "Mother are you result people would feel this incredible flow of As a vibrations. The Buddha promised to come as Mattreya (or the future Buddha) and Mother was telling them "Ask me, Mother are you the Mattreya?" said it is Trigunatmika in fact) and the recognition was tremendous. 250 people who were there the last night didn "t all get it at first, but they all stayed and Mother worked on so many. (She The 100 people gave their names 20

 There was one amazing scene where a girl up She threw herself around Mother 's delicate, came come to follow-ups. was totally enamoured by Mother. neck with both her arms and was overjoyed. The Chinese are very deep people and also have kept their dharma. They are very much like Indians. to and A SAHAJA YOGI SAHAJA YOGI is always a part of the answer he is never a part of the problem. SAHAJA YOGI always has a programme he never has excuses. SAHAJA YOGI says, let me do it for you he does not say thats not my job. SAHAJA YOGI sees an advantage in disadventage he does not find problems in every situation. SAHAJA YOGI says, it may be difficult but its possible" he never says, its impossible". SAHAJA YOGA VIDEOS For Hindi & English Latest : Shivratri Puja 9.2.91 :162, Munirka Enclave. New Delhi-110 067 Phone - 686 8156. Contact For Marathi Latest : 14 Tapes of P.O. Box 1901, Kothrud, Pune 411 029. Contact Maharashtra Tour 90 - 91 AUDIO TAPES Latest : All tapes of Maharashtra Tour Shivratri Puja Tape, Hindi & English Contact : A - 16 Mahendru Enclave, Delhi, 110 009. Phone-712 6731 DIVINE COOL BREEZE Hindi Subscriptions to : 162 Munirka Enclave, N. Delhi 110 067 English and Marathi Subscriptions to : P.0. Box 1901, Kothrud, Pune 411 029 SHRI MATAJI 'S FORTHCOMING PROGRAMME Holi Celebration, Delhi. Public Programmes, Delhi - Talkatora Auditorium Noida & Gazi abad Bombay Public Programmes Birthday Puja, Bombay Public Programmes, Calcutta 1st March 2nd - 3rd March 4th - 5th March 19 20th March 21st March 23rd -25th Merch 21

 Editor : Shri Yogi Mahajan Printed and Published by : P.C. Kulkarni Printed at : 9, Bhagya Chintamani Soc. Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411 029



----------------------

1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-0.txt 
 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
VOL. II NO. 4 & 5
 1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-1.txt 
 NAVARATRI PUJA
LECTURE BY H.H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
GENEVA SWITZERLAND 23.9.90
( SYNOPSIS )
According to the calendar this year there are ten days of Navaratri and not
Nine are the days and nights when the Goddess had
nine.
to fight the
demons and save the children from negativity. On the one side she
protecting them like a tigress because times were such that nobody could
meditate, take the name of God, or even think of realisation, But those who
are sitting here today, have been there in those days and were all saved
for today, so that you could achieve your self realisation.
was
The form of the Goddess in those days was not Mayaswaroopi. She was in her
real form and that created a great awe even
question of giving self realisation was not there.
to be saved. Like for nine months the mother has to keep the child in her
womb,
in the tenth month you are given birth. The
celebrate actually the Adi Shakti. On one side she is Mahakali, on the
other side she is Mahasaraswati and in the centre she is Mahalaxmi. She is
also the Amba, the one who is the Kundalini. But she is beyond all that.
She is the generator of power. Today we worship Her in all those forms.
the disciples. The
among
First of all they were
in the same way you all have been for nine yugas saved properly and
tenth Navaratri is to
When we say that there is only one God, but that God has got a head, liver
stomach, nose, in fact everything that a human being has, because they say
God made human beings in his own image.
and he has to run those different parts. He has to have different deities
and unless and until you understand those deities you cannot awaken them
within yourself as they are all part and parcel of the Adi Shakti.
are all completely under the control of the Adi Shakti. The powers of the
Adi Shakti are like a tortoise who draws his whole body inside his shell.
You cannot discover them easily, except for those modern cameras when the
vibrations are emitted you start seeing them in those cameras.
so many miraculous photographs.
what you have to understand, that we have entered into a new
He has different parts in the body
They
There
аге
You don 't know what 's happening. This is
realm.
Of
sometimes you get lost, because of your previous problems you get
dragged down, tempted, dominated by negative forces and fall down. This is
a very sad thing that should happen to any Sahaja Yogi, because perhaps you
don't know your past, you do not know how you have struggled, how you have
worked hard to come up to this level. After coming up to this level if you
do not try to go higher then either you will be stuck at the same place or
course
You must know that you are a Sahaja Yogi.
you will be thrown down.
You
are not a wife, husband, mother or father. You should say my main job is
to give realisation to others and because all my relationships are already
fixed properly, I don 't have to worry about any God, any deity, because
they work out everything very effectively.
 1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-2.txt 
 In the descrintinn.of. the Gadtsas you read that her hands
were throwing
arrows wi th such speed that one felt she was dancing. Every hair of mine
is just like an arrow and it works so tremendously but to you I am sitting
here quietly, just as you are sitting, but its not so, its something much
When they show a lion or a tiger as my 'vahana then you should know
that they are actually so. Even to get a vahana of this kind had to be
evolved from amoeba stage to this stage otherwise he would not have been
In the same way you are evolved and in you all these vahanas
You desire
something and you will be surprised, immediately it works out but there
should be complete dedication to Sahaja Yoga. When I say Sahaja Yoga you
More.
here.
are
also there and they work out very quickly al1 that you want.
know its the yoga of your attenti on at my feet.
If you are still moving within your egos, thinking on those lines that we
are something and we can start our own Sahaja Yoga, we can work out this
way, that way, my wife is like this, my child is like that or my husband is
like that, you have to give up those problems on one side otherwise vou
will nat. ARCend.
because you were just ready for that but to keep your light on you have to
work hard. Now a tiger remains at his own position. He doesn 't change in
this position.
their own qualities. In the same way you must remain in your own position
of a Sahaja Yogi.
The Was not difficult for me to give you realisation
All the dieties and Gods are in their own position with
Now the problems we have in the West
suitable to any Sahaja Yogis i.e. attachment. First they were not
attached to their wife or children, now they are attached like glue. I do
not say that you give up your children or wife, but your attachment should
be to Sahaja Yoga. Once the blessings of Sahaja Yoga come to you, they
will flow to your wife, children , to everyone in your country and the
whole world. Supposing this attachment is a very simple electrical thing,
if
are stupid problems which are not
the attachment is not to the mains but elsewhere, then whats the use ?
It cannot give electricity. Its si mple logic that you should be attached to
the source of energy first, then that energy can flow to others. If you
yourself are not attached to that source of energy then how can that power
flow anywhere ?
understand what has happened to us. We are not attached to the main source
and that 's the only attachment you need and then the whole thing will flow
to the other end. We are attached to so many miserable things we like
which make us miserable, for example we are attached to some sort of stupid
entrepreneur fashion. All these attachments are not the source of joy,
knowledge, and energy which ascends you. This is the reason why our
situation of collective ascent is spoilt.
Our
attachments start getting rusted and we don 't
The Adi Shakti's work is to give you realisation first, Second is to give
you life, to comfort you. If you have physical problems She will look
after them, she will go all out, if you have mental problems she will solve
them. She is the comforter, She gi ves you comfort. At the same time She
protects you. I have seen many people even now get frightened at the
slightest thing. Why should we get frightened now that there is a tiger
standing.
She is.
Your Mother is so powerful you have to understand how powerful
2.
 1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-3.txt 
 The energy is not allowed to flow and if you are still worried about
wife, house,
This shnuld not be taken in the way that I say you become ascetics, no way.
No saints
attention
that a little boy is playing with his kite. The kite is going all over; he
is talking with his friends, joking but his attention is on the kite.
There is a lady who is cleaning the house and a little child is on her
waist. She
attention is on the child. There are ladies in India who have three,
pitchers of water
laughing, making fun, but the attention is on the pitcher. My attention is
always on your Kundalini.
who tries to play tricks will be very badly punished. You have to be very
careful not to be di shonest.
the teeth of the tiger, the Vahanas. They are all fixed quantities. They
all
your
when this my drops then it can
children, my',
work out.
wife and children.
Their
They all had
ascetics.
were
a
at the lotus feet of the Mother.
As Guru Nanaka has
said
was
15
is cleaning the house, brooming, doing everything, but her
four
their heads.
to each
other,
They are talking to
on
You cannot play tricks in Sahaja Yoga.
Anybody
I won t do anything but here there
all
are
know what to do and they will do it. Such negative things come into
your head, I would say they are demonic ideas, because they will destroy
you completely.
On one side Sahaja Yoga is an absolute blessing for the ascent to go ahead.
You go up to a point but you must also know you have reached a height.
have
You
to be very careful there, if you fall from that height you will fall
There you are having al1 the blessi ngs, the beauty, love, joy,
If you are playing tricks than it is not
you are immediately
very low.
knowledge, friends, al1 the care.
possible to
thrown out , One has to know that the deities are extremely alert, they are
watching all of you because they have to guard you, look after and help
you.
create flowers for you. They are the ones who do all sorts of good things
for you. But at the same time they are only attached to me and not to you.
Because you are my children they are looking after you.
misbehave you are finished.
that she always tries to forgive and give chances. She tells those deities
to keep quiet and of course they obey up to a point. However if you want
to be nasty, cruel, sinful and yet stay in Sahaja Yoga, you cannot.
not like any religion where you go on committing mistakes,
like, kill and cheat. Here you have to be a Sahaja Yogi in the real
of the word and this is what one has to understand.
remain there, that does not work out,
They have to work out everything for you. They are the ones who
Once you try to
But the compassion of your Mother is so great
Its
do what you
sense
Don't take things for granted. I have told you to write what I have
done
for Sahaja Yoga today. For ourself we do everything, paint our home, have
sarees etc. but one should ask oneself what have I done for Sahaja
nice
Yoga, how many presents have I given to others, how many letters have
I
written to others narrating my experience of the love I felt for Mother
in
my heart'.
Today you have had this Puja of Adi Shakti, that's a dangerous one
its like
yourself. To dominate your husband is a stupid nonsense because you don 't
know how to handle your husband.
who are like the Mother Earth.
because
a mirror where you will have to see
yourself, clearly face
We have to grow as wise women, as women
When you ask me "Mother, you work so hard,
3.
.
 1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-4.txt 
 yet you look so fresh'"?
me, so coling. Everything is a music to me.
On the contrary you feel fresh. Please have introspection, soul searching,
find out whats wrong with you. Do not pamper your ego because ego makes
you idiotic. We have some people like that in Sahaja Yoga, it is like
have some buffoons in a circus but we have to have lions and tigers.
impresses people are the lions and tigers, not the buffoons.
It is because I enjoy it. Doing work is musie to
Do you get tired of music?
we
What
whole power of your Mother is Love. Whatever she does is out of love
for her creations and the introspection starts. It should not be too late.
I have been saying since long the way that they are exhausting the
Earth.
The
Mother
Now the ecological problems are standing like a Rakshasa before us.
yourself, your
what do you do with it? Vou have to face
destruction. If you do not face it now, then you will have to face it at a
time when it will be very late. So don't just be satisfied wi th yourselves
that you are Sahaja Yogis. You have come to
fall into the sea, it has the power to absorb you but also has the power to
throw you back on the shore. It acts both ways. So why can't I go deep
into Saha ja Yoga? There are excuses also, "I haven "t got the time;
very busy; I am working in the office, I am doing that",
Sahaja Yogi.
Yoga gives you sufficient time to do everything. I knaw of people whom I
find suddenly in Puja's all over the world.
They say that business has brought them there.
great, to realise it, to know how great it is, then you leave everything to
this power.
Now
Puja of course, like if you
I 'm
Then you are not
All your ti me is for Sahaja Yoga. Because of that Sahaja
you here?n
is so
I say, "how are
When this power
It works out everything for you.
Today we are talking about the Shakti, about the powers of the Goddess
s very well
, Whatever work these powers have done
Please try to assimilate them and
I have got pregnancy,
you perfect
Then you don t ask
You
are more to be discovered and to implicate, which is
and extremely efficiient.
which
balanced
within you, please try to respect them.
let
children, jobs.
yourselves. Everything is related to your perfection.
me questions. What job I have to do Mother? What I have to achieve?
just see your way through and everything works out.
your being grow.
Don't say '1 am married,
Everything becomes perfect
as
as
soon
All the demons were killed but they are again back into their
own seats;
worst thing is that they have entered into the heads of the seekers because
the Catholic Church,
They look
If you look at them they influence you and go into your
heads, but after you come to Sahaja Yoga even these heads are cleansed.
This cleansing and joy, you have to give to others. This is your
responsibility. First of all your character, behaviour and relationships
should be so pure that by itself will emit light. Like if you have a very
they have
Protestant Church,
like Rakshasas
as gurus now. They have come
kinds of temples and fundamentalists etc.
as
clean glass the light can pass through but also Kundalini being the
pure
desire, you should be extremely fervent, bubbling, absolutely pouring out
desire; when to give vibrations, whom to gi ve realisation.
Whatever you
are doing keep attention on your connection. If you are doing Sahaja Yoga
and the connection is loose then you are only giving darkness, ignorance or
With this powerful Shakti you must all the time keep connection
madness.
 1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-5.txt 
 all these
and keep her pleased by the protocol. Its very important,
deities you see have the protocols because they are fixed. You should also
fix your protocol properly.
and
Unless and until you know what powers you have, how you got them
remember it and unless this truth becomes part and parcel of you, your
like
growth is going to be difficult, You will be neither here nor there
a pendulum going from right to left, left to right. Sahaja Yogis should be
ashamed to see they are going from right to left, left to right. How can
You have to be like the
rock of Gibralter. How can you catch? If you think someone is extremely
But you cannot become dainty
You are my children, you are
You have to be brave, righteous,
I hope that after this
Puja you will sit down, meditate and do introspection and find out why I do
you be so vulnerable? Because you have not grown.
negative then don 't go near that person.
darlings. My children are Viras, chivalrous.
more Hindus, Muslims, Christians.
good, compassionate, dynamic, that's the minimum.
по
is the problem? If you are really connected with this divine
IE
it?
power you may keep awake for three days and nights and not be tired.
has happened with you sometimes, but the attention should be on the power.
The attention should be connected, that you have this power otherwise
you
will be exhausted naturally.
Thank God, that there is someone like your Mother who can tell you
wrong with you. Even your own mothers didn 't tell you because they were so
frightened of you and didn't say that when your heart catches what can you
do then?
will work it out. It is not so much of mental understanding but
understanding of a higher level where it becomes just a part and parcel of
your awareness. HoW can it be wrong, it all has to be good. Last but not
the least, one must understand that as all the seven Chakras I am working
what's
then you
If you understand that this is out of love, concern,
is the
in a collective way held by me, by Virata.
The quality of
the
on,
Viratangana is that She creates this universal awareness within
collectivity and in modern times we are in a spiritual path in a collective
way only.
us,
reached to the stage of Sahasrara and here we have to have the
to be
Anybody who tries to harm the collective by bad
We have
This has
collective working only.
absolutely realised.
behaviour or by anything will be thrown out but will also fall into wrong
hands.
Sahasrara is the rule of the Virata and the power is the Viratangana. This
is the most important point we must know that if we cannot be collective
because of anything, may be jealousy, fear complex, anything that is coming
from behind like a worm crawling up, then know that something is wrong with
you and not with the collective. Don 't criticise the collectivity til11 I
myself find it out. Keep to the collectivity wisely, earnestly and try to
keep together.
enjoy together. Don 't criticise each other. Only criticise yourself if
you are in the habit of criticiam; it is better because these are habits
also.
There is no other way out.
The collectivity is the work of the Adi Shakti because at the
Try to help the people to get together collectively, to
 1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Adi Shaktis work is the most important in the whole creation. Killing of
the demons was over when Shri Saraswati 's work was done.
work was done when she brought it to human level. The climax is now
you got your realisation. You have got the special quality.
entered the Kingdom of God, so now behave yourself.
Shri Mahalaxmi 's
that
Now you have
DIWALI PUJA
TALK BY H.H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
GHOGGIA, ITALY H 2 I
- I 0-90
The word Diwali comes from two words - Deep and Aawali. Deep means
and Aawali means rows. Rows of 1ights. It is a very ancient idea and
over the world whenever they have to celebrate something then
joy and happiness. To
ignorance we have to enlighten ourselves and that is why it is important
should get self realisation to feel
lights
all
they put
the darkness of
lights. Lights give
overcome
that everybody
themselves
sparkle. There is light in the eyes of every Sahaja Yogi.
the light within
and you must have noticed that after realisation the eyes also
is the day when we worship the Laxmi principle, i.e. our Nabhi.
benevolent
Today
is so
normally you find that anybody who has money will try to put pressure
others. Even in Sahaja Yoga, if they are a 1ittle better off they try to
push other people, organise and control them. They think that this is
power they have got out of the money. But Laxmi herself stands on a lotus,
the beauty of her being is shown in that she does not trouble anyone though
she stands on a flower. Those who worship Laxmi have to remember that they
shouldn't push or pressurise, anyone, control or destroy anyone. Her feet
She
and so kind that she does not pressurise
but
anyone,
on
the
the lotuses and in two hands she has lotuses. Lotus is a sign of
агe
beauty and their pink colour is love. It symbolises that a person who has
Laxmi, Wealth should be extremely geerous like a lotus
little beetle to come into it and sleep, It covers him with its petals and
makes him comfortable and protected.
on
which allows a
For
person who has money that should be his temperament, otherwise
he
loses his money very fast or he is always insecure about his money. He
wants to hide his money here or there. There is no grace about such
person. His house is not comfortable because all the time they are worried
that the carpet will be spoilt or this or that will be spoilt.
should be where you can live freely. As soon as we get materialistic,
out of the Laxmi principle. All the beauty of wealth we
a
A
house
we
get
finished. I have seen that even a rat does not enter such a house leave
aside human beings. This is materialism that we get so much worried
everything. The Laxmi principle is to be understood that matter is for the
expression of your love; how much you can do tor others, how much comfort
have is
about
can give to others. I have seen in some people where the Grihalaxmi,
you
woman in the house will not even offer tea to the people. She is just
the
enjoying herself and bothering about the carpets, etc. So low level it
It is not even a human thing. The Laxmi principle means love. This very
people few understand. To them Laxmi means money in the bank.
principle means to express your love.
is.
The Laxmi
Another symbolic thing about Her is that she is your Mother and a
Mother
just gives. Her enjoyment is giving. I always think what I can give you.
Diwali is a good day for me that I can buy so
What present I can give you.
6.
 1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-7.txt 
 many things that I want to give you and I love it. Nothing like the joy of
When you think that I
have to buy this thing now, or wi11 this fit this person, it relates to the
collective feeling, a very beautiful feeling. We have to realise in al1
That does not
we should not make money, not work, be lethargic, or say,
giving.
If you have more things its a headache.
introspecti on that we have gone too much into materiali sm.
mean that
Mother has said that let us be Lotus eaters'.
oh
if
Try to understand that
you are making money it is just to give, otherwise your situation will be
You will always be insecure about money and those who have the money
What is the use of
enjoy Sahaja Yoga.
bad.
instead of feeling secure will be shaking like that.
that money which shakes you. Better to have 1ittle but
tattwa is not money oriented. Supposing you take a dog or a donkey
Laxmi
and put lots of notes on that, will you call him a Laxmipati? (A rich man).
Ог
take another person who has ten cars but is nervous, twitchy; will you
call him Laxmipati ? There is no grace in this kind of money Its
There are no traditions. They have no sweetness, nothing on
are dry, as if the whole juice has been taken out of the sugarcane.
are like that and nobody wants to go to their houses and if I eat there I
get vomiting. My Laxmi does 'nt like it. You should feel what you can give
to others, what to do for others. That is the first sign of a Sahaja Yogi.
I have heard that people do not 1ike to spend for Sahaja Yoga.
to know that Sahaja Yoga is for the emancipation of the whole world.
is spending so much on ,cosmetics going to do for the whole world ? Or what
is this watch going to do for the world ? Or the way you dress up or
off is it going to help the whole world ? You are here to help the world
and not to decorate yourself and just to take advantage of Sahaja Yoga.
Sahaja Yoga is extremely peaceful.
Laxmi, then it gives
temptation and you can fall away and go down.
crazy.
They
They
them.
You
You have
What
show
It gives you tirst the glimpse of
It is the first
you money. You are blessed.
Then there are two other symbols that we see with her hand.
She gives. If
You have to open the other one.
She must give, So all those who have Laxmi tattwa developed in them, they
think what they have to give, but they don 't give the worst thing they
have, just like the waste paper basket. "0, this is useless so I can give
to this friend", All friends are used as waste paper baskets. Whatever is
open one door the air won't come in.
you
the worst is given. How can
you touch your depth like this ? Whatever is
the best, you should give. if you are free to give then you should give the
One of the snags is that we have never learnt the art of giving. If
we learn the art of giving, it is so joyous so beautiful. Because we are
best.
аге
understand what will gi ve joy to us. We don 't
understand what will give joy to others and when we understand this then
very ego oriented we
that joy reflects on us thousand times more.
On the periphery both the forces work on. On the one side are the misers
on the other side are the exploiters. If you
and
the
exploiters are there. So there is an antithesis. Another type of people
Sometimes you are exploited,
Thats not your look out. You have not committed the sins.
has exploited has committted the sins and he is going
become nervous who don 't know what to do.
The
who
one
to
So why to worry ? With the help of this Divine Power the one who
suffer.
7.
 1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-8.txt 
 exploits will suffer. You get more than what you suffered and you will get
ten times more than you lost. This is what is to be understood by Sahaja
Yogis that we are now blessed by this Divine Power. We are not alone. All
the time it is blessing us. So giving means nothing is mine.
"My" has to
go.
Even in Saha ja Yoga I was surpri sed that people get very much attached to
their children and think of nothing else.
selfishness. Just to think of your own children only and no one else, then
the same children wi11 become devils and teach you a lesson.
"O God, next time don 't give me any children I've had enough". If you make
that child collective and teach the child to give to others and enjoy it
then from childhood that child will become extremely generous.
is a quality of an incarnation. Aishwarya.
money, wealth, but generosity. It excels the money and that is the sign of
an incarnation and a Sahaja Yogi
This is another kind of
You will pгау
Generosity
Aishwarya does not mean only
Say, you are working in an office, hospital or a factory, you have to feel
You have to trust your
office like your family. When my husband's colleagues used to arrive early
morning from Calcutta I would myself cook their breakfast and serve them.
They were just ordinary clerks but this is how through the protection, care
can make them so dynamic that their Laxmi tattwa will
why a
person who is a capitalist must understand that his capital means nothing
if he doesnt know how to use his Laxmi Tattwa, thats why they end up
that you are working like a family, try this.
love, you
there will be strikes, fights etc.
Otherwise
increase.-
Thats
jail, lunatic asylum, become smugglers or some thing happens.
respectable. I have never seen a statue of a man who
They are
is garlanded
If you are rich nobody is going to respect you, unless you
never
for being rich.
are generous and do something substantial for the society.
How the Laxmi tattwa comes in. First the Laxmi is born out of the sea.
Now why was she born out of the sea ? She was born out of the sea
her father is a generous personality. Look at the sea, it spreads it wings
all over, gets itself heated up completely so that the clouds are made and
these clouds go bang at high mountains where it rains, they form the rivers
and come back to the sea.
because
All the while the sea contains al1 the salt and
Christ has said that you are the salt. What is the salt ? The salt which
gives taste to your food is your Guru principle, If you are a miserly
then you cannot become a guru or a leader. How horrible you would
person
look, just imagine. Laxmi is born out of the Guru principle and this Guru
principle starts in you when this Laxmi principle is awakened, not just
money; when you start thinking what sweet thing I can give to others, what
I should do for others, how to express my love.
The first thing is that the sea spreads its wings and says ok let the
take away my water, let me heat up, get clouds. In the same way you
have to understand that unless and until I allow the sun that is the Spirit
to evaporate this water from me, means to give to others, how will I
develop this Guru principle within myself. You cannot have salt in the sea
water unless and until it evaporates so you cannot become a Guru unless and
sun
 1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-9.txt 
 until you allow the evaporation of water which is this wealth, this money.
But if you are not mature like the sea then you will remain like at a level
that like the muck of mud and ending in a lunatic asylum because maryadas
are lost, dharma is lost. Without Guru principle there is no dharma.
do not think of anybody else, your father, mother collective work, world.
So you become smaller and smaller. But when the Laxmi tattwa starts thats
the first inkling of love for others.
but its not a complete reflection of your mother.
other and share everything with each other with love.
light of love starts showing you, in that light you move, you become deeply
generous and enjoy your generosity.
You
I know you all love me very much,
You have to love each
When this first
You have to come to the centre as this love has to start showing itself,
mani festing itself in all humility.
for others.
myself because I cant bear
obligation, I am secretive, I don t want to talk about it. I am enjoying
myself".
You are doing it for yourself and
"If I have tried to help somebody wi th money I am helping
So no
not
to see that
person in trouble.
We must understand, are we allowing the children to grow big ? Are they
? Are they saints ? Are they beautiful ? How do
they talk to
generous
others ? Ary they confi dent ? Tomorrow they ere going to leaders of Sahaja
Yogis.
the mother who makes children great. If she wants all the time to grab the
child and the child wants to grab her, its suicidal. Suicidal for you
suicidal for the children.
duty of every Sahaja Yogi to see that their children grow up to be great
people. Greater than you. They have to look after the world. Spend time
with your children, see that you mould and nourish them with love,
them that they should give love to others.
a manner that others will feel the love through them. Otherwise they will
become devils like Ravana.
mother he became a devil. First of all understand that they are not your
children, they are my children under your trust and you are not
them dwarfed and smal1.
Like Shivaji 's mother,
Jijamata, how she made her son great.
Its
and
What have we done about our children ? Its
the
tell
That they should behave in such
Ravana was realised soul, but spoilt by his
to make
We have to make our children like lights. Light burns for others and
not
Are
for itself. In Diwali, what are we burning lights for ? For others.
we learning from these lights ? Are our children going to burn for others ?
So many thousands of children are going to
come and even if they are born realised, you spoil them. If you take
the
of children you'll spoil them with this idea that this is my
child, this is "mine". Expose your child to good things, tell them what is
how to
feed the
You are making them selfish.
di amond and put it in the gutter, it will be ruined. Even if you get
best kind
how to be good to others, how to press the feet of others,
the hair. Let them carry little trays and feed others,
comb
Let them give water to the flowers. Don 't make them petty. Some
ruining
- The
birds.
of the children are really dynamic who are born to you but you are
them.
The last of the Mahalaxmi principle came as Fatima. Fatima
Grihalaxmi; she stayed at home, she didnt go out. She looked after
children and huaband who fought for the right and the truth.
her
6.
 1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-10.txt 
 What is the principle of Mahalaxmi ? First is that of saerifice - sacrifice
one 's own children at the altar of truth. Of course that is not needed in
Sahaja Yoga.
whatsoever, but if you do not develop your children with proper ways,
will hold you responsible and will say why did you not give us full
to develop ? If you find your child is obstinate, does 'nt know how to share
his love with others or is dominating then try to curb it down immediately.
Children
You don 't have to sacrifice
they
You don't
You are all blessed people.
Scope
are very clever, the moment they realise they are going to
lose
your love, they behave themselves.
We have three principles of Mahalaxmi and the fourth one is myself.
Mine
is a majestic work, much wider and tremendous patience is needed. It won't
have to sacrifice myself, my family
I have to sacrifice my sleep, comforts and everything possible
your Mahalaxmi
to
work out if I sacrifice anyone, I
S0
I
under the
have to sacrifice for
reason,
sun.
ane
principle should be manifested. It should have its roots.
So you come
Sahaja Yoga as seekers of truth, blessed by Mahalaxmi Principle already and
We love our Mother why ? Why do we
if that is so, let us feel it's love.
feel it ? Because
she loves us. But love does
without
not
come
Bny
I don 't feel the sacrifice. Outwardly many people say "Mother,
sacrifice.
how much you are travelling, how much you are doing this;" I don 't feel at
all anything like that because I am enjoying it
important.
t and
that 's
what is
If we have to develope our full personality, we have
our love should not be only a lip service. We have to work. I
seen people, when it comes to working for Sahaja Yoga they just run
Where are they ? Nobody is available. All around, only five or six people
working "Where are the rest of them ? - "Oh Mother they 11 only come
to know
have
away.
are
What work have you put in ? What effort have you
when you wi11 come".
put
in ? We are just enjoying ourselves, but work without any effort, enjoyment
without any sacrifice can not be complete. If you are attached
to your
laziness, selfishness and all that of course that will be there,
but you cannot enjoy. You cannot enjoy when you care only for enjoyment
can bring complete
If you
someone without any expectations then this power of love floods you
with things, ideas, everything. Just try to understand that it should be
This
enjoyment is not possible for a person who has not become the pure love.
comfort,
rest of it is finished.
and the
The power of love
command over everything; over your body, mind, ego, everything.
love
pure love without thinking, just a feeling that I am enjoying it.
The
which does not have love.
source of enjoyment is the power of love and it won 't fill the
10
 1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-11.txt 
 PUNE PUJA AT SHERE
TALK BY H.H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
3-12-1990
(SYNOPSIS)
foundation has to be strong of spirituality and then you
whatever type of building you want on it. But if you do not have that
foundation then the whole thing collapses.
doesn 't touch the souree of its nourishment then it wil1 definitely
collapse. This is what Sahaja Yoga is, that you are touching the source of
your nourishment, nourishment to your civilisation. Once this nourishment
starts growing you see whats wrong in those countries where people have
gone headlong into extremes, and what they are suffering.
The
can build
you can
Like the tree grows and if it
Source
Firstly, ask for the blessings of spirituality. But also the promise that
you will help others who are getting drowned into the dry materialism. You
are all enjoying this beautiful life and are at peace with yourself
this wine of spirituality has to be shared, otherwise life becomes very
selfish,
think you may catch from them. You have to become Baddha proof, fearless
and touch your depth. If you live with superficiality of any kind, it must
be thrown away, otherwise you will sink.
which
civilisation.
but
You are frightened of those people because you
self-centred.
There are many superficialities
Western
to us because of the blessings of this
come
First of all we have our norms and ideas. Actually it
activity.
is all mental
we cannot have
Rembrandt, or Michaelangelo anymore. The reason is that criticism of this
has become so much in the modern times that nobody wants to produce
Now the only situation left is that the
critics are criticizing the critics. This mental activity of putting
everybody down is extremely dangerous and destructive. It is happening in
every field-industry, music, art, architecture, business and even politics.
so superficial that you have to be prepared for
facing all kinds of oppositions and troubles. Still as you have your
The
art of
the West is finished, þecause
art
anything that will be criticised.
Everything has become
Own
depth, you can master them all by your own tranquillity, temperanent and by
your powers which you have got. When you are not afraid of that society,
you have that tranqui 1lity within you and the courage, I am sure you
when
can do a lot. Of course, we have some very dynamic people in Sahaja
What may come, they never deter and they have worked very hard to see that
Sahaja Yoga is established.
Yoga.
11
 1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-12.txt 
 SHRI LALITA AND SRI CHAKRA PUJA
BRAHMAPURI
17-12-1990
(SYNOPSIS)
When the left side reaches up to Vishuddhi, then it uses on the right side
the Sri Chakra and on the left side the Lalita Chakra, to mani fest
These two chakras are the ones who manifest all
chakras emit vibrations of different kinds because of their angularities.
Like if you have some kind of a cardboard attached with small holes of
different
permutations and combinations. In the same way, different permutations and
combinations are
Sahaja Yoga.
itself.
These
that you
you see.
the time, you
colours which rotates
all
different
get
created and that is why you get all the advantages of
Today,
together.
we are worshipping Maha Saraswati Power and Mahakali
Power both
Now we have started combining things. These two energies are
very important. Without the energy and power nothing exists. For example,
if this light had no power to give light or to burn then it is useless.
In
the same way without getting your realisation you are useless because your
Whatever you see created in this world is done
power is not available -
by these two chakras of the Adi Shakti. Here the power doesn't move.
in the human being the power starts moving.
can say it is creating another world.
But
When it starts moving then
we
The movement is not the only thing.
This power acts, gives you intelligence, gi ves you all kinds of things
the power itself becomes
Means the left and the right side both become enlightened.
which
a human bei ng. Later on
you have as
enlightened.
You get this enlightenment when you get your realisation.
j mmediately. For example, if you have pain or if your chakra is catching,
you have
within me, so its alright, I can manage it.
to use your hands to impart that power to yourself or to others.
have pain in the stomach, you can say, "I have energy in my stomach, why
should I have pain in the stomach? But the play of these chakras has to
come and that is why you have to use the power of your hands.
But not
to use your hands. You cannot Say that the energy
is flowing
It is not like that. You have
If you
If you cannot use your hands, then you cannot impart this energy.
Many
Mother when will it move horizontally? It will move
people ask
horizontally.
me
It does, but even these horizontal movements
guided by these two very important chakras. Don 't move your head all the
With many people it's a style of talking. That's another way,
have to be
time.
not respecting your chakras. You should not move your
are
shoulders too
Those who move their shoulders too much do not feel the vibrations
much.
much because the chakras are not alright. They are
chakras we have and whatever is to be used out of this Param Chaitanya,
they have to be used by these two centres. Even supposing some chakra is
catching on your spinal cord, you have to use your hands. You cannot just
put your attention.
attention has not yet reached that stage where these two chakras obey it.
Unless and until
materialistic life takes you to a very partial development. To get a
the most important
It doesn't work out that well. Because as yet your
there is the foundation of the spiritual 1ife,
life, the
full
12
 1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-13.txt 
 development,
spirituality has to be deep, fully equipped and absolutely perfect.
the whole building can be built.
on spirituality.
you must have
your foundation
That
Then
When you go beyond thought these
because a thought puts pressure on them and because of the pressure,
movement of these tWo chakras is very slow and ineffective.
get out of your thoughts, and go into thoughtless awareness,
chakras start working it out and you start maving much deeper into your own
being.
chakras become extremely efficient,
the
Once you can
then these
MAHALAXMI PUJA
TALK GIVEN BY H.H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI, KOLHAPUR
21.12.1990
In Indian Shastra and scriptures, Shakti is the most important thing, say-
The power of fire
Supposing
it does not have its power, then who will care for fire? So anybody
who hasn't got the power of being the Spirit, is useless. This power, this
Shakti has to be awakened within us because we do not have the power of the
Spirit. We have to have the power of the Spirit. That 's only possible if
your self-realisation. It is therefore very important that we
should pay attention to our Power. This power is made as the power of a
if you have a light or fire, what is the power of fire?
be that it can give you light, it can burn away things.
can
that
Mother is the most loving relationship and through
mother.
that
relationship all the love is expressed. That is why the Shakti is that of
for
a Mother.
her children,
Shakti can never
The affection, the love and the patience that a mother has
Shakti too has the same powers and that is how the
is the
Kundalini is the highest because without her you cannot get realisation.
the
Out of all these powers, Shakti
harm you.
to that is the Mahalaxmi Power. Without the Mahalaxmi
Complementary
cannot
rise. This is the ladder through which this power of Kundalini
can rise. Both the powers are very important and very much related to each
we
other.
Mahalaxmi principle starts when we have finished with Laxmi principle
Like in the West, people are fed up with affluence, they are thinking wnat
have we achieved? We have gone into imbalance.
have to balance ourselves. How do we balance ourselves? We have to
the knowledge of the spirit, that is called as Adhyatma.
knowledge,
this all pervading power.
energy and get transformation within yourself. When there is light you can
see all your problems and defects in it. Also if you know how to connect
with it, it is the easiest thing to do is to get your transformation in
Sahaja Yoga.
So what should we do? We
have
To know this
Kundalini has to awakened and that you are to be connected to
Once that happens, you just become one with that
Today, seems to be
Mahalaxmi is being
thoughtless awareness. When you are in the centre you don't think, you are
in meditation, that is why Mahalaxmi is very important.
up and you can feel that there is something missing then you
Mahalaxmi principle. In India, because of so many saints we feel we should
short circuit. First let us develop our knowledge of Atma and then take to
Science,
of Adhyatma (knowledge of the Spirit), if you take to any kind of progress
you can topple down. That is why, all the Western enterprises and also
projections of religions have gone to waste, because there
balance.
Here in Mahalaxmi temple,
a special day for me.
awakened and I am feeling really in
that
state of
When you are
fed
so there is no more jmbalance within us.
Without the foundation
It is important that we must have balance within ourselves.
13
 1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-14.txt 
 In India, we have people who have this idea at least that you have to
higher than materiali sm and become one with the Virata
the whole.
rise
- part and parcel of
they grow very
"The depth we have achieved with this faith that " we have to be
this conviction
By knowing that, once they get Sahaja Yoga,
deeply.
self-realised, we have to feel the all pervading power,
itself gives them the depth and s0 when they achieve realisation, they go
down very deeply.
Ganesha,
deep than the people who know all these things by heart. One can deduce
that
outside. They have nothing to tell us because they have had no
of the self. That experience is only possible when your kundalini rises
and breaks your brahmarandra; that is the time the first experience
to you of all pervading power. All these people who have only
praying to Mahalaxmi, doing a lot of penances, fastings etc have no
what Mahalaxmi wants,
Most surprising that people who have never heard about
about Kolhapur or Mahalaxmi, are sometimes much better
and
more
those who know outwardly through books, or from gurus are absolutely
experience
comes
just been
ideas
Such people are very religious. They are doing
you do
пок
to
all kinds of ritualism; what we call as Karma Kande but wi th that
not reach
have to reach. People may know in words but in
experience, they do not know. Sahaja Yoga is very important to give them
this experience.
We have 5ri Chakra on the right side and Shri Lalita Chakra on
hand side. All the things that we do with our hands after realisation are
worked through these two chakras.
the Chakra knows how to work it out. It works by itself, as if it is an in
built mechanism within us which knows what sort of vibrations have
given to a
certain defects these chakras know what is to be emitted,
out. If you have vishuddhi problems then you can find that your hands are
stiff and
realisation because
vibrations. These Chakras are like a complete programming.
put your hands on a person, the programming starts working it out.
this programming is done by God almighty, it can never be wrong.
the left
As soon as you put your hand on somebody
to be
particular person for a particular cause. If a
person has
how to work it
you cannot feel guidance or we can say Divine Intentions of
when you start using your hands you don t
don't
feel
any
As soon as you
Because
The people here think that all this talk of God is wrong.
progress of the West is effective, more apparent. There it can be seen in
material progress.
in the area of physical or mental development.
where we realise this, it is very important for Western people to have
foundation of Adhyatma. For that it is important to give up some of your
conditioning because this knowledge is coming definitely from India.
Indians, had all the knowledge of medical science, etc. God's science is in
India and
understood with full dedication and devotion. Because of the conditioning
of the Western influence and progress, sometimes we do not know
grasp this knowledge within ourselves. If you can understand that
had
To them the
They can't understand how people progress with Adhyatma
a point
the
Now we come
to a
The
for that what are you going to do? God 's science has
to be
as we
to accept science from the West, you have to accept the knowledge of
the Self from the East. You have to be ready to receive it. If you are
still in your arrogance, conditioning then you cannot do it. Like a boy
who comes from a village who has never known about science, and suddenly
put him ina science college, he '11 say what is this nonsense,
you
why
14
 1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-15.txt 
 should I use a test-tube? Why should I go in the laboratory? That is the
conditioning which turns away many people from Sahaja Yoga after some time.
We must watch our conditioning. The Indians have conditioning of so called
religious beliefs, ritualism etc. But its easy to overcome
them - for
example, in India everybody has a Kul-devta (the family god/goddess), if
they just ask Mother are you that goddess, the vibrations start flowing and
conditioning get easily eradicated. But the
something is very difficult to overcome.
mental acceptance
of
I've also seen when a marriage is
arranged they go mental. If you go mental, then you cannot understand many
things. But if you are spiritual then you can understand. For example
we
the Mother Earth giving us these flowers. How can we
can
go mental
A sage will say - alright this is Mother
she wants to give the children these flowers, fruits, trees - so
see
about it? It's a living process.
Earth,
she is working it out.
In matter energy never moves, it is stationary, i.e. electricity etc.
аге
absolutely blank. If there's electricity flowing and someone stops it,
You start
seeing within yourself that you've become mindless and becoming absolutely
like robots. People have very fi xed ideas. Its difficult for them to get
out of it, because they dan 't have that movement towards spiritual subtlety
The Mother Earth has got the
Nobody
will believe that this Mother Earth thinks, and produces these things.
Logically, you can say that a tree has a certain height, the fruits have
certain shape, colours, etc. Who changes al1 these seasons? That is the
it
will stop. It has no mind.
In materialism you become mindless.
where they can use the mind to do something.
mind,
she produces these vigrahas, (Svyambhu Forms) and deities.
which is a lady, she thinks, decides and works out everything.
one
This
concept is doubly denied in the West. First, they cannot accept a Goddess.
Woman has no part. From Socrates onwards, nobody has talked much about
a
Greek Goddesses were just like human beings so
except Athena.
Woman
that
also gets ruled out. When Christianity came, the Christians saw to it that
there should be no mention of the Mother. Despite that they worshipped the
Mother of Christ like a Goddess. Though in the Bible she is addressed as a
woman in a very derogatory style.
The conditioning in the West is about the power of God who hangs somewhere
in the air. That he 's here and that he gives us everything. But what
the communication?
explain?
believe
conditioning because they just took out Christ's Mother; though the
painters and artists couldn 't do that. They had the mother there. Despite
all that the motherhood has not been respected as it should have been in
the Bible. While Mahalaxmi herself incarnated as Mother Mary. You cannot
expect any spiritual growth, unless and until you
Shakti, the Mother who is the only communication between
Divinity.
is
How to
can people
Jew
is the justification or
the logic?
What
So you have to say that God is a mystery.
in it? The Christian conditioning has been even worse than
How
can accept its the
and the
US
15
 1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-16.txt 
 as the
Shakti and that the whole thing is done by the movement of the Shakti, by
the thinking of Shakti, by the co-ordination, understanding and planning of
spectator.
She does everything. Once that concept can fit into your head properly
Because religion was organised and in
an organised religion, you can put whatever you like the way you want
it was such a big mistake. By that people developed lots of ego and things
And also the first sin, they call the Original Sin,
blamed on woman. They really ill-treated women, and had no respect for
So the women changed their role and instead of becoming Mothers or
But you can
understand that without the power, there is no sense in anything. This is
This is the power of Truth. Once you get that power
which has
It is
very big blessing in India that they respect the Mother
It is not done by God Almighty. He is just a
the Shakti only.
then so many condtionings will drop.
and
against women.
was
them.
goddesses, they tried to become something like actresses.
the power of love.
you should humble down and know that this power is within us,
given us all this knowledge and this ability to raise the Kundalini.
this is because of energy within us, the Shakti within us, without that
All
we
are nothing and that too is the Mother who does everything.
16
 1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-17.txt 
 CHRISTMAS PUJA
TALK BY SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
GANPATIPULE
25-12-1990
(SYNOPSIS)
Today, we have such a great opportunity to celebrate the birth of Christ.
He was born in a manger. All these things were already preplanned, to show
that whether you are born poor or rich, in difficulties or in problems, if
you have dignity within you then it shines by itself.
a very wrong deviated line, they have never been able to understand the
significance of Christ. To them immaculate conception is absolutely not
possible. Most of the people think that its some sort of a mythical story.
But in India we do believe that Gauri created Shri Ganesha out of Her
vibrations and that he became the deity of the Moola-dhara.
they will never accept such a thing because their mental side
developed and dominates. May be they are not so very ancient like Indians
to understand that above all is God. Even the concept of God is quite
mental.
As Christianity took
OWn
In the West
over-
15
Moreover,
guidance.
mystery.
possible for God. After all he is God Almighty. Because of this
attitude which
the way Christianity has been jt has not
On the contrary wherever they have failed they said
It is very simple to understand for Indians that anything is
provided any
proper
mental
is much 1ower than the knowledge of
type of the superficial
your Spirit,
the
ordinary mundane
the personality to accept the greatness of God.
knowledge can
never allow
There is a story of a seer who was going to meet God.
a devotee singing bhajans. The seer asked if he had any message for God.
The Devotee suid, "P1ease tell God I am alright but he should arrange for
my food, as it is finishing".
another devotee who was very religious singing hymns, prayers, going to the
temple daily. The Devotee told the seer that I have tried everything, when
will he meet me?
On the way he found
Then the seer went further ahead and found
"I would like to have His darshan". Then the seer
went
to God and gave the message of both the devotees. God said that the second
devotee wil1l still have to do more practises as its not easy.
Yoga comes
i mmediately food should be given to him.
devotee who prayed, went to temple daily
whereas God is impressed by other devotee who is doing nothing to seek
God only singing bhajans. God seeing the perplexed state of the seer
him to tel1 both the devotees that he saw God pass a camel through the eye
When Sahaja
God said that
that the
God saying that he has to wait;
then
will see! About the first devotee
we
The seer was puzzled,
told
a needle. When he returned to the second devotee and gave the message
of
to wait till Sahaja Yoga comes and then God would meet him and that he saw
the camel passing through the eye of a needle, the devotee started arguing
that how can that be possible. He went mental. Then he went to the first
devotee and told him the same thing, the devotee said "What is so amazing,
He is God. He can do anything? That made the seer realise that God is all
It doesn't mean that he can move the Himalayas to Maharashtra.
powerful.
It means that he can do the subtlest things, and such things our brain, our
17
 1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-18.txt 
 mental side cannot understand. God is beyond the conception of
human
He is the one who has created human beings. He has to be beyond us
if he is creating. If a potter creates a pot that means he is beyond the
mind.
pot.
The pot cannot create the potter.
It
is beyond the conception of human beings what a God it must be who has
made this great computer. We take everything for granted. We cannot make
even a particle of clay. Human beings can take a stone or clay and make
Can you make
photograph
Can you do that? We have no idea of the complete,
sort of a house.
But it's all dead from the dead.
some
candle
the badhas burn.
which will burn budhis ? You have seen that before my
intricate, delicate, very dynamic, explosive machinery. How it
create
human beings, all this universe,
beautiful flowers,
trees and
everything.
has chosen this Mother Earth to create human beings.
When he wants to send his own son, he can send him the way he wants.
to challenge this shows the mental mind which is absolutely in mud.
Look at the stars, how many there are. Out of all these he
How he has made
it.
Even
Mother Mary being the Mahalaxmi herself, she could create a child. What 's
the harm?
She could do anything.
Christians have
above
Christianity to understand that Christ was such a great thing, Who came
to
rise
to
this earth, who was the incarnation of the principle of Ganesha.
becoming Maha Vishnu is a big thing.
Ganesha
Ganesha is the son of Shiva. Ganesha
is the one who was first created before any other creation, atmosphere,
He is the 0mkara.
that sound Tankara ',
Omkara is the first breaking of Adi
from there started
This sound is Shri Ganesha is his power.
etc.
Shakti from
Omkara. He is the
He
Shiva,
embodiment of that Omkara.
was created first and foremost to create holiness (Pavitrata). When
holiness was created then everything was created in the sea of that
Holiness. He incarnated as Christ; but as Mahavishnu, not as Shiva's son.
Vishnu is the Uncle of Shri Ganesha, His mother's brother.
up by Mahavishnu but Mahalaxmi adopted the principle of Shri Ganesha.
this
Shri Ganesha is connected on the left hand side to the Ida Nadi
and the
Kundalini is above that. He transcended that part and then he had to
come
for the redemption.
He had to come as the son of Mahalaxmi. It
Mahalaxmi who conceived him within herself es Christ and he became
It is beyond human mi nd to understand how these things are
Working out in that realm. After realisation you can feel the cool breeze,
There are no unholy alliances
There is nothing that is human in them.
Once you understand this point then you will
Mahavishnu.
so many things now are happening to you.
among the gods and Goddesses.
They are all Divine and pure.
know why Shri Ganesha had to accept to be the son of Mahalaxmi
and
a5
Christ. Because he had to come on Agnya for the redemption. As Ganesha he
do the redemption part because at that stage he is for the
innocence, holiness, wisdom and also for destroying negativity. He had
does not
to
Only Ganesha could be brought into this very constricted Chakra
come.
Agnya Chakra.
constricted; the more we think, the more we go into the right or left and
it goes on becoming constricted.
could be settled, because he 's the subtlest of the Subtle. He is even
subtler than an atom.
It had
to be constricted and it goes on
getting more
In this very subtle area only Christ
The vibrations which move in isometric and symmetric
18
 1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-19.txt 
 are subtler than the atom and this is the subtler of that also,
movements
so in that very constricted area only a personality like Christ, which is
nothing but purity could come. There is no other element in him but
purity. All other incarnations have all the five elements in them. He has
nothing.
the water.
He is nothing but pure vibrations, that is why he could walk
on
Omkar became Ganesha from the thing that came out of Mahalaxmi 's body, the
Chaitanya.
Christ 's
resurrection because he is the one who is responsible for our resurrection%;
he is the gate. He is the path because he is Shri Ganesh. Omkara is
path but he 's not the destination. His mother is the destination.
Mahalaxmi, Mahakali, Mahasaraswati is not the destination. Adi Shakti is
the destination where you have to reach.
At Ganesh 's stage that Chaitanya was kept in that form but at
stage the whole drama was played later on,
his
death and
of
the
Even
Today, we are here to celebrate the birth of Omkara - its a very big thing.
It moves into everything,
I don 't know if you can realise what it is.
atoms molecules, into all the organising of chemical and the
anuparmanu,
periodic laws, also in the gravity, into everything that moves
Omkara.
vibrations have come as Omakaras.
like Omkaras.
is this
Your vibrations are nothing but Omkaras. In my photograph the
How is it happening these lights look
How is it on the top of the heads of Sahaja Yogis there's
Omkaras or Allah in Arabic language. Who is doing this? It is he, who is
Omkara itself takes the form to do things to convince you
doing all this.
of Adi Shakti. He 's the one who is handling all these powers. He doesn't
enter into the photograph but he plays a trick. You see if you go into
details how you get a photograph through the light. The light passes in a
line. But if he wants he can make the light pass another
transform the light into something else.
to convince you. In the whole play, he
straight
around.
whatever
Sutradhara. He 's the conductor, the one who moves the strings in a
way
do
the
Не
he likes
He
can
can
is like
puppet
It is very important to pray to Shri Ganesha everytime we have a
are praying to Lord Jesus Christ.
show.
Puja.
auspiciousness, his help, we cannot do Sahaja Yoge.
Thats how
Without his
we
19
 1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-20.txt 
 KULWE PUJA
TALK BY SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
01-01-1991
(SYNOPSIS)
In this yuga
Krutha Yoga has started now Kaliyuga
Paramchaitanya is absolutely effective and very efficient.
anything wrong it will punish you.
will give you a suggestion.
something is
footsteps
about that. There are two forces working - one which attracts you
and the other which throws you out. In Kruthayuga, this Paramchaitanya
ever active. Also you are rewarded. You have told me so many stories
Sahaja Yoga worked it out, how Sahaj it has happened. It is part of
plan and that 's your place is in the Kingdom of God.
there,
you try to dislocate yourself from this joy or break this connection by
the
is
over.
If you do
It may not punish immediately but it
that
J5
It will give you
a proper signal
going wrong with you but if you do not try to mend your
very careful
then you may go down very fast, You have to
15
how
You are already
If
the only thing you have to do is to enjoy the kingdom of God.
of thinking which is not reality then you are responsible
Keep the connection and also try to
some sort
yourself.
stronger and become one with that Divine force permanently, which will flow
through you.
powers that you will see new life in the New Year.
make
it stronger and
It will not only enlighten you but will give you
80
many
We have to go all out to see that we spread Sahaja Yoga and talk about
On this day, I give you complete freedom to do what you like to spread
Sahaja Yoga. anything
but it should be something decent.
which is not behoving a Sahaja Yogi. Even if you have to write letters or
answers, even if you have to show anger, it should be done in a very decent
and beautiful manner and it should show that it is a Yogi who 's talking.
All your problems will be solved in no time. The main problem is yourself
which should be solved by you through meditative methods.
attention
it.
You need not ask me any permission and you can try
It should not be something indecent
So much
we have paid to all our extra - curricular activities, but
will definitely fail. It will boomerang on you if you do not have the
foundation of Sahaja Yoga. It's very important to keep attention on your
Spirit all the time so that whatsoever you are doing or projecting,
that base. Without the nourishment from the roots you cannot grow, so this
nourishment must be kept alive. May God Bless you.
has
NEWS FROM PUBLIC PROGRAMME AT TAIWAN 1990.
At
the programme a Chinese lady recognised Mother as Kwan Yin and said I
bow to my Kwan yin. Mother was asking the Chinese to say,
Kwan Yin".
"Mother are you
result people would feel this incredible flow of
As a
vibrations. The Buddha promised to come as Mattreya (or the future Buddha)
and Mother was telling them "Ask me, Mother are you the Mattreya?"
said it is Trigunatmika in fact) and the recognition was tremendous.
250 people who were there the last night didn "t all get it at first, but
they all stayed and Mother worked on so many.
(She
The
100 people gave their
names
20
 1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-21.txt 
 There was one amazing scene where a girl
up
She threw herself around Mother 's
delicate,
came
come to follow-ups.
was totally enamoured by Mother.
neck with both her arms and was overjoyed. The Chinese are very
deep people and also have kept their dharma. They are very much like
Indians.
to
and
A SAHAJA YOGI
SAHAJA YOGI is always a part of the answer
he is never a part of the problem.
SAHAJA YOGI always has a programme
he never has excuses.
SAHAJA YOGI says, let me do it for you
he does not say thats not my job.
SAHAJA YOGI sees an advantage in disadventage
he does not find problems in every situation.
SAHAJA YOGI says, it may be difficult but its possible"
he never says, its impossible".
SAHAJA YOGA VIDEOS
For Hindi & English
Latest : Shivratri Puja 9.2.91
:162, Munirka Enclave.
New Delhi-110 067
Phone - 686 8156.
Contact
For Marathi
Latest : 14 Tapes of
P.O. Box 1901, Kothrud,
Pune 411 029.
Contact
Maharashtra Tour 90 - 91
AUDIO TAPES
Latest : All tapes of Maharashtra
Tour Shivratri Puja Tape, Hindi &
English
Contact : A - 16 Mahendru Enclave,
Delhi, 110 009.
Phone-712 6731
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
Hindi Subscriptions to : 162 Munirka Enclave, N. Delhi 110 067
English and Marathi Subscriptions to : P.0. Box 1901, Kothrud,
Pune 411 029
SHRI MATAJI 'S FORTHCOMING PROGRAMME
Holi Celebration, Delhi.
Public Programmes, Delhi - Talkatora Auditorium
Noida & Gazi abad
Bombay Public Programmes
Birthday Puja, Bombay
Public Programmes, Calcutta
1st March
2nd - 3rd March
4th - 5th March
19 20th March
21st March
23rd -25th Merch
21
 1991_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Editor : Shri Yogi Mahajan
Printed and Published by : P.C. Kulkarni
Printed at : 9, Bhagya Chintamani Soc.
Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411 029
