Shri Ganesha Puja Date 15th December 1991 : Place Shere Type Puja Speech Language English & Marathi CONTENTS | Transcript | 02 - 05 English 08 - 12 Marathi Hindi || Translation 06 - 07 English 13 - 14 Hindi Marathi

 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT ENGLISH TALK Today we are really sitting in a very close relationship with the nature. The whole thing, as you can see very clearly, is done by villagers and in a very simple way and I'm sure you all must be enjoying it very much. (Applause) Today being the first puja in Maharashtra, we'll have to do Ganesha Puja, but one has to understand how it is so important in Maharashtra that people worship Ganesha. As you know there are Ashtavinayakas, eight Ganeshas are there, around this area, and this triangle of Maharashtra, which has got on one side one big mountain. On the other side we have another mountain, which, of course, is not in Maharashtra. And also on top we have another mountain. So like a triangle, which is made like a Mooladhara, means the Kundalini itself. So the Kundalini of the whole world resides in this area. That's why it is called, we should say, as Maharashtra, is the country which is very great, the nation which is very great. But I don't know how far Maharashtrians realize that they are sitting in the land of Maharashtra. This land, which is vibrated by Shri Ganesha, has its own simplicity, has its own vibrations, a different style, a different type. But the best part of Maharashtra is that it gives you a very good attention. With Ganesha so much vibrating, the attention becomes very concentrated, and this concentration helps you in so many ways, and that is why it is said that Ganesha was created to spread or to emit auspiciousness and holiness. Actually, if there is holiness there is auspiciousness. But Ganesha is actually the one who cleanses everything, cleanses everything, because it is innocence and the innocence that cleanses you takes away all kinds of conditionings and egos that are distracting 6. your attention. So the attention, which is so wobbly otherwise, in other places, can settle down very well in Maharashtra because of Shri Ganesha's blessings that this country has, that people have very good attention. With that good attention they can really do so many things like now, for example, you can see the software; good mathematics. They're very good at music because all these things require tremendous attention. Art, dancing, anything which requires tremendous attention that has to come only through Ganesha. Because they say that Ganesha is a giver of wisdom. He's a giver of wisdom. Means just His wisdom becomes a dharma, becomes a part and parcel of your being. You become just wise. Now somebody may ask, "Mother how to become wise?" It's very difficult to say - how to become wise. It is just that it happens that you become wise. So, though He's a child, He's so matured. He's so wise. And He's not only that, but He emits wisdom and this wisdom is a innate quality of anyone who is a Sahaja Yogi, because in him, also, Shri Ganesha has been awakened. So he becomes a wise person, very wise, and with wisdom what does he achieve? He achieves a balance, a proper ascent and also he understands that this ascent is for his benevolence, for the benevolence of his country, benevolence of the whole world. He understands the importance of Sahaja Yoga. Without this wisdom, one cannot understand. And this wisdom is within us, just absolutely, innately built in. Only thing is we have to use the storehouse of this wisdom that is within 6- 6. us. Of course, with Sahaja Yoga, it starts emitting and you start feeling and you start understanding what His wisdom is. You give up all your stupid, childish things. You give up all your attachments. You give up many of your, say, things that you don't like which doesn't behoove you. You feel that you should give up, but you cannot. But, with Sahaja Yoga, it just happens automatically and you just see in your light what is needed, what is not needed. In that wisdom you throw away whatever is wrong. 2

 Original Transcript : English So what a great work this Ganesha has to do within ourselves. This manifestation of Ganesha within us is very important, I think, not that it is only the basis, but also the foundation stone of spiritual life is Shri Ganesha. That's why I've been very anxious that we should find out proper schools for our children. They should have proper education and they should be looked after because their Ganesh Tattva is already there. Only thing we have to nourish it, we have to look after it and make it grow. Once that happens then children are safe. Then nothing, nothing can harm them. Nothing they will absorb which is wrong. They will never be again in the wrong path. But if from very childhood, if you've never had this kind of training or this kind of understanding about Kundalini or about the wisdom part of it, you can never, later on, easily assimilate it. For that, you really require a great effort and understanding that you have to have this; it's so beautiful; you must get this attention and you must get this innocence within. With Sahaja Yoga, as you see, it's working out very fast and people are getting really very wise and I can see the wisdom writ large on their faces. In this wisdom what do we find here? You see, on any line that we move, we can find that most of our problems are coming from human beings, because ecological problem, or any problem we think of, comes from human beings. Or other problems that you have in your own country, as you that there are such problems that it's sort of endless and they cannot change them. You feel very nice sitting underneath this because you are fed up with the cement that you have and the problems it causes to you and the way it is now becoming very artificial. have seen, But in these circumstances, one has to understand that the wisdom plays such a part in life that whatever may happen outside, whatever may be the trend, whatever may be the fashion, whatever may be the people are all changing into, you do not change. You change within. Once you are changed within, then you have full idea as to what is expected of others, what they should do, what you are doing and how to deal with them and how to talk to them, how to tell them, how far to go with them; everything. All this comes through wisdom. 6. In Sahaja Yoga, as you know, you are very capable people, you have achieved a lot, you everything, you know all about chakras. You know practically everything. I don't have to tell you anything. Despite all that, one should have also the wisdom how to deal with others, how to talk to others, how to behave towards others, how not to control anyone. Not to say something that will be rather harsh or hurting. Because, if you are trying to spread Sahaja Yoga, this is the only way we can go forward, is to look after everyone with great compassion. know Now, we might think that wisdom is there with us and we know how to do so many things with our wisdom, and now we are absolutely wise. I agree, with Sahaja Yogis, now they have become really very, very wise and they know how to use their wisdom. But still, faith in themselves has to be really on a Nirvikalpa state. That is only possible also Shri Ganesha because He is in Nirvikalpa. He has no vikalpas, nothing. He doesn't have to question anything. He doesn't have to ask for anything. He is just there. And He's in complete Nirvikalpa; complete; absolutely into a state where He is not at all attached, nor is He worrying about things, nothing of the kind. He is just in Nirvikalpa and in that Nirvikalpa He worships Mother. Small, small stories can show you how He was so sure of Himself, how He had courage and how He worked out everything so intelligently. But when you are doing something, you can be in two minds. You can be not so decisive, but He was and He is, always very decisive that He knows what is to be done; right there - this is the point. So, in wisdom you don't have to think, argue. I've seen many people who say, "Mother, you see, we were thinking, then we had vibrations. We didn't know what to do, this, that, how to do, how to correct, how to work it out." Now, I must say this is a state. It is not a state to be achieved, but it's a state. Means you are there. It has to be innately built in yourself, this state of wisdom. But you can also work it out by just concentrating on yourself and trying to find out, "What's the matter with me? What happens to me? Why, why is it I'm like this?" The introspection can help you a lot to be extremely 99 3

 Original Transcript : English wise, but easier method is to worship the principle of innocence within yourself. For example now, we are dealing, supposing, with somebody who is a thief, say. He's a thief. Now, what should you do with a thief? After you have found out whatever was lost, whatever you have, after that, what you have to do is just to forget about it completely. Once it is happened, then have to just forget, not to worry about it too much, "Oh, this has happened, that has happened and how to make this point all right and this gentleman is not all right. This, that." Just forget it. you So the wisdom is also in forgiving. That's why Christ talked about forgiveness. Just forgive. There's no sense in remembering, "This person said so, this person did so, that happened so." Just forget it. And once you start forgetting all these things, you know, you'll remember right things and useless things you'll just forget. You don't remember who has insulted you, who has troubled you, who has been misbehaving. I don't even think about people who have gone out of Sahaja Yoga talking ill about Me, saying things, this, that. It's all right. Let them say whatever they like, I am not bothered. But what bothers Me more, that if they do like this, I don't know what will happen to them. That's the only wisdom part of it, that, you see, when I forgive everyone, I say, "Well, forgive. I have nothing to say." 99 But then also a thought comes in, that if they're doing like this, then what's going to happen to them? They're doing this to someone who is so good, so religious, so highly placed in spiritual life. Then you can't play about but somebody's playing. Then what you have to do is to really forgive because one thing is built-in in Sahaja Yoga that who tried to trouble you they will be troubled also. So try to forgive at least, at least you soothe him down. "All right, I forgive you." So soothe him down. Like this kind of a wisdom we should have, not to get after people, not to pester someone, not to be very strict, not to be very sort of, I should say, pursue the matter. Whatever is it that point you should finish off and just don't worry. I was telling just now that there is a servant, supposing. Now, he steals your money all the time. You know he steals your money. Now what to do if he's stealing your money? One thing is to get out, ask him to get out. Then you have another one. Then again you'll get him out and get another one. It goes on like that because they're poor people; they'll steal if they get it. Now even if you're careful, still they might steal, so what you should do is to just to forgive the person and put the money in such a place that he cannot reach. Finished. As simple as this. You should just find out what does he steal, "Oh, that's all." Then you keep it one side. But don't worry about all the time that, "Now, how am I to save myself from this thief or how am I to punish him?" Just don't think. These incidents are just like a breeze coming and going. These relationships are just like that. There's no depth in it. They're not going to bring any kind of unhappiness or happiness; whatever it is, if you go on lingering about them. So, the first thing is live in the present. The wisdom is in living in the present. Present, we are here, so forget the past. Now, if I say forget the past, one may say, "How to do it? How to forget the past?" Again, I would say, meditation is the only way. You give up your left and you give up your right and you are just standing in the center, enjoying the wisdom, enjoying the joy of your being. So, the best part of our lives is spent in bothering, in getting upset, getting worried, getting after someone. Where is the time? Just think like that. Now supposing somebody says something to Me and then others will say, "Mother, you must do something about it. You must punish that person." Where is the time? We have to awaken the Kundalini of thousands and thousands and thousands, and here we are just worried about something nonsensical. So our wisdom is finished. We have no wisdom at all. Even at the highest level you can see people don't have wisdom. Highest level of realization I've seen people who do not have wisdom in the sense that they want to run away, they just get fed up, take sanyasa, finished, go to Himalayas, live there happily. There's no wisdom in that also. So living in the present you don't also feel tired because you don't think of the past and the future, and you live very well and in great happiness. You improve things and you don't think of the future, 4

 Original Transcript : English what is going to happen to me or anything, and that's how you save lot of troubles of others, as well as yours. So this wisdom is to live in the present, is now... that you ask somebody, "How are you?" "All right." Then he's not in the present. You ask somebody, "Are you enjoying yourself?" Not in the present. You ask somebody, "Are you happy?" "No." Then you are not in the present. You ask someone that, "Are you hungry?" "Maybe, may not be." (Laughter) Maybe they don't know even in the present they're hungry or not. It is so much that they're lost in the past and in the future. That's the sign of unwise behavior, unwise life. If they don't know whether they would like to have their food or not. But those who are really in the present forget all these small, small things. They're just in the present and in the present whatever they have to do, they will do it. This is a very good practice. One has to practice wisdom through living in the present. Just think, "What have I to do just now? What am I to do?" Like you're getting out of the house. Many people will go half way, "Oh my God, I have left my passport!" They'll go back. Then again, some time they'll come out, "My God, I have left my spectacles!" Again go back. Then again they will come back and say, "I have lost this. I should have this." This kind of people are very, very common. So at that time when you are leaving the house, at that time, if you're in the present, then you just think, "What have I to take?" Just say, "One, two, three, four, five, yes. This is what I have to take and this there." That's how you can really establish yourself in wisdom itself, means the wisdom acts by itself. It's a power. Wisdom is a very big power. If you are a wise person, it's a power. It can combat any kind of ignorance, any kind of attacks, any kind of stupidity. It's such a tremendous power that God has given us that we are wise and this wisdom you should try to really, to develop it and mature it properly within ourselves. So today's Shri Ganesha's Puja is there while we should ask for wisdom and for that we have to be in the present. Every way we should be in the present. If you can try, you can be because your Kundalini has been awakened and you can be all the time in the present, but today you should first try and get the Kundalini established in the present. May God bless you! 5

 ENGLISH TRANSLATION (Marathi Talk) The devotion to Shri Ganesha is extremely important in Maharashtra. The Ashta Vinayakas have surrounded this land which sits like the Kundalini in the triangular region formed by three mountains. This is the region in which the Kundalini of the universe resides. Shri Ganesha performs most important functions in our body, in that he controls our mind, intellect and body. The Subuddhi meaning good intelligence is his special gift. One cannot get the Subuddhi by asking. For that wisdom has to be ingrained in the being. How to ingrain it? It is ingrained by learning to live in the present. Now, when you are here in the Puja, wisdom is to tell yourself that if you think about the future, say, whether you will get a bus to return or whether you will get food, the puja will not benefit you. If you think about the past, again it is no use. A way to ingrain wisdom is to introspect, wherever you may be, whether you are in the present or in the past. The reason is the past is over. Wisdom has a number of aspects such as good intelligence, alertness, the presence of mind etc. These are achieved by inculcating the habit of living in the present. We regard Shivaji Maharaj as the great king. So, we should see, as to which of his qualities we can imbibe in the present times, by asking yourself, whether he used to drink liquor, how he behaved etc. We also had Mahatma Gandhi. Although a number of such great lotuses bloomed in Maharashtra it has remained like a puddle. Hence we should find out where we are. So long as you do not have the good intelligence to find this, Shri Ganesha will not work in you. 6. One more sign of Shri Ganesha is that he gives you wisdom. Do you see wisdom any where? The people fight they misappropriate money, they indulge into unholy activities, before Shri Ganesha. The subudddhi is totally absent at that place. Then where is Shri Ganesha? The one with presence of mind will have complete change in his state, you try and you will realize it. You will grow only in the present. Now, see a flower. Does it grow in the past or future? It will grow at this time, won't it? We do not progress, because we think of the past or the future, but never about the present. If we consider present circumstances all problems, whatever are there, will be solved. Problems of rural areas will also be solved. Suppose you want to sow seeds. If you are engrossed in thinking over what was sown last year and what the outcome was, all will be lost. Similarly if you keep planning on sowing in the future, again all will be lost. You should consider what should best be sown today. It is common practice in India to sing praises of past events. It very much exists in Sahaja Yoga. Shri Mataji gave us the self-realization. So, what is next? We are idol over it or involved in other activities. If you think what you have to do for it today, instantly you will get the benefits. It will happen every moment. However, the people do not remember that they had the self realization and it remains as it was. How can you do now, what you were doing before the enlightenment with Divine light? That conditioning should be finished with. Now you should overcome your gullibility with the dharma. How will it go? You have learnt the wrong dharma. You wanted to purchase dharma and there are people who sell it. The dharma cannot be purchased. So you have all the three things wrong. You have got the self-realization in the and now you should do whatever you want to, on the strength of the spirit. present Why do you give to God? Is it God? Anybody places a stone, is God? They will say," Shri Mataji we have faith in Shri Rama. But, he is not here, I am here. So you listen to me! Why they have faith in Shri Rama because he can be pocketed and he will not come and question you. But, I will question if 99

 English Translation (Marathi Talk) you are my devotee. So they are afraid of me and hence do not devote to me, because I am alive. They do not devote to the living God, because he will question and take you to task," Why have you behaved this way?" 99 In the rural areas it is all old and outdated. Out of that, what is truth and what is not, you will know only on joining Sahaja Yoga. Now with this over, another thing has come," We are modern". What does it mean? "We will not oil our heads. We will sing dirty songs before Shri Ganesha's idol. We are non believers." Thus one is wasted due to one way and the other due to the other. Why so? Because children observe that their parents tramp out chanting“ Hari, Hari", to the beats of cymbals.They have been doing this life after life in the warkari sect. What have they achieved? IAnumber of times I have explained to them to stop the waris and take that for which they were going to the waris. However, they cannot understand it. As if intoxicated they go on walking beating the cymbals. It has been brought for you and all should take it. But my advice will not enter into their brains. They are after collecting the Punyas. 99 99 What is in the present situation? Sahaja Yoga is Dharma in the present age and we should accept this Dharma. Fully involving ourselves in this Dharma we should cleanse ourselves. Sahaja Yoga is the essence of all Dharmas. We accept all Dharmas, because accepting one Dharma would trigger quarrels like I am very good and you are bad. Instead learning all that is good from all Dharmas, would avoid quarrels. Where should one start Sahaja Yoga? Even four persons, who would peacefully sit down and understand Sahaja Yoga are not available .So I tell you please take care of the children and tell them not to worry of the past or the future but think of the present so that prosperity will come. Further, it is wrong to build castles in air. Since the past holds you in its fetters the past is also wrong. You should come in the center, in the state of balance. In the state of balance you will see how many powers you will have and what you can do. Maharashtra is the statue of Chaitanya, because the Kundalini ofuniverse resides here. I am tired of trying to convince the people of Maharashtra but they cannot yet understand. When I am in London, the people from Maharashtra write letters full of complaints," He does this, that person does that." I am fed up. It is endless. Amazing that they call themselves Sahaja Yogis and cannot see anything good with others! What will sints feel ? I have come to carry forward their work. I have taken birth in Maharashtra and know the Marathi language> In spite of all this, these people cannot understand. 99 Today you should remember Shri Ganesha and make a resolve that we shall lie in the present. Please do not feel hurt by my talk. I am mother and please understand that I have told the reality. Children are suffering. You should pay attention to it. My blessings to all.

 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT MARATHI TALK मी ह्यांना सांगत होते की आज आपण श्री गणेशाची पूजा करूयात. श्री गणेशाचे फार महत्त्वाचे कार्य आपल्या शरीरात होते. म्हणजे मन, बुद्धी आणि शरीर. सगळ्या गोष्टींवरती ताबा म्हणजे गणेश. गणेशाने जे आपल्याला विशेष दान दिलेले आहे, ते म्हणजे सुबुद्धीचे आहे. सुबुद्धी जी आहे, ती मागून मिळत नाही. कोणी म्हटलं, की मी तुला सुबुद्धी देतो, तर कधीच ऐकले नाही पाहिजे. (इंग्लिशमध्ये बोलल्यानंतर मराठीत बोलतांना मला एकदम शब्दच मिळत नाहीत. दोन्ही भाषेत बोलायचे म्हणजे कंटिन्यूटी नाही येत. विज्डमला मराठीत काय शब्द आहे?) सूज्ञता! सूज्ञता जरा गंभीर शब्द आहे. बरं, त्याला आपण सूज्ञता म्हणतो. सुबुद्धीपेक्षा सूज्ञता. त्या सूज्ञतेला आपण आपल्या अंगामध्ये बाणले पाहिजे. ती बाणायची कशी? तर वर्तमान काळांत रहायला शिकले पाहिजे. हे मी सांगते. आता वर्तमानकाळात, ह्यावेळेला, आपण इथे बसलेलो आहोत. ही पूजा होते आहे. तर ह्या ठिकाणी आपण बसलेलो आहोत. तर ह्यावेळेला सूज्ञता काय आहे? हे की आता पूजा होते आहे. पूजा करायची आहे. पण ह्याचवेळी आपण जर विचार केला पुढचा, की आता मला बस मिळेल की नाही? घरी जेवायला मिळेल की नाही? काहीतरी असे झाले तर! माझे जाणे झाले नाही तर ? किंवा माझ्या मुलाचे असे. हे जर आपण विचार केले तर तुम्हाला पूजा लाभणार नाही. भूतकाळाचा विचार केला, हे असे झाले, तसे झाले, असे केले, तर मग परत घोटाळा होणार. तर हा जो सूज्ञपणा आहे, हा सूज्ञपणा आपल्यामध्ये बाणला पाहिजे. ते बाणण्याची एक पद्धत आहे. प्रत्येक वेळी आपण कुठेही असलो तरी, आता मी वर्तमानात आहे की भूतकाळांत आहे ते पाहिले पाहिजे. कारण भूतकाळ हा संपलेला आहे आणि भविष्यकाळ काही समोर नाही. ह्या सूज्ञतेमध्ये मी अडकले होते. सूज्ञता म्हणता येईल म्हणा, पण तरी सूज्ञामध्ये थोडेसे गहन आहे. त्याच्यात पुष्कळ गोष्टी आहेत. आता इंग्लिशमध्ये एकच शब्द आहे, विज्डम. पण आपल्या मराठी भाषेत त्याला सूज्ञता म्हणता येईल. सुबुद्धी म्हणता येईल, समयसूचकता म्हणता येईल किंवा दक्षता म्हणता येईल. दक्षता म्हणू. दक्ष. असे अनेक शब्द त्याला आहेत. ते सगळे एका गोष्टीने आपल्याला सहज साध्य होतात, जर आपण वर्तमान काळात राहण्याची व्यवस्था केली तर. आता मी असे ऐकले की भयंकर भांडणं करतात लोक. भांडणं होतात. का होतात? कारण तुझ्या वडीलांच्या वडीलांनी ह्याला मारलं. आता ते वडील मेले, त्याचे वडील ही मेले. आता ते पूर्वीचे कशाला काढत बसले ? नाहीतर तुला मी मारेन, तुला मी ठोकेन असं काहीतरी भविष्यकाळाचे बोलत रहायचे. आत्ता ह्यावेळेला काय करणार आहे ? तू माझ्यासमोर आला , ह्यावेळेला मी तुझ्याबरोबर काय करणार आहे? तो विचार नाही. काय केले पाहिजे ह्यावेळेला? त्यावेळेला जी समयसूचकता येते, ती समयसूचकता जी आहे, ती खरी. त्यावेळेला लगेच लक्षात येईल, की हे भांडण मिटवा ह्यावेळेला. चांगला चान्स आहे. संधी मिळाली आहे. ही संधी मिळाली असे म्हंटले, की एकदम मनुष्याच्या डोक्यात येते, केवढी मोठी संधी आहे. इतकी आपल्या पूर्वजांची भांडणं संपली ০

 Original Transcript : Marathi आहेत. उगीचच कोर्टकचेऱ्या कशाला? हे कशाला ? ते कशाला? संपवा. ही जी एक सुबुद्धी आपल्यामध्ये येते त्या समयसूचकतेला, त्यालाच आपण इंग्लिशमध्ये विज्डम असे म्हणतो. पण विज्डममध्ये अनेक अर्थ आहेत. आपल्या मराठी भाषेत ना प्रत्येक ह्याला दहा पर्याय असतील. ही अशी आपली फार समृद्ध भाषा आहे. त्यामुळे एका शब्दात नाही सांगता येत. पण तरीसुद्धा त्या समयाला जागृत असणं, त्या वेळेला जागरूक असणं हे फार गरजेचे आहे. इतर पुष्कळशा गोष्टी आहेत. आता समजा मला घरून निघायचे आहे. तर मी असा विचार की आता मला जायचे आहे, तर मला काय काय पाहिजे ? जिथे मी जाते, तिथे मला काय पाहिजे? पण करायचा, काय होतं. त्यावेळेला लक्षात येत नाही. त्यावेळेला दुसराच विचार असतो. मग गाडीत बसल्यावर लक्षात येतं , की अरे, हे राहिलं, ते राहिलं. तर ही जी एक समयसूचकता आहे, ही जी सूज्ञता आहे, ही आपल्यामध्ये बाणण्यासाठी आपण आता वर्तमान काळात रहायला शिकले पाहिजे. शिवाजी महाराज झाले. ते फार मोठे होते. पण ते वर्तमान काळात रहात होते. आपल्यासारखे नाही त्यांचे. आपण शिवाजी महाराजांना मानतो, पण या वर्तमान काळात आपल्यामध्ये शिवाजी महाराजांचे कोणते आहेत? ते काय दारू प्यायची का? पहिली गोष्ट. त्यांचे वागणे कसे होते ? त्यांचे चरित्र कसे होते? तसं आम्ही त्यांना मानतो, पण त्यांचे चरित्र ह्या वर्तमानकाळात, ह्या आयुष्यात आमच्यात आले आहे का? काहीतरी गुण मागच्या गोष्टीचे महात्म्य घेऊन बसायचे. त्याने काही फायदा होणार नाही. महात्मा गांधी झाले. पुष्कळ झाले. आपल्या देशात फार मोठी मोठी कमळे होऊन गेली. पण डबकेच आहे ना अजून ! बाकी सगळे डबकेच आहे ! तेव्हा आपण आता डबक्यात आहोत की कमळात आहोत ते पाहिलं पाहिजे. ह्यावेळेला आपण कुठे आहोत ते पाहिले पाहिजे. ही पाहण्याची सुबुद्धी जोपर्यंत तुमच्यात येणार नाही तोपर्यंत गणेश तुमच्यात कार्य करीत नाही. गणपतीचे एक लक्षण सांगितले आहे, की ते तुम्हाला? त्या गणपतीसमोर बसून भांडतात लोक. गणपतीच्या नावाने पैसे खातात, हे करतात, ते करतात, म्हणजे सुबुद्धी नाहीच. मग गणपती आहे कुठे तिथे ? नुसता गणपती करून ठेवलेला आहे. समयसूचकतेला, देतात. ते सुबुद्धी देतात. ती कुठे दिसते कां तुम्हाला सूजता त्यावेळेला मनुष्य बरोबर जे लक्षात आणेल, त्या माणसाच्या स्थितीत एकदम अंतर येणार आहे. हे करून बघा तुम्ही आणि वर्तमान काळातच तुमची जी वाढ होणार आहे ती होते. आता फूल आहे. फुलाची वाढ भविष्यात होते की भूतकाळात होते? आता या वेळेला होईल नां? आपली प्रगती एवढ्यासाठीच होत नाही. कारण आपण पुढच्या गोष्टीचा विचार करतो किंवा मागच्या गोष्टीचा विचार करतो. पण सद्यकालीन विचार करीत नाही. सद्यकालीन आपली स्थिती काय आहे ते पाहिले पाहिजे. तर जे काही आहेत ते सर्व प्रश्न सुटतील. आता ग्रामीण प्रश्न आहेत, ते सगळे सुटतील. आज शेती करायची आहे समजा. आज तुम्हाला पेरायचे आहे. तुम्ही म्हणाल, मागच्या वेळेला पेरले होते, असे झाले, तसे झाले. असे करत बसाल तर गेले. किंवा म्हटले, उद्या, परवा पेरीन. तरीही गेले. आत्ता, आजचे जे करायचे ते आत्ता केले पाहिजे.ही एक आपल्या भारतामध्ये एक ट्रम आहे. गेलेल्याचे फार पोवाडे गात रहायचे. अमके झाले, तमके झाले. अरे, तुम्ही काय ? तुम्ही कुठे आहात? सहजयोगामध्ये फारच आवश्यक आहे की, 'माताजींनी आम्हाला जागृती दिली.' मग, त्याच्या पुढे काय ? आता जागृती दिली आता बसलो आहोत आम्ही. आता दुसरे धंदे करायचे. 'आज, आता त्याच्यासाठी मला काय

 Original Transcript : Marathi करायचे?' असा विचार डोक्यात आला, तर तत्क्षणी तुम्हाला फायदा होणार आहे. आता पुष्कळांना जागृती झाली, पुष्कळांना त्याचे फायदे झाले, चमत्कार पाहिले. झाले. पण विसरून जातात कि, 'मला जागृती झालेली आहे.' प्रत्येक क्षणाला 'मला जागृती झालेली आहे.' ह्या क्षणालासुद्धा 'मला जागृती झालेली आहे.' असे लक्षात राहत नाही लोकांच्या. मग तसच वागायला लागतात. परवाच एक गृहस्थ आले. त्यांना जागृती दिली. चांगले पार झालेले. सगळें काही. पण मला म्हणे, 'माताजी, आजकाल मला फार भीती वाटते.' म्हटलं, 'अहो, तुम्ही सहजयोगी. तुम्हाला कसली भीती ? तुम्ही विसरले का?' 'अरे हो, खरंच! विसरलो. मी पार झालो होतो. मला काही भ्यायला नको.' काय म्हणाल ते तुमच्यासमोर असतांनासुद्धा! कारण तुम्ही विसरलात. तुम्हाला तेच मागचेच आठवते. तेव्हा तुम्ही बेकार होता. तेव्हा तुम्ही नालायक होता. तुम्हाला काही समजत नव्हते. जेव्हा तुम्ही अज्ञानी होता. किंवा जेव्हा तुम्ही अंधारात होता किंवा परमात्म्याचा प्रकाश तुमच्यामध्ये आला नव्हता. त्यावेळची गोष्ट ती. आता ती कशी चालवायची पुढे? ते संस्कार कशाला पाहिजेत? आता खेडेगावात गेले की सगळ्यांनी पायावर यायचे. कशाला ? मी कोणी दगडाची मूर्ती तर नाही, की शंभर लोकांना माझ्या पायावर घेईन. पायावर येऊ नका. बरं, तर पैसे ठेवतो. दहा पैसे ठेवले. 'अरे,' म्हटलं, 'पण माताजी पैसे नाही घेत.' 'बरं पंचवीस पैसे घ्या.' हे ह्यंना समजायचेच नाही, की आज सद्यस्थिती काय आहे आणि त्या सद्यस्थितीमध्ये माताजी पैसे घेत नाहीत आणि कोणीही देवाच्या नावावर पैसे द्यायचे नाहीत. पण ते डोक्यातच घुसणार नाही. 'असं कसं माताजी, सगळेच सांगतात, तुझी आई मेली, तर गाय दे म्हणून. आणि तुम्ही आमच्याकडून कसे पैसे घेत नाहीत ?' तर हा धर्मभोळेपणा, हा सुद्धा आता सोडला पाहिजे. आणि तो कसा सुटणार? कारण जो धर्म तुम्ही शिकलेला आहात, तो चुकीचाच शिकलात तुम्ही. ज्याला तुम्ही धर्म म्हणता, तो चुकीचा शिकला. कारण तुम्ही धर्म विकत घ्यायला निघाले आणि विकणारेही आहेत. धर्म विकता येत नाही. विकणारे आहेत आणि तुम्ही विकत घेता. म्हणजे ह्या तिन्ही गोष्टी चुकलेल्या आहेत. सद्यस्थितीमध्ये तुम्हाला आत्मसाक्षात्कार (रियलायझेशन) मिळाला आहे. आता आत्म्याच्या बलावर काय करायचे ते करायचे. ते सोडून ते मागचेच, आमचे संस्कार आहेत माताजी. आता रस्त्यावर एक दगड मांडला. त्या दगडाला शेदूर लावला. बसले एक तिथे. चला दोन पैसे घाला. चार पैसे घाला. कोणीही मनुष्य निघाला, मग देवच आहे. द्या दोन पैसे. अरे , तुम्ही सहजयोगी, तुम्ही कशाला देता ? 'आता माताजी असे आहे नां, आमच्यावर संस्कार आहेत.' कसले कुसंस्कार आहेत! कशाला देता त्या देवाला? तो काही देव आहे कां? कोणीही दगड मांडायचा, तो काय देव आहे कां? पण ह्या सगळ्या आपल्यामध्ये ज्या जुनाट गोष्टी आहेत, त्या काढाव्या लागतील. त्या एकाच प्रकाराने निघतील, की आज सद्यस्थितीत काय आहे. नाहीतर म्हणतील, 'माताजी, आम्ही रामाला मानतो.' अरे, आता राम नाही, आता मी आहे. माझे ऐका. रामाला कशाला मानायचे? कारण राम खिशात घालता येतो. कसेही वागा. दारू पिऊन यायचे आणि म्हणायचे मी रामाचा भक्त आहे. राम काही येऊन विचारणार नाही. पण माझे भक्त झाले तर विचारीन मी. म्हणून घाबरायचे! नको. माताजींची भक्ती नको. कारण माताजी आता जिवंत आहेत नां! मेल्यावर बघू. जिवंत असेपर्यंत मानायचे नाही. कारण जिवंत माणसे विचारतात नां! फैलावर घेतात. 'का बाबा, तू असे का वागलास?' तर हे ग्रामीण भागातले आपले जे काही आहे, जुनाट पद्धतीचे, त्यातले किती सत्य, किती असत्य ते तुम्हाला सहजयोगात येऊन कळेल. त्यामुळे झालंय काय इतके आपण कुजलो आहे असं समजलं 10

 Original Transcript : Marathi पाहिजे. जुनाट नाही. कुजून गेलो आहे तेव्हा आपल्या ज्या काही कल्पना आहेत, आपले जे काही विचार आहेत, धर्माबद्दलचे तेसुद्धा एकदा पाजळून पहायला पाहिजे. बरं, हे सुटले, तर दुसरे आहे, की 'आता आम्ही मॉडर्न झालो.' म्हणजे काय? डोक्याला आम्ही तेल लावणार नाही. मॉडर्न झालो नां! मॉडर्न झालो म्हणजे काय तर काही तरी वाह्यात गाणी गायची. गणपतीसमोर जाऊन घाणेरडी गाणी म्हणायची. मग म्हणायचं आम्ही देवालाच मानत नाही. हे मॉडर्न झाले. म्हणजे एक ते त्याने गेले आणि एक ह्याने गेले. ह्याला कारण काय? तर आजकालची मुले बघतात, हे आपले आईवडील वेड्यासारखे चालले आता हरी, हरी टाळ कुटत. जन्मानुजन्म हे केले, पण काय मिळाले ह्यांना? रोजचे जातात त्या वारकरी पंथात ? किती मी समजावून सांगितले , बाबा, आता वार्या बंद करा. ज्यासाठी वा्या करीत होते, ते घ्या. ते समजतच नाही त्यांना. तो नशा असतो ना तसा. चालले सगळे टाळ कुटत. अहो, आता घ्या. तुमच्यासाठी आणलंय सगळे मी. घेत का नाही. ते डोक्यातच येणार नाही त्यांच्या. पण माताजी असे आहे, आमचे पूर्वज पण तेच करतात. अहो, पण त्यांनी जे केले, जे पुण्य जोडलेले आहे त्याची फळं घ्या ना! अजून पुण्य जोडत बसले आहेत का? म्हणजे आजच्या परिस्थितीत काय आहे ? आजच्या युगामध्ये सहजयोग हा धर्म आहे. हा धर्म आम्ही स्वीकारला पाहिजे. या धर्मात आम्ही उतरून स्वत:ला स्वच्छ करून घेतले पाहिजे. सर्व धर्माचा जो काही अर्क आहे, तो म्हणजे सहजयोग आहे. आम्ही सर्व धर्मांना मानतो. एका धर्माला मानत नाही. कारण एका धर्माला मानले म्हणजे काय, मी फार चांगला तू वाईट! मग झाले, भांडा. पण धर्मांमधला जो काही चांगुलपणा आहे तो जर तुम्ही पहायला शिकले तर भांडणच करणार नाहीत. महाराष्ट्रात म्हणतात, की भाऊबंदकी म्हणजे पाचवीलाच पूजली आहे. त्याला कारण काय आहे? त्याला कारण हे आहे, की आपण नसते आठवत बसतो. जे नको ते आठवत बसतो. पण जर कोणी म्हटले, की सोडा ते. तर अहो, काय सांगता तुम्ही! सोडा. कसं ? आमचं इतकं जुने चालले आहे . सोडायचे कसे ? ते जे काही जुनाट आहे, ते एवढे धरून धरून आपण अशा रीतीने वागतो आहे. आता भाऊबंदकी पण जुनाट झाली. ती सोडून द्या. काही कामाची नाही. त्याने काय फायदे झाले महाराष्ट्राचे? आता आपल्या ग्रामीण भागात मी बघते. मला परिस्थिती फार गंभीर वाटायला लागली. कारण इकडे मॉडर्न झाले, तर दारू पिऊन पडलेत. जे नाही ते असे बेकार गेले. म्हणजे सहजयोग सुरू तरी कुठे करायचा ? चार माणसेसुद्धा अशी मिळणार नाहीत तुम्हाला की जी बसून समजतील या गोष्टी. म्हणून मी म्हणते की आपल्या मुलांना तरी आता जपा. त्यांना तरी आता सांभाळा. त्यांना हे सांगा, की तू मागची पुढची चिंता न करता, आत्ताची चिंता कर. आजच्या चितेत तुम्ही असलात तर बरोबर समृद्धी येईल. नाहीतर समृद्धीसुद्धा येणार नाही. पुढची गोष्ट म्हणजे नुसते मनाचे मनोरे बांधायचे, हे ही बरोबर नाही आणि मागची गोष्ट, ज्याने तुम्हाला जखडून ठेवलंय, तेही बरोबर नाही. तेव्हा मध्यात आले पाहिजे. मध्यमार्गात आले पाहिजे. संतुलनात आले पाहिजे. जेव्हा तुम्ही संतुलनात याल, तेव्हा बघाल तुमच्यात केवढ्या शक्त्या येतील आणि तुम्ही किती कार्य करू शकता. महाराष्ट्र म्हणजे चैतन्याचा नुसता पुतळा आहे. कारण विश्वाची कुंडलिनी इथे आहे. हे लोकांना समजवून समजवून मी थकते. ह्या गोष्टी माझे ऐकतच नाहीत. त्यांच्या लक्षातच ही गोष्ट येत नाही. अजूनही मला इतके आश्चर्य वाटते, मी लंडनला असते आणि महाराष्ट्रातून पत्रं, 'हा मनुष्य असा, तो मनुष्य तसा'. माझे कान किटले 11

 Original Transcript : Marathi नी डोळे मिटले. ते संपतच नाही. दसऱ्याचे चांगले दिसतच नाही. म्हणजे ते सगळे लोक सहजयोगी आहेत ! आश्चर्याची गोष्ट आहे. तर अशा रीतीने सहजयोग चालला, तर त्या साधुसंतांना काय वाटणार आहे मला सांगा? त्यांचे कार्य पूर्ण करण्यासाठी आम्ही आलो आहोत. तुमच्या महाराष्ट्रांत जन्म घेतला. मराठी भाषा आम्हाला येते. सगळे काही असूनही लोकांना काहीही समजत नाही की केवढे मोठे आम्ही घेऊन आलो आहे. आता हे पंचावन्न देशातले लोक आहेत. ते आले धडपडत तुमच्या देशात. येऊन तरी काय? तुमच्यावर त्यांचा काही परिणाम होतो आहे का? बघता का हे कसे लोक आहेत ते. हे परदेशातून आले तुमच्या देशात. ते कशाला आले? का आले? हे बघता का तुम्ही? हे काय करतात? ह्यांना कसला एवढा आनंद झाला आहे? ह्यांनी काय मिळवलं? आपणही तसे मिळविले पाहिजे. असा विचार एक साधारण, समजूतदार माणसाला आला पाहिजे. समज येण्यासाठी फक्त एक गोष्ट करा, की आज आम्ही इथे बसलो आहोत, आज आम्हाला काय केले पाहिजे? आत्ता काय करायचे आहे ? ह्यावेळेला काय करायचे ? ही वेळ कसली ? ही वेळच महत्त्वाची आहे. तेच माणसाला समजत नाही, म्हणून सगळे घोटाळे आहेत. तर आज श्री गणेशाला स्मरून निश्चय करायचा, की आम्ही वर्तमानकाळात राह . मला असे होते, की एक भाषा बोलतांना दुसरी भाषा बदलायची म्हणजे त्रास होतो. पण एका भाषेत शुद्ध बोलते मी. पण ती जर भाषा सुटली मग मला जमतच नाही. कारण शुद्ध आहे नां सगळे. असले पाहिजे. मिक्श्चर करता येत नाही. शुद्ध भाषेतसुद्धा शुद्ध असायला पाहिजे. त्यामुळे ते मला जमत नाही. विशेष शुद्धता असायला पाहिजे. ती एकाच गोष्टीने येते ती म्हणजे मी ह्यावेळेला काय करते आहे? मी ह्यावेळेला काय विचार करते? अगदी तुम्ही जरासे लक्ष दिले ना पटकन सगळे बदलून जाईल. तुम्हाला आश्चर्य वाटेल, तुमच्या सवयी सुटतील सगळे काही होईल. त्यावेळी फक्त 'मी ह्यावेळेला काय करते ?' माझ्या बोलण्याचे वाईट वाटून घ्यायचे नाही. मी आई आहे. जे खरे ते सांगितले. हे लक्षात घ्यावे आणि आपले आयुष्य सुधारावे. आपले आयुष्य काय आहे? मुलाबाळांची काय दैना होतेय. ते बघायला पाहिजे. त्याकडे लक्ष द्यायला पाहिजे. परत मी येणारच आहे. निदान शेरे गावचा तरी उद्धार होऊ देत . त्याच्यात तुम्ही सगळ्यांनी मला मदत करावी. सहजयोगाचा योग घ्यावा आणि मेहनत करावी. आपली कुंडलिनी तर जागृत तर मी करून देईन पण त्यानंतर, त्या जागृतीनंतर तुम्हाला अभ्यासाने ती कुंडलिनी बरोबर बसवली पाहिजे. इतके हे दुसर्या देशातले लोक पार झाले. ज्यांना गणपतीचे नाव माहीत नव्हते. गणपतीचा ग माहीत नव्हता. आपल्या इथे अष्टविनायक ह्या पृथ्वीमातेने आणून ठेवले आहेत, तेव्हा आपण काय करतो ते बघायला पाहिजे. ह्या गोष्टींकडे लक्ष द्यायला पाहिजे. फार महत्त्वाची गोष्ट आहे. त्याने आपल्या सबंध देशाचेच मुळी भले होणार आहे. पण निदान आधी स्वत:चे भले करून घ्या. किती सोपे आहे, हे बघा तुम्ही! मी काही कठीण काम सांगितलेले नाही, की डोक्यावर उभे रहा, की हिमालयावर जा. काही नाही. सहज साधी गोष्ट आहे. सहजयोग करा. पहिल्यांदा कुंडलिनी जागृत करून घ्या. आणि वर्तमानकाळात रहायला शिका. मग मी येऊन बघते काय होतं ते ! आशा आहे, पुढच्या वर्षी इथे सगळी भांडणं, तंटे मिटून सगळे सुरळीत होईल. लोक चांगले राहतील. सगळ्यांना माझा अनंत आशीर्वाद ! 12

 HINDI TRANSLATION (English Talk) Scanned from Hindii Chaitanya Lahiri महाराष्ट्र में श्री गणेश की पूजा के महत्व की हमें समझना है। अष्टविनायक (आठ गणपति) इस क्षेत्र के इर्द-गिर्द है और महाराष्ट्र के त्रिकोण बनाते हुए तीन पर्वत कुण्डलिनी के समान हैं। पूरे विश्व की कुण्डलिनी इस क्षेत्र में निवास करती है श्री गणेश द्वारा चैतन्यित इस पृथ्वी का अपना ही स्पन्दन तथा चैतन्य है। महाराष्ट्र की सर्वात्तम विशेषता यह है कि यह बहुत बाद में कभी भी आप सुगमता से यह विवेक उनमें नहीं भर सकते। तब इसके लिए आपको वहुत परिश्रम करना पड़ेगा। सहजयोग में यह विवेक तजी से कार्य कर रहा है और लोग वहुत बुद्धिमान होते जा रहे हैं। किसी भी मार्ग से हम चलें, हम पात हैं कि हमारो सारी समस्याएं मानव की ही देन है। जीवन में महत्वपूर्ण भूमिका है कि बाह्य जगत में जा भी प्रवृत्तियां या फैशन आयें आप उनसे प्रभावित नहीं हाते। आप अन्दर से परिवर्तित होते हैं। तब आप पूर्णतया जान जाते हैं कि दूसरे लोगों से क्या आशा की जाती उनसे किस प्रकार व्यवहार किया जाए, किस प्रकार बातचीत की जाए और उनके साथ किस सीमा तक चला जाए। यह सव विवेक से प्राप्त होता है। सहजयाग में आप सब अतियोग्य लाग विवेक को डतनी ही सुन्दर चित्त प्रदान करता है। श्री गणेश के चैतन्य प्रवाह के कारण चित्त एकाग्रित हो जाता है। पवित्रता तथा मंगल प्रदान करने के लिए श्री गणेश की सृष्टि हुईं। गणेश ही सभी का शुद्ध करते हैं । ये इनकी अवाधिता है जो आपको शुद्ध करती है तथा आपके चित्त को विचलित करने वाले अह तथा बन्धनों का दूर करती है। अच्छे चित्त वाले लोग बहुत से अच्छे कार्य कर सकते हैं जैसे अच्छी कलाकृतियाँ, अच्छा गणित और अच्छा संगीत। इन सब के लिए पूरे चित्त की आवश्यकता होती है। अच्छा चित्त श्री गणेश की देन है वे विवेक के दाता हैं। विवेक ही धर्म बन जाता है तथा अपके अस्तित्व का अंगे-प्रत्यंग बन जाता है। है तथा उन्हें क्या करना चाहिए। हैं। आपने बहुत कुछ पा लिया है और आप सभी कुछ जानते हैं। इस सबके बावजूद भी हमें दूसरों से व्यवहार तो करना ही है। किसी को रोकना नहीं हैं और न ही कोई कठोर या दु:खदायी बात कहनी है। यदि आप सहजयांग को फैलाने का प्रयत्न कर रहे हैं तो एक ही मार्ग है कि हम सबकी आप बुद्धिमान हो जाते हैं। यद्यपि वे शिशु हैं फिर भी अति परिपक्व हैं। सहजयोगी के अन्दर क्योंकि श्री गणेश जागृत होते करुणापूर्वक देखभाल करें। हैं इसलिए विवेक उनका अन्तर्जात गुण होता है। एक सन्तुलन एक उत्थान, वह व्यक्ति प्राप्त करता है तथा वह समझता है गणेश के माध्यम से संभव है। वे निर्विकल्प में हैं। उन्हें कोई कि यह उत्थान उसके लिए, उसके देश तथा पूरे विश्व के लिए हितकर है। वह सहजयोग के महत्व को जानता है। यह विवेक हमारे अन्दर रचित है और अपने अन्दर विवेक के इस सरोत का उपयोग सीखना हमारे लिए आवश्यक है। सहजयोग होते हैं। यह एक अवस्था है जो आपके अन्तस में बनी होनी में व्यक्ति विवेक प्रवाहित करने लगता है तथा इसे समझने भी लगता है। व्यक्ति अपनी मूर्खतापूर्ण बातें छोड़ देता है। श्री गणेश ही आध्यात्मिक जीवन की नींव के पत्थर हैं। इसी तो आप इस अवस्था को प्राप्त कर सकते हैं। अन्तरदर्शन कारण मरी बहुत इच्छा है कि अपने बच्चों के लिए हम उचित विद्यालय खोज सकें। उन्हें अच्छी शिक्षा मिले तथा उनकी उचित देखभाल हो क्यांकि उनका गणेश तत्व उनमें पहले से ही है। हमें केवल इसका पोषण करना है देखभाल करनी है तथा इसे बढ़ाना है। एक बार यदि एसा हो जाए तो बच्चे सुरक्षित हैं और उन्हें कोई हानि नहीं पहुंचा सकता। गलतं चीजों स्वयं में विश्वास भी आना आवश्यक है। यह भी ओरी प्रश्न नहीं करना। न उन्हें कोई चिन्ता है और न कोई मोह। कांई कार्य करते हुए आप दो-विचारों में हो सकते हैं। हो सकता हैं ही कि आप दृढ़ न हां। परन्तु वे (श्री गणेश) सदा बहुत दृढ़ चाहिए। आप स्वयं पर चित्त को केन्द्रित कर यदि पता लगाने का प्रयत्न करें कि मेरे साथ क्या समस्या हेख में ऐसा क्यों हूँ? आपका बहुत सहायक होगा। अपने अन्दर के अवाधिता तत्व की पूजा करना सुगम मार्ग हैं। मान लोजिए हम किसी चोर से व्यवहार कर रहे हैं। तो हमें क्या करना चाहिए? उसके दोष का भूल जाना सर्वोत्तम है। इसकी चिन्ता नहीं करनी है। भूल जाइए कि इस व्यक्ति को ठीक करना है। भूल जाना ही विवेक है। एक बार जब आप दोषों को भूलने लगेंगे तो अच्छी बातें आपको याद रहेंगी। भूल जाइए किसने आपका अपमान किया, आपको कष्ट दिया या आपसे अनुचित बतांव किया। को वे कभी आत्मसात नहीं करेंगे। यदि वाल्यकाल में ही आप उन्हें कुण्डलिनी का ज्ञान तथा विवेक बुदझ्धि नहीं दे सकते तो 13

 Hindi Translation (English Talk) लेते हैं। वर्तमान में रहते हुए आप थकते नहीं क्योंकि न तो आप भूत की सोचते हैं न भविष्य की। प्रसन्नतापूर्वक रहते हुए आप चीजों को सुधारते हैं। इस प्रकार आप अपने तथा दूसरा को कठिनाइयों से बचाते हैं। विवक का अभ्यास व्यक्ति का करना चाहिए और पूर्णतया वर्तमान में रहने का भी उदाहरणतया घर से बाहर जाते हुए आधे रास्ते जाकर बहुत से लोगों को याद आएगा कि वे कुछ भूल गए हैं। इसके लिए वे वापिस आयंग आदि..... कुछ भी ने सहजयोग में एक बात निश्चित है कि आपको दुःख देनं वाले स्वयं कष्ट पायेंगे। अत: उन्हें क्षमा कर दीजिए। उन्हें शांत कीजिए। इस प्रकार की विवेक बुद्धि हममें होनी चाहिए। लोगों के पीछे नहीं पड़ना है किसी को भयभीत नहीं करना है और न ही किसी से कठोरता से व्यवहार करना है। ध्यान ही एक एसा मार्ग है जिसके द्वारा आप अपना दायां और बायां (झुकाव) त्याग कर अपने मध्य में स्थिर हो जाते हैं तथा अपने अस्तित्व तथा विवेक का आनन्द लेते हैं। अपने जीवन का एक अहं भाग हम कष्ट परेशानियाँ झेलने तथा दूसरों को परेशान करने में व्यतीत करते हैं। हमारे पास समय है कहाँ? उस समय यदि आप वर्तमान में हों ता आदि भूलें। विवेक स्वतः कार्य करता है। यह एक महान शक्ति हैं। यह किसी भी प्रकार की भूल, हमले या मूर्खता का सामना कर सकता है। अत: हमें चाहिए कि विवेक को विकसित कर इसे परिपक्व करें। हजारों लोगों की कृण्डलिनियां हमें जागृत करनी हैं। पर हम तो व्यर्थ की चीजों में फंसे हुए हैं। हमारा विवेक समाप्त ही जाता है। सर्वोच्च स्तर के लोगों में भी विवेक नहीं है क्योंकि वे भी पलायन करना चाहते हैं। तंग आकर सन्यास ले आज की पूजा में हमें विवेक की याचना करनी चाहिए तथा इसके लिए हमें वर्तमान में रहना होगा। परमात्मा आपको धन्य करें। 14



----------------------

19911215_Shri Ganesha Puja_Shere.pdf-page0.txt 
 Shri Ganesha Puja
Date
15th December 1991
:
Place
Shere
Type
Puja
Speech
Language
English & Marathi
CONTENTS
| Transcript
|
02 - 05
English
08 - 12
Marathi
Hindi
|| Translation
06 - 07
English
13 - 14
Hindi
Marathi
 19911215_Shri Ganesha Puja_Shere.pdf-page1.txt 
 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT
ENGLISH TALK
Today we are really sitting in a very close relationship with the nature. The whole thing, as you
can see very clearly, is done by villagers and in a very simple way and I'm sure you all must be
enjoying it very much. (Applause)
Today being the first puja in Maharashtra, we'll have to do Ganesha Puja, but one has to
understand how it is so important in Maharashtra that people worship Ganesha. As you know there are
Ashtavinayakas, eight Ganeshas are there, around this area, and this triangle of Maharashtra, which
has got on one side one big mountain. On the other side we have another mountain, which, of course,
is not in Maharashtra. And also on top we have another mountain. So like a triangle, which is made
like a Mooladhara, means the Kundalini itself. So the Kundalini of the whole world resides in this
area. That's why it is called, we should say, as Maharashtra, is the country which is very great, the
nation which is very great. But I don't know how far Maharashtrians realize that they are sitting in the
land of Maharashtra.
This land, which is vibrated by Shri Ganesha, has its own simplicity, has its own vibrations, a
different style, a different type. But the best part of Maharashtra is that it gives you a very good
attention. With Ganesha so much vibrating, the attention becomes very concentrated, and this
concentration helps you in so many ways, and that is why it is said that Ganesha was created to spread
or to emit auspiciousness and holiness. Actually, if there is holiness there is auspiciousness. But
Ganesha is actually the one who cleanses everything, cleanses everything, because it is innocence and
the innocence that cleanses you takes away all kinds of conditionings and egos that are distracting
6.
your attention.
So the attention, which is so wobbly otherwise, in other places, can settle down very well in
Maharashtra because of Shri Ganesha's blessings that this country has, that people have very good
attention. With that good attention they can really do so many things like now, for example, you can
see the software; good mathematics. They're very good at music because all these things require
tremendous attention. Art, dancing, anything which requires tremendous attention that has to come
only through Ganesha. Because they say that Ganesha is a giver of wisdom. He's a giver of wisdom.
Means just His wisdom becomes a dharma, becomes a part and parcel of your being. You become just
wise. Now somebody may ask, "Mother how to become wise?" It's very difficult to say - how to
become wise. It is just that it happens that you become wise. So, though He's a child, He's so matured.
He's so wise. And He's not only that, but He emits wisdom and this wisdom is a innate quality of
anyone who is a Sahaja Yogi, because in him, also, Shri Ganesha has been awakened.
So he becomes a wise person, very wise, and with wisdom what does he achieve? He achieves a
balance, a proper ascent and also he understands that this ascent is for his benevolence, for the
benevolence of his country, benevolence of the whole world. He understands the importance of
Sahaja Yoga. Without this wisdom, one cannot understand. And this wisdom is within us, just
absolutely, innately built in. Only thing is we have to use the storehouse of this wisdom that is within
6-
6.
us.
Of course, with Sahaja Yoga, it starts emitting and you start feeling and you start understanding
what His wisdom is. You give up all your stupid, childish things. You give up all your attachments.
You give up many of your, say, things that you don't like which doesn't behoove you. You feel that you
should give up, but you cannot. But, with Sahaja Yoga, it just happens automatically and you just see
in your light what is needed, what is not needed. In that wisdom you throw away whatever is wrong.
2
 19911215_Shri Ganesha Puja_Shere.pdf-page2.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
So what a great work this Ganesha has to do within ourselves. This manifestation of Ganesha
within us is very important, I think, not that it is only the basis, but also the foundation stone of
spiritual life is Shri Ganesha. That's why I've been very anxious that we should find out proper schools
for our children. They should have proper education and they should be looked after because their
Ganesh Tattva is already there. Only thing we have to nourish it, we have to look after it and make it
grow. Once that happens then children are safe. Then nothing, nothing can harm them. Nothing they
will absorb which is wrong. They will never be again in the wrong path. But if from very childhood, if
you've never had this kind of training or this kind of understanding about Kundalini or about the
wisdom part of it, you can never, later on, easily assimilate it. For that, you really require a great effort
and understanding that you have to have this; it's so beautiful; you must get this attention and you must
get this innocence within. With Sahaja Yoga, as you see, it's working out very fast and people are
getting really very wise and I can see the wisdom writ large on their faces.
In this wisdom what do we find here? You see, on any line that we move, we can find that most of
our problems are coming from human beings, because ecological problem, or any problem we think
of, comes from human beings. Or other problems that you have in your own country, as you
that there are such problems that it's sort of endless and they cannot change them. You feel very nice
sitting underneath this because you are fed up with the cement that you have and the problems it
causes to you and the way it is now becoming very artificial.
have
seen,
But in these circumstances, one has to understand that the wisdom plays such a part in life that
whatever may happen outside, whatever may be the trend, whatever may be the fashion, whatever
may be the people are all changing into, you do not change. You change within. Once you are changed
within, then you have full idea as to what is expected of others, what they should do, what you are
doing and how to deal with them and how to talk to them, how to tell them, how far to go with them;
everything. All this comes through wisdom.
6.
In Sahaja Yoga, as you know, you are very capable people, you have achieved a lot, you
everything, you know all about chakras. You know practically everything. I don't have to tell you
anything. Despite all that, one should have also the wisdom how to deal with others, how to talk to
others, how to behave towards others, how not to control anyone. Not to say something that will be
rather harsh or hurting. Because, if you are trying to spread Sahaja Yoga, this is the only way we can go
forward, is to look after everyone with great compassion.
know
Now, we might think that wisdom is there with us and we know how to do so many things with
our wisdom, and now we are absolutely wise. I agree, with Sahaja Yogis, now they have become
really very, very wise and they know how to use their wisdom. But still, faith in themselves has to be
really on a Nirvikalpa state. That is only possible also Shri Ganesha because He is in Nirvikalpa. He
has no vikalpas, nothing. He doesn't have to question anything. He doesn't have to ask for anything.
He is just there. And He's in complete Nirvikalpa; complete; absolutely into a state where He is not at
all attached, nor is He worrying about things, nothing of the kind. He is just in Nirvikalpa and in that
Nirvikalpa He worships Mother.
Small, small stories can show you how He was so sure of Himself, how He had courage and how
He worked out everything so intelligently. But when you are doing something, you can be in two
minds. You can be not so decisive, but He was and He is, always very decisive that He knows what is
to be done; right there - this is the point.
So, in wisdom you don't have to think, argue. I've seen many people who say, "Mother, you see,
we were thinking, then we had vibrations. We didn't know what to do, this, that, how to do, how to
correct, how to work it out." Now, I must say this is a state. It is not a state to be achieved, but it's a
state. Means you are there. It has to be innately built in yourself, this state of wisdom. But you can also
work it out by just concentrating on yourself and trying to find out, "What's the matter with me? What
happens to me? Why, why is it I'm like this?" The introspection can help you a lot to be extremely
99
3
 19911215_Shri Ganesha Puja_Shere.pdf-page3.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
wise, but easier method is to worship the principle of innocence within yourself.
For example now, we are dealing, supposing, with somebody who is a thief, say. He's a thief.
Now, what should you do with a thief? After you have found out whatever was lost, whatever you
have, after that, what you have to do is just to forget about it completely. Once it is happened, then
have to just forget, not to worry about it too much, "Oh, this has happened, that has happened and how
to make this point all right and this gentleman is not all right. This, that." Just forget it.
you
So the wisdom is also in forgiving. That's why Christ talked about forgiveness. Just forgive.
There's no sense in remembering, "This person said so, this person did so, that happened so." Just
forget it. And once you start forgetting all these things, you know, you'll remember right things and
useless things you'll just forget. You don't remember who has insulted you, who has troubled you, who
has been misbehaving. I don't even think about people who have gone out of Sahaja Yoga talking ill
about Me, saying things, this, that. It's all right. Let them say whatever they like, I am not bothered.
But what bothers Me more, that if they do like this, I don't know what will happen to them. That's the
only wisdom part of it, that, you see, when I forgive everyone, I say, "Well, forgive. I have nothing to
say."
99
But then also a thought comes in, that if they're doing like this, then what's going to happen to
them? They're doing this to someone who is so good, so religious, so highly placed in spiritual life.
Then you can't play about but somebody's playing. Then what you have to do is to really forgive
because one thing is built-in in Sahaja Yoga that who tried to trouble you they will be troubled also. So
try to forgive at least, at least you soothe him down. "All right, I forgive you." So soothe him down.
Like this kind of a wisdom we should have, not to get after people, not to pester someone, not to be
very strict, not to be very sort of, I should say, pursue the matter. Whatever is it that point you should
finish off and just don't worry.
I was telling just now that there is a servant, supposing. Now, he steals your money all the time.
You know he steals your money. Now what to do if he's stealing your money? One thing is to get out,
ask him to get out. Then you have another one. Then again you'll get him out and get another one. It
goes on like that because they're poor people; they'll steal if they get it. Now even if you're careful, still
they might steal, so what you should do is to just to forgive the person and put the money in such a
place that he cannot reach. Finished. As simple as this. You should just find out what does he steal,
"Oh, that's all." Then you keep it one side. But don't worry about all the time that, "Now, how am I to
save myself from this thief or how am I to punish him?" Just don't think. These incidents are just like a
breeze coming and going. These relationships are just like that. There's no depth in it. They're not
going to bring any kind of unhappiness or happiness; whatever it is, if you go on lingering about them.
So, the first thing is live in the present. The wisdom is in living in the present. Present, we are
here, so forget the past. Now, if I say forget the past, one may say, "How to do it? How to forget the
past?" Again, I would say, meditation is the only way. You give up your left and you give up your right
and you are just standing in the center, enjoying the wisdom, enjoying the joy of your being.
So, the best part of our lives is spent in bothering, in getting upset, getting worried, getting after
someone. Where is the time? Just think like that. Now supposing somebody says something to Me and
then others will say, "Mother, you must do something about it. You must punish that person." Where is
the time? We have to awaken the Kundalini of thousands and thousands and thousands, and here we
are just worried about something nonsensical.
So our wisdom is finished. We have no wisdom at all. Even at the highest level you can see people
don't have wisdom. Highest level of realization I've seen people who do not have wisdom in the sense
that they want to run away, they just get fed up, take sanyasa, finished, go to Himalayas, live there
happily. There's no wisdom in that also.
So living in the present you don't also feel tired because you don't think of the past and the future,
and you live very well and in great happiness. You improve things and you don't think of the future,
4
 19911215_Shri Ganesha Puja_Shere.pdf-page4.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
what is going to happen to me or anything, and that's how you save lot of troubles of others, as well as
yours. So this wisdom is to live in the present, is now... that you ask somebody, "How are you?" "All
right." Then he's not in the present. You ask somebody, "Are you enjoying yourself?" Not in the
present. You ask somebody, "Are you happy?" "No." Then you are not in the present. You ask
someone that, "Are you hungry?" "Maybe, may not be." (Laughter) Maybe they don't know even in
the
present they're hungry or not. It is so much that they're lost in the past and in the future. That's the
sign of unwise behavior, unwise life. If they don't know whether they would like to have their food or
not. But those who are really in the present forget all these small, small things. They're just in the
present and in the present whatever they have to do, they will do it.
This is a very good practice. One has to practice wisdom through living in the present. Just think,
"What have I to do just now? What am I to do?" Like you're getting out of the house. Many people will
go half way, "Oh my God, I have left my passport!" They'll go back. Then again, some time they'll
come out, "My God, I have left my spectacles!" Again go back. Then again they will come back and
say, "I have lost this. I should have this." This kind of people are very, very common. So at that time
when you are leaving the house, at that time, if you're in the present, then you just think, "What have I
to take?" Just say, "One, two, three, four, five, yes. This is what I have to take and this there." That's
how you can really establish yourself in wisdom itself, means the wisdom acts by itself. It's a power.
Wisdom is a very big power. If you are a wise person, it's a power. It can combat any kind of ignorance,
any kind of attacks, any kind of stupidity. It's such a tremendous power that God has given us that we
are wise and this wisdom you should try to really, to develop it and mature it properly within
ourselves.
So today's Shri Ganesha's Puja is there while we should ask for wisdom and for that we have to be
in the present. Every way we should be in the present. If you can try, you can be because your
Kundalini has been awakened and you can be all the time in the present, but today you should first try
and get the Kundalini established in the present.
May God bless you!
5
 19911215_Shri Ganesha Puja_Shere.pdf-page5.txt 
 ENGLISH TRANSLATION
(Marathi Talk)
The devotion to Shri Ganesha is extremely important in Maharashtra. The Ashta Vinayakas have
surrounded this land which sits like the Kundalini in the triangular region formed by three mountains.
This is the region in which the Kundalini of the universe resides.
Shri Ganesha performs most important functions in our body, in that he controls our mind,
intellect and body. The Subuddhi meaning good intelligence is his special gift. One cannot get the
Subuddhi by asking. For that wisdom has to be ingrained in the being. How to ingrain it? It is
ingrained by learning to live in the present. Now, when you are here in the Puja, wisdom is to tell
yourself that if you think about the future, say, whether you will get a bus to return or whether you will
get food, the puja will not benefit you. If you think about the past, again it is no use. A way to ingrain
wisdom is to introspect, wherever you may be, whether you are in the present or in the past. The
reason is the past is over.
Wisdom has a number of aspects such as good intelligence, alertness, the presence of mind etc.
These are achieved by inculcating the habit of living in the present. We regard Shivaji Maharaj as the
great king. So, we should see, as to which of his qualities we can imbibe in the present times, by asking
yourself, whether he used to drink liquor, how he behaved etc. We also had Mahatma Gandhi.
Although a number of such great lotuses bloomed in Maharashtra it has remained like a puddle.
Hence we should find out where we are. So long as you do not have the good intelligence to find this,
Shri Ganesha will not work in you.
6.
One more sign of Shri Ganesha is that he gives you wisdom. Do you see wisdom any where? The
people fight they misappropriate money, they indulge into unholy activities, before Shri Ganesha.
The subudddhi is totally absent at that place. Then where is Shri Ganesha?
The one with presence of mind will have complete change in his state, you try and you will
realize it. You will grow only in the present. Now, see a flower. Does it grow in the past or future? It
will grow at this time, won't it? We do not progress, because we think of the past or the future, but
never about the present. If we consider present circumstances all problems, whatever are there, will be
solved. Problems of rural areas will also be solved. Suppose you want to sow seeds. If you are
engrossed in thinking over what was sown last year and what the outcome was, all will be lost.
Similarly if you keep planning on sowing in the future, again all will be lost. You should consider
what should best be sown today.
It is common practice in India to sing praises of past events. It very much exists in Sahaja Yoga.
Shri Mataji gave us the self-realization. So, what is next? We are idol over it or involved in other
activities. If you think what you have to do for it today, instantly you will get the benefits. It will
happen every moment. However, the people do not remember that they had the self realization and it
remains as it was. How can you do now, what you were doing before the enlightenment with Divine
light? That conditioning should be finished with.
Now you should overcome your gullibility with the dharma. How will it go? You have learnt the
wrong dharma. You wanted to purchase dharma and there are people who sell it. The dharma cannot
be purchased. So you have all the three things wrong. You have got the self-realization in the
and now you should do whatever you want to, on the strength of the spirit.
present
Why do you give to God? Is it God? Anybody places a stone, is God? They will say," Shri Mataji
we have faith in Shri Rama. But, he is not here, I am here. So you listen to me! Why they have faith in
Shri Rama because he can be pocketed and he will not come and question you. But, I will question if
99
 19911215_Shri Ganesha Puja_Shere.pdf-page6.txt 
 English Translation (Marathi Talk)
you are my devotee. So they are afraid of me and hence do not devote to me, because I am alive. They
do not devote to the living God, because he will question and take you to task," Why have you
behaved this way?"
99
In the rural areas it is all old and outdated. Out of that, what is truth and what is not, you will know
only on joining Sahaja Yoga.
Now with this over, another thing has come," We are modern". What does it mean? "We will not
oil our heads. We will sing dirty songs before Shri Ganesha's idol. We are non believers." Thus one is
wasted due to one way and the other due to the other. Why so? Because children observe that their
parents tramp out chanting“ Hari, Hari", to the beats of cymbals.They have been doing this life after
life in the warkari sect. What have they achieved? IAnumber of times I have explained to them to stop
the waris and take that for which they were going to the waris. However, they cannot understand it. As
if intoxicated they go on walking beating the cymbals. It has been brought for you and all should take
it. But my advice will not enter into their brains. They are after collecting the Punyas.
99
99
What is in the present situation? Sahaja Yoga is Dharma in the present age and we should accept
this Dharma. Fully involving ourselves in this Dharma we should cleanse ourselves. Sahaja Yoga is
the essence of all Dharmas. We accept all Dharmas, because accepting one Dharma would trigger
quarrels like I am very good and you are bad. Instead learning all that is good from all Dharmas, would
avoid quarrels.
Where should one start Sahaja Yoga? Even four persons, who would peacefully sit down and
understand Sahaja Yoga are not available .So I tell you please take care of the children and tell them
not to worry of the past or the future but think of the present so that prosperity will come. Further, it is
wrong to build castles in air. Since the past holds you in its fetters the past is also wrong. You should
come in the center, in the state of balance. In the state of balance you will see how many powers you
will have and what you can do.
Maharashtra is the statue of Chaitanya, because the Kundalini ofuniverse resides here. I am tired
of trying to convince the people of Maharashtra but they cannot yet understand. When I am in
London, the people from Maharashtra write letters full of complaints," He does this, that person does
that." I am fed up. It is endless. Amazing that they call themselves Sahaja Yogis and cannot see
anything good with others!
What will sints feel ? I have come to carry forward their work. I have taken birth in Maharashtra
and know the Marathi language> In spite of all this, these people cannot understand.
99
Today you should remember Shri Ganesha and make a resolve that we shall lie in the present.
Please do not feel hurt by my talk. I am mother and please understand that I have told the reality.
Children are suffering. You should pay attention to it.
My blessings to all.
 19911215_Shri Ganesha Puja_Shere.pdf-page7.txt 
 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT
MARATHI TALK
मी ह्यांना सांगत होते की आज आपण श्री गणेशाची पूजा करूयात. श्री गणेशाचे फार महत्त्वाचे कार्य
आपल्या शरीरात होते. म्हणजे मन, बुद्धी आणि शरीर. सगळ्या गोष्टींवरती ताबा म्हणजे गणेश. गणेशाने जे
आपल्याला विशेष दान दिलेले आहे, ते म्हणजे सुबुद्धीचे आहे. सुबुद्धी जी आहे, ती मागून मिळत नाही. कोणी
म्हटलं, की मी तुला सुबुद्धी देतो, तर कधीच ऐकले नाही पाहिजे. (इंग्लिशमध्ये बोलल्यानंतर मराठीत बोलतांना
मला एकदम शब्दच मिळत नाहीत. दोन्ही भाषेत बोलायचे म्हणजे कंटिन्यूटी नाही येत. विज्डमला मराठीत काय
शब्द आहे?) सूज्ञता! सूज्ञता जरा गंभीर शब्द आहे. बरं, त्याला आपण सूज्ञता म्हणतो. सुबुद्धीपेक्षा सूज्ञता. त्या
सूज्ञतेला आपण आपल्या अंगामध्ये बाणले पाहिजे.
ती बाणायची कशी? तर वर्तमान काळांत रहायला शिकले पाहिजे. हे मी सांगते. आता वर्तमानकाळात,
ह्यावेळेला, आपण इथे बसलेलो आहोत. ही पूजा होते आहे. तर ह्या ठिकाणी आपण बसलेलो आहोत. तर
ह्यावेळेला सूज्ञता काय आहे? हे की आता पूजा होते आहे. पूजा करायची आहे. पण ह्याचवेळी आपण जर विचार
केला पुढचा, की आता मला बस मिळेल की नाही? घरी जेवायला मिळेल की नाही? काहीतरी असे झाले तर!
माझे जाणे झाले नाही तर ? किंवा माझ्या मुलाचे असे. हे जर आपण विचार केले तर तुम्हाला पूजा लाभणार नाही.
भूतकाळाचा विचार केला, हे असे झाले, तसे झाले, असे केले, तर मग परत घोटाळा होणार. तर हा जो सूज्ञपणा
आहे, हा सूज्ञपणा आपल्यामध्ये बाणला पाहिजे. ते बाणण्याची एक पद्धत आहे. प्रत्येक वेळी आपण कुठेही
असलो तरी, आता मी वर्तमानात आहे की भूतकाळांत आहे ते पाहिले पाहिजे. कारण भूतकाळ हा संपलेला आहे
आणि भविष्यकाळ काही समोर नाही. ह्या सूज्ञतेमध्ये मी अडकले होते. सूज्ञता म्हणता येईल म्हणा, पण तरी
सूज्ञामध्ये थोडेसे गहन आहे. त्याच्यात पुष्कळ गोष्टी आहेत. आता इंग्लिशमध्ये एकच शब्द आहे, विज्डम. पण
आपल्या मराठी भाषेत त्याला सूज्ञता म्हणता येईल. सुबुद्धी म्हणता येईल, समयसूचकता म्हणता येईल किंवा
दक्षता म्हणता येईल. दक्षता म्हणू. दक्ष. असे अनेक शब्द त्याला आहेत. ते सगळे एका गोष्टीने आपल्याला सहज
साध्य होतात, जर आपण वर्तमान काळात राहण्याची व्यवस्था केली तर.
आता मी असे ऐकले की भयंकर भांडणं करतात लोक. भांडणं होतात. का होतात? कारण तुझ्या वडीलांच्या
वडीलांनी ह्याला मारलं. आता ते वडील मेले, त्याचे वडील ही मेले. आता ते पूर्वीचे कशाला काढत बसले ?
नाहीतर तुला मी मारेन, तुला मी ठोकेन असं काहीतरी भविष्यकाळाचे बोलत रहायचे. आत्ता ह्यावेळेला काय
करणार आहे ? तू माझ्यासमोर आला , ह्यावेळेला मी तुझ्याबरोबर काय करणार आहे? तो विचार नाही. काय केले
पाहिजे ह्यावेळेला? त्यावेळेला जी समयसूचकता येते, ती समयसूचकता जी आहे, ती खरी. त्यावेळेला लगेच
लक्षात येईल, की हे भांडण मिटवा ह्यावेळेला. चांगला चान्स आहे. संधी मिळाली आहे. ही संधी मिळाली असे
म्हंटले, की एकदम मनुष्याच्या डोक्यात येते, केवढी मोठी संधी आहे. इतकी आपल्या पूर्वजांची भांडणं संपली
০
 19911215_Shri Ganesha Puja_Shere.pdf-page8.txt 
 Original Transcript : Marathi
आहेत. उगीचच कोर्टकचेऱ्या कशाला? हे कशाला ? ते कशाला? संपवा. ही जी एक सुबुद्धी आपल्यामध्ये येते
त्या समयसूचकतेला, त्यालाच आपण इंग्लिशमध्ये विज्डम असे म्हणतो. पण विज्डममध्ये अनेक अर्थ आहेत.
आपल्या मराठी भाषेत ना प्रत्येक ह्याला दहा पर्याय असतील. ही अशी आपली फार समृद्ध भाषा आहे. त्यामुळे
एका शब्दात नाही सांगता येत. पण तरीसुद्धा त्या समयाला जागृत असणं, त्या वेळेला जागरूक असणं हे फार
गरजेचे आहे. इतर पुष्कळशा गोष्टी आहेत. आता समजा मला घरून निघायचे आहे. तर मी असा विचार
की आता मला जायचे आहे, तर मला काय काय पाहिजे ? जिथे मी जाते, तिथे मला काय पाहिजे? पण
करायचा,
काय होतं. त्यावेळेला लक्षात येत नाही. त्यावेळेला दुसराच विचार असतो. मग गाडीत बसल्यावर लक्षात येतं ,
की अरे, हे राहिलं, ते राहिलं. तर ही जी एक समयसूचकता आहे, ही जी सूज्ञता आहे, ही आपल्यामध्ये
बाणण्यासाठी आपण आता वर्तमान काळात रहायला शिकले पाहिजे.
शिवाजी महाराज झाले. ते फार मोठे होते. पण ते वर्तमान काळात रहात होते. आपल्यासारखे नाही त्यांचे.
आपण शिवाजी महाराजांना मानतो, पण या वर्तमान काळात आपल्यामध्ये शिवाजी महाराजांचे कोणते
आहेत? ते काय दारू प्यायची का? पहिली गोष्ट. त्यांचे वागणे कसे होते ? त्यांचे चरित्र कसे होते? तसं आम्ही
त्यांना मानतो, पण त्यांचे चरित्र ह्या वर्तमानकाळात, ह्या आयुष्यात आमच्यात आले आहे का? काहीतरी
गुण
मागच्या गोष्टीचे महात्म्य घेऊन बसायचे. त्याने काही फायदा होणार नाही. महात्मा गांधी झाले. पुष्कळ झाले.
आपल्या देशात फार मोठी मोठी कमळे होऊन गेली. पण डबकेच आहे ना अजून ! बाकी सगळे डबकेच आहे !
तेव्हा आपण आता डबक्यात आहोत की कमळात आहोत ते पाहिलं पाहिजे. ह्यावेळेला आपण कुठे आहोत ते
पाहिले पाहिजे. ही पाहण्याची सुबुद्धी जोपर्यंत तुमच्यात येणार नाही तोपर्यंत गणेश तुमच्यात कार्य करीत नाही.
गणपतीचे एक लक्षण सांगितले आहे, की ते
तुम्हाला? त्या गणपतीसमोर बसून भांडतात लोक. गणपतीच्या नावाने पैसे खातात, हे करतात, ते करतात,
म्हणजे सुबुद्धी नाहीच. मग गणपती आहे कुठे तिथे ? नुसता गणपती करून ठेवलेला आहे. समयसूचकतेला,
देतात. ते सुबुद्धी देतात. ती कुठे दिसते कां
तुम्हाला सूजता
त्यावेळेला मनुष्य बरोबर जे लक्षात आणेल, त्या माणसाच्या स्थितीत एकदम अंतर येणार आहे. हे करून बघा
तुम्ही आणि वर्तमान काळातच तुमची जी वाढ होणार आहे ती होते. आता फूल आहे. फुलाची वाढ भविष्यात
होते की भूतकाळात होते? आता या वेळेला होईल नां? आपली प्रगती एवढ्यासाठीच होत नाही. कारण आपण
पुढच्या गोष्टीचा विचार करतो किंवा मागच्या गोष्टीचा विचार करतो. पण सद्यकालीन विचार करीत नाही.
सद्यकालीन आपली स्थिती काय आहे ते पाहिले पाहिजे. तर जे काही आहेत ते सर्व प्रश्न सुटतील. आता ग्रामीण
प्रश्न आहेत, ते सगळे सुटतील. आज शेती करायची आहे समजा. आज तुम्हाला पेरायचे आहे. तुम्ही म्हणाल,
मागच्या वेळेला पेरले होते, असे झाले, तसे झाले. असे करत बसाल तर गेले. किंवा म्हटले, उद्या, परवा पेरीन.
तरीही गेले. आत्ता, आजचे जे करायचे ते आत्ता केले पाहिजे.ही एक आपल्या भारतामध्ये एक ट्रम आहे.
गेलेल्याचे फार पोवाडे गात रहायचे. अमके झाले, तमके झाले. अरे, तुम्ही काय ? तुम्ही कुठे आहात?
सहजयोगामध्ये फारच आवश्यक आहे की, 'माताजींनी आम्हाला जागृती दिली.' मग, त्याच्या पुढे काय ? आता
जागृती दिली आता बसलो आहोत आम्ही. आता दुसरे धंदे करायचे. 'आज, आता त्याच्यासाठी मला काय
 19911215_Shri Ganesha Puja_Shere.pdf-page9.txt 
 Original Transcript : Marathi
करायचे?' असा विचार डोक्यात आला, तर तत्क्षणी तुम्हाला फायदा होणार आहे. आता पुष्कळांना जागृती
झाली, पुष्कळांना त्याचे फायदे झाले, चमत्कार पाहिले. झाले. पण विसरून जातात कि, 'मला जागृती झालेली
आहे.' प्रत्येक क्षणाला 'मला जागृती झालेली आहे.' ह्या क्षणालासुद्धा 'मला जागृती झालेली आहे.' असे लक्षात
राहत नाही लोकांच्या. मग तसच वागायला लागतात. परवाच एक गृहस्थ आले. त्यांना जागृती दिली. चांगले पार
झालेले. सगळें काही. पण मला म्हणे, 'माताजी, आजकाल मला फार भीती वाटते.' म्हटलं, 'अहो, तुम्ही
सहजयोगी. तुम्हाला कसली भीती ? तुम्ही विसरले का?' 'अरे हो, खरंच! विसरलो. मी पार झालो होतो. मला
काही भ्यायला नको.' काय म्हणाल ते तुमच्यासमोर असतांनासुद्धा! कारण तुम्ही विसरलात. तुम्हाला तेच
मागचेच आठवते. तेव्हा तुम्ही बेकार होता. तेव्हा तुम्ही नालायक होता. तुम्हाला काही समजत नव्हते. जेव्हा
तुम्ही अज्ञानी होता. किंवा जेव्हा तुम्ही अंधारात होता किंवा परमात्म्याचा प्रकाश तुमच्यामध्ये आला नव्हता.
त्यावेळची गोष्ट ती. आता ती कशी चालवायची पुढे? ते संस्कार कशाला पाहिजेत?
आता खेडेगावात गेले की सगळ्यांनी पायावर यायचे. कशाला ? मी कोणी दगडाची मूर्ती तर नाही, की शंभर
लोकांना माझ्या पायावर घेईन. पायावर येऊ नका. बरं, तर पैसे ठेवतो. दहा पैसे ठेवले. 'अरे,' म्हटलं, 'पण
माताजी पैसे नाही घेत.' 'बरं पंचवीस पैसे घ्या.' हे ह्यंना समजायचेच नाही, की आज सद्यस्थिती काय आहे
आणि त्या सद्यस्थितीमध्ये माताजी पैसे घेत नाहीत आणि कोणीही देवाच्या नावावर पैसे द्यायचे नाहीत. पण ते
डोक्यातच घुसणार नाही. 'असं कसं माताजी, सगळेच सांगतात, तुझी आई मेली, तर गाय दे म्हणून. आणि तुम्ही
आमच्याकडून कसे पैसे घेत नाहीत ?' तर हा धर्मभोळेपणा, हा सुद्धा आता सोडला पाहिजे. आणि तो कसा
सुटणार? कारण जो धर्म तुम्ही शिकलेला आहात, तो चुकीचाच शिकलात तुम्ही. ज्याला तुम्ही धर्म म्हणता,
तो
चुकीचा शिकला. कारण तुम्ही धर्म विकत घ्यायला निघाले आणि विकणारेही आहेत. धर्म विकता येत नाही.
विकणारे आहेत आणि तुम्ही विकत घेता. म्हणजे ह्या तिन्ही गोष्टी चुकलेल्या आहेत. सद्यस्थितीमध्ये
तुम्हाला
आत्मसाक्षात्कार (रियलायझेशन) मिळाला आहे. आता आत्म्याच्या बलावर काय करायचे ते करायचे. ते सोडून
ते मागचेच, आमचे संस्कार आहेत माताजी. आता रस्त्यावर एक दगड मांडला. त्या दगडाला शेदूर लावला.
बसले एक तिथे. चला दोन पैसे घाला. चार पैसे घाला. कोणीही मनुष्य निघाला, मग देवच आहे. द्या दोन पैसे.
अरे , तुम्ही सहजयोगी, तुम्ही कशाला देता ? 'आता माताजी असे आहे नां, आमच्यावर संस्कार आहेत.' कसले
कुसंस्कार आहेत! कशाला देता त्या देवाला? तो काही देव आहे कां? कोणीही दगड मांडायचा, तो काय देव
आहे कां? पण ह्या सगळ्या आपल्यामध्ये ज्या जुनाट गोष्टी आहेत, त्या काढाव्या लागतील. त्या एकाच प्रकाराने
निघतील, की आज सद्यस्थितीत काय आहे. नाहीतर म्हणतील, 'माताजी, आम्ही रामाला मानतो.' अरे,
आता
राम नाही, आता मी आहे. माझे ऐका. रामाला कशाला मानायचे? कारण राम खिशात घालता येतो. कसेही
वागा. दारू पिऊन यायचे आणि म्हणायचे मी रामाचा भक्त आहे. राम काही येऊन विचारणार नाही. पण माझे भक्त
झाले तर विचारीन मी. म्हणून घाबरायचे! नको. माताजींची भक्ती नको. कारण माताजी आता जिवंत आहेत नां!
मेल्यावर बघू. जिवंत असेपर्यंत मानायचे नाही. कारण जिवंत माणसे विचारतात नां! फैलावर घेतात. 'का बाबा,
तू असे का वागलास?' तर हे ग्रामीण भागातले आपले जे काही आहे, जुनाट पद्धतीचे, त्यातले किती सत्य,
किती
असत्य ते तुम्हाला सहजयोगात येऊन कळेल. त्यामुळे झालंय काय इतके आपण कुजलो आहे असं समजलं
10
 19911215_Shri Ganesha Puja_Shere.pdf-page10.txt 
 Original Transcript : Marathi
पाहिजे. जुनाट नाही. कुजून गेलो आहे तेव्हा आपल्या ज्या काही कल्पना आहेत, आपले जे काही विचार
आहेत, धर्माबद्दलचे तेसुद्धा एकदा पाजळून पहायला पाहिजे. बरं, हे सुटले, तर दुसरे आहे, की 'आता आम्ही
मॉडर्न झालो.' म्हणजे काय? डोक्याला आम्ही तेल लावणार नाही. मॉडर्न झालो नां! मॉडर्न झालो म्हणजे काय
तर काही तरी वाह्यात गाणी गायची. गणपतीसमोर जाऊन घाणेरडी गाणी म्हणायची. मग म्हणायचं आम्ही
देवालाच मानत नाही. हे मॉडर्न झाले. म्हणजे एक ते त्याने गेले आणि एक ह्याने गेले. ह्याला कारण काय? तर
आजकालची मुले बघतात, हे आपले आईवडील वेड्यासारखे चालले आता हरी, हरी टाळ कुटत. जन्मानुजन्म हे
केले, पण काय मिळाले ह्यांना? रोजचे जातात त्या वारकरी पंथात ? किती मी समजावून सांगितले , बाबा, आता
वार्या बंद करा. ज्यासाठी वा्या करीत होते, ते घ्या. ते समजतच नाही त्यांना. तो नशा असतो ना तसा. चालले
सगळे टाळ कुटत. अहो, आता घ्या. तुमच्यासाठी आणलंय सगळे मी. घेत का नाही. ते डोक्यातच येणार नाही
त्यांच्या. पण माताजी असे आहे, आमचे पूर्वज पण तेच करतात. अहो, पण त्यांनी जे केले, जे पुण्य जोडलेले
आहे त्याची फळं घ्या ना! अजून पुण्य जोडत बसले आहेत का? म्हणजे आजच्या परिस्थितीत काय आहे ?
आजच्या युगामध्ये सहजयोग हा धर्म आहे. हा धर्म आम्ही स्वीकारला पाहिजे. या धर्मात आम्ही उतरून स्वत:ला
स्वच्छ करून घेतले पाहिजे. सर्व धर्माचा जो काही अर्क आहे, तो म्हणजे सहजयोग आहे. आम्ही सर्व धर्मांना
मानतो. एका धर्माला मानत नाही. कारण एका धर्माला मानले म्हणजे काय, मी फार चांगला तू वाईट! मग झाले,
भांडा. पण धर्मांमधला जो काही चांगुलपणा आहे तो जर तुम्ही पहायला शिकले तर भांडणच करणार नाहीत.
महाराष्ट्रात म्हणतात, की भाऊबंदकी म्हणजे पाचवीलाच पूजली आहे. त्याला कारण काय आहे? त्याला
कारण हे आहे, की आपण नसते आठवत बसतो. जे नको ते आठवत बसतो. पण जर कोणी म्हटले, की सोडा ते.
तर अहो, काय सांगता तुम्ही! सोडा. कसं ? आमचं इतकं जुने चालले आहे . सोडायचे कसे ? ते जे काही जुनाट
आहे, ते एवढे धरून धरून आपण अशा रीतीने वागतो आहे. आता भाऊबंदकी पण जुनाट झाली. ती सोडून द्या.
काही कामाची नाही. त्याने काय फायदे झाले महाराष्ट्राचे? आता आपल्या ग्रामीण भागात मी बघते. मला
परिस्थिती फार गंभीर वाटायला लागली. कारण इकडे मॉडर्न झाले, तर दारू पिऊन पडलेत. जे नाही ते असे बेकार
गेले. म्हणजे सहजयोग सुरू तरी कुठे करायचा ? चार माणसेसुद्धा अशी मिळणार नाहीत तुम्हाला की जी बसून
समजतील या गोष्टी. म्हणून मी म्हणते की आपल्या मुलांना तरी आता जपा. त्यांना तरी आता सांभाळा. त्यांना हे
सांगा, की तू मागची पुढची चिंता न करता, आत्ताची चिंता कर. आजच्या चितेत तुम्ही असलात तर बरोबर
समृद्धी येईल. नाहीतर समृद्धीसुद्धा येणार नाही. पुढची गोष्ट म्हणजे नुसते मनाचे मनोरे बांधायचे, हे ही बरोबर
नाही आणि मागची गोष्ट, ज्याने तुम्हाला जखडून ठेवलंय, तेही बरोबर नाही. तेव्हा मध्यात आले पाहिजे.
मध्यमार्गात आले पाहिजे. संतुलनात आले पाहिजे. जेव्हा तुम्ही संतुलनात याल, तेव्हा बघाल तुमच्यात केवढ्या
शक्त्या येतील आणि तुम्ही किती कार्य करू शकता.
महाराष्ट्र म्हणजे चैतन्याचा नुसता पुतळा आहे. कारण विश्वाची कुंडलिनी इथे आहे. हे लोकांना समजवून
समजवून मी थकते. ह्या गोष्टी माझे ऐकतच नाहीत. त्यांच्या लक्षातच ही गोष्ट येत नाही. अजूनही मला इतके
आश्चर्य वाटते, मी लंडनला असते आणि महाराष्ट्रातून पत्रं, 'हा मनुष्य असा, तो मनुष्य तसा'. माझे कान किटले
11
 19911215_Shri Ganesha Puja_Shere.pdf-page11.txt 
 Original Transcript : Marathi
नी डोळे मिटले. ते संपतच नाही. दसऱ्याचे चांगले दिसतच नाही. म्हणजे ते सगळे लोक सहजयोगी आहेत !
आश्चर्याची गोष्ट आहे. तर अशा रीतीने सहजयोग चालला, तर त्या साधुसंतांना काय वाटणार आहे मला सांगा?
त्यांचे कार्य पूर्ण करण्यासाठी आम्ही आलो आहोत. तुमच्या महाराष्ट्रांत जन्म घेतला. मराठी भाषा आम्हाला येते.
सगळे काही असूनही लोकांना काहीही समजत नाही की केवढे मोठे आम्ही घेऊन आलो आहे.
आता हे पंचावन्न देशातले लोक आहेत. ते आले धडपडत तुमच्या देशात. येऊन तरी काय? तुमच्यावर
त्यांचा काही परिणाम होतो आहे का? बघता का हे कसे लोक आहेत ते. हे परदेशातून आले तुमच्या देशात. ते
कशाला आले? का आले? हे बघता का तुम्ही? हे काय करतात? ह्यांना कसला एवढा आनंद झाला आहे?
ह्यांनी काय मिळवलं? आपणही तसे मिळविले पाहिजे. असा विचार एक साधारण, समजूतदार माणसाला आला
पाहिजे. समज येण्यासाठी फक्त एक गोष्ट करा, की आज आम्ही इथे बसलो आहोत, आज आम्हाला काय केले
पाहिजे? आत्ता काय करायचे आहे ? ह्यावेळेला काय करायचे ? ही वेळ कसली ? ही वेळच महत्त्वाची आहे. तेच
माणसाला समजत नाही, म्हणून सगळे घोटाळे आहेत.
तर आज श्री गणेशाला स्मरून निश्चय करायचा, की आम्ही वर्तमानकाळात राह . मला असे होते, की एक
भाषा बोलतांना दुसरी भाषा बदलायची म्हणजे त्रास होतो. पण एका भाषेत शुद्ध बोलते मी. पण ती जर भाषा
सुटली मग मला जमतच नाही. कारण शुद्ध आहे नां सगळे.
असले पाहिजे. मिक्श्चर करता येत नाही.
शुद्ध
भाषेतसुद्धा शुद्ध असायला पाहिजे. त्यामुळे ते मला जमत नाही. विशेष शुद्धता असायला पाहिजे. ती एकाच
गोष्टीने येते ती म्हणजे मी ह्यावेळेला काय करते आहे? मी ह्यावेळेला काय विचार करते? अगदी तुम्ही जरासे लक्ष
दिले ना पटकन सगळे बदलून जाईल. तुम्हाला आश्चर्य वाटेल, तुमच्या सवयी सुटतील सगळे काही होईल.
त्यावेळी फक्त 'मी ह्यावेळेला काय करते ?' माझ्या बोलण्याचे वाईट वाटून घ्यायचे नाही. मी आई आहे. जे खरे ते
सांगितले. हे लक्षात घ्यावे आणि आपले आयुष्य सुधारावे. आपले आयुष्य काय आहे? मुलाबाळांची काय दैना
होतेय. ते बघायला पाहिजे. त्याकडे लक्ष द्यायला पाहिजे. परत मी येणारच आहे. निदान शेरे गावचा तरी उद्धार
होऊ देत . त्याच्यात तुम्ही सगळ्यांनी मला मदत करावी. सहजयोगाचा योग घ्यावा आणि मेहनत करावी. आपली
कुंडलिनी तर जागृत तर मी करून देईन पण त्यानंतर, त्या जागृतीनंतर तुम्हाला अभ्यासाने ती कुंडलिनी बरोबर
बसवली पाहिजे. इतके हे दुसर्या देशातले लोक पार झाले. ज्यांना गणपतीचे नाव माहीत नव्हते. गणपतीचा ग
माहीत नव्हता. आपल्या इथे अष्टविनायक ह्या पृथ्वीमातेने आणून ठेवले आहेत, तेव्हा आपण काय करतो ते
बघायला पाहिजे. ह्या गोष्टींकडे लक्ष द्यायला पाहिजे. फार महत्त्वाची गोष्ट आहे. त्याने आपल्या सबंध देशाचेच
मुळी भले होणार आहे. पण निदान आधी स्वत:चे भले करून घ्या.
किती सोपे आहे, हे बघा तुम्ही! मी काही कठीण काम सांगितलेले नाही, की डोक्यावर उभे रहा, की
हिमालयावर जा. काही नाही. सहज साधी गोष्ट आहे. सहजयोग करा. पहिल्यांदा कुंडलिनी जागृत करून घ्या.
आणि वर्तमानकाळात रहायला शिका. मग मी येऊन बघते काय होतं ते ! आशा आहे, पुढच्या वर्षी इथे सगळी
भांडणं, तंटे मिटून सगळे सुरळीत होईल. लोक चांगले राहतील.
सगळ्यांना माझा अनंत आशीर्वाद !
12
 19911215_Shri Ganesha Puja_Shere.pdf-page12.txt 
 HINDI TRANSLATION
(English Talk)
Scanned from Hindii Chaitanya Lahiri
महाराष्ट्र में श्री गणेश की पूजा के महत्व की हमें समझना
है। अष्टविनायक (आठ गणपति) इस क्षेत्र के इर्द-गिर्द है और
महाराष्ट्र के त्रिकोण बनाते हुए तीन पर्वत कुण्डलिनी के समान
हैं। पूरे विश्व की कुण्डलिनी इस क्षेत्र में निवास करती है श्री
गणेश द्वारा चैतन्यित इस पृथ्वी का अपना ही स्पन्दन तथा
चैतन्य है। महाराष्ट्र की सर्वात्तम विशेषता यह है कि यह बहुत
बाद में कभी भी आप सुगमता से यह विवेक उनमें नहीं भर
सकते। तब इसके लिए आपको वहुत परिश्रम करना पड़ेगा।
सहजयोग में यह विवेक तजी से कार्य कर रहा है और लोग
वहुत बुद्धिमान होते जा रहे हैं।
किसी भी मार्ग से हम चलें, हम पात हैं कि हमारो सारी
समस्याएं मानव की ही देन है। जीवन में
महत्वपूर्ण भूमिका है कि बाह्य जगत में जा भी प्रवृत्तियां या
फैशन आयें आप उनसे प्रभावित नहीं हाते। आप अन्दर से
परिवर्तित होते हैं। तब आप पूर्णतया जान जाते हैं कि दूसरे
लोगों से क्या आशा की जाती
उनसे किस प्रकार व्यवहार किया जाए, किस प्रकार बातचीत
की जाए और उनके साथ किस सीमा तक चला जाए। यह सव
विवेक से प्राप्त होता है। सहजयाग में आप सब अतियोग्य लाग
विवेक को डतनी
ही सुन्दर चित्त प्रदान करता है। श्री गणेश के चैतन्य प्रवाह के
कारण चित्त एकाग्रित हो जाता है। पवित्रता तथा मंगल प्रदान
करने के लिए श्री गणेश की सृष्टि हुईं। गणेश ही सभी का
शुद्ध करते हैं । ये इनकी अवाधिता है जो आपको शुद्ध करती
है तथा आपके चित्त को विचलित करने वाले अह तथा बन्धनों
का दूर करती है।
अच्छे चित्त वाले लोग बहुत से अच्छे कार्य कर सकते हैं
जैसे अच्छी कलाकृतियाँ, अच्छा गणित और अच्छा संगीत। इन
सब के लिए पूरे चित्त की आवश्यकता होती है। अच्छा चित्त
श्री गणेश की देन है वे विवेक के दाता हैं। विवेक ही धर्म
बन जाता है तथा अपके अस्तित्व का अंगे-प्रत्यंग बन जाता है।
है
तथा उन्हें क्या करना चाहिए।
हैं। आपने बहुत कुछ पा लिया है और आप सभी कुछ जानते
हैं। इस सबके बावजूद भी हमें दूसरों से व्यवहार तो करना ही
है। किसी को रोकना नहीं हैं और न ही कोई कठोर या
दु:खदायी बात कहनी है। यदि आप सहजयांग को फैलाने का
प्रयत्न कर रहे हैं तो एक ही मार्ग है कि हम सबकी
आप बुद्धिमान हो जाते हैं। यद्यपि वे शिशु हैं फिर भी अति
परिपक्व हैं। सहजयोगी के अन्दर क्योंकि श्री गणेश जागृत होते करुणापूर्वक देखभाल करें।
हैं इसलिए विवेक उनका अन्तर्जात गुण होता है। एक सन्तुलन
एक उत्थान, वह व्यक्ति प्राप्त करता है तथा वह समझता है गणेश के माध्यम से संभव है। वे निर्विकल्प में हैं। उन्हें कोई
कि यह उत्थान उसके लिए, उसके देश तथा पूरे विश्व के
लिए हितकर है। वह सहजयोग के महत्व को जानता है। यह
विवेक हमारे अन्दर रचित है और अपने अन्दर विवेक के इस
सरोत का उपयोग सीखना हमारे लिए आवश्यक है। सहजयोग होते हैं। यह एक अवस्था है जो आपके अन्तस में बनी होनी
में व्यक्ति विवेक प्रवाहित करने लगता है तथा इसे समझने भी
लगता है। व्यक्ति अपनी मूर्खतापूर्ण बातें छोड़ देता है। श्री
गणेश ही आध्यात्मिक जीवन की नींव के पत्थर हैं। इसी तो आप इस अवस्था को प्राप्त कर सकते हैं। अन्तरदर्शन
कारण मरी बहुत इच्छा है कि अपने बच्चों के लिए हम उचित
विद्यालय खोज सकें। उन्हें अच्छी शिक्षा मिले तथा उनकी
उचित देखभाल हो क्यांकि उनका गणेश तत्व उनमें पहले से
ही है। हमें केवल इसका पोषण करना है देखभाल करनी है
तथा इसे बढ़ाना है। एक बार यदि एसा हो जाए तो बच्चे
सुरक्षित हैं और उन्हें कोई हानि नहीं पहुंचा सकता। गलतं चीजों
स्वयं में विश्वास भी आना आवश्यक है। यह भी ओरी
प्रश्न नहीं करना। न उन्हें कोई चिन्ता है और न कोई मोह। कांई
कार्य करते हुए आप दो-विचारों में हो सकते हैं। हो सकता हैं
ही
कि आप दृढ़ न हां। परन्तु वे (श्री गणेश) सदा बहुत
दृढ़
चाहिए। आप स्वयं पर चित्त को केन्द्रित कर यदि पता लगाने
का प्रयत्न करें कि मेरे साथ क्या समस्या हेख में ऐसा क्यों हूँ?
आपका बहुत सहायक होगा। अपने अन्दर के अवाधिता तत्व
की पूजा करना सुगम मार्ग हैं। मान लोजिए हम किसी चोर से
व्यवहार कर रहे हैं। तो हमें क्या करना चाहिए? उसके दोष का
भूल जाना सर्वोत्तम है। इसकी चिन्ता नहीं करनी है। भूल जाइए
कि इस व्यक्ति को ठीक करना है। भूल जाना ही विवेक है।
एक बार जब आप दोषों को भूलने लगेंगे तो अच्छी बातें
आपको याद रहेंगी। भूल जाइए किसने आपका अपमान किया,
आपको कष्ट दिया या आपसे अनुचित बतांव किया।
को वे कभी आत्मसात नहीं करेंगे। यदि वाल्यकाल में ही आप
उन्हें कुण्डलिनी का ज्ञान तथा विवेक बुदझ्धि नहीं दे सकते तो
13
 19911215_Shri Ganesha Puja_Shere.pdf-page13.txt 
 Hindi Translation (English Talk)
लेते हैं। वर्तमान में रहते हुए आप थकते नहीं क्योंकि न तो
आप भूत की सोचते हैं न भविष्य की। प्रसन्नतापूर्वक रहते हुए
आप चीजों को सुधारते हैं। इस प्रकार आप अपने तथा दूसरा
को कठिनाइयों से बचाते हैं। विवक का अभ्यास व्यक्ति का
करना चाहिए और पूर्णतया वर्तमान में रहने का भी उदाहरणतया
घर से बाहर जाते हुए आधे रास्ते जाकर बहुत से लोगों को याद
आएगा कि वे कुछ भूल गए हैं। इसके लिए वे वापिस आयंग
आदि..... कुछ भी ने
सहजयोग में एक बात निश्चित है कि आपको दुःख देनं
वाले स्वयं कष्ट पायेंगे। अत: उन्हें क्षमा कर दीजिए। उन्हें शांत
कीजिए। इस प्रकार की विवेक बुद्धि हममें होनी चाहिए। लोगों
के पीछे नहीं पड़ना है किसी को भयभीत नहीं करना है और
न ही किसी से कठोरता से व्यवहार करना है।
ध्यान ही एक एसा मार्ग है जिसके द्वारा आप अपना दायां
और बायां (झुकाव) त्याग कर अपने मध्य में स्थिर हो जाते
हैं तथा अपने अस्तित्व तथा विवेक का आनन्द लेते हैं। अपने
जीवन का एक अहं भाग हम कष्ट परेशानियाँ झेलने तथा
दूसरों को परेशान करने में व्यतीत करते हैं। हमारे पास समय
है कहाँ?
उस समय यदि आप वर्तमान में हों ता
आदि
भूलें। विवेक स्वतः कार्य करता है। यह एक महान शक्ति हैं।
यह किसी भी प्रकार की भूल, हमले या मूर्खता का सामना
कर सकता है। अत: हमें चाहिए कि विवेक को विकसित कर
इसे परिपक्व करें।
हजारों लोगों की कृण्डलिनियां हमें जागृत करनी हैं। पर
हम तो व्यर्थ की चीजों में फंसे हुए हैं। हमारा विवेक समाप्त
ही जाता है। सर्वोच्च स्तर के लोगों में भी विवेक नहीं है
क्योंकि वे भी पलायन करना चाहते हैं। तंग आकर सन्यास ले
आज की पूजा में हमें विवेक की याचना करनी चाहिए
तथा इसके लिए हमें वर्तमान में रहना होगा।
परमात्मा आपको धन्य करें।
14
