Shri Ganesh Puja Synopsis Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Perth, Australia, February 1992 for fife. But when it starts the other way round it works out the destructive part. These both are in balance. If not, life can constructive and destructive both have be in balance." "It is so joy giving to be back in Australia," Here it is has been seorchingly hot, but "now you have seen how it rained and rained because you wanted rain that was needed very rmuch, and also you wanted a cooler atmosphere. Both things worked out. Then the worry was because of the rain the seekers won't come. Also that was solved because not go on. The As in nature, whatever is created is destroyed and something new comes up again in a constructive way, and then whatever it has constructed, a part of it is destroyed. So in death resides life; there is no death. "Imagine if all the people who have been born since long would have been living today we would not have been here.. Sa many animals have died and those animals have also becorne human beings. So many human belngs have to die to get other people to come on this earth, and that you have to take some rest and come back again. So the deoth is just the change of life. Withoutdeath life cannot exist can not exist, t's a balance between the two. So a Sahaja Yogl should never be afraid of death...If he is going to die, it is only going to be another life where he rests for a while and comes back again with greater enthusiasm, with greater energy. it was a testing ground. I told them if they are real seekers they will come; otherwise what is the use of having big quantity with no seeking? And see yesterday what beautiful people came. They came all the way in the rain because they were seekers, and very deep seekers. They never even asked a question. Can you imagine? In Australia I am always bormbarded with questions... But I could feel the seeking so much that I said, 'Better ask Me questions,' and not a single question was asked. So in one shot, how many things I have done." At the program, the electricity went off, which also had a good effect because we had to use candles and then all the bhools were just merged with the candles. This happened when Shri Mataji came in the room. It was also important to realize that to be so dependent on electricity is not a very good thing. "So we should have always provislons for something natural. We should keep some lanterns and things and should try to be more with the nature than with this electrticity. I tll you this electricity is responsible for spoiling our eyes very much... Because not that it gives us light but also it takes away light from our eyes. So too much use of electricity has made us like slaves." It is a good trend to have more natural surToundings, more natural places to live, So many things in nature are completely in balance. "If this balance breaks then we would be nowhere. So we have to understand that all this is done by Shti Ganesha. He is the one who looks after all these material things and all the things that you created. For example, the first chakra is created by this Mother Earth and all this universe is created by the second chakra. But the first chakra is the one which emits the holiness, the auspiciousness which gives balance." When people lose their balance, they go to the right or to the left. Some Sahaja Yagis are extremely righteous. But there is no love. "Without love, righteousness has no meaning. Love doesn't mean that you have to indulge into anything but you must have detached love and responsibility." Shri Ganesha is on Mooladhara and He controls all our senses as far as the Mooladhara is concerned- specially all the execretion. "So we are not people "If Param Chaitanya is the power of love of God, then it works out equilibrium. So the Sahaja Yogis who are going to work out Param Chaitanya have to have equilibrium in their life. This is a place where I say resides Maha Ganesha." Shri Ganesha brings balance when it is steady. "When it starts moving in the right direction then a constructive work starts and also it works out all that is important Shree Ganesh Puja

 who believe in indulgence of it, neither in the detachment of it, but in the balance. That's why you have to be married, you have to have proper physical life, and that you should have proper children and lead a very sensible dignified married life.. But love should be there love between husband and wife between children and parents and everyone, If one person goes into imbalance, the whole farily goes into imbalance. To establish a family sweetly and nicely is also an art, and if both of them agree and say we will do this way I am sure this is not difficult because you are Sahaja Yogis. You already know the quallty of balancing." Earth has made Shri Ganesha. "This gravity comes very naturally to human beings. It is not to be adopted or anything." "In childhood if the children are told about their gravity, about their dignityabout their greatness. they will immediately develop it with a great pride. This gravity gives you a kind of an attraction. Anybody who is grave-grave doesn't mean you pull a big face... but gravity means you are not disturbed easily by any tumoil or anything. Gravity means os many things As you can see from Shri Ganesha's character that gravity means you are the one who is standing in the cenfer - a person who sees everything. doesn't get disturbed, doesn't get tempted, self contented, doesn't ask, for anything, doesn't need anything, doesn't take revenge, forgives because he has no way to get out of his gravity - he is just bound there." Such a person does not tun after someone who is imbalanced or who has done something wrong.| He has pity on such a person. In the West now there is imbalance because there all kinds of problems of homosexuality, including asceticism which is practised in T.M. and which is unnatural. It is natural to be in balance, then things go off and you become either too much of something and nothing of the other. That is how people suffer." From the Ganesha chakra we have to learn what we are doing. Sornetimes we have to accumulate things, we have to consume things and then we have to throw them away also. "When we receive some thoughts from anywhere we should only digest what is good for us, and is digested because of Param Chaitanya. The rest should be thrown away." Standing firm itself is sufficient to frighten others and to destroy others. "He is standing at the point where he cannot be disturbed, but others are running towards destruction. So what is the use of running after and also get destroyed?" They may fry to help because they can see that someone is going to fall down, but if a person doesn't want to become balanced, you cannot force it. For example, we take whatever is good out of Catholicism- the worship of Christ, but whatever is nonsensical has to be thrown away, "Christians have crossed all the limits of adultery... What will happen to your children? What will happen to your saciety?" All the societies where adultery is a style of life are in complete imbalance, and are going against Christ's teachings. "Ganesha's greatest quality is that he has balance. With that gravity, He sits down on this Mother Earth." Australia is a country of Shri Ganesha, so Australians must naturally have balance, but they don't. Before starting Sahaja Yoga in Australia, Shri Mataji's experience of Australians was that they drank a lot, talked irreverently, shook hands very hard-did everything in a big way. This country of should "Shri Krishna has said in everybody resides the spirit. Then everybody is just the same. How can you have a caste system? You can have a caste system according to the work you are doing but you can't have caste system according to the birth. Everybody has got the spirit, so everybody can ascend. Christ has said the same thing. He has not sald that women don't have the spirit and men have the spirit. It has no relevance to dharma which means balance, being in the center. If you are in the center, at the gravity point, you can not move to one side or the other. Gravity comes from Mother Earth and Mother Shri Ganesha with be in tune Paramchaitanya. Animals who live in nature cure absolutely in contact with God, under the complete controt of God Almighty. They do not agrees each other, they are extremely gentle, and they do not form groups. "They grow, accept whatever is given to them, live with it happily, and if they have to be destroyed they accept the destruction." In this country of Shri Ganesha, the nature should be imbibed within you." and the baloance should come in such a manner that your whole The Divine Cool Breeze 2)

 gentle to show we are Ganeshas Special Ganas - that's what l feel about Australlans. temperament should show that balance in you." But the most difficult thing in Australia is that "there are groups and groups and people fight and lots of problems with them." In the country of Ganesha where there are Ganas' "if the Ganas start fighting with each other, "What will happen?" Supposing the antibodles in our body start fighting with each other, what will happen in the body? So you are like Ganas, specially blessed people to be born In this country. And after all these achlevements that you have made, if you are going to take absolutely nonsensical things of the countries who are over developed, have lost their balance, then what is the use of being born in this Ganesha's land? In this Ganesha land, you have to have complete balance within yourself. That is what I expect from the Sahaja Yogis of Australia, and they have to give to the whole world the sense of balance of Shri Ganeshoa." "All of you should really learn to be Very loving, gentle, kind and concemed. Small, smail things can make people happy, very happy. When I try all these tricks Myself you should also try these tricks, very simple - that one day I gave a saree to a lady. She said, 'Mother, how do you know I love this colour? Because have seen you mostly wearing this colour. So I know you love this colour." Did You see me?' 'Of course I saw you. So these small things you see. She was so heartened. She felt that Mather notices me because I hove seen her. I mean I see all of you. I know about all of you because I am concerned, I am bothered about you: Everyone I know-where you stand, what's wrong with you, what should be done, what you like, what you don't like, There is no harm in doing that. It is much betler to have a better rapport and then you understand what the problem is." We should bear no grudge to anyone and we have to be forgiving all the time. The English language is not very soft "in that if you say something, one should not mind. It is a very hurnorous language but humour sometimes cuts you out... but that doesn't mean that you should say harsh words to anyone or you should be indifferent to anyone, your duties, to your children, or to your wife or to your husband. Indifference to anyone is itself a tremendous harshness. For a smll thing, if a woman gets angry and doesn't talk to her husband or husband neglects the wife, doesn't bother about her.. caring for her, then it is a crime according to Sahaja Yoga. It is a wrong thing because you must have balance, soffness of nature. You should talk very softly to others and be kind and nice. Just find out if you are doing that or not." Shri Mataji explained that She tries to correct people very gently, but we need nol tell them Instead, we can give a bandhan, We donitihave to worry about doing something very drastic on teling people on the face. Meditation helps to be in the center, but still sometimes we just slip off. "When there is a crisis, you just jump onto your gravity point.. if that happens, no problem. It happens with Me. If I see any crisis anywhere... immediately I know that I am deep down on My gravity and from there I can see everything clearly, and then I solve the problem." You do not have to compare yourself to others or think that you'll be losing or gaining something. "You are in charge of yourself. So you don't worry, there is no jealousy, there's no kind of a temptation. You are there. You are not bothered." THE Then between the groups it's a question of using the power of love," which is the only power we have. "Look at Shri Ganesha -how gentle He is, how sweet He is and how innocent He is. His ways are so gentle, how He works on you, how He makes things for you, how gently He does all these things." For example, you can't see a flower opening out, you can't see anything that is growing in nature by Shri Ganesha. He does it so gently, and He makes every leaf in the whole world different. "While we are living on the ground of Shri Ganesha, how gentle we should be and in dealing with people you should be extremely "Sometimes the leaders are worried about their leadership, and now leadership is just a hocus pocus." Leadership is a joke, and if you know it's a joke then it will work out better. There is no hierarchy in Sahaja Yoga. "We all are one." No one is better than anyone else. "So one should not have any fear of the leadership.. If you are standing on your gravity, you keep doing it. He will understand you. As soon as the leader is on the gravity he will be there. As soon as you go away from the gravity, he will go away himself. So you stand on your own gravity 50 13 Shree Ganesh Puja

 point and nobody can disturb you. You should have no fear, nothing to bother in Sahaja Yoga. As it is, you are all saints." All the ganas, the angels, and the all-pervading power are looking after you. "This is Ganesha's place here; things are going to work out." your balance.. If you start lasing your balance, how can you get back that person? In that way you will lose all your hatred, all your anger, all your lust... all your competition because you stand in your own dignity... You don't want praises from anyone, you just know you are there, self- contented. "Anybody who tries to trouble you will be looked after by this all-pervading power. You don't have to do anything about it." Try to see if you are in balance not too attached or too unattached to your family. "Attached love is the death of love. So we have to have proper understanding of this detached love where you stand on your gravity and are concerned about everyone. In case you find that somebody is not all right. You don't lose l's also not necessary to have a special audience with Shti Mataji. That's all ego. Shri Mataji is never private, She is available all the time to us. "All these things are coming aut of ignorance and out of the fact that you are not on your gravity point. So today... in our heart we should think, "What is our gravity point? and that we have to stand very firm. May God bless you." () The Divine Cool Breeze

 Mahalakshmi Puja Synopsis Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Brisbane, Australia, February 20,1992 This Mahalakshmi Puja is being done so that we'll understand what is Wishwa Nirmala Dharma. The Mahalakshmi principle lies within all of you in the center, and once you are fed up with the falsehood and also with the hypocrisy of people, you start seeking the fruth within. That's how a new category of people are born who are called as seekers, sadhakas. They are very different from others. They don't care for material gain or any power, position. They want to seek the truth. And this category Is the one you are and that's why you have come to Sahaja Yoga." judge ourselves is to feel our vibrations. When we go so far to the left or the right that we do not feel vibrations, our Mahalakshmi principle working. We become derailed. We should watch out for these conditionings in ourselves and in others that pull us off the central path. In a very detached way we must be the witness, see for ourselves and not about others. s not We must be aware that if we have physical problems we are not in the center. We should be able to completely cure ourselves. We should be peaceful, never angry. A person who is in the center, might put up a show that he is angry, but he doesn't get angry, but he doesnt get involved in onger or any emotions whatsoever." You should be sure first of all detached... If you become yourself, then you are a master and you can see where are you going." If we are capable of going to the left or to the right we are not solidly Sahaja Yogis. There is no Our seeking comes from our past lives, as well as from the conditions of our current lives, such as being born in an affluent family and getting fed up with weaith, or being raised in a place life India, where tradition is to seek the truth, where seeking money and powet are recognized as falsehood, and people receive good conditioning from the culture. It can also becomne a fashion to seek the truth, but this can become dangerous and such people can get lost. People who take drugs can be seekers, not taking drugs because of fashion, but because they wish to find their Mahalakshmi principle."So this Mahalakshrni principle was born within them. Sort of started manifesting, that beyond all this there must be something... The conditioning of every country has also hampered the progress of Sahaja Yoga within you and outside." that you are cornpletely progress. The first criterion of being in the center to fix up our Mahalakshmi principle is that our physical being has to be normal We should feel healthy and happy, and should not always be complaining about pains in our body. Secondly, if we are in the center our aftention is more towards nature, how it is working out. We should enjoy the creation around. us. That's enjoyment which is surprisingly deep and joy-giving, and which takes us into thoughtless awareness. To understand Mahalakshmi principle we must know we hoave two other channels into which we We should not condemn any religion, only the people who do not follow the principles of religion and are not realized souls call themselves religious. "Churches can be condemned, but not Christ, not the Bible, not at all, never." We autornatically respect and incarnation, religion or prophet. "There should be no malice about any religion whatsoever. No religion has done any wrong so far." It is the people who have been wrong, who use religion can jurmp, depending on our background in this life. "Because of your background in last life you have come to the right path, but last ife is being covered by this life... the society has dominated you in so many ways." Many people who come to the programs are seekers of many lives, but they may not settle down in Sahaja Yoga because of habits formed by the left and right sides. For a Sahaja Yogl to keep his Mahalakshmi principle all right, has to always introspect/ The best way to condemn would any never Mahalakshml Puja

 for money or power. "Vishwa Nirmala Dharma, which is based on the Mahalakshmi principle, is the essence of all the religions. The truth of all the religions." fragrance. This is our job. This Mahalakshml principle is not just for ourselves but for the whole world. We are reforming a new race, a new society which is enlightened. Standing on truth and love. And there should be compassion. In the Bible, Paul created most of the confusion about Christianity. He started the nonsense of confessions and making people feel guilty. treating wormen as nothing. He had no right to do this because he did not know Christ. He was an epleptic who wanted a platform to give him powers so he organized Christianity. Christ never sald you should organize Christianity, nor that you should confess or feel guilty. "All the time He has been talking of forgiveness." We must be people who are spiritually well equipped and we must see to ourselves. We must be solid and then nothing can deter us, We have to desire that our vibrations should be all right, let our chakras be cleared, let us be in the center, in balance. We should not avoid attending to our own problems; we must desire to be clean and solid Sahaja Yogis. "So many can be very high up in Sahaja Yoga, but their desires are not yet being fully manifested. There is a damping effect of so many things I have told you." In a very short time, Christ gave us the truth, but when it is interpreted, it goes wrong. "Another point of a Sahaja Yogi is whatever I say they don't have to interpret, they know it, exactly what I say. If they start interpreting, then there is something wrong with them. You cannot interpret Me. Whatever I say, I Language.... There's nothing to interpret, I'm saying straightforward thing which interpreted." People who think they have brains to interpret should realize that their brains are not of that calibre to interpret. This is one way to know if we are not in the center. Mahalakshmi principle is the principle within us which nourishes everything and balances us. It is the guiding factor working out everything that brings out wisdom and love for God and for the truth, and you thrive on that love. "A simple one you can do is just to be on My Kundoalini... just put attention." The problem will be solved by becoming thoughtless because there is no thought. "By that your ego will definitely dissolve because then you will know that Mother is doing everything, I am doing nothing so why should I be proud of it? Also, the conditioning will dissolve because My Kundalini is absolutely pure. It's not attached to anyone. It's not even attached to Sahaja Yoga.. The job it has got to do is to nourish everything. If it can nourish, well and good, if it does not nourish, well and good." 1 say in a very simple English not be need When we give lectures about Sahaja Yoga we must be careful not to become egoistical or say things which Shri Mataji has never sald. People who are not solid Sahaja Yogs should give realization but should not talk about Sahaja Yoga. Also, somebody who gives you realization is not your guru and there should not be any awe or obligation towards that person. If this is not done, you may wind up following that person or group of people to the left or right. When we move out of Mahalakshmi, forces around us, and we become even worse than common people. It depends on what you want. "Nobody is going to force you in any way." The Kundalini is flowing just like the river Ganges and if you desire, it will just flow into you. "Bhakti is the desire, the joy of bhakti." It's such a beautiful thing and we just get lost into it, enjoying it, without thinking. "And that's what is the most committed, the highest state where you are just one with the Divine and just swimming in the ocean of joy." we are grabbed by negative We do not belong to any country but to the universe- Vishwa Nirmala Dharrma. "We are part and parcel of the Universe... Now we have gone into eternal life, we have gone into something that is unlimited." "Like a little lotus that comes out of the mud that is sticking onto it, ultimately it comes out. the very clean flower." Then it spreads its fragrance all around so that even the mud gets "This Mahalakshmi principle is to be preserved, and has to be always watched and looked into." There are so many blessings of Mahalakshmi that they cannot be told in one lecture, but the greatest is complete comfortable in your Spirit. When the Mahalakshmi self-contentedness are you The Divine Cool Breeze

 principle enters into our brain then the Virata is manifesting and collective. Then we don't consider where we are from, what colour is our skin or what is our relligion. "This Joy comes from the same Mahalakshml principle when She enlightens your Sahasrara." The feeling is of the whole, not the Individual. We are one with the whole, we belong to the whole. "This Virata's feeling that we are part and parcel of the whole glves you complete peace and complete protection." principle means we glve up our ego and our conditioning. That's why Mahalakshmi is so Important. become beautifully we Surrendering the Mahalakshml Mahalakshml Puja

 Mahasaraswati Puja Synopsis Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Auckland, New Zealand, February 23,1992 The Maharasaraswati principle is on the right side. "First is the Brahmadeva's principle, which is the Saraswati principle, and then this Mahasaraswati takes you to the principle of Mahabrahmadeva, called as Hiranyagarbha, which is very important for Sahaja Yogis. Greek tragedy all the time. They go on crying and weeping... and make you cry also." Some left- sided artists drink a lot and become over romantic types who "lve in an imaginary world of pain and suffering, And they have their own ideos about their own romantic models that they've formed in their heads with their left side." Even in India those Muslims who used to drink a lot started singing 'gazals." Not in the meeting, not in yoga, but in separation they sing, When will I meet you, oh God?" "Those who think too much, or those who create too much without realization.. In all kinds of arts.. go to the left to the extreme or to the right." For example, if an artist goes to the right, gradually his paintings expressions. He would also be austere, Inflexible, and would have his own style and not get into any other style. "And then when he gels tired of it, then he will take to something... like abstract art. But without realization the abstract arti can be something very absurd and funny. extremely will violent become Society also moves to the right and to the left. When it moves to the right they like right sided things, and when it moves to the left they like left sided things. "So also there are people with two types of temperament, so that's how they start appreciating these things," At the same time there are people who are in the center, like Tolstoy and, among French writers, De Moupassánt. In every language we have the same type of people, but especially in Sanskrit language writers were in the center, not so much on the right or left side. "The reason is, for the literature there are some rules and regulations. It's not the western idea in india that we should be abandoned people. That's not accepted. So even in literature there is kind of restriction. What is literatture?" It's called sa hita which means which will be benevolent: If it is not sahitya then it is not literature, it is trash. But when the Germans or Japanese dig our Sanskrit literature they make a big ado about the Kamasutra which is not recognized as sahitya at all by Indian scholars. These creations of ugliness and vulgarity are a compensation for people who dre very right sided. A right sided person will take to drink because he wants to compensate, to quench the thirst for power, or to neutralize the right sided movement. In modern society, people slog for five days, then drink, hibernate, and spend all the money on weekends, and return with a hangover on Monday. Today's pop music also, which is very aggressive, is from the same outcome. Because you cannot ascend, so you move to your right... Then these people also impress people who are also very right-sided... Popularity is not the sign of real success. It will come and go... It creates no impression in the history." There are many writers in English language starting from Shakespeare who showed the futility of human endeavous. They are like avadhutas, "the one who has reached a very great degree of development in his spiritual life. He can see the futility of human endeavour, and then brings them to the point that they hove to rise above these stupld inhuman endeavours, and take to some sort of something higher, and also will create something of eternal value." People like Somerset Maugham and Cronyn were centrally placed; however later when Hemingway came he started moving towards the right. Now modern novels are all full of filth and violence; they are absolutely not palatable to human consumption. on endeavour which will bring them When these extreme things start showing results, the artist gets fed up. Then within him rises a subtler Artists who move to the left side are "suffering frorm The Divine Cool Breeze

 attitude towards creativity. He starls seeking true knowledge, pure knowledge In ail which sings of divinity. All of the madness inspires him to think that we should start doing things better, and then the Mahasaraswati principle starts working out. But then also when they start thinking of God, they fall into traps, They may follow money-oriented or power-oriented religions, and never become spirit- oriented. If they develop a personality which is mental, "whatever they speak has no effect on others also because they are not awakened people, they are not connected with the Divine and whatever they do is just mental. reached a stage at his agnya where he saw Shri Mataji in his dream and recognized Her instantly. We should allow the Mahosaraswati principle to grow within us. in Sahaja Yoga we are not told not to read any book, but in whatever books we read we should see the subtie points and see for ouTselves Whatever intellectuals write, however true, they cannot propagate anything. "It will be just a game, sormething that will happen outside and it will drop out.. It has to become innate. That's only possible if your spirit comes into your attention." As tealized souls whose Mahasaraswati prinaiple has been awakened, wemustread books of value andunderstandhow Sahaja Yoga is contained within them All of these books talk of some part of Sahaja Yoga, but not the whole of it because they come at different times, Now we have to So when the Mahasaraswati principle is awakened you start seeing clearly the difference between what is mental and the fruth, and realize that there must be something higher. "They read about all the spiritual works in their own religion in which they are born. Then they start moving out and reading about some other religion also. Then they realize that every religion says the same thing Then when it comes fo the Agnya point, then suddenly they realize that sornething is wrong, that people are only mentally accepting this religion, and there must be something beyond this. Af that point, if someone gets their realization, he just sticks to it." know the complete integrated knowledge of religious thought in order to understand how alt Sahaja Yogis should read and understand what others have said and where they hove gone Wrong. We shouldn't read nonsensical people who make no point at all. "We have to read and see the subfle side of this growth of thought, how it grew up and how it became subtler and subtler, and how so many people in the world have contributed to the central path of sushumna and then they completely wrote about the yoga." rellgions are integrated. This Mahasaraswati principle has to be awakened musicians, artists, and those whohave reached that state, and then suddenly they can get their realization very easily, Many Indian musiclans came to Shri Mataji and asked Her to creavity. awakened, all of them became world-renowned. "Those who have reached Mahasaraswati level For example, Rabindranath Tagore initially wrote about separation, and later he became subtler and wrote about meeting the spirit. The same thing happened with Buddha who renounced everything. including Upanishads and other scriptures, Ultimately He reached Gaya where, when He was tired and fed up. He got His realization. But Buddhists think that whatever He did before, by renouncing, is important. Actually, it had to happen because He was such a pure seeker, But Sahaja Yogis don't have to do anything of the kind. They just get their realization because most of them in their last lives have crossed most of their problems, and have known that it's all nonsense "or moay be in this life also they must have realized it's all nonsense, and then they must have come to Sahaja Yoga. So it's a very great luck for you that you are here, that you've got your tealization and that you're enjoying yourself." enhance When they their were His family, read the through reading or creativity or through writing or anything, when they reach a certaln state of Agnya, then either they will get disappointed go to the left and absolutely think this is all useless or else they get realization, they become very dynamic artists, very dynamic writers and people who are creating something of an eternal value." The Mahasaraswati principle makes you much subller. "and you start understanding that the gross understanding that we had about our art and our creativity has to be subtler and then such writers only appeal to people who are subtler." For example, William Blake was regarded as a mad poet, and Mascaro, who franslated the Gita into English in the hope of communicating the subtle, Mahasaraswati Puja

 There is also a political aspect to the right side. "Even in politics the growth becomes subtler and subtler." For example, in Russia where communism was so power-orlented, not money-oriented, a person like Gorbachev was to be born on the central path who would put it into balance, "So far he's not been able to manage, but he will be known all over the world for his great thought, and the great work of reducing the pressure between the two ideologies." never speak that way. There should not be any domination or commanding people not to do things, or organization. "It is something so spontaneous, so beautiful Because we are Sahaja Yogis, the main thing is love, compassion and Divine Grace which is a beautiful living force which creates al kind of constructive things. If this understanding is not there, you'll have problems with leadership. "Sahaja Yoga doesn't work out with people who are violent." The best thing is to judge ourselves, and whenever we are doing anything for anyone or saying anything, we should ask ourselves, "Is it benevolent or is it violent? is it for our self- propagation or a holier than-thou principle, or is it for the goodness of others?" "Once you start judging like that your way of talking, your way of working it out... You should try to see the whole thing as a complete play.. If you watch everything ina witness state then you can handle the whole situation very nicely. Even if you do not taik, If you do not say anything. Still in a witness state you become very powerful. I mean that in a witness state you can easily solve lots of problems. May God bless you." just works out. SO Another problem today is fundamentaiism which also comes' from the tight side and which takes people to extremes of violence, craziness and madness. "But a new disease has started now, those who go too much to the right... where the whole conscious mind goes out of order, and you become like a reptile." People with this disease understand everything, can talk well, but they cannot move their hands or feet if they want to. "This disease is the one which is a warning to everyone so we have to be careful." It is dangerous for Sahaja Yogis to go too much to the right, Some people start preaching Sahaja Yoga in a very fanatical manner, But we should The Divine Cool Breeze 10

 Guru Puja Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Cabella (Italy) 19-7-1992 and majestic. The state in which you rise now be- comes effective. Before this it was not. You had to al the time manipulate, say this or that, but in your silence you can manifest yourgravity. This gravity act silike a magnet. Mother earth has a magnet which is called gravity by which people are attracted and we rest on this mother earth because of her gravity. You get a magnetic termperament, character and personality. This magnetic personality immediately shows that is is manifesting itspower, like the sunsrays fall onto the leaves, the rays which look simple mani- fest their power of making it into chiorophyl. In the same way when you are at that height or state then withoutsaying anything, with justa glance youmani- fest. Notonly thatbutyou recordeverything. Iseldom forget things. Status of a Guru is a state and not a status, because status is external and can be bestowed upon anyone and is external. For an external merit you can give a status to a person. It is a state. Which means the innate being evolved to that level that you become the master. Otherwise how can you achleve that state? If it is innate, in a Sahaj way, then how do we achieve it? There are certain faculties which we have to develop to begin with. The first facultytobecomethoughtless. in meditation you can become thoughtless for a short time. Gradually this short time should go on increasing. This is a state. So how do we achieve that? Human beings cannot understand that anything can happen spontane- ously. For that it is Sahaj. It is very simple. Youhave get a mantra called 'Nirvichara'. Then you stent witness- ing that without thinking. Just see witness. Just seeing creates the first state within us. You become the witness--Saakshi. Assoon as you become Saakshi the whole thing, whatever you are seeing gives you the complete idea, subtle as well as gross of that thing. You see it and you know it. As a Sahaja Yogi it becomes your knowledge. We can say in modern terminology that you see something, it getsrecorded in your mind and it manifests joy, knowledge, com- passion, whatever is the situation. Because now you have many dimensions which you have to develop. For example-you meet someone you have to deal with. He is talking and talking. Just become thought- less. As soon as you become thoughtless you are in a different realm altogether. But in that realm your power will manifest and it may cool him down. It will shut him down or may be he may feel tremendous love for you. When youstart witnessing something without thought there is no obstruction for absorbing the knowledge about that thing. There's no thought. Complete absorption takesplace. Then itmanifests. This is how the Divine Power works within us. With our gravity we touch the depth within us whichcan carry the Divine power within us andmanifestit. Unless and until we touch that depth within us Sahaj Yoga is like Hare Krishna Hare Rama. Thats why I find so many Sahaja Yoga is like Hare krishna Hare Rama. Thats why I find so many Sahaja Yogis go off their rails suddenly because they have no gravity to go down into their own being and to use that gravity for manifesting the Divine Power. For example a vehicle which is not properly fixed cannot be used for sormething substantial. The most substantial thing in your lives is this Divine Power which looks very light. You never feel the weight or pressure of this Divine Power; but if your channel is not clean then this Divine Power cannot flow properly and manifest. So when we say that we are the instrurnents of God Almighty, we are connected to the mains. If this instrument is not alright then it cannot manifest whatever it is supposed to do. We are much above all these ordinary instruments, even the most com- plicatedoradvancedby sclencebecause wereach a state where we ourselves become the science. Science of Truth. Absolute Truth. The word Guru means gravity. The Mother Earth has gravity. A person who is a Guruhas to have the gravity. How do you develop this gravity? Some people artificially become very grave and some- times show that they are veryserious. Gravity is within yourself. In the second state of your Guru-pada gravity must manifest. As you become the witness, you gravity starts expressing itself. It will not show as temper or seriousness etc, but it wilmanifest in a way that the whole thing will becomeextremely dignified 11 Guru Puja

 understands, co-ordinates, co-operates, loves and looks afteryou. It is at your disposal. Whereveryou go the connection is maintained. Its like oa Governor traveling and the security travels with him The ganas are all around. You are Sahaja Yogis, so you are such special people that where-ever you may be sleeping, walking, sitting, that connection is main- tained. So what is needed for a Guru is self-esteem. This is a very important point. To achleve the self- esteem we have to intropect. And know that today lam not what lwasbefore. Iamarealised soul. Ihave got powers. I have powers of love, compassion, grasping things, powers of creativity, and powers of giving realisation to others. Nobody had these powers. In Sahaja Yoga we are not self consclous. We should not be self conscious because that can give you ego. But we should have self-esteem. I anm a Guru. lam not an ordinary person of the street. iam something special. Iam on the shores of truth, Ihave to salvage the people who are blind and mad. You don't have to say anything, command orrequest. It is at your disposal because you are one of the governors in the realm of God. Anyone who tries to frouble you or insult you has to pay for it. You should never worry or think of those things on the mundane level. On the contrary I would say better forgive because God alone knows what will happen to that person who misbehaves. You are specioal people. Only thing you have to have your self es- teem and you must try to maintain your balance. At that time a kind of a silence will come within you. When there will be any such crisis you will become extremelysilent. This is again a state. If there Issomething that makes you unhappy or upsettry to reach that axis which is Just silence. This silence will make youreally powerful. Thissilence is notonly yours because when you are in that silence you are in the silence of the cosmos. You are in connection with that Divine Power which is working all the cosmos. If you just become silent, know that your are just sitting in the kingdom of God. When you get the great honour of becoming a king then you walk upto you rthrone and sit down and look around and you feel the silence of this state that now you are the king. This silence is the sign that you are definitely now in contact with the Divine. You are silent because now the Divine is going to look aftereverything. You don't have to do anything. Just keep silent. Not forcibly. Its n a state. If a problem or turmoil takes place Once you come in balance, the Job of a Guru is to give balance ta others. It balances every- thing, the climate, nature, atmosphere. society, hu- man beings. It is there to balance you. That balance comes from the Guru principle which balances you. If you have Guru principle within, you get intobalance automatically. How do we develop thatbalance? In the ancient times they had very severe mnethods like starvation, asceticism, asanas, etc. This brings great imbalance. If you become austere, it will make you such a dry person and you will be burning. These ascetic ideasmayhave comebecause theywanted people to pay more attention to their spirit. A guru is not ascetic by nature, but he is so detached that he is ascetic. He may be a king or a beggar. if he is a Guru then in every state he is in complete balance. Nothing is termpting. There is no temptation. When you reach a state beyond temptation, greed or lust then there is no problem. Nothing can really bring you down. You may wear a tulsi garland, pearls or diamonds it doesn't touch you. But you don't run away from anything. When you run away from anything you become an ascetic artificially. As- ceticism is within yourself. It is innate. again suddenly your attention wiil jump onto that silence and once thishappens you are in contactwith this All Pervading Power. What is this All Pervading Power of love? Is it some energy floating around? Or is it some sort of river or ether? It is the complete totality of reality. Other things are unreal. The reality is so efficient that it never fails. We cannot even imagine with this human understanding how it controls or works. For example: You see the trees. The rose bush will give roses only. It wont give apples. It will grow upto a certain height, it wont grow like a coconut tree. All the characteristics of this nature is maintained, nourished, looked after, controlled absolutely and at the right time and seasons. That is why it is called Ritumbhara Pragyna. It is complicated for human brains that they cannot understand how it works. All the miracles are just a play of this power which thinks, Mostly what happens with people is that they feel that they are not a Guru. They come and tell me "Whatever symptoms you told me are still there. Istll have desires." You are going the other way round. You should not try to weigh upon what I tell you or judge yourself. Do not judge. Just gradually rise and appreciate yourself and gradualy settle down on the position you have achieved. But if you start The Divine Cool Breeze 12

 judging you will feeldiffidentand depressed. "Mother has said we must have this". Judging yourself all the time will not help you. You are self assured. You are sure about yourself. pline a Guru? Then they are Sahaj. None of these non Sahaj Gurus knewhow to giverealisation. Theynever knew that Kundalini can rise with their hands. Very few people historically have given realisation so far, But you people are giving left and right to anybody. You have CrOssed the limits of science now, You have yourself become the science of the Divine and you know each and everything about these chakras catching of yours and others. But the way we deal with others is the Guru pada i.e. kindness, sweetness and concern. Thats whatyour Mother has given. You have to have concern for each and every person. You also have to be motherly, extremely sweet, kindly, understanding and forgiving. Some people say "Mother said so'. I might have sald and might not have said. So Ihave said so. But what are you saying? It is a very good way of troubling others. You should outgrow into your own experience of what is good. You have a greater enjoyment thanmebecauseyou are alreadyhuman beings, so you know about human beings. Then you see your ascent and is much easier for you to ap- preciate. For me it is different because I have never known temptation and all these qualities you have. You have come from something human to a higher level is very creditable. You can enjoy much more thanIcould enjoy or Christ or Shri Krishna couldenjoy. Because the one who has risen and grown now feels the fragrance of his virtues, qualities and greatness. Then heenjoys himself. To him a properunderstanding of this change comes and he understands other human beings much better who don' have your capacity, your knowledge, depth and gravity. Be- cause you have been a human being. Now you are Divine. But because you have been a human being you understand other people. The real Gurus were very harsh people. But I am a Mother. Those Gurus have come out from the human level. You are different from those Gurus. You got it Sahaj, Others can also get it from you. You don't have to shout at them. Sahaja Yogis have no right to say anything harsh to anyone. Without saying anything to you, you got your realisation. If somebody comes to your for realisation you must do in the same mannet. If you have this harsh attitude you could be a Guru but not a Sahaja Guru. It is our responsibility to spread Sahaj Yoga and to emancipate the whole world, So no more priesthood and no more 'this person says so'. What you have to say, you say to that person. You will yourself see how you are reflecting your personality on another person; how he reacts and how he behaves, Gradually I see our collectivity is learning all this and all those horīble, dominating people have run away from Sahaja Yoga. I find that people are extremely loving and kindly to each other and also to others because you are the embodiment of goodness, righteousness, patience.compassion, love and concern. It isnothow youcando it. Youshouldn't give up. Just work at something and watch. Nobody can do that but you can do it. There should be self- esteem and assumption, Assume your powers if you are a Guru. You still think, " God knows if I have the powers or not, etc."Then you are stilil a beginner. We just say from our lips, "Mother, lom my own Guru;"Not only are you your own Guru but the Guru of the whole world. Its a collective Gurudonm we have. nothing can escape us now. We are absolutely formidable. We must understand that we have to aSsume. We elect someone, put some robes on him and say he is the Pope, But inside him he is not; he is just acting. He is fallible. With us, we have all these things within us and now you have to assume. Once you start assuming, all budhas will run away and you will be surprised who can stand a person who is a saint, a Guru and who knows he is a Guru. There is a difference between a Sahaj Guru and a non Sahaja Guru. Non Sahaj Gurus are very hot tempered. A Sahaj Guru has no business to be hot termpered. Here there is such love, such com- passion, such love fro each ofher. No competition, you understand that you have got everything in a Sahaj manner and in the same Sahaj manner you give it to others and respect others. You all know that you are all Gurus. You have to be Sahaj. You got it Sahaj, so youhave no business to be harsh, horrible, hot-tempered or strict Gurus. But it crawls up. Quite a lot of military business starts in Sahaja Yoga. No disciplining is needed. They will discipline by themselves. They are also Gurus. Who can disci- no politics. If You have to have introspection to see that your self esteem is completely correct. Other real Gurus lack compassion in this Sahaj style because they think theyhave workedvery hard so why should these people not work hard. You may be anything. educated, uneducated, doing this or that work, rich Guru Puja 13

 have their this freedom intact. You are a Guru. Supposing I am God Almighty I cant be like you." Then he told all his disciples to 'praise Her, because God is fond of praise. He said, "If you praise the Lord, He always gives every thing." I said, "Its true. You cannot get to Mother unless you really have Bhakti from your heart." or poor, makesno difference at all. You are the Guru and you assume your powers. Like in any talent, e.g. music. You know that you know music. You know that you know cooking etc. But that could be also not totally absolute. You are already absolute totality of reality. The reality is at your disposal. But assume it. You are not ordinary at all. In that you will drop out all that is nonsensical. Others will see you and be sur- prised. This knowledge is so subtle and great of the highest degree. You never feel bloated up with fruit. That humility and simplicity gives you the special edge which can pierce into any heart. Thus you become apostles of truth. Youcanbecome prophets like William Blake. Believe that you are one with that great Power which is God Almighty. You cannot get to God without Bhakti. If someone demands to get his Kundalini raised, cannot do that. But if someone asks humbly and with devotion to get realisation, it happens. There should be not only Bhakti but faith. This faith is now being challenged by science, Catholic church and other such horrible people. Your faith in God has to be absolutely untarnishible. Nothing can disturb that. You have seen the miracles of God. You have how you are working out His powers. You have seen known all these things. But still the faith in God is missing. The person who has complete faith in God, is God himself. Guru is called as one who is himself Brahma Chaitanya. When this faith in God is abso- lutely established that there is God Almighty and that I am the messenger of that God, and when it becomes absolutely firm in you then you are in the Guru pada. People discuss the immaculate conception of Christ. But He is God Almighty. He can do anything. How can you judge Him and His Powers? To discuss about God have you got His brains? In hurnility you realise that He is God Almighty; He can do anything. Then there is faith, not blind, but the real faith in that feeling that God is Almighty and you have become the messenger of God Almighty. This gives you all the strength and courage, His compassion, love, atten- tion and understanding. Thisfaith should be absolutely one with him. Önce I went to meet a real Guru who was very harsh. He spoke to me just as he would talk to a Goddess He said, "How do you find these worldly people here?" I said, "Alright. After all I have created them." He said, "You are God; with your powers, why don't you change them a little bit?" I said, "I have given them freedom. So they have the choice whether they want to get transformed or not. I cannot force them. I can do whatever I want to do but I don't want to do certain things. That is their freedom to choose. It is given to them because if they have to have the ultimate freedom, they should Ibless you today that all of you achieve that state that you reside in that Guru-pada state. Wherever you are, whatever may be your position, whatever you may do, the faith in God Almighty that is so truly within you will express itself and also mani- fest. It will act just like God. Today we must remember one thing that we must have complete faith in the Kingdom of God and in the powers of God Almighty and then in ourselves. May God Bless You. The Divine Cool Breeze 14

 Shiva Puja Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Bombay, 26th & 27th February 1987. was so because of its A-Vyakta form. It was only a STATE. A state to be enjoyed only in that State with no manifestation in the gross. In that State they became beyond Temptations, beyond Tamper etc. That is proof before us. HOW they did it, WHAT was this Broahma-Chaitanya ? - they could not show its Pratyaksha form. What they could show was only thorough Similes or through some Parables. Sahaj Yoga was known to me all along. It is a unique knowledge with which I was born. It was not so easy to reveal it & I wanted to find out how to reveal it. First of all I thought that the seventh chakra must be opened, Which I did, on the 5th of May. It is a secret in a way, Formerly, the Brahrma Chaitanya was A-Vyakta. It was not manifested. It was not expressed by itself. The people who managed to reach Brahma Chaitanya somewho, by attaining "Realisation', said It was Nirakar Ka Guna. You are like a drop that gets dissolved in the ocean'. This is whatI have achieved-Its Pratyaksha form. The complete form of the Brahma-Chaitanya I have brought form the sea. So now, l do not allow you to get dissolve in it. a big Ghata (Matka). In that, you are smailler matkas. In other words, I have taken you all in my body as small cells, nourishing you, looking after you, cleansing you & working it out. But I am MAHA-MAYA. So I gradually, and at the right time and right point. . I have put it in the form of No one could say, explain or tell people anything more about it. The great incarnations also who came out of this great Ocean of Brahma- Chaitanya, tried their best to share it with the best available followers (Which were very few) & introduce them to this Brahma-Chaitanya. But because the Brahma-Chaitanya was not in a Vyakta form, these incarnations got dissolved in it. have to work very siowly, When the seventh chakra was opened, all the chakras came to your Sahasrara, and so I could manage all your chakras & all your deities. Any Deity you ask and you get the vibrations. So that proves that i am the Brahma-Chaitanya, Like Gyaneshwara took his Samadhi. People said that he cannot talk. It has to be experienced. So very few people got to swallow it. Nobody could actualise the experience by feeling on their finger tips, or feel it on their senses, or on their mind, or ever understand it with their intellect. It was a big problem. They all tried and or prepared a ground for it. The Brahma-Chaitanya is the Adi-Shaktiiand Sada- Shiva is also in my heart. But since humanised, it is not so easy to find it out. If you tell this to Modern human beings, they will not understand. It can only be told to Sahoj Yogis because they will understand. To bear this Truth is so difficult. These days it is difficult to bear money, leave alone that, even to bear ones own position." They become so shaky. So for them to bear the fact that i encompass all the Incarnations is too difficult to bear. I am so much Now I have come as the Incarnation of the Brahma-Chaltanya AS A WHOLE. The sea of the Nirakar has now become a big cloud (Saakar). It has taken a form. Those who came before were all a part-and-parcel of it. Now the WHOLE has come. This cloud has rain water. The rain water is nourishing the minds of the people. Gradually they are brought to a level where their Kundalinis have risen. They have got their Realisation and now gradually they are feeling everything on their senses, their finger tips. This is the reason why nobody has talked about Vibrations so clearly. They managed to talk about Chaitanya Lahiri. This One day I went to Aurangabad, where a boy told me that Brahma-Chaitanya is beyond feeling and non-feeling. He had read about in some book. I told him it was true, but he should forget about it and just feel it. It was THEN that I decided to tell about it to a few people. You see, the right time 15 Shiva Puja

 also had to come before I disclosed it. All other religions have so far been segmented and non- integrated. NOW the WHOLE integration has come. I can now explain Christ, Mohommad saheb and others, because they are all a part & parcel of the whole, which is Brahma-Chaitanya. got crucified. Tukaram were coming from Vaikuntha and see how they were treated. Things just did not work out then. Mohommedsaheb, Nanak know all beyond the Vaikunthajibut | have not revealed it so far. It will be slowly revealed by me because people have not been prepared yet to become capoble of absorbing it. You see, it is like the preparation of a Khichidi, It is yet under preparation. So let it cook. You are all in it. The quality of people being builtiup now is equivalent to the choicest of the handful of disciples of the past prophets. NOW & HERE everyone is destined to come along slowly and steadily. All those who will now fall into this great Hand of the Supreme Cook will be well prepared in it. Rest who opt to remain out will be left out. I is all beyond TIME. Each to his own capability to achieve. Just as it is difficult to say how long will one learn to ride a Bicycle, or become a CA., or a Doctor. Some may take very little time, while others very long. Do not talk about me to the Scientists. Just tell them that this is a Unique Method that has come. Though it is a little difficult to understand, yet it has HAPPENED and we have seen it for ourselves. Like that you tell them. If you talk about Me, they will be shocked. Maximum you can tell them that - this knowledge was brought out by Sri Mataji Nirmala Devi, by which the Kundalini could be arisen. HOW she has managed it, we do not know. It is probably a secret. Put the whole thing on me. Now you understand. Can you say-how does a seed sprout 7 By putting it in the Mother earth. So you say, that by putting EVERYTHING to Mataji, our seed has sprouted. It is a living process and we have seen it for ourselves. The bondage of time is ereated by man himself. In reality this body has no timing. Time dimension has been created by man by his habitation. With the formation of habits, the KAAL or time bondage is created. When there is no habit, there is no time dimension.. So far nobody has been able to give Realisation to others. May be only one or two have given Realisation to others. Most people have achleved it by the process of cleansing. Example : Buddha got his Realisation by thorough cleansing. Brahrna- Chaitanya ciawled inside him because he asked for it, genuinely wanted it & prayed for it and was therefore cleansed by it. But again He went into its STATE. There was no communication about it thereafter. This is what is in the COLLECTIVE now. This collective working is now happening because this STATE has started expressing itself. With Sahaj-Yoga lots of Habits leave you. But this takes time too. You must therefore never justify your habits If you want to rid them. It is with justification that habits stay. If in one life time you can achleve Self-Realisation, reach the point of having begun to lose your habils, THEN in that very life time it is possible for you to acquire that so called STATE. In the event that you may happen to remain half-baked during the process of one life time, then you will come back to complete your achievement, This is how Sahaj-Yoga will now work out for some time. THIS is now the last Judgement. During the process of the revelations in Sahaj-Yoga, when I still see people behave in the opposite direction, I feel awesome. I continue to have such bad experience at times but then such people leave Sahaj-Yoga. This happens, but you must not get discouraged. You must go on working towards it putting in your very best efforts. Supposing you discover electricity, and you keep it to yourself & not talk about it to anybody. Then how will anyone know about it ? It is not that the great Saints did not want to express it, but there was no communication then. It s just llke if someone hos no eyes to see, then whom are you going to show to ? Or talk to ? There was no one to appreciate and absorb that STATE at that time. Those who did achleve realisation, their Sahasraras got opened, but they got lost in it, The whole experience remained to be individual and not collective. Now that is over. Now it is collective. Everything has to be collective at a point. Always remain in the Centre. Do not worry about your growth in Sahaj. Once you are in the centre, growth l automatic. If is already belng nourished Even to reach this point, testing was done by sending liftle bit feelers at a time. Ulfimately Christ The Divine Cool Breeze 16

 stunned. The mode of action of Stiponilan Adrenaline, they cannot explain, but we can. Now take carbon. If you see it from the lett side, you can see the tight side and vice versa. On the left side you can see the figure of Carbon as in form of a Swastika, On the right side it looks like the Omkara. If you see upward from down below, it looks like a cross. THAT ISA FACT. That there exists an all prevading power above the Human Brain. This is only a hypothesis. The human brain is in the form of a Pyramid. The Param Chaitanya or all pervading power is coming from all sides and is striking the brain of a Foetus (soon after its formation). by me, Daily you move from left to right. In your Habits you move towards the left while Ambitions you move towards the right. To seat ne in your Heart, is a Bhav ona feeling. So just as you develop Habits.on the lefl sicie, you must practice to have that Habit-like Bhav for me in your hearls. If, so easily you can acquire your habits, then why not this Beautiful Bhav ? All this is nothing but a change in Bhav. After all Habits are easy to remove, being Just a mere STATE ofmind. in Once you have established MY Bhav in you, takes its posilion in your entire body and carries liseif through eternity. Depends on how much you are using yourself to it. It is Just like if you put lots of smoke on your room then all the mosquitoes will run away. So it depends on how much of ME you have filled in your hearts. What actualy happens is that, at the apex of this pyramidical brain, the Param-Chaitanya passes unhindered and settles down in the spine in the inverted Triangular bone area, at the base, in three and a half coils as the KUNDALINI SHAKTI In the process it leaves its mark called the "Vacuum channel" in the spine. Now the Param-Chaitanya hitting on the sides of the triangular brain, has to permeate the Grey and the White matter. THESE have their own Densities, and so governed by the physics Laws of Refraction, the Choitanya refracts from left to right and from right to left. This is also called the Prismatic refraction effect. This phenomena exists mostly for Human brains and not so much in animals. The question that now arises is that, how does one come to stabilise the state of My bhav in your hearts ? The ANSWER is constantly stopping your own attention ar Chitta. Always do Chitta-nirodh. Just like you go out and you see something you must conciously stop your Chitta from going towards it. It comes with practice, Pull it inside. This is called detachment. Remember the contact outside, or Samparka is always through the Chitta. Watch where it goes all the time. Always ask yourself, "Where is my Chitta" Stability comes by ? During the refraction process, attention is pulled out to both the sides and is driven in the outward direction. Both the attention and the refracted Chaitanya cross at the AGNYA Chakra from both sides on their way out. As a result of this pull, and additional force called the resultant force is created. Now the theory of Parallelogram of forces (of physics) comes into play. The resultant force is divided into two parts, each being at a 90 degree angle to the other on both the left as well as the right side. The resultant force acts in the centre of Its two counterparts. One part creates the left and the right Sympathetic Channel of the Foetus by pushing its way down the body. The other part pushes its way out through the senses, dragging with it the Human attention both to the left and the right. The second part is also known as the ACTION in the outer world. From the outer world, this ACTION brings back a reaction. (another famous law of Physics). The path followed by the action & the Human Actually Chitta is segregated within us as our consciousness as well as our awareness. When our consciousness becornes one with our awareness, it assumes the form of Vibratory awareness which balances you. This balancing keeps you in the Centre. The moment your chitta goes in the wrong direction, immediately you feel the HEAT on your senses. That is how the all pervading Power works and grows within you. All our habits and Samskaras crumple our Brain formation and appear as convolutions in the brain. When all these convolutions open up, new spaces are created in the brain, having more absorption power. The crumpled brain supply opens. This is how the connection with the Divinity is made. Solentists basically have to be stunned. Like I went to a Medical Institute and I told them about the Para-Sympathetic nervous system. They got 17 Shiva Pula

 starts and all chakras get integrated. Take an example of your Mind. It wants to do something. Your body- It wants to do something else. Thirdly, your intellect – it wants to do something else. There is no Integration. On Realisation, all three reaction is the same on the left side this reaction builds one's Conditioning while on the right side it builds the Ego. In short, our Chitta accompanied by the resultant Brahma-Chaitanya's living force went to the outer world, collected a reaction and brought back with it a conditioning from the left, thereby forming the MANASA or the MiND. Both the action & reaction pass through both the AGNYA & Vishuddhi chakras. The Chitta, being dispersed in nature, has the ability to flow from the whole body. The reaction of the left is the DESIRE element, the potential of which gives birth to the IDA nadi on the left sympathetic channel. Similarly, the reaction of the right is the ACTION element, the potential of which forms the Pingala nadi. The overflow of the IDA nadi forms a Balloon-like cloud at the back of the AGNYA chakra called the Super-Ego, while the overflow of the Pingala nadi forms a similar cloud in front of the AGNYA chakra called the Ego. The AGNYA femains directly in- between these two balloons. The front of the AGNYA is controlled by the Pituitary of the brain, while the back is controlled by the Penial. become one. Take another example of a piece of cloth, if represents the attention. Before realisation it is all spread out & in all directions. Now take a finger and poke the cloth in the centre from the bottom and raise it upwards. What happens ? The cloth is pulled up to a point & in the process it just wraps or falls around the finger. In the same way, when the Kundalinl rises, it pokes the attention, raises it to the Sahasrara, where it gets enlightened by the light of the Brahma-Chaltanya. It then just wraps and falls in line with the Kundalini's path on the Sushumna Nadi in the centre. What has actually happened is that on realisation, our Chitta is pulled inside from wherever it is spread out in the outer mundane world. The Chitta is thereby enlightened. This is the so-called STATE. But in reality we human are slaves of our habits. We out of sheer habit do not allow our Chitta to stay out in that state permanently. Actually the chitta should not go out. Here is a simple situation that I find myself to be in with you. I am putting you in the Boat to sail off but you are resisting my help by constantly sticking your one foot In the water. Your attention is on frivolous things you see, out of your habit you put out your leg, knowing very well, I am sitting inside to sail you through. I also happen to see that your leg may be swallowed anytime by an alligator, but you, In your own habits are blind enough not to notice the alligator. Now, can you imagine my plight ? Imagine how I feel ? When the Kundalini enters the Agnya chakra, she enlightens it. Then Christ within you is enlightened or awakened. He sucks both these balloons of the Ego & the Super-Ego, and the whole AGNYA chakra opens. That is why Christ died for our sins. There is simultaneous opening of the Sahasrara. I saw the Sahasrara of the Virat open. It was like tonguest of flame. Just like when you disect the human brain, Its cross-section looks like petals or like flames. In the centre of it, it looks like a yellow hole. The opening of the Sahasrara is sudden. With a bang it opens. How canI explain,-it gives the effect of one telescope into another. Normally with the opening of the Agnya and the Vishuddi, the Ego and the Super-Ego get sucked in. Mind is Super-Ego. Ahamkara is Ego. Our soul or Atman is surrounded by all the five Elements plus their causal expression, with the Kundalini on the periphery. The elements are mainly the Earth and the water, while their causal is just jyot matra. That is why I say-do SATSANG-meaning, spend time with other Sahaj-Yogis with the object to keep yourattention in the Centre. It is very important to constantly keep your attention in the centre. With realisation, our left and right Nadis relax off upon receipt of Divine energy. Due to release of tension, the Chakras open out still further. It is a cycle. More Kundalini fibres can then rise and so on. At this stage the attentlon develops a quality to remain in the centre. You can then direct it out to perform a particular task, and after achieving it, without any reaction, it occupies Its position in the centre. It has by now achieved the quality of not getting attached to anything. When self-Realisation takes place, the Deities are awakened, and the chakras are nourished and freshened. They open out and start releasing energies, At the Pithas (representative points of the chakras on our brain) all actions begin against each related chakra. Coordination at both level The Divine Cool Breeze 18

 In my case it is different. If my attention is on you, | will take all your problems into myself and cleanse it and myself suffer. This I will do only if I want to, Now. Sahaj Yogis, I have to fix, because I have put them indiscriminately into my body. So T have to suffer. The Sahaj-Yogis themselves are just barometric In this regard. They cannot suffer the way I do, may be a liftle bit, because whatever they suck, goes into the vast ocean. ocean and dissolving in it is not anything unique or great. But to become a cloud from the ocean and then soak everyone with your Rain-water would surely be a unique achievernent: This is my aim and also my game. Just as every game has an aim, so has mine. To stay in the Centre, become Sharangat. Say "you are everything Mother, so you do everything". it is complete surrender. Now the study of the fifth dimension of matter is going on in Russia-the study of Bloplasm. This is completely a tight sided activity. Each human being has his own Aura and depending on his changing Gunas, the colour represented by that Guna or Aura changes. What do you glve bandhans to ? To your Auras so as to protect it. Only matter can have an Aura. So it is all materialistic. The fifth dimension is actually a microscopic or a photographic dimension. So when you see some lights in my photographs, it is one form of an Aura. You see Brahnma-Chaitanya has got its own light. This is only visible to me, Some people can also see it when their AGNYA is bad. They can see it from outside. For a Scientific mind, you have to give them this whole vidya in bits. If their cup is small you cannot fill more than the capacity it can take. So have patience. You cannot glve them the whole ocean now. Remember that Science is only a wee part of the WHOLE. First create a craving for SAHAJA In them by introducing it to them. Once they come, then watch them. Remember your tirme ? The same thing happened with each one of you. At first you experienced It then craved more and more for it, very progressively. This process is also Scientific. In the mundane, when you work to earn money, you will encounter the MAYA. Just remember that you are earning for ME. That's all. Go ahead and earn as much as you can. This I am only talking from the materialistic point of view. The principle is that when you are away from it, you can see it, but when you are in it, then what can you see ? People who come into SAHAJ-YOGA through you Sahaj-Yogis come better than through ME. You see, with me they tend to get entangled in my MAYA. See, I am nobody in my human form as far as the new comers are concerned. Thoughtless awareness comes when your Kundalini crosses the Agnya Chakra-when there is no thought. It happens by control. Slowly it becomes a part of you and encompasses your whole body. It becomes a STATE. This is doubtless Awareness. You become the Brahma-Chaitanya or the STATE. EPILEPSY: At this stage, you all need to work and not just land up in that STATE & get into a Samadhi. I have achieved It for you without giving it to you. Then why do you ask for it ? You must know that YOU ARE THERE and there is no doubt about it. This is now the final game. In reality this STATE is very easy and spontaneous to achieve, but yet I would like you to work for it & try for it. When you feel like achieving this STATE right now and for your own individual self, then I would say that you are being selfish and in a way you are becoming an escapisc. You have to first become collective. Otherwise on an individual basis you will get lost in the Nirakar and you will not even be able to see ME. You see, you will be in that STATE-you will be dissolved in the ocean. So evolving from the Cause: Movement of the attention to the extreme left. You Subconscious. This happens when you develop some fear or fright being a weak person on the left side, Also when you happen to be involved in an accident -sudden fright or jerk. go Into the state of collective Cure: Bring attention to the centre. To do this, first bring it to the right by saying the Gayatri Mantra. Then to the centre by saying the Brahamdeva- Saraswati Mantra. On moving to the right, you start feeling Vibrations, stop at this point, Do not say any more Gayatri Mantra because you must not go too much to the right. Too much to the right frequency of the Vibrations start means decreasing.. Shiva Puja 19

 It is important that you'must get the Vibrations. I noi, Ihen repeatedly raise the Kuridalini till you teel the Vibrations. your mind does not go towards all non-sensical things in grOSs forms. All that you must say is : "Mother you are doing everything, I do nothing". THIS IS THE CONTROL ON YOU. Another best way is to put the left hand towards the Photographs and the right an the ground. Say Mahakali Mantra so that the Vibrations start flowing. Use of the candle from the bock side of the left will also help. For both left and right sided persons it is important to first cleanse yourselves and then do your meditation. When you move towards the left side, you raise your Kundalini and it Just comes out. You Must raise your Kundalini before Meditation. Do not just be mechanical when sitting to do Puja. Your DESIRE must be genuine to GROW. This freatment is also the same for CANCER & other PSYCHOSOMATIC diseases. It Muscular It includes disedses. Scheletal disorders. In People who are from Arya-Samaj are basically Right sided people. They nust use Bhakti, Bhajans, seat me in their hearts i.e.. move towards the left side, Cleansing must be done only by use of mantras on the Central Chakras. Mahakali and Maha Saraswati, both act an the centre from both the sides and are therefore Inter connected. Even the Mantras for the left and right are chanted only for the purposes of raising the Kundalini alone. There Is no use of attention here. Treatment of left side through chanting of Mantras for raising the Kundalini is only to improve upon your desire problems, the trouble comes from your disturbed Shri Ganesha. In Hysterectomy cases, where the Uterus is removed, the problem is of Sri Ganesha. AND fear element. If somebody is not having a child, then she has a left Swadeshthana problem. Same problem is also true for heavy Periods- when there is Parasympathetic in the Sacral region, there is too much flow resulting in heavy bleeding, Other results are Diarrhoea & Excessive urination. much stimulation in the too Cure Use of Gayatıl Mantra, initially, But it must also be backed by some Medicines. You can give alvain dhuni (even for surgery patients). For Lumbago you give ajvain water. For Muscular Lumbago use application only. In Lumbogo the bone gets twisted, therefore use vibrated kerosine oil mixed with some other oil. In few days it gets alright. energy. Another way is to raise your right and lower it to the left by hand. This helps a lot. In addition activate your right side by Mantras of Brahmdeva & of Gayatri. But all upto a point. You see when I have to do it i control it by raising your Kundalini upto a point. And before it goes too much to the other side, I control by pulling it out just in time. It is all in my control. When people do not control, they just go on and on.& Like-Ram, Ram... Panduranga, Panduranga .. and get lost on one side totally. Ajvain for intake and geru for For any treatment whatsoever, remember that the most important fact renains that everything depends on your Ichha or Desire Shakti. So Ida nadi is important that you must have desire and it must be the right Desire. No wrong Desires because eventually everything becomes Mother is now asking you all "Where is your attention". mechanical & hypocritical. The right desire is only to achieve your GROWTH. This is SHUDDHA-ICHHA. If you have a gross desire like-l must have a son etc. you hove it too, but then you will want sormething else also. Meaning that you are now becoming a hypocrite. In pure Desire you got everything ina bundle. It is from genuine Desire that you grow. This whole concept is your attitude towards your Ichha-Shakti. First must come Bhakti Bhav and this then must move onto Shraddha BHAV. ON PHYSIOTHERAPY When the vibrations flow, they relax the muscles. The muscles in reality have gone into spasms due to tensions. E.g. Left Vishuddi or any chakra, the vertebrae start to twist (Physical). When you put your chakras in me (in my care) they will be relaxed and then you can adjust by giving vibrations. These vibrations can be given to others. Now take the Action energy or Kriya Shakti. This has two aspects, namely Physical and Mental, Physically you must sit down and Meditate do become thoughtless. Mentally you must see that The Divine Cool Breeze 20

 You need not touch the other person, by giving vibrations by using circular movement by hand using mantra. take Tobacco and cigarette, creating problem an Left Vishuddhi, This makes the pumping of the heart difficult, so it becomes tired because it cannot pump. Due to extrerme left Vishuddhi, the lethargic heart gives you Angina. These are the 2 types of Heart attacks. The first type can be cured by putting ice on the stomach and on the heart on the tight side. Also move from left to right. Sit in water. Do not use light at all. Sleep in darkness, stay more indoors. Take full rest. And repeat that "l am the Spirit". "O Lord, please forgive me". The second fype can be cured by asking him to say- "Mother you are my beej mantra. You are the Mantrika. Also "I am not guilty". and say "I forgive everybody Lord." So that all the hurts disappear. Use light and fire to clear the leff side. In left sided diseases, you get into the collective subconscious frorn where you collect Protein 52, virus. These make you beyond help sometimes. Fever is caused to those whose liver is out, who has overworked his liver. He is heated up etc. It can be corrected by putting lce on the liver. Malarial Fevers are right sided l.. Mosquito bites. Bacterial Fevers are left sided. These are mainly due to certain in-takes of food such as Fungus like Mushrooms, old paneer etc, Diabetes is the action of the right side affected by the left side. Right side being vuinerable. Firstly when you think too much, pay no attention and remain in your habits, then a fear element adds to your vulnerability. Just like a hard working man thinks too much. All his fat cells are used for the brain. The swadhishthana goes into action and neglects its left counter part. The left side gets drained. You become vulnerable, At this stage if sorne fear comes up in you and you also start feeling guilty,. then you develop Diabetes. Asthama is mostly a left sided psychosomatic disease. It can sormetimes be tight sided with persons who are very dry and have always tried to Dominate others- The Dryness of the peritorium is too much. Mostly to also come, from the right heart- For those whose father is dead or that, you are not a good father or that you happen to trouble your child or that you are unhappy about your ownself. It can be combination of any. Correction is to use All's name in mantra. Source is from swadhisthana and Nabhi of the left. Left Nabhi gets first affected by having fear of wife or worries for her or any other family member. In addition your vuinerability at that point brings about Diabetes. Clear it by clearing your Agnya chakra. Don't think so much. Go into Thoughtless Awareness. Put left side to right side. Take more salt so that it neutralises the action of sugar it has got crystallisation. Use ice on right Swadhishthan and Nabhi. Avoid sugar after proper tests if necessary. Intake for left side-If people eat the fat it is bad. Because the fat is stored and it is not available for circulation. For thin people their fat is available for circulationi, so they can eat fat. But for fat people, they should only put fat in their nose, oil in the ears etc. For fat people oll massage on the head is very good. These people can massage with Golden Amla Hair oil. It cools them down. water of because excretion ARTICARIA is also psychosomatic. When your liver is lethargic, t becomes vulnerable. Cure : Use geru-Rub it on some stone and give it to your child in Honey (very little). Also for grown ups. For very old people it is also very good for it has soluble calcium. Any soluble calcium is good. It is good for application and then cover it with something black. The source of its problem is left Nabhi. You see when the liver is lethargic, the left Nabhi becomes lethargic. The person is not using much of his energies. So it is a lethargic liver, excited by the left Nabhi. Heart Attacks: Over active and inactive or lethargle heart. Overactive heart is of right sided people. In such cases the heart can collapse. Especially it can happen in very young age. This is because their attention is too much outside. Due to this their Atma departs. The atma gets no attention due to their extreme materialistic nature. Overactivity can also come from too much worry about the family. thinking too much of the future. The heart starts to pump more blood and over works itself. It gets tired. In addition the attention is not on the spirit. For Lethargic hearts people take all kinds of mantra's and first spoil their Left Vishuddhi. They Treatment ; is again left side. Best is to cover the body with something black, so that the heat is given to it. It is a form of an allergy. Most allergies are caused from cold to hot. i.e. Taking bath in Shiva Puja 21

 must be clubbed with complete Discrimination. cold water and then hot water. To take coffee and immediately take cold water. This sudden change, the system cannot adjust to. In the left Nabhi area is the spleen. The spleen is a speedometer and also an adjuster. When it adjusts and it is not properly done due to sudden change, it causes problem, so it has to suddenly provide its energies to either increase or decrease the flow of the RBC's. That's how the spleen goes crazy. This is also the root cause of Blood Cancer for people who are hectic. There are Deities who are in the Chakras. When the Kundalini rises, she awakens them just like seeds. Once they are awakened, they start working it out. They know what is their job, what to like they have been appolinted. Those work out - Deities you have achieved through your evolution at different points: So where ever they are settled, they do the job. Take a seed. It is gross. It has potential to become a tree and this has the potential to become numerous trees. So this potential is subtle to subtler to subtlest. ts appearance is gross. The causal of mother earth is fragrance so when it awakens the kundallni, it touches the causal also just like you get the fragrance. The Causel of realisation is the Shuddh Iccha. Man is made of 3 potential Le. the gross, the subtle and causal. This causal of realisation, ie. Shuddha iccha enlightens the subtle and the gross bodies. Just like you put a seed into mother Earth. The mother earth enlightens the seed and gives its potential to it.-In the same way, the Kundalini is the mother earth in you. She rises and gives this potential dimension to your seed. Everything has a different causal and so every chakra acts according to its own causal. The problem is, we do not understand even at the grosser level. Now take a very gross level-you reach a point where to take an atom. This atom has Nucleus which as protons, Neutrons and Mestons. Now, if you cool down this atom such as Helium gas, the atoms become collective. So also the mesotons act on their own, and even they become collective when cooled to a certain point. So even to the grosser and grosser. Scientifically it can be proved. When you have the Back Agnya working, you become lethargic and when you have the front Agnya working you become overactive. The balance of chemicals in the body comes from the Agnya. That is why you should always be in thoughtless Awareness. Left sided people are ones who have troubles thernselves and Right Sided people trouble others. Those who are left sided, their bodies will pain and they will suffer. The right side people, who inflict pains on athers will not notice it. These right sided people can therefore develop diseases like cithosis of the liver or a problem on the eyes. Bhakti is the guna of the left. Shraddha is of the centre, The left side is very pleasant till you start getting the pangs and then you start getting drifted away– this is happening in Bhakti with some people. When I speak, every word is a mantra As l speak people start getting alright. Now all types of people are coming up. Sorne are coming up very fast. As far as I am concerned they have put me aside as Devi and that I cannot be reached. Now, it will be one of you only who will stand up and people will see you and come into Sahaj, This is the best way to let some people just come up. This is the game. this potentiol exists: But when we take a human being, we are talking about a living process, The human being is the most manifested one on the grosser level. Now, the inner growth has to corne. On the grosser level he is now fully manifested. Just take a seed which hos reached its grosser level and is now living and pulsating and it is then put inslde the mother Earth then what is happens? Lots of people have personallsed it. They want to know what is happening about it in my family, then to others, then to people of Bombay etc. Sahaj Yogi's are very honest, compassionate and diligent, good natured and have lesser tempers. The subtle to the subtlest is replicated in our whole being as such. The potential is the Kundalini. The Kundalini is representing the causal of the mother Earth. The causal of the Virata is collectivity. Their character has assumed a new dimension in this process of building up. Each one of you must work hard towards it and not bother too much about the other. Sthiti is tested only when you are exposed to it. That is the time of Paristhiti. Sthifi The representatives of Sada Shiva and Adi Shakti in The Divine Cool Breeze 22

 stone, If does not fight with it, It just goes around it and binds It so that later when it is to become a free it will help in Its foundation. Then slowly, and easily it reaches out towards the watet. It hos no premonition about where it will find the level of us are the Atma and the Kundalini (These are beyond the causal, in fact they excite the causal). Take an Example : Light a candle. Put your hand before it, It is awakened before my photograph. The potential of the candle has come in. That is my photograph has awakened its potential. With it, it can now burn the negativity. You have seen a wall getting black out of such an effect. water. I ance experimented with a bumble Bee. I appled some colour on to it as it used to make its own house at mny place, Now sornehow that colour came to its wings. One fine day I went to a place which was very far away, I Bee there. Then she was seen again at my house. How did she take on all these routes. She must be having some magnet. Everything hos a cousal which keeps all the potential. From causal to the gross you rmove through the subtle, Now what happens, just os fragrance is the causal of the mother Earth, through that causal all flowers and trees come out. Also for human being it is the carbon. How the mother Earth burns within herself, creates this carbon within herself with the heat and that carbon becomes a part and parcel within you to create Amino Acids. So the Mother knows, at the causal level, she knows what you are. The causal is the Nirakar in the Shakti form while the Deities are in the Sakaar to use it. They know how to use It. The exhibifion of it comes on the gross through the central nervous system. saw the same Bumble Also how do birds find their homes from Australia to Siberia? You see they all are in collective and absolutely Homogeneous: Any they all move together. This is for the Pasha state of the Pashus. But we humans are no longer pashus, we are free. Now it is in this freedom, when lots and lots is lost and gone, then human beings settle down. This freedom was given at Adam and Eve level. If they were sensible, there would problem. Now one has to pay too much for this freedom. But now-a-days it is all working out. This living process cannot be explained to Science. The Scientists will not accept the Deitles: So don't worry about them. If we don't have Scientists whot is the harm, we will not miss them. The Sakaar is the Doer or the Karta, The causal is would have been no the power of a particular Deity-the unrmanifested power. But as soon as the Deities are awakened, their powers are alsu awakened. This is a living process and how it, works out you cannot explain. Now see the foetus, how does it takes its form, who guides it, there must be some Intelligence does it, who manages It - who plans it out? who The greatest thing for all Scientists is to see for themselves. Nothing can be explained to them. Say Sulphur Di Oxide has got vibrations that are electromagnetic Symmetric and Iso-Symmetric. They just state what they see. They will see in Sahaj Yoga what it is, you give them the facts and let them experience it. How can you show them anything Scientifically? Now I will question a Gynac : Anything foreign in the body is thrown out of the system, then why not the foetus? Answer me. Something nourishes it, looks after it and then throws it out at the right point of time. It is growing within and it does not trouble the mother, but in fact the mother's face changes while the whole energy of the being is transferred. Now where does this beauty on the mother come from? See the nourishing and looking after. It is so amazing to see its perfection. Isn't it? Jai Shri Mataji We think no end of our intelligence. But living in the presence of God, a small seed came and at the end of each a small cell came out. The intelligence which this cell has, if it is to come to man then Sahaj Yoga would be fully established. It stralght away sees, its own direction. It sees a Shiva Puja 23



----------------------

1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Shri Ganesh Puja Synopsis
Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Perth, Australia, February 1992
for fife. But when it starts the other way round it
works out the destructive part. These both are in
balance. If not, life can
constructive and destructive both have be in
balance."
"It is so joy giving to be back in Australia," Here it is
has been seorchingly hot, but "now you have seen
how it rained and rained because you wanted
rain that was needed very rmuch, and also you
wanted a cooler atmosphere. Both things worked
out. Then the worry was because of the rain the
seekers won't come. Also that was solved because
not go on. The
As in nature, whatever is created is destroyed and
something new comes up again in a constructive
way, and then whatever it has constructed, a part
of it is destroyed. So in death resides life; there is no
death. "Imagine if all the people who have been
born since long would have been living today we
would not have been here.. Sa many animals
have died and those animals have also becorne
human beings. So many human belngs have to
die to get other people to come on this earth, and
that you have to take some rest and come back
again. So the deoth is just the change of life.
Withoutdeath life cannot exist can not exist, t's a
balance between the two. So a Sahaja Yogl
should never be afraid of death...If he is going to
die, it is only going to be another life where he
rests for a while and comes back again with
greater enthusiasm, with greater energy.
it was a testing ground. I told them if they are real
seekers they will come; otherwise what is the use
of having big quantity with no seeking? And see
yesterday what beautiful people came. They
came all the way in the rain because they were
seekers, and very deep seekers. They never even
asked a question. Can you imagine? In Australia I
am always bormbarded with questions... But I
could feel the seeking so much that I said, 'Better
ask Me questions,' and not a single question was
asked. So in one shot, how many things I have
done."
At the program, the electricity went off,
which also had a good effect because we had to
use candles and then all the bhools were just
merged with the candles. This happened when
Shri Mataji came in the room. It was also important
to realize that to be so dependent on electricity is
not a very good thing. "So we should have always
provislons for something natural. We should keep
some lanterns and things and should try to be
more with the nature than with this electrticity. I tll
you this electricity is responsible for spoiling our
eyes very much... Because not that it gives us light
but also it takes away light from our eyes. So too
much use of electricity has made us like slaves." It
is a good trend to have more natural surToundings,
more natural places to live,
So many things in nature are completely in
balance. "If this balance breaks then we would be
nowhere. So we have to understand that all this is
done by Shti Ganesha. He is the one who looks
after all these material things and all the things
that you created. For example, the first chakra is
created by this Mother Earth and all this universe is
created by the second chakra. But the first chakra
is the one which emits the holiness, the
auspiciousness which gives balance."
When people lose their balance, they go to the
right or to the left. Some Sahaja Yagis are
extremely righteous. But there is no love. "Without
love, righteousness has no meaning. Love doesn't
mean that you have to indulge into anything but
you must have detached love and responsibility."
Shri Ganesha is on Mooladhara and He controls all
our senses as far as the Mooladhara is concerned-
specially all the execretion. "So we are not people
"If Param Chaitanya is the power of love of God,
then it works out equilibrium. So the Sahaja Yogis
who are going to work out Param Chaitanya have
to have equilibrium in their life. This is a place
where I say resides Maha Ganesha." Shri Ganesha
brings balance when it is steady. "When it starts
moving in the right direction then a constructive
work starts and also it works out all that is important
Shree Ganesh Puja
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-1.txt 
 who believe in indulgence of it, neither in the
detachment of it, but in the balance. That's why
you have to be married, you have to have proper
physical life, and that you should have proper
children and lead a very sensible dignified married
life.. But love should be there love between
husband and wife between children and parents
and everyone, If one person goes into imbalance,
the whole farily goes into imbalance. To establish
a family sweetly and nicely is also an art, and if
both of them agree and say we will do this way I
am sure this is not difficult because you are Sahaja
Yogis. You already know the quallty of balancing."
Earth has made Shri Ganesha. "This gravity comes
very naturally to human beings. It is not to be
adopted or anything."
"In childhood if the children are told about their
gravity, about their dignityabout their greatness.
they will immediately develop it with a great pride.
This gravity gives you a kind of an attraction.
Anybody who is grave-grave doesn't mean you
pull a big face... but gravity means you are not
disturbed easily by any tumoil or anything. Gravity
means os many things As you can see from Shri
Ganesha's character that gravity means you are
the one who is standing in the cenfer - a person
who sees everything. doesn't get disturbed,
doesn't get tempted, self contented, doesn't ask,
for anything, doesn't need anything, doesn't take
revenge, forgives because he has no way to get
out of his gravity - he is just bound there." Such a
person does not tun after someone who is
imbalanced or who has done something wrong.|
He has pity on such a person.
In the West now there is imbalance because there
all kinds of problems of homosexuality, including
asceticism which is practised in T.M. and which is
unnatural. It is natural to be in balance, then things
go off and you become either too much of
something and nothing of the other. That is how
people suffer."
From the Ganesha chakra we have to learn what
we are doing. Sornetimes we have to accumulate
things, we have to consume things and then we
have to throw them away also. "When we receive
some thoughts from anywhere we should only
digest what is good for us, and is digested
because of Param Chaitanya. The rest should be
thrown away."
Standing firm itself is sufficient to frighten others
and to destroy others. "He is standing at the point
where he cannot be disturbed, but others are
running towards destruction. So what is the use of
running after and also get destroyed?" They may
fry to help because they can see that someone is
going to fall down, but if a person doesn't want to
become balanced, you cannot force it.
For example, we take whatever is good out of
Catholicism- the worship of Christ, but whatever is
nonsensical has to be thrown away, "Christians
have crossed all the limits of adultery... What will
happen to your children? What will happen to
your saciety?" All the societies where adultery is a
style of life are in complete imbalance, and are
going against Christ's teachings.
"Ganesha's greatest quality is that he has balance.
With that gravity, He sits down on this Mother
Earth." Australia is a country of Shri Ganesha, so
Australians must naturally have balance, but they
don't. Before starting Sahaja Yoga in Australia, Shri
Mataji's experience of Australians was that they
drank a lot, talked irreverently, shook hands very
hard-did everything in a big way. This country of
should
"Shri Krishna has said in everybody resides the spirit.
Then everybody is just the same. How can you
have a caste system? You can have a caste
system according to the work you are doing but
you can't have caste system according to the
birth. Everybody has got the spirit, so everybody
can ascend. Christ has said the same thing. He
has not sald that women don't have the spirit and
men have the spirit. It has no relevance to
dharma which means balance, being in the
center. If you are in the center, at the gravity
point, you can not move to one side or the other.
Gravity comes from Mother Earth and Mother
Shri Ganesha
with
be
in
tune
Paramchaitanya. Animals who live in nature cure
absolutely in contact with God, under the
complete controt of God Almighty. They do not
agrees each other, they are extremely gentle, and
they do not form groups. "They grow, accept
whatever is given to them, live with it happily, and
if they have to be destroyed they accept the
destruction."
In this country of Shri Ganesha, the nature should
be imbibed within you." and the baloance should
come in such a manner that your whole
The Divine Cool Breeze
2)
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-2.txt 
 gentle to show we are Ganeshas Special Ganas -
that's what l feel about Australlans.
temperament should show that balance in you."
But the most difficult thing in Australia is that "there
are groups and groups and people fight and lots
of problems with them." In the country of Ganesha
where there are Ganas' "if the Ganas start fighting
with each other, "What will happen?" Supposing
the antibodles in our body start fighting with each
other, what will happen in the body? So you are
like Ganas, specially blessed people to be born In
this country. And after all these achlevements that
you have made, if you are going to take
absolutely nonsensical things of the countries who
are over developed, have lost their balance, then
what is the use of being born in this Ganesha's
land? In this Ganesha land, you have to have
complete balance within yourself. That is what I
expect from the Sahaja Yogis of Australia, and
they have to give to the whole world the sense of
balance of Shri Ganeshoa."
"All of you should really learn to be Very loving,
gentle, kind and concemed. Small, smail things
can make people happy, very happy. When I try
all these tricks Myself you should also try these
tricks, very simple - that one day I gave a saree to
a lady. She said, 'Mother, how do you know I love
this colour? Because have seen you mostly
wearing this colour. So I know you love this colour."
Did You see me?' 'Of course I saw you. So these
small things you see. She was so heartened. She
felt that Mather notices me because I hove seen
her. I mean I see all of you. I know about all of you
because I am concerned, I am bothered about
you: Everyone I know-where you stand, what's
wrong with you, what should be done, what you
like, what you don't like, There is no harm in doing
that. It is much betler to have a better rapport
and then you understand what the problem is."
We should bear no grudge to anyone and we
have to be forgiving all the time. The English
language is not very soft "in that if you say
something, one should not mind. It is a very
hurnorous language but humour sometimes cuts
you out... but that doesn't mean that you should
say harsh words to anyone or you should be
indifferent to anyone, your duties, to your children,
or to your wife or to your husband. Indifference to
anyone is itself a tremendous harshness. For a smll
thing, if a woman gets angry and doesn't talk to
her husband or husband neglects the wife, doesn't
bother about her.. caring for her, then it is a crime
according to Sahaja Yoga. It is a wrong thing
because you must have balance, soffness of
nature. You should talk very softly to others and be
kind and nice. Just find out if you are doing that or
not."
Shri Mataji explained that She tries to correct
people very gently, but we need nol tell them
Instead, we can give a bandhan, We donitihave
to worry about doing something very drastic on
teling people on the face. Meditation helps to be
in the center, but still sometimes we just slip off.
"When there is a crisis, you just jump onto your
gravity point.. if that happens, no problem. It
happens with Me. If I see any crisis anywhere...
immediately I know that I am deep down on My
gravity and from there I can see everything
clearly, and then I solve the problem." You do not
have to compare yourself to others or think that
you'll be losing or gaining something. "You are in
charge of yourself. So you don't worry, there is no
jealousy, there's no kind of a temptation. You are
there. You are not bothered."
THE
Then between the groups it's a question of using
the power of love," which is the only power we
have. "Look at Shri Ganesha -how gentle He is,
how sweet He is and how innocent He is. His ways
are so gentle, how He works on you, how He
makes things for you, how gently He does all these
things." For example, you can't see a flower
opening out, you can't see anything that is
growing in nature by Shri Ganesha. He does it so
gently, and He makes every leaf in the whole
world different. "While we are living on the ground
of Shri Ganesha, how gentle we should be and in
dealing with people you should be extremely
"Sometimes the leaders are worried about their
leadership, and now leadership is just a hocus
pocus." Leadership is a joke, and if you know it's a
joke then it will work out better. There is no
hierarchy in Sahaja Yoga. "We all are one." No one
is better than anyone else.
"So one should not have any fear of the
leadership.. If you are standing on your gravity,
you keep doing it. He will understand you. As soon
as the leader is on the gravity he will be there. As
soon as you go away from the gravity, he will go
away himself. So you stand on your own gravity
50
13
Shree Ganesh Puja
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-3.txt 
 point and nobody can disturb you. You should
have no fear, nothing to bother in Sahaja Yoga. As
it is, you are all saints." All the ganas, the angels,
and the all-pervading power are looking after you.
"This is Ganesha's place here; things are going to
work out."
your balance.. If you start lasing your balance,
how can you get back that person? In that way
you will lose all your hatred, all your anger, all your
lust... all your competition because you stand in
your own dignity... You don't want praises from
anyone, you just know you are there, self-
contented.
"Anybody who tries to trouble you will be looked
after by this all-pervading power. You don't have
to do anything about it." Try to see if you are in
balance not too attached or too unattached to
your family. "Attached love is the death of love. So
we have to have proper understanding of this
detached love where you stand on your gravity
and are concerned about everyone. In case you
find that somebody is not all right. You don't lose
l's also not necessary to have a special audience
with Shti Mataji. That's all ego. Shri Mataji is never
private, She is available all the time to us. "All these
things are coming aut of ignorance and out of the
fact that you are not on your gravity point. So
today... in our heart we should think, "What is our
gravity point? and that we have to stand very
firm. May God bless you."
()
The Divine Cool Breeze
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Mahalakshmi Puja Synopsis
Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Brisbane, Australia, February 20,1992
This Mahalakshmi Puja is being done so that we'll
understand what is Wishwa Nirmala Dharma. The
Mahalakshmi principle lies within all of you in the
center, and once you are fed up with the
falsehood and also with the hypocrisy of people,
you start seeking the fruth within. That's how a new
category of people are born who are called as
seekers, sadhakas. They are very different from
others. They don't care for material gain or any
power, position. They want to seek the truth. And
this category Is the one you are and that's why
you have come to Sahaja Yoga."
judge ourselves is to feel our vibrations. When we
go so far to the left or the right that we do not feel
vibrations, our Mahalakshmi principle
working. We become derailed. We should watch
out for these conditionings in ourselves and in
others that pull us off the central path. In a very
detached way we must be the witness, see for
ourselves and not about others.
s not
We must be aware that if we have physical
problems we are not in the center. We should be
able to completely cure ourselves. We should be
peaceful, never angry. A person who is in the
center, might put up a show that he is angry, but
he doesn't get angry, but he doesnt get involved
in onger or any emotions whatsoever." You should
be sure first of all
detached... If you become yourself, then you are
a master and you can see where are you going."
If we are capable of going to the left or to the
right we are not solidly Sahaja Yogis. There is no
Our seeking comes from our past lives, as well as
from the conditions of our current lives, such as
being born in an affluent family and getting fed
up with weaith, or being raised in a place life
India, where tradition is to seek the truth, where
seeking money and powet are recognized as
falsehood, and people receive good conditioning
from the culture. It can also becomne a fashion to
seek the truth, but this can become dangerous
and such people can get lost. People who take
drugs can be seekers, not taking drugs because of
fashion, but because they wish to find their
Mahalakshmi principle."So this Mahalakshrni
principle was born within them. Sort of started
manifesting, that beyond all this there must be
something... The conditioning of every country has
also hampered the progress of Sahaja Yoga within
you and outside."
that you are cornpletely
progress.
The first criterion of being in the center to fix up our
Mahalakshmi principle is that our physical being
has to be normal We should feel healthy and
happy, and should not always be complaining
about pains in our body. Secondly, if we are in the
center our aftention is more towards nature, how
it is working out. We should enjoy the creation
around. us. That's enjoyment which is surprisingly
deep and joy-giving, and which takes us into
thoughtless awareness.
To understand Mahalakshmi principle we must
know we hoave two other channels into which we
We should not condemn any religion, only the
people who do not follow the principles of religion
and are not realized souls call themselves religious.
"Churches can be condemned, but not Christ, not
the Bible, not at all, never." We autornatically
respect and
incarnation, religion or prophet. "There should be
no malice about any religion whatsoever. No
religion has done any wrong so far." It is the
people who have been wrong, who use religion
can jurmp, depending on our background in this
life. "Because of your background in last life you
have come to the right path, but last ife is being
covered by this life... the society has dominated
you in so many ways." Many people who come to
the programs are seekers of many lives, but they
may not settle down in Sahaja Yoga because of
habits formed by the left and right sides. For a
Sahaja Yogl to keep his Mahalakshmi principle all
right, has to always introspect/ The best way to
condemn
would
any
never
Mahalakshml Puja
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-5.txt 
 for money or power. "Vishwa Nirmala Dharma,
which is based on the Mahalakshmi principle, is
the essence of all the religions. The truth of all the
religions."
fragrance. This is our job. This Mahalakshml
principle is not just for ourselves but for the whole
world. We are reforming a new race, a new
society which is enlightened. Standing on truth
and love. And there should be compassion.
In the Bible, Paul created most of the confusion
about Christianity. He started the nonsense of
confessions and making people feel guilty.
treating wormen as nothing. He had no right to do
this because he did not know Christ. He was an
epleptic who wanted a platform to give him
powers so he organized Christianity. Christ never
sald you should organize Christianity, nor that you
should confess or feel guilty. "All the time He has
been talking of forgiveness."
We must be people who are spiritually well
equipped and we must see to ourselves. We must
be solid and then nothing can deter us, We have
to desire that our vibrations should be all right, let
our chakras be cleared, let us be in the center, in
balance. We should not avoid attending to our
own problems; we must desire to be clean and
solid Sahaja Yogis. "So many can be very high up
in Sahaja Yoga, but their desires are not yet being
fully manifested. There is a damping effect of so
many things I have told you."
In a very short time, Christ gave us the truth, but
when it is interpreted, it goes wrong. "Another
point of a Sahaja Yogi is whatever I say they don't
have to interpret, they know it, exactly what I say.
If they start interpreting, then there is something
wrong with them. You cannot interpret Me.
Whatever I say, I
Language.... There's nothing to interpret, I'm saying
straightforward thing which
interpreted." People who think they have brains to
interpret should realize that their brains are not of
that calibre to interpret. This is one way to know if
we are not in the center.
Mahalakshmi principle is the principle within us
which nourishes everything and balances us. It is
the guiding factor working out everything that
brings out wisdom and love for God and for the
truth, and you thrive on that love. "A simple one
you can do is just to be on My Kundoalini... just put
attention." The problem will be solved by
becoming thoughtless because there is no
thought. "By that your ego will definitely dissolve
because then you will know that Mother is doing
everything, I am doing nothing so why should I be
proud of it? Also, the conditioning will dissolve
because My Kundalini is absolutely pure. It's not
attached to anyone. It's not even attached to
Sahaja Yoga.. The job it has got to do is to nourish
everything. If it can nourish, well and good, if it
does not nourish, well and good."
1
say in a very simple English
not be
need
When we give lectures about Sahaja Yoga we
must be careful not to become egoistical or say
things which Shri Mataji has never sald. People
who are not solid Sahaja Yogs should give
realization but should not talk about Sahaja Yoga.
Also, somebody who gives you realization is not
your guru and there should not be any awe or
obligation towards that person. If this is not done,
you may wind up following that person or group of
people to the left or right. When we move out of
Mahalakshmi,
forces around us, and we become even worse
than common people.
It depends on what you want. "Nobody is going to
force you in any way." The Kundalini is flowing just
like the river Ganges and if you desire, it will just
flow into you. "Bhakti is the desire, the joy of
bhakti." It's such a beautiful thing and we just get
lost into it, enjoying it, without thinking. "And that's
what is the most committed, the highest state
where you are just one with the Divine and just
swimming in the ocean of joy."
we are grabbed by negative
We do not belong to any country but to the
universe- Vishwa Nirmala Dharrma. "We are part
and parcel of the Universe... Now we have gone
into eternal life, we have gone into something that
is unlimited." "Like a little lotus that comes out of
the mud that is sticking onto it, ultimately it comes
out. the very clean flower." Then it spreads its
fragrance all around so that even the mud gets
"This Mahalakshmi principle is to be preserved, and
has to be always watched and looked into." There
are so many blessings of Mahalakshmi that they
cannot be told in one lecture, but the greatest is
complete
comfortable in your Spirit. When the Mahalakshmi
self-contentedness
are
you
The Divine Cool Breeze
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-6.txt 
 principle enters into our brain then the Virata is
manifesting and
collective. Then we don't consider where we are
from, what colour is our skin or what is our relligion.
"This Joy comes from the same Mahalakshml
principle when She enlightens your Sahasrara." The
feeling is of the whole, not the Individual. We are
one with the whole, we belong to the whole. "This
Virata's feeling that we are part and parcel of the
whole glves you complete peace and complete
protection."
principle means we glve up our ego and our
conditioning. That's why Mahalakshmi is so
Important.
become beautifully
we
Surrendering the
Mahalakshml
Mahalakshml Puja
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Mahasaraswati Puja Synopsis
Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Auckland, New Zealand, February 23,1992
The Maharasaraswati principle is on the right side.
"First is the Brahmadeva's principle, which is the
Saraswati principle, and then this Mahasaraswati
takes you to the principle of Mahabrahmadeva,
called as Hiranyagarbha, which is very important
for Sahaja Yogis.
Greek tragedy all the time. They go on crying and
weeping... and make you cry also." Some left-
sided artists drink a lot and become over romantic
types who "lve in an imaginary world of pain and
suffering, And they have their own ideos about
their own romantic models that they've formed in
their heads with their left side." Even in India those
Muslims who used to drink a lot started singing
'gazals." Not in the meeting, not in yoga, but in
separation they sing, When will I meet you, oh
God?"
"Those who think too much, or those who create
too much without realization.. In all kinds of arts..
go to the left to the extreme or to the right." For
example, if an artist goes to the right, gradually his
paintings
expressions. He would also be austere, Inflexible,
and would have his own style and not get into any
other style. "And then when he gels tired of it, then
he will take to something... like abstract art. But
without realization the abstract arti can be
something very absurd and funny.
extremely
will
violent
become
Society also moves to the right and to the left.
When it moves to the right they like right sided
things, and when it moves to the left they like left
sided things. "So also there are people with two
types of temperament, so that's how they start
appreciating these things," At the same time there
are people who are in the center, like Tolstoy and,
among French writers, De Moupassánt. In every
language we have the same type of people, but
especially in Sanskrit language writers were in the
center, not so much on the right or left side. "The
reason is, for the literature there are some rules
and regulations. It's not the western idea in india
that we should be abandoned people. That's not
accepted. So even in literature there is kind of
restriction. What is literatture?" It's called sa hita
which means which will be benevolent: If it is not
sahitya then it is not literature, it is trash. But when
the Germans or Japanese dig our Sanskrit
literature they make a big ado about the
Kamasutra which is not recognized as sahitya at
all by Indian scholars. These creations of ugliness
and vulgarity are a compensation for people who
dre very right sided. A right sided person will take
to drink because he wants to compensate, to
quench the thirst for power, or to neutralize the
right sided movement. In modern society, people
slog for five days, then drink, hibernate, and
spend all the money on weekends, and return with
a hangover on Monday.
Today's pop music also, which is very aggressive,
is from the same outcome. Because you cannot
ascend, so you move to your right... Then these
people also impress people who are also very
right-sided... Popularity is not the sign of real
success. It will come and go... It creates no
impression in the history."
There are many writers in English language starting
from Shakespeare who showed the futility of
human endeavous. They are like avadhutas, "the
one who has reached a very great degree of
development in his spiritual life. He can see the
futility of human endeavour, and then brings them
to the point that they hove to rise above these
stupld inhuman endeavours, and take to some
sort of
something higher, and also will create something
of eternal value." People like Somerset Maugham
and Cronyn were centrally placed; however later
when Hemingway came he started moving
towards the right. Now modern novels are all full of
filth and violence; they are absolutely not
palatable to human consumption.
on endeavour which will bring them
When these extreme things start showing results,
the artist gets fed up. Then within him rises a subtler
Artists who move to the left side are "suffering frorm
The Divine Cool Breeze
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-8.txt 
 attitude towards creativity. He starls seeking true
knowledge, pure knowledge In ail which sings of
divinity. All of the madness inspires him to think that
we should start doing things better, and then the
Mahasaraswati principle starts working out. But
then also when they start thinking of God, they fall
into traps, They may follow money-oriented or
power-oriented religions, and never become spirit-
oriented. If they develop a personality which is
mental, "whatever they speak has no effect on
others also because they are not awakened
people, they are not connected with the Divine
and whatever they do is just mental.
reached a stage at his agnya where he saw Shri
Mataji in his dream and recognized Her instantly.
We should allow the Mahosaraswati principle to
grow within us. in Sahaja Yoga we are not told not
to read any book, but in whatever books we read
we should see the subtie points and see for
ouTselves Whatever intellectuals write, however
true, they cannot propagate anything. "It will be
just a game, sormething that will happen outside
and it will drop out.. It has to become innate.
That's only possible if your spirit comes into your
attention."
As tealized souls whose Mahasaraswati prinaiple
has been awakened, wemustread books of
value andunderstandhow Sahaja Yoga is
contained within them All of these books talk of
some part of Sahaja Yoga, but not the whole of it
because they come at different times, Now we
have to
So when the Mahasaraswati principle is awakened
you start seeing clearly the difference between
what is mental and the fruth, and realize that
there must be something higher. "They read about
all the spiritual works in their own religion in which
they are born. Then they start moving out and
reading about some other religion also. Then they
realize that every religion says the same thing
Then when it comes fo the Agnya point, then
suddenly they realize that sornething is wrong, that
people are only mentally accepting this religion,
and there must be something beyond this. Af that
point, if someone gets their realization, he just
sticks to it."
know the
complete integrated
knowledge of religious thought in order to
understand how alt
Sahaja Yogis should read and understand what
others have said and where they hove gone
Wrong. We shouldn't read nonsensical people who
make no point at all. "We have to read and see
the subfle side of this growth of thought, how it
grew up and how it became subtler and subtler,
and how so many people in the world have
contributed to the central path of sushumna and
then they completely wrote about the yoga."
rellgions are integrated.
This Mahasaraswati principle has to be awakened
musicians, artists, and those whohave
reached that state, and then suddenly they can
get their realization very easily, Many Indian
musiclans came to Shri Mataji and asked Her to
creavity.
awakened, all of them became world-renowned.
"Those who have reached Mahasaraswati level
For example, Rabindranath Tagore initially wrote
about separation, and later he became subtler
and wrote about meeting the spirit. The same
thing happened with Buddha who renounced
everything. including
Upanishads and other scriptures, Ultimately He
reached Gaya where, when He was tired and fed
up. He got His realization. But Buddhists think that
whatever He did before, by renouncing, is
important. Actually, it had to happen because He
was such a pure seeker, But Sahaja Yogis don't
have to do anything of the kind. They just get their
realization because most of them in their last lives
have crossed most of their problems, and have
known that it's all nonsense "or moay be in this life
also they must have realized it's all nonsense, and
then they must have come to Sahaja Yoga. So it's
a very great luck for you that you are here, that
you've got your tealization and that you're
enjoying yourself."
enhance
When they
their
were
His family,
read
the
through reading or creativity or through writing or
anything, when they reach a certaln state of
Agnya, then either they will get disappointed go
to the left and absolutely think this is all useless or
else they get realization, they become very
dynamic artists, very dynamic writers and people
who are creating something of an eternal value."
The Mahasaraswati principle makes you much
subller. "and you start understanding that the gross
understanding that we had about our art and our
creativity has to be subtler and then such writers
only appeal to people who are subtler." For
example, William Blake was regarded as a mad
poet, and Mascaro, who franslated the Gita into
English in the hope of communicating the subtle,
Mahasaraswati Puja
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-9.txt 
 There is also a political aspect to the right side.
"Even in politics the growth becomes subtler and
subtler." For example, in Russia where communism
was so power-orlented, not money-oriented, a
person like Gorbachev was to be born on the
central path who would put it into balance, "So far
he's not been able to manage, but he will be
known all over the world for his great thought, and
the great work of reducing the pressure between
the two ideologies."
never speak that way. There should not be any
domination or commanding people not to do
things, or organization. "It is something so
spontaneous, so beautiful
Because we are Sahaja Yogis, the main thing is
love, compassion and Divine Grace which is a
beautiful living force which creates al kind of
constructive things. If this understanding is not
there, you'll have problems with leadership.
"Sahaja Yoga doesn't work out with people who
are violent." The best thing is to judge ourselves,
and whenever we are doing anything for anyone
or saying anything, we should ask ourselves, "Is it
benevolent or is it violent? is it for our self-
propagation or a holier than-thou principle, or is it
for the goodness of others?" "Once you start
judging like that your way of talking, your way of
working it out... You should try to see the whole
thing as a complete play.. If you watch
everything ina witness state then you can handle
the whole situation very nicely. Even if you do not
taik, If you do not say anything. Still in a witness
state you become very powerful. I mean that in a
witness state you can easily solve lots of problems.
May God bless you."
just works out.
SO
Another problem today is fundamentaiism which
also comes' from the tight side and which takes
people to extremes of violence, craziness and
madness. "But a new disease has started now,
those who go too much to the right... where the
whole conscious mind goes out of order, and you
become like a reptile." People with this disease
understand everything, can talk well, but they
cannot move their hands or feet if they want to.
"This disease is the one which is a warning to
everyone so we have to be careful."
It is dangerous for Sahaja Yogis to go too much to
the right, Some people start preaching Sahaja
Yoga in a very fanatical manner, But we should
The Divine Cool Breeze
10
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Guru Puja
Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Cabella (Italy) 19-7-1992
and majestic. The state in which you rise now be-
comes effective. Before this it was not. You had to al
the time manipulate, say this or that, but in your
silence you can manifest yourgravity. This gravity act
silike a magnet. Mother earth has a magnet which is
called gravity by which people are attracted and
we rest on this mother earth because of her gravity.
You get a magnetic termperament, character and
personality. This magnetic personality immediately
shows that is is manifesting itspower, like the sunsrays
fall onto the leaves, the rays which look simple mani-
fest their power of making it into chiorophyl. In the
same way when you are at that height or state then
withoutsaying anything, with justa glance youmani-
fest. Notonly thatbutyou recordeverything. Iseldom
forget things.
Status of a Guru is a state and not a status,
because status is external and can be bestowed
upon anyone and is external. For an external merit
you can give a status to a person. It is a state. Which
means the innate being evolved to that level that
you become the master. Otherwise how can you
achleve that state? If it is innate, in a Sahaj way, then
how do we achieve it? There are certain faculties
which we have to develop to begin with. The first
facultytobecomethoughtless. in meditation you can
become thoughtless for a short time. Gradually this
short time should go on increasing. This is a state. So
how do we achieve that? Human beings cannot
understand that anything can happen spontane-
ously. For that it is Sahaj. It is very simple. Youhave get
a mantra called 'Nirvichara'. Then you stent witness-
ing that without thinking. Just see witness. Just
seeing creates the first state within us. You become
the witness--Saakshi. Assoon as you become Saakshi
the whole thing, whatever you are seeing gives you
the complete idea, subtle as well as gross of that
thing. You see it and you know it. As a Sahaja Yogi it
becomes your knowledge. We can say in modern
terminology that you see something, it getsrecorded
in your mind and it manifests joy, knowledge, com-
passion, whatever is the situation. Because now you
have many dimensions which you have to develop.
For example-you meet someone you have to deal
with. He is talking and talking. Just become thought-
less. As soon as you become thoughtless you are in
a different realm altogether. But in that realm your
power will manifest and it may cool him down. It will
shut him down or may be he may feel tremendous
love for you.
When youstart witnessing something without
thought there is no obstruction for absorbing the
knowledge about that thing. There's no thought.
Complete absorption takesplace. Then itmanifests.
This is how the Divine Power works within us. With our
gravity we touch the depth within us whichcan carry
the Divine power within us andmanifestit. Unless and
until we touch that depth within us Sahaj Yoga is like
Hare Krishna Hare Rama. Thats why I find so many
Sahaja Yoga is like Hare krishna Hare Rama. Thats
why I find so many Sahaja Yogis go off their rails
suddenly because they have no gravity to go down
into their own being and to use that gravity for
manifesting the Divine Power. For example a vehicle
which is not properly fixed cannot be used for
sormething substantial. The most substantial thing in
your lives is this Divine Power which looks very light.
You never feel the weight or pressure of this Divine
Power; but if your channel is not clean then this
Divine Power cannot flow properly and manifest. So
when we say that we are the instrurnents of God
Almighty, we are connected to the mains. If this
instrument is not alright then it cannot manifest
whatever it is supposed to do. We are much above
all these ordinary instruments, even the most com-
plicatedoradvancedby sclencebecause wereach
a state where we ourselves become the science.
Science of Truth. Absolute Truth.
The word Guru means gravity. The Mother
Earth has gravity. A person who is a Guruhas to have
the gravity. How do you develop this gravity? Some
people artificially become very grave and some-
times show that they are veryserious. Gravity is within
yourself. In the second state of your Guru-pada
gravity must manifest. As you become the witness,
you gravity starts expressing itself. It will not show as
temper or seriousness etc, but it wilmanifest in a way
that the whole thing will becomeextremely dignified
11
Guru Puja
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-11.txt 
 understands, co-ordinates, co-operates, loves and
looks afteryou. It is at your disposal. Whereveryou go
the connection is maintained. Its like oa Governor
traveling and the security travels with him The ganas
are all around. You are Sahaja Yogis, so you are such
special people that where-ever you may be
sleeping, walking, sitting, that connection is main-
tained.
So what is needed for a Guru is self-esteem.
This is a very important point. To achleve the self-
esteem we have to intropect. And know that today
lam not what lwasbefore. Iamarealised soul. Ihave
got powers. I have powers of love, compassion,
grasping things, powers of creativity, and powers of
giving realisation to others. Nobody had these
powers. In Sahaja Yoga we are not self consclous.
We should not be self conscious because that can
give you ego. But we should have self-esteem. I anm
a Guru. lam not an ordinary person of the street. iam
something special. Iam on the shores of truth, Ihave
to salvage the people who are blind and mad.
You don't have to say anything, command
orrequest. It is at your disposal because you are one
of the governors in the realm of God. Anyone who
tries to frouble you or insult you has to pay for it. You
should never worry or think of those things on the
mundane level. On the contrary I would say better
forgive because God alone knows what will happen
to that person who misbehaves. You are specioal
people. Only thing you have to have your self es-
teem and you must try to maintain your balance.
At that time a kind of a silence will come
within you. When there will be any such crisis you will
become extremelysilent. This is again a state. If there
Issomething that makes you unhappy or upsettry to
reach that axis which is Just silence. This silence will
make youreally powerful. Thissilence is notonly yours
because when you are in that silence you are in the
silence of the cosmos. You are in connection with
that Divine Power which is working all the cosmos. If
you just become silent, know that your are just sitting
in the kingdom of God. When you get the great
honour of becoming a king then you walk upto you
rthrone and sit down and look around and you feel
the silence of this state that now you are the king. This
silence is the sign that you are definitely now in
contact with the Divine. You are silent because now
the Divine is going to look aftereverything. You don't
have to do anything. Just keep silent. Not forcibly. Its
n a state. If a problem or turmoil takes place
Once you come in balance, the Job of a
Guru is to give balance ta others. It balances every-
thing, the climate, nature, atmosphere. society, hu-
man beings. It is there to balance you. That balance
comes from the Guru principle which balances you.
If you have Guru principle within, you get intobalance
automatically. How do we develop thatbalance? In
the ancient times they had very severe mnethods like
starvation, asceticism, asanas, etc. This brings great
imbalance. If you become austere, it will make you
such a dry person and you will be burning. These
ascetic ideasmayhave comebecause theywanted
people to pay more attention to their spirit. A guru is
not ascetic by nature, but he is so detached that he
is ascetic. He may be a king or a beggar. if he is a
Guru then in every state he is in complete balance.
Nothing is termpting. There is no temptation. When
you reach a state beyond temptation, greed or lust
then there is no problem. Nothing can really bring
you down. You may wear a tulsi garland, pearls or
diamonds it doesn't touch you. But you don't run
away from anything. When you run away from
anything you become an ascetic artificially. As-
ceticism is within yourself. It is innate.
again
suddenly your attention wiil jump onto that silence
and once thishappens you are in contactwith this All
Pervading Power.
What is this All Pervading Power of love? Is it
some energy floating around? Or is it some sort of
river or ether? It is the complete totality of reality.
Other things are unreal. The reality is so efficient that
it never fails. We cannot even imagine with this
human understanding how it controls or works. For
example: You see the trees. The rose bush will give
roses only. It wont give apples. It will grow upto a
certain height, it wont grow like a coconut tree. All
the characteristics of this nature is maintained,
nourished, looked after, controlled absolutely and
at the right time and seasons. That is why it is called
Ritumbhara Pragyna. It is complicated for human
brains that they cannot understand how it works. All
the miracles are just a play of this power which thinks,
Mostly what happens with people is that they
feel that they are not a Guru. They come and tell me
"Whatever symptoms you told me are still there. Istll
have desires." You are going the other way round.
You should not try to weigh upon what I tell you or
judge yourself. Do not judge. Just gradually rise and
appreciate yourself and gradualy settle down on
the position you have achieved. But if you start
The Divine Cool Breeze
12
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-12.txt 
 judging you will feeldiffidentand depressed. "Mother
has said we must have this". Judging yourself all the
time will not help you. You are self assured. You are
sure about yourself.
pline a Guru? Then they are Sahaj. None of these non
Sahaj Gurus knewhow to giverealisation. Theynever
knew that Kundalini can rise with their hands. Very
few people historically have given realisation so far,
But you people are giving left and right to anybody.
You have CrOssed the limits of science now, You
have yourself become the science of the Divine and
you know each and everything about these chakras
catching of yours and others. But the way we deal
with others is the Guru pada i.e. kindness, sweetness
and concern. Thats whatyour Mother has given. You
have to have concern for each and every person.
You also have to be motherly, extremely sweet,
kindly, understanding and forgiving.
Some people say "Mother said so'. I might
have sald and might not have said. So Ihave said so.
But what are you saying? It is a very good way of
troubling others. You should outgrow into your own
experience of what is good. You have a greater
enjoyment thanmebecauseyou are alreadyhuman
beings, so you know about human beings. Then you
see your ascent and is much easier for you to ap-
preciate. For me it is different because I have never
known temptation and all these qualities you have.
You have come from something human to a higher
level is very creditable. You can enjoy much more
thanIcould enjoy or Christ or Shri Krishna couldenjoy.
Because the one who has risen and grown now feels
the fragrance of his virtues, qualities and greatness.
Then heenjoys himself. To him a properunderstanding
of this change comes and he understands other
human beings much better who don' have your
capacity, your knowledge, depth and gravity. Be-
cause you have been a human being. Now you are
Divine. But because you have been a human being
you understand other people. The real Gurus were
very harsh people. But I am a Mother. Those Gurus
have come out from the human level. You are
different from those Gurus. You got it Sahaj, Others
can also get it from you. You don't have to shout at
them. Sahaja Yogis have no right to say anything
harsh to anyone. Without saying anything to you,
you got your realisation. If somebody comes to your
for realisation you must do in the same mannet. If you
have this harsh attitude you could be a Guru but not
a Sahaja Guru.
It is our responsibility to spread Sahaj Yoga
and to emancipate the whole world, So no more
priesthood and no more 'this person says so'. What
you have to say, you say to that person. You will
yourself see how you are reflecting your personality
on another person; how he reacts and how he
behaves, Gradually I see our collectivity is learning
all this and all those horīble, dominating people
have run away from Sahaja Yoga. I find that people
are extremely loving and kindly to each other and
also to others because you are the embodiment of
goodness, righteousness, patience.compassion, love
and concern. It isnothow youcando it. Youshouldn't
give up. Just work at something and watch. Nobody
can do that but you can do it. There should be self-
esteem and assumption, Assume your powers if you
are a Guru. You still think, " God knows if I have the
powers or not, etc."Then you are stilil a beginner. We
just say from our lips, "Mother, lom my own Guru;"Not
only are you your own Guru but the Guru of the
whole world. Its a collective Gurudonm we have.
nothing can escape us now. We are absolutely
formidable. We must understand that we have to
aSsume. We elect someone, put some robes on him
and say he is the Pope, But inside him he is not; he is
just acting. He is fallible. With us, we have all these
things within us and now you have to assume. Once
you start assuming, all budhas will run away and you
will be surprised who can stand a person who is a
saint, a Guru and who knows he is a Guru.
There is a difference between a Sahaj Guru
and a non Sahaja Guru. Non Sahaj Gurus are very
hot tempered. A Sahaj Guru has no business to be
hot termpered. Here there is such love, such com-
passion, such love fro each ofher. No competition,
you understand that you have got
everything in a Sahaj manner and in the same Sahaj
manner you give it to others and respect others. You
all know that you are all Gurus. You have to be Sahaj.
You got it Sahaj, so youhave no business to be harsh,
horrible, hot-tempered or strict Gurus. But it crawls
up. Quite a lot of military business starts in Sahaja
Yoga. No disciplining is needed. They will discipline
by themselves. They are also Gurus. Who can disci-
no politics. If
You have to have introspection to see that
your self esteem is completely correct. Other real
Gurus lack compassion in this Sahaj style because
they think theyhave workedvery hard so why should
these people not work hard. You may be anything.
educated, uneducated, doing this or that work, rich
Guru Puja
13
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-13.txt 
 have their this freedom intact. You are a Guru.
Supposing I am God Almighty I cant be like you."
Then he told all his disciples to 'praise Her, because
God is fond of praise. He said, "If you praise the Lord,
He always gives every thing." I said, "Its true. You
cannot get to Mother unless you really have Bhakti
from your heart."
or poor, makesno difference at all. You are the Guru
and you assume your powers. Like in any talent, e.g.
music. You know that you know music. You know
that you know cooking etc. But that could be also
not totally absolute. You are already absolute totality
of reality. The reality is at your disposal. But assume it.
You are not ordinary at all. In that you will drop out all
that is nonsensical. Others will see you and be sur-
prised. This knowledge is so subtle and great of the
highest degree. You never feel bloated up with fruit.
That humility and simplicity gives you the special
edge which can pierce into any heart. Thus you
become apostles of truth. Youcanbecome prophets
like William Blake. Believe that you are one with that
great Power which is God Almighty.
You cannot get to God without Bhakti. If
someone demands to get his Kundalini raised,
cannot do that. But if someone asks humbly and with
devotion to get realisation, it happens. There should
be not only Bhakti but faith. This faith is now being
challenged by science, Catholic church and other
such horrible people. Your faith in God has to be
absolutely untarnishible. Nothing can disturb that.
You have seen the miracles of God. You have how
you are working out His powers. You have seen
known all these things. But still the faith in God is
missing. The person who has complete faith in God,
is God himself. Guru is called as one who is himself
Brahma Chaitanya. When this faith in God is abso-
lutely established that there is God Almighty and
that I am the messenger of that God, and when it
becomes absolutely firm in you then you are in the
Guru pada.
People discuss the immaculate conception
of Christ. But He is God Almighty. He can do anything.
How can you judge Him and His Powers? To discuss
about God have you got His brains? In hurnility you
realise that He is God Almighty; He can do anything.
Then there is faith, not blind, but the real faith in that
feeling that God is Almighty and you have become
the messenger of God Almighty. This gives you all the
strength and courage, His compassion, love, atten-
tion and understanding. Thisfaith should be absolutely
one with him. Önce I went to meet a real Guru who
was very harsh. He spoke to me just as he would talk
to a Goddess He said, "How do you find these worldly
people here?" I said, "Alright. After all I have created
them." He said, "You are God; with your powers, why
don't you change them a little bit?" I said, "I have
given them freedom. So they have the choice
whether they want to get transformed or not. I
cannot force them. I can do whatever I want to do
but I don't want to do certain things. That is their
freedom to choose. It is given to them because if
they have to have the ultimate freedom, they should
Ibless you today that all of you achieve that
state that you reside in that Guru-pada state.
Wherever you are, whatever may be your position,
whatever you may do, the faith in God Almighty that
is so truly within you will express itself and also mani-
fest. It will act just like God.
Today we must remember one thing that we
must have complete faith in the Kingdom of God
and in the powers of God Almighty and then in
ourselves.
May God Bless You.
The Divine Cool Breeze
14
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Shiva Puja
Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Bombay, 26th & 27th February 1987.
was so because of its A-Vyakta form. It was only a
STATE. A state to be enjoyed only in that State with
no manifestation in the gross. In that State they
became beyond Temptations, beyond Tamper
etc. That is proof before us. HOW they did it, WHAT
was this Broahma-Chaitanya ? - they could not
show its Pratyaksha form. What they could show
was only thorough Similes or through some
Parables.
Sahaj Yoga was known to me all along. It is a
unique knowledge with which I was born. It was
not so easy to reveal it & I wanted to find out how
to reveal it.
First of all I thought that the seventh chakra must
be opened, Which I did, on the 5th of May. It is a
secret in a way, Formerly, the Brahrma Chaitanya
was A-Vyakta. It was not manifested. It was not
expressed by itself. The people who managed to
reach Brahma Chaitanya somewho, by attaining
"Realisation', said It was Nirakar Ka Guna. You are
like a drop that gets dissolved in the ocean'.
This is whatI have achieved-Its Pratyaksha form.
The complete form of the Brahma-Chaitanya I
have brought form the sea. So now, l do not allow
you to get dissolve in it.
a big Ghata (Matka). In that, you are smailler
matkas. In other words, I have taken you all in my
body as small cells, nourishing you, looking after
you, cleansing you & working it out. But I am
MAHA-MAYA. So I
gradually, and at the right time and right point.
. I have put it in the form of
No one could say, explain or tell people anything
more about it. The great incarnations also who
came out of this great Ocean of Brahma-
Chaitanya, tried their best to share it with the best
available followers (Which were very few) &
introduce them to this Brahma-Chaitanya. But
because the Brahma-Chaitanya was not in a
Vyakta form, these incarnations got dissolved in it.
have to work very siowly,
When the seventh chakra was opened, all the
chakras came to your Sahasrara, and so I could
manage all your chakras & all your deities. Any
Deity you ask and you get the vibrations. So that
proves that i am the Brahma-Chaitanya,
Like Gyaneshwara took his Samadhi. People said
that he cannot talk. It has to be experienced. So
very few people got to swallow it. Nobody could
actualise the experience by feeling on their finger
tips, or feel it on their senses, or on their mind, or
ever understand it with their intellect. It was a big
problem. They all tried and or prepared a ground
for it.
The Brahma-Chaitanya is the Adi-Shaktiiand Sada-
Shiva is also in my heart. But since
humanised, it is not so easy to find it out. If you tell
this to Modern human beings, they will not
understand. It can only be told to Sahoj Yogis
because they will understand. To bear this Truth is
so difficult. These days it is difficult to bear money,
leave alone that, even to bear ones own position."
They become so shaky. So for them to bear the
fact that i encompass all the Incarnations is too
difficult to bear.
I am so much
Now I have come as the Incarnation of the
Brahma-Chaltanya AS A WHOLE. The sea of the
Nirakar has now become a big cloud (Saakar). It
has taken a form. Those who came before were
all a part-and-parcel of it. Now the WHOLE has
come. This cloud has rain water. The rain water is
nourishing the minds of the people. Gradually they
are brought to a level where their Kundalinis have
risen. They have got their Realisation and now
gradually they are feeling everything on their
senses, their finger tips. This is the reason why
nobody has talked about Vibrations so clearly.
They managed to talk about Chaitanya Lahiri. This
One day I went to Aurangabad, where a boy told
me that Brahma-Chaitanya is beyond feeling and
non-feeling. He had read about in some book. I
told him it was true, but he should forget about it
and just feel it. It was THEN that I decided to tell
about it to a few people. You see, the right time
15
Shiva Puja
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-15.txt 
 also had to come before I disclosed it. All other
religions have so far been segmented and non-
integrated. NOW the WHOLE integration has
come. I can now explain Christ, Mohommad
saheb and others, because they are all a part &
parcel of the whole, which is Brahma-Chaitanya.
got crucified.
Tukaram were coming from Vaikuntha and see
how they were treated. Things just did not work out
then.
Mohommedsaheb, Nanak
know all beyond the Vaikunthajibut | have not
revealed it so far. It will be slowly revealed by me
because people have not been prepared yet to
become capoble of absorbing it. You see, it is like
the preparation of a Khichidi, It is yet under
preparation. So let it cook. You are all in it. The
quality of people being builtiup now is equivalent
to the choicest of the handful of disciples of the
past prophets. NOW & HERE everyone is destined
to come along slowly and steadily. All those who
will now fall into this great Hand of the Supreme
Cook will be well prepared in it. Rest who opt to
remain out will be left out. I is all beyond TIME.
Each to his own capability to achieve. Just as it is
difficult to say how long will one learn to ride a
Bicycle, or become a CA., or a Doctor. Some
may take very little time, while others very long.
Do not talk about me to the Scientists. Just tell
them that this is a Unique Method that has come.
Though it is a little difficult to understand, yet it has
HAPPENED and we have seen it for ourselves. Like
that you tell them. If you talk about Me, they will
be shocked. Maximum you can tell them that - this
knowledge was brought out by Sri Mataji Nirmala
Devi, by which the Kundalini could be arisen. HOW
she has managed it, we do not know. It is
probably a secret. Put the whole thing on me.
Now you understand. Can you say-how does a
seed sprout 7 By putting it in the Mother earth. So
you say, that by putting EVERYTHING to Mataji, our
seed has sprouted. It is a living process and we
have seen it for ourselves.
The bondage of time is ereated by man himself. In
reality this body has no timing. Time dimension has
been created by man by his habitation. With the
formation of habits, the KAAL or time bondage is
created. When there is no habit, there is no time
dimension..
So far nobody has been able to give Realisation to
others. May be only one or two have given
Realisation to others. Most people have achleved
it by the process of cleansing. Example : Buddha
got his Realisation by thorough cleansing. Brahrna-
Chaitanya ciawled inside him because he asked
for it, genuinely wanted it & prayed for it and was
therefore cleansed by it. But again He went into its
STATE. There was no communication about it
thereafter. This is what is in the COLLECTIVE now.
This collective working is now happening because
this STATE has started expressing itself.
With Sahaj-Yoga lots of Habits leave you. But this
takes time too. You must therefore never justify
your habits If you want to rid them. It is with
justification that habits stay. If in one life time you
can achleve Self-Realisation, reach the point of
having begun to lose your habils, THEN in that
very life time it is possible for you to acquire that
so called STATE. In the event that you may happen
to remain half-baked during the process of one life
time, then you will come back to complete your
achievement, This is how Sahaj-Yoga will now
work out for some time. THIS is now the last
Judgement. During the process of the revelations
in Sahaj-Yoga, when I still see people behave in
the opposite direction, I feel awesome. I continue
to have such bad experience at times but then
such people leave Sahaj-Yoga. This happens, but
you must not get discouraged. You must go on
working towards it putting in your very best efforts.
Supposing you discover electricity, and you keep
it to yourself & not talk about it to anybody. Then
how will anyone know about it ? It is not that the
great Saints did not want to express it, but there
was no communication then. It s just llke if
someone hos no eyes to see, then whom are you
going to show to ? Or talk to ? There was no one
to appreciate and absorb that STATE at that time.
Those who did achleve realisation, their Sahasraras
got opened, but they got lost in it, The whole
experience remained to be individual and not
collective. Now that is over. Now it is collective.
Everything has to be collective at a point.
Always remain in the Centre. Do not worry about
your growth in Sahaj. Once you are in the centre,
growth l automatic. If is already belng nourished
Even to reach this point, testing was done by
sending liftle bit feelers at a
time. Ulfimately Christ
The Divine Cool Breeze
16
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-16.txt 
 stunned. The mode of action of Stiponilan
Adrenaline, they cannot explain, but we can. Now
take carbon. If you see it from the lett side, you
can see the tight side and vice versa. On the left
side you can see the figure of Carbon as in form
of a Swastika, On the right side it looks like the
Omkara. If you see upward from down below, it
looks like a cross. THAT ISA FACT. That there exists
an all prevading power above the Human Brain.
This is only a hypothesis. The human brain is in the
form of a Pyramid. The Param Chaitanya or all
pervading power is coming from all sides and is
striking the brain of a Foetus (soon after its
formation).
by me, Daily you move from left to right. In your
Habits you move towards the left while
Ambitions you move towards the right. To seat ne
in your Heart, is a Bhav ona feeling. So just as you
develop Habits.on the lefl sicie, you must practice
to have that Habit-like Bhav for me in your hearls.
If, so easily you can acquire your habits, then why
not this Beautiful Bhav ? All this is nothing but a
change in Bhav. After all Habits are easy to
remove, being Just a mere STATE ofmind.
in
Once you have established MY Bhav in you,
takes its posilion in your entire body and carries
liseif through eternity. Depends on how much you
are using yourself to it. It is Just like if you put lots of
smoke on your room then all the mosquitoes will
run away. So it depends on how much of ME you
have filled in your hearts.
What actualy happens is that, at the apex of this
pyramidical brain, the Param-Chaitanya passes
unhindered and settles down in the spine in the
inverted Triangular bone area, at the base, in
three and a half coils as the KUNDALINI SHAKTI In
the process it leaves its mark called the "Vacuum
channel" in the spine. Now the Param-Chaitanya
hitting on the sides of the triangular brain, has to
permeate the Grey and the White matter. THESE
have their own Densities, and so governed by the
physics Laws of Refraction, the Choitanya refracts
from left to right and from right to left. This is also
called the Prismatic refraction effect. This
phenomena exists mostly for Human brains and
not so much in animals.
The question that now arises is that, how does one
come to stabilise the state of My bhav in your
hearts ? The ANSWER is
constantly stopping your own attention ar Chitta.
Always do Chitta-nirodh. Just like you go out and
you see something you must conciously stop your
Chitta from going towards it. It comes with
practice, Pull it inside. This is called detachment.
Remember the contact outside, or Samparka is
always through the Chitta. Watch where it goes all
the time. Always ask yourself, "Where is my Chitta"
Stability comes by
?
During the refraction process,
attention is pulled out to both the sides and is
driven in the outward direction. Both the attention
and the refracted Chaitanya cross at the AGNYA
Chakra from both sides on their way out. As a
result of this pull, and additional force called the
resultant force is created. Now the theory of
Parallelogram of forces (of physics) comes into
play. The resultant force is divided into two parts,
each being at a 90 degree angle to the other on
both the left as well as the right side. The resultant
force acts in the centre of Its two counterparts.
One part creates the left and the right
Sympathetic Channel of the Foetus by pushing its
way down the body. The other part pushes its way
out through the senses, dragging with it the
Human attention both to the left and the right. The
second part is also known as the ACTION in the
outer world. From the outer world, this ACTION
brings back a reaction. (another famous law of
Physics). The path followed by the action &
the Human
Actually Chitta is segregated within us as our
consciousness as well as our awareness. When our
consciousness becornes one with our awareness, it
assumes the form of Vibratory awareness which
balances you. This balancing keeps you in the
Centre. The moment your chitta goes in the wrong
direction, immediately you feel the HEAT on your
senses. That is how the all pervading Power works
and grows within you.
All our habits and Samskaras crumple our Brain
formation and appear as convolutions in the
brain. When all these convolutions open up, new
spaces are created in the brain, having more
absorption power. The crumpled brain supply
opens. This is how the connection with the Divinity
is made.
Solentists basically have to be stunned. Like I went
to a Medical Institute and I told them about the
Para-Sympathetic nervous system. They got
17
Shiva Pula
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-17.txt 
 starts and all chakras get integrated. Take an
example of your Mind. It wants to do something.
Your body- It wants to do something else. Thirdly,
your intellect – it wants to do something else.
There is no Integration. On Realisation, all three
reaction is the same on the left side this reaction
builds one's Conditioning while on the right side it
builds the Ego.
In short, our Chitta accompanied by the resultant
Brahma-Chaitanya's living force went to the outer
world, collected a reaction and brought back
with it a conditioning from the left, thereby forming
the MANASA or the MiND. Both the action &
reaction pass through both the AGNYA &
Vishuddhi chakras. The Chitta, being dispersed in
nature, has the ability to flow from the whole
body. The reaction of the left is the DESIRE
element, the potential of which gives birth to the
IDA nadi on the left sympathetic channel. Similarly,
the reaction of the right is the ACTION element,
the potential of which forms the Pingala nadi. The
overflow of the IDA nadi forms a Balloon-like cloud
at the back of the AGNYA chakra called the
Super-Ego, while the overflow of the Pingala nadi
forms a similar cloud in front of the AGNYA chakra
called the Ego. The AGNYA femains directly in-
between these two balloons. The front of the
AGNYA is controlled by the Pituitary of the brain,
while the back is controlled by the Penial.
become one.
Take another example of a piece of cloth, if
represents the attention. Before realisation it is all
spread out & in all directions. Now take a finger
and poke the cloth in the centre from the bottom
and raise it upwards. What happens ? The cloth is
pulled up to a point & in the process it just wraps
or falls around the finger. In the same way, when
the Kundalinl rises, it pokes the attention, raises it to
the Sahasrara, where it gets enlightened by the
light of the Brahma-Chaltanya. It then just wraps
and falls in line with the Kundalini's path on the
Sushumna Nadi in the centre. What has actually
happened is that on realisation, our Chitta is
pulled inside from wherever it is spread out in the
outer mundane world. The Chitta is thereby
enlightened. This is the so-called STATE. But in
reality we human are slaves of our habits. We out
of sheer habit do not allow our Chitta to stay out
in that state permanently. Actually the chitta
should not go out. Here is a simple situation that I
find myself to be in with you. I am putting you in
the Boat to sail off but you are resisting my help by
constantly sticking your one foot In the water. Your
attention is on frivolous things you see, out of your
habit you put out your leg, knowing very well, I am
sitting inside to sail you through. I also happen to
see that your leg may be swallowed anytime by
an alligator, but you, In your own habits are blind
enough not to notice the alligator. Now, can you
imagine my plight ? Imagine how I feel ?
When the Kundalini enters the Agnya chakra, she
enlightens it. Then Christ within you is enlightened
or awakened. He sucks both these balloons of the
Ego & the Super-Ego, and the whole AGNYA
chakra opens. That is why Christ died for our sins.
There is simultaneous opening of the Sahasrara. I
saw the Sahasrara of the Virat open. It was like
tonguest of flame. Just like when you disect the
human brain, Its cross-section looks like petals or
like flames. In the centre of it, it looks like a yellow
hole. The opening of the Sahasrara is sudden. With
a bang it opens. How canI explain,-it gives the
effect of one telescope into another. Normally
with the opening of the Agnya and the Vishuddi,
the Ego and the Super-Ego get sucked in. Mind is
Super-Ego. Ahamkara is Ego. Our soul or Atman is
surrounded by all the five Elements plus their
causal expression, with the Kundalini on the
periphery. The elements are mainly the Earth and
the water, while their causal is just jyot matra.
That is why I say-do SATSANG-meaning, spend
time with other Sahaj-Yogis with the object to
keep yourattention in the Centre. It is very
important to constantly keep your attention in the
centre. With realisation, our left and right Nadis
relax off upon receipt of Divine energy. Due to
release of tension, the Chakras open out still
further. It is a cycle. More Kundalini fibres can then
rise and so on. At this stage the attentlon develops
a quality to remain in the centre. You can then
direct it out to perform a particular task, and after
achieving it, without any reaction, it occupies Its
position in the centre. It has by now achieved the
quality of not getting attached to anything.
When self-Realisation takes place, the Deities are
awakened, and the chakras are nourished and
freshened. They open out and start releasing
energies, At the Pithas (representative points of
the chakras on our brain) all actions begin against
each related chakra. Coordination at both level
The Divine Cool Breeze
18
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-18.txt 
 In my case it is different. If my attention is on you,
| will take all your problems into myself and
cleanse it and myself suffer. This I will do only if I
want to, Now. Sahaj Yogis, I have to fix, because
I have put them indiscriminately into my body. So
T have to suffer. The Sahaj-Yogis themselves are just
barometric In this regard. They cannot suffer the
way I do, may be a liftle bit, because whatever
they suck, goes into the vast ocean.
ocean and dissolving in it is not anything unique or
great. But to become a cloud from the ocean
and then soak everyone with your Rain-water
would surely be a unique achievernent: This is my
aim and also my game. Just as every game has
an aim, so has mine.
To stay in the Centre, become Sharangat. Say
"you are everything Mother, so you do
everything". it is complete surrender.
Now the study of the fifth dimension of matter is
going on in Russia-the study of Bloplasm. This is
completely a tight sided activity. Each human
being has his own Aura and depending on his
changing Gunas, the colour represented by that
Guna or Aura changes. What do you glve
bandhans to ? To your Auras so as to protect it.
Only matter can have an Aura. So it is all
materialistic. The fifth dimension is actually a
microscopic or a photographic dimension. So
when you see some lights in my photographs, it is
one form of an Aura. You see Brahnma-Chaitanya
has got its own light. This is only visible to me, Some
people can also see it when their AGNYA is bad.
They can see it from outside.
For a Scientific mind, you have to give them this
whole vidya in bits. If their cup is small you cannot
fill more than the capacity it can take. So have
patience. You cannot glve them the whole ocean
now. Remember that Science is only a wee part of
the WHOLE. First create a craving for SAHAJA In
them by introducing it to them. Once they come,
then watch them. Remember your tirme ? The
same thing happened with each one of you. At
first you experienced It then craved more and
more for it, very progressively. This process is also
Scientific.
In the mundane, when you work to earn money,
you will encounter the MAYA. Just remember that
you are earning for ME. That's all. Go ahead and
earn as much as you can. This I am only talking
from the materialistic point of view.
The principle is that when you are away from it,
you can see it, but when you are in it, then what
can you see ?
People who come into SAHAJ-YOGA through you
Sahaj-Yogis come better than through ME. You
see, with me they tend to get entangled in my
MAYA. See, I am nobody in my human form as far
as the new comers are concerned.
Thoughtless awareness comes when your Kundalini
crosses the Agnya Chakra-when there is no
thought. It happens by control. Slowly it becomes
a part of you and encompasses your whole body.
It becomes a STATE. This is doubtless Awareness.
You become the Brahma-Chaitanya or the STATE.
EPILEPSY:
At this stage, you all need to work and not just
land up in that STATE & get into a Samadhi. I have
achieved It for you without giving it to you. Then
why do you ask for it ? You must know that YOU
ARE THERE and there is no doubt about it. This is
now the final game. In reality this STATE is very
easy and spontaneous to achieve, but yet I would
like you to work for it & try for it. When you feel like
achieving this STATE right now and for your own
individual self, then I would say that you are being
selfish and in a way you are becoming an
escapisc. You have to first become collective.
Otherwise on an individual basis you will get lost in
the Nirakar and you will not even be able to see
ME. You see, you will be in that STATE-you will be
dissolved in the ocean. So evolving from the
Cause: Movement of the attention to the extreme
left. You
Subconscious. This happens when you develop
some fear or fright being a weak person on the left
side, Also when you happen to be involved in an
accident -sudden fright or jerk.
go Into the state of collective
Cure: Bring attention to the centre. To do this, first
bring it to the right by saying the Gayatri Mantra.
Then to the centre by saying the Brahamdeva-
Saraswati Mantra. On moving to the right, you start
feeling Vibrations, stop at this point, Do not say
any more Gayatri Mantra because you must not
go too much to the right. Too much to the right
frequency of
the
Vibrations start
means
decreasing..
Shiva Puja
19
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-19.txt 
 It is important that you'must get the Vibrations. I
noi, Ihen repeatedly raise the Kuridalini till you teel
the Vibrations.
your mind does not go towards all non-sensical
things in grOSs forms. All that you must say is :
"Mother you are doing everything, I do nothing".
THIS IS THE CONTROL ON YOU.
Another best way is to put the left hand towards
the Photographs and the right an the ground. Say
Mahakali Mantra so that the Vibrations start
flowing. Use of the candle from the bock side of
the left will also help.
For both left and right sided persons it is important
to first cleanse yourselves and then do your
meditation. When you move towards the left side,
you raise your Kundalini and it Just comes out. You
Must raise your Kundalini before Meditation. Do
not just be mechanical when sitting to do Puja.
Your DESIRE must be genuine to GROW.
This freatment is also the same for CANCER &
other PSYCHOSOMATIC diseases. It
Muscular
It includes
disedses.
Scheletal disorders. In
People who are from Arya-Samaj are basically
Right sided people. They nust use Bhakti, Bhajans,
seat me in their hearts i.e.. move towards the left
side, Cleansing must be done only by use of
mantras on the Central Chakras. Mahakali and
Maha Saraswati, both act an the centre from both
the sides and are therefore Inter connected. Even
the Mantras for the left and right are chanted only
for the purposes of raising the Kundalini alone.
There Is no use of attention here. Treatment of left
side through chanting of Mantras for raising the
Kundalini is only to improve upon your desire
problems, the trouble comes from your disturbed
Shri Ganesha. In Hysterectomy cases, where the
Uterus is removed, the problem is of Sri Ganesha.
AND fear element. If somebody is not having a
child, then she has a left Swadeshthana problem.
Same problem is also true for heavy Periods- when
there is
Parasympathetic in the Sacral region, there is too
much flow resulting in heavy bleeding, Other
results are Diarrhoea & Excessive urination.
much
stimulation
in
the
too
Cure Use of Gayatıl Mantra, initially, But it must
also be backed by some Medicines. You can give
alvain dhuni (even for surgery patients). For
Lumbago you give ajvain water. For Muscular
Lumbago use
application only. In Lumbogo the bone gets
twisted, therefore use vibrated kerosine oil mixed
with some other oil. In few days it gets alright.
energy.
Another way is to raise your right and lower it to
the left by hand. This helps a lot. In addition
activate your right side by Mantras of Brahmdeva
& of Gayatri. But all upto a point. You see when I
have to do it i control it by raising your Kundalini
upto a point. And before it goes too much to the
other side, I control by pulling it out just in time. It
is all in my control. When people do not control,
they just go on and on.& Like-Ram, Ram...
Panduranga, Panduranga .. and get lost on one
side totally.
Ajvain for intake and geru for
For any treatment whatsoever, remember that the
most important fact renains that everything
depends on your Ichha or Desire Shakti. So Ida
nadi is important that you must have desire and it
must be the right Desire. No wrong Desires
because
eventually everything
becomes
Mother is now asking you all "Where is your
attention".
mechanical & hypocritical. The right desire is only
to achieve your GROWTH. This is SHUDDHA-ICHHA.
If you have a gross desire like-l must have a son
etc. you hove it too, but then you will want
sormething else also. Meaning that you are now
becoming a hypocrite. In pure Desire you got
everything ina bundle. It is from genuine Desire
that you grow. This whole concept is your attitude
towards your Ichha-Shakti.
First must come Bhakti Bhav and this then must
move onto Shraddha BHAV.
ON PHYSIOTHERAPY
When the vibrations flow, they relax the muscles.
The muscles in reality have gone into spasms due
to tensions. E.g. Left Vishuddi or any chakra, the
vertebrae start to twist (Physical). When you put
your chakras in me (in my care) they will be
relaxed and then you can adjust by giving
vibrations. These vibrations can be given to others.
Now take the Action energy or Kriya Shakti. This
has two aspects, namely Physical and Mental,
Physically you must sit down and Meditate do
become thoughtless. Mentally you must see that
The Divine Cool Breeze
20
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-20.txt 
 You need not touch the other person, by giving
vibrations by using circular movement by hand
using mantra.
take Tobacco and cigarette, creating problem an
Left Vishuddhi, This makes the pumping of the
heart difficult, so it becomes tired because it
cannot pump. Due to extrerme left Vishuddhi, the
lethargic heart gives you Angina. These are the 2
types of Heart attacks. The first type can be cured
by putting ice on the stomach and on the heart
on the tight side. Also move from left to right. Sit in
water. Do not use light at all. Sleep in darkness,
stay more indoors. Take full rest. And repeat that "l
am the Spirit". "O Lord, please forgive me". The
second fype can be cured by asking him to say-
"Mother you are my beej mantra. You are the
Mantrika. Also "I am not guilty". and say "I forgive
everybody Lord." So that all the hurts disappear.
Use light and fire to clear the leff side.
In left sided diseases, you get into the collective
subconscious frorn where you collect Protein 52,
virus. These make you beyond help sometimes.
Fever is caused to those whose liver is out, who has
overworked his liver. He is heated up etc. It can be
corrected by putting lce on the liver. Malarial
Fevers are right sided l.. Mosquito bites. Bacterial
Fevers are left sided. These are mainly due to
certain in-takes of food such as Fungus like
Mushrooms, old paneer etc, Diabetes is the action
of the right side affected by the left side. Right
side being vuinerable. Firstly when you think too
much, pay no attention and remain in your habits,
then a fear element adds to your vulnerability. Just
like a hard working man thinks too much. All his fat
cells are used for the brain. The swadhishthana
goes into action and neglects its left counter part.
The left side gets drained. You become
vulnerable, At this stage if sorne fear comes up in
you and you also start feeling guilty,. then you
develop Diabetes.
Asthama is mostly a left sided psychosomatic
disease. It can sormetimes be tight sided with
persons who are very dry and have always tried to
Dominate others- The Dryness of the peritorium is
too much. Mostly to also come, from the right
heart- For those whose father is dead or that,
you are not a good father or that you happen to
trouble your child or that you are unhappy about
your ownself. It can be combination of any.
Correction is to use All's name in mantra. Source is
from swadhisthana and Nabhi of the left. Left
Nabhi gets first affected by having fear of wife or
worries for her or any other family member. In
addition your vuinerability at that point brings
about Diabetes. Clear it by clearing your Agnya
chakra. Don't think so much. Go into Thoughtless
Awareness. Put left side to right side. Take more
salt so that it neutralises the action of sugar
it has got
crystallisation. Use ice on right Swadhishthan and
Nabhi. Avoid sugar after proper tests if necessary.
Intake for left side-If people eat the fat it is bad.
Because the fat is stored and it is not available for
circulation. For thin people their fat is available for
circulationi, so they can eat fat. But for fat people,
they should only put fat in their nose, oil in the ears
etc. For fat people oll massage on the head is very
good. These people can massage with Golden
Amla Hair oil. It cools them down.
water
of
because
excretion
ARTICARIA is also psychosomatic. When your liver
is lethargic, t becomes vulnerable.
Cure : Use geru-Rub it on some stone and give it
to your child in Honey (very little). Also for grown
ups. For very old people it is also very good for it
has soluble calcium. Any soluble calcium is good.
It is good for application and then cover it with
something black. The source of its problem is left
Nabhi. You see when the liver is lethargic, the left
Nabhi becomes lethargic. The person is not using
much of his energies. So it is a lethargic liver,
excited by the left Nabhi.
Heart Attacks:
Over active and inactive or lethargle heart.
Overactive heart is of right sided people. In such
cases the heart can collapse. Especially it can
happen in very young age. This is because their
attention is too much outside. Due to this their
Atma departs. The atma gets no attention due to
their extreme materialistic nature. Overactivity can
also come from too much worry about the family.
thinking too much of the future. The heart starts to
pump more blood and over works itself. It gets
tired. In addition the attention is not on the spirit.
For Lethargic hearts people take all kinds of
mantra's and first spoil their Left Vishuddhi. They
Treatment ; is again left side. Best is to cover the
body with something black, so that the heat is
given to it. It is a form of an allergy. Most allergies
are caused from cold to hot. i.e. Taking bath in
Shiva Puja
21
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-21.txt 
 must be clubbed with complete Discrimination.
cold water and then hot water. To take coffee
and immediately take cold water. This sudden
change, the system cannot adjust to. In the left
Nabhi area is the spleen. The spleen is a
speedometer and also an adjuster. When it adjusts
and it is not properly done due to sudden change,
it causes problem, so it has to suddenly provide its
energies to either increase or decrease the flow of
the RBC's. That's how the spleen goes crazy. This is
also the root cause of Blood Cancer for people
who are hectic.
There are Deities who are in the Chakras. When
the Kundalini rises, she awakens them just like
seeds. Once they are awakened, they start
working it out. They know what is their job, what to
like they have been appolinted. Those
work out -
Deities you have achieved through your evolution
at different points: So where ever they are settled,
they do the job. Take a seed. It is gross. It has
potential to become a tree and this has the
potential to become numerous trees. So this
potential is subtle to subtler to subtlest. ts
appearance is gross. The causal of mother earth is
fragrance so when it awakens the kundallni, it
touches the causal also just like you get the
fragrance. The Causel of realisation is the Shuddh
Iccha. Man is made of 3 potential Le. the gross,
the subtle and causal. This causal of realisation, ie.
Shuddha iccha enlightens the subtle and the gross
bodies. Just like you put a seed into mother Earth.
The mother earth enlightens the seed and gives its
potential to it.-In the same way, the Kundalini is
the mother earth in you. She rises and gives this
potential dimension to your seed. Everything has a
different causal and so every chakra acts
according to its own causal. The problem is, we do
not understand even at the grosser level. Now
take a very gross level-you reach a point where
to take an atom. This atom has Nucleus which as
protons, Neutrons and Mestons. Now, if you cool
down this atom such as Helium gas, the atoms
become collective. So also the mesotons act on
their own, and even they become collective
when cooled to a certain point. So even to the
grosser and grosser.
Scientifically it can be proved.
When you have the Back Agnya working, you
become lethargic and when you have the front
Agnya working you become overactive. The
balance of chemicals in the body comes from the
Agnya. That is why you should always be in
thoughtless Awareness. Left sided people are ones
who have troubles thernselves and Right Sided
people trouble others. Those who are left sided,
their bodies will pain and they will suffer. The right
side people, who inflict pains on athers will not
notice it. These right sided people can therefore
develop diseases like cithosis of the liver or a
problem on the eyes.
Bhakti is the guna of the left. Shraddha is of the
centre, The left side is very pleasant till you start
getting the pangs and then you start getting
drifted away– this is happening in Bhakti with
some people.
When I speak, every word is a mantra As l speak
people start getting alright.
Now all types of people are coming up. Sorne are
coming up very fast. As far as I am concerned
they have put me aside as Devi and that I cannot
be reached. Now, it will be one of you only who
will stand up and people will see you and come
into Sahaj, This is the best way to let some
people just come up. This is the game.
this potentiol exists:
But when we take a human being, we are talking
about a living process, The human being is the
most manifested one on the grosser level. Now,
the inner growth has to corne. On the grosser level
he is now fully manifested. Just take a seed which
hos reached its grosser level and is now living and
pulsating and it is then put inslde the mother Earth
then what is happens?
Lots of people have personallsed it. They want to
know what is happening about it in my family,
then to others, then to people of Bombay etc.
Sahaj Yogi's are very honest, compassionate and
diligent, good natured and have lesser tempers.
The subtle to the subtlest is replicated in our whole
being as such. The potential is the Kundalini. The
Kundalini is representing the causal of the mother
Earth. The causal of the Virata is collectivity.
Their character has assumed a new dimension in
this process of building up. Each one of you must
work hard towards it and not bother too much
about the other. Sthiti is tested only when you are
exposed to it. That is the time of Paristhiti. Sthifi
The representatives of Sada Shiva and Adi Shakti in
The Divine Cool Breeze
22
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-22.txt 
 stone, If does not fight with it, It just goes around it
and binds It so that later when it is to become a
free it will help in Its foundation. Then slowly, and
easily it reaches out towards the watet. It hos no
premonition about where it will find the level of
us are the Atma and the Kundalini (These are
beyond the causal, in fact they excite the causal).
Take an Example : Light a candle. Put your hand
before it, It is awakened before my photograph.
The potential of the candle has come in. That is
my photograph has awakened its potential. With
it, it can now burn the negativity. You have seen
a wall getting black out of such an effect.
water.
I ance experimented with a bumble Bee. I appled
some colour on to it as it used to make its own
house at mny place, Now sornehow that colour
came to its wings. One fine day I went to a place
which was very far away, I
Bee there. Then she was seen again at my house.
How did she take on all these routes. She must be
having some magnet.
Everything hos a cousal which keeps all the
potential. From causal to the gross you rmove
through the subtle, Now what happens, just os
fragrance is the causal of the mother Earth,
through that causal all flowers and trees come
out. Also for human being it is the carbon. How the
mother Earth burns within herself, creates this
carbon within herself with the heat and that
carbon becomes a part and parcel within you to
create Amino Acids. So the Mother knows, at the
causal level, she knows what you are. The causal
is the Nirakar in the Shakti form while the Deities
are in the Sakaar to use it. They know how to use
It. The exhibifion of it comes on the gross through
the central nervous system.
saw the same Bumble
Also how do birds find their homes from Australia
to Siberia?
You see they all are in collective and absolutely
Homogeneous: Any they all move together. This is
for the Pasha state of the Pashus.
But we humans are no longer pashus, we are free.
Now it is in this freedom, when lots and lots is lost
and gone, then human beings settle down. This
freedom was given at Adam and Eve level. If they
were sensible, there would
problem. Now one has to pay too much for this
freedom. But now-a-days it is all working out. This
living process cannot be explained to Science.
The Scientists will not accept the Deitles: So don't
worry about them. If we don't have Scientists whot
is the harm, we will not miss them.
The Sakaar is the Doer or the Karta, The causal is
would have been no
the power of a particular Deity-the unrmanifested
power. But as soon as the Deities are awakened,
their powers are alsu awakened. This is a living
process and how it, works out you cannot explain.
Now see the foetus, how does it takes its form, who
guides it, there must be some Intelligence
does it, who manages It - who plans it out?
who
The greatest thing for all Scientists is to see for
themselves. Nothing can be explained to them.
Say Sulphur Di Oxide has got vibrations that are
electromagnetic Symmetric and Iso-Symmetric.
They just state what they see. They will see in Sahaj
Yoga what it is, you give them the facts and let
them experience it. How can you show them
anything Scientifically?
Now I will question a Gynac : Anything foreign in
the body is thrown out of the system, then why not
the foetus? Answer me.
Something nourishes it, looks after it and then
throws it out at the right point of time. It is growing
within and it does not trouble the mother, but in
fact the mother's face changes while the whole
energy of the being is transferred. Now where
does this beauty on the mother come from? See
the nourishing and looking after. It is so amazing to
see its perfection. Isn't it?
Jai Shri Mataji
We think no end of our intelligence. But living in
the presence of God, a small seed came and at
the end of each a small cell came out. The
intelligence which this cell has, if it is to come to
man then Sahaj Yoga would be fully established. It
stralght away sees, its own direction. It sees a
Shiva Puja
23
