Diwali Puja Synopsis Cabella, November 10, 1991 TALK H.H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI has to die but the way they've made the death as some sort of a big part of life. It is jusi a momenti Just a moment that you pass out and you go and change and come back again. But in this life, if you have to do anything, is to enjoy." At Diwali Puja in France, Shri Mataji asked us to be Joyful in sahaja Yoga. Our personalities have to express the Joy of realization and of being in the kingdom of God. In particular, we cannot be sing- ing sad dongs or reading tragic books. Shri Mataji's puja address also contained some special advice for Sahaja Yoginis. Christianity has not said much on the subject of death. "Christ, if they had allowed Him to live He would have talked about it; but he has said that Spirit is eternal. He has talked of reincarnation, no doubt." Women have certain water powers of crying, weeping, and thinking they are very miserable and making everybody miserable this is their power. Inside every woman, there is a mother- hood, there is great capacities, sacrifice, every- thing is there, but with that they also should know they are left-sided. And our joy about which we talk within our heart has to manifest outside. People should see that we are joyous, that we are happy people we are not like others who start crying for small things." "In this lifetirme, the highest thing is your ascent and your position in the kingdom of God. Especially for ladies, I have to tell you because, you see, read- ing all these tragic things all over... it just starts working in the nerves of the ladies. If somebody says the slightest things it becomes like a bomb- shell." We should first see what harm we do to ourselves. So many wornen in the West have ru- ined themselves, but they never cry for that. Even in the event of crisis, Sahaja Yoginis should not cry. Shri Mataji related Her own experience: "Like when my father died, I was surprised that suddenly 1 thoughtiess. For about three days I was thoughtless neither the thought of pain or unhappiness or anything came up, but just thoughtless. And eve- rybody was surprised because I looked after him, and he was very attached to Me, very fond of the Me everything was there." So if you are a Sahaja Yogini or Yogi, "then at the lime of crisis you should become thoughtless. That is one of the signs....That means what? That God just takes you in, your problerns. He puts his hand, He puts His protection and He takes you out of it and makes you absc- lutely thoughtless. And In that thoughtless aware- ness you discover what is right. What is wrong. So even in crisis, this thoughtless awareness is all the time extremely alert, it becomes much more alert than nomal. But there are very sensible women I have seen in the East and and the West who have a great sense of life, like an elephant is walking and the dogs are barking, so what does it matter? That majesty comes when inside you have that joy. Nobody can make me unhappy.' This should be the principle: otherwise you start moving towards the left side." Crying is also another kind of ego expression. When women start crying, men start moving onto the left and get possessed. "So today I want a promise frorm you all that you're not going to cry at all. Instead of flowers you just give me this flower of promise. I never cry. Of course, some- times, 'Sandra Katuna,"one tear or two tears might come out. After all, I'm a Mother." But this does not mean sitting, crying and becoming hysterical. Don't read any book which talks of crying but book which are deep also makes you feel very much touched; if you feel like crying its all right." became thoughtless absolutely "We are in the Kingdom of God. in no way we are unhappy, in no way, Some things happen in life, life is such: somebody has to die, everybody doesn't die together.. So everybody who is born So today we are here to enjoy our joy-our At- manand, Niranand, and Paramanand which are of eternal value. "You have to understand and Diwall Pooja

 built on rocks. So we have to be very courageous, we have to be very bold and the same time ex- tremely humble." believe now you are in the Kingdom of God and all the subtle beauties of your being are going to be opened out to you...(but) if your eyes are al- ready closed, your heart is already closed, and you don't want to see something that's so beauti- ful, how can you say what a beautiful thing they have made?" It is important in life to have a very positive attitude and to develop ourselves within. "All of you have become saints... You are soaints because inside you there is a fragrance, beautiful fragrance of your lotus. That is the Spirit.. in the same way is reflected in your heart-it is a beautiful lotus. Feel that lotus. How beautiful, how delicate i1 is. It's pink because pinik is a lotus which invites everyone, a sign of generosity, of invitation... That's what your are. Wherever you will be you can create that beauty... you can make people see what a spiritual person is. You are the reflectors of Sahaja Yoga. not me, You have to reflect Sahaja Yoga. For such peopie are always in joy and wis- "What are you? You are Sahaja Yogi and in Sahaj you have to know that you have all the proofs, everyting before you to know that you are Sahaja Yogl. Now if I know that I am Adi Shakti, supposing If I know I am Adi Shakti, then I know. Then I don't have to ask for help from anybody. After all, if I am Adi Shakti, then I know. Then I don't have to ask for help from anybody. After all, if I am Adi Shakti, I am supposed to do everything. That is my job dom." Shri Ganesha is the giver of wisdom which is how to behove at what time, how to say something at what time, how far to go with everything. "It just should become innate, sahaj. Every moining you should tell yourself, am a Sahaja Yogini. So how far should go? How should behave? What should be my attitude? All these can be very easily understood if you develop this lotus of wis- dom. How does the lotus come out?" There is a seed which sprouts which is already within you. "All of you have got it. Now it started opening be- cause you are realized souls. Allow the wisdom to to take over." because I have that power. I have that power becouse within Me so I have to do it. Now 1 can also say that I am a Woman, I should sit down and cry. Nol Thave no right. I cannot even do it, even if I want to do it. My job is to encourage you, to tell you about your inner subtleties, your beauty. Do you know what beautiful thing you are?" "Let us talk about our inner beauty. What are we?... Are we all these people who are all time crying, miserable or people who are always fight- ing. always hankering after things, whom matter dominates? Nol We are the Spirit." We are the reflection of God Almighty which is purity, truth, and knowledge. "We are not like ordinary people. How can we live on that ievel? Only if you are possessed or had a bad guru or may be some- thing like that you may be going like a yo-yo, going up and down. But those who have crossed that limit and have reached that state should "So how do you do it? There's one way I would say. Supposing Mother has this problem, "What She would have done? How She would have dealt with it? You may say that we don't understand Mother's style. She is full of tricks. Correctl I am, but there is a very simple way of doing It. You can surrender to My wisdom, and the Wisdom ilself is active, it will work... Wisdom within you is active... because the Delties are with you... and whatever happens to you They are before you. Nobody can harm you, nobody can touch you. You are sO protected that anyone tries to harm you, immedi- ately there is a protection. Also your own protec- tion is there, as i said, that you jump into thought- less awareness." value that they are the Spirit. So many Spirits sitting here reflecting God Almighty. I am such a proud Mother, and all of you are capable of enlighten- ing so many people in the world. But the beauty within you is that your areabsolutely independent of anybody else. You depend only on yourselves upon the source of your Spirity upon the joy of youUr spirit. You don't expect others to give you joy. Supposing somebody tomorrow comes and abuses Me...if never fouches Me because I am with Myself.. Imagine a house which is standing on rocks. Like that you are, Try to feel it. Feel the rock within you. People who have built their houses on sand have to wory. Not we. We have "We harm ourselves more than anybody else can sometimes... It is a kind of personality you develop that, I'm like that, I just cry. Why not develop a personality like that that, 1 am always in joy?" Then this lotus of your fragrance will improve and the The Divine Cool Breeze

 lems. When you have joy you have to be joy-giv- ing and if you are not joy giving that means there's something lacking in your Sahaja Yaga. and that Is: we have fo come up now... We can change pur name, if you like. if 'Sahaja Yoga' is not good "Joy Giving Association." activity of your wisdom will lead you to people who are extremely nice and to situations which are beautiful. "in your own wisdom, your own Spirit is working it out. You don't have to do anything." The enly thing you have to remember is that you are a Sahaja Yogini or Yogi and your character and ideas should be Sahaja. "Now we should find out what kills the joy... First I said you must have wisdom." Wisdom gives you detachmentifrom all ihat teredness, self:obsession, egoi Selfishness com- pletely darkens the self, which is the Spirit, because you think of yourself, your children, your family. There gre even some people who think only of themselves. "When you start thinking like that, when you start becorning smaller and smaller and Smaller, the lotus collapses. But to think about otheis is so great. "Sahaja Yogis, being men, they don't show much, but there are certain other ways of showing this temper. They get into tempers and sometimes the tempers are so much that you just start looking, "What is the matter with this person?' One side, the temper and another side, the crying. In between, what remains? I don't knowi Both thingsiare abso- dutely nol needed You have to correct people, to say things. Just now I said. I'have said it, finished. But it's not anger, it's just I hove to act. The differ- ence is like this: I am not involved with it. If I oam crying, I'm not involved, I am just crying. Even if I om angry, I am not angry. I am trying to be angry- in an acting. That's what happens- you do not get Involved into it. But if you get involved into your anger than the you is finished. u selfishnessseit-cen- "If you do not allow your spirit to fulfill its own na- ture and its own character, the Spirit is not going to manifest itself. So you are the vehicle, You are the lamp, you can say, as far as the body and mind is concerned. But this light:of Spiriteifiitinassto manifest then it has to be of a very unique type which emit all its light outsicle andigives lightito athers. And this light-giving quality you have to irmprove gradually. Youll be surprised, only if you will iryin your life. in your relationships, In your endeavors, to give light to others, to make thei kives better, not lo show off or lo be egotistical but to be loving.. you really understand that you are the Spirit because Spirit loves... and in love you are forgiving.. Not to forgive is difficult, but to forgive is the best. At least when you forgive there is no headache for you" "Sorne people think also if you are joyous you have to be very serious. Not at all. What is there to be serious in this world? Everything is stupidity... So because you suffer from serious stupid problems, that's why you become serious, and by becoming serlous, if you think your problems will be solved they will not be at the time." At the same time, we should not be vulgar and frivolous, "What is the use of the light? Let us see, As the light we are to give the light." So we are here to give joy and happiness to everyone. There are so many ways of making others happy which we have to learn. "And then when you make therm happy, then you feel that joy within yourself." Just think of the times when you did something good for oth- ers. "But that tirne is eternally with you all the time and that is why Diwali is so important..,As I said, you are My light, and the light is there which is an eternal light. These lights will be finished. We have to light them every year. Not you people, you hove eternal light and this light is going to spread joy." "So you have to first understand that life is for giving joy to others because you are now saints and your light has to give joy. Little bityou have to bear You have powers to bear. You have all the powers. And so I wish you good luck for the next year and great prosperity. May God bless you." When you have joy do not want to fight or say anything harsh to anyone. "Not only that, but you do not want to have something that will spoll this Mother Earth or which will bring ecological prob- Diwal Pooja

 MADRAS PUBLIC PROGRAMME (Synopsis) 6-12-91 Talk by H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi If we are real seekers of truth we have to be honest about it so that we are sincere to ourselves and we have justified our own existence in this world. There are so many Sadhakas who are work- ing out some sort of ritual, meditation, bhakti or reading. One has to understand what one has achieved. Where are we? As say, 'My child, you have done so much in your seeking, what have you found? Have you got the ultimate reality? Have you got what is described in the scriptures?" There are three types of movements towards the Divine. One was the Vedas. Vid means to know Thomas called the peop;le who know as Gnosties. Gna means Gyana. Not mental or emotional knowledge but something much beyond and the same path they tried. In the Vedas the first sholka says that if you so not know it. then it is no use reading this book. To know means what? To know It on your central nervous system. Not on your mental or physical plane. As we have become human beings we have to humbly say that we are not perfect beings. There is something missing. Otherwise why are you fighting or quarelling? Why are there ecological, economic and political problems? Then you come to the source of the human beings who are doing all this. So what's wrong with human beings? who are doing all this. So what's wrong with human beings? Animals are Pashu, they are under the control of God i.e. they are pasha. But human beings have got the free- dom and they are going helter skelter. These prob- lems are there because they have not got the real knowledge. We should try to seek the real knowl- edge. According to Vedas they tried to under- stand nature and the five elements, which ac- cording to us is the right side movement. In the Greeks the right side movement is very well shown. Left side was the Bhakti. People started worship- ping God with blind faith. India is quite blessed as the knowledge came from the saints though now it has become quite deviated and stagnated. Another good point of India is that the religion is not organised. a Mother I would Namdev was an ordinary tailor and he went to meet another saint called Gora Kumbhar (the potter). Namdev just stood before him and said "I carne here to see the Nirguna(the formless) but here I have found it in the Saguna(in a form)" Only a realised soul, a saint can say this about a saint because he knows the ultimate reality. People who are not realised cannot understand what it beyond this life. Even in Christian religion we have Thomas who came to India and wrote a lot of treatise which were kept in a cave in Egypt and discovered. Now there's a book about him after forty eight years of research. Its amazing how he is describing Sahaja Yoga through-out. That you have to have the experience of reality. Every scripture says know thyself. Who am 1? When it is said so, our effort should be to find out that self that is within us. We say my body. my nose, my country. 'My 'MY'. Who is this I who always thinks. From where does this inspiration come? This T is within us reflected in our heart. Take a hypothesis and if it is proved and if you have found, felt or experienced what I am saying then as honest people you have to accept it. In the West they have other problems. But once they experienced they went to universities and different libraries and found out everything about the Kundalini. So much work has been done by Nath Panthies about Kundalini awakening but it was lost. Then the Germans came who were completely misin- formed by Tantrikas. In a German book it says Kundalini lies in your stomach. Despite that all these ideologies and even the Vedas got into some sort of a mental Maya and that's how we have Arya Samaj etc. which are very difficult. Such people have not reached the point and are satisfied with what they have read. Kabira has said, 'By reading too much even the Pandits have become stupid." By reading foO much you cannot know the ultimate. Supposing there is a doctor who gives you prescription for your headache. Whereas you have to take the The Divine Cool Breeze 4.

 medicine. What is written in the Vedas and Upan- ishads is that you must find out yourself. Even Patanjali Shastra there is only a small bit of Viyayam (exercise and physical problems.) In Sahaja Yoga also we use It but according to un- derstanding of the problem. We are not only physical, mental or emotional being but are also spiritual being. given up drugs, bad habits etc. Overnight people have been cured. I don't do anything as such, Your own Kundalini works it out. She is your Mother, your only real Mother and She knows everything about you. Its all taped into Her. She is placed into three and a half coils within you. When she rises She may glve a little heat because of the ittle struggle that She has to do, This heat is generated only in some people like liver patients who may feel a little heat in the hands also. All of you have got the Kundalini and it is the Pure Desire within you. The law of economic states that in general wants are not satisfied. Today we want a house, then tomorrow a car, after that helcopter and it goes on. When we do not have it we struggle to get it and when we have it we don't enjoy it. But this is Pure Desire, that is to be one with this all prevaling power of God's tove. We see everything created, beautiful flowers, a big tree coming out of a small little seed. Look at our eyes. They are The second type of movement we have in this country is the Bhakti, Going to temples etc. But that also started deteriorating. What is bhakti? Shri krishna was a diplomat and not a mother. He wanted that people to go around to find our the truth because nobody likes a straight forward statement. At that time he just told it to Arjuna. He said three things. Firstly "You must get to Gyana." Gyana means this knowledge on you central nerv- ous system. Secondly you should do Bhakti and whatever fruit, flower or water you give me I will take It. But you must do Bhakti which is Ananya. That means when there is not the other. When you are a realised soul. If you are not connected whoat is the bhakti. such beautiful cameras, Who has made them? Who has evolved us to this state? What is that power that has made us human beings? We have to find out because science cannot give an ex- planation. How a seed sprouts. How we became human beings. God Almighty has spread this beautiful Brahma Chaitanya all over. If it is so you must experience and verify but Just to say no is to deny yourself a chance of getting connected to that vital power. This vital power has evolved us. It organizes, creates everything, vibrates everything. It thinks how far to go with you. Such a beautiful power is all prevailing into every atom and into every living commune, into every living being. It acts so beautifully that we don't even feel the Smoothness of it. We don't even see a flower flow- Many people complain " have been fasting, do- ing japs, doing this or that and see my condition. It is not the mistake of God. You are not yet connected. Like if a telephone is not connected what's the use of telephoning. Bhakti without the connection is wrong. That is why Shri Krishna said "Yoga kshema Vahamyam." First get Yoga the union and then you will get kshema or benevo- lence. For karma he said "Do all the work and put it at the lotus feet of God Almighty. Many people say all my works I put at the lotus feet of God. Even the murderers, Its just a mental idea. You cannot because you are not yet at that state. But a Sahaja Yogi will not tell me "I am raising the Kun- dalini." He will say," It does not come up." He talks in the third person because he is no more there. This is the kama which is automatically at the lotus feet of God Almighty. He is doing everything. We afe just instruments. It is automatic and spontane- ous and that is Sahaja. ering, blossoming. opening. it is done so sweetly and beautifully that we don't even feel the exis- tence of it in any way. Unless and until we are connected with that power we cannot know the ultimate reality, be- cause the spirit within us is not in our attention. But once this Kundalini rises. She passes through the six centres, pierces through this fontanelle bone area which is the actualisation of baptism and then this spirit comes into our attention as a light and our nerves get a new dimension by which we become collectively conscious. Samuhik chetna. You can feel others. You can feel on you finger tips. There are seven centres on the left and seven centres on the right. The left side seven centres represent your All of you have got this power within yourself. There are books which describe that Kundalini is a very dangerous thing. It is absolutely nonsense. I have been to many countries and so many people have got realisation and there is no trace of any trouble to them. On the contrary they have im- proved in every way. Overnight people have Madras Public Program

 emotional side and this the right side represents your physical and mental side. You can feel the centres of all the people. Medically when we treat people we treat a tree from outside, We treat the leaves. But if you have to really treat the tree you have to go to the roots. This is the roots within us and the tree of life.. not. You know yourself. There is no need to ask. Through that you will know the absolute because you are the Spirit. It gives absalute truth. The third kind of mavement we have in our coun- fry is of Nath Panthies. Jains have Adi Nath. In that one Guru was supposed to give knowledge to only one person. Like Janaka had only Nachiketa. Till the time of Gyneshvara ie. the 12th century. Gyneshvara was the disciple of his own brother. They suffered a lot. He asked his brother for one permission to open the truth to the public", "Be- cause thirteen or fourteen thousand years back Markandeya hos described the Kundalini but all in Sanskrit language. Sanskrit language was not available to the common public. Thus this knowl- edge was kept a secret all the time, Gyaneshvara wrote Gnaneshvari, which was a kind of a Marathi Gita which be enlarged and decorated i with lots of poetry Sixth chapter in described about Kun- dalini The organizers of religion called the sixth chapter 'Nishipta'. The people in charge of religion forbade its reading. Thus this chapter was closed and nobody got to know about it, The Noth Pan- this knew about it. Out of that we have Kabir and Nanak. Nanak talked of Khalis whiich means pure, Nirmal. Shaja Yogis are Nimal. Khalis people can- not be like this. They cannot have vlolence. It love, Its love which is absolutely Navajaya le. without any compensation. It is love that is unlimited. It is love which has no discrimination. Like the energY in the sap rises and goes to all the areas of the tree. To the flowers and fruits and comes back. Iit does not stick to one, If you stick to one it is the death of that entire tree. We have to understand that all these great incarnations, seers and proph- ets came on this earth on the same tree of life. You have to believe in all of them. It is a living process of evolution. The last break through. You did not do onything to become human beings so In the same way it is effortless. It is Sahoja. Even Mohammed Sahib has described Kiyama or resurrection time. "When the resurrection time wil come your hands will speak and bear witness against you." They have all talked about this time. The last judgement and this Kall Yuga is bringing forth something, But how many are willing to take to it? Thousands and thousonds go off to some sort of maddening craze but not after reality. You re- quire a kind of Divine Intelligence to understand. I found Russia the most teceptive country for this. They are very introspective people, At least in one place there are twenty two thousand Sahaja Yo- gis. When I was there the coup had taken place. I asked "Are you not disturbed?" they said, Mother, what it the need to be disturbed. We are in the kingdom of God. We don't belong to this country. We Indians have problems that we are very con- ditioned. We have such Ideals before us but we never aspire. We will worship Rama or a Guru but what have you got within yourself? You are cling- Ing on to something. What about you having something? That is what is Sahaja Yoga. Unless and until you know youself you will not know Shri Rama. You will not know anyone. The other day I saw a book on Yoga some crazy man has written. He is denying the existence of Krishna, Rama, Christ and everybody. It is very unscientific. With- out finding out how can you say. Supposing 1 never came to Madras and start describing Ma- dras what would you call me? In the same way many people have written about God because there is no law prohibiting them to write. Nonsense can be written. Unless and until we get the truth we will not know who is a fake Guru and who is May God Biess You. The Divine Cool Breeze

 Madras Public Programme (Synopsis) 7-12-91 Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Mythology is not all absurd. Ninety percent is ab- solutely what it was. We go to temples. We think going to temples is very good. But we don't know what we are doing or why we are praying. Whom are we praying to? What are these dieties? How do they work In us? What is their job? How to please them? pressed on your central nervous system. For ex- ample if you have a dog or horse and you want to take him through a very dirty lane it will go. But for hurnan being it is very difficult because in our evolution this central nervous systerm has devel- oped this sense of smell and beauty. We human beings are definitely higher than animals in our evolution and in our subtler sensifivities. For a dog it doesn't matter what you decorate, what colour you wear. To us it is very important because our sensitivity has improved. The Spirit is the reflection af God Almighty ls one God who reflects, Sadashiva Sadashiva is the wil- ness to ihe work ofithe:Prirmordial Motherthe Adi Shakti, He is just witnessing the play In you Hels witnessing a Alme but He doesn'ticome into your altention, His attention is only limited because He has not iniany way to interfere with your freedom. He keeps to Himself and is just watching. That is the auto, the Spirit. It is the reflection of one Sadashiv. So naturally all the reflections have to be the same. Ther effects have to be the same. After realisation you become reflectors. Every one re- flects. the same thing so the effect of the At- masaakshaat is the same, that first he starts feeling the cool breeze on his hand, then out of his fon- tanelle bone Area. All of them feel the same way: Then they start feeling these centres and finding out what's wrong. Also all of them becorne thoughtlessly aware. The first stage which you call as nirvichara Samadhi. It works out Instantane- ously. You may say Mother it is very difficult. Peo- ple had to go to the Himalayas. Those days are gone. After all the tree of civilization has grown so big. Its roots have to grow. Otherwise whole civi- lization will be finished. This is the knowledge of the roots and that is why to know this knowledge you have to become subtler-sukshama. This is only possible when the Kundalini rises and pierces through your fontanelle bone and gets oonnected with the all prevailing power of God's love. The first thing that you feel is collective consciousness because everybody is the Spirit. So you can feel another Afma. You can feel their body andmind etc. This is the first quality you get on your central nervous system.. In the hurman stage we have one problem and that is that we have developed two institutions in our head called asiEgo.and:Super-ego (condition- ing). These cross over in our head and calssify and we become a closed personality, When the Kun- dalini rises she posses through this agnya chakra which is on the optic chaisma and sucks in these two and opens the Sahasrara, then the Kundalini goes up. This is a living process of a living God and living energy. Ihe Kundalini is your Mather. She moves very beautifully without troubling you She knows Her ohild very wel. She has loved you all your lives. When She pierces the Brahmarandra the seat of Sadashiva on top of the head then we have touched the feet of Sadashiva and He en- ters info our attention. When the spirit enters into our attention then out attention becomes enlight- ened. This allention is very alert, it knows every- ahing. You can know about people on the chakras: They don't discuss what clathes you are wearing or how much money they have in the bank. But they will see where are they on their chakras. You can cure them but they have to be with this all Prevailling Power. First of all you become Nirvichara, you start work- ing your collective consciousness by giving realisa- tion to others. The problem is that you have been given the throne and made to sit on that but still you don't want to beleve that you have become the king. Self confidence is very difficult. People cannot believe that they have got selfrealisation. They are afraid. But all these horrible people who Whatever you have got in your evolution is ex- (G) Madras Public Program

 achieved in collectively as well as in your medita- tion for which you don't have to pay. have no realisation, no knowledge, they become the great Gurus, have thousands of people be- hind them, make a fool out of them, make money and spoil their lives. Reality cannot be purchased. God doesn't know money. He has not made money. This is your headache. If I get a hall I have to pay for it. So it - is for the hall, not for God. For awakening and enlightenment we cannot charge any money. Even for darshan people charge money. How can they rise to the level of the Spirit if all is money. The bhaktas are so simple and gullible. A Guru in America has 48 Rolls Royces and he wanted one more. So his disciples started starving to save money for a Rolls Royce, When a Sahaj Yogi asked they explained that "We are just giving his the metal. But he is giving us the Spirit." can metal be exchanged for spirit? The second nature of the Spirit is that it is a collec- tive being "This is good, this is bad, this and that". It means if you put your hands towards a photo- graph, it is made by a realised soul you will start getting the vibrations. All things can be proved. There is pramaan for all. This chitta also purifies. It knows where is your problem. What chakra is catching. In Delhi they brought three boys and said 'their agya is catching and we are not able to clear it.' That means they are egoistical. Because now your Agya pains you. It means your ego is paining you. So you start judging yourself. You know about yourself what's wrong with you. They all know about themselves and they know how to clear it out and work it out. So you cleanse your- self. But the greatest cleansing comes when you are collective. Many people take my photograph, do puja and meditate but still again they get the same trouble. You have to be in the collective. That is a very important part of Sahaja Yoga. The relationship with God if it has to establish, we have to become first of all the spirit. Then only this relation can be established. One may certify oneself, but its no use. We must evaluate our hu- man life. What is it for? Is it for just insurance? Or is it for something that we become the light of the world. This light of the Spirit spreads in the attention and the attention becomes dynamic, active, and works out. It is very alert and extremely punctual. This attention doesn't get bored at all. Boredom comes when your attention becomes tired. But here the attention is full of light. The nature of the Spirit is that is tells you the truth. When your con- coction is complete that is the state of Nirvikalpa. Then your attention is absolutely correct, you vi- brations are correct and the information you get is hundred percent. Like if you want to know about Shri Ganesh. Many people make fun of him, espe- cially intellectuals. it is a sin. But you can ask 'Is Gauri Putra Ganesh Mooladhar in Ourselves? All those who are realised will get cool vibrations saying "Shiva, Shiva' or "Rama, Rama'. Is He in our pocket? Is He our ser- vant? But if you are realized, then by even taking His name once is sufficient. Because we are in His kingdom. If you are connected then not only will that deity help but also the one who is troubling you will be set alright. Whatever you want is done. All kinds of 'manoraths' (desires) are fulfilled. Whether you call it enlightenment or fulfilment. It is complete fulfilment of your being. Now you don't have to go to Himalayas or jump in the Ganges. You don't have to do any fasting or japas. Only one thing. You be collective. Collec- tive is the ocean of the attention of the Almighty. Once you ate in the collective you get cleansed. There are people who are very big, very rich, very well educated. They find it difficult to come down to a humble place which is the centre. The centre Is Mother's house. They don't come and when they lose their vibrations. It is a very common failing in India. In the West it is not there because they know what a precious thing they have achieved. Peo- ple say they have been meditating at home. If you don't come to the collective you cannot cleanse yourself. bestowed upon the When the Kundalini passes through your agya chakra you become thoughtlessly aware. A thought rises and falls, another thought rises and falls. Some come from the past and some form the future. But we are not in the present. That's why the Kundalini awakening is a happening which attracts your attention inside. When the Kundalini pierces through there is a state in between called vilamba. That Increases. That is the present, then we are thoughtless. The growth takes place when you are thoughtlessly aware and that can be The third nature of the spirit is that it is love. Be- cause it is love gives you joy. Bur Nirvajya love doesn't want anything. It just gives such a soothing 8. The Divine Cool Breeze

 ture and our own knowledge. Sahaja Yoga is very ancient. It is nothing new. Nanak has said "Sahaja Samadhi lago". Every saint has described it. Spirit is what we have to be. That is the ultimate goal of our life. Let us now just think that let us become the Spirit and become a realised soul, A master. feeling, all your stress goes out. This is mata modern sclence, i.e. above modern science. But do you know we are Indians and have this heritage of ours? We belleve mare in the English language and knowledge. Now the time has come that we should beleve in our own cul- May God Bless You. Madras Public Program

 Banglore Public Programme 1C (Synopsis) 9-12-91 Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi One seed can give a big tree, this beautiful at- mosphere. How these trees, plants and bushes grow up to a certain height. How individually they produce whatever they are supposed to. Look at our eye. What a complicated thing it is. What a camera, How many things it does: We never think how did we get this camera fixed here which is doing so many things. We just take everything for granted. Also science cannot tell you how. It can only say it is: We have come from amoeba stage to the human stage. But is it the absolute that we have reached? If is the end of out evolution? If It was so there would have been no problems. We all would have been very different people, under- standing each other. So we turn to the scriptures which say that you are to be born again. Some say you must have atma bodha, so that you get your moksha. Some say that you have become Vali. What is it they are talking about? They are big people of different awareness. They are talking of absolute nature of human beings, which is the Spirit. haven't got knowledge. You are not sinning but you are ignorant. Like Kabir has soid "How can I tell them for the whole world is blind." Gyaneshvara went into Smadhi at the age of twenty three years. They were very frustrated that they cannot talk to you and tell you what is for your benevo- lence. This is because we are so conditioned. We are conditioned on left side because we are very rituallstic. If we are born in a particular religion we are that. But we don't even think that all these religions muat be coming from the same source. All these incarnations and prohets are the flowers on the same tree. We think we are the best and the rest are all horrible. They are all related to each other. Christ hos said "Those wha are not against me are with me. "Every religion started with great Ideas of spreading righteousness and ultirmately seif-relisation. Atmanubhuti, atmabodha and moksha. It deviated because it did not find the truth. You understand all this when you jurmp into that awareness where you have complete light to see the truth. The Spirit is the source of that truth. The truth is absolute. It is not whether it is red or black. For example if you have ten children who are reallsed souls; you tie up their eyes and ask them please tell us what wtong with this gentleman, they feel the vibrations of that person. Whatever you achieve in your evolution you achieve on your ourselves and with everyone, struggling all the central nervous system. We have to achieve higher evolutionary process called oas collective consciousness. That means who is the other? The microcosm becomes the macrocOSm. You be- come part and parcel of the whole and when you think of anyone you can leel it on your finger tips. Whether he is dead living or awake. If you know how to correct those problems you can cure that Human beings have been given the freedom to seek the truth. While seeking the truth we go Wrong but unless we finid the truth, we are not going to the happy or satisfied and moreover, apart from finding it, it is the last breakthrough of our evolulion, If we don't become the Spirit we are not yet complete and will go on fighting with time till you have found out what we gre. This Kundalini is a Pure Desire, all other desire are not pure. Suppose you want a house. You struggle to get a house and then immediately you start thinking of something else. This is because in gen- eral wants are not satiable. The reason is that these are not pure wants. The pure want is to be the Spirit, to be connected with this All Prevailing Power which does all living work. This connection has to established otherwise we are nat going to be restful, The stress is nothing but the struggle to be that. All these diseases are because of our mistakes in a way that we gre blind, because we person. Because there is atma bodha you also know about your own centres which are basically seven. Once you know these seven centres you can easily correct them because it is innate. For ex- ample you are sitting there and you see that I am The Divine Cool Breeze 10

 rnuch and the disciples are getting sick and pov- erty stricken? In Kali Yuga these things were to happen. wearing a white sari. It is there. I don't have to tell you. In the same way it is the easiest thing, It is Sahaja. It is born with you, the right of this union with the Divine power, the all prevalling, the Brahrma chaitanya. Its your birth right as human beings and you should have it. One must know that one cannot pay for It. How much do you pay to this mother earth for sprouting the seeds? If anyone takes money then know that he is a cheat. When people start selling God it is a great sin and you cannot pay for it. First find out what kinds of disciples they have created and then you should believe, What has your Guru done for you? What have you got out of the guru? Have you got any powers? Are you pegceful or healthy? Whats the use of having a guru who is prospering very In Sahaja Yoga your life becomes a miracle. You are helped all the time by this Divine Power and you know how to handle It and work it out. It is right that you should have it. People get trans- formed. You becone adjustable, adaptable and absorbent. So many people have become great artists, musicians, writers, orators etc. Your person- ality which is glorious starts expressing itself. You are glorious but you are not yet connected. You have to become a collective personality. We have the truth with us and we should become Masters May God Bless You. Bangalore Pubiic Program 11

 MAHAKALI PUJA Banglore 9-12-91 Talk by H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi (Synopsis) Mysore was the state ruled by Mahishasura. Ban- glore is a beautiful place with a beautiful climate and you will find that rakshasas always live in places like this. They always try to find places which are cold because they have so much heat in their body. of the incarnations did these tricks and fruth should be based on the traditions and the Shas- tras. Whatever deviates is actually blasphemy. A guru who doesn't talk of realisation or Kundalini, ascent or second birth cannot be a Guru. If you believe in Rama, Are you obliging Rama. If you believe in Christ So what? You believe in this or that. It is such an absurd idea. What does that mean? I believe in God. But you are doing every- thing against Divinity. Now you say I believe in Shri Mataji. So what. Alright you believe in me because of certain experiences. Still what? Mataji should be in you life. Should be in your expression, behaviour, in your treatment to others, in understanding each other and loving each other. That is what im- presses people. People say we come to Mataji, we just pray to her and go away. Why? Because we believe in Mataji. But belief has to penetrate into your being. This belef has to act, has to show results. It has to work out in every way. Some say we believe in Mataji, She will do everything. Will she do Bhakti for us? What is going to come from your side? In the olden days when the goddess had to fight the rakshasas, the rakshasas were not Involved in human beings as such. They didn't become Guru or anything, now in Kaliyuga, they are born into the brains of Sadhakas, of their devotees. Its very difficult to remove them. Once they go into the brain of the Sadhakas then the devotees be- comes possessed, they suffer and have all kinds of problems. Despite that they stick on that person because they are mesmerised.. This mesmerism makes them so strong-headed that even if they have to die they wont give up their Gurus. In Kali Yuga there are so many sadhakas. They are running all over to find some way of finding the truth. Most of the Gurus have gone to the Western countries because people have money. Despite that so many of you have come to Sahaja Yoga. Its you destiny. Its the blessings to you of your previous lives that you could see it sa clearly and come to Sahaja Yoga, now you have grown so much, become so mature and understand that what others are doing is absolutely wrong. Once that starts working, all these demons and rakshasas will all vanish. What am 1 doing for Sahaja Yaga? If it is not doing anything what is the use of making this instrument. You are the light, you have got enlightenment. What's the use of a light which is hanging somewhere which is not going to give light to anyone. When you are giving light to others in a very innocent and reciprocal manner. Not that we are giving light to have an advantage or we want to show off. Then the derailment starts. We should be with full under- standing, that we are instruments in the hands of the Divinity and we are just enjoying that Divinity flowing through us and working it out. You wont feel tired or upset, You will not be in anyway troub- led. We all have to decide that now we are going to India to get the whole joy of the tour. For What? Not to keep it to yourself but to share it with others. Unless and until you learn that, your ego will come back again and again. It is very dangerous to play about witha person like Vishnu. Like in Kerela they say that when Vishnu had become Mohini he had a child by Shiva. This is blasphemy. He is very dangerous diety. They should understand that if what they are doing is good then why should they get diseases. These people wear back dresses for one month and go to Aiyappa, starve themselves, torture themselves for eleven months it has become a craze like jogging etc. In India we are very conditioned by ritualism espe- cially in the south. We are impressed by people who take out some Swiss made watches. They are: simple people. They do not understand that none The Divine Cool Breeze 12

 tion with thern. Something unknown. The people who are known to you will trouble you. Also you have seen the way people who have been spreading Sahaja Yoga got into the mess of the ego. One has to be very careful. The more you are maturing, you have to be very careful. See on a tree. If there is a leaf no insect will come. If there is a flower an insect will enter and eat it off. So when you are becoming a fruit you have to be very careful that no insect should get into it. On the contrary, now you have the capacity to de- stroy all the insects, That is the state we should all come up to, so you are destroying insects on one side and satistying people on the other side. Col- lectively is the only way you can be cleansed but the greater thing is to go all the out to find out where can I spread Sahaja Yoga, where can I go? What is the nearest village I can go? Where will It work out. All these things the more you think the better, it is. Once you start moving in that direction you will be surprised that Sahaja Yoga will move ahead of you. You will meet the people whom you want. You will get all the necessary help that you want. You will suddenly find some people who will come down and say what can we do for you. Every type of help starts coming to you when you expand yourself. Its like expanding your wings like a bird does and then you take off. if you don't extend yourself, you keep Sahaja Yoga to yourself only, it doesn't work. I know you love me very much but don't you think others should also share this love. Ours is an open place where anybody can come in and so we get all kinds of people. Everything can be overcome but first is your own initiative. Your own lethargy has to be overcome then it will start spreading out. It has been predicted that Sahaja Yoga will grow very much this year. You have the power, the Shakti within your reach. They say it was very cold one day before I came here. I said dan't worry. I did not give bandhan or any thing. I just came here. Its become all right. That's how it works. But you have to be that way dedi- cated. Now for all these surya, chandra stars, and the whole coomos has only one thing to do is to see that Sahaja Yoga is spreading well, settling well and is achieving its goal. Every element is working out in so many ways You have not to be convinced about me. You have to be convinced about yourself. You have to do it. You are rny channels. You are the channels of Shakti. Do it in a way which is gracious, beautiful and satisfylng. You should want to do it. I don't have to tell you. I'm sure in every area that you work, in every personality whom you meet you start talking about Sahaja Yoga. It works, it exists. Moreover the whole power of all the dieties is behind you. Have faith in yourself. Have faith in all of them helping you. Do not be nervous and just go ahead because the Shakti is in you. I assure you, you have every power. Ask foI it and you will have it. But don't hesitate. I make you sit on the throne, I put the crown on your head and say you are the King but still you are running away and not beleving When we start struggling we also struggle with people who are very difficult. Just don,t go near 'my'. 'My' is the most difficult thing. What you have to do is to see what is beyond. the more you will go beyond the better it will be. You can see clearly, we have worked so hard in Maharastra, it is useless place I find. Maharashtrian Sahaja Yogis are very few and whatever are there are also not so good. Those who are very neat, they cannot see your greatness. when you go near a big mountain you cannot see it. (When you want to do some work with anyane try to see that you are not closely related nor do you have any connec- me. By God's grace you will be the people who will be the foundation of Sahaja Yoga and you will build the great mansion of Sahaja Yoga with your wis- dom faith, shakti and love. Today we will worship the Mahakali shakti who destroyed all the devils and rakshasas. Ifs your desire which is going to work. May God Bless You. Mahakali Puja 13

 HYDERABAD PUJA (Synopsis) 11-12-91 TALK H.H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI We have come to Hyderabad which was ruled by Muslim kings but they were very Indian and they fought for the Independence of India agalnst the British. Tipu Sultan was a realized soul but he was killed. We have in our country one very big prob- lem and that is that indiviciualy we are all very great peopie but we dont know howito live col- lectiveiy and that is why we lost our independ- ence. Anybody can manage if he can open our eyes and see clearly that when people try to talk ill of others involving us there must be some inten- fion. This has been our falling since long that people use such methods that they spoil the rela- tionships and this has crawied into Sahaja Yoga.. The second weakness we have is that we are very involved with our familyahildren, parents, broth dioesn't spread, that we get invoiveci into pockets eiCOusins, elc, Till you are completely deceived or cheated by someone so close you can never learn a lesson All our problems are around them. Thave seen Sahaja Yogis of a very high level and Suddenly I find out that they are attached to some brother or someone who is doing some other kind of Guru business, Instead of we influencing them they start influencing us. Taiking ill of others,saying things just to spoil the relationship is sin in Sahaja Yoga, Always talk good things about others.For example if someone ally you are there. comes and tells me such and such person is not good, I tell them lies. I tell them that person was praising you so much. Why are you saying all these things against that person? It is important for Sahaja Yogis to create more systhesis, co- ordination?more combinations and bringing in more people. But people get more attached to the negative people, than to the positive people. That means you are still not is Sahaja Yoga fully. in india it is a common thing for a minister to appoint his wife, son, brother, even his servani into some post whether they are capable or not. In Sahaja Yoga you cannot do this. You have to be a Sahaja Yogi. You cannot just get anybody be- cause he is your relation and ask that Mother see that he is my relation.please help this man. Our concepl about fomily life has tochange. Of course the best thing you ican do for your family is to bring therm to Sahaja Yoga. Then there is another kind of moverment that you slat ihinking about yourowncily. Your could have been bom anywhere. Mother you come to my city is important. Itsilike my.home, relations my city, then my country. I understand your concern about other people in your country but there should not be any attachment. One should be cietached Iniaway that just watch yourseif and olhers. See for yourself why you are so interested in your own country and in your own capltal. Mostly it is because you belong to this place and are born in this place. This is orie of the basic reasons why Sahaja Yoga ofour fomily. And don't go across to others all our attention, behaviout is completely entangled into something which is not Sahaja. The whole world is our family so we have to move out. Don't be stag- nated or entangled with a small circle of few people who are negative but go beyond them because you have got the powers, you have got every thing, You can easily cross over this barrier and the see for yourself that you are feeling now mentally very happy, physlcally alright and spiritu- In our Indian society people take to sanyas. They will wear kashaya and gO out. What not take the Sanyosa inside. What is the need to wait till you get old and absolutely haggard ond then to say that you are Sanyasi? Anyway you are a sanyasi at that time, when you are young if you develop this detachment that is you are attached to Sahaja Yoga and to nothing. Nothing is more irn- portant than Sahaja Yaga to you. Once you de- cide that. then you move in that line grow. sup- posing you get short circuited and move some- where else then how can there be growth. West- ein people are worried about themselves. They want that they should achieve the highest them- selves. Once we take our attention from the family you will be surprised how this atlention works! across the family, across this small litle well that we The Divine Cool Breeze 14

 If you do not know managed wilh the change, how to manage the change then your fransforma- tion is incomplete, Remember how graciously someone has done something for you, next time you meet that person oll the graciousness will come out because when somebody does some- thing for you, you get a beautiful feeling and if you remember that feeling then you will go on adding to it. Every time you get some sort of an experi- ence within yourself you keep it within yourself. Anytime you open that area of youE memory al the beauty will start pouring on you, of that feel- ing. Me hove to learn new methods of making our- selves happy. Before that we used to be happy when we hurt olhers or were sarcastic. Once my mind goes onto that I have to be happy and joyous. What am I doing? Why am I doing like this? How can I be happy saying harsh things or mis- chievous things to others? This ego makes me extremely unhappy. It has really spoilt my mood. Tell it to get down. Then it will g est movement completely changes the atmos- phere, One has to be extremely careful and atten- tive, as to know what to say, how to behave and how to create a teeling. in the society of Sahaja Yoga we have beoutiful people. We laugh, enjoy arid we are in the most joyous company all the tirme. What we achieve on loy it the highest. Sahaja Yoga does not believe in any hatred, false pride, restrictions etc. It believes In the pure sense of humanity and also in the great work of Sahaja Yoga. It gives you great pleasure to be kind & nice. To subside these habits you have to do some practice and introspect yourself. When you will be going out you will be meeting have built. You are surprised how it expands and gives you all the blessings and all the grace of Divine Love. I know of certain Sahala Yogis whose wives are so strong headed that they cannol overcome even their wives, In india there Is a rule that whatever is the Dharma of the husband that the wife has to follow. The wives can be very powerful nusance if they are so assertive and aggressive. If the hus- band is sirmple he has to suffer. One should not succumb to anyone because he is dominating but stand back oand tell that this is the Dhama we are following and nobody has any biusiness to check us: We have the fundarnental right in doing it. The question is about how we deal with each other in Sahaja Yoga. How we live with each other and talk to each other. What is the net tesult. Do we have a complete rapport with others? Do you invite Sahala Yogis to your house as you would Invite your neighbours? The left side and right side attachments are differ- ent. Right side people are individualistic. They dont like collectivity It is a force on them. Right sided people have the biggest problem of Ego with Sahaja Yoga it is getting intoxicated and doesn't come up. On what points do we get up- set? This attitude of mine' has to be changed. When you are in Sahaja Yoga how can you be upset. We don't even find out the means and methods how not to upset others. Even the hu- rnour is disturbing and dinoincing that can upset a person very much. What sort of language we speak, what sort of communication we have, what sort of harm we do. You need not be hot tempered, your ego may not be seen but its the style of the ego. Second way is oficritising others ail the time. This is new people. Then you might have problems of not good. Who has asked you to judge it. You should not judge yoursell and at the same time you should not judge others andipunishthem, We have to develop a very Sweet dimension. You have to work it out. Even after corning to Sahaja Yoga certain things linger on. These habits can be corrected very simply and eosily. Obstinacy is also aivery horrible thing. Everybody suffers from this kind of subtle obstinacy. Once I have decided, I have decided. What is the harm in changing? In Sahaja Yoga nothing is decided or fixed. When is the pro- gramme and when is not the programme is not important but what is important is how you have down. The silght- facing people with whem yeu would be harsh. You would be more meticulous or much more aggressive thian normal. A|l these things will upset them. But iyou are peaceful, tolerant, forgiving thatiwild definitely make them feel thatiyou.are . Ifithey are difficult, leave them alane By Rigumentiyoulcannot give them realisation fthey donitihave wisdom they donih deserve it They are not destined to be like that. But your style has to be such that they should know that you are saints, In all your self respect, in all your love you have to talk to them. You have to find ways and methods on how to spread Sahaja Yoga. saints | am happy that May God Bless You. 15 Hyderabad Puja

 Ganesha Puja Shere, Pune 15-12-91 Talk by H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi (Synopsis) One has to understand that in Maharashtra it is important that people worship Shri Ganesha. As you know the Ashta Vinayakas - Eight Ganpatis gre around this area and this triangle of Maharash- tra with three mountains form a triangle which is like the Kundalini. The Kundalini of the whole world resides In this area. This land which Shri Ganesha has its own simplicity and vibrations The best part of Maharashtra is that it gives you a very good attention, With Shri Ganesha so much vibrating, the attention becomes concentrated. Ganesha was created to emit auspiciousness and holiness. Ganesha is the one who cleanses every- thing, it is innocence. The innocence that cleanses you, takes away all kinds of conditionings and egoes that are distracting your attention. never absorb wrong things. if in childhood you cannot give them the knowiedge of Kundalini and proper wisdom you can never latef on easily as- similate it. For that you really require great effort. With Sahaja Yoga it is working out very fast and people are getting very wise. is vibrated by on diny line we move we find that most of our problems are coming form human beings. Wisdom plays such a part in life that whatever may hap- pen outside, the trends, fashions etc, you do not change. You change within. Then you have a full idea what is expected of others and what they should do; how to deal with them: how to talk to them: how far to go with them. All this connes through wisdom In Sahaja Yoga you are very capable people; You have achieved a lot and know everything. Despite all that one should also have the deal with others; How not to contrail anyone. Not to say anything that would be rather harsh or hurting. If you are trying to spread Sahaja Yoga, the only way to look after everyone is with great compassion. With a good attention people can do very good things, like software, good mathematics, they are very good in music. All these things require tremen- dous attention. Art. dancing etc. Ihat comes only through Shri Ganesha, He is the giver of wisdom. Wisdom becomes a Dharma, a part and parcel of your being. You become wise. Though He is a child He is so mature, This wisdom is an innate quality of anyone who is a Sahaja Yogi because in him also Shri Ganesha has been awakened, Wifth wisdom He achieves a balance, an ascent and also He understands that this assent is for His be- nevolence, the benevolence of his country and the whole world. He understands the importance of Sahaja Yoga. This wisdom is just innately buit in and we must learn to use the store house of this wisdom within us. With Sahaja Yoga it starts emit- ting and understanding wisdom. You give up all your stupid childish things, The foundation stone of spiritual life is Shri Ganesha. That's why I have been very anxious that we should find out proper schools for our children. They should have proper education, and they should be looked after be- cause their Ganesha Tattwa is already there. Only thing is, we have to nourish it, look after it and make it grow. Once that happens then children are safe and nothing can harm them. They will Faith in yourself must also come. That is also pos- sible by only Shri Ganesha. He is in Nirvikalpa. He is just there. He doesn't have to question anything, ask for anything. He is not worrying and is com- pletely detached. But when you are doing some- thing you can be in two minds, You can be not so decisive. But he is always very decisive. It is a state and it has to be innately built within yourself. You can also work it out by just concentrating on yourself and trying to find out what is the matter with me, why am I like this? The introspection can help you a lot. The easier method is to worship the principle of innocence within yourself. Supposing we are dealing with someone who is a thief. What should you do? It is best to forget about it com- pletely, once it has happened. Not to worry too much about it. How to make this point alright? This gentleman is not alright. Just forget it. The wisdom is also in forgiving. There is no sense in remember- ing. Once you start forgetting all these things you will remember right things. You don't remember The Divine Cool Breeze 16

 dom, in the sense that they want to run away. They just get fed up and take sanyasa. Living in the present you don't gef tired because you don't think of the past and the future. You live very well in great happiness and you improve things. Thats how you save troubles of others as well as yourself. One has to practice wisdom. Thorough living in the present. For example when you are getting out of the house, many people will go half way and forget something behind and keep going back and forth. At that time if you are in the present then you don't forget. The wisdom acts by itself. Wisdom is a very big power. It can combat any kind of ignorance, attack, or stupidity We should try to develop and mature it. who has insulted you, troubled you or misbe- haved. One thing is built in Sahaja Yoga is that who tries to trouble you they will be in trouble also, So for- give them. Soothe him down. This kind of a wisdom we should have. Not to get after people. Not to pester someone. Not to be very strict. Meditation is the only way you give up right and left side and you are just standing in the centre enjoying the wisdom and the joy of your being. Best part of our lives we spend in bothering, get- ting upset. worrying or getting after someone. Where is the time. We have to awaken the Kundalini of thousands and thousands. Here we are just worried about something nonsensical. Our wisdom is finished. Even at the highest level people don't have wis- We should ask for wisdom in today's puja and for that we have to be in the present. May God Bless You. 17 Ganesha Puja

 Mahalakshmi Puja Kolhapur 21-12-91 Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi (Synopsis) When we see the poverty in India we teally get upset. It will be alright when all these people will also get the blessings of the Divine. Principle of Divine works through Mahalakshmi. You have to get lo a point where your Laskhmi principie is sat istied and then only you start seeking, That seoking comes fromidhe Mahalaxrmiitattva, Sahaja Yoga grows in the middle path. Very tich seldom come to Sahaja Yoga. If they come they will take advan- tage and wont understand Its depth. Inthe same way the very poor don't come, These are twO sheres of one river If we start expanding theri we will definitely shower blessing of the divine on both the shores, Unless and untl you become a Sahaja Vogi your financial situation cannot be improved very much. You connot become a Sahajo Yogi unless you getiyour principleof takshmiEailisfjed. How do we get our Lakshrni principle satisfied? When we hove more noney thon required then we istart thinking what shall I do with this money. Some people start thinking that I will have one more car, onie more house, more this or that. A kind of dissatisfaction sets in. Now what more? Then we have taxations and all kinds of problems that people think I have had enough of it and no more. The hankering affer money gpes away. In Sahaja Yoga you ate so blessed that you start getting whatever you like. If you get your self re- alisation then you can short circuit the whole thing and enter Into Mahalakshmi principle. In case where your situation is such that now you have become overly rich then that richness car go into your head. Ihe principle of lakshmiis to give away. IBe generouS. Second principle of Lakshmi works when you have very nice beautiful houses, people corme and stay complete immorality, To them a girl of twenty there, you look after them, give them food and enjoy all this. So generosity starts. But that generos- ity is also not very satisfying. Then they start thinking of getting to the truth of life. Once Shivaji was working on the building of a fort. He thought, 1 have given so much work to so many poor people." Suddenly his guru Ramdas Swami came there and said" Get that boulder and break it slowly. Ultirmately they came to a stone which was just ike a coconut. Rarndas Swami took that stone in his hand and broke it and there was water in it anda frog Inside. Then Shivaji realised when God creales you He gisa provides (or you You need not be proud that you are daing so much for olheis When you do social work etc, you develop a kind of an ego. To pamer it people give you a peace prize, Nobel prize etc. That kind of generosity can also be very danger- ous that creates some sort of a feeling that you ate something very great and are doing this great work and looking after so many people. Then we come to the miserly people. Its a disease. Sometimes d whole nation is of a miserly type. They falk of money and there is no decency about it. Many countries which are supposed to be very rich are not only miserly but indecent. Once we went to a hotel and had dinnier with sorne people. After the dinner lots of food was left over and they fold the waiter to pack it for therm as they haci pad for it. There is no sharme, decency or decorum about it. This is the greatest curse of being rich. People become absolutely shameless, indecent, arrogant and above all itreligious. One has to fear trose things that look very illusory and look like sornething very great to achieve, but can make a human being so horrible. The iich have no man- ners at all. They have no maryadas of any kind and don't care for what others are going to say or what they have to be. Such rich countries have gone left to right and right to left like yo-yo. The kind of an ego that comes into a rich man is really very stupid. Like the king who made chap- pals out of pearis. People who are trying to show off their wealth in the most hideous manner, are killers of culture. Another thing they get into is years or eight years is the same. They have no sense of proportion. They live such a low life that they get not only sub-human but subanimal also. They may have decency as to what glass should be used for which wine etc. This arrogance of a very incorrigible ego is even thickened when there are five six more like that because a kind of competition starts. May God Bless You. The Divine Cool Breeze 18

 Christmas Puja Ganpatipule 24-12-91 Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi (Synopsis) and He writes everything about you, what you did, what are your problems, where you went in your seeking, what wrangs you did. When the Kundalini tises any obstruction on your chakras is seen and felt and you know what's wrong with that ehakra. In this way it is absolutely scientific. There is not only this guna of the Ganesha Tattwa that a peisori should be innocent and pure. He has many gunas. Like you must have wisdom and inteligerice. You must know what is right and wrong. Today's Yoga is very Special. This special day is called Angaarkl Chaturti or the chaturti of Krishna- paksha, Every chaturti is celebrated as the birth- day of Shri Ganesh which falls every fourth day of the month. But if the chaturti falls on a Tuesday it is a very special day. Today is the same day and we are all here in Ganpatipule an Tuesday on Angarki chaturti. Thousands of people come here to perform puja of Shrl Ganesha Sahaja Yogis must undestandthat whatever happens should be taken with patience Saboori If you try to hurry up or gel frustrated or panicky then nothing gets done. By patience you immedi- ately understand what should be done and how fo do it. Hurry is an unsahaja way, Shri Sainath sald that have patience. The Divine is found in pa- tience". When any conveIsation is:taking place then just wait and watch, When you come into this state then the Param Chaitanya does all the work and you know exactly what to do, What is Angarika? Sari Ganesha cools down the buining embers, Kundalini is aiso a blaze, Its move- ment is like a blazing fire. Earth has gravity and everything that goes up is pulled towards the earth Only fire goes up against gravityr Shr Ganesha coolk down the fire within yeu in two ways. He caima down thenkondalinir He requests the Kundalini to give realisation to a person de- spite the problems or faults of that person. He is the child of the Kundalini and within you He is the child. Because of this relationship He makes the Kundalini understand that"you are a Mother and please help me in whatI want". She then calms down and thinks that my child wants It so I will rise. iri Shri:GaneshO' speciality is His humility and His wisdom. Both of these come from Ganesh Tattwa. Another speciality is that He is a veny calm.and cool person. His gait is also calm, just like an ele- phant, who also has a very slow gait. Also a woman who walks beautifully is called Galgamini or elephant-gait. Elephants only eat grass but are still so strong, they very heavy loads Elephants are also very mld tempered. They will never hurry for anything. They also have terrific memmory. When your left side gels weakenediyour poweriofimem ory fades This is because Ganesha tattwa has decreased within you. Wheni you are too tight sided then dhe Ganesha Tallwa ofthe lett side gets less. People who work too much their memory diminishes in old age. Once the Devi got very angry, She thought She will destroy the whole world. She felt that the creation She created is to no purpose as people have gone the wrong way and are commiting many sins So She started doing the dance of destruc- tion. Seeing this Lord Shiva got very worried and thought the whole world will be destroyed. So he placed Shri Kartikeya who is Her own child under Her feet. As Soon as She placed Her feet on Hen child She cooled down at once. In the same way Shil Genesha cools down the Kundalini by telling Her that'you are giving birth to your child and you should not be angry at sucha time". Some people who have gone to wrong gurus have also troubled the Kundalini a lot. This support is also Shri Ganesha. Ihe Kundalini rises only through Hk Shakti The flames that nse in the Kundalini are cool ficimes This cooling also shri Ganesha does, Inco Way He cools your anger and annoyance aiso. A special thing about Shri Ganesha is that along with His wisdom His power of memory is very sharp. He remembers everything. He has to remember everything because the imprint of all the Karmas (actions) on the Kundalini is done by Shri Ganesha. In His right hand is a pen which is His own tooth 19 Chilstmas Puja

 When we get angry we get carried away and we cannot remember what we are supposed to do. In that temper we can hit anyone or even murder someone. At that time the control that comes is because of Shri Ganesha and He cools your tem- Hanuman is also born on a Tuesday and both shri Ganesha and Shri Hanuman jointly perform their task, especially controlling the anger within human beings. They play tricks in such a way that the person realises he has done wrong. People who are hot tempered are also put right by Hirm. If a person is a Manglik Le. his house of Mars is not alright, then such a person is told to wear a coral stone which is also hot. Heat kilis heat. People who live In hot countries eat a lot of chillies. They per- spire and cool down. Shri Ganesha also cools your heat by His heat. He shows you in such a way that you cool down yourself. All these diseases also generate a lot of heat and because of this heat a person gets confused. We should pray to Shri Ganesha and surrender to Him to control this heat. per. Christ is also like Shri Ganesha. He said forgive everyone. Those who tortured Him and Hung Him on the cross He forgive them. He said, "O lord forgive them for they know not what they do". When people were selling wares and making a business out of temple offerings in the name of God, He took a hunter and hit them. This was His other side. When some Rakshsa or evil person troubles you, He being Ganapati, the Lord of Ganas, He destroys them. You don't have to do or say anything. These ganas are with you When you are saved by them you think it is a miracle. If they are protecting you then know that you are a Sahaja Yogi. There should be patience to know that whatever time is appropriate that is the time the Puja will start. Why change what is ordained? We are not slaves of time: If you people do not become slaves of time then Sahaja Yoga can spread. There should be the experience of it and foaith in it. There is no blind faith in Sahaja Yoga. We have seen this faith with our own brains and eyes. When you are seeing and yet not believing then there is defi- nitely some fault within you. You can see how great Shri Ganesha is and because of the Asta Vinayakas (elight Ganeshas) Maharastra has got so much Punyas. Secondly they are always active within our body also. When you get your realisation you get con- nected to God then they look after you, all your jobs, children etc. Before realisation they are within us as Antibodies, which protect us from diseases, This is in the centre heart and till the age of twelve years they are prepared in the sternum bone. When any calamity befalls on you the sternum bone shakes and immediately they will start fight- ing any impending danger, disease or virus. When you go against the Mother you become immoral. When you go against the Father you become lazy and inefficient. People who have lost their moral- ity, their chakras become very weak and difficult to cure. They may get AIDS or other destructive diseases. That is why we must all the time immerse our lives in Purity. Christ spoke of this Purity. He said. "Thou shall not have adulterous eyes". Because His place is on the Agya chakra. If the eyes are not Pure then Christ is not there. The people of the West believe in Christ but they have very bad eyes. Their eyes are always roving, looking at women or the women looking at men. Their eyes are never steady. This is negativity. You are very blessed and intelligent that you found out and got the truth. To make this com- plete you should imbibe the Gunas (qualities) of Shri Genesha within yourself. Thousands have come to Ganpatipule for the Puja of Shri Ganesha. How many really believe in Him? How many are there in whom there is any quality of Shri Ganesha? They drink, womanize, fight with each other, commit atrocities and have arrived for the Angarika of Shri Ganesha. If there is such a big fire within you why have you come? Nobody thinks that they should imbibe the qualities of the One in Whom they believe. You pray to this or that Deity or guru but have you imbibed their qualities? tll you do not imbibe their qualities your believing in Them is as good as not believing. Shir Ganesha is situated on each chakra. He is the Vice Chancellor sitting on every chakra. Till He does not say so the Kundalini does not rise, His other nature is like embers 'Angaar. Only a flame can cool a flame. When Ravan spoke against Shri Rama the whole of Lanka got burnt because Shri May God Bless You. The Divine Cool Breeze 20

 Shri Lakshmi Puja Alibagh 29-12-91 Talk by H.H. Mataji Nirmala Devi (Synopsis) The second quality of the sea is that it looks after all the creatures that are in it. It is salty but fish and other marine life exist there and the first life came into being in the sea. All our forefathers must have been born in the sea and then we became hu- man beings. We have no right to insult the sea where our forefathers must have existed. To enjoy the beauty of nature is to be with nature. The fruit of coconut is called Shriphal because it is the Sahasrara. It is very surprising that this fruit knows and understands. If wont fall on any animal Or person. Nobody is hurt by this fruit. It is more sensible than human beings. In Sahaja Yoga there is lot of sweetness, goodness, righteousness and is so encouraging. Newly married people should try to be kind to each other. If you are reserved in the beginning you will have to pay for it. Please try to be kind, and nice and talkative. It is not that you are impressing others by keeping quiet. Talking is very important and not to hide your feelings If you have very good marriages you will have very good children born to you and then we will have a new race of people in this world. These children will be the most powerful thing for us and they will work out many things which we could not work out. The third quality is that it is deep. If the depth of the sea is reduced by even a few feet there will problem all over. It keeps to its depth. In the same way whatever depth we have got in Sahaja Yoga we should keep to that. We should not become cheap types. We have to be deep people with deep understanding of Sahaja Yoga and our- selves. That is the sign of dignity. You must have dignity and majestic nature of the sea. These trees get all the wind from the sea but they all bend towards the sea, never away. They show their gratitude by bending towards the sea. Even these fress understand. Without the sea we could not have had transport and also there is a great wealth inside the sea bed which is not yet ex- plored but once explored the whole world can be very rich. There is lots of wealth like gold, silver and diamonds which are all imbedded in the sea and We are next to the sea here in Alibagh and must understand the feeling of the sea. Sea is your grandfather in a way, because He gave birth to Lakshmi who becomes Mahalakshmi later on. We have to show all respect to Him. Normally the way people are living in the West and India. Here people use it for bathrooms. In the West they use it for swimming and they wear funny dresses and lead a very licentious life. This is an insult to the sea, As we have Varuna, in Greek mythology they had a god for the sea - Neptune. This God for the sea has to be worshipped, understood and respected. We cannot be disrespectful. Before entering into the sea and after coming out of it you must say Namaskar to it. one day may be this Lakshmi might be discovered and we people might be entiched all over. More- over when we carry the transport we carry La- kshmi from one place to another. The sea has given us that mobility. I have seen that sea teacts to me very much. If there's light or the moon reflecting in the sea it moves with me. The sea understands me very well because I have a special relationship and respect for the sea Because of the sea you are enjoying here, It is giving you such good feelings and spiri- tuality. There is no need to go to the Himalayas for whatever is covering the Himalayas is the water form the sea which passes as rain and snow on the Himalayas and returns as rivers to the sea. It is a circle. Everything ends up in the sea and goes through tapasya by allowing the sun to create that cloud by suffering the heat of the sun. In the Because of the sea we get rain. Sea is so impor- tant to our life. The sea is the Guru the Maha Guru, which teaches us so many things. First of all this Mahaguru is the one who creates salt for us. Christ has said you ate the salt of the universe. You are the one who gave taste and all qualities of the salt to the human being. The sea has its own maryada, When its high tide it comes up to a point and recedes and next day again it will be at that point. 21 Shrf Lakshmi Puja

 same way We have to bearthe heatiand angeriof others and cieate vapoursjumeans the biessing, the vibrations for others When I see somebody who is the sick and I treat him, of course Ihave to bear it, I absorb it and then it become vibrations and start flowing as vibrations. brations in every waypossible and wherever is possible to help.olher taigetialright. You can take a bandhan if you feel it will hurt. But atleastiuse my photograph. After the photograph you can just fouch the person and there is no harm. Afterialliif; yourare aliaid of any troubles then what's the use of becominga Shaja Yogi. If the Ship is not sea worthy what is the use of making a ship. You have to be sea worthy. You have to decide that we are going to absorb the vibrations and take up every- thing upon ourselves. Have fallh that you are all justilike the sea, the Mahaguru and that whatever you are doing is creating vibrations within you by which you canisave so many hisvery important fon Sahaja Yogis to absorb eve tything Don't get attached to it and let it become vapours. This method we should try to understand by correction. Sahaja Yogis still come to me to treat someone. Why cant you treat? Are you afraid to treat sameone? You all can treat them. help them and the more you treat them the better you will be. You should venture. You should have thatimuch courage to treat others Ifiyou don't treatiothers yoU wont graw, When you dieat athers thete are more vibrations Why should Godigive you vibrations if you are nol going to use il? When we do not use out hands, feet and brains for Sahaja Yoga, we are not oreating vibrations within ourselves. If you don't then you will have problerns all the time. You say lam doing meditation, puja, but still t amnot airight, You have to use your vi- The more you give the more you get The more you use your vibrations the more youwill get it Always use vibrations for helping others give vibra- tions to plantsanimals, nature That stale has to come that yoU:can vibrate your own water All of you can work it out and do such a lot but have faith in yourself which is going to help. Your faith in yourself thaf you are absolutely obedient to your Mother. a great Sahaja Yogi and May God Bless You. The Divine Cool Breeze 22

 Puja at Kalwe (Synopsis) 31-12-91 Talk by H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi It is very important to worship Shri Ganesha, You know through photographs etc that He is a living deity. He is in fhe Mooladhara though actually He is sitting on all the chakras. With Him nothing can work out because He is the one who is Holiness Wherever the Kundalini goes it is He who Pours the Holiness and its the cleansing power of Shri Ganesha that cleanses your chakras. It is very important to understand the virtue of Shri Ganesha and how He works within your chakras and how He helps you. We should worship Him for great chastity purity and wisdom We have to under- stand that wisdom is not something that can be inculcated. It cannot be manoeuvrer. It is some- thing very innate. It comes through our maturity. This proper maturity comes through proper atten- tion to your Kundalini; fixing upiyourikundalini with the all pievailing power. ihis has to be done through regulan meditationu lt is not a titual. After SOmetime you will find that you are all the time in meditation. Him the Innocence of d child. When the Kundalni starts rising and blessing our chakras, automatically we start thinking our innocence has come back We have got Innocent heart, innocent mind and Innocent love. This simple innocent personallty is the sign of a good Sahaja Yogi. He also knows that he is looked after by the ganas of Shri Ganesha. These ganas are all the time looking after you. But apart from this they are also watching you and watching your behaviour. If you try to take advan- tage of Sahaja Yoga then they may punish you. It may act against you: I warned you many times not to exploit sahoja Yoga for your advantage. It is for the benefit of others. The enjoyment of Sahaja Yoga is the best way to know Sahaja Yoga. They are many people who are seeking this truth. You must find out who are seeking this truth. After finding them out do not argue with them, just glve them realisation and let them feel the vibrations and then things will be better. There are many things which are false in this world. Doesn't matter. All this falsehood can be easily cleared out by the Truth. He is a little child, the eternal child and that gives MAY GOD BLESS YOU. Editor : Shri. Yogi Mahajan Printer & Publisher : P. C. Kulkarni Printed & Published at: The Divine Cool Breeze (Xerox M/cs.) 9. Bhagya Chintamani Soc. Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411.029. Shri Lakshmi Puja 23



----------------------

1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Diwali Puja Synopsis
Cabella, November 10, 1991
TALK H.H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
has to die but the way they've made the death as
some sort of a big part of life. It is jusi a momenti
Just a moment that you pass out and you go and
change and come back again. But in this life, if
you have to do anything, is to enjoy."
At Diwali Puja in France, Shri Mataji asked us to be
Joyful in sahaja Yoga. Our personalities have to
express the Joy of realization and of being in the
kingdom of God. In particular, we cannot be sing-
ing sad dongs or reading tragic books. Shri Mataji's
puja address also contained some special advice
for Sahaja Yoginis.
Christianity has not said much on the subject of
death. "Christ, if they had allowed Him to live He
would have talked about it; but he has said that
Spirit is eternal. He has talked of reincarnation, no
doubt."
Women have certain water powers of crying,
weeping, and thinking they are very miserable
and making everybody miserable this is their
power. Inside every woman, there is a mother-
hood, there is great capacities, sacrifice, every-
thing is there, but with that they also should know
they are left-sided. And our joy about which we
talk within our heart has to manifest outside.
People should see that we are joyous, that we are
happy people we are not like others who start
crying for small things."
"In this lifetirme, the highest thing is your ascent and
your position in the kingdom of God. Especially for
ladies, I have to tell you because, you see, read-
ing all these tragic things all over... it just starts
working in the nerves of the ladies. If somebody
says the slightest things it becomes like a bomb-
shell." We should first see what harm we do to
ourselves. So many wornen in the West have ru-
ined themselves, but they never cry for that.
Even in the event of crisis, Sahaja Yoginis should
not cry. Shri Mataji related Her own experience:
"Like when my father died, I was surprised that
suddenly 1
thoughtiess. For about three days I was thoughtless
neither the thought of pain or unhappiness or
anything came up, but just thoughtless. And eve-
rybody was surprised because I looked after him,
and he was very attached to Me, very fond of the
Me everything was there." So if you are a Sahaja
Yogini or Yogi, "then at the lime of crisis you should
become thoughtless. That is one of the signs....That
means what? That God just takes you in, your
problerns. He puts his hand, He puts His protection
and He takes you out of it and makes you absc-
lutely thoughtless. And In that thoughtless aware-
ness you discover what is right. What is wrong. So
even in crisis, this thoughtless awareness is all the
time extremely alert, it becomes much more alert
than nomal.
But there are very sensible women I have seen in
the East and and the West who have a great
sense of life, like an elephant is walking and the
dogs are barking, so what does it matter? That
majesty comes when inside you have that joy.
Nobody can make me unhappy.' This should be
the principle: otherwise you start moving towards
the left side." Crying is also another kind of ego
expression. When women start crying, men start
moving onto the left and get possessed. "So today
I want a promise frorm you all that you're not going
to cry at all. Instead of flowers you just give me this
flower of promise. I never cry. Of course, some-
times, 'Sandra Katuna,"one tear or two tears might
come out. After all, I'm a Mother." But this does not
mean sitting, crying and becoming hysterical.
Don't read any book which talks of crying but
book which are deep also makes you feel very
much touched; if you feel like crying its all right."
became
thoughtless absolutely
"We are in the Kingdom of God. in no way we are
unhappy, in no way, Some things happen in life,
life is such: somebody has to die, everybody
doesn't die together.. So everybody who is born
So today we are here to enjoy our joy-our At-
manand, Niranand, and Paramanand which are
of eternal value. "You have to understand and
Diwall Pooja
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-1.txt 
 built on rocks. So we have to be very courageous,
we have to be very bold and the same time ex-
tremely humble."
believe now you are in the Kingdom of God and
all the subtle beauties of your being are going to
be opened out to you...(but) if your eyes are al-
ready closed, your heart is already closed, and
you don't want to see something that's so beauti-
ful, how can you say what a beautiful thing they
have made?" It is important in life to have a very
positive attitude and to develop ourselves within.
"All of you have become saints... You are soaints
because inside you there is a fragrance, beautiful
fragrance of your lotus. That is the Spirit.. in the
same way is reflected in your heart-it is a beautiful
lotus. Feel that lotus. How beautiful, how delicate
i1 is. It's pink because pinik is a lotus which invites
everyone, a sign of generosity, of invitation... That's
what your are. Wherever you will be you can
create that beauty... you can make people see
what a spiritual person is. You are the reflectors of
Sahaja Yoga. not me, You have to reflect Sahaja
Yoga. For such peopie are always in joy and wis-
"What are you? You are Sahaja Yogi and in Sahaj
you have to know that you have all the proofs,
everyting before you to know that you are Sahaja
Yogl. Now if I know that I am Adi Shakti, supposing
If I know I am Adi Shakti, then I know. Then I don't
have to ask for help from anybody. After all, if I am
Adi Shakti, then I know. Then I don't have to ask for
help from anybody. After all, if I am Adi Shakti, I
am supposed to do everything. That is my job
dom."
Shri Ganesha is the giver of wisdom which is how
to behove at what time, how to say something at
what time, how far to go with everything. "It just
should become innate, sahaj. Every moining you
should tell yourself, am a Sahaja Yogini. So how
far should go? How should behave? What
should be my attitude? All these can be very
easily understood if you develop this lotus of wis-
dom. How does the lotus come out?" There is a
seed which sprouts which is already within you. "All
of you have got it. Now it started opening be-
cause you are realized souls. Allow the wisdom to
to take over."
because I have that power. I have that power
becouse
within Me so I have to do it. Now 1 can also say
that I am a Woman, I should sit down and cry. Nol
Thave no right. I cannot even do it, even if I want
to do it. My job is to encourage you, to tell you
about your inner subtleties, your beauty. Do you
know what beautiful thing you are?"
"Let us talk about our inner beauty. What are
we?... Are we all these people who are all time
crying, miserable or people who are always fight-
ing. always hankering after things, whom matter
dominates? Nol We are the Spirit." We are the
reflection of God Almighty which is purity, truth,
and knowledge. "We are not like ordinary people.
How can we live on that ievel? Only if you are
possessed or had a bad guru or may be some-
thing like that you may be going like a yo-yo,
going up and down. But those who have crossed
that limit and have reached that state should
"So how do you do it? There's one way I would say.
Supposing Mother has this problem, "What She
would have done? How She would have dealt
with it? You may say that we don't understand
Mother's style. She is full of tricks. Correctl I am, but
there is a very simple way of doing It. You can
surrender to My wisdom, and the Wisdom ilself is
active, it will work... Wisdom within you is active...
because the Delties are with you... and whatever
happens to you They are before you. Nobody can
harm you, nobody can touch you. You are sO
protected that anyone tries to harm you, immedi-
ately there is a protection. Also your own protec-
tion is there, as i said, that you jump into thought-
less awareness."
value that they are the Spirit. So many Spirits sitting
here reflecting God Almighty. I am such a proud
Mother, and all of you are capable of enlighten-
ing so many people in the world. But the beauty
within you is that your areabsolutely independent
of anybody else. You depend only on yourselves
upon the source of your Spirity upon the joy of youUr
spirit. You don't expect others to give you joy.
Supposing somebody tomorrow comes and
abuses Me...if never fouches Me because I am
with Myself.. Imagine a house which is standing
on rocks. Like that you are, Try to feel it. Feel the
rock within you. People who have built their
houses on sand have to wory. Not we. We have
"We harm ourselves more than anybody else can
sometimes... It is a kind of personality you develop
that, I'm like that, I just cry. Why not develop a
personality like that that, 1 am always in joy?" Then
this lotus of your fragrance will improve and the
The Divine Cool Breeze
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-2.txt 
 lems. When you have joy you have to be joy-giv-
ing and if you are not joy giving that means there's
something lacking in your Sahaja Yaga. and that
Is: we have fo come up now... We can change
pur name, if you like. if 'Sahaja Yoga' is not good
"Joy Giving Association."
activity of your wisdom will lead you to people
who are extremely nice and to situations which
are beautiful. "in your own wisdom, your own Spirit
is working it out. You don't have to do anything."
The enly thing you have to remember is that you
are a Sahaja Yogini or Yogi and your character
and ideas should be Sahaja.
"Now we should find out what kills the joy... First I
said you must have wisdom." Wisdom gives you
detachmentifrom all ihat
teredness, self:obsession, egoi Selfishness com-
pletely darkens the self, which is the Spirit, because
you think of yourself, your children, your family.
There gre even some people who think only of
themselves. "When you start thinking like that,
when you start becorning smaller and smaller and
Smaller, the lotus collapses. But to think about
otheis is so great.
"Sahaja Yogis, being men, they don't show much,
but there are certain other ways of showing this
temper. They get into tempers and sometimes the
tempers are so much that you just start looking,
"What is the matter with this person?' One side, the
temper and another side, the crying. In between,
what remains? I don't knowi Both thingsiare abso-
dutely nol needed You have to correct people, to
say things. Just now I said. I'have said it, finished.
But it's not anger, it's just I hove to act. The differ-
ence is like this: I am not involved with it. If I oam
crying, I'm not involved, I am just crying. Even if I
om angry, I am not angry. I am trying to be angry-
in an acting. That's what happens- you do not get
Involved into it. But if you get involved into your
anger than the you is finished.
u
selfishnessseit-cen-
"If you do not allow your spirit to fulfill its own na-
ture and its own character, the Spirit is not going
to manifest itself. So you are the vehicle, You are
the lamp, you can say, as far as the body and
mind is concerned. But this light:of Spiriteifiitinassto
manifest then it has to be of a very unique type
which emit all its light outsicle andigives lightito
athers. And this light-giving quality you have to
irmprove gradually. Youll be surprised, only if you
will iryin your life. in your relationships, In your
endeavors, to give light to others, to make thei
kives better, not lo show off or lo be egotistical but
to be loving.. you really understand that you are
the Spirit because Spirit loves... and in love you are
forgiving.. Not to forgive is difficult, but to forgive is
the best. At least when you forgive there is no
headache for you"
"Sorne people think also if you are joyous you have
to be very serious. Not at all. What is there to be
serious in this world? Everything is stupidity... So
because you suffer from serious stupid problems,
that's why you become serious, and by becoming
serlous, if you think your problems will be solved
they will not be at the time." At the same time, we
should not be vulgar and frivolous,
"What is the use of the light? Let us see, As the light
we are to give the light." So we are here to give
joy and happiness to everyone. There are so many
ways of making others happy which we have to
learn. "And then when you make therm happy,
then you feel that joy within yourself." Just think of
the times when you did something good for oth-
ers. "But that tirne is eternally with you all the time
and that is why Diwali is so important..,As I said,
you are My light, and the light is there which is an
eternal light. These lights will be finished. We have
to light them every year. Not you people, you
hove eternal light and this light is going to spread
joy."
"So you have to first understand that life is for
giving joy to others because you are now saints
and your light has to give joy. Little bityou have to
bear You have powers to bear. You have all the
powers. And so I wish you good luck for the next
year and great prosperity.
May God bless you."
When you have joy do not want to fight or say
anything harsh to anyone. "Not only that, but you
do not want to have something that will spoll this
Mother Earth or which will bring ecological prob-
Diwal Pooja
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-3.txt 
 MADRAS PUBLIC PROGRAMME
(Synopsis) 6-12-91
Talk by H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
If we are real seekers of truth we have to be
honest about it so that we are sincere to ourselves
and we have justified our own existence in this
world. There are so many Sadhakas who are work-
ing out some sort of ritual, meditation, bhakti or
reading. One has to understand what one has
achieved. Where are we? As
say, 'My child, you have done so much in your
seeking, what have you found? Have you got the
ultimate reality? Have you got what is described in
the scriptures?"
There are three types of movements towards the
Divine. One was the Vedas. Vid means to know
Thomas called the peop;le who know as Gnosties.
Gna means Gyana. Not mental or emotional
knowledge but something much beyond and the
same path they tried. In the Vedas the first sholka
says that if you so not know it. then it is no use
reading this book. To know means what? To know
It on your central nervous system. Not on your
mental or physical plane. As we have become
human beings we have to humbly say that we are
not perfect beings. There is something missing.
Otherwise why are you fighting or quarelling? Why
are there ecological, economic and political
problems? Then you come to the source of the
human beings who are doing all this. So what's
wrong with human beings? who are doing all this.
So what's wrong with human beings? Animals are
Pashu, they are under the control of God i.e. they
are pasha. But human beings have got the free-
dom and they are going helter skelter. These prob-
lems are there because they have not got the real
knowledge. We should try to seek the real knowl-
edge. According to Vedas they tried to under-
stand nature and the five elements, which ac-
cording to us is the right side movement. In the
Greeks the right side movement is very well shown.
Left side was the Bhakti. People started worship-
ping God with blind faith. India is quite blessed as
the knowledge came from the saints though now
it has become quite deviated and stagnated.
Another good point of India is that the religion is
not organised.
a Mother I would
Namdev was an ordinary tailor and he went to
meet another saint called Gora Kumbhar (the
potter). Namdev just stood before him and said "I
carne here to see the Nirguna(the formless) but
here I have found it in the Saguna(in a form)" Only
a realised soul, a saint can say this about a saint
because he knows the ultimate reality. People
who are not realised cannot understand what it
beyond this life. Even in Christian religion we have
Thomas who came to India and wrote a lot of
treatise which were kept in a cave in Egypt and
discovered. Now there's a book about him after
forty eight years of research. Its amazing how he is
describing Sahaja Yoga through-out. That you
have to have the experience of reality.
Every scripture says know thyself. Who am 1? When
it is said so, our effort should be to find out that self
that is within us. We say my body. my nose, my
country. 'My 'MY'. Who is this I who always thinks.
From where does this inspiration come? This T is
within us reflected in our heart. Take a hypothesis
and if it is proved and if you have found, felt or
experienced what I am saying then as honest
people you have to accept it. In the West they
have other problems. But once they experienced
they went to universities and different libraries and
found out everything about the Kundalini. So
much work has been done by Nath Panthies
about Kundalini awakening but it was lost. Then
the Germans came who were completely misin-
formed by Tantrikas. In a German book it says
Kundalini lies in your stomach.
Despite that all these ideologies and even the
Vedas got into some sort of a mental Maya and
that's how we have Arya Samaj etc. which are
very difficult. Such people have not reached the
point and are satisfied with what they have read.
Kabira has said, 'By reading too much even the
Pandits have become stupid." By reading foO
much you cannot know the ultimate. Supposing
there is a doctor who gives you prescription for
your headache. Whereas you have to take the
The Divine Cool Breeze
4.
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-4.txt 
 medicine. What is written in the Vedas and Upan-
ishads is that you must find out yourself. Even
Patanjali Shastra there is only a small bit of
Viyayam (exercise and physical problems.) In
Sahaja Yoga also we use It but according to un-
derstanding of the problem. We are not only
physical, mental or emotional being but are also
spiritual being.
given up drugs, bad habits etc. Overnight people
have been cured. I don't do anything as such,
Your own Kundalini works it out. She is your Mother,
your only real Mother and She knows everything
about you. Its all taped into Her. She is placed into
three and a half coils within you. When she rises
She may glve a little heat because of the ittle
struggle that She has to do, This heat is generated
only in some people like liver patients who may
feel a little heat in the hands also. All of you have
got the Kundalini and it is the Pure Desire within
you. The law of economic states that in general
wants are not satisfied. Today we want a house,
then tomorrow a car, after that helcopter and it
goes on. When we do not have it we struggle to
get it and when we have it we don't enjoy it. But
this is Pure Desire, that is to be one with this all
prevaling power of God's tove. We see everything
created, beautiful flowers, a big tree coming out
of a small little seed. Look at our eyes. They are
The second type of movement we have in this
country is the Bhakti, Going to temples etc. But
that also started deteriorating. What is bhakti? Shri
krishna was a diplomat and not a mother. He
wanted that people to go around to find our the
truth because nobody likes a straight forward
statement. At that time he just told it to Arjuna. He
said three things. Firstly "You must get to Gyana."
Gyana means this knowledge on you central nerv-
ous system. Secondly you should do Bhakti and
whatever fruit, flower or water you give me I will
take It. But you must do Bhakti which is Ananya.
That means when there is not the other. When you
are a realised soul. If you are not connected whoat
is the bhakti.
such beautiful cameras, Who has made them?
Who has evolved us to this state? What is that
power that has made us human beings? We have
to find out because science cannot give an ex-
planation. How a seed sprouts. How we became
human beings. God Almighty has spread this
beautiful Brahma Chaitanya all over. If it is so you
must experience and verify but Just to say no is to
deny yourself a chance of getting connected to
that vital power. This vital power has evolved us. It
organizes, creates everything, vibrates everything.
It thinks how far to go with you. Such a beautiful
power is all prevailing into every atom and into
every living commune, into every living being. It
acts so beautifully that we don't even feel the
Smoothness of it. We don't even see a flower flow-
Many people complain " have been fasting, do-
ing japs, doing this or that and see my condition.
It is not the mistake of God. You are not yet
connected. Like if a telephone is not connected
what's the use of telephoning. Bhakti without the
connection is wrong. That is why Shri Krishna said
"Yoga kshema Vahamyam." First get Yoga the
union and then you will get kshema or benevo-
lence. For karma he said "Do all the work and put
it at the lotus feet of God Almighty. Many people
say all my works I put at the lotus feet of God. Even
the murderers, Its just a mental idea. You cannot
because you are not yet at that state. But a
Sahaja Yogi will not tell me "I am raising the Kun-
dalini." He will say," It does not come up." He talks
in the third person because he is no more there.
This is the kama which is automatically at the lotus
feet of God Almighty. He is doing everything. We
afe just instruments. It is automatic and spontane-
ous and that is Sahaja.
ering, blossoming. opening. it is done so sweetly
and beautifully that we don't even feel the exis-
tence of it in any way.
Unless and until we are connected with that
power we cannot know the ultimate reality, be-
cause the spirit within us is not in our attention. But
once this Kundalini rises. She passes through the six
centres, pierces through this fontanelle bone area
which is the actualisation of baptism and then this
spirit comes into our attention as a light and our
nerves get a new dimension by which we become
collectively conscious. Samuhik chetna. You can
feel others. You can feel on you finger tips. There
are seven centres on the left and seven centres on
the right. The left side seven centres represent your
All of you have got this power within yourself. There
are books which describe that Kundalini is a very
dangerous thing. It is absolutely nonsense. I have
been to many countries and so many people
have got realisation and there is no trace of any
trouble to them. On the contrary they have im-
proved in every way. Overnight people have
Madras Public Program
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-5.txt 
 emotional side and this the right side represents
your physical and mental side. You can feel the
centres of all the people. Medically when we treat
people we treat a tree from outside, We treat the
leaves. But if you have to really treat the tree you
have to go to the roots. This is the roots within us
and the tree of life..
not. You know yourself. There is no need to ask.
Through that you will know the absolute because
you are the Spirit. It gives absalute truth.
The third kind of mavement we have in our coun-
fry is of Nath Panthies. Jains have Adi Nath. In that
one Guru was supposed to give knowledge to
only one person. Like Janaka had only Nachiketa.
Till the time of Gyneshvara ie. the 12th century.
Gyneshvara was the disciple of his own brother.
They suffered a lot. He asked his brother for one
permission to open the truth to the public", "Be-
cause thirteen or fourteen thousand years back
Markandeya hos described the Kundalini but all in
Sanskrit language. Sanskrit language was not
available to the common public. Thus this knowl-
edge was kept a secret all the time, Gyaneshvara
wrote Gnaneshvari, which was a kind of a Marathi
Gita which be enlarged and decorated i with lots
of poetry Sixth chapter in described about Kun-
dalini The organizers of religion called the sixth
chapter 'Nishipta'. The people in charge of religion
forbade its reading. Thus this chapter was closed
and nobody got to know about it, The Noth Pan-
this knew about it. Out of that we have Kabir and
Nanak. Nanak talked of Khalis whiich means pure,
Nirmal. Shaja Yogis are Nimal. Khalis people can-
not be like this. They cannot have vlolence. It love,
Its love which is absolutely Navajaya le. without
any compensation. It is love that is unlimited. It is
love which has no discrimination. Like the energY
in the sap rises and goes to all the areas of the
tree. To the flowers and fruits and comes back. Iit
does not stick to one, If you stick to one it is the
death of that entire tree. We have to understand
that all these great incarnations, seers and proph-
ets came on this earth on the same tree of life.
You have to believe in all of them. It is a living
process of evolution. The last break through. You
did not do onything to become human beings so
In the same way it is effortless. It is Sahoja.
Even Mohammed Sahib has described Kiyama or
resurrection time. "When the resurrection time wil
come your hands will speak and bear witness
against you." They have all talked about this time.
The last judgement and this Kall Yuga is bringing
forth something, But how many are willing to take
to it? Thousands and thousonds go off to some sort
of maddening craze but not after reality. You re-
quire a kind of Divine Intelligence to understand. I
found Russia the most teceptive country for this.
They are very introspective people, At least in one
place there are twenty two thousand Sahaja Yo-
gis. When I was there the coup had taken place.
I asked "Are you not disturbed?" they said, Mother,
what it the need to be disturbed. We are in the
kingdom of God. We don't belong to this country.
We Indians have problems that we are very con-
ditioned. We have such Ideals before us but we
never aspire. We will worship Rama or a Guru but
what have you got within yourself? You are cling-
Ing on to something. What about you having
something? That is what is Sahaja Yoga. Unless
and until you know youself you will not know Shri
Rama. You will not know anyone. The other day I
saw a book on Yoga some crazy man has written.
He is denying the existence of Krishna, Rama,
Christ and everybody. It is very unscientific. With-
out finding out how can you say. Supposing 1
never came to Madras and start describing Ma-
dras what would you call me? In the same way
many people have written about God because
there is no law prohibiting them to write. Nonsense
can be written. Unless and until we get the truth
we will not know who is a fake Guru and who is
May God Biess You.
The Divine Cool Breeze
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Madras Public Programme
(Synopsis) 7-12-91
Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Mythology is not all absurd. Ninety percent is ab-
solutely what it was. We go to temples. We think
going to temples is very good. But we don't know
what we are doing or why we are praying. Whom
are we praying to? What are these dieties? How
do they work In us? What is their job? How to
please them?
pressed on your central nervous system. For ex-
ample if you have a dog or horse and you want
to take him through a very dirty lane it will go. But
for hurnan being it is very difficult because in our
evolution this central nervous systerm has devel-
oped this sense of smell and beauty. We human
beings are definitely higher than animals in our
evolution and in our subtler sensifivities. For a dog
it doesn't matter what you decorate, what colour
you wear. To us it is very important because our
sensitivity has improved.
The Spirit is the reflection af God Almighty ls one
God who reflects, Sadashiva Sadashiva is the wil-
ness to ihe work ofithe:Prirmordial Motherthe Adi
Shakti, He is just witnessing the play In you Hels
witnessing a Alme but He doesn'ticome into your
altention, His attention is only limited because He
has not iniany way to interfere with your freedom.
He keeps to Himself and is just watching. That is the
auto, the Spirit. It is the reflection of one Sadashiv.
So naturally all the reflections have to be the
same. Ther effects have to be the same. After
realisation you become reflectors. Every one re-
flects. the same thing so the effect of the At-
masaakshaat is the same, that first he starts feeling
the cool breeze on his hand, then out of his fon-
tanelle bone Area. All of them feel the same way:
Then they start feeling these centres and finding
out what's wrong. Also all of them becorne
thoughtlessly aware. The first stage which you call
as nirvichara Samadhi. It works out Instantane-
ously. You may say Mother it is very difficult. Peo-
ple had to go to the Himalayas. Those days are
gone. After all the tree of civilization has grown so
big. Its roots have to grow. Otherwise whole civi-
lization will be finished. This is the knowledge of the
roots and that is why to know this knowledge you
have to become subtler-sukshama. This is only
possible when the Kundalini rises and pierces
through your fontanelle bone and gets oonnected
with the all prevailing power of God's love. The first
thing that you feel is collective consciousness
because everybody is the Spirit. So you can feel
another Afma. You can feel their body andmind
etc. This is the first quality you get on your central
nervous system..
In the hurman stage we have one problem and
that is that we have developed two institutions in
our head called asiEgo.and:Super-ego (condition-
ing). These cross over in our head and calssify and
we become a closed personality, When the Kun-
dalini rises she posses through this agnya chakra
which is on the optic chaisma and sucks in these
two and opens the Sahasrara, then the Kundalini
goes up. This is a living process of a living God and
living energy. Ihe Kundalini is your Mather. She
moves very beautifully without troubling you She
knows Her ohild very wel. She has loved you all
your lives. When She pierces the Brahmarandra
the seat of Sadashiva on top of the head then we
have touched the feet of Sadashiva and He en-
ters info our attention. When the spirit enters into
our attention then out attention becomes enlight-
ened. This allention is very alert, it knows every-
ahing. You can know about people on the
chakras: They don't discuss what clathes you are
wearing or how much money they have in the
bank. But they will see where are they on their
chakras. You can cure them but they have to be
with this all Prevailling Power.
First of all you become Nirvichara, you start work-
ing your collective consciousness by giving realisa-
tion to others. The problem is that you have been
given the throne and made to sit on that but still
you don't want to beleve that you have become
the king. Self confidence is very difficult. People
cannot believe that they have got selfrealisation.
They are afraid. But all these horrible people who
Whatever you have got in your evolution is ex-
(G)
Madras Public Program
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-7.txt 
 achieved in collectively as well as in your medita-
tion for which you don't have to pay.
have no realisation, no knowledge, they become
the great Gurus, have thousands of people be-
hind them, make a fool out of them, make money
and spoil their lives.
Reality cannot be purchased. God doesn't know
money. He has not made money. This is your
headache. If I get a hall I have to pay for it. So it -
is for the hall, not for God. For awakening and
enlightenment we cannot charge any money.
Even for darshan people charge money. How can
they rise to the level of the Spirit if all is money. The
bhaktas are so simple and gullible. A Guru in
America has 48 Rolls Royces and he wanted one
more. So his disciples started starving to save
money for a Rolls Royce, When a Sahaj Yogi asked
they explained that "We are just giving his the
metal. But he is giving us the Spirit." can metal be
exchanged for spirit?
The second nature of the Spirit is that it is a collec-
tive being "This is good, this is bad, this and that".
It means if you put your hands towards a photo-
graph, it is made by a realised soul you will start
getting the vibrations. All things can be proved.
There is pramaan for all. This chitta also purifies. It
knows where is your problem. What chakra is
catching. In Delhi they brought three boys and
said 'their agya is catching and we are not able to
clear it.' That means they are egoistical. Because
now your Agya pains you. It means your ego is
paining you. So you start judging yourself. You
know about yourself what's wrong with you. They
all know about themselves and they know how to
clear it out and work it out. So you cleanse your-
self. But the greatest cleansing comes when you
are collective. Many people take my photograph,
do puja and meditate but still again they get the
same trouble. You have to be in the collective.
That is a very important part of Sahaja Yoga.
The relationship with God if it has to establish, we
have to become first of all the spirit. Then only this
relation can be established. One may certify
oneself, but its no use. We must evaluate our hu-
man life. What is it for? Is it for just insurance? Or is
it for something that we become the light of the
world. This light of the Spirit spreads in the attention
and the attention becomes dynamic, active, and
works out. It is very alert and extremely punctual.
This attention doesn't get bored at all. Boredom
comes when your attention becomes tired. But
here the attention is full of light. The nature of the
Spirit is that is tells you the truth. When your con-
coction is complete that is the state of Nirvikalpa.
Then your attention is absolutely correct, you vi-
brations are correct and the information you get is
hundred percent. Like if you want to know about
Shri Ganesh. Many people make fun of him, espe-
cially intellectuals. it is a sin. But you can ask 'Is
Gauri Putra Ganesh
Mooladhar in Ourselves? All those who are realised
will get cool vibrations saying "Shiva, Shiva' or
"Rama, Rama'. Is He in our pocket? Is He our ser-
vant? But if you are realized, then by even taking
His name once is sufficient. Because we are in His
kingdom. If you are connected then not only will
that deity help but also the one who is troubling
you will be set alright. Whatever you want is done.
All kinds of 'manoraths' (desires) are fulfilled.
Whether you call it enlightenment or fulfilment. It is
complete fulfilment of your being.
Now you don't have to go to Himalayas or jump in
the Ganges. You don't have to do any fasting or
japas. Only one thing. You be collective. Collec-
tive is the ocean of the attention of the Almighty.
Once you ate in the collective you get cleansed.
There are people who are very big, very rich, very
well educated. They find it difficult to come down
to a humble place which is the centre. The centre
Is Mother's house. They don't come and when they
lose their vibrations. It is a very common failing in
India. In the West it is not there because they know
what a precious thing they have achieved. Peo-
ple say they have been meditating at home. If
you don't come to the collective you cannot
cleanse yourself.
bestowed upon the
When the Kundalini passes through your agya
chakra you become thoughtlessly aware. A
thought rises and falls, another thought rises and
falls. Some come from the past and some form the
future. But we are not in the present. That's why
the Kundalini awakening is a happening which
attracts your attention inside. When the Kundalini
pierces through there is a state in between called
vilamba. That Increases. That is the present, then
we are thoughtless. The growth takes place when
you are thoughtlessly aware and that can be
The third nature of the spirit is that it is love. Be-
cause it is love gives you joy. Bur Nirvajya love
doesn't want anything. It just gives such a soothing
8.
The Divine Cool Breeze
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-8.txt 
 ture and our own knowledge. Sahaja Yoga is very
ancient. It is nothing new. Nanak has said "Sahaja
Samadhi lago". Every saint has described it. Spirit is
what we have to be. That is the ultimate goal of
our life. Let us now just think that let us become the
Spirit and become a realised soul, A master.
feeling, all your stress goes out.
This is mata modern sclence, i.e. above modern
science. But do you know we are Indians and
have this heritage of ours? We belleve mare in the
English language and knowledge. Now the time
has come that we should beleve in our own cul-
May God Bless You.
Madras Public Program
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Banglore Public Programme
1C
(Synopsis) 9-12-91
Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
One seed can give a big tree, this beautiful at-
mosphere. How these trees, plants and bushes
grow up to a certain height. How individually they
produce whatever they are supposed to. Look at
our eye. What a complicated thing it is. What a
camera, How many things it does: We never think
how did we get this camera fixed here which is
doing so many things. We just take everything for
granted. Also science cannot tell you how. It can
only say it is: We have come from amoeba stage
to the human stage. But is it the absolute that we
have reached? If is the end of out evolution? If It
was so there would have been no problems. We
all would have been very different people, under-
standing each other. So we turn to the scriptures
which say that you are to be born again. Some
say you must have atma bodha, so that you get
your moksha. Some say that you have become
Vali. What is it they are talking about? They are big
people of different awareness. They are talking of
absolute nature of human beings, which is the
Spirit.
haven't got knowledge. You are not sinning but
you are ignorant. Like Kabir has soid "How can I tell
them for the whole world is blind." Gyaneshvara
went into Smadhi at the age of twenty three
years. They were very frustrated that they cannot
talk to you and tell you what is for your benevo-
lence. This is because we are so conditioned. We
are conditioned on left side because we are very
rituallstic. If we are born in a particular religion we
are that. But we don't even think that all these
religions muat be coming from the same source. All
these incarnations and prohets are the flowers on
the same tree. We think we are the best and the
rest are all horrible. They are all related to each
other. Christ hos said "Those wha are not against
me are with me. "Every religion started with great
Ideas of spreading righteousness and ultirmately
seif-relisation. Atmanubhuti,
atmabodha and
moksha. It deviated because it did not find the
truth.
You understand all this when you jurmp into that
awareness where you have complete light to see
the truth. The Spirit is the source of that truth. The
truth is absolute. It is not whether it is red or black.
For example if you have ten children who are
reallsed souls; you tie up their eyes and ask them
please tell us what wtong with this gentleman,
they feel the vibrations of that person. Whatever
you achieve in your evolution you achieve on your
ourselves and with everyone, struggling all the central nervous system. We have to achieve
higher evolutionary process called oas collective
consciousness. That means who is the other? The
microcosm becomes the macrocOSm. You be-
come part and parcel of the whole and when you
think of anyone you can leel it on your finger tips.
Whether he is dead living or awake. If you know
how to correct those problems you can cure that
Human beings have been given the freedom to
seek the truth. While seeking the truth we go
Wrong but unless we finid the truth, we are not
going to the happy or satisfied and moreover,
apart from finding it, it is the last breakthrough of
our evolulion, If we don't become the Spirit we are
not yet complete and will go on fighting with
time till you have found out what we gre.
This Kundalini is a Pure Desire, all other desire are
not pure. Suppose you want a house. You struggle
to get a house and then immediately you start
thinking of something else. This is because in gen-
eral wants are not satiable. The reason is that
these are not pure wants. The pure want is to be
the Spirit, to be connected with this All Prevailing
Power which does all living work. This connection
has to established otherwise we are nat going to
be restful, The stress is nothing but the struggle to
be that. All these diseases are because of our
mistakes in a way that we gre blind, because we
person.
Because there is atma bodha you also know
about your own centres which are basically seven.
Once you know these seven centres you can
easily correct them because it is innate. For ex-
ample you are sitting there and you see that I am
The Divine Cool Breeze
10
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-10.txt 
 rnuch and the disciples are getting sick and pov-
erty stricken? In Kali Yuga these things were to
happen.
wearing a white sari. It is there. I don't have to tell
you. In the same way it is the easiest thing, It is
Sahaja. It is born with you, the right of this union
with the Divine power, the all prevalling, the
Brahrma chaitanya. Its your birth right as human
beings and you should have it. One must know
that one cannot pay for It. How much do you pay
to this mother earth for sprouting the seeds? If
anyone takes money then know that he is a
cheat. When people start selling God it is a great
sin and you cannot pay for it. First find out what
kinds of disciples they have created and then you
should believe, What has your Guru done for you?
What have you got out of the guru? Have you got
any powers? Are you pegceful or healthy? Whats
the use of having a guru who is prospering very
In Sahaja Yoga your life becomes a miracle. You
are helped all the time by this Divine Power and
you know how to handle It and work it out. It is
right that you should have it. People get trans-
formed. You becone adjustable, adaptable and
absorbent. So many people have become great
artists, musicians, writers, orators etc. Your person-
ality which is glorious starts expressing itself. You
are glorious but you are not yet connected. You
have to become a collective personality. We
have the truth with us and we should become
Masters
May God Bless You.
Bangalore Pubiic Program
11
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-11.txt 
 MAHAKALI PUJA
Banglore 9-12-91
Talk by H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi (Synopsis)
Mysore was the state ruled by Mahishasura. Ban-
glore is a beautiful place with a beautiful climate
and you will find that rakshasas always live in
places like this. They always try to find places
which are cold because they have so much heat
in their body.
of the incarnations did these tricks and fruth
should be based on the traditions and the Shas-
tras. Whatever deviates is actually blasphemy.
A guru who doesn't talk of realisation or Kundalini,
ascent or second birth cannot be a Guru. If you
believe in Rama, Are you obliging Rama. If you
believe in Christ So what? You believe in this or
that. It is such an absurd idea. What does that
mean? I believe in God. But you are doing every-
thing against Divinity. Now you say I believe in Shri
Mataji. So what. Alright you believe in me because
of certain experiences. Still what? Mataji should be
in you life. Should be in your expression, behaviour,
in your treatment to others, in understanding each
other and loving each other. That is what im-
presses people. People say we come to Mataji,
we just pray to her and go away. Why? Because
we believe in Mataji. But belief has to penetrate
into your being. This belef has to act, has to show
results. It has to work out in every way. Some say
we believe in Mataji, She will do everything. Will
she do Bhakti for us? What is going to come from
your side?
In the olden days when the goddess had to fight
the rakshasas, the rakshasas were not Involved in
human beings as such. They didn't become Guru
or anything, now in Kaliyuga, they are born into
the brains of Sadhakas, of their devotees. Its very
difficult to remove them. Once they go into the
brain of the Sadhakas then the devotees be-
comes possessed, they suffer and have all kinds of
problems. Despite that they stick on that person
because they are mesmerised.. This mesmerism
makes them so strong-headed that even if they
have to die they wont give up their Gurus.
In Kali Yuga there are so many sadhakas. They are
running all over to find some way of finding the
truth. Most of the Gurus have gone to the Western
countries because people have money. Despite
that so many of you have come to Sahaja Yoga.
Its you destiny. Its the blessings to you of your
previous lives that you could see it sa clearly and
come to Sahaja Yoga, now you have grown so
much, become so mature and understand that
what others are doing is absolutely wrong.
Once that starts working, all these demons and
rakshasas will all vanish. What am 1 doing for
Sahaja Yaga? If it is not doing anything what is the
use of making this instrument. You are the light,
you have got enlightenment. What's the use of a
light which is hanging somewhere which is not
going to give light to anyone. When you are giving
light to others in a very innocent and reciprocal
manner. Not that we are giving light to have an
advantage or we want to show off. Then the
derailment starts. We should be with full under-
standing, that we are instruments in the hands of
the Divinity and we are just enjoying that Divinity
flowing through us and working it out. You wont
feel tired or upset, You will not be in anyway troub-
led. We all have to decide that now we are going
to India to get the whole joy of the tour. For What?
Not to keep it to yourself but to share it with others.
Unless and until you learn that, your ego will come
back again and again.
It is very dangerous to play about witha person
like Vishnu. Like in Kerela they say that when
Vishnu had become Mohini he had a child by
Shiva. This is blasphemy. He is very dangerous
diety. They should understand that if what they are
doing is good then why should they get diseases.
These people wear back dresses for one month
and go to Aiyappa, starve themselves, torture
themselves for eleven months it has become a
craze like jogging etc.
In India we are very conditioned by ritualism espe-
cially in the south. We are impressed by people
who take out some Swiss made watches. They are:
simple people. They do not understand that none
The Divine Cool Breeze
12
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-12.txt 
 tion with thern. Something unknown. The people
who are known to you will trouble you.
Also you have seen the way people who have
been spreading Sahaja Yoga got into the mess of
the ego. One has to be very careful. The more you
are maturing, you have to be very careful. See on
a tree. If there is a leaf no insect will come. If there
is a flower an insect will enter and eat it off. So
when you are becoming a fruit you have to be
very careful that no insect should get into it. On
the contrary, now you have the capacity to de-
stroy all the insects, That is the state we should all
come up to, so you are destroying insects on one
side and satistying people on the other side. Col-
lectively is the only way you can be cleansed but
the greater thing is to go all the out to find out
where can I spread Sahaja Yoga, where can I go?
What is the nearest village I can go? Where will It
work out. All these things the more you think the
better, it is. Once you start moving in that direction
you will be surprised that Sahaja Yoga will move
ahead of you. You will meet the people whom
you want. You will get all the necessary help that
you want. You will suddenly find some people who
will come down and say what can we do for you.
Every type of help starts coming to you when you
expand yourself. Its like expanding your wings like
a bird does and then you take off. if you don't
extend yourself, you keep Sahaja Yoga to yourself
only, it doesn't work. I know you love me very
much but don't you think others should also share
this love.
Ours is an open place where anybody can come
in and so we get all kinds of people. Everything
can be overcome but first is your own initiative.
Your own lethargy has to be overcome then it will
start spreading out. It has been predicted that
Sahaja Yoga will grow very much this year. You
have the power, the Shakti within your reach. They
say it was very cold one day before I came here.
I said dan't worry. I did not give bandhan or any
thing. I just came here. Its become all right. That's
how it works. But you have to be that way dedi-
cated. Now for all these surya, chandra stars, and
the whole coomos has only one thing to do is to
see that Sahaja Yoga is spreading well, settling
well and is achieving its goal. Every element is
working out in so many ways You have not to be
convinced about me. You have to be convinced
about yourself. You have to do it. You are rny
channels. You are the channels of Shakti. Do it in
a way which is gracious, beautiful and satisfylng.
You should want to do it. I don't have to tell you.
I'm sure in every area that you work, in every
personality whom you meet you start talking
about Sahaja Yoga. It works, it exists. Moreover the
whole power of all the dieties is behind you.
Have faith in yourself. Have faith in all of them
helping you. Do not be nervous and just go ahead
because the Shakti is in you. I assure you, you have
every power. Ask foI it and you will have it. But
don't hesitate. I make you sit on the throne, I put
the crown on your head and say you are the King
but still you are running away and not beleving
When we start struggling we also struggle with
people who are very difficult. Just don,t go near
'my'. 'My' is the most difficult thing. What you have
to do is to see what is beyond. the more you will
go beyond the better it will be. You can see
clearly, we have worked so hard in Maharastra, it
is useless place I find. Maharashtrian Sahaja Yogis
are very few and whatever are there are also not
so good. Those who are very neat, they cannot
see your greatness. when you go near a big
mountain you cannot see it. (When you want to
do some work with anyane try to see that you are
not closely related nor do you have any connec-
me.
By God's grace you will be the people who will be
the foundation of Sahaja Yoga and you will build
the great mansion of Sahaja Yoga with your wis-
dom faith, shakti and love. Today we will worship
the Mahakali shakti who destroyed all the devils
and rakshasas. Ifs your desire which is going to
work.
May God Bless You.
Mahakali Puja
13
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-13.txt 
 HYDERABAD PUJA
(Synopsis) 11-12-91
TALK H.H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
We have come to Hyderabad which was ruled by
Muslim kings but they were very Indian and they
fought for the Independence of India agalnst the
British. Tipu Sultan was a realized soul but he was
killed. We have in our country one very big prob-
lem and that is that indiviciualy we are all very
great peopie but we dont know howito live col-
lectiveiy and that is why we lost our independ-
ence. Anybody can manage if he can open our
eyes and see clearly that when people try to talk
ill of others involving us there must be some inten-
fion. This has been our falling since long that
people use such methods that they spoil the rela-
tionships and this has crawied into Sahaja Yoga..
The second weakness we have is that we are very
involved with our familyahildren, parents, broth dioesn't spread, that we get invoiveci into pockets
eiCOusins, elc, Till you are completely deceived
or cheated by someone so close you can never
learn a lesson All our problems are around them.
Thave seen Sahaja Yogis of a very high level and
Suddenly I find out that they are attached to some
brother or someone who is doing some other kind
of Guru business, Instead of we influencing them
they start influencing us.
Taiking ill of others,saying things just to spoil the
relationship is sin in Sahaja Yoga, Always talk good
things about others.For example if someone ally you are there.
comes and tells me such and such person is not
good, I tell them lies. I tell them that person was
praising you so much. Why are you saying all these
things against that person? It is important for
Sahaja Yogis to create more systhesis, co-
ordination?more combinations and bringing in
more people. But people get more attached to
the negative people, than to the positive people.
That means you are still not is Sahaja Yoga fully.
in india it is a common thing for a minister to
appoint his wife, son, brother, even his servani into
some post whether they are capable or not. In
Sahaja Yoga you cannot do this. You have to be
a Sahaja Yogi. You cannot just get anybody be-
cause he is your relation and ask that Mother see
that he is my relation.please help this man. Our
concepl about fomily life has tochange. Of
course the best thing you ican do for your family is
to bring therm to Sahaja Yoga.
Then there is another kind of moverment that you
slat ihinking about yourowncily. Your could
have been bom anywhere. Mother you come to
my city is important. Itsilike my.home, relations my
city, then my country. I understand your concern
about other people in your country but there
should not be any attachment. One should be
cietached Iniaway that just watch yourseif and
olhers. See for yourself why you are so interested in
your own country and in your own capltal. Mostly
it is because you belong to this place and are
born in this place.
This is orie of the basic reasons why Sahaja Yoga
ofour fomily. And don't go across to others all our
attention, behaviout is completely entangled into
something which is not Sahaja. The whole world is
our family so we have to move out. Don't be stag-
nated or entangled with a small circle of few
people who are negative but go beyond them
because you have got the powers, you have got
every thing, You can easily cross over this barrier
and the see for yourself that you are feeling now
mentally very happy, physlcally alright and spiritu-
In our Indian society people take to sanyas. They
will wear kashaya and gO out. What not take the
Sanyosa inside. What is the need to wait till you
get old and absolutely haggard ond then to say
that you are Sanyasi? Anyway you are a sanyasi
at that time, when you are young if you develop
this detachment that is you are attached to
Sahaja Yoga and to nothing. Nothing is more irn-
portant than Sahaja Yaga to you. Once you de-
cide that. then you move in that line grow. sup-
posing you get short circuited and move some-
where else then how can there be growth. West-
ein people are worried about themselves. They
want that they should achieve the highest them-
selves. Once we take our attention from the family
you will be surprised how this atlention works!
across the family, across this small litle well that we
The Divine Cool Breeze
14
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-14.txt 
 If you do not know
managed wilh the change,
how to manage the change then your fransforma-
tion is incomplete, Remember how graciously
someone has done something for you, next time
you meet that person oll the graciousness will
come out because when somebody does some-
thing for you, you get a beautiful feeling and if you
remember that feeling then you will go on adding
to it. Every time you get some sort of an experi-
ence within yourself you keep it within yourself.
Anytime you open that area of youE memory al
the beauty will start pouring on you, of that feel-
ing.
Me hove to learn new methods of making our-
selves happy. Before that we used to be happy
when we hurt olhers or were sarcastic. Once my
mind goes onto that I have to be happy and
joyous. What am I doing? Why am I doing like this?
How can I be happy saying harsh things or mis-
chievous things to others? This ego makes me
extremely unhappy. It has really spoilt my mood.
Tell it to get down. Then it will g
est movement completely changes the atmos-
phere, One has to be extremely careful and atten-
tive, as to know what to say, how to behave and
how to create a teeling.
in the society of Sahaja Yoga we have beoutiful
people. We laugh, enjoy arid we are in the most
joyous company all the tirme. What we achieve on
loy it the highest. Sahaja Yoga does not believe in
any hatred, false pride, restrictions etc. It believes
In the pure sense of humanity and also in the great
work of Sahaja Yoga. It gives you great pleasure
to be kind & nice. To subside these habits you
have to do some practice and introspect yourself.
When you will be going out you will be meeting
have built. You are surprised how it expands and
gives you all the blessings and all the grace of
Divine Love.
I know of certain Sahala Yogis whose wives are so
strong headed that they cannol overcome even
their wives, In india there Is a rule that whatever is
the Dharma of the husband that the wife has to
follow. The wives can be very powerful nusance if
they are so assertive and aggressive. If the hus-
band is sirmple he has to suffer. One should not
succumb to anyone because he is dominating but
stand back oand tell that this is the Dhama we are
following and nobody has any biusiness to check
us: We have the fundarnental right in doing it.
The question is about how we deal with each
other in Sahaja Yoga. How we live with each other
and talk to each other. What is the net tesult. Do
we have a complete rapport with others? Do you
invite Sahala Yogis to your house as you would
Invite your neighbours?
The left side and right side attachments are differ-
ent. Right side people are individualistic. They
dont like collectivity It is a force on them. Right
sided people have the biggest problem of Ego
with Sahaja Yoga it is getting intoxicated and
doesn't come up. On what points do we get up-
set? This attitude of mine' has to be changed.
When you are in Sahaja Yoga how can you be
upset. We don't even find out the means and
methods how not to upset others. Even the hu-
rnour is disturbing and dinoincing that can upset a
person very much. What sort of language we
speak, what sort of communication we have,
what sort of harm we do. You need not be hot
tempered, your ego may not be seen but its the
style of the ego.
Second way is oficritising others ail the time. This is new people. Then you might have problems of
not good. Who has asked you to judge it. You
should not judge yoursell and at the same time
you should not judge others andipunishthem, We
have to develop a very Sweet dimension. You
have to work it out. Even after corning to Sahaja
Yoga certain things linger on. These habits can be
corrected very simply and eosily.
Obstinacy is also aivery horrible thing. Everybody
suffers from this kind of subtle obstinacy. Once I
have decided, I have decided. What is the harm
in changing? In Sahaja Yoga
nothing is decided or fixed. When is the pro-
gramme and when is not the programme is not
important but what is important is how you have
down. The silght-
facing people with whem yeu would be harsh.
You would be more meticulous or much more
aggressive thian normal. A|l these things will upset
them. But iyou are peaceful, tolerant, forgiving
thatiwild definitely make them feel thatiyou.are
. Ifithey are difficult, leave them alane By
Rigumentiyoulcannot give them realisation fthey
donitihave wisdom they donih deserve it They are
not destined to be like that. But your style has to
be such that they should know that you are saints,
In all your self respect, in all your love you have to
talk to them.
You have to find ways and methods on how to
spread Sahaja Yoga.
saints
| am happy that
May God Bless You.
15
Hyderabad Puja
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-15.txt 
 Ganesha Puja
Shere, Pune 15-12-91
Talk by H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi (Synopsis)
One has to understand that in Maharashtra it is
important that people worship Shri Ganesha. As
you know the Ashta Vinayakas - Eight Ganpatis
gre around this area and this triangle of Maharash-
tra with three mountains form a triangle which is
like the Kundalini. The Kundalini of the whole world
resides In this area. This land which
Shri Ganesha has its own simplicity and vibrations
The best part of Maharashtra is that it gives you a
very good attention, With Shri Ganesha so much
vibrating, the attention becomes concentrated.
Ganesha was created to emit auspiciousness and
holiness. Ganesha is the one who cleanses every-
thing, it is innocence. The innocence that cleanses
you, takes away all kinds of conditionings and
egoes that are distracting your attention.
never absorb wrong things. if in childhood you
cannot give them the knowiedge of Kundalini and
proper wisdom you can never latef on easily as-
similate it. For that you really require great effort.
With Sahaja Yoga it is working out very fast and
people are getting very wise.
is vibrated by
on diny line we move we find that most of our
problems are coming form human beings. Wisdom
plays such a part in life that whatever may hap-
pen outside, the trends, fashions etc, you do not
change. You change within. Then you have a full
idea what is expected of others and what they
should do; how to deal with them: how to talk to
them: how far to go with them. All this connes
through wisdom In Sahaja Yoga you are very
capable people; You have achieved a lot and
know everything. Despite all that one should also
have the deal with others; How not to contrail
anyone. Not to say anything that would be rather
harsh or hurting. If you are trying to spread Sahaja
Yoga, the only way to look after everyone is with
great compassion.
With a good attention people can do very good
things, like software, good mathematics, they are
very good in music. All these things require tremen-
dous attention. Art. dancing etc. Ihat comes only
through Shri Ganesha, He is the giver of wisdom.
Wisdom becomes a Dharma, a part and parcel of
your being. You become wise. Though He is a
child He is so mature, This wisdom is an innate
quality of anyone who is a Sahaja Yogi because in
him also Shri Ganesha has been awakened, Wifth
wisdom He achieves a balance, an ascent and
also He understands that this assent is for His be-
nevolence, the benevolence of his country and
the whole world. He understands the importance
of Sahaja Yoga. This wisdom is just innately buit in
and we must learn to use the store house of this
wisdom within us. With Sahaja Yoga it starts emit-
ting and understanding wisdom. You give up all
your stupid childish things, The foundation stone of
spiritual life is Shri Ganesha. That's why I have been
very anxious that we should find out proper
schools for our children. They should have proper
education, and they should be looked after be-
cause their Ganesha Tattwa is already there. Only
thing is, we have to nourish it, look after it and
make it grow. Once that happens then children
are safe and nothing can harm them. They will
Faith in yourself must also come. That is also pos-
sible by only Shri Ganesha. He is in Nirvikalpa. He is
just there. He doesn't have to question anything,
ask for anything. He is not worrying and is com-
pletely detached. But when you are doing some-
thing you can be in two minds, You can be not so
decisive. But he is always very decisive. It is a state
and it has to be innately built within yourself. You
can also work it out by just concentrating on
yourself and trying to find out what is the matter
with me, why am I like this? The introspection can
help you a lot. The easier method is to worship the
principle of innocence within yourself. Supposing
we are dealing with someone who is a thief. What
should you do? It is best to forget about it com-
pletely, once it has happened. Not to worry too
much about it. How to make this point alright? This
gentleman is not alright. Just forget it. The wisdom
is also in forgiving. There is no sense in remember-
ing. Once you start forgetting all these things you
will remember right things. You don't remember
The Divine Cool Breeze
16
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-16.txt 
 dom, in the sense that they want to run away.
They just get fed up and take sanyasa. Living in
the present you don't gef tired because you don't
think of the past and the future. You live very well
in great happiness and you improve things. Thats
how you save troubles of others as well as yourself.
One has to practice wisdom. Thorough living in the
present. For example when you are getting out of
the house, many people will go half way and
forget something behind and keep going back
and forth. At that time if you are in the present
then you don't forget. The wisdom acts by itself.
Wisdom is a very big power. It can combat any
kind of ignorance, attack, or stupidity We should
try to develop and mature it.
who has insulted you, troubled you or misbe-
haved.
One thing is built in Sahaja Yoga is that who tries
to trouble you they will be in trouble also, So for-
give them. Soothe him down. This kind of a wisdom
we should have. Not to get after people. Not to
pester someone. Not to be very strict.
Meditation is the only way you give up right and
left side and you are just standing in the centre
enjoying the wisdom and the joy of your being.
Best part of our lives we spend in bothering, get-
ting upset. worrying or getting after someone.
Where is the time.
We have to awaken the Kundalini of thousands
and thousands. Here we are just worried about
something nonsensical. Our wisdom is finished.
Even at the highest level people don't have wis-
We should ask for wisdom in today's puja and for
that we have to be in the present.
May God Bless You.
17
Ganesha Puja
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Mahalakshmi Puja
Kolhapur 21-12-91
Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi (Synopsis)
When we see the poverty in India we teally get
upset. It will be alright when all these people will
also get the blessings of the Divine. Principle of
Divine works through Mahalakshmi. You have to
get lo a point where your Laskhmi principie is sat
istied and then only you start seeking, That seoking
comes fromidhe Mahalaxrmiitattva, Sahaja Yoga
grows in the middle path. Very tich seldom come
to Sahaja Yoga. If they come they will take advan-
tage and wont understand Its depth. Inthe same
way the very poor don't come, These are twO
sheres of one river If we start expanding theri we
will definitely shower blessing of the divine on both
the shores, Unless and untl you become a Sahaja
Vogi your financial situation cannot be improved
very much. You connot become a Sahajo Yogi
unless you getiyour principleof takshmiEailisfjed.
How do we get our Lakshrni principle satisfied?
When we hove more noney thon required then
we istart thinking what shall I do with this money.
Some people start thinking that I will have one
more car, onie more house, more this or that. A
kind of dissatisfaction sets in. Now what more?
Then we have taxations and all kinds of problems
that people think I have had enough of it and no
more. The hankering affer money gpes away. In
Sahaja Yoga you ate so blessed that you start
getting whatever you like. If you get your self re-
alisation then you can short circuit the whole thing
and enter Into Mahalakshmi principle. In case
where your situation is such that now you have
become overly rich then that richness car go into
your head. Ihe principle of lakshmiis to give away.
IBe generouS.
Second principle of Lakshmi works when you have
very nice beautiful houses, people corme and stay complete immorality, To them a girl of twenty
there, you look after them, give them food and
enjoy all this. So generosity starts. But that generos-
ity is also not very satisfying. Then they start thinking
of getting to the truth of life.
Once Shivaji was working on the building of a fort.
He thought, 1 have given so much work to so
many poor people." Suddenly his guru Ramdas
Swami came there and said" Get that boulder
and break it slowly. Ultirmately they came to a
stone which was just ike a coconut. Rarndas
Swami took that stone in his hand and broke it and
there was water in it anda frog Inside. Then Shivaji
realised when God creales you He gisa provides
(or you You need not be proud that you are
daing so much for olheis When you do social
work etc, you develop a kind of an ego. To pamer
it people give you a peace prize, Nobel prize etc.
That kind of generosity can also be very danger-
ous that creates some sort of a feeling that you
ate something very great and are doing this great
work and looking after so many people.
Then we come to the miserly people. Its a disease.
Sometimes d whole nation is of a miserly type.
They falk of money and there is no decency about
it. Many countries which are supposed to be very
rich are not only miserly but indecent. Once we
went to a hotel and had dinnier with sorne people.
After the dinner lots of food was left over and they
fold the waiter to pack it for therm as they haci
pad for it. There is no sharme, decency or decorum
about it. This is the greatest curse of being rich.
People become absolutely shameless, indecent,
arrogant and above all itreligious. One has to fear
trose things that look very illusory and look like
sornething very great to achieve, but can make a
human being so horrible. The iich have no man-
ners at all. They have no maryadas of any kind
and don't care for what others are going to say or
what they have to be. Such rich countries have
gone left to right and right to left like yo-yo.
The kind of an ego that comes into a rich man is
really very stupid. Like the king who made chap-
pals out of pearis. People who are trying to show
off their wealth in the most hideous manner, are
killers of culture. Another thing they get into is
years or eight years is the same. They have no
sense of proportion. They live such a low life that
they get not only sub-human but subanimal also.
They may have decency as to what glass should
be used for which wine etc. This arrogance of a
very incorrigible ego is even thickened when there
are five six more like that because a kind of
competition starts.
May God Bless You.
The Divine Cool Breeze
18
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-18.txt 
 Christmas Puja
Ganpatipule 24-12-91
Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi (Synopsis)
and He writes everything about you, what you did,
what are your problems, where you went in your
seeking, what wrangs you did. When the Kundalini
tises any obstruction on your chakras is seen and
felt and you know what's wrong with that ehakra.
In this way it is absolutely scientific. There is not only
this guna of the Ganesha Tattwa that a peisori
should be innocent and pure. He has many gunas.
Like you must have wisdom and inteligerice. You
must know what is right and wrong.
Today's Yoga is very Special. This special day is
called Angaarkl Chaturti or the chaturti of Krishna-
paksha, Every chaturti is celebrated as the birth-
day of Shri Ganesh which falls every fourth day of
the month. But if the chaturti falls on a Tuesday it
is a very special day. Today is the same day and
we are all here in Ganpatipule an Tuesday on
Angarki chaturti. Thousands of people come here
to perform puja of Shrl Ganesha
Sahaja Yogis must undestandthat whatever
happens should be taken with patience Saboori
If you try to hurry up or gel frustrated or panicky
then nothing gets done. By patience you immedi-
ately understand what should be done and how
fo do it. Hurry is an unsahaja way, Shri Sainath sald
that have patience. The Divine is found in pa-
tience". When any conveIsation is:taking place
then just wait and watch, When you come into this
state then the Param Chaitanya does all the work
and you know exactly what to do,
What is Angarika? Sari Ganesha cools down the
buining embers, Kundalini is aiso a blaze, Its move-
ment is like a blazing fire. Earth has gravity and
everything that goes up is pulled towards the
earth Only fire goes up against gravityr Shr
Ganesha coolk down the fire within yeu in two
ways. He caima down thenkondalinir He requests
the Kundalini to give realisation to a person de-
spite the problems or faults of that person. He is
the child of the Kundalini and within you He is the
child. Because of this relationship He makes the
Kundalini understand that"you are a Mother and
please help me in whatI want". She then calms
down and thinks that my child wants It so I will rise.
iri
Shri:GaneshO' speciality is His humility and His
wisdom. Both of these come from Ganesh Tattwa.
Another speciality is that He is a veny calm.and
cool person. His gait is also calm, just like an ele-
phant, who also has a very slow gait. Also a
woman who walks beautifully is called Galgamini
or elephant-gait. Elephants only eat grass but are
still so strong, they very heavy loads Elephants are
also very mld tempered. They will never hurry for
anything. They also have terrific memmory. When
your left side gels weakenediyour poweriofimem
ory fades This is because Ganesha tattwa has
decreased within you. Wheni you are too tight
sided then dhe Ganesha Tallwa ofthe lett side
gets less. People who work too much their memory
diminishes in old age.
Once the Devi got very angry, She thought She will
destroy the whole world. She felt that the creation
She created is to no purpose as people have
gone the wrong way and are commiting many
sins So She started doing the dance of destruc-
tion. Seeing this Lord Shiva got very worried and
thought the whole world will be destroyed. So he
placed Shri Kartikeya who is Her own child under
Her feet. As Soon as She placed Her feet on Hen
child She cooled down at once. In the same way
Shil Genesha cools down the Kundalini by telling
Her that'you are giving birth to your child and you
should not be angry at sucha time". Some people
who have gone to wrong gurus have also troubled
the Kundalini a lot. This support is also Shri
Ganesha. Ihe Kundalini rises only through Hk
Shakti The flames that nse in the Kundalini are cool
ficimes This cooling also shri Ganesha does, Inco
Way He cools your anger and annoyance aiso.
A special thing about Shri Ganesha is that along
with His wisdom His power of memory is very sharp.
He remembers everything. He has to remember
everything because the imprint of all the Karmas
(actions) on the Kundalini is done by Shri Ganesha.
In His right hand is a pen which is His own tooth
19
Chilstmas Puja
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-19.txt 
 When we get angry we get carried away and we
cannot remember what we are supposed to do.
In that temper we can hit anyone or even murder
someone. At that time the control that comes is
because of Shri Ganesha and He cools your tem-
Hanuman is also born on a Tuesday and both shri
Ganesha and Shri Hanuman jointly perform their
task, especially controlling the anger within human
beings. They play tricks in such a way that the
person realises he has done wrong. People who
are hot tempered are also put right by Hirm. If a
person is a Manglik Le. his house of Mars is not
alright, then such a person is told to wear a coral
stone which is also hot. Heat kilis heat. People who
live In hot countries eat a lot of chillies. They per-
spire and cool down. Shri Ganesha also cools your
heat by His heat. He shows you in such a way that
you cool down yourself. All these diseases also
generate a lot of heat and because of this heat a
person gets confused. We should pray to Shri
Ganesha and surrender to Him to control this heat.
per.
Christ is also like Shri Ganesha. He said forgive
everyone. Those who tortured Him and Hung Him
on the cross He forgive them. He said, "O lord
forgive them for they know not what they do".
When people were selling wares and making a
business out of temple offerings in the name of
God, He took a hunter and hit them. This was His
other side. When some Rakshsa or evil person
troubles you, He being Ganapati, the Lord of
Ganas, He destroys them. You don't have to do or
say anything. These ganas are with you When you
are saved by them you think it is a miracle. If they
are protecting you then know that you are a
Sahaja Yogi.
There should be patience to know that whatever
time is appropriate that is the time the Puja will
start. Why change what is ordained? We are not
slaves of time: If you people do not become
slaves of time then Sahaja Yoga can spread. There
should be the experience of it and foaith in it. There
is no blind faith in Sahaja Yoga. We have seen this
faith with our own brains and eyes. When you are
seeing and yet not believing then there is defi-
nitely some fault within you. You can see how
great Shri Ganesha is and because of the Asta
Vinayakas (elight Ganeshas) Maharastra has got
so much Punyas.
Secondly they are always active within our body
also. When you get your realisation you get con-
nected to God then they look after you, all your
jobs, children etc. Before realisation they are within
us as Antibodies, which protect us from diseases,
This is in the centre heart and till the age of twelve
years they are prepared in the sternum bone.
When any calamity befalls on you the sternum
bone shakes and immediately they will start fight-
ing any impending danger, disease or virus. When
you go against the Mother you become immoral.
When you go against the Father you become lazy
and inefficient. People who have lost their moral-
ity, their chakras become very weak and difficult
to cure. They may get AIDS or other destructive
diseases. That is why we must all the time immerse
our lives in Purity. Christ spoke of this Purity. He said.
"Thou shall not have adulterous eyes". Because His
place is on the Agya chakra. If the eyes are not
Pure then Christ is not there. The people of the
West believe in Christ but they have very bad
eyes. Their eyes are always roving, looking at
women or the women looking at men. Their eyes
are never steady. This is negativity.
You are very blessed and intelligent that you
found out and got the truth. To make this com-
plete you should imbibe the Gunas (qualities) of
Shri Genesha within yourself. Thousands have
come to Ganpatipule for the Puja of Shri
Ganesha. How many really believe in Him? How
many are there in whom there is any quality of Shri
Ganesha? They drink, womanize, fight with each
other, commit atrocities and have arrived for the
Angarika of Shri Ganesha. If there is such a big fire
within you why have you come? Nobody thinks
that they should imbibe the qualities of the One in
Whom they believe. You pray to this or that Deity
or guru but have you imbibed their qualities? tll
you do not imbibe their qualities your believing in
Them is as good as not believing.
Shir Ganesha is situated on each chakra. He is the
Vice Chancellor sitting on every chakra. Till He
does not say so the Kundalini does not rise, His
other nature is like embers 'Angaar. Only a flame
can cool a flame. When Ravan spoke against Shri
Rama the whole of Lanka got burnt because Shri
May God Bless You.
The Divine Cool Breeze
20
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-20.txt 
 Shri Lakshmi Puja
Alibagh 29-12-91
Talk by H.H. Mataji Nirmala Devi (Synopsis)
The second quality of the sea is that it looks after
all the creatures that are in it. It is salty but fish and
other marine life exist there and the first life came
into being in the sea. All our forefathers must have
been born in the sea and then we became hu-
man beings. We have no right to insult the sea
where our forefathers must have existed.
To enjoy the beauty of nature is to be with nature.
The fruit of coconut is called Shriphal because it is
the Sahasrara. It is very surprising that this fruit
knows and understands. If wont fall on any animal
Or person. Nobody is hurt by this fruit. It is more
sensible than human beings. In Sahaja Yoga there
is lot of sweetness, goodness, righteousness and is
so encouraging. Newly married people should try
to be kind to each other. If you are reserved in the
beginning you will have to pay for it. Please try to
be kind, and nice and talkative. It is not that you
are impressing others by keeping quiet. Talking is
very important and not to hide your feelings If you
have very good marriages you will have very
good children born to you and then we will have
a new race of people in this world. These children
will be the most powerful thing for us and they will
work out many things which we could not work
out.
The third quality is that it is deep. If the depth of
the sea is reduced by even a few feet there will
problem all over. It keeps to its depth. In the same
way whatever depth we have got in Sahaja Yoga
we should keep to that. We should not become
cheap types. We have to be deep people with
deep understanding of Sahaja Yoga and our-
selves. That is the sign of dignity. You must have
dignity and majestic nature of the sea. These trees
get all the wind from the sea but they all bend
towards the sea, never away. They show their
gratitude by bending towards the sea. Even these
fress understand. Without the sea we could not
have had transport and also there is a great
wealth inside the sea bed which is not yet ex-
plored but once explored the whole world can be
very rich. There is lots of wealth like gold, silver and
diamonds which are all imbedded in the sea and
We are next to the sea here in Alibagh and must
understand the feeling of the sea. Sea is your
grandfather in a way, because He gave birth to
Lakshmi who becomes Mahalakshmi later on. We
have to show all respect to Him. Normally the way
people are living in the West and India. Here
people use it for bathrooms. In the West they use
it for swimming and they wear funny dresses and
lead a very licentious life. This is an insult to the sea,
As we have Varuna, in Greek mythology they had
a god for the sea - Neptune. This God for the sea
has to be worshipped, understood and respected.
We cannot be disrespectful. Before entering into
the sea and after coming out of it you must say
Namaskar to it.
one day may be this Lakshmi might be discovered
and we people might be entiched all over. More-
over when we carry the transport we carry La-
kshmi from one place to another. The sea has
given us that mobility.
I have seen that sea teacts to me very much. If
there's light or the moon reflecting in the sea it
moves with me. The sea understands me very well
because I have a special relationship and respect
for the sea Because of the sea you are enjoying
here, It is giving you such good feelings and spiri-
tuality. There is no need to go to the Himalayas for
whatever is covering the Himalayas is the water
form the sea which passes as rain and snow on the
Himalayas and returns as rivers to the sea. It is a
circle. Everything ends up in the sea and goes
through tapasya by allowing the sun to create
that cloud by suffering the heat of the sun. In the
Because of the sea we get rain. Sea is so impor-
tant to our life. The sea is the Guru the Maha Guru,
which teaches us so many things. First of all this
Mahaguru is the one who creates salt for us. Christ
has said you ate the salt of the universe. You are
the one who gave taste and all qualities of the salt
to the human being. The sea has its own maryada,
When its high tide it comes up to a point and
recedes and next day again it will be at that point.
21
Shrf Lakshmi Puja
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-21.txt 
 same way We have to bearthe heatiand angeriof
others and cieate vapoursjumeans the biessing,
the vibrations for others When I see somebody
who is the sick and I treat him, of course Ihave to
bear it, I absorb it and then it become vibrations
and start flowing as vibrations.
brations in every waypossible and wherever is
possible to help.olher taigetialright. You can take
a bandhan if you feel it will hurt. But atleastiuse my
photograph. After the photograph you can just
fouch the person and there is no harm. Afterialliif;
yourare aliaid of any troubles then what's the use
of becominga Shaja Yogi. If the Ship is not sea
worthy what is the use of making a ship. You have
to be sea worthy. You have to decide that we are
going to absorb the vibrations and take up every-
thing upon ourselves. Have fallh that you are all
justilike the sea, the Mahaguru and that whatever
you are doing is creating vibrations within you by
which you canisave so many
hisvery important fon Sahaja Yogis to absorb eve
tything Don't get attached to it and let it become
vapours. This method we should try to understand
by correction. Sahaja Yogis still come to me to
treat someone. Why cant you treat? Are you
afraid to treat sameone? You all can treat them.
help them and the more you treat them the better
you will be. You should venture. You should have
thatimuch courage to treat others Ifiyou don't
treatiothers yoU wont graw, When you dieat athers
thete are more vibrations Why should Godigive
you vibrations if you are nol going to use il? When
we do not use out hands, feet and brains for
Sahaja Yoga, we are not oreating vibrations within
ourselves. If you don't then you will have problerns
all the time. You say lam doing meditation, puja,
but still t amnot airight, You have to use your vi-
The more you give the more you get The more
you use your vibrations the more youwill get it
Always use vibrations for helping others give vibra-
tions to plantsanimals, nature That stale has to
come that yoU:can vibrate your own water All of
you can work it out and do such a lot but have
faith in yourself which is going to help. Your faith in
yourself thaf you are
absolutely obedient to your Mother.
a great Sahaja Yogi and
May God Bless You.
The Divine Cool Breeze
22
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Puja at Kalwe
(Synopsis) 31-12-91
Talk by H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
It is very important to worship Shri Ganesha, You
know through photographs etc that He is a living
deity. He is in fhe Mooladhara though actually He
is sitting on all the chakras. With Him nothing can
work out because He is the one who is Holiness
Wherever the Kundalini goes it is He who Pours the
Holiness and its the cleansing power of Shri
Ganesha that cleanses your chakras. It is very
important to understand the virtue of Shri Ganesha
and how He works within your chakras and how
He helps you. We should worship Him for great
chastity purity and wisdom We have to under-
stand that wisdom is not something that can be
inculcated. It cannot be manoeuvrer. It is some-
thing very innate. It comes through our maturity.
This proper maturity comes through proper atten-
tion to your Kundalini; fixing upiyourikundalini with
the all pievailing power. ihis has to be done
through regulan meditationu lt is not a titual. After
SOmetime you will find that you are all the time in
meditation.
Him the Innocence of d child. When the Kundalni
starts rising and blessing our chakras, automatically
we start thinking our innocence has come back
We have got Innocent heart, innocent mind and
Innocent love. This simple innocent personallty is
the sign of a good Sahaja Yogi. He also knows that
he is looked after by the ganas of Shri Ganesha.
These ganas are all the time looking after you. But
apart from this they are also watching you and
watching your behaviour. If you try to take advan-
tage of Sahaja Yoga then they may punish you. It
may act against you: I warned you many times
not to exploit sahoja Yoga for your advantage. It
is for the benefit of others. The enjoyment of
Sahaja Yoga is the best way to know Sahaja Yoga.
They are many people who are seeking this truth.
You must find out who are seeking this truth. After
finding them out do not argue with them, just glve
them realisation and let them feel the vibrations
and then things will be better. There are many
things which are false in this world. Doesn't matter.
All this falsehood can be easily cleared out by the
Truth.
He is a little child, the eternal child and that gives
MAY GOD BLESS YOU.
Editor : Shri. Yogi Mahajan
Printer & Publisher : P. C. Kulkarni
Printed & Published at: The Divine Cool Breeze (Xerox M/cs.)
9. Bhagya Chintamani Soc. Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411.029.
Shri Lakshmi Puja
23
