The Divine Cool Breeze Vol. IV, No. 11 & 12 CONTENTS Navaratri Puja Talk, Cabella '92 1) Shri Mataji's Advice to Sahaja Yogis, U.K. '84 2) Shri Guru Puja - '81 3) 4) Introspection - Shudy Camps, U.K. '88 The Divine Cool Breeze

 Navratri Puja Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Synopsis Cabella, Italy, 27-9-1992 Mathematical things have come to us from Inside, from the Divine. We have not created them. This was found out by some mathematicians who were realized souis, and they used this Alpha and omega. It shows very clearly Swastika becoming Omkar and Omkar becoming Alpha and Omega. Everything in Sahaja Yoga is tangible and can be verified. complete power of Sada Shlva. She gives the Power to every chakra by which all these chakras gre enlightened and all the deities are awakened. Supposing you have no power of life you will be like dead people. These centres when they receive this power, this shakti then they are awakened. You con do it yourself. Its all tangible. While she is Jagadamba - the Amba. She is the pure form of power which resides in the triangular bone, the Kundalini, but in her form where she is Jagdamba the Mother of the Universe, She resides on the heart centre. This heart centre is very important. Tll twelve years of age in a child this centre produces the ganas, Ganos are the workers on the left hand side. Their leader is saint Michael, but their king is Ganesha. First she has done the Ghat sthapana establishes the Kumbha which is the triangular bone. Her first work is to establish the Mooldhara. She established your innocence, The first is fo establish the Kundalini in the Triangular bone and then to establish Shri Ganesha. Whatever she is going to create has to be filled with innocence. For example the stones are innocent. If you hit a stone you get hit otherwise it does not come up and hit you. The tivers are innocent. All matter is innocent. It is not cunning, or manipulating. It is not aggressive. They are under the complete order of God Almighty. They do not have their own free will to do what they like. Even animals are innocent except for very tew. They are completely under the control of God. A tiger will behave like a tiger and a snake will behave like a snake but in human beings someone will behave like a tiger, like a snake. The next day there is no steadiness. These animals have a purpose that's why they are there. The purpose is only one, that is to support human beings, because you are at the epitome of evolution. She has created all these things just for you, and ultimately to get your self realisation, to have meaning for your life, to get connected to this all pervading power, to enter into the kingdom of God. All is Her work. She came nine times and tenth time. She is supposed to give realisation to all Today you are worshipping Durga or the nine forms of the Goddess. She came nine times on this earth. She fought all the people who were destroying the seekers who were trying to make a mess of their lives and these tortured saints prayed to the Goddess because none of the gods could do anything and Sadashiva never interferes with the Goddess, They worshipped the Bhagwati and then the incarnation of Hers canme nine times according to the need of the time. Everytime she was confronting people who were extremely arrogant & self-opiniated. - means - first she In India when we cast the horoscope of a person there are 3 categories of people. One are the Devas, second are the Manavas or humans and the third ones are Rakshas. I think I have got all of you from the Deva categories, because you could not have taken to Sahaja Yoga that seriously unless you were Devagana. When you raise the Kundalini on the centre heart you can feel that if there is a catch you have to take the name of the Jagadamba. Even when clear the centre heart I also have to say I am in reality the Jagadamba then the Jagdamba within you awakens. You have verified much more than the Scientists. Scientists are going from outside and are not conclusive at all. They work out problems one by one they don't know the basics of what those problems are and where lies the solution. This Kundalini is the reflection of the Holy Ghost or the Adi Shakti within you. When she rises through these different chakras she gives them power because she is the power. She is the Shakti. She is the the divine power of Sadashiva. She is the Navaratil Puja 92

 Mahalaxmi and Maha Saraswati. They chose to work it out in human beings. of you. At the tenth time all these three powers are joined together, that is why it is called Trigunatmika. That's why Buddha said Maitreya three mothers put together, The first working was very effective in India. They chose India. There are six seasons and the climate is very good. These seasons are very well balanced. This Param Chaitanya is also called Ritumbhara Pragnya, The one which is the enlightened knowledge of the one which makes seasons. In the West the Ritumbhara Pragnya is not so effective. The humans are so scatter-brained that even the nature has becorme scatter brained there; and cannot understand how to deal with such human beings. This power when it starts acting has got .complete control over all the three channels and seven centres, as without taking the name of this power you cannot achieve anything. That is where human beings fall because they have o free will so why should they obey, listen or docept anyone. That's why though you have to be given self realisation the task is very difficult. Because you are not used to a way where you don't have to use your free will. Human were made to understand that there is God. The real saints were respected and they Made different observations. When Shankaracharya I was amozed how he knows so many things about me. He knows how my knee looks, he knows how many lines I have on my back etc. That means through his meditative power he The same power has now been awakened in the Param Chaitanya This aw.akening in the Param Chaifanya is doing marvellous work which you can see clearly. Firstly you have seen my photographs. The Param Chaitanya is all the tirne working out to convince you people about the truth. If it was so active at the time of Christ it would have been could visualize. He never saw me. The deseription much better, but it has to be at this time because human beings are most difficult to mnanage. They have been glven freedom. The freedom was given to Adam and Eve. But how was it achieved. Adam and Eve were both like Pashus, animals, under the complete control of God, There was no free will they were living in the nude, in the garden If Eden and would not have known more than to live and eat like animals: Then the Shakti herself took the form of a snake and went and told them that you must have the fruit of knowledge. She wanted them to evolve. Shakti knew that she is capable of lots of miracles ond she can make these human beings understand the krowledge. So she said you must eat this fruit & try to know the knowledge. Then a new type of human race started which wanted to know what is the knowledge. We had all kinds of primitive people before, then they started evolving the first creation which took place, before, that there were other higher creations which were planned by Adi Shakti. She created Brahma Vishnu, Mahesha and she created their lokas or abodes. in that all the planning was done how we can make anirnals realized souls. From animals to human beings and from human beings to realized souls. It was a very big problem. These three channels were created in human beings later on. Out of these three channels came out the three shakties Mahakali, I read Adi is so clear cut. The 1000 names of the Goddess are so precise. You can verify them in me and it is a fact. The knowledge of these people is most remarkable - how did they know that a Goddess is like that. The meditative power in India was great. The reason was our seasons disciplined. People were disciplined. In India most of the people get up eatly in the morming and do their Pujas, take their baths and go for work and come home to be with their family, sing some bhajans and then sleep of. They don't go on holidays or get into drinking etc. If someone drinks he is thrown out of the house and is condemned as a leper. He is called as a Daruda -a drunkard. were Because of these six seasons being absolutely disciplined we know what to do when and how to do it. In india people could live in the jungles because one didn't have so much idea of comfort at all. They could live in a simple hut, with protection from sun or rain. They had very little needs of life. Now I find there is a lot of difference In simple living you do not take out all the wealth fiom the mother earth. There is no ecological problem. This shakti which was working in them in those days was there to make them seekers, because they did not have to do anything else. You had food to eat and place to sleep. Not much to be done living so happily. With all these comforts which put so much demand on your The Divine Cool Bieeze

 time. They had lot of time. They did not go swimming or ballroom dancing. With that time they meditated, when that time for meditation started. They started realising what is the Divine Power. What is Divinity and what is God. In the West people even disouss the private lives of Christ. In India nobody does that. How can you know about God? You have come through him. God can do anything. How can you understand God? You can be in connection with God or can be in his Cormpany, can be blessed and looked after by Him. You can know lots of things about God, but you cannat understand Him. You cannot question why he made Swastika or omkara that they even ask God why did you exist? This arragance, this ego has blinded us from God. We think no end of ourselves. We are very self- opiniated. made you like his own image. That means He has given you all the powers. He hos made you. You cannot make Him. He is the source. What you do is to make others in His image. These powers are within you. The first thing you have to have is the discipline in yourself. People cannot control thermselves then how can they control anyone. First you must see that you control yourself because now you are in the Kingdom of God. You should have dignity, that affection, compassion, love and dedication. If It is not there then this power is useless, because you are the vehicle of that power. Supposing I want water, I need an empty glass. If it is already full with ego then what can you put inside that? If you are already filled with your own ideas, convenience progress then you cannot rise very high. You have to surrender fully. To say that Mother whatever is your desire. Once you surrender all your problems will solve. Surrender your problems also. God you solve the problems". You do this. It is such a precise, efficient and effective power and above all it loves you, cares and forgives you. It is wanting you all to be properly seated in your thrones enjoying your power. So whatever is needed is done with great This power this shakti which has given you self tealization will also give you God realization, but still you will not undersland God. You will have to go above to understand God. Suppose somebody is down the hill ini Cabella, can he see my house properly? He has to go above Cabella, to see my house. We cannot understand the source from which we have come. We cannot judge or say why. That is God's desire. So we have to say. whatever is His wish we must be happy with that. The power within you is Amba which is the desire power itself. His wish is that you enter the kingdom of God. When you enter His Kingdom the Shakti makes you sit in different beautiful positions, and some are sitting in the Heart of God, some are sitting in the Sahasrara of God. care. The 10th day of Navratri is the most important day for all af you, It is where the Param Chaitanya has become active. By this activity it has become very powerful. Anyone who tries to be nasty and trles to trouble you, you don't have to worry at all, it wil take care of it. All wrong things or bad karmas you have done you will be rewarded for that a realized soul not on that level. Ordinary people can be charged with criminality. But if you rise to a higher state of Kingdom then nobody can charge you. You are above the law. In the same way nobody can touch or destroy you. Nobody can hamper your progress. Nobody can harm me. No Rakshasa can harm me, has never done so. But it is you who can harm me. In this life I have taken you into my body and I am working it out in my body, your cleansing, which is a difficult task. In the beginning only this power went to Adam and Eve and told them that you must have the knowledge. So that promise has to be fulfilled. Now you should assume your powers, because you have now crossed the limit and we are in the 10th position, Believe that you are Sahaja Yogis. Believe that you have entered into the Kingdom of God. You cannot judge God. But when you sit there it is not an assembly ar like politiclans fighting. It is that you have entered into the Kingdom of God, blessed by God and looked after, knowledgable. But still this arrogance has to go down. Humility is very important for us otherwise this power cannot take you beyond. Now it has crossed the Sahasrara and it has to go higher for that you have to be humble. It is artificial humility. That humbleness is within your heart. Let us know ourselves. Then you will be amazed that he has and made nourished protected, In the West it is very difficult to make people understand that they are a part and parcel of the whole. They talk of big things. They are without any destination saying that we are seeking. We have Navaratil Puja 92

 to try to save as many as possible. Those who do not want to come, there is no need for it. They have to humnble down and ask for it, You have the knowledge. With this knowledge you should be Identified and know that you have this knowledge, that it can be given to others and we can transform this world intoa beautiful world to fulfil the vision of Adi Shakti. She created you for this purpose, brought you out form the human level to this super human level for this purpose. Today If you are worshipping me as Jagdamba then know that the Jagdamba Itself is nothing else but Adi Shakti. Don't waste your energies in small things. Just think you have to meditate and rise and you have to give it to others: If you love yourself say See my body, mind everything is given to me by God, how beautiful it Is, and it will be used by God for such a great purpose. You are moulded and made upto this polint. With your free will you will have to rise and understand what is to be done and how to achleve that State. It is a nature's reaction to things. Nature reacts to human beings. Nature has no free will but God reacts then all these colamitles come and people die of calamities. May God Bless You. The Divine Cool Breeze

 Shri Mataji's advice to Sahaja Yogis 19 Jan. 84, U.K. understand that "What" part is left out is "now" to There is no need for women to do all that men have done or the whole energy will be cormpletely wasted, The whole preparation has been made for this Aquarian age to come in to bring in the kundalini upward and to make the whole thing work out in such a way that the left and right meet and you all become Ignited, enlightened. It was a question of our being, sharing the whole job in a proper understanding. Now see how Mother Earth herself was created. It isa very simple thing. First the movement of the energy started flowing. Now this is a combined energy: alright? Then the combined energy went round and round like that. and when it consolidated there was this big bang' took place-now this is the manly work, I should say, manly style, because still the Mother Earth is not produced-so then these little fragments again went round and round. With the momentum, they became roundish. Out of them Mother Earth was selected for one job. On the Mother Earth out of the water came the life-the carbon came In. be done. So that part to be done is now Realisation, our awakening of the Kundalini. For that your feminine qualities are going to help you, not your masculine qualities. So aggressiveness must be given up by men. Also, because they are Sahaja Yogis now, they have to take feminine qualities. Not of fighting. If women fight they are not women. You see, women are told that You are good for nothing' so now they are trying to show, "No, we are also alright, If you have eaten one crow we will eat three" Now, this understanding and the wise perception would be such that "What we have to do now to change the 'mode' and the 'style' of our lives?. "What's wrong here? A turning point has come. Now the evolution is not rebellion at all by any chance. It's a wrong idea people have. It's not that you hit me and I hit you-go on hitting each other, like the movement of the pendulum. It's not like a boom, that today you are born as a Muslirm tomorrow you are born as a Jew, then you are born as Hindu it's not a pendulum. It a spiral movement. So every time you achieve any evolution you are at a higher level than before. Everybody helped there and a human being was created. Then the men went round, to improve their societies; and whatever was possible with their ego is done, finished now, they have done their job. Now they are on the dole. Women have to complete their part and go forward together. Now, to achieve the 'higher' position in our whole being what should we do? Is to understand that from this point to that point we have to rise in a way that we move not in a pendulum way but in a spiral way. And to move spirally, you have to use another kind of force. Whatever you have used so far has to be endowed with another kind of force- and that's the feminine qualities of women. But where are the feminine women? They dress up as women, that's not the way. From inside, from the heart. A feminine heart. Christ showed that in His life-He forgave. Only a women can forgive, man cannot because he is aggressive. How can he forgive? Krishna never forgave any one. He used to kill. Right royal fashion. "So, alright, if you are so, alright." - Done. Now the women, or we can say the Kundalini. which has been waiting all these years, was resting, waiting for that time, isn't it? So we call it "The blossom time has now come", At that time, the Kundalini has to rise and ignite in such a way that the completion of the whole world takes place. It is simple. Do you understand now? So, there's no competition between men and women, but the style of work is different. If you understand that, then only this kind of revolution will take place, and not turn out a rebellion. Actually women are rebelling against men, and a nonsense it is. It is such a headache, that you create something. allow them to grow, and another party comes which has to complete the job starts rebelling. So the revolution has to take place and the revolution is only possible when we Advice to Sahala Yogis

 Christ forgave to such an extent to show that he is now giving a turn to the spiral, and now a 'feminine' quality has to be developed among human beings. All the problems have come out of the overgrowth of masculinity overgrowth. It reaches a certain point you see, it's reached such a wretched point now, that it has to come But that doesn't mean that you start walking like women or developing waistlines, Because that's another stupidity. down. You have to have love for 'every' Sahaja Yogi, every person. But to be 'Motherly'. Not to be fatherly, but to be 'Motherly'. "That kindness, 'that gentleness' should be in you behaviour towards each other. How to behave towards new seekers - First you' think of being gentle, nice. embalming. sweet. Let's think, find out ways and means. Of course this force also corrects, sormetimes gets angry also. Mother also has to get angry sornetimes specially with people who never get alright with their behaviour She has to be shouting, punishing and sometimes. She also destroys. It's alright. But that is sometimes, not all the time. So Just now one has to accept that to be like Mother Earth they have to be for bearing- Dhara'. She is the sustenoance of 'everything' She takes everything, the vibrations are suocked in And now, for the first time, afler Realisation, you can give Her back what you have got - ftom Her. You can give vibrations to Her trees that are created, you can make them beautiful. You con fransform a flower into a more beautiful flower. Now whatever you have to give-what you have got from Mother Earth - you can give, because 'your Mother Earth is awakened in you now. So you return Her back everything that you got from Her. and give it to others. "Generosity. the greatness of heart, nobility, forgiveness, love, affection, beating 'everything' for love", Anc for the Mother, to save her chilld, she'll starve herself, do everything to Save her child - complete declication she has fo her child. That's a real Mother - Imedn, the kind of mothers you see these days, neither they are mothers nor women. But what I am saying, that's the real image of a mather, and you have an Image before you. There's a very good way, in the evening, to write down : "How many sweet things I've sald today I" Not like this, sweet things we say - "You're looking beautiful" and all that. Not the supeilicial ones. That may pamper the ego, But they are so sweet you know, things are. There are so many words you can say, like : "Are you wam enough ? very sweet way of asking a question. Il's very difficult for people to say that even, I've seen. Looking afiet other's comforts. Somebody is sitting, he wants water. You just go rush and give him water. "Oh, that's too much to expect. Oh Godl You gave waterl" *I'm not your servant"- Immediately the question comes into the head. Little bit trying to do sornething here and there. Or sometimes thinking-going in the market, you find something. "Ohl Let mne take it, for him "Well then, 'do'. I've seen children 'all" the fime they think of their friends - what they can buy for others. "This is good for my triend- You have to have love for 'every' Sahaja Yogi, This is what you have to develop now, whether you are men or women, as Sahaja Yogis you must develop a (new consciousness) of affection, love and compassion. Getting ongry, getting into a temper, shouting at people - this is not going to help you much. If you have to help the Whole, the growth of the Whole, try to make yourself a milder person - be angry with yaurself that you are losing tempers and you are so unkind to others. every person, He's very fond of things, he likes this. All these little things: Do all these little, little things for each other, you know. Sornetimes even small things like: early in the morning you get up. you find another person is sleeping on one side, his blanket on the third side and his pillow on the fourth side. So you Just put his head on the pillow and cover him with the blanket. That's Mother's job, Not out of fear, The Divine Cool Breeze

 Inever say fight the ego, but surrender it. but out of 'sheer' love. it is the only way your ego can go. Like even if it is cold and buttons are open, you can button up a person, Little, little things, you know. For example, you see people come down here, for Sahaja Yoga. Now they have other interests and other priorities and other things which are very important to them. All the time, they are wasting their time for that and then they will say that, "Mother, we are not progressing very much in Sahaja Yoga". Women have very little sweet things which they do which make men very happy. But women have lost now that sense. Not the fighting, but thinking what sweet thing you can do. If you decide, that 'we have to do Sahaja Yoga first and other things are secondary' then only the Sahaja Yoga can be really established into you. To overcome ego, to be a Sahaja Yogi, how much Identified you should be with the truth of Sahaja Yoga. Now it is for you to receive, imbibe into it and you have to change the whole thing. That is your job and that is why it is a serious matter. Do not tespect false saints. Beat them with shoes. Get up in the morning and do meditation. Here, even to get up in the morning people grudge. The second point: lalways have been saying that due to ego problem, we are very much disintegrated. We are so disintegrated that, the connection with the Divine is never properly established. As I have said it, that this instrument (through whlch I am speaking), if it is divided into five parts and all the five parts are fighting with each other., you cannot get anything done through this instrument, though it is connected to the mains. We must understand that, we have a very great responsibility in the West. Because this has to happen in London. It has to happen in England to begin with and that is why you bear a very big responsibility. You have to evaluate yourself and Sahaja Yoga again and again and again and know that what makes you SO slow is your ego, or even super-ego is there, no doubt. In the same way if you still remain disintegrated, you cannot get that connection. But ego is the main problem. Try to see your ego, how it is deviating. Because it is your own joy that you are seeking. It is your own, that is hidden from you, which you have been seeking for ages. We will have some Sahaja Yogis of a very high level. Now that is what I have to expose to you. I know that we will have some of mediocre level. What is there to argue with a person who is trying to give you the highest? It is just a waste of energy. Do not waste your energy on the these frivolous things and finding faults. Some will be absolutely useless and some will be absolutely thrown out. We will have all types, that also I know. Now it is for you to decide, where do you come? Did you have anybody complaining, anybody quarrelling or themselves? Nothing of the kind. anybody fighting amongst How far are you going to? If you are going to waste your time in thinking about other Sahaja Yogis and small, small things and frivolous things, your disintegtation is going to be increased, you are going to be separated much more, as all these decisions are taken through your ego, e.g. "I don't like it, I don't do it, I don't see it, and the like. You see, this is not the sign of intelligence either, all the time trying to find faults with each other or trying to blame yourself. Both things are wrong. The best is to grow in wisdom and yourself. See that we are becoming wiser and wiser. Some of you are really very grown up and some of you still go up and down and some of you are still very low. IF you could somehow of other see your ego working, then you can get rid of it and that is the thing one has to do not to fight the ego. Advice to Sahaja Yogis

 belong to the bigger thing, the biggest of all, the Primordial, the highest, to the Viratal If you realise your importance then you will work It out. So, all of us have to go together. If somebody has achieved sormething, it is of no use to Sahaja Yoga. As I have told you, it is the collective thing. That is going to work and all of you have to work it out. And certain things definitely have gone wrong with us, we know that, we should understand them. Because these are the troubles of our own. over-thinking and our over-reading and over- domination. But we coan get rid of them very easily. It is Jjust to detach yourself and see for yourself addressing yourself - "Now Mister how are you?". If you will say like that, immediately your attention will go through yourself to see your outer being. That is very important. The more you see yourself clearly, the better it is. It is so sweet that you have real brothers and sisters all aver the world today. When you will go there with a full heart, they are going to receive you, as you have recelved them, with full heart. But we all must come up to a point, where we can face each other with full love, with openness, without worry or fear of anyone but just say that they are your brothers and you are their brothers and that you have to love them. You have to face yourself. And you do not want to face - because you are afraid of facing yourself. Because you have been aggressing others and you are afraid of aggressing in the way that is towards yourself. You have to love your brothers and sisters in Sahaja Yoga. That is only possible when we get out of our fears here because there is also another side to it that ego always has fears. Because it aggresses others, and that it knows others can aggress it. So this is a point we have got to think about that never will fetch you in any way. Despise yourself, never Il You are saints. You must know that. You are realised souls in this world. How many there are, who can raise the Kundalini? How many there are, who understand what is vibrations? But there would not be any aggression-because that is the perfect state where you see yourself. Neither you aggress any-one nor aggressed by any-one. You just see yourself clearly, and that is what you have to see. or you gre Gradually you start seeing your chakras, seeing your problems and you know that's how it gradually develops. But everybody wants quick results. If you are not be patient with yourself. Not with me, but with yourself. If you are patient with yourself, this is the long promised thing which you will get. How your chakras are awakened through Sahaja Yoga. Yes, it has happened. But what are you doing about it? This is the greatest of the greatest things which can happen to any-one that you know. Also you know, this is the greatest happening. which was prophesied long time back as the 'last judgement'. But you must learn to be patient with yourself and not to be angry with yourself not to debase yourself, not to aggress yourself onto others. It is a very simple thing, the simplest thing to do; but because of our complex life and our complicated thinking, we have becorne quiet entwined up into things. It can easily be got out of and slipped out of without any difficulty. I know you can do it. So forget about all these things like my father, my sister, my brother. You know that this is the way, you are going to be judged. So, we have to work very hard. We have to work. It is effortlessly given to you, ailright. But to maintain it, keep it up to go high, we have to religiously work it out. It is a very humble attitude in receiving more and more into your being, imbibing into your being. Let it trickle into your brain completely covering it. Let that eternal bliss come into you. All these problems will be burnt in no time. As soon as your life runs straight, everything will be burnt away. Nothing will be left-but your light-and others who will come to you for enlightenment. Do not make yourself a small petson. Have a bigger vision. Have bigger ideas because now you know that you are golng to have a big day for a The Divine Cool Breeze 10

 Guru Puja (2 Dec. 1979); and before that I have to request you to prepare yourself. of evolution and of higher life, a plethora of spurious people have come out making it well nigh impossible (difficult), to convince any-one of the existence of truth. I may do something great. But I must have a proper recipient, so that you must prepare yourself. Think about it. Sometimes I feel that I have developed a unique method by which I can give realisation en mass all over the world. But it really poses a problem for me if the masses are not interested. In fact, it is only very few who take a keen interest in their evolutionary process and would like to come ut of their ignorance in which they have been living. in all the ego-oriented countries it is very difficult to bring home the truth that we are still ignorant. We have to know a lot. It is very difficult because they think they know every-thing, because they have been to the moon. The Russians, for instance, still say that they saw no God when they orbited in space, which is like saying that one has been to the third floor but hasn't seen the top. Are you in love with everyone? Just to think that you love every-one is so greatl Because I always think how much I have to love. You see so much love I have, always to give to others. Just think how great it is to love others. You know how people treat me sometimes. Terrible, is it not? I sill love them. I enjoy playing with them. As I love, in the same way you should love, and love is the thing that is going to unfold beautifully like a lotus, you see : opens out petals and beautiful fragrance starts flowing. In the same way, your heart will open out and the fragrance of love will spread throughout the world. Where does God reside? Where does He manifest within us ? In what manner does He manifest? We do no know what to see. What we want to see is possible only through our effort. "If we have not been able to see God, then He does not exist" This is how we develop our attitude in this matter, But better say 'no' to all that we did not know through our effort. Because we have not known about Him. So He does not exist. You turn round in a cave. So when you see a shadow of your-self you belleve in that only and say "Nothing else existed". The light does not exist. That kind of attitude I have persistently been facing. And sometimes I do not know how to give them realisation. Now you have to start the other way way round. You have to seek. You have to ask for it. Nobody is going to fall at your feet and say "Well, you get your realisation." You have this, for Heaven's sake, please have it" Because nothing is selling here. It will ring into you. I know it can happen. The Sooner the better and the choice is your own which you have to make-your cholce. I am very happy because, such a beautiful song to hear and just before Christmas, which is a very big thing for me. You know that and in the same way we are having another Christmas now. Christmas to celebrate a new Christ bon within us. Let us prepare for His coming, and how you prepare is not by running away from yourself, not by getting into frivolous things; but by working it out, beautifully cleansing. Cleansing has to be done if the Self has to be established in the temple of this being. May God bless you all. In today's talk I will dwell on the essence of Sahaja Yoga. First of all we need to understand that we are passing through an extremely serious time, pregnant with unpredictable consequences. You are used fo salesmanship, that is, if anything is selling you have to be persuaded or requested. You can save pounds for a sale and all that. But nothing is for sale here. This is a very difficult thing for people to understoand. In this present atmosphere, where we do not know if we can get anything which is not for sale. Somehow, we have to work very hard, Sornetimes it is very frustrating and sometimes so stupid-the way people react. Like the other day when we had a meeting at Brighton I was laughing all the while. It is so sad. A gentle-man who came to our programme made When we look at life we do not seem to understand that if we miss this opportunity that has come our way, for our evolution, we will not only be depriving ourselves of it-or this country. England, but also it will be a stupendous loss for the whole of creation. The trouble, however, is that in the name of God, Advice to Sahaja Yogis 11

 complaints. Look, who has got time to put him on video; who is interested in taking his photograph? He says he is a managing director. So what? In the presence of the Divine what is managing director or what is even a King? Just think of it. Who is he? What does he think of himself? He has complained against us. Even the laws are so stupid some-times that one con hardly understand. I feel so much mud is going to cover their brains that they may not receive their realisation. Whatever you have known Is through awareness. and in your awareness you have come to know. The awareness has to be enlightened. It is not what you know but human awareness vwhich has still to grow. It involves such a lot of journey even after our realisation. It takes no time, sometimes, to give realisation to so many people. I know it has happened with so many. But they do not know what they have to achieve. The ego is such a horrible stuff the people do not want to see what they haven't got with them, what they have to have and what they They may miss it. deserve. Actually the Divine does not know what human beings have created. Really I tell you, the Divine is in the dark as to all the nonsense that you have created around you. All kinds of nonsense you have created out of your ignarance, out of your ego, and out of the choice that you had. I can't explain why people have created this kind of because then there ignorance which cannot be broken of removed. Because you are so much identifled with it. It is like a stuck up stamp which refuses to come off. And when such a thing happens you feel "O Godl" The whole creation has been created the whole working has taken place and the human beings have grown so well having reached this stage. But now in this modern life which you are leading - you find them so stupid and foolish. that they have begun deluding others with their stupidity and foolishness. How are we to approach those people who are true seekers? Those who have been seekers for ages? All their lives before have been lost. Sometimes it is very disappoinling. But still, hoping agalnst hopes, I hope we reach all the comers of the universe, where we find all people who are true seekers. It is their power to know the Divine. They do not want to see that beauty, that llght. that is the spirit. The reflection of God's love is the most precious thing you could think of. In England progress hoas been very slow. been disoppointed if it was at the time of Christ, I would not have were very few seekers. Actually even the close disciples that Christ collected were not true seekers. You are seekers of truth. So many of you have taken to this path just to pursue the truth. But where are we going? What are we doing about it all? What are our ideas about the truth? is it that our ideas are but by product of our ego? Is it that we do not want to seek the truth? I have met all kinds of people in this country who occupy important positions, lords, ladles and host of others. They ask "Who wants to change?" Because they think they are the greatest. Born thus, they hope to cary their lordship and their possessions with them to heaven? When they say "Who wants to change?" What can be said? -except that they have reached the dead-end, the full stop from which no further journey is possible. It is the power of all true seekers to know the Divine. It is not for those who are managing directors, or kings or something! Now this, Imust say, can work out only with people who are seekers who want to know, through their awareness, what is the truth, You have to know your Spirit, for without knowing your Spirit you cannot know the truth and whatever I talk to you is a complete waste of time. Because you haven't got the awareness today, to know the truth, I am talking about. So, I must earnestly ask you to "become' the Spirit. Why should you hesitate to do what you are told so that you will get your realisation? You have to become the Spirit first. Unless and until this awareness is enlightened, you What does it matter in the presence of God? They would be pushed out. They will not be allowed to enter the kingdom of God. That kingdom is only for those who have known. Not for those who simply talk about God. Those who say that we are worshippers of God and we have learned so much it will be said "That is well, then go back to the place from where you have come" The Divine Cool Breeze 12

 cannot see. It is like describing the nature of colours to a blind man. You have to apen your eyes. Even this people find difficult, they have become nalve, they don't know what it is, and also they do not have any inclination to understand. Now, you see a tree standing there and somebody has told you that there are roots but you do not believe it because they are not visible. Why not try to find out? Supposing somebody says "Whatever are out-side, thati much more are inside". So why not see why should I put a barrier to seeing?, if that is going to give the best in the world, if it is going to give an inkling of that beautiful thing called the Spirlt. Why should we not have It? You don't have to pay for it, not even exert for it. You don't have to do anything. things which are useless and nonsensical what am I to do about it? But this is something innate and does not work with people who do not have pure desire. This has been written down since long; it cannot be changed; it cannot be forced, explained, discussed or argued about. Nothing can be done; it has to work out from within. Even if you have worked it out on some-one, you may not achleve the results. So, when the situation is difficult and the children are also so adamant-what can Mother do. Push them in? I am very much concerned, because this ego which sometimes is selfish and conceived, salisfies itself and is very happy. It (the ego) will not allow you to get to the point where you really stand, where you have all you powers and where you are the master of being. But you must desire. This is the point I am trying to make. It you do not desire it from your own heart, God The identification with the ego is so much that it is easy to take a bull by the horns but to take an ego-oriented man to the practices of Sahaja Yoga is very difficult. God is not going to fall at your feet, imploring "Please desire me". And if you understand that you have to really desire it because it is such a desirous thing, that must tell you that this kundalini is the Pure Desire within you. It is not yet manifested, not yet awakened, in the sense that it has not yet acted. Imagine how important it is. You should have the desire to be one with the Divine, to be one with your Spirit. Today I am rather disgusted with the ego-oriented people, but other moods also corne-the moods of compassion and tremendous love. I should do something to bring sense to these people. Something should happen to them, otherwise, what I see is a complete disaster. It is going to happen. I do not want to frighten you like Mrs. Thatcher does about the Russians. That might be imaginary. But this is real. I am warning you that. the disaster is going to come as destruction itself. But the greatest thing is the failure of the desire, that is could not communicate with you-who are chosen specially in order to bring the Kingdom of Heaven. But suddenly you will find that they have all fallen into a sieve without a way out. The Sahaja Yogis too feel frustrated at times. Whatever it is. as far as I am concerned they have tremendous desire. But I am so desireless that the desire may not always work out. The desire has to be strong, if not, then you would be challenging the Kundalini, that is, you turn anti- Kundalini. Then the Kundalini would not rise. Sometimes you have to take it upon yourself for going into and discovering the truth, It is you who have to find it out. For example, I say this is a place which has lots of diamonds or a cave in which there is a lot of gold. The gold is not going to come to you. You have to go to the cave to get it. It is as simple. I am not saying you have to walk towards. You have to desire and desire from your heart. It is impossible for me to raise your Kundalini if you do not desire it, because Kundalini itself is the pure desire. What can I do about it? Can I force it? You cannot push it out. If you want to have seed planted you have to put it in the mother earth. You cannot take pleces. If that pure desire is not there, then I am breaking my head against the wall, So, it is important to understand that you must have that desire which is the highest. If you are satisfied with You see, I am a desireless person. So, I ask the Sahaja Yogis to desire, so that people will have the great desire to become the Spirit. This is the greatest thing that we can give to our brothers and sisters, fo the people, to the chilldren, to the beautiful light and to the beautiful time they all have to enjoy. it out in bits and I hope those who come for the first time will Advice to Sahaja Yogis 13

 growth of spirituality starts, after thoughtless awareness, not before. One should know that. On rational plane you cannot grow in Sahaja yoga. understand my difficulty, and try to see that you should desire only your self-realisation and nothing else. Just desire that, and forget about everything else-even if you are a managing director or a kind. So, first thing is to establish your thoughtless awareness: still you might feel little chakra blockages here and there; forget it. Just forget it. Keep all your shoes outside and Just desire your Spirit. I have to see that you all get your realisation somehow. It is like a Mother's desire, to give a bath to the baby and get him cleansed. Now, start your surrendering. Now if a chakra is catching, you should say: "Mother, I surrender this to you". Instead of doing any of these things you can just say that. But, that surrendering should not be rationalised. worrying-" why should I say this?", it will never work out. If there's pure love and purity in your heart that's the best thing: that to do so is to surrender. Leave all the worries to your Mother. Everything to your Mother. So, which-ever you like-whether to be desolate or like to receive a rebuke-l am willing to work it out. If you're still rationalising and But at least ensure that you desire to get your realisation. May God bless you. In the morning you get up, have your bath, sit down take some tea; don't talk. But surrendering is one point that is very difficult in ego-orlented societies. Even taiking about that, I feel a little bit worried. But if there's any thoughts coming in to you or any chakra catching, just surrender, And you'll see that the chakras are cleared up. in the morning time you do not go on, putting this way, that way, nothing don't move your hands too much in the morning. You'll find most of your chakras will clear out in the meditation. Try to put love in your heart. Just try in your heart, and there, try to put your Guru, in the cote of it. Don't talk in the morning. sit down.meditate. because at that time the Divine rays come in, the sun comes afterwards. That's how the birds get up. That's how the flowers get up. They're all awakened by that, and if you are sensitive you will feel that by getting up in the morning, you will look at least ten years younger. Really, it's such a good thing to get up in the moming and then, automatically you sleep early. This is for getting up, for sleeping I need not tell because that you'll manage yourself. Then, in the morning time you should just meditate. After establishing in the heart, we must bow to that with full devotion and dedication. Now whatever you do with your mind after realisation is not Imagination because now your mind, your imagination, is itself Enlightened. In meditation try to stop your thoughts. Watch my photograph with open eyes and see that you stop your thoughts. You should stop your thoughts, then you go into meditation. The simple thing to stop your thoughts is the Lord's Prayer, because that's the Agnya state. So project yourself in such a way that you humble down at the feet of your Guru, your Mother. And now ask for the necessary temperament needed for meditation. Meditation is when you ore One with the Divine. Specific problems on Meditation. So In the morning you remember the Lord's Prayer or Ganesha's mantra. It's just the same. Or you can even say " I forgive ". Now if there are thoughts coming in first you have to say the first mantra, of course, and then watch inside. You must say the mantra of Ganesha, will help some people, and then you should watch inside and see for yourself which is the biggest hurdle. It works out. Then you are in thoughtless awareness. Now you meditate. Before that there's no meditation. When thoughts are coming or "I have to take tea] What shall I do?", Now what have I to do?", "Who's this and Who's that", all this will be there. First the thought... Now for the thought you have So first you become thoughtlessly aware, then the The Divine Cool Breeze 14

 to say the mantra of NIRVICHARA: inside for a while. Now come to the hurdle of our ego. You see the thought has stopped now no doubt, but there is still a pressure on the head. So if it is ego you have to say: Mantra of mahat ahamkara Hold it. Bring it our. Hold out. Then keep it outside for a while. Then again. Then you'll find that for a while you will not breathe You're settled now. The LAYA takes place between your PRANA and your MANA. Both the Shaktis become one. Now at the Sahasrara you should say the mantra of Sahasrara- thrice: MAHAT means the great, AHAMKARA means the ego. You say it thrice. Now, even now, you find that ego is still there, then you have to raise your left side to push it back to the right side, With your left hand towards the photograph, push the left side higher and the right side lower so the ego and the super-ego get the balance. Do it seven times. Try to see how you are feeling Inside, you see. Some people start feeling the awareness of that unbounding love as soon as they get their realisation. But, in some people they have some more ego-trip left to be finished. So, they come to me. I find they are flying in the air like the bubbles and as if blown by the nourishing Mother-blown out like the bubbles on the surface af the sea. And there are many who are suffering from super-ego. They get mixed up with the sand and become very heavy and all the time weeping and crying about personal things. But, once the thing clicks they become one with the spirit of the ocean. So once you have given yourself a balance, then, the best thing is to pay attention to your emotions, to MANAS SHAKTI. Watch them. You can enlighten your emotions, by thinking of your Mother. Right?. Just enlighten them. This solves all the problems. Whatever are the problems in the MANA, So, once you are connected to those emotions and you start looking at them in your meditation you will see these emotions are rising within you, and if you try to put these emations on your Mother, (as they say at the Lotus Feet of your Mother) those emotions, will start dissolving and they'l become sort of, expanded. You will extend them in such a way that you will feel you are in control of them and by controlling those emotions your emotions are expanded, enlightened and powerful. Then they feel that deep, joyous force of the sea which nourishes them, guides them, and elevates them every moment. Like deep down in the sea they go and there they find the beautiful pearls of eternal experiences. And when they find these pearls they bring to me as poems, as dances, as smiles, as laughter, as enjoyment. These are all within you, and they lie there away from your consciousness. Now what you do is to watch your breathing. Try to reduce your breathing: reduce it, in the sense that you have breathed out, wait for a while, then breath in. For a long time. Then you breath our. So during one minute your breathing will be less than normal. Alright? Try that, keep the attention on the emotions you see?. So that the connection is established. Though your consciousness is enlightened by self- realisation it is not yet enlightened by joy. That is, something happens to all of you gradually, and should happen to all of you as soon as possible. What is there to surrender-the force that itself is flowing towards you and nourishing. Do we say the lotus has surrendered Itself to It's fragrance? Do we say the sun has surrendered itself to it's brilliance? Do we say that the moon has surrendered itself to it's coolness? It would be absurd to say like that. See the Kundalini rises. Now when you are breathing, you find that there is a space in- between which you just leave vacant. Breath in. Keep it there. Now breath our and keep breathing out. Now breath in. Now start breathing in such a way that you really reduce your breathing-but no exertion about it. The word "surrender" sometimes can mean only, at the most, in the context of Sahaja Yoga that we surrendered shallowness, what we have achieved is our own. limitations, egos, our our our Your attention should be on your heart or if could be on your emotion. It's better to keep the breath Advice to Sahaja Yogis 15

 blessed with it. You are loved by it. You are gently guided by it. It's so gentle that you do not even feel the guidance-like a leaf, when it falls on the ground- Try to become identified with that power- that is what you are. Like the meaning of the word is identified with the word, like ihe moonlight is identified with the moon, sunlight is identified with the sun. We have surrendered ail that is useless for something that is great and eternal. This weight of the ignorance has to drop out. I don't think I do anything, because I'm really doing nothing. Sormetimes I think this is not my due to be praised like this, because what ever is my nature that is what I am. And I haven't achieved anything-l just exist with my nature because I can't do anything else. While you have achieved. It's great credit lo you-that you have achieved this enlightenment to see yourself. your true Self which is so joy giving. I do my best to show by my own methods how the Divine is pleased. And you see that everywhere. every fime, every moment. Let that identification be that one-ness, that integration, so that you become the light of God's love, that people know God through your depths and your fruits. It's the most fulfilling job, highest paid in every way, the most satisfying, energy- giving and dynamic. You don't have to give up anything-just be organised in the light of your Spirit yourself. I will tell you a few things about meditation. Tonight we all should say one thing in our hearts that this bountiful nature of motherhood should be brought into our consciousness, which I have told you is called Ritambhara Pragnya. Means your consciousness gels enlightened ta that nature of this Mother earth-which fillis it up with different seasons -that is pragnya. When your heart is so full, the words are too poor to carry the intensity. I wish you could understand that intensity through your heart. It's all been arranged, 1 think, by the Divine, that we should meet here all of us in such a wonderful surrounding, in the Nature, that something great should happen to all of us. That we should achieve something really great this time. That happens to everyone I said, but it happens more to people who try to be in the centre and don't go on ego-trips. Now it is high time to jump from that little area to the vast area which has no bounds. Meditation is a very general word. It is not a word that explains all the three steps one has to take for meditating. But in Sanskrit language they have very clearly said, how you have to move in your meditation. And once that happens you will be surprised all these petty little problems will drop out in the ocean of greatness. Don't indulge into them, and leave them in the hands of the tree, So that all your small petty problems will be looked after by that nourishing force. Because you belong to a tree of great wisdom, tree of great sustenance and religion, and tree of great mastery that you can never know how great it is. You belong to a tree that has complete security for you, and you belong to a very great tree which gives you complete witnessing of the drama and which gives you understanding that the whole is a part and parcel of you, and you are part and parcel of the Whole. First is called as Dhyana, and second is called as Dharana, and the third is called as Samadhi. Luckily Sahaja Yoga is sucha thing that you get everything in a bundle. You avoided everything else. You got the Samadhi part. That's the beauty of it. The first part of meditation is the Dhyana. First when you have seeking, you put your attention towards the object of your worship. That is called as Dhyana. And the Dharana is the one in which you put all your effort. Concentrate all your effort. But this is all drama for people who are not realised. For them it's just a sort of an acting that they do. But for a realised soul it is a reality. So the first, the Dhyana, you have to do. Some do it of the form, another of the formless. But you are so fortunate that the formless has become a form for you. No problem, you don't have to go from form So, you belong to the great ocean of love and generosity. This great tree of life has everything integrated within itself. This is the tree of life that has been described in the Bible, the tree of fire they call it. Now you have becorne One with it. You are The Divine Cool Breeze 16

 to formless, from formless to to form; it's oall there, in a bundle. So you concentrate, or think of some Deity, or some point for Nirakar, for the formless, or of Nirakar itself. It's all a Tmental projection as long as you are not a realised soul. there; you read a book, in that book immediately you find what is good for Sahaja Yoga. If there is a book which is anti-God you discard it. So the state that is awakened within you is called, Is a new state of mind, in Sanskrit language it has a very beautiful name, Ritambhara Pragnya, which is a very difficult name. Ritambhara is the name of the Nature, and that the whole Nature one feels is enlightened. But, once you are realised, you have just to think of Dhyana, whom you are going to concentrate. or you can say meditate on. But once you start meditating on a peison your attention starts moving. That is also possible after realisation, though it is in a bundle; but some people have it-part of it, like that. I'll give an example; when a child is to be born, the mothers start lactating, automatically. The nature itself works out for the birth of the child. In the same way, when this Ritambhara Pragnya starts expressing itself, only for Sahaja Yoga, nobody else, you are amazed how things work out suddenly. So when you meditate, still your attention can get disturbed every moment. It can happen, depending on the intensify of your concentration. So, there are some Sahaja Yogis I've seen, they are cooking, and there's another one is meditating. The meditating one will say : "Oh, I can snell it is burning". So the Ritambhara Pragnya has started woiking in your favour. You all tel me: this is a miracle, that has happened Mother, and we don't know how it has happened. I'll give you an example, yesterday, we were doing something with cement and the Italian boy said that we will need two bags of cement. I said, "You carry on, it wan' finish" So there is no Dharana, Dhyana is there but not Dharana. The Second part of it is very important, that you have to put your attention continuously on to your deity. Then you develop a state which is called as Dharana in which your attention becomes one, with the Deity. But when these mature, the third stage, of Samadhi, comes in. Even before I was leaving, they were carrying on, still not finished. Now cement of all the things, imaginel So this special thing is your own state. Where you are feeling one with Nature and the Nature is feeling one-ness with you. So the Divine itself is expressing through Nature, through various happenings, through various incidents the love, the protection, the attention that the Divine is giving. And there's no end to it. Now for people who think that without realization they can reach Samadhi, I think they are absolutely mistaken. But after realization also, when the Dharana is established you have to get to the position where you become Samadhi. Now, what is that state? When that state comes into your mind then whatever you do, the Deity that you worship. you see that Deity in your work; whatever you see, you see the Deity giving you the show; you can put it like that. It just happens, and people don't know how it happens. But that is what is the state of Samadhi. But there could be people if I tell them "Will you do this?" "Oh no Mother, the shop will be closed, "Oh, they won't do it, that' not all right". They go on like that. Whatever you hear, you find the Deity tellng you the truth, Whatever you read, you find there what the Deity would tell you. So, in that state, whatever you do with your eyes, nose, and all these organs, all that, becomes a kind of manifestation of the Delty whom you worship, automatically. And there are people who say (even if we think it is shut)- "Nol Let's see, - if Mother has said, may be". I mean there are a thousand and one examples like that. Today like some were trying to push the bed. The three of them we were trying it would not You don't have to think-now I must concentrate, alright, I will not have these thoughts, I have to now think about this. It becomes, automatically 17 Advice to Sahaja Yogis

 push. I said, "Alright, I'll push. I just put my Nabhi there "just, I didn't push anything, it just pushedl - because of the Ritambhara Pragnya. to go higher. The level has to come up. So those who are at the perlphery are a problem definately for me. Because in my compassion, I cannot throw them out. And we have to help them come out, by redily, telling them that they have to rise. How long are we to wait for them? Every-one has to see that the peripheral people are brought in properly, so that they don't go out of Sahaja Yoga. Compassion is alright, But not at the cost of keeping the level of Sahaja Yoga lower, neverl. This help is not the Chamtkar or anything. It exists in the Divine, the capacity to manifest it's love to show that you are the saints, you are chosen ones of God. But you accept that situation first: but if you behave like all other normal people Oh God, shops are closed, and that man is sao difficult, and I don't think it will happen. Never happen. But you must know you are saints, chosen, and given birth by Me, the Form and the Formless. We have to raise the level of people who are very well settled in Sahaja Yoga. So this Pragnya is going to manifest, is manifesting every moment Be prepared. Be happy. Welcome it. And accept that you are there. The level is different. Now the time has come for Sahaja Yoga to change it's level. We have to change. We have So everybody must try to settle down and come up to minimum standards at leastl Otherwise, I'm sorry, many will be seized out. The Divine Cool Breeze 18

 Guru Puja - 81 Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Synopsis Why is this Puja arranged? not harming is taken to a point where reality disappears: e.g. when it was said "Do not : harm any-one", people started saying, "Alright we will not harm mosquitoes and bugs and will not kill therm." One should know that it is very important for every disciple to worship his Guru. But the Guru has to be a real Guru, not a one who is just exploiting the disciples and who is not authorised by God. A Puja is arranged, because you have been initiated into the Statutes of the LORD. You have been told what are the DHARMAS of a human being. For that actually you do not need a Guru. You can read a book and know what are the statues of the LORD. But Guru has to see that you practice them. These statues are to be practised to be brought into your own life, which is a difficult thing and without a Guru, a correcting force, it is very difficult to follow thee statues of the LORD. Because, there is a very big gap betweenn human awareness and Divine awareness and that gap can only be filled by a Guru, who himself is complete. And there are some people who are following religians in which they preserve mosquitoes and bugs, This is an absurdity. Taking anything to absurdity, cannot be reality, First of all we should not harm any-one who is walking in the path of God, the one who is a realised soul. There may be some mistakes in him. He may need correction. Nobody is perfect as yet. So do not harm. Always try to help. Secondly, anybody who is a real seeker, he may be wrong. He might have gone to wrong Gurus, he might have done wrong things. But have feelings for them-because you have been going on wrong path yourself sometimes. You have been misled before, so have some sympathles. That is why if you have done mistakes - in a way it is good, because you have more sympathies for such people. Then you are not to harm human beings in any way, you are not to cause them any bodiily harm. Or any emotional upsetting just for harm's sake, for correction it is alright. Today is PURNIMA, which means a complete moon. A Guru has to be a complete personality to talk about these Statuettes and to elevate his disciples to this level of understanding by which they imbibe those Statutes. He is here to fulfill this gap and for that it is essential that every Guru has to be a realized soul of a very high quality and greatly evolved. He need not be a person who is an ascetic or a person who is living In a forest. He could be a common householder. He could be d king. All these outward manifestations of one's life do not matter, whatever may be your position, I would say the so-called position in this world, makes no difference to your being a Guru as long as you have imbibed the Statutes of the LORD. The second statute is that you have to stand on your own legs. And know that you are here one with the truth, the testimony of Truth, that you have seen the Truth. You know what the truth is, and you cannot compromise with false-hood. You just cannot. For that you need not harm any-one. You have just to profess it. You have to stand up and say that you have seen the Truth and this is the Truth, and you have to be one with it so that people see that light of truth in you and they accept it. Again I say you have to imbibe the Statutes of the LORD. Let us see what are the Statutes. The first is, *You cannot do harm to any-one. If you go near a snake he'l bite. If a scorpion is there he'll put his polson into your being. Test yourself. It is not for telling others that you have to be truthful and this is the Truth we have seen and this is what God's laws are, how they work out. Humans are not to harm any-one. They can correct but not harm. But the principle of Guru Puja 81 19

 Through vibatory awareness we have been able to see that this is the Truth. But be completely confident about it. difference between a realized soul and a non- realized soul is basically this: He does not talk of woes and his separation with God. He says "I have found it now, THIS IS IT like Christ said, "I AM THE LIGHT, I AM THE PATHT Or anybody else can claim that, but you can make out that it is not the Truth. But for that, first of all, you must test yourself completely otherwise you might be playing into the hands of evil. It happens with many people who start dolng Sahaja Yoga in the beginning. They have to receive vibrations. So be cautious. with that complete With the confidence, understanding coming out of your people can make out, "This is absolute Truth, and then all kinds of falsehood must be denounced. Doesn't matter if some-one feels bad, because, by telling that, you are saving them and not harming them. But, must be told in a correct way not in a frivolous way. In a very persuasive way, you must tell them that this is wrong. You must wait for the time when you can tell people, more in confidence. Tell them "This is wrong, it is wrong, you don't know. We have done the same thing' Be sure that you are telling the Truth and nothing else and that you have felt the Truth in full ways. Those who have not felt the vibrations, should not talk of Sahaja Yoga. They have no authority. They have to receive vibrations. They have to fully Imbibe within them and then they can say "Yes, we felt." This is a very important task Sahaja Yogis have to do in these modern times, l.e. to tell aloud that they have found the Truth. That part is very weak. This is how you are going to express your principle of Mastery. - or you can say "GURU TATWA* In whatever way you like you can announce the Truih. You can write books, you can talk to your friends, relations and tell them : "This is the Truth now - you have to be truthful. First and foremost thing is that YOU SHOULD KNOW THE TRUTH AND STAND THE TESTIMONY AND THAT AND YOU SHOULD ANNOUNCE IT. That you have entered into the kingdom of God. That you been blessed by the Grace of God". The third thing, to become a Guru, a Sahaja Yogi has to do is to develop DETACHMENT. Now you can announce the Truth. Gradually you do develop it because you find That you cra realised souls, that you have felt this Divine power which is prevailing everywhere. That you con give realization to others and know that, by your accepting the Truth, you are not adding anything to the Truth - but you are adoring you develop that unless and until that detachment, you are not receiving vibration in full way, All kinds of detachments have to be developed, means your priorities change. Once your attention gets fixed up with your spirit, the catch or the hold on things which are of no Importance starts reducing by itself, e.g. you have a father anda mother and a sister. This is a bigger problem in India. yourself. One requires courage to enjoy the Truth. Sometimes people may mock at you, laugh at you, and persecule you also, but that should not be any worry to you, because your relationship is with the Statutes, with the Grace of God. Here you are over detached. But in India, people are very much involved in their own children "This is MY son" and others are orphans. Only your sons and daughters are the real children. "My daughter, I must do this for My son, My father, My When that is your connection, you should not worry about other people, and what they have to say about it. mother". You have to stand up, adorn yourself with that Truth, and talk to people and people will know that you have found it. Two types of attachment are there, one through Moha-involvement into that. That you want to do this for them, that for them, want to give them property, have insurance for them and every sort of thing. With that authenticity with which you speak people will know that you have found it. The The Divine Cool Breeze 20

 And another could be the other way, as we have here. (London) For example, in a tree, say the sap rises, goes to all the necessary parts, all the flowers, all the fruits, then goes back to Mother Earth. You hate your father, you hate your mother, you hate every-one. Both things are just the same. So DETACHMENT must be developed. It is not attached to any-one. Supposing, the sap goes and gets attached into one fruit. What will happen? The fruit will die and the tree will die. The DETACHMENT is: that you are your father, you are your mother, you are everything. DETACHMENT GIVES YOU THE MOVEMENT OF YOUR LOVE, CIRCULATION OF YOUR LOVE. ONLY YOUR SPIRIT Is EVERYTHING to you, only your spirit you HAVE TO ENJOY, then the detachment comes from them, then you really do good to them, because, by detaching you see the complete vision about them and about what is to be done. Things have no value unless and until there are ermotions behind it. For example, the sari I am wearing today, was bought for Guru Day, Guru Purnima. But they had no sari. The other day, they wanted to have sari for Puja. Then I sald if you insist I may have., but I wore it today just to say that this was bought with that devotion, that love that on Guru Day, Mother would like to wear something of a lighter shade: white the pure colour of silk- complete detachment. Attachment to crazes. For example people have attachment with some crazes. Human beings always become crazy about something. I mean it can be anything. One has to understand that there should be only one craze I.e. to be SETTLED, ABSOLUTELY SETTLED, IN YOUR SPIRIT. But in white all the colours are mixed, then only it becomes white, such a balance and unity it is. It should be that you should become white and whiter than snow. All other crazes will disappear because it is the greatest joy-giving thing. DETACHMENT IS PURITY, IS INNOCENCE. That's the most nourishing thing, that's the most beautiful thing. INNOCENCE IS SUCH A LIGHT, LIGHT THAT REALLY BLINDS YOU TO ALL THAT IS FILTHY. So all the olher things fall off, you enjoy only that which is the source of all enjoyment. You would not even know that a person has come with bad intentions. A person comes to you, to steal. You'll say : "Come along, what do you want? You'll offer him tea and all that then he says "I have come to rob you" - "alright, tob me, if you want to" So he might not rob you at all. That is what is innocence, which one may develop, only through DETACHMENT. DETACHMENT IS OF THE ATTENTION. Do not allow your attention to involved into something, even rituals of anything. Say, now we have now washed MATAJI's FEET. Alright it does not matter. You love ME alright. If some mistakes, may be committed, what does it matter? If you see on the abstract plane. It's love. This is just a step forward, like somebody ran very fast and fell down before reaching ME and says, "Mother, Sorry I fell down before reaching you, I should not have done that. But Mother see how prostrated before you." It's a complete poetry DETACHMENT. You GET YOURSELF ATTACHED TO YOUR SPIRIT, And DETACHMENT STARTS WORKING. Sometimes detachment is taken as a llcence for becoming dry to others, which is absurd. This is a human quality to make everything dirty which is beautiful. Actually, a person who is DETACHED IS THE MOST BEAUTIFUL PERSON - IS THE EXTREMELY LOVING PERSON, IS LOVE. Look at the flowers, they are detached. They are dying tomorrow, they are not going to live, but every minute Ihey are emitting fragrance to you. The trees are not attached to anything; they wil die tomorrow, doesn't matter. But if anybody comes to them they give shadow, they give fruits. So, one has to develop that DETACHMENTS to be a GURU. AND THAT DETACHMENT does not mean ATTACHMENT means DEATH OF LOVE, DEATH OF LOVE IS ATTACHMENT. 21 Guru Puja - 81

 have sald that you have to lead of them had said that you do not get married, that you should not talk to your wife or you should have no relationship with your wife. All this is nonsense. LEAD A MORAL LIFE. When you are young and not married, keep your eyes on the ground. MOTHER EARTH GIVES YOU THAT INNOCENCE. SANYAS or anything like that. Sometimes one has to wear those dresses to announce to the world because, if you have to work in short time then you have to take to that intensive behavlour, like CHRIST, you can say or ADISHANKARACHARYA. All these people had a very, very short life. In that short life, they had to achieve such a tremendous task that they had to actually take a military uniform just to avoid problems. Not to impress others. a moral life. None Most of the confusions and problems, specially in the Western life, have come because they have thrown morality to the sea, and to accept morality as the very basis of society is very difficult for them. Now-a-days people do it just to impress others that they are detached and do just the things opposite to it. It is complete reverslon. But you have to do it, you have to turn the whole wheel back. So, we understand that first work is not to harm anyone. - AHIMSA. So many things were done in the beginning of the society to establish these pure relationships. There are laws which act, just as Chemical laws are there. Physical laws are there in Chemistry and Physics. Not to kill anyone. That does not mean that you do not have to eat meat and fish and all that. That is all nonsense. Of course you should not hanker after food, no doubt about it. THERE ARE HUMAN LAWS WHICH ONE SHOULD UNDERSTAND, THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN EACH OTHER. THE SUBLIMITY OF THEIR RELATIONSHIP THE PURITY understood. Lead a moral life. You do not kill any-one means :- OF THEIR be RELATIONSHIP must Do not kill a human being. THOU SHALT NOT KILL. The Purity of the relationship between husband and wife must be understood. Then only can you have a very, very happy married life, which is the basis. "Thou shalt not commit adultery", Christ has said: So, first thing is not to harm any-one. Second is to know that you have found the TRUTH and give the testimony of the TRUTH, Third is the DETACHMENT, the way I've told you about DETACHMENT. Not to get attached to any one person because he is a relation or something. (perhaps He knew the modern people as they would be using their brains for this.) He said "Thou shalt not have adulterous eyes", What a vislon, in those days to think. Even I could not understand it when I was in India. Only after coming here I could see, what it could mean. But develop a UNIVERSAL FELLING and also NOT TO HATE anyone. That is the worst kind of attachment. This word should go away from the mouth of al Sahaja Yogis "I hate". It is a POSSESSION on the EYES, - possession. It's a joyless, useless behaviour. ATTENTION is frittered away completely. There's no dignity. Eyes should be steady, If you look at somebody steadily, he should know that you have Sahaja Yoga in you. With love, with respect, with dignity. Not staring at people, which is just playing in the hands of these POSSESSIONS. The whole society is possessed. It is called as DANDAK, is the STATUTE. You CANNOT HATE ANYONE, even Rakshasas. Better not hate them. Give them a chance. Now the fourth STATUTE of Lord is, TO LEAD A MORAL LIFE. These Statutes were given by Gurus. Take them from SOCRATES onwards MOSES, IBRAHIM, DATTAREYA, JANAKA, MOHAMMED SAHIB and take up to the point when it was about a 100 years back at the most, was SAINATH. All of them All the Satanic forces have been let loose, I think, and the way people are possessed, they cannot see through these things. They are supposed to be Christians. The Divine Cool Breeze 22

 Attention is to be looked after. That is the most important thing Because attention is the one which is going to be enlightened. is so beautiful, you cannot imagine it. I met a lady after say 30 years of her married life in London, suddenly, and she said "Oh what a co- incidence", I said "Why?" She said "I am wearing the same pearl necklace you had given me on my wedding day, today, and I should meet you". The whole thing, the whole drama changed with that meeting. So, we have to know what MORALITY is, We are proud and not ashamed of being righteous people. This is a very important part of righteousness. Those who do not follow this will loose their vibrations very fast. It is how you give even a small thing. It is the greatest art of giving that one has to learn in Sahaja Yoga. Then for a Guru, He should not accumulate things; he should not have much possessions. If he has possessions they should be just what he needs. A Guru must give away his possesslons. Give up the mundane type of things, like if you go to somebody's birthday, you send a card, "Thank you very much". Make it a more deeper significant thing. Let us see how you develop your symbols of love. When you have these things of vibrations and you will give it to a Sahaja Yogi, he will know what it is. Never lack in generosity specially among Sahaja Yogis. Gradually, you will be amazed how through small things you win over, as if the vibrations flow through these things and work out for those people. He should not have stamp collections (for financial gain) and all such kinds of collections. Whatever things are useful and beautiful, which give happiness and joy to others, to their eyes, such things must be collected. He should have such things which glve symbolic to his life, very symbolic, which suggest that he is a DHARMIC PERSON. He should not have things that are symbolic of ADHARMIC, of irreligious life. Then, for a Sahaja Yogl it is important to use things which are more natural in their character, Give up artificiality and be more natural. I do not mean that take out the roots and eat them or you eat the fish raw. I do not mean that. Always, you must avoid going too far with the things. But try to lead a life which is more natural. Natural, in the sense that people know there is no vanity about you. Some people can be the other way round. You see they will dress up as a tramp, just to attract more attention. I mean there can be both ways. Then I find some people colouring their hair and all that, So you have to be a very natural person in your behaviour. Everything that he has or wears or shows should be representative of his Dharmikta. Anything that is impure, giving bad vibrations should not be possessed. EVEN whatever you have, you should think to whom you can give this. So, it means you should have possessions to express your generosity. A Sahaja Yogi has to be generous like the sea. A miserly Sahaja Yogi it is like mixing of darkness with light. So, be natural. Miserliness Is not allowed in Sahaja Yoga. If can mean anything absurd also to some people who do not use their wisdom. Anybody whose mind goes on how much money I can save, how much labour I can save-there are many labour saving devices, and money-saving devices-and also cheating others or making money out of a few things here and there, and all such things are against Sahaja Yoga. WISDOM IS VERY IMPORTANT IN SAHAJA YOGA. -that you have to keep intact all the time. Natural means you must wear natural dresses, which are suitable to you, e.g.. in this climate there is no use to wear dress like RAMA used to wear. He will not wear anything on the top, there was no need. They will pull you down. Enjoy your generosity. How many times have I told you about Generosity? Apart from the way you give it, the emotional side You have to wear the dress of whatever country Guru Puja - 81 23

 you belong to, whatever suits the occasian, whatever you think is dignified and good. It speaks for your more elegance and your personality. Whatever suits you, you should weat, not like oall the people wearing moss-coloured dress, the great suit, horrible looking and making clowns out of them. YOU ARE REBORN NOW. Now, you are DHARMATIT -means-you need not follow any particular type of religion. You are open to all religions and the essence of all religions you have to take. You have not to denounce any religion or insult any religious incarnation at any time. it is a sin. It is a great sin in Sahaja Yoga -and you know who they are. There should be no racial understanding of oneself. You could be Chinese or any group. No clownish things are necessary, no dandy stuff is necessary. Simple beautiful dresses should be worn which give you dignity. Actually, in the East, people believe that God has given you a beautiful body and it is to be adorned with the beauty of what human beings have created, just to respect it, just to worship your body. As long as we are human beings, we should know that we laugh the same way, we smile the same way, we hold the same way. This is all conditioning our mind-of this soclety that some are in our touchableness and some are untouchable. This Is in our indian Community. For example in india, women wear their saris and saris are expressive of their moods and expression of their worship of their bodies, because you must respect your body. Brahmanism of India has ruined India completely and you learn from, -for example, who was VYASA, the one who vwrote GEETA, He was the illegitimate son of a fisher-woman. That is why, deliberately, he was born like that. All the Brahrnins who read Geeta, ask them -who was VYASA?. Dresses should be such that they should be for utility as well as for dignity. There is no need to have uniform clothes for Sahaja Yogis at all. I don't like it. There should be a variety as nature is. Every-one should look a different petson. For Puja etc. all can wear something similar, it doesn't matter, where your attention need not be on the variety, But outside you should be a normal person. Brahmins are those who are reallsed souis, there is nothing like where and in what caste community you are born. or With all education and everything in the West, we find this nonsense of nationalism, You are all householders. nobody announce something. For you people I don't even advice to put the red mark when walking on the has to If somebody is fair or dark, after all God had to make variety in colour in every way. street. Who told you (London)-that you are the most handsome people going around?. May be for some markets here, or in Hollywood, it may be fit -but In the Kingdom of God, all these so-called handsome people will be denled entry-marrying seven husbands and all sort of things. They will all be put in Hell. You should be a NORMAL PERSON, not to be pointed out. You need not be dressed absurdly or in a funny way, but in a normal way as others wear. To be normal is very important in Sahaja Yoga. Then we have to know that Sahaja Yogis have to get over identifications according to races, colour and different religions in which you are born. God has created all of you as His cwn children, kinds of discrimination all and The beauty is of the heart and not of the face. that shows and shines. May be people are a little bit aware of it, that is why they go and tan their faces, I do not know. As a Christian you don't belong to a church, you are not born in a church. Thank God, otherwise all the spirits there will capture you, immediately. But these identifications wil linger on. To accept anything new, you have to be reborn and They are quite aware, but there is too much Showing -off' they are doing. Some people like black hair, others like red hair, I mean there have INE The Divine Cool Breeze 24

 your dignity, weight of your behaviour, weight of your faith; and your light, You become a Guru not through frivolousness and vanity. Cheapness, vulgar language, cheap jokes, anger and temper- all must be avolded completely. Wield the weight of your sweetness, of your tongue, of the dignity, which will attract people just like the flower which is loaded with nectar, attiacting the bees from all over. In the same way you will be attracting people. Be proud of that, be very proud of that and have sympathies for other and care for to be all types of hair, why do you like a paiticular type of hair. this I con't understand. There is nothing to like or dislike. What God has created is all beautiful, who are you to judge that I like or dislike?- T. Who is this , you see, is Mr. Ego, which is being pampered by this society, which teaches you how to smoke a cigar and how to have your lager. morning till evening. All this training and conditioning has to be thrown away just like filth, and see that God created all of you as His own children. others. Now, in short, I have to tell you how you have to do it yourself. You have to WORK OUT YOUR VOID clearly. First of all you have to know that VOID catches when you had a wrong type of GURU. YOU MUST KNOW ABOUT YOUR GURU ENTIRELY. Try to find out the character of your Guru. Rather difficult becCuse your Guru is very elusive, SHE IS MAHAMAYA. - not easy to find out. She behaves in a nomal way - and sometimes you are outwitted. But you see how is small things also, She behaves. How her Character is expressed, How her Love is expressed. TryY to remember Her forgiveness. Then you should know that you have the Guru that many people must have desired to have, Who is the souree of all Gurus. It is the ardent desire of even BRAHMA, VISHNU and MAHESHA to have a GURU le that. They must all be jealous of you. It is such a beautiful thing. Why do you want to make it ugly with these ugly ideas? All this ugliness of I like or dislike is nonsense. Only there should be one word "I LOVE Forget everything, There is no need to remember what the British cid to the Indians or the Germans did to the Jews. Forget everything. Those people who did it are dead and finlshed. We are diffetent people. We are Saints. This is for the STATUTES I have told you, whlch you have to Imbibe. But, today, I authorise you to be the GURUS. So that through your own characler and Ihrough your own personality the way you practice Sahaja Yoga in your own life and manifest the light, other will follow you. And that will establish the STATUTES of the LORD in their hearts and emancipate them. Give them their salvation, because you have got your salvation. You are the channels without the channels this all-pervading power cannot work out. That's the system. If you see the Sun, it's lght spreads through it's rays - from your heart the blood flows through he arterles, they becormne smaller and smaller. YOU ARE THE ARTERIES WHICH IS GOING TO FLOW THIS BLOOD, complete freedom, OF MY LOVE, TO ALL THE PEOPLE. If arteries are broken, the blood will not reach the people. That is why you are so Important. The blgger you become, the bigger the arteries become. Then you encompass more people, by fhat you are more responsible, But this Guru is very elusive. So to irmprove your VOID, say that, "Mother you are our Guru." Because of this elusiveness, that fear, or that awe, that respect which Is necessary, for the Guru, is not established. Unless and until you develop that awe complete awe within you, your Guru principle will not be established. No liberty is to be taken. I am telling you Myself, but I am extremely elusiver next moment, I nake you laugh and forget about it. Because I am testing your freedorn to do it - So first of all you must find out about your own Guru establish Her in your heart. I mean-you have a wonderful 'Guru' otherwise. I must say, I wish had one like that myselff And She is desireless and sinless, absolutely sinless. Whatever I da it is not a can kili anyone and do whatever fact. am above sin but I see to it that 1 do not do gravity, You rnust have the gravity by your welght,anything like that in your presence, so that you do not get one of these things, becousee thai is My sin tor Me. l Guru must have the dignity, Guru means the intrigue or anything. I really tell you that's weight, is the GRAVITY. GURUTATWA means means the weight of your character, weighf of quality. 25 Guru Puja 81

 You have a very supreme Guru, no doubt, but still you must know that those powers of supremacy you DON'T have. I am above all these things. I don't know what temptations are, Whatever I like it is all my Whim. But despite that I have made myself very normal because I must appear before you in such a manner that you understand what is the STATUTES, For Me there are no statutes. I make these Statutes. Because of you I do all these things and teach you small things because you are still chlldren. but I am NIRMALA - I arn beyond love. Different state all togethet. Under these clrcumstances you are much better off because no Guru ever goes to that extent. Apart from that I am the source of all the SHAKTIS of all the powers, so you can have all the powers from Me, whatever you like. I am desireless, but whatever desires you have will be fulfilled. Even about me, you have to desire, look at that, how much I am bound by you. Unless and until you desire My good health, I will have bad health. It is to that extent. In the same way, you must remember that when you are talking to other people about Sahaja Yoga, remember that they will see you all the time and try to see how far you are in it. But to me what is good health and bad health? Under these beautiful conditions you should really prosper so well There should be no problems for you to be GURUS. As I understand you try to understand them. As I love you, you try to love them. I definitely Love you The Divine Cool Breeze 26

 Introspection Study Campus, U.K. Whenever there is a circumstance which, some how or other, changes our programs, we must Immediately know that there is a purpose, behind all that change. And we must immediately accept it with an open heart. The Divine wants us to change. Supposing I am going on a road and people say you have lost your way, Mother. That's all right. I am never lost, because I am with Myself. But I had to go by that particular road, is the point. I had to do i' And that's why I am supposed to be not on that road and I have lost my way. If you have that kind of an understanding, and if you have that satisfaction in your heart, then you'll find life is worth much more than what you think it to corrected. Now these problems we con see very clearly with the light of the spirit, we can see them very clearly that "this" has gone wrong with me. One of the most Interestirg things I've noticed is that Sahaja Yaga is all the time at work with some sort of a maya. And this maya is ignorance, complete ignorance, sometimes partially. Now when you get into Sahaja Yoga You get blessed. May be your family gets blessed. Your children get blessed. You get some sort of a blessing for your physical being. Also, for financial, you get jobs; you get money, You get something exceptional, which is really miraculous. Now people get very much lost in those achlevements and start drifting, thinking that, oh, this is the blessing we have got now, we don't have to do anything anymore, that we have been rewarded sufficiently for whatever we have done so far. That's nat so. It's just a sort of a support to you comes so that your faith should be fully established in Sahaja Yoga. Especially, you should know Me, what am. But, if you go on still drifting, then maybe some of these blessings may turn out to be curses. And you might feel that what a curse that has fallen upon us and how it has gone in the wrong way. be. Now, as it is, what was the reason, I thought, that we have decided to have public programs this year, definitely, and we could not have public programs. So the reason is that we have to consolidate. In the growth of a tree, which is a living tree, it happens that it moves in a particular direction up to a point, ill i# has to change, because there is no sun coming that side, maybe there is no water levels arriving, so they start changing. In the same way one has to understand that we are in the hands of the Divine. And if sonme plans are changed, it is reflecting back on us, and we have to see why. And the why of it is that we have to consolidate. For some people it takes time to feel, to get to the feel of the blessings. For example, mostly, according to the modern ideas, we think that to get more money is the biggest blessing. So many get that also. But actually, it is not. To get your peace within, to get to your witness state, and to feel your vibrations all right, and to be in the centre all the time ascending is the real blessing. Because with that you get everything else. The completion is only possible when you have the complete joy bubbling within yourself, After all, everything is just a means to achieve joy, to feel the Joy. It is not the end. If it was, those people who have money, those people who have good health, those people who have all the success of Job With them, they should have had been happy and peaceful, but they are not. They are suffering, they are suffering too much. And they are, in a Consolidation of Sahaja Yogis is very inmportant. The first thing to consolidate yourself you must do introspection. It's to reflect the light within and see for yourself. What have you done so far in Sahaja Yoga? Where ere you? How far you have gone? And how far have you to go? What is the thing that is lacking in you? You'll be surprised when you start seeing yourself in a very unblased manner, not justifying yourself, not blaming any bhoots, or not blaming any badhas within you, or somebody else. If you start yourself what has gone wrong with you that you could not consolidate yourself properly, you'll be amazed that there has been problems still lingering on which must be 27 Introspection

 way, destroying themselves, day by day, because they hate their lives: they can't bear it. They cannot understand why they are always sad. something for Sahaja Yoga. It's not money. It's not work. It's not thinking. It's not any kind of a support. One of the most important thing is how many people we have given realization to, you have to Count how many people you have been able to give realisation to, how many people you have falked about Sahaja Yoga. You may think that you glve realization to some people. They come. They disappear. Doesn't matter. They will ultimately come to you. Today you try on some. They get lost. Again, tomorrow. You have to relentlessly work for it.. So all these blessings that come to you, all these changes that come to you, all these new avenues that open to you, one has to know that it is for everything benevolence, for your your benevolence. And your benevolence is your ascent, nothing else but your ascent. The rest of it is all useless and fruitless. Once you understand that this is what you have to achieve in life, that is what you have to enjoy- Then n it works out. As you know I work hard in U.K. My coming to U.K. itself was ll predetemired. There was a need for me to come here, to make the heart work better. But heart is lethargic. You know that. And lethargic heart gets all kinds of probiems. But all these years I have been working, every year what ever timel could give for Sahoja Yogis, for their problems, for Sahaja Yoga, for their minutest problem, for any kind of help they needed, every sort, I've tried to work it out. Directly, indirectly, you are all blessed. Still, what about you people who are now yogis? You are saints. You must see a photogragh that i have, very interesting photogragh, where you are certified But in Sahoja Yoga, as you see, It's conpassion and love. It is not so much restrictions. You're left to yourself to develop yourself. It is your Spirit which has to guide you. There's no, coaxing or correction going on all the time. But, it is left to you to understand yourself. to see for yourself, and work It out. One of the criterla should be that, what have 1 done for Sahaja Yoga? What have I done for Mother? These two things are very important to understand. Whatever smmall thing I could do for Sahaja Yoga is important because, if you are intelligent, then you can see that this is the greatest thing you have to do, is to work for God. This is the most important thing so far human beings have indulged Into, is the highest type of enterprise that human belings have ever had a chance to indulge into. And what a chance it is, tool You may say that - Mother, we are mediocre, we are no good, we are useless - but you are chosen. You are the one chosen so there must be something about you. You might not have seen that part within yourself which is going to work out, this great work of God. So you have to locate and find out: Why am I selecied for Sahaja Yoga? What can I do in Sahaja Yoga? What can I work it out in Sahaja Yoga? It should be a constant reminder to you that I have been chosen for Sahaja Yoga, I want to take full advantage of sahaja Yoga? Supposing somebody doesn't have money. He expects that Sahaja Yoga should give money, must give jobs, must give this, must give that, must have children, must, give good health, etc. Expectations are all tight. But what, why then for Sahaja Yoga? This is another point of introspection. have you saints, that al seen photograph? Not yet? you better see. Let's have it. the photograph is in my box, I thing, yes. You are il certified saints, by the Divine, rot by any cardinal or by any pope. So, what are all these? Stately? one saint which is certified by pope, who is artificially certified? It's such a big thing, you know. What about you, who have been certified by God Almighty? You are still busy with your work. You're still busy with your little, little things. You're still busy with, your small lives and small families. For a saint for a person who is of a generous nature, means a person who is a saint. The whole worid is his own farmily? Are you still only wortied about your own family? Then you are not yet aware of your saintliness. And a saint doesn't only warry about his own wife, about his own children, about his own house; he worries about the whole world. Now, as Sahaja Yogis, you are powerful entities. You are very powerful people. We have got problems in the whole woild. You know that very well. It's not necessary you have to be great intellectuals, or you have to be people who are, some sort of politicians, or something. But you must be on the lokout for problems which are troubling Very important to see that we have to do The Divine Cool Breeze 28

 this world. You have to be. You cannot live in your own world, that you are a saint now. You have to know that you have to live in this world. And you have to think about them, not only your problems, but Mother, how will I be able to do this ond how will be able to do that. But you have to know all the problems of this world. And you have to worry about the whole world. You have to think, what's happening in the world. What are the problems of the world? You are responsible for it. had said - don't see any televisions- for there was no use seeing television by Sahaja Yogis. When they saw the television they only got caught up. But now there are important things that are happening which you can see for yourself. You can scan it out, what are the world problems, and you can see for yourself where you have to put your attention. If you become aware of your personality, it's not a personality that can be completely involved into a very small area. Your personality should get Involved into all the problems of the universe, all the problems there are. And you'll be amazed that everything can work out in a very collective Not only that, but you have to pray, In your prayers you have to say, Mother, solve this problem, Collectively, individually, you have to take your attention from yoursell, from your smaller life, to a much wider thing. Then you are a saint. And you have to think that it is your duty to ask for Divine help that all these problems should be solved. This is your job for which you are selected. Your asking is all going to work out, because, as you know, I am desirous. You have to desire for it. Whatever you desire will work out. The protection, the affection, the compassion, of Mother is with you. But you have to look after this world and show the concern that you have, not to live with very limited areas, and with very limited ways. The British think, that U.K. problems are aur problems. No. Your problems extend to all the places wherever there is Sahaja Yoga. And you have to worry about all of them now. We are having the same problerns in Australia. And there's somebody who is very froublesome. You have to see to it that you beat that person with shoes and put that right. The leader has to tell whom to beat with the shoes. I'll work it out, whether it is in Australia, America or india. way. And at this stage where you are, you can see for yoursell now, all the Sahaja Yogis have got vibrations on top of their heads. Stretch out your vibrations. Stretch out your attention. And you'll be arndzed that all other stupid problems that you have will be finished. So the attitude toward ourselves should be to be aware of own glory, of our own position, to know that we are saints, that we have reached a stage where we are at the highest. and that now we have become the light and we have to give light to others. If you see in the Bible Christ has said something that is very important, that you don't pur the light under the toble. That's what it is. You have to put the light on a pedestal. And that's what it is that you have to put your llght on the citadel, at a very highest point to glive light to others. And this is working both ways if you start undeistanding what you are, what you have to be aware of, what is your situation, what is your Anywhere you see that there's a problem or an assault on Sahaja Yoga, all of you should put your attention to it and work if out. powers, what you have achieved in Sahaja Yoga, poweis, v what is the debt you have toward Sahaja Yoga, and what you have to give for Sahajn Yoga, how Sahaja Yoga has made you so capable, so good, so nice. Are you righteous enough? Are you behaving properly? Are you doing all the rightful things which are necessary? Because it is only you who can do It. You are the people with very, very special energies and special contacts with the spiritual life. And if you start behaving like all other mundane, nonsensical peple, limiting yourself to a family, your children, your nonsensical. Previous lives, you'd be lost, lost to yourself and lost to everyone. The problems are much more than what you know about. That is the understanding Then there are general problems, as you see. We see that America is now becoming idiotic, or whatever you may say, so you have to put your attention to America. You have to stretch your attention outside, not inside, just worried about yourself, about your family, about your house, about your children. As soon as you spread your attention outside, your problems are solved in the house, in the smallest of circumstances. You have to pay attention outside. SO These days there are televisions. Where first we Introspection 29

 you have to reach, that Mother has made us yogis. We are saints. And we have to show to the world the right path. She has told us that we are the light and we have to show the people which way to go, how to go further. Isn't ir? That everybody seems to be a problem, seems to be in a very small little whirlpool, going round and round and round. How can that bel l've told you many a time, look at these false gurus. They don't have vibrations. They don't know anything about Kundalini, nothing about Sahaja Yoga, But how much they are doingl While what are we doing? We're struggling still with ourselves and with our problems, with out own ideas, with our very small- mindedness and chicken-heartedness. company. Everybody is Just without Me. I'm travelling, everyday. You know that very well. And I'm working so very hard. Sometimes I sleep at two o'clock, sometimes at three o'clock. In the same way you have to feel, after all, what is my gain in it? What do I gain out of it? I have brought My children back to normal conditions Iive taken them to the Kingdom of God. You have to do the same. You have to take them to the kingdom of God. But if you yourself are involved into your own mayas, you'll be every day going down and down and down. I may shout. I might say You'll be all stranded where ever you are, because you don't want to see. For that I would say, you have one advantage especially in U. K. You're all very intelligent people. You're not Idiots like cunningness once upon a time. And now you are tired of your cunning. Indians have learned the cunning from you. They have become really very cunning. But you are tired of your cunningness, so now you are tired, fed up, fagged out, and lethargic. But with your intelligence you can understand that this is such an important work our Mother is doing.) Wevsrmall- Now it is for you to understand. It is for you to decide about yourself. It is your own desire, it is your own bigness, you own magnanimity, which has to come forward. To see for yourself what you are capable of, what you can do. It's very easy for people to say that, Mother, it's too much, I can't do anything. Or somebody to say that, Mother, I'm very busy with my family. Somebody to say. I'm busy with my children. You have come to Sahaja Yoga for that? I have given you reallsation for that? All these blessings have come to you for that? This intelligence Americans. became It will go down in the history, every word you say, every thing you say, every way you behave. Everything is golng to go down in the history. Not how many children you produced, or what sort of a wife you have, but what you did for Sahaja Yoga. Remember that. History is going to record everything, whatever you have done, whatever you have achieved in Sahaja Yoga, It's not showing off. It's not just, demonstration. It's not talking big. It's nothing of the kind. It's actually, really, totally what you have achleved, which will be recorded. At least God knows hypocrisy. And God knows bombastic? Inmprovidence?. If's God who knows where you are, and what you are up to. You can not befool God. One thing you must realize, that when you are befooling God, you are befooling yourself, your Spirit, your realization, your own ascentl So we have to be careful. So the consolidation that you have to do is very important. You can see it clearly that's why we could not have any public programs, because we really need consolidation in U. K. Though I have lived in U. K. For so many years, people take me for granted here, because I am staying here. They think we should go to the airport, Finished. We have done all the hardship, everything. Have you been to the airport? Have you seen Mother. What's the use of seeing Me? What I have given you? Is your light spreading? How many people have got realization from you? Just find out how many people have learned Sahaja Yoga from you, or from your lives, or from your wisdom, or from your behaviour? That is the way. That is the criterion. It's not that, all right, I have sent Mother Her money for Her travel. At my age, from India, if you see any lady at My age, she waiks with a stick: she can't climb even one step. Indian woman can't, because of the heat that they have. But I'm travelling. You know how I'm travelling, how much I am doing. What about my family? I deprive them of My company. I deprive My husband of My As a mother I would say, try to be introspr ting yourself very carefully. What have you done for Sahaja Yoga? What have you done for other Sahaja Yogis? What have you done for other people who are drifting? What has been ou behaviour towards other Sahaja Yogis? how much peace and love and compassion we have given The Divine Cool Breeze 30

 is the centre of your dharma. Here you have to pray that let Vishwa Nirmala Dharma spread in the whole world, let people see the light through our dharmic life, through our righteousness, let people see them and accept the Vishwa Nimala Dharma by which they get enlightenment and a benevolent, higher life anda desire to ascend. others? How much understanding and tolerance we have shown to others? If somebody gets here a little more money. he becomes, so bombastic. He becomes so aggressive. He becomes so rude. I can't believe itl How can money lure you into these vices? You're not ordinary people: you'te the saints whose feet were washed by the River Gangas. Try to understand your glory. Try to understand your own powers, your own position as saintly people, Sahaja Yogls. which are above all saints because you know how to glve realization. You know everything about Kundalini. You know everything about realization. How many people knew about it? Otherwise, I start thinking I have given all this knowledge to some bunch of foals who do not krow what is the value. As Christ has said, don't throw pearls betore the swines. It is for you to decide where you stand, in what category. Now take your right hand In the lower portion of your abdomen, of the stomach on the left hand side. Press if. Now this is the centre of pure knowledge. Here you have to say as Sahaja Yogis that our Mother has given us the full Idea how the Divine works. She has glven us all the mantras and all the pure knowledge that we could bear and understand, Let me fully be knowledgeable about that, all of us. I've seen if the man is a leader, the wite doesn't know a word about Sahaja Yoga, if the women know about Sahaja Yoga, the husband doesn't know anything about it. Let me be proficient and an expert in this knowledge. So that I can glve realization to people, make them understand what is Divine Law, what is Kunidalini, and what are the chakras. Let my attention be more on Sahaja Yoga than all these mundane things. It is so obvious that it is a very precarious time we are passing. It's very important. We have to fight it out. It's much more than any wars you have fought. It's much more than any struggle human beings have had. It's such a horrible world that has been created, and we have to transform it. It's a tremendous task. For that you have to work out in a very sincere and an innate manner. I'm sure one day will come that in the history of this world Sahaja Yogis will have their names written in golden letters. I'm sure this will work out. I'm sure this has to work out. And that you all have to achleve it, collectively, with one mind, with one heart. What should I sacrifice? What should I do? How should I help? What is my contribution? I wish I could see those days in My lifetime. So today is the day when we have to introspect. Now pul your tight hand in the upper part of your abdomen, Close your eyes. Now here on the left hand side, pIess it. Now here Mother has given me the spirit, and I have my own guru which is the spirit. I'm master of my own. Let there be no abondonment. Let there be dignity in my character. Let there be generosity in my behaviour. Let there be cormpassion, love for other Sahaja Yogis. Let me not show off. but have a deep, deep kriowledge about God's love and his doings. So that when people come to me, I should be oble to fell them about Sahaja Yoga and give them this great knowledge with humility and love. Now first of all, you put your hand on your heart. In the heart resides Shiva, is the spirit. So, you have to thank your spirit that it has brought light to your attention, because you're a saint and the light that has come in your heart, has to enlighten the whole world so, piease, now in your heart, you pray that let this light of my love of the Divine spread to the whole world. With all sincerity and understanding that you are connected with the Divine and whatever you desire will happen with full confidence in yourself. Now raise your right had on your heart, Here you have to thank God that you have felt the ocean of joy and you have felt the ocean of forgiveness and the capacity to forgive as your Mother has which we have seen is so tremendous. let my heart expand and encompass the whole universe. And my love should resound the name of god. The heart, every moment, should express the beauty of god's love. Now put your right hand in the upper part of your abdomen on the ieft hand side, on the upper part of your stomach on left hand side. And now here Take your, right hand in the vishuddhi, that is on the left vishuddht between the neck and the Introspection 31

 This humility has o come within us, so you have to say here - let the humilityY, in my heart, in a true sense, non hypocritical, work aut this feeling of forgiveness, so that I bow to reality, to God, and to Sahaja Yoga. shoulder in the coner. I will not indulge into the falsehood of guilt, because I know it is falsehood. I will not escape my faults, but face them and eradicate them. I will not try to find faults with others, but in my own knowledge of Sahaja Yoga, let me remove their faults. We have so many ways, secretly we can remove the faults of others. Let my collectivity become so great that the whole Sahaja world is my own family. my own children, my home, my everything. Let me get that feeling completely, innately built within myself that I am a part of and a parcel of the whole, because we all have Atmal And let my concern go to the whole world to know what are their problems and how can, through my true desire, power, solve that. Let me feel the problems of the world in my heart. innately, to remove all of them from the basis of which they are, from the basis from which they are generated. Let me go to the principles of all these problems and try to remove them through my Sahaja Yoga powers, through my saintly powers. Now you have to put back your hand on the backside of your head. Now push back your head, here. And you have to say here oh, Mother whatever wrong we have done to You so far. whatever wrong goes in our minds, and whatever smallness we have shown to You, whatever way we have troubled You and challenged You, please forgive us. You have to ask for forgiveness. In your intelligence you should know what I am. I don't have to tell you again and again. Now at sahasrara, you have to thank Me. At sahasrara, put your hand, move it seven times, and thank Me seven times. Mother, thank You very much for the realization. And Mother, thank. You very much for making us understand how great we are. And thank You very much for bringing all the blessings of the Divine. And thank You very much for raising us higher, much higher, than from whete we were. And, also, thank You very much for sustaining us and for helping us improve ourselves and correct ourselves. And thank You very, much ultirmately, that Mother, You have come on this earth, taken Your birth, and working so hard for us, for all of us. Now put your right hand on your forehead, across, Now here you have to say, first of all, I have to forgive all those who haven't come in Sahaja Yoga, those who are on the periphery, who come and go, who jump in and jump out. But, first of all, and foremost, I have to forgive all the Sahaja Yogis, because they are all better than me. I'm the one who tries to find faults with them, but I am at the lowest ebb; and I have to forglve them because I must know that I still have to go very further. I'm still much less. I have to improve myself. The Divine Cool Breeze 32



----------------------

1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. IV, No. 11 & 12
CONTENTS
Navaratri Puja Talk, Cabella '92
1)
Shri Mataji's Advice to Sahaja Yogis, U.K. '84
2)
Shri Guru Puja - '81
3)
4) Introspection - Shudy Camps, U.K. '88
The Divine Cool Breeze
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-1.txt 
 Navratri Puja
Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Synopsis
Cabella, Italy, 27-9-1992
Mathematical things have come to us from Inside,
from the Divine. We have not created them. This
was found out by some mathematicians who were
realized souis, and they used this Alpha and
omega. It shows very clearly Swastika becoming
Omkar and Omkar becoming Alpha and Omega.
Everything in Sahaja Yoga is tangible and can be
verified.
complete power of Sada Shlva. She gives the
Power to every chakra by which all these chakras
gre enlightened and all the deities are awakened.
Supposing you have no power of life you will be
like dead people. These centres when they
receive this power, this shakti then they are
awakened. You con do it yourself. Its all tangible.
While she is Jagadamba - the Amba. She is the
pure form of power which resides in the triangular
bone, the Kundalini, but in her form where she is
Jagdamba the Mother of the Universe, She resides
on the heart centre. This heart centre is very
important. Tll twelve years of age in a child this
centre produces the ganas, Ganos are the
workers on the left hand side. Their leader is saint
Michael, but their king is Ganesha. First she has
done the Ghat sthapana
establishes the Kumbha which is the triangular
bone. Her first work is to establish the Mooldhara.
She established your innocence, The first is fo
establish the Kundalini in the Triangular bone and
then to establish Shri Ganesha. Whatever she is
going to create has to be filled with innocence.
For example the stones are innocent. If you hit a
stone you get hit otherwise it does not come up
and hit you. The tivers are innocent. All matter is
innocent. It is not cunning, or manipulating. It is not
aggressive. They are under the complete order of
God Almighty. They do not have their own free will
to do what they like. Even animals are innocent
except for very tew. They are completely under
the control of God. A tiger will behave like a tiger
and a snake will behave like a snake but in human
beings someone will behave like a tiger, like a
snake. The next day there is no steadiness. These
animals have a purpose that's why they are there.
The purpose is only one, that is to support human
beings, because you are at the epitome of
evolution. She has created all these things just for
you, and ultimately to get your self realisation, to
have meaning for your life, to get connected to
this all pervading power, to enter into the kingdom
of God. All is Her work. She came nine times and
tenth time. She is supposed to give realisation to all
Today you are worshipping Durga or the nine
forms of the Goddess. She came nine times on this
earth. She fought all the people who were
destroying the seekers who were trying to make a
mess of their lives and these tortured saints prayed
to the Goddess because none of the gods could
do anything and Sadashiva never interferes with
the Goddess, They worshipped the Bhagwati and
then the incarnation of Hers canme nine times
according to the need of the time. Everytime she
was confronting people who were extremely
arrogant & self-opiniated.
- means - first she
In India when we cast the horoscope of a person
there are 3 categories of people. One are the
Devas, second are the Manavas or humans and
the third ones are Rakshas. I think I have got all of
you from the Deva categories, because you could
not have taken to Sahaja Yoga that seriously
unless you were Devagana. When you raise the
Kundalini on the centre heart you can feel that if
there is a catch you have to take the name of the
Jagadamba. Even when clear the centre heart I
also have to say I am in reality the Jagadamba
then the Jagdamba within you awakens. You
have verified much more than the Scientists.
Scientists are going from outside and are not
conclusive at all. They work out problems one by
one they don't know the basics of what those
problems are and where lies the solution.
This Kundalini is the reflection of the Holy Ghost or
the Adi Shakti within you. When she rises through
these different chakras she gives them power
because she is the power. She is the Shakti. She is
the the divine power of Sadashiva. She is the
Navaratil Puja 92
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Mahalaxmi and Maha Saraswati. They chose to
work it out in human beings.
of you. At the tenth time all these three powers are
joined together, that is why it is called
Trigunatmika. That's why Buddha said Maitreya
three mothers put together,
The first working was very effective in India. They
chose India. There are six seasons and the climate
is very good. These seasons are very well
balanced. This Param Chaitanya is also called
Ritumbhara Pragnya, The one which is the
enlightened knowledge of the one which makes
seasons. In the West the Ritumbhara Pragnya is not
so effective. The humans are so scatter-brained
that even the nature has becorme scatter brained
there; and cannot understand how to deal with
such human beings.
This power when it starts acting has got .complete
control over all the three channels and seven
centres, as without taking the name of this power
you cannot achieve anything. That is where
human beings fall because they have o free will so
why should they obey, listen or docept anyone.
That's why though you have to be given self
realisation the task is very difficult. Because you
are not used to a way where you don't have to
use your free will.
Human were made to understand that there is
God. The real saints were respected and they
Made different observations. When
Shankaracharya I was amozed how he knows so
many things about me. He knows how my knee
looks, he knows how many lines I have on my back
etc. That means through his meditative power he
The same power has now been awakened in the
Param Chaitanya This aw.akening in the Param
Chaifanya is doing marvellous work which you can
see clearly. Firstly you have seen my photographs.
The Param Chaitanya is all the tirne working out to
convince you people about the truth. If it was so
active at the time of Christ it would have been could visualize. He never saw me. The deseription
much better, but it has to be at this time because
human beings are most difficult to mnanage. They
have been glven freedom. The freedom was
given to Adam and Eve. But how was it achieved.
Adam and Eve were both like Pashus, animals,
under the complete control of God, There was no
free will they were living in the nude, in the garden
If Eden and would not have known more than to
live and eat like animals: Then the Shakti herself
took the form of a snake and went and told them
that you must have the fruit of knowledge. She
wanted them to evolve. Shakti knew that she is
capable of lots of miracles ond she can make
these human beings understand the krowledge.
So she said you must eat this fruit & try to know the
knowledge. Then a new type of human race
started which wanted to know what is the
knowledge. We had all kinds of primitive people
before, then they started evolving the first creation
which took place, before, that there were other
higher creations which were planned by Adi
Shakti. She created Brahma Vishnu, Mahesha and
she created their lokas or abodes. in that all the
planning was done how we can make anirnals
realized souls. From animals to human beings and
from human beings to realized souls. It was a very
big problem. These three channels were created
in human beings later on. Out of these three
channels came out the three shakties Mahakali,
I read Adi
is so clear cut. The 1000 names of the Goddess are
so precise. You can verify them in me and it is a
fact. The knowledge of these people is most
remarkable - how did they know that a Goddess
is like that. The meditative power in India was
great. The reason was our seasons
disciplined. People were disciplined. In India most
of the people get up eatly in the morming and do
their Pujas, take their baths and go for work and
come home to be with their family, sing some
bhajans and then sleep of. They don't go on
holidays or get into drinking etc. If someone drinks
he is thrown out of the house and is condemned
as a leper. He is called as a Daruda -a drunkard.
were
Because of these six seasons being absolutely
disciplined we know what to do when and how to
do it. In india people could live in the jungles
because one didn't have so much idea of
comfort at all. They could live in a simple hut, with
protection from sun or rain. They had very little
needs of life. Now I find there is a lot of difference
In simple living you do not take out all the wealth
fiom the mother earth. There is no ecological
problem. This shakti which was working in them in
those days was there to make them seekers,
because they did not have to do anything else.
You had food to eat and place to sleep. Not
much to be done living so happily. With all these
comforts which put so much demand on your
The Divine Cool Bieeze
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-3.txt 
 time. They had lot of time. They did not go
swimming or ballroom dancing. With that time
they meditated, when that time for meditation
started. They started realising what is the Divine
Power. What is Divinity and what is God. In the
West people even disouss the private lives of
Christ. In India nobody does that. How can you
know about God? You have come through him.
God can do anything. How can you understand
God? You can be in connection with God or can
be in his Cormpany, can be blessed and looked
after by Him. You can know lots of things about
God, but you cannat understand Him. You cannot
question why he made Swastika or omkara that
they even ask God why did you exist? This
arragance, this ego has blinded us from God. We
think no end of ourselves. We are very self-
opiniated.
made you like his own image. That means He has
given you all the powers. He hos made you. You
cannot make Him. He is the source. What you do
is to make others in His image. These powers are
within you. The first thing you have to have is the
discipline in yourself. People cannot control
thermselves then how can they control anyone.
First you must see that you control yourself
because now you are in the Kingdom of God. You
should have dignity, that affection, compassion,
love and dedication. If It is not there then this
power is useless, because you are the vehicle of
that power. Supposing I want water, I need an
empty glass. If it is already full with ego then what
can you put inside that? If you are already filled
with your own ideas, convenience progress then
you cannot rise very high. You have to surrender
fully. To say that Mother whatever is your desire.
Once you surrender all your problems will solve.
Surrender your problems also. God you solve the
problems". You do this. It is such a precise, efficient
and effective power and above all it loves you,
cares and forgives you. It is wanting you all to be
properly seated in your thrones enjoying your
power. So whatever is needed is done with great
This power this shakti which has given you self
tealization will also give you God realization, but
still you will not undersland God. You will have to
go above to understand God. Suppose somebody
is down the hill ini Cabella, can he see my house
properly? He has to go above Cabella, to see my
house. We cannot understand the source from
which we have come. We cannot judge or say
why. That is God's desire. So we have to say.
whatever is His wish we must be happy with that.
The power within you is Amba which is the desire
power itself. His wish is that you enter the kingdom
of God. When you enter His Kingdom the Shakti
makes you sit in different beautiful positions, and
some are sitting in the Heart of God, some are
sitting in the Sahasrara of God.
care.
The 10th day of Navratri is the most important day
for all af you, It is where the Param Chaitanya has
become active. By this activity it has become very
powerful. Anyone who tries to be nasty and trles to
trouble you, you don't have to worry at all, it wil
take care of it. All wrong things or bad karmas you
have done you will be rewarded for that a
realized soul not on that level. Ordinary people
can be charged with criminality. But if you rise to
a higher state of Kingdom then nobody can
charge you. You are above the law. In the same
way nobody can touch or destroy you. Nobody
can hamper your progress. Nobody can harm me.
No Rakshasa can harm me, has never done so.
But it is you who can harm me. In this life I have
taken you into my body and I am working it out in
my body, your cleansing, which is a difficult task. In
the beginning only this power went to Adam and
Eve and told them that you must have the
knowledge. So that promise has to be fulfilled.
Now you should assume your powers, because
you have now crossed the limit and we are in the
10th position, Believe that you are Sahaja Yogis.
Believe that you have entered into the Kingdom of
God. You cannot judge God. But when you sit
there it is not an assembly ar like politiclans
fighting. It is that you have entered into the
Kingdom of God, blessed by God and looked
after,
knowledgable. But still this arrogance has to go
down. Humility is very important for us otherwise
this power cannot take you beyond. Now it has
crossed the Sahasrara and it has to go higher for
that you have to be humble. It is artificial humility.
That humbleness is within your heart. Let us know
ourselves. Then you will be amazed that he has
and made
nourished
protected,
In the West it is very difficult to make people
understand that they are a part and parcel of the
whole. They talk of big things. They are without any
destination saying that we are seeking. We have
Navaratil Puja 92
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-4.txt 
 to try to save as many as possible. Those who do
not want to come, there is no need for it. They
have to humnble down and ask for it, You have the
knowledge. With this knowledge you should be
Identified and know that you have this knowledge,
that it can be given to others and we can
transform this world intoa beautiful world to fulfil
the vision of Adi Shakti. She created you for this
purpose, brought you out form the human level to
this super human level for this purpose. Today If
you are worshipping me as Jagdamba then know
that the Jagdamba Itself is nothing else but Adi
Shakti.
Don't waste your energies in small things. Just think
you have to meditate and rise and you have to
give it to others: If you love yourself say See my
body, mind everything is given to me by God, how
beautiful it Is, and it will be used by God for such
a great purpose. You are moulded and made
upto this polint. With your free will you will have to
rise and understand what is to be done and how
to achleve that State. It is a nature's reaction to
things. Nature reacts to human beings. Nature has
no free will but God reacts then all these
colamitles come and people die of calamities.
May God Bless You.
The Divine Cool Breeze
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Shri Mataji's advice to Sahaja Yogis
19 Jan. 84, U.K.
understand that "What" part is left out is "now" to
There is no need for women to do all that men
have done or the whole energy will be cormpletely
wasted, The whole preparation has been made
for this Aquarian age to come in to bring in the
kundalini upward and to make the whole thing
work out in such a way that the left and right meet
and you all become Ignited, enlightened. It was a
question of our being, sharing the whole job in a
proper understanding. Now see how Mother Earth
herself was created. It isa very simple thing. First
the movement of the energy started flowing. Now
this is a combined energy: alright? Then the
combined energy went round and round like that.
and when it consolidated there was this big bang'
took place-now this is the manly work, I should say,
manly style, because still the Mother Earth is not
produced-so then these little fragments again
went round and round. With the momentum, they
became roundish. Out of them Mother Earth was
selected for one job. On the Mother Earth out of
the water came the life-the carbon came In.
be done.
So that part to be done is now Realisation, our
awakening of the Kundalini. For that your feminine
qualities are going to help you, not your masculine
qualities. So aggressiveness must be given up by
men. Also, because they are Sahaja Yogis now,
they have to take feminine qualities. Not of
fighting. If women fight they are not women. You
see, women are told that You are good for
nothing' so now they are trying to show, "No, we
are also alright, If you have eaten one crow we
will eat three" Now, this understanding and the
wise perception would be such that "What we
have to do now to change the 'mode' and the
'style' of our lives?. "What's wrong here? A turning
point has come. Now the evolution is not rebellion
at all by any chance. It's a wrong idea people
have. It's not that you hit me and I hit you-go on
hitting each other, like the movement of the
pendulum. It's not like a boom, that today you are
born as a Muslirm tomorrow you are born as a
Jew, then you are born as Hindu it's not a
pendulum. It a spiral movement. So every time you
achieve any evolution you are at a higher level
than before.
Everybody helped there and a human being was
created. Then the men went round, to improve
their societies; and whatever was possible with
their ego is done, finished now, they have done
their job. Now they are on the dole. Women have
to complete their part and go forward together.
Now, to achieve the 'higher' position in our whole
being what should we do? Is to understand that
from this point to that point we have to rise in a
way that we move not in a pendulum way but in
a spiral way. And to move spirally, you have to use
another kind of force. Whatever you have used so
far has to be endowed with another kind of force-
and that's the feminine qualities of women. But
where are the feminine women? They dress up as
women, that's not the way. From inside, from the
heart. A feminine heart. Christ showed that in His
life-He forgave. Only a women can forgive, man
cannot because he is aggressive. How can he
forgive? Krishna never forgave any one. He used
to kill. Right royal fashion. "So, alright, if you are so,
alright." - Done.
Now the women, or we can say the Kundalini.
which has been waiting all these years, was
resting, waiting for that time, isn't it? So we call it
"The blossom time has now come", At that time,
the Kundalini has to rise and ignite in such a way
that the completion of the whole world takes
place. It is simple. Do you understand now? So,
there's no competition between men and
women, but the style of work is different. If you
understand that, then only this kind of revolution
will take place, and not turn out a rebellion.
Actually women are rebelling against men, and a
nonsense it is. It is such a headache, that you
create something. allow them to grow, and
another party comes which has to complete the
job starts rebelling. So the revolution has to take
place and the revolution is only possible when we
Advice to Sahala Yogis
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Christ forgave to such an extent to show that he is
now giving a turn to the spiral, and now a
'feminine' quality has to be developed among
human beings.
All the problems have come out of the overgrowth
of masculinity overgrowth.
It reaches a certain point you see, it's reached
such a wretched point now, that it has to come
But that doesn't mean that you start walking like
women or developing waistlines, Because that's
another stupidity.
down.
You have to have love for 'every' Sahaja Yogi,
every person.
But to be 'Motherly'. Not to be fatherly, but to be
'Motherly'. "That kindness, 'that gentleness' should
be in you behaviour towards each other.
How to behave towards new seekers -
First you' think of being gentle, nice. embalming.
sweet. Let's think, find out ways and means.
Of course this force also corrects, sormetimes gets
angry also. Mother also has to get angry
sornetimes specially with people who never get
alright with their behaviour She has to be
shouting, punishing and sometimes. She also
destroys. It's alright. But that is sometimes, not all
the time. So Just now one has to accept that to be
like Mother Earth they have to be for bearing-
Dhara'. She is the sustenoance of 'everything' She
takes everything, the vibrations are suocked in And
now, for the first time, afler Realisation, you can
give Her back what you have got - ftom Her. You
can give vibrations to Her trees that are created,
you can make them beautiful. You con fransform
a flower into a more beautiful flower. Now
whatever you have to give-what you have got
from Mother Earth - you can give, because 'your
Mother Earth is awakened in you now. So you
return Her back everything that you got from Her.
and give it to others. "Generosity. the greatness of
heart, nobility, forgiveness, love, affection, beating
'everything' for love", Anc for the Mother, to save
her chilld, she'll starve herself, do everything to
Save her child - complete declication she has fo
her child. That's a real Mother - Imedn, the kind of
mothers you see these days, neither they are
mothers nor women. But what I am saying, that's
the real image of a mather, and you have an
Image before you.
There's a very good way, in the evening, to write
down : "How many sweet things I've sald today I"
Not like this, sweet things we say - "You're looking
beautiful" and all that. Not the supeilicial ones.
That may pamper the ego, But they are so sweet
you know, things are.
There are so many words you can say, like :
"Are you wam enough ? very sweet way of
asking a question.
Il's very difficult for people to say that even, I've
seen. Looking afiet other's comforts. Somebody is
sitting, he wants water. You just go rush and give
him water.
"Oh, that's too much to expect. Oh Godl You
gave waterl" *I'm not your servant"- Immediately
the question comes into the head. Little bit trying
to do sornething here and there.
Or sometimes thinking-going in the market, you
find something. "Ohl Let mne take it, for him "Well
then, 'do'.
I've seen children 'all" the fime they think of their
friends - what they can buy for others. "This is good
for my triend-
You have to have love for 'every' Sahaja Yogi,
This is what you have to develop now, whether
you are men or women, as Sahaja Yogis you must
develop a (new consciousness) of affection, love
and compassion. Getting ongry, getting into a
temper, shouting at people - this is not going to
help you much. If you have to help the Whole, the
growth of the Whole, try to make yourself a milder
person - be angry with yaurself that you are losing
tempers and you are so unkind to others.
every person,
He's very fond of things, he likes this. All these little
things: Do all these little, little things for each other,
you know. Sornetimes even small things like: early
in the morning you get up. you find another
person is sleeping on one side, his blanket on the
third side and his pillow on the fourth side. So you
Just put his head on the pillow and cover him with
the blanket. That's Mother's job, Not out of fear,
The Divine Cool Breeze
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Inever say fight the ego, but surrender it.
but out of 'sheer' love.
it is the only way your ego can go.
Like even if it is cold and buttons are open, you
can button up a person, Little, little things, you
know.
For example, you see people come down here,
for Sahaja Yoga. Now they have other interests
and other priorities and other things which are very
important to them. All the time, they are wasting
their time for that and then they will say that,
"Mother, we are not progressing very much in
Sahaja Yoga".
Women have very little sweet things which they do
which make men very happy. But women have
lost now that sense.
Not the fighting, but thinking what sweet thing you
can do.
If you decide, that 'we have to do Sahaja Yoga
first and other things are secondary' then only the
Sahaja Yoga can be really established into you.
To overcome ego, to be a Sahaja Yogi, how much
Identified you should be with the truth of Sahaja
Yoga. Now it is for you to receive, imbibe into it
and you have to change the whole thing. That is
your job and that is why it is a serious matter.
Do not tespect false saints. Beat them with shoes.
Get up in the morning and do meditation. Here,
even to get up in the morning people grudge.
The second point: lalways have been saying that
due to ego problem, we are very much
disintegrated. We are so disintegrated that, the
connection with the Divine is never properly
established. As I have said it, that this instrument
(through whlch I am speaking), if it is divided into
five parts and all the five parts are fighting with
each other., you cannot get anything done
through this instrument, though it is connected to
the mains.
We must understand that, we have a very great
responsibility in the West.
Because this has to happen in London. It has to
happen in England to begin with and that is why
you bear a very big responsibility. You have to
evaluate yourself and Sahaja Yoga again and
again and again and know that what makes you
SO slow is your ego, or even super-ego is there, no
doubt.
In the same way if you still remain disintegrated,
you cannot get that connection.
But ego is the main problem. Try to see your ego,
how it is deviating. Because it is your own joy that
you are seeking. It is your own, that is hidden from
you, which you have been seeking for ages.
We will have some Sahaja Yogis of a very high
level.
Now that is what I have to expose to you.
I know that we will have some of mediocre level.
What is there to argue with a person who is trying
to give you the highest? It is just a waste of energy.
Do not waste your energy on the these frivolous
things and finding faults.
Some will be absolutely useless and some will be
absolutely thrown out.
We will have all types, that also I know.
Now it is for you to decide, where do you come?
Did you have anybody complaining, anybody
quarrelling or
themselves? Nothing of the kind.
anybody fighting amongst
How far are you going to? If you are going to
waste your time in thinking about other Sahaja
Yogis and small, small things and frivolous things,
your disintegtation is going to be increased, you
are going to be separated much more, as all
these decisions are taken through your ego, e.g. "I
don't like it, I don't do it, I don't see it, and the like.
You see, this is not the sign of intelligence either, all
the time trying to find faults with each other or
trying to blame yourself. Both things are wrong.
The best is to grow in wisdom and yourself. See
that we are becoming wiser and wiser. Some of
you are really very grown up and some of you still
go up and down and some of you are still very
low.
IF you could somehow of other see your ego
working, then you can get rid of it and that is the
thing one has to do not to fight the ego.
Advice to Sahaja Yogis
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-8.txt 
 belong to the bigger thing, the biggest of all, the
Primordial, the highest, to the Viratal If you realise
your importance then you will work It out.
So, all of us have to go together.
If somebody has achieved sormething, it is of no
use to Sahaja Yoga. As I have told you, it is the
collective thing. That is going to work and all of
you have to work it out.
And certain things definitely have gone wrong
with us, we know that, we should understand
them. Because these are the troubles of our own.
over-thinking and our over-reading and over-
domination. But we coan get rid of them very
easily. It is Jjust to detach yourself and see for
yourself addressing yourself - "Now Mister how are
you?". If you will say like that, immediately your
attention will go through yourself to see your outer
being. That is very important. The more you see
yourself clearly, the better it is.
It is so sweet that you have real brothers and sisters
all aver the world today. When you will go there
with a full heart, they are going to receive you, as
you have recelved them, with full heart. But we all
must come up to a point, where we can face
each other with full love, with openness, without
worry or fear of anyone but just say that they are
your brothers and you are their brothers and that
you have to love them.
You have to face yourself. And you do not want to
face - because you are afraid of facing yourself.
Because you have been aggressing others and
you are afraid of aggressing in the way that is
towards yourself.
You have to love your brothers and sisters in
Sahaja Yoga. That is only possible when we get
out of our fears here because there is also another
side to it that ego always has fears. Because it
aggresses others, and that it knows others can
aggress it. So this is a point we have got to think
about that never will fetch you in any way.
Despise yourself, never Il You are saints. You must
know that. You are realised souls in this world. How
many there are, who can raise the Kundalini? How
many there are, who understand what is
vibrations?
But there would not be any aggression-because
that is the perfect state where you see yourself.
Neither you aggress any-one nor
aggressed by any-one. You just see yourself
clearly, and that is what you have to see.
or you gre
Gradually you start seeing your chakras, seeing
your problems and you know that's how it
gradually develops. But everybody wants quick
results. If you are not be patient with yourself. Not
with me, but with yourself. If you are patient with
yourself, this is the long promised thing which you
will get.
How your chakras are awakened through Sahaja
Yoga. Yes, it has happened. But what are you
doing about it?
This is the greatest of the greatest things which can
happen to any-one that you know.
Also you know, this is the greatest happening.
which was prophesied long time back as the 'last
judgement'.
But you must learn to be patient with yourself and
not to be angry with yourself not to debase
yourself, not to aggress yourself onto others. It is a
very simple thing, the simplest thing to do; but
because of our complex life and our complicated
thinking, we have becorne quiet entwined up into
things. It can easily be got out of and slipped out
of without any difficulty. I know you can do it. So
forget about all these things like my father, my
sister, my brother.
You know that this is the way, you are going to be
judged.
So, we have to work very hard. We have to work.
It is effortlessly given to you, ailright. But to maintain
it, keep it up to go high, we have to religiously
work it out. It is a very humble attitude in receiving
more and more into your being, imbibing into your
being. Let it trickle into your brain completely
covering it. Let that eternal bliss come into you.
All these problems will be burnt in no time.
As soon as your life runs straight, everything will be
burnt away. Nothing will be left-but your light-and
others who will come to you for enlightenment.
Do not make yourself a small petson. Have a
bigger vision. Have bigger ideas because now you
know that you are golng to have
a big day for a
The Divine Cool Breeze
10
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Guru Puja (2 Dec. 1979); and before that I have to
request you to prepare yourself.
of evolution and of higher life, a plethora of
spurious people have come out making it well
nigh impossible (difficult), to convince any-one of
the existence of truth.
I may do something great.
But I must have a proper recipient, so that you
must prepare yourself. Think about it.
Sometimes I feel that I have developed a unique
method by which I can give realisation en mass all
over the world. But it really poses a problem for me
if the masses are not interested. In fact, it is only
very few who take a keen interest in their
evolutionary process and would like to come ut
of their ignorance in which they have been living.
in all the ego-oriented countries it is very difficult to
bring home the truth that we are still ignorant. We
have to know a lot. It is very difficult because they
think they know every-thing, because they have
been to the moon. The Russians, for instance, still
say that they saw no God when they orbited in
space, which is like saying that one has been to
the third floor but hasn't seen the top.
Are you in love with everyone? Just to think that
you love every-one is so greatl Because I always
think how much I have to love. You see so much
love I have, always to give to others. Just think how
great it is to love others. You know how people
treat me sometimes. Terrible, is it not? I sill love
them. I enjoy playing with them.
As I love, in the same way you should love, and
love is the thing that is going to unfold beautifully
like a lotus, you see : opens out petals and
beautiful fragrance starts flowing.
In the same way, your heart will open out and the
fragrance of love will spread throughout the world.
Where does God reside? Where does He manifest
within us ? In what manner does He manifest? We
do no know what to see. What we want to see is
possible only through our effort. "If we have not
been able to see God, then He does not exist" This
is how we develop our attitude in this matter, But
better say 'no' to all that we did not know through
our effort. Because we have not known about
Him. So He does not exist. You turn round in a
cave. So when you see a shadow of your-self you
belleve in that only and say "Nothing else existed".
The light does not exist. That kind of attitude I have
persistently been facing. And sometimes I do not
know how to give them realisation. Now you have
to start the other way way round. You have to
seek. You have to ask for it. Nobody is going to fall
at your feet and say "Well, you get your
realisation." You have this, for Heaven's sake,
please have it" Because nothing is selling here.
It will ring into you. I know it can happen. The
Sooner the better and the choice is your own
which you have to make-your cholce.
I am very happy because, such a beautiful song
to hear and just before Christmas, which is a very
big thing for me. You know that and in the same
way we are having another Christmas now.
Christmas to celebrate a new Christ bon within us.
Let us prepare for His coming, and how you
prepare is not by running away from yourself, not
by getting into frivolous things; but by working it
out, beautifully cleansing. Cleansing has to be
done if the Self has to be established in the temple
of this being.
May God bless you all.
In today's talk I will dwell on the essence of Sahaja
Yoga. First of all we need to understand that we
are passing through an extremely serious time,
pregnant with unpredictable consequences.
You are used fo salesmanship, that is, if anything is
selling you have to be persuaded or requested.
You can save pounds for a sale and all that. But
nothing is for sale here. This is a very difficult thing
for people to understoand. In this present
atmosphere, where we do not know if we can get
anything which is not for sale. Somehow, we have
to work very hard, Sornetimes it is very frustrating
and sometimes so stupid-the way people react.
Like the other day when we had a meeting at
Brighton I was laughing all the while. It is so sad. A
gentle-man who came to our programme made
When we look at life we do not seem to
understand that if we miss this opportunity that has
come our way, for our evolution, we will not only
be depriving ourselves of it-or this country.
England, but also it will be a stupendous loss for
the whole of creation.
The trouble, however, is that in the name of God,
Advice to Sahaja Yogis
11
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-10.txt 
 complaints. Look, who has got time to put him on
video; who is interested in taking his
photograph? He says he is a managing director.
So what? In the presence of the Divine what is
managing director or what is even a King? Just
think of it. Who is he? What does he think of
himself? He has complained against us. Even the
laws are so stupid some-times that one con hardly
understand. I feel so much mud is going to cover
their brains that they may not receive their
realisation.
Whatever you have known Is through
awareness. and in your awareness you have
come to know. The awareness has to be
enlightened. It is not what you know but human
awareness vwhich has still to grow. It involves such
a lot of journey even after our realisation.
It takes no time, sometimes, to give realisation to
so many people. I know it has happened with so
many. But they do not know what they have to
achieve. The ego is such a horrible stuff the
people do not want to see what they haven't got
with them, what they have to have and what they
They may miss it.
deserve.
Actually the Divine does not know what human
beings have created. Really I tell you, the Divine is
in the dark as to all the nonsense that you have
created around you. All kinds of nonsense you
have created out of your ignarance, out of your
ego, and out of the choice that you had. I can't
explain why people have created this kind of because then there
ignorance which cannot be broken of removed.
Because you are so much identifled with it. It is like
a stuck up stamp which refuses to come off. And
when such a thing happens you feel "O Godl" The
whole creation has been created the whole
working has taken place and the human beings
have grown so well having reached this stage. But
now in this modern life which you are leading - you
find them so stupid and foolish. that they have
begun deluding others with their stupidity and
foolishness. How are we to approach those
people who are true seekers? Those who have
been seekers for ages? All their lives before have
been lost. Sometimes it is very disappoinling. But
still, hoping agalnst hopes, I hope we reach all the
comers of the universe, where we find all people
who are true seekers. It is their power to know the
Divine.
They do not want to see that beauty, that llght.
that is the spirit. The reflection of God's love is the
most precious thing you could think of. In England
progress hoas been very slow.
been disoppointed if it was at the time of Christ,
I would not have
were very few seekers.
Actually even the close disciples that Christ
collected were not true seekers. You are seekers
of truth.
So many of you have taken to this path just to
pursue the truth. But where are we going? What
are we doing about it all? What are our ideas
about the truth? is it that our ideas are but by
product of our ego? Is it that we do not want to
seek the truth? I have met all kinds of people in this
country who occupy important positions, lords,
ladles and host of others. They ask "Who wants to
change?" Because they think they are the
greatest. Born thus, they hope to cary their
lordship and their possessions with them to
heaven? When they say "Who wants to change?"
What can be said? -except that they have
reached the dead-end, the full stop from which
no further journey is possible.
It is the power of all true seekers to know the
Divine. It is not for those who are managing
directors, or kings or something!
Now this, Imust say, can work out only with people
who are seekers who want to know, through their
awareness, what is the truth, You have to know
your Spirit, for without knowing your Spirit you
cannot know the truth and whatever I talk to you
is a complete waste of time. Because you haven't
got the awareness today, to know the truth, I am
talking about. So, I must earnestly ask you to
"become' the Spirit. Why should you hesitate to do
what you are told so that you will get your
realisation? You have to become the Spirit first.
Unless and until this awareness is enlightened, you
What does it matter in the presence of God? They
would be pushed out. They will not be allowed to
enter the kingdom of God. That kingdom is only for
those who have known. Not for those who simply
talk about God. Those who say that we are
worshippers of God and we have learned so
much it will be said "That is well, then go back to
the place from where you have come"
The Divine Cool Breeze
12
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-11.txt 
 cannot see. It is like describing the nature of
colours to a blind man. You have to apen your
eyes. Even this people find difficult, they have
become nalve, they don't know what it is, and
also they do not have any inclination to
understand. Now, you see a tree standing there
and somebody has told you that there are roots
but you do not believe it because they are not
visible. Why not try to find out? Supposing
somebody says "Whatever are out-side, thati
much more are inside". So why not see why should
I put a barrier to seeing?, if that is going to give the
best in the world, if it is going to give an inkling of
that beautiful thing called the Spirlt. Why should
we not have It? You don't have to pay for it, not
even exert for it. You don't have to do anything.
things which are useless and nonsensical what am
I to do about it? But this is something innate and
does not work with people who do not have pure
desire. This has been written down since long; it
cannot be changed; it cannot be forced,
explained, discussed or argued about. Nothing
can be done; it has to work out from within. Even
if you have worked it out on some-one, you may
not achleve the results.
So, when the situation is difficult and the children
are also so adamant-what can Mother do. Push
them in? I am very much concerned, because this
ego which sometimes is selfish and conceived,
salisfies itself and is very happy. It (the ego) will not
allow you to get to the point where you really
stand, where you have all you powers and where
you are the master of being.
But you must desire. This is the point I am trying to
make. It you do not desire it from your own heart,
God
The identification with the ego is so much that it is
easy to take a bull by the horns but to take an
ego-oriented man to the practices of Sahaja
Yoga is very difficult.
God is not going to fall at your feet, imploring
"Please desire me".
And if you understand that you have to really
desire it because it is such a desirous thing, that
must tell you that this kundalini is the Pure Desire
within you. It is not yet manifested, not yet
awakened, in the sense that it has not yet acted.
Imagine how important it is. You should have the
desire to be one with the Divine, to be one with
your Spirit.
Today I am rather disgusted with the ego-oriented
people, but other moods also corne-the moods of
compassion and tremendous love.
I should do something to bring sense to these
people. Something should happen to them,
otherwise, what I see is a complete disaster. It is
going to happen. I do not want to frighten you like
Mrs. Thatcher does about the Russians. That might
be imaginary. But this is real. I am warning you that.
the disaster is going to come as destruction itself.
But the greatest thing is the failure of the desire,
that is could not communicate with you-who are
chosen specially in order to bring the Kingdom of
Heaven. But suddenly you will find that they have
all fallen into a sieve without a way out. The
Sahaja Yogis too feel frustrated at times. Whatever
it is. as far as I am concerned they have
tremendous desire. But I am so desireless that the
desire may not always work out.
The desire has to be strong, if not, then you would
be challenging the Kundalini, that is, you turn anti-
Kundalini. Then the Kundalini would not rise.
Sometimes you have to take it upon yourself for
going into and discovering the truth, It is you who
have to find it out. For example, I say this is a place
which has lots of diamonds or a cave in which
there is a lot of gold. The gold is not going to come
to you. You have to go to the cave to get it. It is
as simple. I am not saying you have to walk
towards. You have to desire and desire from your
heart. It is impossible for me to raise your Kundalini
if you do not desire it, because Kundalini itself is
the pure desire. What can I do about it? Can I
force it? You cannot push it out. If you want to
have seed planted you have to put it in the
mother earth. You cannot take
pleces. If that pure desire is not there, then I am
breaking my head against the wall, So, it is
important to understand that you must have that
desire which is the highest. If you are satisfied with
You see, I am a desireless person. So, I ask the
Sahaja Yogis to desire, so that people will have the
great desire to become the Spirit. This is the
greatest thing that we can give to our brothers
and sisters, fo the people, to the chilldren, to the
beautiful light and to the beautiful time they all
have to enjoy.
it out in bits and
I hope those who come for the first time will
Advice to Sahaja Yogis
13
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-12.txt 
 growth of spirituality starts, after thoughtless
awareness, not before. One should know that. On
rational plane you cannot grow in Sahaja yoga.
understand my difficulty, and try to see that you
should desire only your self-realisation and nothing
else. Just desire that, and forget about everything
else-even if you are a managing director or a kind.
So, first thing is to establish your thoughtless
awareness: still you might feel little chakra
blockages here and there; forget it. Just forget it.
Keep all your shoes outside and Just desire your
Spirit. I have to see that you all get your realisation
somehow. It is like a Mother's desire, to give a bath
to the baby and get him cleansed.
Now, start your surrendering. Now if a chakra is
catching, you should say: "Mother, I surrender this
to you". Instead of doing any of these things you
can just say that. But, that surrendering should not
be rationalised.
worrying-" why should I say this?", it will never work
out. If there's pure love and purity in your heart
that's the best thing: that to do so is to surrender.
Leave all the worries to your Mother. Everything to
your Mother.
So, which-ever you like-whether to be desolate or
like to receive a rebuke-l am willing to work it out.
If you're still rationalising and
But at least ensure that you desire to get your
realisation.
May God bless you.
In the morning you get up, have your bath, sit
down take some tea; don't talk.
But surrendering is one point that is very difficult in
ego-orlented societies. Even taiking about that, I
feel a little bit worried. But if there's any thoughts
coming in to you or any chakra catching, just
surrender, And you'll see that the chakras are
cleared up. in the morning time you do not go on,
putting this way, that way, nothing don't move
your hands too much in the morning. You'll find
most of your chakras will clear out in the
meditation. Try to put love in your heart. Just try in
your heart, and there, try to put your Guru, in the
cote of it.
Don't talk in the morning. sit down.meditate.
because at that time the Divine rays come in, the
sun comes afterwards.
That's how the birds get up. That's how the flowers
get up. They're all awakened by that, and if you
are sensitive you will feel that by getting up in the
morning, you will look at least ten years younger.
Really, it's such a good thing to get up in the
moming and then, automatically you sleep early.
This is for getting up, for sleeping I need not tell
because that you'll manage yourself. Then, in the
morning time you should just meditate.
After establishing in the heart, we must bow to
that with full devotion and dedication.
Now whatever you do with your mind after
realisation is not Imagination because now your
mind, your imagination, is itself Enlightened.
In meditation try to stop your thoughts.
Watch my photograph with open eyes and see
that you stop your thoughts. You should stop your
thoughts, then you go into meditation. The simple
thing to stop your thoughts is the Lord's Prayer,
because that's the Agnya state.
So project yourself in such a way that you humble
down at the feet of your Guru, your Mother.
And now ask for the necessary temperament
needed for meditation. Meditation is when you
ore One with the Divine. Specific problems on
Meditation.
So In the morning you remember the Lord's Prayer
or Ganesha's mantra. It's just the same. Or you
can even say " I forgive ".
Now if there are thoughts coming in first you have
to say the first mantra, of course, and then watch
inside. You must say the mantra of Ganesha, will
help some people, and then you should watch
inside and see for yourself which is the biggest
hurdle.
It works out. Then you are in thoughtless
awareness. Now you meditate. Before that there's
no meditation. When thoughts are coming or "I
have to take tea] What shall I do?", Now what
have I to do?", "Who's this and Who's that", all
this will be there.
First the thought... Now for the thought you have
So first you become thoughtlessly aware, then the
The Divine Cool Breeze
14
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-13.txt 
 to say the mantra of NIRVICHARA:
inside for a while.
Now come to the hurdle of our ego. You see the
thought has stopped now no doubt, but there is
still a pressure on the head. So if it is ego you have
to say: Mantra of mahat ahamkara
Hold it. Bring it our. Hold out. Then keep it outside
for a while. Then again. Then you'll find that for a
while you will not breathe You're settled now. The
LAYA takes place between your PRANA and your
MANA. Both the Shaktis become one. Now at the
Sahasrara you should say the mantra of Sahasrara-
thrice:
MAHAT means the great, AHAMKARA means the
ego. You say it thrice. Now, even now, you find
that ego is still there, then you have to raise your
left side to push it back to the right side, With your
left hand towards the photograph, push the left
side higher and the right side lower so the ego and
the super-ego get the balance. Do it seven times.
Try to see how you are feeling Inside, you see.
Some people start feeling the awareness of that
unbounding love as soon as they get their
realisation.
But, in some people they have some more ego-trip
left to be finished. So, they come to me. I find they
are flying in the air like the bubbles and as if blown
by the nourishing Mother-blown out like the
bubbles on the surface af the sea. And there are
many who are suffering from super-ego. They get
mixed up with the sand and become very heavy
and all the time weeping and crying about
personal things. But, once the thing clicks they
become one with the spirit of the ocean.
So once you have given yourself a balance, then,
the best thing is to pay attention to your emotions,
to MANAS SHAKTI. Watch them. You can enlighten
your emotions, by thinking of your Mother. Right?.
Just enlighten them.
This solves all the problems. Whatever are the
problems in the MANA, So, once you are
connected to those emotions and you start
looking at them in your meditation you will see
these emotions are rising within you, and if you try
to put these emations on your Mother, (as they say
at the Lotus Feet of your Mother) those emotions,
will start dissolving and they'l become sort of,
expanded. You will extend them in such a way
that you will feel you are in control of them and by
controlling those emotions your emotions are
expanded, enlightened and powerful.
Then they feel that deep, joyous force of the sea
which nourishes them, guides them, and elevates
them every moment.
Like deep down in the sea they go and there they
find the beautiful pearls of eternal experiences.
And when they find these pearls they bring to me
as poems, as dances, as smiles, as laughter, as
enjoyment. These are all within you, and they lie
there away from your consciousness.
Now what you do is to watch your breathing. Try
to reduce your breathing: reduce it, in the sense
that you have breathed out, wait for a while, then
breath in. For a long time. Then you breath our. So
during one minute your breathing will be less than
normal. Alright? Try that, keep the attention on the
emotions you see?. So that the connection is
established.
Though your consciousness is enlightened by self-
realisation it is not yet enlightened by joy. That is,
something happens to all of you gradually, and
should happen to all of you as soon as possible.
What is there to surrender-the force that itself is
flowing towards you and nourishing.
Do we say the lotus has surrendered Itself to It's
fragrance? Do we say the sun has surrendered
itself to it's brilliance? Do we say that the moon
has surrendered itself to it's coolness? It would be
absurd to say like that.
See the Kundalini rises. Now when you are
breathing, you find that there is a space in-
between which you just leave vacant. Breath in.
Keep it there. Now breath our and keep breathing
out. Now breath in. Now start breathing in such a
way that you really reduce your breathing-but no
exertion about it.
The word "surrender" sometimes can mean only,
at the most, in the context of Sahaja Yoga that we
surrendered
shallowness, what we have achieved is our own.
limitations,
egos,
our
our
our
Your attention should be on your heart or if could
be on your emotion. It's better to keep the breath
Advice to Sahaja Yogis
15
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-14.txt 
 blessed with it. You are loved by it. You are gently
guided by it. It's so gentle that you do not even
feel the guidance-like a leaf, when it falls on the
ground- Try to become identified with that power-
that is what you are. Like the meaning of the word
is identified with the word, like ihe moonlight is
identified with the moon, sunlight is identified with
the sun.
We have surrendered ail that is useless for
something that is great and eternal. This weight of
the ignorance has to drop out. I don't think I do
anything, because I'm really doing nothing.
Sormetimes I think this is not my due to be praised
like this, because what ever is my nature that is
what I am. And I haven't achieved anything-l just
exist with my nature because I can't do anything
else. While you have achieved. It's great credit lo
you-that you have achieved this enlightenment to
see yourself. your true Self which is so joy giving. I
do my best to show by my own methods how the
Divine is pleased. And you see that everywhere.
every fime, every moment.
Let that identification be that one-ness, that
integration, so that you become the light of God's
love, that people know God through your depths
and your fruits. It's the most fulfilling job, highest
paid in every way, the most satisfying, energy-
giving and dynamic. You don't have to give up
anything-just be organised in the light of your Spirit
yourself. I will tell you a few things about
meditation.
Tonight we all should say one thing in our hearts
that this bountiful nature of motherhood should be
brought into our consciousness, which I have told
you is called Ritambhara Pragnya. Means your
consciousness gels enlightened ta that nature of
this Mother earth-which fillis it up with different
seasons -that is pragnya.
When your heart is so full, the words are too poor
to carry the intensity. I wish you could understand
that intensity through your heart. It's all been
arranged, 1 think, by the Divine, that we should
meet here all of us in such a wonderful
surrounding, in the Nature, that something great
should happen to all of us. That we should achieve
something really great this time.
That happens to everyone I said, but it happens
more to people who try to be in the centre and
don't go on ego-trips.
Now it is high time to jump from that little area to
the vast area which has no bounds.
Meditation is a very general word. It is not a word
that explains all the three steps one has to take for
meditating. But in Sanskrit language they have
very clearly said, how you have to move in your
meditation.
And once that happens you will be surprised all
these petty little problems will drop out in the
ocean of greatness.
Don't indulge into them, and leave them in the
hands of the tree, So that all your small petty
problems will be looked after by that nourishing
force. Because you belong to a tree of great
wisdom, tree of great sustenance and religion,
and tree of great mastery that you can never
know how great it is. You belong to a tree that has
complete security for you, and you belong to a
very great tree which gives you complete
witnessing of the drama and which gives you
understanding that the whole is a part and parcel
of you, and you are part and parcel of the Whole.
First is called as Dhyana, and second is called as
Dharana, and the third is called as Samadhi.
Luckily Sahaja Yoga is sucha thing that you get
everything in a bundle. You avoided everything
else. You got the Samadhi part. That's the beauty
of it.
The first part of meditation is the Dhyana. First
when you have seeking, you put your attention
towards the object of your worship. That is called
as Dhyana. And the Dharana is the one in which
you put all your effort. Concentrate all your effort.
But this is all drama for people who are not
realised. For them it's just a sort of an acting that
they do. But for a realised soul it is a reality. So the
first, the Dhyana, you have to do. Some do it of
the form, another of the formless. But you are so
fortunate that the formless has become a form for
you. No problem, you don't have to go from form
So, you belong to the great ocean of love and
generosity.
This great tree of life has everything integrated
within itself. This is the tree of life that has been
described in the Bible, the tree of fire they call it.
Now you have becorne One with it. You are
The Divine Cool Breeze
16
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-15.txt 
 to formless, from formless to to form; it's oall there, in
a bundle. So you concentrate, or think of some
Deity, or some point for Nirakar, for the formless, or
of Nirakar itself. It's all a Tmental projection as long
as you are not a realised soul.
there; you read a book, in that book immediately
you find what is good for Sahaja Yoga. If there is
a book which is anti-God you discard it.
So the state that is awakened within you is called,
Is a new state of mind, in Sanskrit language it has
a very beautiful name, Ritambhara Pragnya,
which is a very difficult name. Ritambhara is the
name of the Nature, and that the whole Nature
one feels is enlightened.
But, once you are realised, you have just to think
of Dhyana, whom you are going to concentrate.
or you can say meditate on.
But once you start meditating on a peison your
attention starts moving. That is also possible after
realisation, though it is in a bundle; but some
people have it-part of it, like that.
I'll give an example; when a child is to be born,
the mothers start lactating, automatically. The
nature itself works out for the birth of the child.
In the same way, when this Ritambhara Pragnya
starts expressing itself, only for Sahaja Yoga,
nobody else, you are amazed how things work out
suddenly.
So when you meditate, still your attention can get
disturbed every moment.
It can happen, depending on the intensify of your
concentration. So, there are some Sahaja Yogis
I've seen, they are cooking, and there's another
one is meditating. The meditating one will say :
"Oh, I can snell it is burning".
So the Ritambhara Pragnya has started woiking in
your favour. You all tel me: this is a miracle, that
has happened Mother, and we don't know how it
has happened. I'll give you an example,
yesterday, we were doing something with cement
and the Italian boy said that we will need two
bags of cement. I said, "You carry on, it wan'
finish"
So there is no Dharana, Dhyana is there but not
Dharana. The Second part of it is very important,
that you have to put your attention continuously
on to your deity.
Then you develop a state which is called as
Dharana in which your attention becomes one,
with the Deity. But when these mature, the third
stage, of Samadhi, comes in.
Even before I was leaving, they were carrying on,
still not finished. Now cement of all the things,
imaginel So this special thing is your own state.
Where you are feeling one with Nature and the
Nature is feeling one-ness with you. So the Divine
itself is expressing through Nature, through various
happenings, through various incidents the love,
the protection, the attention that the Divine is
giving. And there's no end to it.
Now for people who think that without realization
they can reach Samadhi, I think they are
absolutely mistaken. But after realization also,
when the Dharana is established you have to get
to the position where you become Samadhi. Now,
what is that state? When that state comes into
your mind then whatever you do, the Deity that
you worship. you see that Deity in your work;
whatever you see, you see the Deity giving you
the show; you can put it like that.
It just happens, and people don't know how it
happens. But that is what is the state of Samadhi.
But there could be people if I tell them "Will you
do this?"
"Oh no Mother, the shop will be closed, "Oh, they
won't do it, that' not all right". They go on like that.
Whatever you hear, you find the Deity tellng you
the truth, Whatever you read, you find there what
the Deity would tell you. So, in that state, whatever
you do with your eyes, nose, and all these organs,
all that, becomes a kind of manifestation of the
Delty whom you worship, automatically.
And there are people who say (even if we think it
is shut)- "Nol Let's see, - if Mother has said, may
be".
I mean there are a thousand and one examples
like that. Today like some were trying to push the
bed. The three of them we were trying it would not
You don't have to think-now I must concentrate,
alright, I will not have these thoughts, I have to
now think about this. It becomes, automatically
17
Advice to Sahaja Yogis
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-16.txt 
 push. I said, "Alright, I'll push. I just put my Nabhi
there "just, I didn't push anything, it just pushedl -
because of the Ritambhara Pragnya.
to go higher. The level has to come up.
So those who are at the perlphery are a problem
definately for me. Because in my compassion, I
cannot throw them out. And we have to help
them come out, by redily, telling them that they
have to rise. How long are we to wait for them?
Every-one has to see that the peripheral people
are brought in properly, so that they don't go out
of Sahaja Yoga. Compassion is alright, But not at
the cost of keeping the level of Sahaja Yoga
lower, neverl.
This help is not the Chamtkar or anything. It exists
in the Divine, the capacity to manifest it's love to
show that you are the saints, you are chosen ones
of God. But you accept that situation first: but if
you behave like all other normal people Oh God,
shops are closed, and that man is sao difficult, and
I don't think it will happen. Never happen.
But you must know you are saints, chosen, and
given birth by Me, the Form and the Formless.
We have to raise the level of people who are very
well settled in Sahaja Yoga.
So this Pragnya is going to manifest, is manifesting
every moment Be prepared. Be happy. Welcome
it. And accept that you are there. The level is
different. Now the time has come for Sahaja Yoga
to change it's level. We have to change. We have
So everybody must try to settle down and come
up to minimum standards at leastl
Otherwise, I'm sorry, many will be seized out.
The Divine Cool Breeze
18
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Guru Puja - 81
Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Synopsis
Why is this Puja arranged?
not harming is taken to a point where reality
disappears: e.g. when it was said "Do not : harm
any-one", people started saying, "Alright we will
not harm mosquitoes and bugs and will not kill
therm."
One should know that it is very important for every
disciple to worship his Guru. But the Guru has to be
a real Guru, not a one who is just exploiting the
disciples and who is not authorised by God. A Puja
is arranged, because you have been initiated into
the Statutes of the LORD. You have been told
what are the DHARMAS of a human being. For
that actually you do not need a Guru. You can
read a book and know what are the statues of the
LORD. But Guru has to see that you practice them.
These statues are to be practised to be brought
into your own life, which is a difficult thing and
without a Guru, a correcting force, it is very
difficult to follow thee statues of the LORD.
Because, there is a very big gap betweenn human
awareness and Divine awareness and that gap
can only be filled by a Guru, who himself is
complete.
And there are some people who are following
religians in which they preserve mosquitoes and
bugs, This is an absurdity. Taking anything to
absurdity, cannot be reality,
First of all we should not harm any-one who is
walking in the path of God, the one who is a
realised soul. There may be some mistakes in him.
He may need correction. Nobody is perfect as yet.
So do not harm. Always try to help. Secondly,
anybody who is a real seeker, he may be wrong.
He might have gone to wrong Gurus, he might
have done wrong things. But have feelings for
them-because you have been going on wrong
path yourself sometimes. You have been misled
before, so have some sympathles. That is why if
you have done mistakes - in a way it is good,
because you have more sympathies for such
people. Then you are not to harm human beings
in any way, you are not to cause them any bodiily
harm. Or any emotional upsetting just for harm's
sake, for correction it is alright.
Today is PURNIMA, which means a complete
moon. A Guru has to be a complete personality to
talk about these Statuettes and to elevate his
disciples to this level of understanding by which
they imbibe those Statutes. He is here to fulfill this
gap and for that it is essential that every Guru has
to be a realized soul of a very high quality and
greatly evolved. He need not be a person who is
an ascetic or a person who is living In a forest. He
could be a common householder. He could be d
king. All these outward manifestations of one's life
do not matter, whatever may be your position, I
would say the so-called position in this world,
makes no difference to your being a Guru as long
as you have imbibed the Statutes of the LORD.
The second statute is that you have to stand on
your own legs. And know that you are here one
with the truth, the testimony of Truth, that you have
seen the Truth. You know what the truth is, and you
cannot compromise with false-hood. You just
cannot. For that you need not harm any-one. You
have just to profess it. You have to stand up and
say that you have seen the Truth and this is the
Truth, and you have to be one with it so that
people see that light of truth in you and they
accept it.
Again I say you have to imbibe the Statutes of the
LORD. Let us see what are the Statutes. The first is,
*You cannot do harm to any-one. If you go near
a snake he'l bite. If a scorpion is there he'll put his
polson into your being.
Test yourself. It is not for telling others that you
have to be truthful and this is the Truth we have
seen and this is what God's laws are, how they
work out.
Humans are not to harm any-one.
They can correct but not harm. But the principle of
Guru Puja 81
19
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-18.txt 
 Through vibatory awareness we have been able
to see that this is the Truth. But be completely
confident about it.
difference between a realized soul and a non-
realized soul is basically this: He does not talk of
woes and his separation with God. He says "I have
found it now, THIS IS IT like Christ said, "I AM THE
LIGHT, I AM THE PATHT Or anybody else can claim
that, but you can make out that it is not the Truth.
But for that, first of all, you must test yourself
completely otherwise you might be playing into
the hands of evil. It happens with many people
who start dolng Sahaja Yoga in the beginning.
They have to receive vibrations. So be cautious.
with that complete
With
the confidence,
understanding coming out of your people can
make out, "This is absolute Truth, and then all kinds
of falsehood must be denounced. Doesn't matter
if some-one feels bad, because, by telling that,
you are saving them and not harming them. But,
must be told in a correct way not in a frivolous
way. In a very persuasive way, you must tell them
that this is wrong. You must wait for the time when
you can tell people, more in confidence. Tell them
"This is wrong, it is wrong, you don't know. We
have done the same thing'
Be sure that you are telling the Truth and nothing
else and that you have felt the Truth in full ways.
Those who have not felt the vibrations, should not
talk of Sahaja Yoga. They have no authority. They
have to receive vibrations. They have to fully
Imbibe within them and then they can say "Yes,
we felt."
This is a very important task Sahaja Yogis have to
do in these modern times, l.e. to tell aloud that
they have found the Truth. That part is very weak.
This is how you are going to express your principle
of Mastery. - or you can say "GURU TATWA*
In whatever way you like you can announce the
Truih. You can write books, you can talk to your
friends, relations and tell them : "This is the Truth
now -
you have to be truthful.
First and foremost thing is that YOU SHOULD KNOW
THE TRUTH AND STAND THE TESTIMONY AND THAT
AND YOU SHOULD ANNOUNCE IT.
That you have entered into the kingdom of God.
That you been blessed by the Grace of God".
The third thing, to become a Guru, a Sahaja Yogi
has to do is to develop DETACHMENT.
Now you can announce the Truth.
Gradually you do develop it because you find
That you cra realised souls, that you have felt this
Divine power which is prevailing everywhere. That
you con give realization to others and know that,
by your accepting the Truth, you are not adding
anything to the Truth - but you are adoring
you develop that
unless and until
that
detachment, you are not receiving vibration in full
way, All kinds of detachments have to be
developed, means your priorities change. Once
your attention gets fixed up with your spirit, the
catch or the hold on things which are of no
Importance starts reducing by itself, e.g. you have
a father anda mother and a sister. This is a bigger
problem in India.
yourself.
One requires courage to enjoy the Truth.
Sometimes people may mock at you, laugh at
you, and persecule you also, but that should not
be any worry to you, because your relationship is
with the Statutes, with the Grace of God.
Here you are over detached. But in India, people
are very much involved in their own children "This
is MY son" and others are orphans. Only your sons
and daughters are the real children. "My
daughter, I must do this for My son, My father, My
When that is your connection, you should not
worry about other people, and what they have to
say about it.
mother".
You have to stand up, adorn yourself with that
Truth, and talk to people and people will know
that you have found it.
Two types of attachment are there, one through
Moha-involvement into that. That you want to do
this for them, that for them, want to give them
property, have insurance for them and every sort
of thing.
With that authenticity with which you speak
people will know that you have found it. The
The Divine Cool Breeze
20
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-19.txt 
 And another could be the other way, as we have
here. (London)
For example, in a tree, say the sap rises, goes to all
the necessary parts, all the flowers, all the fruits,
then goes back to Mother Earth.
You hate your father, you hate your mother, you
hate every-one. Both things are just the same. So
DETACHMENT must be developed.
It is not attached to any-one. Supposing, the sap
goes and gets attached into one fruit. What will
happen? The fruit will die and the tree will die.
The DETACHMENT is: that you are your father, you
are your mother, you are everything.
DETACHMENT GIVES YOU THE MOVEMENT OF YOUR
LOVE, CIRCULATION OF YOUR LOVE.
ONLY YOUR SPIRIT Is EVERYTHING to you, only your
spirit you HAVE TO ENJOY, then the detachment
comes from them, then you really do good to
them, because, by detaching you see the
complete vision about them and about what is to
be done.
Things have no value unless and until there are
ermotions behind it. For example, the sari I am
wearing today, was bought for Guru Day, Guru
Purnima. But they had no sari. The other day, they
wanted to have sari for Puja. Then I sald if you insist
I may have., but I wore it today just to say that this
was bought with that devotion, that love that on
Guru Day, Mother would like to wear something of
a lighter shade: white the pure colour of silk-
complete detachment.
Attachment to crazes. For example people have
attachment with some crazes. Human beings
always become crazy about something. I mean it
can be anything.
One has to understand that there should be only
one craze I.e. to be SETTLED, ABSOLUTELY SETTLED,
IN YOUR SPIRIT.
But in white all the colours are mixed, then only it
becomes white, such a balance and unity it is.
It should be that you should become white and
whiter than snow.
All other crazes will disappear because it is the
greatest joy-giving thing.
DETACHMENT IS PURITY, IS INNOCENCE.
That's the most nourishing thing, that's the most
beautiful thing.
INNOCENCE IS SUCH A LIGHT, LIGHT THAT REALLY
BLINDS YOU TO ALL THAT IS FILTHY.
So all the olher things fall off, you enjoy only that
which is the source of all enjoyment.
You would not even know that a person has come
with bad intentions. A person comes to you, to
steal. You'll say : "Come along, what do you
want? You'll offer him tea and all that then he says
"I have come to rob you" - "alright, tob me, if you
want to" So he might not rob you at all. That is
what is innocence, which one may develop, only
through DETACHMENT. DETACHMENT IS OF THE
ATTENTION. Do not allow your attention to involved
into something, even rituals of anything. Say, now
we have now washed MATAJI's FEET. Alright it does
not matter. You love ME alright. If some mistakes,
may be committed, what does it matter? If you
see on the abstract plane. It's love. This is just a
step forward, like somebody ran very fast and fell
down before reaching ME and says, "Mother, Sorry
I fell down before reaching you, I should not have
done that. But Mother see how prostrated before
you." It's a complete poetry DETACHMENT.
You GET YOURSELF ATTACHED TO YOUR SPIRIT, And
DETACHMENT STARTS WORKING.
Sometimes detachment is taken as a llcence for
becoming dry to others, which is absurd.
This is a human quality to make everything dirty
which is beautiful.
Actually, a person who is DETACHED IS THE MOST
BEAUTIFUL PERSON - IS THE EXTREMELY LOVING
PERSON, IS LOVE.
Look at the flowers, they are detached. They are
dying tomorrow, they are not going to live, but
every minute Ihey are emitting fragrance to you.
The trees are not attached to anything; they wil
die tomorrow, doesn't matter. But if anybody
comes to them they give shadow, they give fruits.
So, one has to develop that DETACHMENTS to be
a GURU. AND THAT DETACHMENT does not mean
ATTACHMENT means DEATH OF LOVE, DEATH OF
LOVE IS ATTACHMENT.
21
Guru Puja - 81
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-20.txt 
 have sald that you have to lead
of them had said that you do not get married, that
you should not talk to your wife or you should have
no relationship with your wife. All this is nonsense.
LEAD A MORAL LIFE. When you are young and not
married, keep your eyes on the ground. MOTHER
EARTH GIVES YOU THAT INNOCENCE.
SANYAS or anything like that. Sometimes one has
to wear those dresses to announce to the world
because, if you have to work in short time then
you have to take to that intensive behavlour, like
CHRIST, you can say or ADISHANKARACHARYA. All
these people had a very, very short life. In that
short life, they had to achieve such a tremendous
task that they had to actually take a military
uniform just to avoid problems. Not to impress
others.
a moral life. None
Most of the confusions and problems, specially in
the Western life, have come because they have
thrown morality to the sea, and to accept morality
as the very basis of society is very difficult for them.
Now-a-days people do it just to impress others that
they are detached and do just the things opposite
to it.
It is complete reverslon. But you have to do it, you
have to turn the whole wheel back.
So, we understand that first work is not to harm
anyone. - AHIMSA.
So many things were done in the beginning of the
society to establish these pure relationships. There
are laws which act, just as Chemical laws are
there. Physical laws are there in Chemistry and
Physics.
Not to kill anyone. That does not mean that you
do not have to eat meat and fish and all that.
That is all nonsense. Of course you should not
hanker after food, no doubt about it.
THERE ARE HUMAN LAWS WHICH ONE SHOULD
UNDERSTAND, THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN EACH
OTHER. THE SUBLIMITY OF THEIR RELATIONSHIP THE
PURITY
understood. Lead a moral life.
You do not kill any-one means :-
OF
THEIR
be
RELATIONSHIP
must
Do not kill a human being.
THOU SHALT NOT KILL.
The Purity of the relationship between husband
and wife must be understood. Then only can you
have a very, very happy married life, which is the
basis. "Thou shalt not commit adultery", Christ has
said:
So, first thing is not to harm any-one.
Second is to know that you have found the TRUTH
and give the testimony of the TRUTH,
Third is the DETACHMENT, the way I've told you
about DETACHMENT. Not to get attached to any
one person because he is a relation or something.
(perhaps He knew the modern people as they
would be using their brains for this.) He said "Thou
shalt not have adulterous eyes", What a vislon, in
those days to think. Even I could not understand it
when I was in India. Only after coming here I could
see, what it could mean.
But develop a UNIVERSAL FELLING and also NOT
TO HATE anyone. That is the worst kind of
attachment.
This word should go away from the mouth of al
Sahaja Yogis "I hate".
It is a POSSESSION on the EYES, - possession. It's a
joyless, useless behaviour. ATTENTION is frittered
away completely. There's no dignity. Eyes should
be steady, If you look at somebody steadily, he
should know that you have Sahaja Yoga in you.
With love, with respect, with dignity. Not staring at
people, which is just playing in the hands of these
POSSESSIONS. The whole society is possessed.
It is called as DANDAK, is the STATUTE.
You CANNOT HATE ANYONE, even Rakshasas.
Better not hate them. Give them a chance.
Now the fourth STATUTE of Lord is, TO LEAD A
MORAL LIFE. These Statutes were given by Gurus.
Take them from SOCRATES onwards MOSES,
IBRAHIM, DATTAREYA, JANAKA, MOHAMMED SAHIB
and take up to the point when it was about a 100
years back at the most, was SAINATH. All of them
All the Satanic forces have been let loose, I think,
and the way people are possessed, they cannot
see through these things. They are supposed to be
Christians.
The Divine Cool Breeze
22
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Attention is to be looked after. That is the most
important thing Because attention is the one
which is going to be enlightened.
is so beautiful, you cannot imagine it.
I met a lady after say 30 years of her married life
in London, suddenly, and she said "Oh what a co-
incidence", I said "Why?" She said "I am wearing
the same pearl necklace you had given me on
my wedding day, today, and I should meet you".
The whole thing, the whole drama changed with
that meeting.
So, we have to know what MORALITY is,
We are proud and not ashamed of being
righteous people. This is a very important part of
righteousness. Those who do not follow this will
loose their vibrations very fast.
It is how you give even a small thing. It is the
greatest art of giving that one has to learn in
Sahaja Yoga.
Then for a Guru, He should not accumulate things;
he should not have much possessions. If he has
possessions they should be just what he needs. A
Guru must give away his possesslons.
Give up the mundane type of things, like if you go
to somebody's birthday, you send a card, "Thank
you very much". Make it a more deeper
significant thing. Let us see how you develop your
symbols of love. When you have these things of
vibrations and you will give it to a Sahaja Yogi, he
will know what it is. Never lack in generosity
specially among Sahaja Yogis. Gradually, you will
be amazed how through small things you win over,
as if the vibrations flow through these things and
work out for those people.
He should not have stamp collections (for financial
gain) and all such kinds of collections.
Whatever things are useful and beautiful, which
give happiness and joy to others, to their eyes,
such things must be collected. He should have
such things which glve symbolic to his life, very
symbolic, which suggest that he is a DHARMIC
PERSON.
He should not have things that are symbolic of
ADHARMIC, of irreligious life.
Then, for a Sahaja Yogl it is important to use things
which are more natural in their character, Give up
artificiality and be more natural. I do not mean
that take out the roots and eat them or you eat
the fish raw. I do not mean that. Always, you must
avoid going too far with the things. But try to lead
a life which is more natural. Natural, in the sense
that people know there is no vanity about you.
Some people can be the other way round. You
see they will dress up as a tramp, just to attract
more attention. I mean there can be both ways.
Then I find some people colouring their hair and all
that, So you have to be a very natural person in
your behaviour.
Everything that he has or wears or shows should be
representative of his Dharmikta.
Anything that is impure, giving bad vibrations
should not be possessed.
EVEN whatever you have, you should think to
whom you can give this.
So, it means you should have possessions to
express your generosity. A Sahaja Yogi has to be
generous like the sea.
A miserly Sahaja Yogi it is like mixing of darkness
with light.
So, be natural.
Miserliness Is not allowed in Sahaja Yoga.
If can mean anything absurd also to some people
who do not use their wisdom.
Anybody whose mind goes on how much money
I can save, how much labour I can save-there are
many labour saving devices, and money-saving
devices-and also cheating others or making
money out of a few things here and there, and all
such things are against Sahaja Yoga.
WISDOM IS VERY IMPORTANT IN SAHAJA YOGA.
-that you have to keep intact all the time. Natural
means you must wear natural dresses, which are
suitable to you, e.g.. in this climate there is no use
to wear dress like RAMA used to wear. He will not
wear anything on the top, there was no need.
They will pull you down. Enjoy your generosity. How
many times have I told you about Generosity?
Apart from the way you give it, the emotional side
You have to wear the dress of whatever country
Guru Puja - 81
23
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-22.txt 
 you belong to, whatever suits the occasian,
whatever you think is dignified and good. It speaks
for your more elegance and your personality.
Whatever suits you, you should weat, not like oall
the people wearing moss-coloured dress, the
great suit, horrible looking and making clowns out
of them.
YOU ARE REBORN NOW.
Now, you are DHARMATIT -means-you need not
follow any particular type of religion.
You are open to all religions and the essence of all
religions you have to take. You have not to
denounce any religion or insult any religious
incarnation at any time. it is a sin. It is a great sin
in Sahaja Yoga -and you know who they are.
There should be no racial understanding of
oneself. You could be Chinese or any group.
No clownish things are necessary, no dandy stuff is
necessary. Simple beautiful dresses should be worn
which give you dignity. Actually, in the East,
people believe that God has given you a
beautiful body and it is to be adorned with the
beauty of what human beings have created, just
to respect it, just to worship your body.
As long as we are human beings, we should know
that we laugh the same way, we smile the same
way, we hold the same way. This is all conditioning
our mind-of this soclety that some are
in our
touchableness and some are untouchable. This Is
in our indian Community.
For example in india, women wear their saris and
saris are expressive of their moods and expression
of their worship of their bodies, because you must
respect your body.
Brahmanism of India has ruined India completely
and you learn from, -for example, who was
VYASA, the one who vwrote GEETA, He was the
illegitimate son of a fisher-woman. That is why,
deliberately, he was born like that. All the Brahrnins
who read Geeta, ask them -who was VYASA?.
Dresses should be such that they should be for
utility as well as for dignity. There is no need to
have uniform clothes for Sahaja Yogis at all. I don't
like it.
There should be a variety as nature is. Every-one
should look a different petson. For Puja etc. all can
wear something similar, it doesn't matter, where
your attention need not be on the variety, But
outside you should be a normal person.
Brahmins are those who are reallsed souis, there is
nothing like where and in what caste
community you are born.
or
With all education and everything in the West, we
find this nonsense of nationalism,
You are all householders. nobody
announce something. For you people I don't even
advice to put the red mark when walking on the
has to
If somebody is fair or dark, after all God had to
make variety in colour in every way.
street.
Who told you (London)-that you are the most
handsome people going around?. May be for
some markets here, or in Hollywood, it may be fit
-but In the Kingdom of God, all these so-called
handsome people will be denled entry-marrying
seven husbands and all sort of things. They will all
be put in Hell.
You should be a NORMAL PERSON, not to be
pointed out.
You need not be dressed absurdly or in a funny
way, but in a normal way as others wear.
To be normal is very important in Sahaja Yoga.
Then we have to know that Sahaja Yogis have to
get over
identifications according to races, colour and
different religions in which you are born.
God has created all of you as His cwn children,
kinds of discrimination
all
and
The beauty is of the heart and not of the face.
that shows and shines.
May be people are a little bit aware of it, that is
why they go and tan their faces, I do not know.
As a Christian you don't belong to a church, you
are not born in a church. Thank God, otherwise all
the spirits there will capture you, immediately. But
these identifications wil linger on. To accept
anything new, you have to be reborn and
They are quite aware, but there is too much
Showing -off' they are doing. Some people like
black hair, others like red hair, I mean there have
INE
The Divine Cool Breeze
24
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-23.txt 
 your dignity, weight of your behaviour, weight of
your faith; and your light, You become a Guru not
through frivolousness and vanity. Cheapness,
vulgar language, cheap jokes, anger and temper-
all must be avolded completely. Wield the weight
of your sweetness, of your tongue, of the dignity,
which will attract people just like the flower which
is loaded with nectar, attiacting the bees from all
over. In the same way you will be attracting
people. Be proud of that, be very proud of that
and have sympathies for other and care for
to be all types of hair, why do you like a paiticular
type of hair. this I con't understand.
There is nothing to like or dislike. What God has
created is all beautiful, who are you to judge that
I like or dislike?-
T. Who is this , you see, is Mr. Ego, which is being
pampered by this society, which teaches you how
to smoke a cigar and how to have your lager.
morning till evening.
All this training and conditioning has to be thrown
away just like filth, and see that God created all of
you as His own children.
others.
Now, in short, I have to tell you how you have to
do it yourself. You have to WORK OUT YOUR VOID
clearly. First of all you have to know that VOID
catches when you had a wrong type of GURU.
YOU MUST KNOW ABOUT YOUR GURU ENTIRELY. Try
to find out the character of your Guru. Rather
difficult becCuse your Guru is very elusive, SHE IS
MAHAMAYA. - not easy to find out. She behaves in
a nomal way - and sometimes you are outwitted.
But you see how is small things also, She behaves.
How her Character is expressed, How her Love is
expressed. TryY to remember Her forgiveness. Then
you should know that you have the Guru that
many people must have desired to have, Who is
the souree of all Gurus. It is the ardent desire of
even BRAHMA, VISHNU and MAHESHA to have a
GURU le that. They must all be jealous of you.
It is such a beautiful thing. Why do you want to
make it ugly with these ugly ideas? All this ugliness
of I like or dislike is nonsense. Only there should
be one word "I LOVE
Forget everything, There is no need to remember
what the British cid to the Indians or the Germans
did to the Jews. Forget everything. Those people
who did it are dead and finlshed. We are diffetent
people. We are Saints.
This is for the STATUTES I have told you, whlch you
have to Imbibe.
But, today, I authorise you to be the GURUS. So
that through your own characler and Ihrough
your own personality the way you practice Sahaja
Yoga in your own life and manifest the light,
other will follow you. And that will establish the
STATUTES of the LORD in their hearts and
emancipate them. Give them their salvation,
because you have got your salvation. You are the
channels without the channels this all-pervading
power cannot work out. That's the system. If you
see the Sun, it's lght spreads through it's rays - from
your heart the blood flows through he arterles,
they becormne smaller and smaller. YOU ARE THE
ARTERIES WHICH IS GOING TO FLOW THIS BLOOD, complete freedom,
OF MY LOVE, TO ALL THE PEOPLE. If arteries are
broken, the blood will not reach the people. That
is why you are so Important. The blgger you
become, the bigger the arteries become. Then
you encompass more people, by fhat you are
more responsible,
But this Guru is very elusive. So to irmprove your
VOID, say that, "Mother you are our Guru."
Because of this elusiveness, that fear, or that awe,
that respect which Is necessary, for the Guru, is not
established. Unless and until you develop that awe
complete awe within you, your Guru principle will
not be established. No liberty is to be taken. I am
telling you Myself, but I am extremely elusiver next
moment, I nake you laugh and forget about it.
Because I am testing your freedorn to do it -
So first of all you must find out about your own
Guru establish Her in your heart. I mean-you have
a wonderful 'Guru' otherwise. I must say, I wish
had one like that myselff And She is desireless and
sinless, absolutely sinless. Whatever I da it is not a
can kili anyone and do whatever
fact.
am above sin but I see to it that 1 do not do
gravity, You rnust have the gravity by your welght,anything like that in your presence, so that you do
not get one of these things, becousee thai is My
sin tor Me. l
Guru must have the dignity, Guru means the intrigue or anything. I really tell you that's
weight, is the GRAVITY. GURUTATWA means
means the weight of your character, weighf of
quality.
25
Guru Puja 81
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-24.txt 
 You have a very supreme Guru, no doubt, but still
you must know that those powers of supremacy
you DON'T have. I am above all these things. I
don't know what temptations are, Whatever I like
it is all my Whim. But despite that I have made
myself very normal because I must appear before
you in such a manner that you understand what is
the STATUTES, For Me there are no statutes. I make
these Statutes. Because of you I do all these things
and teach you small things because you are still
chlldren.
but I am NIRMALA - I arn beyond love. Different
state all togethet.
Under these clrcumstances you are much better
off because no Guru ever goes to that extent.
Apart from that I am the source of all the SHAKTIS
of all the powers, so you can have all the powers
from Me, whatever you like. I am desireless, but
whatever desires you have will be fulfilled. Even
about me, you have to desire, look at that, how
much I am bound by you.
Unless and until you desire My good health, I will
have bad health. It is to that extent.
In the same way, you must remember that when
you are talking to other people about Sahaja
Yoga, remember that they will see you all the time
and try to see how far you are in it.
But to me what is good health and bad health?
Under these beautiful conditions you should really
prosper so well There should be no problems for
you to be GURUS.
As I understand you try to understand them. As I
love you, you try to love them. I definitely Love you
The Divine Cool Breeze
26
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-25.txt 
 Introspection
Study Campus, U.K.
Whenever there is a circumstance which, some
how or other, changes our programs, we must
Immediately know that there is a purpose, behind
all that change. And we must immediately accept
it with an open heart. The Divine wants us to
change. Supposing I am going on a road and
people say you have lost your way, Mother. That's
all right. I am never lost, because I am with Myself.
But I had to go by that particular road, is the point.
I had to do i' And that's why I am supposed to be
not on that road and I have lost my way. If you
have that kind of an understanding, and if you
have that satisfaction in your heart, then you'll find
life is worth much more than what you think it to
corrected. Now these problems we con see very
clearly with the light of the spirit, we can see them
very clearly that "this" has gone wrong with me.
One of the most Interestirg things I've noticed is
that Sahaja Yaga is all the time at work with some
sort of a maya. And this maya is ignorance,
complete ignorance, sometimes partially. Now
when you get into Sahaja Yoga You get blessed.
May be your family gets blessed. Your children get
blessed. You get some sort of a blessing for your
physical being. Also, for financial, you get jobs;
you get money, You get something exceptional,
which is really miraculous. Now people get very
much lost in those achlevements and start drifting,
thinking that, oh, this is the blessing we have got
now, we don't have to do anything anymore, that
we have been rewarded sufficiently for whatever
we have done so far. That's nat so. It's just a sort
of a support to you comes so that your faith should
be fully established in Sahaja Yoga. Especially, you
should know Me, what am. But, if you go on still
drifting, then maybe some of these blessings may
turn out to be curses. And you might feel that
what a curse that has fallen upon us and how it
has gone in the wrong way.
be.
Now, as it is, what was the reason, I thought, that
we have decided to have public programs this
year, definitely, and we could not have public
programs. So the reason is that we have to
consolidate. In the growth of a tree, which is a
living tree, it happens that it moves in a particular
direction up to a point, ill i# has to change,
because there is no sun coming that side, maybe
there is no water levels arriving, so they start
changing. In the same way one has to understand
that we are in the hands of the Divine. And if sonme
plans are changed, it is reflecting back on us, and
we have to see why. And the why of it is that we
have to consolidate.
For some people it takes time to feel, to get to the
feel of the blessings. For example, mostly,
according to the modern ideas, we think that to
get more money is the biggest blessing. So many
get that also. But actually, it is not. To get your
peace within, to get to your witness state, and to
feel your vibrations all right, and to be in the
centre all the time ascending is the real blessing.
Because with that you get everything else. The
completion is only possible when you have the
complete joy bubbling within yourself, After all,
everything is just a means to achieve joy, to feel
the Joy. It is not the end. If it was, those people
who have money, those people who have good
health, those people who have all the success of
Job With them, they should have had been happy
and peaceful, but they are not. They are suffering,
they are suffering too much. And they are, in a
Consolidation of Sahaja Yogis is very inmportant.
The first thing to consolidate yourself you must do
introspection. It's to reflect the light within and see
for yourself. What have you done so far in Sahaja
Yoga? Where ere you? How far you have gone?
And how far have you to go? What is the thing
that is lacking in you? You'll be surprised when you
start seeing yourself in a very unblased manner,
not justifying yourself, not blaming any bhoots, or
not blaming any badhas within you, or somebody
else. If you start yourself what has gone wrong with
you that you could not consolidate yourself
properly, you'll be amazed that there has been
problems still lingering on which must be
27
Introspection
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-26.txt 
 way, destroying themselves, day by day, because
they hate their lives: they can't bear it. They
cannot understand why they are always sad.
something for Sahaja Yoga. It's not money. It's not
work. It's not thinking. It's not any kind of a support.
One of the most important thing is how many
people we have given realization to, you have to
Count how many people you have been able to
give realisation to, how many people you have
falked about Sahaja Yoga. You may think that you
glve realization to some people. They come. They
disappear. Doesn't matter. They will ultimately
come to you. Today you try on some. They get lost.
Again, tomorrow. You have to relentlessly work for
it..
So all these blessings that come to you, all these
changes that come to you, all these new avenues
that open to you, one has to know that it is for
everything
benevolence,
for
your
your
benevolence. And your benevolence is your
ascent, nothing else but your ascent. The rest of it
is all useless and fruitless. Once you understand
that this is what you have to achieve in life, that is
what you have to enjoy- Then
n it works out.
As you know I work hard in U.K. My coming to U.K.
itself was ll predetemired. There was a need for
me to come here, to make the heart work better.
But heart is lethargic. You know that. And lethargic
heart gets all kinds of probiems. But all these years
I have been working, every year what ever timel
could give for Sahoja Yogis, for their problems, for
Sahaja Yoga, for their minutest problem, for any
kind of help they needed, every sort, I've tried to
work it out. Directly, indirectly, you are all blessed.
Still, what about you people who are now yogis?
You are saints. You must see a photogragh that i
have, very interesting photogragh, where you are
certified
But in Sahoja Yoga, as you see, It's conpassion
and love. It is not so much restrictions. You're left
to yourself to develop yourself. It is your Spirit which
has to guide you. There's no, coaxing or correction
going on all the time. But, it is left to you to
understand yourself. to see for yourself, and work It
out.
One of the criterla should be that, what have 1
done for Sahaja Yoga? What have I done for
Mother? These two things are very important to
understand. Whatever smmall thing I could do for
Sahaja Yoga is important because, if you are
intelligent, then you can see that this is the
greatest thing you have to do, is to work for God.
This is the most important thing so far human
beings have indulged Into, is the highest type of
enterprise that human belings have ever had a
chance to indulge into. And what a chance it is,
tool You may say that - Mother, we are mediocre,
we are no good, we are useless - but you are
chosen. You are the one chosen so there must be
something about you. You might not have seen
that part within yourself which is going to work out,
this great work of God. So you have to locate and
find out: Why am I selecied for Sahaja Yoga?
What can I do in Sahaja Yoga? What can I work
it out in Sahaja Yoga? It should be a constant
reminder to you that I have been chosen for
Sahaja Yoga, I want to take full advantage of
sahaja Yoga? Supposing somebody doesn't have
money. He expects that Sahaja Yoga should give
money, must give jobs, must give this, must give
that, must have children, must, give good health,
etc. Expectations are all tight. But what, why then
for Sahaja Yoga? This is another point of
introspection.
have you
saints,
that
al
seen
photograph? Not yet? you better see. Let's have
it. the photograph is in my box, I thing, yes. You
are il certified saints, by the Divine, rot by any
cardinal or by any pope. So, what are all these?
Stately? one saint which is certified by pope, who
is artificially certified? It's such a big thing, you
know. What about you, who have been certified
by God Almighty? You are still busy with your work.
You're still busy with your little, little things. You're
still busy with, your small lives and small families. For
a saint for a person who is of a generous nature,
means a person who is a saint. The whole worid is
his own farmily? Are you still only wortied about
your own family? Then you are not yet aware of
your saintliness. And a saint doesn't only warry
about his own wife, about his own children, about
his own house; he worries about the whole world.
Now, as Sahaja Yogis, you are powerful entities.
You are very powerful people. We have got
problems in the whole woild. You know that very
well. It's not necessary you have to be great
intellectuals, or you have to be people who are,
some sort of politicians, or something. But you must
be on the lokout for problems which are troubling
Very important to see that we have to do
The Divine Cool Breeze
28
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-27.txt 
 this world. You have to be. You cannot live in your
own world, that you are a saint now. You have to
know that you have to live in this world. And you
have to think about them, not only your problems,
but Mother, how will I be able to do this ond how
will be able to do that. But you have to know all
the problems of this world. And you have to worry
about the whole world. You have to think, what's
happening in the world. What are the problems of
the world? You are responsible for it.
had said - don't see any televisions- for there was
no use seeing television by Sahaja Yogis. When
they saw the television they only got caught up.
But now there are important things that are
happening which you can see for yourself. You
can scan it out, what are the world problems, and
you can see for yourself where you have to put
your attention.
If you become aware of your personality, it's not a
personality that can be completely involved into a
very small area. Your personality should get
Involved into all the problems of the universe, all
the problems there are. And you'll be amazed
that everything can work out in a very collective
Not only that, but you have to pray, In your
prayers you have to say, Mother, solve this
problem, Collectively, individually, you have to
take your attention from yoursell, from your smaller
life, to a much wider thing. Then you are a saint.
And you have to think that it is your duty to ask for
Divine help that all these problems should be
solved. This is your job for which you are selected.
Your asking is all going to work out, because, as
you know, I am desirous. You have to desire for it.
Whatever you desire will work out. The protection,
the affection, the compassion, of Mother is with
you. But you have to look after this world and
show the concern that you have, not to live with
very limited areas, and with very limited ways. The
British think, that U.K. problems are aur problems.
No. Your problems extend to all the places
wherever there is Sahaja Yoga. And you have to
worry about all of them now. We are having the
same problerns in Australia. And there's somebody
who is very froublesome. You have to see to it that
you beat that person with shoes and put that right.
The leader has to tell whom to beat with the
shoes. I'll work it out, whether it is in Australia,
America or india.
way.
And at this stage where you are, you can see for
yoursell now, all the Sahaja Yogis have got
vibrations on top of their heads. Stretch out your
vibrations. Stretch out your attention. And you'll be
arndzed that all other stupid problems that you
have will be finished.
So the attitude toward ourselves should be to be
aware of own glory, of our own position, to know
that we are saints, that we have reached a stage
where we are at the highest. and that now we
have become the light and we have to give light
to others. If you see in the Bible Christ has said
something that is very important, that you don't
pur the light under the toble. That's what it is. You
have to put the light on a pedestal. And that's
what it is that you have to put your llght on the
citadel, at a very highest point to glive light to
others. And this is working both ways if you start
undeistanding what you are, what you have to be
aware of, what is your situation, what is your
Anywhere you see that there's a problem or an
assault on Sahaja Yoga, all of you should put your
attention to it and work if out.
powers, what you have achieved in Sahaja Yoga,
poweis, v
what is the debt you have toward Sahaja Yoga,
and what you have to give for Sahajn Yoga, how
Sahaja Yoga has made you so capable, so good,
so nice. Are you righteous enough? Are you
behaving properly? Are you doing all the rightful
things which are necessary? Because it is only you
who can do It. You are the people with very, very
special energies and special contacts with the
spiritual life. And if you start behaving like all other
mundane, nonsensical peple, limiting yourself to
a family, your children, your nonsensical. Previous
lives, you'd be lost, lost to yourself and lost to
everyone. The problems are much more than
what you know about. That is the understanding
Then there are general problems, as you see. We
see that America is now becoming idiotic, or
whatever you may say, so you have to put your
attention to America. You have to stretch your
attention outside, not inside, just worried about
yourself, about your family, about your house,
about your children. As soon as you spread your
attention outside, your problems are solved in the
house, in the smallest of circumstances. You have
to pay attention outside.
SO
These days there are televisions. Where first we
Introspection
29
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-28.txt 
 you have to reach, that Mother has made us
yogis. We are saints. And we have to show to the
world the right path. She has told us that we are
the light and we have to show the people which
way to go, how to go further. Isn't ir? That
everybody seems to be a problem, seems to be in
a very small little whirlpool, going round and round
and round. How can that bel l've told you many
a time, look at these false gurus. They don't have
vibrations. They don't know anything about
Kundalini, nothing about Sahaja Yoga, But how
much they are doingl While what are we doing?
We're struggling still with ourselves and with our
problems, with out own ideas, with our very small-
mindedness and chicken-heartedness.
company. Everybody is Just without Me. I'm
travelling, everyday. You know that very well. And
I'm working so very hard. Sometimes I sleep at two
o'clock, sometimes at three o'clock.
In the same way you have to feel, after all, what
is my gain in it? What do I gain out of it? I have
brought My children back to normal conditions
Iive taken them to the Kingdom of God. You have
to do the same. You have to take them to the
kingdom of God. But if you yourself are involved
into your own mayas, you'll be every day going
down and down and down. I may shout. I might
say You'll be all stranded where ever you are,
because you don't want to see. For that I would
say, you have one advantage especially in U. K.
You're all very intelligent people. You're not Idiots
like
cunningness once upon a time. And now you are
tired of your cunning. Indians have learned the
cunning from you. They have become really very
cunning. But you are tired of your cunningness, so
now you are tired, fed up, fagged out, and
lethargic. But with your intelligence you can
understand that this is such an important work our
Mother is doing.)
Wevsrmall-
Now it is for you to understand. It is for you to
decide about yourself. It is your own desire, it is
your own bigness, you own magnanimity, which
has to come forward. To see for yourself what you
are capable of, what you can do. It's very easy for
people to say that, Mother, it's too much, I can't
do anything. Or somebody to say that, Mother, I'm
very busy with my family. Somebody to say. I'm
busy with my children. You have come to Sahaja
Yoga for that? I have given you reallsation for
that? All these blessings have come to you for
that?
This intelligence
Americans.
became
It will go down in the history, every word you say,
every thing you say, every way you behave.
Everything is golng to go down in the history. Not
how many children you produced, or what sort of
a wife you have, but what you did for Sahaja
Yoga. Remember that. History is going to record
everything, whatever you have done, whatever
you have achieved in Sahaja Yoga, It's not
showing off. It's not just, demonstration. It's not
talking big. It's nothing of the kind. It's actually,
really, totally what you have achleved, which will
be recorded. At least God knows hypocrisy. And
God knows bombastic? Inmprovidence?. If's God
who knows where you are, and what you are up
to. You can not befool God. One thing you must
realize, that when you are befooling God, you are
befooling yourself, your Spirit, your realization, your
own ascentl So we have to be careful.
So the consolidation that you have to do is very
important. You can see it clearly that's why we
could not have any public programs, because we
really need consolidation in U. K. Though I have
lived in U. K. For so many years, people take me for
granted here, because I am staying here. They
think we should go to the airport, Finished. We
have done all the hardship, everything. Have you
been to the airport? Have you seen Mother.
What's the use of seeing Me? What I have given
you? Is your light spreading? How many people
have got realization from you? Just find out how
many people have learned Sahaja Yoga from
you, or from your lives, or from your wisdom, or
from your behaviour? That is the way. That is the
criterion. It's not that, all right, I have sent Mother
Her money for Her travel. At my age, from India, if
you see any lady at My age, she waiks with a stick:
she can't climb even one step. Indian woman
can't, because of the heat that they have. But I'm
travelling. You know how I'm travelling, how much
I am doing. What about my family? I deprive them
of My company. I deprive My husband of My
As a mother I would say, try to be introspr ting
yourself very carefully. What have you done for
Sahaja Yoga? What have you done for other
Sahaja Yogis? What have you done for other
people who are drifting? What has been ou
behaviour towards other Sahaja Yogis? how much
peace and love and compassion we have given
The Divine Cool Breeze
30
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-29.txt 
 is the centre of your dharma. Here you have to
pray that let Vishwa Nirmala Dharma spread in the
whole world, let people see the light through our
dharmic life, through our righteousness, let people
see them and accept the Vishwa Nimala Dharma
by which they get enlightenment and a
benevolent, higher life anda desire to ascend.
others? How much understanding and
tolerance we have shown to others? If somebody
gets here a little more money. he becomes, so
bombastic. He becomes so aggressive. He
becomes so rude. I can't believe itl How can
money lure you into these vices? You're not
ordinary people: you'te the saints whose feet were
washed by the River Gangas. Try to understand
your glory. Try to understand your own powers,
your own position as saintly people, Sahaja Yogls.
which are above all saints because you know how
to glve realization. You know everything about
Kundalini. You know everything about realization.
How many people knew about it? Otherwise, I
start thinking I have given all this knowledge to
some bunch of foals who do not krow what is the
value. As Christ has said, don't throw pearls betore
the swines. It is for you to decide where you stand,
in what category.
Now take your right hand In the lower portion of
your abdomen, of the stomach on the left hand
side. Press if. Now this is the centre of pure
knowledge. Here you have to say as Sahaja Yogis
that our Mother has given us the full Idea how the
Divine works. She has glven us all the mantras and
all the pure knowledge that we could bear and
understand, Let me fully be knowledgeable about
that, all of us. I've seen if the man is a leader, the
wite doesn't know a word about Sahaja Yoga, if
the women know about Sahaja Yoga, the
husband doesn't know anything about it. Let me
be proficient and an expert in this knowledge. So
that I can glve realization to people, make them
understand what is Divine Law, what is Kunidalini,
and what are the chakras. Let my attention be
more on Sahaja Yoga than all these mundane
things.
It is so obvious that it is a very precarious time we
are passing. It's very important. We have to fight it
out. It's much more than any wars you have
fought. It's much more than any struggle human
beings have had. It's such a horrible world that has
been created, and we have to transform it. It's a
tremendous task. For that you have to work out in
a very sincere and an innate manner. I'm sure one
day will come that in the history of this world
Sahaja Yogis will have their names written in
golden letters. I'm sure this will work out. I'm sure
this has to work out. And that you all have to
achleve it, collectively, with one mind, with one
heart. What should I sacrifice? What should I do?
How should I help? What is my contribution? I wish
I could see those days in My lifetime. So today is
the day when we have to introspect.
Now pul your tight hand in the upper part of your
abdomen, Close your eyes. Now here on the left
hand side, pIess it. Now here Mother has given me
the spirit, and I have my own guru which is the
spirit. I'm master of my own. Let there be no
abondonment. Let there be dignity in my
character. Let there
be generosity in my
behaviour. Let there be cormpassion, love for other
Sahaja Yogis. Let me not show off. but have a
deep, deep kriowledge about God's love and his
doings. So that when people come to me, I should
be oble to fell them about Sahaja Yoga and give
them this great knowledge with humility and love.
Now first of all, you put your hand on your heart. In
the heart resides Shiva, is the spirit. So, you have to
thank your spirit that it has brought light to your
attention, because you're a saint and the light
that has come in your heart, has to enlighten the
whole world so, piease, now in your heart, you
pray that let this light of my love of the Divine
spread to the whole world. With all sincerity and
understanding that you are connected with the
Divine and whatever you desire will happen with
full confidence in yourself.
Now raise your right had on your heart, Here you
have to thank God that you have felt the ocean
of joy and you have felt the ocean of forgiveness
and the capacity to forgive as your Mother has
which we have seen is so tremendous. let my
heart expand and encompass the whole universe.
And my love should resound the name of god. The
heart, every moment, should express the beauty
of god's love.
Now put your right hand in the upper part of your
abdomen on the ieft hand side, on the upper part
of your stomach on left hand side. And now here
Take your, right hand in the vishuddhi, that is on
the left vishuddht between the neck and the
Introspection
31
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-30.txt 
 This humility has o come within us, so you have to
say here - let the humilityY, in my heart, in a true
sense, non hypocritical, work aut this feeling of
forgiveness, so that I bow to reality, to God, and to
Sahaja Yoga.
shoulder in the coner. I will not indulge into the
falsehood of guilt, because I know it is falsehood.
I will not escape my faults, but face them and
eradicate them. I will not try to find faults with
others, but in my own knowledge of Sahaja Yoga,
let me remove their faults. We have so many ways,
secretly we can remove the faults of others. Let
my collectivity become so great that the whole
Sahaja world is my own family. my own children,
my home, my everything. Let me get that feeling
completely, innately built within myself that I am a
part of and a parcel of the whole, because we all
have Atmal And let my concern go to the whole
world to know what are their problems and how
can, through my true desire, power, solve that. Let
me feel the problems of the world in my heart.
innately, to remove all of them from the basis of
which they are, from the basis from which they are
generated. Let me go to the principles of all these
problems and try to remove them through my
Sahaja Yoga powers, through my saintly powers.
Now you have to put back your hand on the
backside of your head. Now push back your
head, here. And you have to say here oh,
Mother whatever wrong we have done to You so
far. whatever wrong goes in our minds, and
whatever smallness we have shown to You,
whatever way we have troubled You and
challenged You, please forgive us. You have to
ask for forgiveness. In your intelligence you should
know what I am. I don't have to tell you again and
again.
Now at sahasrara, you have to thank Me. At
sahasrara, put your hand, move it seven times,
and thank Me seven times. Mother, thank You very
much for the realization. And Mother, thank. You
very much for making us understand how great
we are. And thank You very much for bringing all
the blessings of the Divine. And thank You very
much for raising us higher, much higher, than from
whete we were. And, also, thank You very much
for sustaining us and for helping us improve
ourselves and correct ourselves. And thank You
very, much ultirmately, that Mother, You have
come on this earth, taken Your birth, and working
so hard for us, for all of us.
Now put your right hand on your forehead, across,
Now here you have to say, first of all, I have to
forgive all those who haven't come in Sahaja
Yoga, those who are on the periphery, who come
and go, who jump in and jump out. But, first of all,
and foremost, I have to forgive all the Sahaja
Yogis, because they are all better than me. I'm
the one who tries to find faults with them, but I am
at the lowest ebb; and I have to forglve them
because I must know that I still have to go very
further. I'm still much less. I have to improve myself.
The Divine Cool Breeze
32
