The Divine Cool Breeze Vol. IV, No. 8 & 9 INDEX 1) Shri Matajis Talk To Sahaja Yogis, Australia Shri Buddha Puja 2) Shri Krishna Puja 3) Shri Durga Kali Puja 4) 5) Russian Tour 1992 Liver Diet 6) The Divine Cool Breeze 1.

 SAHAJA YOGIS SHRI MATAJI'S TALK TO ON 1ST MARCH, 1992 at Glenrock, Australia. coordinate with you people, but you always have a direct relationship with Me. So far all these people who believed in God, had no direct connection. But now you have. So why not use Me? And if there are leaders, you have to ask the leaders, themselves and start preaching people, We don't like preaching. We have had enough of it. There is no néed to preach others. If you have to preach. Preach yourself but not to others. Today I wanted to talk to you about certain matters where people get quite confused. There are certain things we must understand in Sahaja Yoga. TL First point, there is no fundamentalism in sahaja yoga, Nobody should use My words, or say Mother said so, nobody should. That is how all these hierarchies have been built, in the churches, everywhete. Everybody can read, everybody can find out. That is a way of controlling people by saying Mother said so. That shows that you are frying to use My words to tell people off. You are not in charge. Nobody should take things upon One has to understand that it is a living process. We can understand from a cell at the end of a root. It has intelligence, it is completely in control of itself. And it has a direct connection with the divine power. So it moves by itself, but the attention is on the collective, like the roots of tree. It moves in such a direction that there is no argument, there is no quarrelling, in the sense, there is no obstacle. Now supposing. there is a big obstacle like a stone it goes round it. Encircles many a times for the future tree that has to come. If I say something in the programme of sahaja yogis, I say it because it is heart to heart talk between My children and Myself. And it should not be just sent over, through your computers all over the world, without consulting, without censoring it by the leader. There is no haste in sahaja yoga. So that should not be done. Now this I have said, definitely. So from the past what do you get is the relative idea as to where you have reached. And from the future, you have to know how far you have to go. This is very important thing to understand, Because, these things creep into the western mind very easily. They don't want to have direct relationships with Me. That's how you will start forming groups. One person will stand up Mother says so. Somebody will use My tapes, anything, There is no need, at all, for you, to get to these things and listen to them. if they want to create something they should talk to Me directly, and not to do it themselves on their own, which is a very wrong attitude towards sahaja yoga. So first of all we must know it is a living process. Youi cannot put on all we must know it is a living process. You cannot put on it artificial types of things which will curb the growth of sahaja yoga. It's very important to understand. I find that nobody should take over from the people don't understand sahaja yoga. You cannot mould into any pattern. It moulds by itself, Whatever I have sald nobody remembers, only they use My name. Mother said so in 1970. In 1970 I never spoke in English. So all this historical utterances should not be used. We live in the present. That time may be, the situation is different. May be because sahaja yogis were just coming to sahaja yoga, may be they needed some sort of a guideline. It isa journey. You are passing through a slope, then you have to use a different type of method. Now you are walking on a plain land. Then you don't behave as if you are climbing a plain land. Then you don't behave as if you are olimbing a mountain. So it is a journey of sahaja yoga to mountain. So it is a journey of sahaja yoga - to our destination. The destination is that, we have to emancipate maximum number of human beings into sahaja yoga. T But that should not be taken over. I again tell you - leaders. I have appointed the leaders just to works by itself. Talk to Sahaj Yogis

 You have to have marriages. But this marriage problem comes when women don't know how to adjust, mainly,. I must tell you. The first thing is, you have to really spoil your husbands. Actually they should entirely depend on you for everything. Then, what will they do. But in a loving manner. Not in an oppressive way, Do not demand anything, do not expect anything. Just be gentle, kind, express your love. Then they get used to it. They can't live without it. These tricks should have been told to you by your parents, but they might have been the same as you are, So you don't know the tricks of the trade. After marriage we have to say, we are, we. Shouldn't say 1. And also understand, you see men are different from women. You are the preserver of the society. They are the creator. You have to have much more patience and compassion. Which you have, no doubt. You must take to your feminine qualities and you will be amazed you are shakti for men. You are the power for men. That's why men must respect women. if they don't respect women, not their romanticism and nonsense. But as personality if they don't respect. then they suffer everyway, specially materially. Materially they suffer and also reputation wise. Some women are extremely demanding and expecting too much. Perhaps may be they see those pictures of Romeo Juliet and things like that. But if you see Romeo Juliet, you will see what Shakespeare wanted to communicate. He was an avadhuta. So we cannot have any hierarchy. Never. These hierarchies ultimately become a barrier between you and Me. Which I don't like. All the leaders are told that whatever letters you get, whatever things you have. You should send it over to Me. I would like to see then Myself. But sometimes they do, some of the leaders specially in Australia I had a very bad experience. But now you have a very wise leader here and a very sensible person. I don't think there is anything wrong with him. Only thing I think he is rather too mild sometimes with some people. He should have told. Yesterday I had to suffer so much because of two ladies. Because he never told them how horrible they were. So I had to absorb all their nonsense quite a lot. Because, if a leader is not mild you'il sit on his head. If he is little strict you'll get after him. Only thing one has to realise, that everything is a living process and through some sort of a coordinator, Mother is trying to work out in a more simpler manner. For example, if everybody writes to me for a small little thing, sometimes write for everything. thing, sometimes that I really laugh. There is no need to ask Me, like Mother we cannot get Indian spices here. All these stupid things. Absolutely useless Then second is about the husbands or about the wives. Because you should not see those films or those televisions, which if you see invariably show the fight between husband and wife. So if you go on seeing that you will learn you will pick it up. It's like a parrot you know. You pick up all the words which are to be said to your husband, harsh words, or to your wife. And then you work it out that way. He wanted to communicate that these are ll futile enterprise. Both of them died. They could never enjoy companionship. We had so many problems like this, in England also. So I asked them, what books you read? Most of them read books of rornance. But romance before marriage. There are no books about romance after the marriage. So naturally there is a problem. After marriage is quarreling, before mariage romance. So why marry? And when I said that man is the head of the family, it doesn't mean that man should dominate a woman. Supposing I say that he is your leader, it doesn't mean that he should dominate you. If head of the family starts dominating, if the brain of the body starts dominating, what will happen to this body. It's stupid, to conclude like that. But you are the heart of the family. Brain can die, but heart dies the last. And so many questions could have been easily solved. I think to work out a marriage is only question of a woman, not so much of man. Normally men don't want to marry, normally. Though they have no responsibility, they don't have to produce children, anything. But still they don't want to marry. They are sort of little bit afraid. In the west specially, not in India. In India men want to marry because they get somebody who will spoil them, who will never answer them, listen them, be humble. But here in the west I have seen men don't want to marry. One fellow I told to get married, he that you have disappeared, for three days. The Divine Cool Breeze

 So try to understand, there should be a But going to sormebody's house is now becoming a problem for Me. Because if I go to somebody's house that person gets the ego O She came to my house. So again, you are not to say that mother this is my house. Mother this is Your house. If I go there it is well and good. If I don't go there well and good. What does it matter? complete integration between heart and brain. And children are the attention in the society of sahaja yoga. So here, how can you have such an idea that if I say the head, then he dominates the heart. How can it be? So they pick up few words from here and there and use it for justifying their own weaknesses in sahaja yoga. But this kind of escape is not going to help you to rise. You are golng benevolence. Now again I tell you nothing has to be sent through your IBM or anything, without the consultation and censoring by the leader. It can land Me into great difficulties and fomorrow could be in jail. Why don't you understand? And you write whatever you feel like. So this kind of irresponsible behaviour, I can't understand. And things I never said also can be said. This shows immaturity, and haste. Such things should be consulted. And use your discretion, You need to consult your leader, which are vital, important. Specially things which are written down and published. Things which circulate, is extremely important to be seen by the leaders., There is no hurry about it. Any book written, any tapes to be released, anything. Should be done with the cormplete consent and understanding of the leader. I would say the leader must sign those papers. Then I can hold hirm responsible. But if you are arbitrary and start doing things then it could be dangerous. against yourself. Is not for your What I am telling you, is that if you try to accept all these outdated Ideas in sahaja yoga, you'll go down, you'll rot. We are fresh and new. We are living. We don't accept these kind of Ideas about men or women. But when I said that man is the head of the family, that doesn't mean that you dominate your wife and torture her. Nor does it mean, that the leader should dominate. They should use their wisdom, love, compassion, and guide you in the proper way. Thave received a letter which is very funny that own leader's wife, not the leader, but the wife, forbade the sahaja yoginis not to come to the house and to the programme because I could not go to her house. Can you imagine? This is absurd. Now if I tell her, she'll be mnore harsh on that person. But by doing that she doesn't know how much she is missing points in sahaja yoga. I can go anywhere I feel like. But she should have taken the blame upon herself. Also, there is a thing that this is my house. This is the biggest nonsense. Mother should come to my house. With Indians specially, it is too much. Please come to my house Mother. Come and have dinner with me. Who are Simple things I will tell you what. They asked Me Mother, what do You think of starting a Vishwa Nirmala Dharma in Melbourne? I sald alright. I didn't know It is going to be an association, there is going to be an election and all, nothing. Vishwa Nirmala Dharma is everywhere. But they don't have any association nothing, It is just a kind of a society which is just spreading Vishwa Nirmala Dharma. There is no sort of any organisation about it. We only have Trusts. And we don't want to have any electioning or all that. Again, if some wrong type of people get in, then sahaja yoga will be ousted completely. So you can only have Trusts. And if you want to do something else you can form it separately but it should not be Vishwa Nirmala Dharma or sahaja yoga. Nothing doing. Because I said yes that doesn't mean that you should go that far with forming this, that, association and all that. It is a news to Me. Airight, whatever has been done has to be rectified. And we have to bring it down to a proper level. There should be people who should be elected as good you? You are a sahaja yogi. So your house is Mine, you are Mine, everything is Mine. What is there to come to your house? Then you are separate. All you houses are Mine. If I go there it doesn't mean that I love you more that anybody else. Like somebody asked Me, why did You take Your birth in Christian religion. I said I had to take My birth somewhere. Better was for Christians because Christians are absolutely fundamentalists, mentally. That's more dangerous. Muslims you can make them out they are fundamentalists because, they do not have that finesse about them. Openly they are fundamentalists. But Christians, are very great fundamentalists. Taik to Sahaj Yogis

 On food yes. Like in England they osked for baked beans in the the morning. Now these horible tinned baked beans which you been giving to them, are not at suitable for Indian climate. people who are in sahaja yoga, who so far have been doing, everything in a straight forward manner and who have been very very sensible about it. You see, if you see the western health of a person, you go to India you get diarrhoea. You cannot stand heat you cannot stand cold Anything that changes you feel so slck you are tired all the time. You must introspect. You work a little and you are tired. What is the reason? The reason is, you think foo much. Same with your marriages. You start thinking, what are my priorities, what should I do, start analysing. Just do it what you want to do. This thinking too much is responsible for your susceptibility to diseases: Of course mooladhara is one of the most important chakras, no doubt. If the mooladhara is weak, you catch it. you can catch any disease. Also the secret diseases, herpes and all these things are very common in the west. But not in India, very few. Because of a strong moladhara. So now first problem is, how to strengthen your mooladhara. There is also a suggestion that we should project ourselves to outside things. If it means that we have to go to other organisations, is wrong. All these organisations are dead organisations. They are not living organisation. But if they want to come to us alright. But we should not go and break our heads with them. Because you land up not only with opposition but you will catch from them. Negativity, Try to understand. We have to be very careful. You can only have sahaja yogis who are seekers, who are honeşt, who are humble, who do not want any money or power out of sahaja yoga. It will grow. It has grown. Two people came from Australia and see how many are there. It will definitely grow, no doubt. But do not try to organise it. You cannot organise. Once you start organising, then the growth can be stunted. Like you have seen bonsai. Bonsai when they cut it and organise it, it becomes a small tree. But I haven't seen any tree which grows, if it is organised grows more. At the most you can nourish it, at the most you can water it, at the most you can see the needs of this, But you cannot just, make it grow more. The second one is the kind of food you are eating here is not so fresh. Try to eat fresh food. At least in Australia you can get it. As far as possible, take to more carbohydrates. If your are thinking too much best is to take to carbohydrates. You are so much worried about putting on weight. I don't know why you want to be skinny. What is the need? On the contrary a person who has little plumpness absorbs vibrations much better. But do you know the vibrations sit on the fat, "medhe sthhitah". That way they go on the nerves. Because nerve is made of fat, your brain is also made of fat. All organisations cut the growth. In the beginning It may look that by organising it, it has increased. Even religions like Christianity, Islam, Buddhism, Hinduism etc., when organised and grown artificially is empty and hollow. We really want substantial people, substantial dharma - Innate, within ourselves. We don't have to take to these artificial things. We are using lots of artificial manure now. And people are revoiting against thing. Because they think all these artificial things are harmful to us. So allow it to work out through the grace of this divine power, in a more natural manner than putting artificial organisations, artificial this and that. In grows like a business. But ultimately comes to recession. All those who had education in Harvard, are responsible all over the world and all over the world there is recession. So, whatever is pumped into your head you accept. That is why the entrepreneurs are definitely controlling. You have no idea. Because we don't have that wisdom to see. Now they sald alright, you shouldn't put any oil on your head, alright? Never put any oil. So you become bald. So they can sell wigs. You can put oll, before, previous night. Just to make your hair grow properly you must give them nourishment. Why do you starve them? What's wrong with ol I Just don't understand. You must massage your body, is a very good idea. Also massage your head. You must look after yourself. But just because there's a fashion not to put oil you lust do not have any oil anywhere near you. So now, regarding your children. I have been really studying the nature of western chldren. Their attention is never on the right things. Not on studies, I should say, not at all on studies. The Divine Cool Breeze 6.

 They all used to put oil if you see films say, about thirty years back. Nobody had dry hair, all shining nice hair. They were supposed to be quite good looking. And this bhootish type of hair then when you have all the bhoots will take over, because they will think this is the head for me. So try to understand what is good for your body and what you should do. Massaging your body is a Without oll, I cannot exist, because My work is on Sahastrara. It's very soothing to massage your hair, very soothing for You are realised souls, there's vibrations flowing, should massage your head nicely. Take about an hour on a Saturday. Saturday is the day of Shani, is the day of Saturn, the day of Shri Krishna. He is so fond of butter and hygiene. Then bathing. All these little little things are very important for you and for your children. So the hyglene part is very poor, personal hygiene. Of course your houses will be clean, the carpet immediately you will pick it up. Because this carpet may be sold later on. Whatever is saleable, you look after it. Now your teeth can also be saleable. You need not neglect them. But you will not be careful. Whatever is saleable you are very careful. Your house very careful, your carpets very caretul. But whatever is not saleable, is not worth it. Now in sahaja yoga, we should know, that nothing is saleable. Whatever we have and own, we'll keep it with ourselves, of give it to our children, or give it as presents to others. We are not going to sell anything. Everybody is a seller. House is to be sold, very particular about the house. If something goes wrong, you will shout at children. We were surprised, that these children were morecareful about nonsensical things like carpets than their teeth. Something fell down on the carpet, immediately they all rushed and cleaned the carpet. We started wondering what's the matter with them. That's not their job. That's the training they have. Whatever saleable, they try to put right. So we must change our mind and say that whatever we own we are not going to sell it. absolutely. If anything falls on very good thing. your nerves. oil. Also you people are very fond of sun I can understand that. I don't know why in Australia you are so fond of sun when it is so much. But because it Is a fashion in west, we are all going to the sun, to the sea, and spoiling your skin. Your skin cannot have the glow. While you see, if you do not use sun-bathing as some sort of a treatment, it's alright. Indians used to wonder about the English. There was a saying, that an Englishman and a mad dog in the sun. Even a sane dog won't go. All such things should be understood. Personal hygiene should also be seen. Use lot of water to wash your hands and when you are using toilets water should be used everytime. Otherwise your mooladhara can never be alright. Your children I am surprised, they don't want to brush their teeth. And if you tell them you have to brush, they start crying. If you tell them you have to have a bath, they start crying. Imagine in that sweltering heat of India they don't want to have a bath. And they smell. But when you tell them, "Our parents also smell like that". Their mouths smell. In India atleast twice we must brush - once in the morning, once in the evening minimum. Evening time we all brush our teeth, In India. It's very important. Now these are such small things which our culture in India has already taught us, long time back. So the way, is when your children are growing, you take them in the bathroom, make a fun out of it. Now let's see the wall brush our teeth. You brush your teeth, I'll brush my teeth. Now see whose are whiter. Like that. Make a fun out of it. You are the one who can teach them good Or sometimes we have to sell the house, alright. It's not so important. In any way whether the house is clean or dirty you'll fetch the same price. That's My experience, whether you decorate or nat. On the contrary they like undecorated houses. So now, this is what is materialism. That we try to get things just for selling off. On the contrary we have to look out what are the beautiful things made by hand. What can we have? Whatever is made by hand, by people. You can have few. And that can be given to your children, to their progeny. You must find out why the child is crying in My programme. Must be something wrong, must be some badha. If a child cries in My presence, or is afraid that means there is some sort of badha, which you should try to remove. So now we have to change our attitude towards ourselves, we are specialy blessed people, we have to look after our body, look after our children, we have to look Talk to Sahaj Yogis

 despite all that, people don't understand why My husband allows me to do that. Because he knows it gives him all the blessings. He told openly to sahaja yogis that all these awards I have got because of my Wife. But She is working for God. I wanted to say also you donated lot's of money. Is the generositfy. And if you donate then you get it also from another thing. But I don't want it for My personal thing at all. But is a sign of your generosity. That is a common thing from all the leaders. Melbourne leader says that nobody wants to pay, Only they want to take advantage of sahaja yoga.: It is not a very good thing from Lakshmi point of view. of much greater after things which importance than material things. That is the spirit. afe So ultimately we come to the point that the spirit which has given us all this beauty, which has given us such moonlight in our life, such sunshine in our work, which has made us so sweet. After all what we have done for the spirit to satisfy it, to enjoy it. So the most important thing for us is our spirit. And we should seek the comfort of the spirit. The more you think about your spirit. the deeper you'll go. And the joy you'll get will be also very deep and you'l settle down very nicely, embedded in spirituality enjoy the collectivity. In general I can talk to you about things Also one has to understand that, once you that firstly that you have to ask your leaders if you have to do anything extraordinary. Now it is your discretiorni. And the last but not the least is this- all the leaders complain that no one wants to pay any money whatsoever for sahaja yoga. Now you see actually as you know that, whatever money you give me for pujas I buy silver for you. And you are given the equal amount of silver as one would glve to Europeans. But as far as the puja money is concerned it is very low. First they used to give me just one dollar. Of course it was all in coins which I brought it back. But otherwise whatever is there, Is. I am not using it for. Myself I don't need it. I should nomally, because It's given to Me. But I just thought that instead of that if I give you silver you will have silver for puja which is very important. And that it will be very auspicious. But the way people want to pay is rather reluctant. I agree you people are now sunning into problem about money. But may be, one of the reasons may be that, do yau know you pay the lowest in the whole world. No cone pays so low as that. Atleast they pay 21 and 11 in India. Minimum. So whatever it is, whatever suits you. I am not going to say anything, whether you collect less or more i am going to give you silver because your are so many people. Now I have to do that. I always put the maximum amount between you and Europe. You are also a continent as Europe is. join sahaja yoga whether you pay or not pay or anything, you think you are a liability. That's very wrong also. For every smnall thing they want help. Of course they are to be helped. We try to help people who haven't got money. But they become sort of liabilities. And they expect so much from other sahaja yogis or from Me also. You marry sormeone then that person becornes a headache. Letters after letters, telephanes after telephones is not proper. Of course some child is sick, you can inform Me. But a child is hot tempered, he is misbehaving, is on My head. May be you have been hot tempered, you are fighting with your wife is fighting with you, may be that. Why not correct that point? Even the smallest thing they think should be done by sahaja yoga. Sahaja yaga must look after this thing, sahaja yaga must do that. So ane should understand that to you sahaja yoga, is a liability not you are a liability to sahaja yoga. That's the best attitude. Of course in a way you are a liability. But what should your attitude? Now you are matured enough, When the son grows up and matures then he looks ofter the parents. In the same way you have to look after sahaja yoga rather than sahaja yoga looking after you all the time. And pestering sahaja yogis about it. This has to be understood very well, that sahaja yoga is not liable for you. You are liable for sahaja yoga. Sahaja yoga has given you so much. God has done so much for you. What have you done for God, always think like that. If you start thinking like that, the more work you put in for sahaja yoga, the more you exert your mind for sahaja yoga in a proper, living, balanced manner, But one has to understand, that atleast we should really think of doing something for sahaja yoga. What can we do for sahaja yoga? As you know very well, that, i have used My husband's money quite a lot. And again I am going to work out something in Australia it will be very good for people. And I can involve My money will them. But The Divine Cool Breeze

 sahaja yoga is a prayer, is a rapport, is a oneness with God, is what we can call the worship. And once you start doing that you will not bother who criticises you, what people say to you, nothing. But you'll feel such relationships and understanding. the more you ate helped, the more you grow, the more you enjoy. And so, foday's lecture is for all of you in a way because I don't know what applies to whom. But you should not put it on somebody else but take it for yourself. That we arenot going to be liabilities on sahaja yoga but a support. We have to look after sahaja yoga. Which is a very beautiful attitude, I don't need sahaja yoga. But I am worried about sahaja yoga, about sahaja yogis. To Me they are all My liabilities. I have to look after them, I have to worry about them, I have to listen to them. I receive letters and all that. I mean this kind of work if sormebody has to do, nobody would accept. In every way I have to support. Because My Spirit gets satisfied. I am not doing for your satisfaction. I am doing for My own satistaction. It's seifishness, So when you reach that Selfhood you will understand what this self needs. And you will put your mind to it. And you will be surprised that when you start doing something for others, for sahaja yoga it's very much rewarding. And very much like a prayer. Everything is a prayer, In sahaja yoga, whatever you do for am sure this Shiv Puja will establish definitely at a much higher level, I am sure. And you will know when you are. Here we are in direct confact with our Spirit. Here we know about our Spirit. We are obliged to our Spirit. We are obliged to our spirit. What it has done to us. We respect it. And that's how I have seen there's certain change. And a very great height suddenly they achieve it. And I am Sure this will happen to , Australians. Now forget your small differences- fighting for power, fighting for money, nonsense. Try to be alright. There are some people who got caught up because of this nonsense in Melbourne. They should all cleanse thermselves out, put themselves tight, look after fhemselves. All My blessings with you. May God bless you all. Talk to Sahaj Yogis www

 despite all that, people don't understand why My husband allows me to do that. Because he knows it gives him all the blessings. He told openly to sahaja yogis that all these awards I have got because of my Wife. But She is working for God. I wanted to say also you donated lot's of money. Is the generosity. And if you donate then you get it also from another thing. But I don't want it for My personal thing at all. But is a sign of your generosity. That is a common thing from all the leaders. Melbourne leader says that nobody wants to pay. Only they want to take advantage of sahaja yoga. It is not a very good thing from Lakshmi point of view. of much greater after things which importance than material things. That is the spirit. are So ultimately we come to the point that the spirit which has given us all this beauty, which has given us such moonlight in our life, such sunshine in our wark, which has made us so sweet. After all what we have done for the spirit to satisfy it, to enjoy it. So the most important thing for us is our spirit. And we should seek the comfort of the spirit. The more you think about your spirit, the deeper you'll go, And the Joy you'll get will be also very deep arnd you'll settle down very nicely, embedded in spirituality enjoy the collectivity. In general I can talk to you about things Also one has to understand that, once you that firstly that you have fo ask your leaders if you. have to do anything extraordinary. Now it is your discretion. And the last but not the least is this - all the leaders complain that no one wants to pay any money whatsoever for sahaja yoga. Now you see actually as you know. that, whafever money you give me for pujas i buy silver for you. And you are given the equal armount of silver as one would give to Europeans. But as far as the puja money is concerned it is very iow. First they used to give me just one dollar. Of course it was all in coins which I brought it back. But ofherwise whatever is there, Is, I am not using it for. Myself I don't need it. should normally, because it's given to Me, But I Just thought that instead of that if I give you silver you will have silver for puja which is very important. And that it will be very auspiclous. But the way people want to pay is rather reluctant,. I agree you people are now Junning into problem about money. But may be, one of the reasons may be that, do you know you pay the lowest in the whole world. No one pays so low as that. Afleast they pay 21 and 11 in India. Minimum. So whatever it is, whatever suits you. I am not going to say anything, whether you collect less or more I am going to give you silver because your are so many people. Now I have to do that, I always put the maximum amount between you and Europe. You are also a continent as Europe is. join sahaja yoga whether you pay or not pay or anything, you think you are a liability. That's very wrong also, For every small thing they want help. Of course they are to be helped. We try to help people who haven't got money. But they become sort of liabilities. And they expect so much from other sahaja yogis or from Me alsa, You marry someone then that person becornes a headache. Letters after letters, telephones after telephones is not proper. Of course some child is sick, you con inform Me, But a child is hot tempered, he is misbehaving, is on My head. May be you have been hot fempered, you are fighting with your wife is fighting with you, may be that. Why not correct that point? Even the smallest thing they think should be done by sahaja yoga. Sahaja yoga must look after this thing, sahaja yoga must do that. So one should understand that to you sahaja yoga, is a liability not you are a liability to sahaja yoga. That's the best attitude. Of course in a way you are a liability. But what should your attitude? Now you are matured enough. When the son grOws up and matures then he looks after the parents. In the same way you have to look after sahaja yoga rather than sahaja yoga looking after you all the time. And pestering sahaja yogis about it. This has to be understood very well, that sahaja yoga is not liable for you. You are liable for sahaja yoga. Sahaja yoga has given you so much. God has dane so much for you. What have you done for God, always think like that. If you start thinking like that, the more work you put in for sahaja yoga, the more you exert your mind for sahaja yoga in a proper, living, balanced manner, But one has to understand, that atleast we should really think of doing something for sahaja yoga. What can we do for sahaja yoga? As you know very well, that, I have used My husband's money quite a lot. And ogain I am going to work out something in Australia it will be very good for people. And i can involve My money wil them. But The Divine Cool Breeze 8.

 sahaja yoga is a prayer, is a rapport, is a oneness with God, is what we can call the worship. And once you start doing that you will not bother who criticises you, what people say to you, nothing. But you'll feel such relationships and understanding. the more you are helped, the mote you grow, the more you enjoy. And so, today's lecture is for all of you in a way because I don't know what applies to whom. But you should not put it on somebody else but take it for yourself. That we arenot going to be liabilities on sahaja yoga but a support. We have to look after sahaja yoga. Which is a very beautiful attitude. I don't need sahaja yoga. But I am worried about sahaja yoga, about sahaja yogis. To Me they are all My liabilities. I have to look after them, I have to worry about them, I have to listen to them, I recelve letters and all that. I mean this kind of work if somebody has to do. nobody would accept. In every way I have to support. Because My Spirit gets satisfied. I am not doing for your satisfaction. I am doing for My own satisfaction. Il's selfishness. So when you reach that Selfhood you will understand what this self needs. And you will put your mind to it. And you will be surprised that when you start daing something for others, for sahaja yoga it's very much rewarding. And very much like a prayer. Everything is a prayer. In sahaja yoga, whatever you do for I am sure this Shiv Puja will establish definitely at a much higher level, I am sure. And you will know when you ale. Here we are in direct contact with our Spirit. Here we know about our Spirit. We are obliged to our Spirit. We are obliged to our spirit. What it has done to us. We respect t. And that's how I have seen there's certain change. Anda very great height suddenly they achieve it. And I am sure this will happen to Australians. Now forget your small differences- fighting for power, fighting for money, nonsense. Try to be alright. There are some people who got caught up because of this nonsense in Melbourne. They should all cleanse themselves out, put thermselves right, look aftet themselves: All My blessings with you. May God bless you all. Talk to Sahaj Yogis www.

 Shri Buddha Puja Shudy Camps, England. 31.5.92 see Buddhists, they do all this, even if they are Kings. One of the Kings was Ashoka. He tried to lead a complete ascetic life. It was a very difficult life and they thought that by doing all that they will achieve their realisation. Two of his disciples did get their realisation. But the whole life was dry, harsh and insipid. There was no fun in it. No children were allowed, No family life was allowed. As in every religion all of them got lost into some sort of a fundamentalism because none of them got realization and that's why everybody established their own style of religion. Tao, Zen are all off-shoots of the sarne. Buddha felt that one has to seek something beyond life. He was a king's son, had a nice wife and son, naturally anybody in that position will be quite satisfied. One day he saw a sick man, a beggar and a dead man. He couldn't understand how this misery has come. What is the need to have this misery. So he gave up his farmily and luxuries of life and went in search of the truth, Like many of you have done. He read all the Upnishads, books to find the truth but he couldn't got anything. He took complete Sanyasa, as far as food is concerned. He gave up everything. Ultimately he was lying under banyan tree when Adi Shoakti gave him realization. Also because he was one of the ones marked for a special place in the virata. He hoad achieved that. It wos a Sangha. (Collectivity) but in that collectivity there was no rapport as they were not supposed to talk too much. They could only talk about meditation and of achleving the highest life. That idea continued in so many religions. Then they started rnaking people take away the money of the householders by saying that you hove to give up everything. Even at the time of Buddha they had to give up everything. But here it was a genuine effort of Buddha to take them to enlightenment. To make them people who were knowledgeable about the absolute reality. It did not happen. That is the reason we find that Buddhists have gone into different types of funny Buddhism. For example - In Japan, one was not allowed to kill any animal. So they said we will not kill any animal but will eat killed animals: They could kill human beings. Japanese became expert in killing human beings. How people find out loopholes. Second type of Buddhism came when Lao Tze taught about Tao. Tao is the Kundalini. The people just couldn't understand what he was talking about. He expressed himself in paintings etc. To deviate from that kind of a harsh Buddhism. Somehow despite that it never took proper roots. There's a river called Yang-tze where the scene changes every five minutes and the beautiful mountains take a form and there are lots of waterfalls. It is said that you should not divert your attention to these temptations which are outside. We should see them but move and that is what is Tao. They went into Art. Basically Buddha never thought of Art. He said that you have to introspect and go within deep down and find out what is the absolute, So the whole thing started What we must see from his life is that he discovered and found out that desire is the cause of all the miseries. He did not know what was the Pure Desire. That's how he could not explain to people that they have to take to their awakening through their Kundalini. As he had followed such a ascetic life that became the code for the Buddhists. He used to have at least thousand people with him barefeet and without any arrangement for tood or stay. They wore supposed to shave off their hair conpletely. They wore only one dress, whether it was warm or cold. They were not allowed to sing. dance, or entertain themselves by any method. Food was collected from the villages they visited, whatever they got as alms. They would offer their guru and then eat later. They would go barefeet in the scorching heat in the mud or rain. They gave up all family relationships. Even if the husband and wife joined the Sangha then they were not supposed to behave like husband and wife. One had to give up all physical, mental and emotional wants. If you The Divine Cool Breeze 10

 deviating. boundless and free expression of God's love. Even now there are many conditionings which are still working in us. Sorne of you are very proud of your nationalities. We cannot mix up with other people. We are too high for the other people. You are now universal being so how can you have these stupid limitations which are mythical. You have the light within and you can see that you need to drop it out. If you still cannat drop it out then you must know that you need more power. You must learn how to raise your Kundalini and be connected with Divine Power all the time so that you are in thoughtless awareness and that you grow within yourself in depth. Then the Zen system was also mixed up with Kundalini, which was started in Japan. In the Zen systerm they used to hit on the back of the spinal chord and the chakras, by doing this they would fry to raise the Kundalini. In the Zen system they developed very harsh methods of raising the Kundalini. It went to such a limit that I have met people who have broken their spinal chords. The Kundalini will never rise it the spinal chord is broken. I met the hedd of the Viditama Zen system. They called me because he was very sick and they asked me to cure him. I found that he was not at all a realized Soul and did not know a word about Kundalini. I asked him what is Zen. It means Dhyan, to meditate. He was so confused about Zen. They had no realized souls for many centuries. Just imagine under what circumstances you got your realisation without sacrificing, giving up anything. working out these penances. Because Buddha is the tapa on the Agya Chakra. So are Christ and Mahavira. Tapa mean penance. In Sahaja Yoga penance means Meditation. For meditation you must know when to get up. That must be the most Important thing for a Sahaja Yogi. The rest of the things work out automatically. To grow in depth you have to meditate. You don't have to shave your head, walk barefeet, or starve yourself or give up your family life. You can sing, dance and entertain I find a conditioning which is very strong "My and "Mine' still in Sahaja Yogis. Earlier the Western people didn't cate for their tamilies, wives and children. Now I find they stick like glue. The husband, children and house becomes very important. The children belong to the Sangha, the collectivity. You don't think this is your child. If you think like that you are limiting yourself and getting into problems. Country-wise also problems are reducing. We don't like to be racist. in India Sahaja Yogis want the caste system to go away. because these are self destructive. So we start seeing in ouEselves what is self destructive, what will destroy me, my family, my country and the whole world. All these ventures which are just the opposite of your constructive life, you start seeing and you can stop it. That is only possible If you try to introspect and dedicate and see that whether you have that quality. Now all your beautiful qualities have been awakened by your Kundalini. All these qualities were there in you, intact. When the Kundalini started rising she awakened all those beautiful qualities. tapasyas, yourself. Buddha means Bodha i.e. to know the reality on your central nervous system. You all have now become Buddhas without giving up anything because whatever he gave up was all non sense. It was a myth. What does it matter if you listen to music or dance. It doesn't matter at all. But these ideas went so deep into these people that you really feel such pity and compasslon for them. They don't eat food, they starve, they look worse than T.B. patients. While you people look like roses, and are beautifully enjoying life. But still, we have to have that principle of Buddha within ourselves, i.e. we have to do Tapa. It doesn't mean you starve yourself. But eat less if you are fond of eating too much. You should enjoy music which is for your emancipation, for your awakening and ascent. We are so bound by conditionings that people don't understand what is the spirit. Spirit is Sahaja Yoga is one of the most precious things a human being should have known long time back. It is not only talking about God or saying there is Divinity within you, but the effectiveness of that. You don't need any science. You have any problem, then give a bandhan. Its that simple. Everything you can do with science you can do with Sahaja Yoga. We are also computers, Only thing is that you have to develop your depth Now you are on the right lines. We don't need thismoden science which can destroy all of us. You must have self esteem and understand that you are a Sahaja Yogi and you Shri Budha Puja 11

 Dhamman Sharnam Gachami'. I surrender myself to my Dhararn. It is not the mythical religions which have gone into some provisions. It means I surrender myself to the innate religion within myself, which is righteousness etc. The third thing he said 'Sangam Sharnarn Gachami', I surrender myself to collectivity. You must meet at least once a month, even in the name of picnic etc. You are part and parcel of the whole. The microcosm hos become the macrocosm, that you are part and parcel of the Virata and you have to become aware of it. That is how things work out very fast and that's how we discover a negative person or one who is not, or an egoist and who is not egoist. We discover people who are Sahaj Yogis and who claim themselves to be Sahaj Yogis and we give them up. Without being collective. You can never understand the value of collective. It gives you so many powers, so much satisfaction and joy that one must pay attention to collectivity first in Sahaja Yougl, Even become collective. While coming to collective you don't have to criticize others call them names or find faults. But introspect that, when everybody is enjoying themselves why am I the one sitting down and trying to find faults. If you can pay attention to yourself as far as the defects are concerned then I'm sure you will become much more collective than when you see the defects in other people. have to achieve that state where you become absolutely capable of whatever sclence can do. You become the embo diment of all the powers. Some people come and tell me "Mother we cannot open our heart". Can't you feel compassion? I have seen people having an open heart for a dog or cat, but not for their children sometimes, It is the place where the spirit exists and it emits Its light and its the first place where you see the light of a person who is full of love. This may be because you have only ego but no self esteern. Buddha is the killer of ego. He is moving on your Pingala Nadi and settles down on left side, He is the controller of our ego and he has to compensate this right side. A right sided person never laughs or smiles. But they have shown Buddha as being fat and loughing. He controls the tight side by just laughing. He makes fun on himself and sees every drama but see with your enlightened consciousness the stupidity of it and enjoy the stupidity. Like Elizabeth Taylor getting married going for her honeymoon and you can see the stupidity rather than getting enamoured of such an inouspicious person. How you react to things depends upon your attention with the chitta. If it is something Divine than you have a rapt attention. But if it is something stupid or humorous you can see the essence of it. With that attention you see to the essence of everything relative to reality. Compared to reality it is stupid. It could be mythical or false, hypocritical and all kinds of things which are not reality. But if you are a Sahaja Yogi you should be able to see that point and enjoy. Children do that very easily, upto a certain age. Your reaction depends on your which is enlightened. Enlightened different mianner than if there is something missing you just Sahaja Yoga is the most practical because it is absolute reality so with all these powers. understanding and compassionate love you have to be sure about yourself and know that you are all the time protected, guided, looked after, nourished and helped to grow by this Divine Power which is all pervading. attention attention reacts in a a stupid, confused or negative attention. One has to Judge how you react. Like I told a 'punk' who said "What wrong', that "you had no identity and self esteern and that's why you try to paint yourself and try to show something which you are not. Why don't you become what you are". Later he became a Sahaja Yogi. We have to accept what May God Bless You. we are and we are the spirit. Buddha has four things which all of you should say every morning. First he says 'Buddham Sharanam Gachami'. It means I surrender myself to my awakened attention. Then he said The Divine Cool Breeze 12

 Shri Krishna Puja 241 Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi CABELLA, ITALY 197.92 AyuT problems, like Aids, immoral life etc. We have done this puja many times and understood Shri Krishna's advent which was over 5000 years back. Now what his manifestation and what he wanted to be accomplished has to be done in this Kali Yuga. Kali Yuga is going into a new realm of Sat Yuga but in between there is Kirta Yuga where this all pervading power of God's love is going to act. Shri Krishna was the incarnation of diplomacy, so he plays around quite a lot and ultimately brings through the untruth and the falsehood. In doing that he judges people. It is very important that Shri Krishna's powers of diplomacy were to be manifested this time when it is the last judgement. Now whatever you have done wrong before, whatever Karmas have been done in ignorance or dellberately, all of them will be paid back. Those pujas which you have done In previous lives and this life will be also rewarded. This is all done through Shree Krshna's principles of collectivity, where he collectively sees the situation. All these countries who think no end of themselves are finished. This is also Shri Krishna's work because he is Kubera. He is the one who is the power of wealth. He gave lot of weaith to all these countries. Now they don't know what to do with it. Specially these last twenty years have been really remartkable. All over the world there has been some sort of complete change or exposure. also suffering because of our past deeds. We had a caste system which is the greatest headache for us. Everywhere every country will have to face what it has done. Shri Krishna's own style was that he never belleved in caste, He himself was born in a cowherd's caste, Then he became a King. He lived like an ordinary person. He would take the cows grazing, look after and bring them home. His life was very human. The way he used to tease his mother and other ladies. This is extremely human, child-like and sweet. Behind that also there was a The Indians are In Krita Yuga all these diseases have started cropping up. One of them is drug addiction. These drugs are made in Bolivia and Columbia, where the aboriginals were finished off. People went in Nicaragua to help them and brought back all these drugs to Washington. In every elite Society they discuss which is the best drugs. So destruction has started from inside. I had told them earlier not to indulge into Freudian practises and keep to morality otherwise you will Aids, great significance. Shri Radha was Mahalaxmi and she used to put her feet and take bath In the river Jamuna. The ladies would take the water from the same river and carry on their heads the same pitcher. Shri Krishna wanted to raise their Kundalini so he used to hit the pitcher from the back and the water which was vibrated would fall on their backs and raise their Kundalini. In the Raas (dance) it woas (Ra - energy Dha- sustain) Radha who had the energy. In the Raas they would play with the energy. That's how he wanted to have a collective awakening of the Gopas an Gopies. Then he had to leave and fight Kamsa. In his own lifetime as a child and grown up he punished all kinds of devils. in this Kali Yuga also he is acting. You have seen that how gradually he has finished so many false Gurus one by one. Somebody called themselves as Shri Krishna, somebody called themselves as God, etc. He exposed them and finished them all. They are quite frightened of us because we are standing on have problems. So now they have Schizophrenia and all kinds of secret diseases, because they made every other country nervous. The English came to India as ordinary traders and ruled the Indians for 300 years and they left us in three pieces and now in their own country they have problems of all kinds. First of all nobody wants to call themselves as English. They call themselves as Weish, Scots or Irish. There is always a bomb scare in London. The English who tried to divide us are automatically divided and other now fighting each other. There are 13 Shri Krishna Puja

 cloth before their mouth and all kinds of nonsense. truth. Shri Krishna resides in our Vishuddhi. At that time Shri Krishna came. His own Many people hove this problem of left Vishuddhi. It Is because we are very social. In the Western society the social system is rigid that anybody can collapse. Now its better, because of revolt and culture. Earlier If you picked up one spoon in the Wrong way, you are finished, The French have made it much worse by making a big science out of alcohol and what glass goes with what alcohol. The whole collective was made so rigid. I thought Indian collective is rigid because of certain conditions, but in the West it is such a conditioning in the heads of the people that some of the conditioning you cannot remove. cousin became a Tirthankara and that made Shri Krishna think about this kind of stupid ritualism. Like they will get up in the morning, put water In the Tulsi, throw water here and there and won't see untouchables or take water from them. You can't eat this, you can't move like that. All kinds of restrictions even with timings, etc. This firme is not good, that you should not do, to such an extent that the whole movernent of our country was round these rituais. There were some people in Bombay who would go to Lucknow. and everytime they would come back they would shave their heads. Because there were so many old people in their families that everytime anyone died they would shave their heads. Such horrible rituals existed. Even now in South India there are a lot of rituals. They are frightened to get out of it. They think if they get out of it they are sinners and will go to hell. It comes from the Catholic Church and when it cormes from Freud who was absolutely a devil, they just give up all those conditioning and take to that. I Church is predominant in any countfry they are following Freud, In India this collective rigidity was there because Shri Rama was a very formal person. In the West it is all mental. if you make this kind of hair or put oil then you are a lunatic. All kinds of funny ideas were given and people started following. If you don't put oll at all you will become bald. It was entrepreneurship, so that they could sell their things. In England you have wear a tail coat if you had to see the Queen. So one has to borrow this tail coat, and everybody looks like Charlle Chaplin. have seen where the Catholic In the West the whole life style is ritualistic. There is no freedom, So there was a revolt by the hippies etc. and they fought it and then it went to another extreme. From one extreme to another extreme. When Shri Krishna came on this earth he sald this is all a Leela a play. if you are in the water you are afraid of the water. But if you get into the boat you can see the water. If you know how to swim you can even save the people who are in the water. He says if you develop a witness state then you see the whole thing as a drama. Nothing matters and you see the problemn. Because you are out of it you can solve the problem. This was his great Advent. The first step towards your ascent is that you have to become a Saakshi. You have to become the Buddha. This kind of stupid rigidity that came into the West has really made them very nervous. People are so nervous here. If you tell them that I am going to come and have food with you she will collapse, is it caring for the public opinion or her own conditioning. But to an Indian housewife if you tell you are going to come she will be the happiest person. Here if you say I would like to come and see you in the evening, theyw ill say, "Come to the pub," because they are so nervous. They are not sure of themselves. This has come from these norms that have been created foday, In India also we have spiritualism where you must be very serious. Like there are people who pick out their hair with their hands. They are not supposed to use scissors or go to a barber. The condition in some communities became so horrible that they said even if you breathe you might take in some insects or organisms. So they put sorme sort of a In Sahaja Yoga there are different types of people from different areas and different cultures: The door is open to everyone. If an Indian comes in he will be all the time watchful about others. He will say "Mother, this man is not doing this or that". He will find faults with others all the time. In the West they will start finding fault with themselves. Who is interested to know what wrong who has done. If a lotus is there no one wants to know how many filthy things are there in the pond. You are now a lotus. But in the West they must confess. Every moment you are changing, So what is there to confess. The life is so formal that people suffer The Divine Cool Breeze 14

 They got after that lady and said who are you to shout. Then they announced that all the fights are cancelled. See the power of his love for his mother that the whole sky couldn't bear it. They said we have never seen such a miracle that in a second the sky got overcast heavily. You must know your powers. Witness yourself. It is the introspection. But with left Vishuddhi you will always say. "How can I have any powers, after all I've done this or that. I'm no good'. It is because that left Vishuddhi is all the time telling that you are good for nothing. It is making a hole in your brain which takes away all the sense, and you accept it. from guilt for the smallest thing this Catholic Church has conditioned you so much. This left Vishuddhi is Vishnu Maya. Once you have this left Vishuddhi you develop all the problems of Vishnu Maya. One of them is the heart. Vishnu maya is lke electricity. If you have Vishnu Maya problem then you become lethargic. I'm so guilty. You become depressed. That Vishnu maya principal disappears from you. She is the one who is quick, fast and she is the light and announces to the whole world what Shri Krishna is Sahaja Yagis who feel guilty say that if we do any work outside our ego will come up. So we don't want to do. It is absurd., If you give light to a candle and if you give light to a candle and the light says I don't want to give fight because maybe this light might develop an ego. It is absurd. To get out of this left Vishuddhi is to becorne absolutely dynamic in Sahaja Yoga. Left Vishuddhi is very depressive action on the whole being. A person who has left Vishuddhi is always a very slow person to do anything for Sahaj Yoga. You have not been given light to hide it. You have been given light to work it out, to think dynamically and how to arrange and organise. If you are guilty you will all the time say 'Mother, it is very difficult, etc." In the beginning no Sahaj Yogi would give realisation in India. It is so happened that my car failed and I was late by two hours. There was a big meeting and they did not know what to do so they started giving realisation and then realized that they can give realisation. You know what you can do. You know whateer you say happens. Whatever you want you cani get: Try and Try. If you don't do it you will be all the time half-baked. Take the experience of your powers. See how dynamic you are. Don't have formalities about it. Just use it fully and you will be amazed you have so many powers. In the same way if one wants to paint something, go ahead and do it and don't be afraid of criticism. Just paint or sing or do anything boldly and go in a big way. You will be amazed at yourself how you have achieved it and how you are doing it. First thing to know is that you have powers. Have faith in yourself. If you have left Vishuddhi, The Vishuddhi, the Vishnu Maya won't work out. Be like Vishnu Maya. Say 1 am a Sahaja Yogl. I am not an ordinary person. they For a Sahaj Yogi it is important to witness himself. That is the introspection. Where was 1? I have come here." Do not indulge too much In the past, but see what you have got in such a short time. You have come into the Kingdom of God. I was travelling with Wolfgang and we had to catch a plane. When we reached the airport the ground hostess started shouting at me for delaying the flight. They need not have waited for me. But they waited and shouted also. All the passengers were on the plane but still it did not take off. We found out there was a snag and the snag was being looked into since half-an-hour. Because she shouted at me Wolfgang was in tears. He was feeling so sad that mother has been insulted like this. The power of his love was so great that the fifty people or so on the balcony watching us, felt a tremendous cool breeze. A big blow came to them and when they opened their eyes they saw that the whole sky was filled with clouds. There was not a single cloud and in one second the whole sky filled up. Then they asked us to get out as they could not take off. When we came back it started raining. You have dll the powers. For e.g. Another side of this left Vishuddhi is that it tries to give an explanation. Like you will say "Telephone someone." He will say, He will not be there Mother." Why give an explanation. You just avoid. Vishnumaya never avoids. Once she has to shine she shines, whatever she is. In the same way we have to be like that. We have to know that we are special people, You are chosen, you are angelic and you have entered into the Kingdom of God and it will all work out. Sahaj Yoga is not meant for useless people. It is meant for people of character, for sorneone special. You have now got your realisation and this Vishriumaya principle has to be expressed, and has to be shown. Don't be afraid that your ego will come. Doesn't matter. 15 Shri Krishna Puja

 also with the speech. Your gestures should show very heart felt emotions. In Sahaja Yoga you hold each others hands and the vibrations start flowing among yourself. It shows it is the communication. These hands are really the beginning of the collectivity. The most important things are the hands which act for your collectivity. There are many angels and ganas who are standing behind you. They also give help to you whenever you want to communicate sornething. They also do your jobs very well. Whatever is expressed in your hands or through your hands they pick up immediately. You will also see your ego. The second part of Shri Krishna's play is that in this you see your ego. There was a Maharastrian lady who would not believe she had a right side. She came to see me in Rome and fell down on the tight side completely. Then she realised that her right side was not alright. So to know whether you have a right or left, a very good method is of meditation. The third situation is to accept whatever is wrong with you. If you do not accept then you are not being kind to yourself. Right Vishuddhi people will always try to correct me. If I say anything they will say 'No'. They will contradict me or try to put their own ideas. Then they discover that it was Wrong. They should not have said it. It is a habit aof saying 'no' to things. I also test you. If I say in the daytirne it is 9 O'clock in the night. You just say "Yes" Try to see. I test you. Some people say if Mother has said it is is so, it is so. Then it starts building up their faith very well and I can see that how they are coming into the realm of real faith. Then when I say something absurd they will just smile. They will know that Mother is just testing us. You have to test yourself. Like Moharnmed Sahib has said ' Your hands will speak and they will give witness agalnst you'. On your hands you will know: Now these hands are the blessings of Shri Krishna. They come out from the same Vishuddhi. There are two chakras of 'Shri and 'Lalita'. With these hands we can feel the vibrations. If your right or left Vishuddhi are too strong you may nof feel. That doesn't mean you haven't got realisation. You have got. You just work out your hands. Vishuddhi has sixteen petals and all ear, nose, throat, eyes are guided by this. Also the sub plexus of the Vishuddhí is the Hamsa Chakra. We have these eyes to see and communicate. The pure eyes communicate pure love. With the pure eyes you can cleanse people, help others, you can bring peace. The purification of the eyes takes place through your Vishuddhi and Agya. Both these have to work out. The nose is very important. Nose has to be pure l.e. you should be able to discard whatever is smelling badly and you should be able to accept whatever is fragrant. Nose is the speciality of Shri Krishna because he is the Kubera and Kubera has given the nose to the Goddess. Some people have a bad habit of moving their nose just to show disapproval. This is insulting yourself. Also we neglect our teeth. The reason for neglect is laziness. At least twice or thrice you must brush your teeth. More important is to change the brush. Also you have to use butter, salt or oil to rub your gums. If you rub your gums properly you will never have problems with your teeth and your gums. In the evening you must brush your teeth otherwise the mouth smells horrible. Also there are people who eat breakfast without brushing their teeth. Teeth are very important. On the teeth depend all the quatities of your Vishuddhi. Avoid a gesture where you clench your teeth. It is dangerous for your tooth. For working your hands you see that you don't use them for useless things. This is very important because you have special hands. These hands are the ones with which you spread the collectivity. Like some people who talk will go on waving their hands about a lot. There is no need to use your hands so much all the time. When you use them it should be decent, regulated and should be very indicative and useful. Just showing off your hands is not good. Do not use Shri Krishna's fingers to order people about. Have respect. These hands are to be used for callectivity. You can say Namaste to thousands of people. I don't like shaking hands. You may get all kinds of pins and needles and problems from another person. When you talk to people you can suggest your softness and sweetness frorm your children and A person who is spiritually endowed has an expression which can never be aggressive. He may not be good looking and attractive. But the expression on the face is absolutely sweet. That is also the blessing of Shri Krishna, I have seen people one year after realization. I was surprised that their faces had changed to much that I could not The Divine Cool Breeze 16,

 Ghazni sit under a tree and he turned Into Shri Krishna. Mahmad said that under my nose the Brahmins were were making money and looting people. I couldn't do anything so Shri Krishna came. You must have cormplete falth In the power of Shri Krishna which is within you. If you have ascended fully ouf of this then he will not trouble you. If you have left Vishuddhi, then he will trouble you. Be careful because Shri Krishno will take your test and make you so miserable that you will not know what happened. Shri Krishna cannot be controlled by any one. He does what he thinks proper. He usually punishes much more than your Mother. She is Ati Raudra and Ati Saumya. She is very hard and very soft, He is not, He will make you alright. You should be sure that you should have your Vishuddhis alright and also Shri Krishna manifesting on others. You don't have to do anything. He will look after you and work it out. Left Vishuddhi is a disease of the West. Why should you feel guilty? You have not murdered anyone. recognise. The whole face becomes mild, soft, peaceful and very joyous. All the qualities of Shri Krishna can be expressed on your face. You can be sometimes very mischievous to look at. So many expressions there are which come on the face and give you a very sweet feeling. Some people have a habit of loaking in the mirror all the time, It gives one a kind of a funny ego. It is better to look at Shri Krishna's photograph than to look at yourself, so that your face will become that of Shri Krishna. It is very dangerOus to all the fime watch your face in the mirror. Do not pay so much attention and importance to your own self. But see to yourseff which is within - to your spirit. If you look after that side all these things will happen in such a beautiful manner, ini The hair is also looked after by Shri Krishna. He is very fond of anything that is like butter. So put ol in your hair. If you don't you will become bald. In the olden days in the West everyone used to put oll. If you don't want to put oil in the daytime you can wash it off. At least once a week you must oll your hair. Shri Krishna's star is Saturn (Shani). If he gets after somebody nobody can do anything Like if Saturn gets after someone that person is finished. Sornetimes it is seven years of 21/2 years he is after you. This Saturn of Shri Krishna is a quality within us that supposing if somebody troubles us, we don't have to do anything. This Shri Krishna will work it out. You can inform the all pervading Power and through that this man or woman or party will be hounded. Automatically it will happen. But you must know that you have the powers of Shri Krishna by which if he gets after someone then nobody can save him. He is the last one who plays around but he doesn't forgive. He gives a long rope to hang yourself, but he never forgives. He says you have to pay for It except when you transcend. If you become a Sahaja Yogi and have transcended then he won't do anything to you. Now we corme to Virata and before that we have to cross the Hamsa. Without that we cannot reach the Virata, Hamsa is the Divine Discretion, It must be within us. Once you develop that you never commit mistakes. With this discretion you have a complete understanding as to what has to be done or not to be done. In many Sahaja Yogis discretion has come even with the left Vishuddhi. With Divine Discretion the first thing that happens is that people get impressed by you. Its teal collectivity. This is a very important point one has to know. While introspecting yourself you just see if you have developed this quality of Divine discretion or not. Like some Sahaja Yogis will fell people they have a bhoot in them. He may be having but the Divine discretion is not to tell him just yet, but to remove it. Divine Discretion gives you a complete understanding as to what is the way to handle another person, or collective; how to talk to others, how to impress on others the right thing. If you have no Divine Discretion you will start speaking what you should not speak and saying at a time when you should not say and you will have no sense of any discretion. The hamsa Chakra physically, mentally and spiritually must be kept alright. Once you get into Verity then all your ideas of separatism and differentiation goes. You do not have any more ideas of racist, nationality, city, village, etc. At that stage you don't belong to anybody. You belong to every place and you Mohammed Ghazni looted Somnath and the temple of Mahadeva, Shri Krishna carne as Ghazni. Mahadeva got out of the temple and was running. Hanumana ran after him, A one point Mahadeva sat down and Hanumana said "you are the God of Gods, then why are you running. What are you afraid of? He said 'You don't know this Mohammed Ghazni'. Then he saw Mahamud that Hanurnan of Mahmud saw 17 Shri Krishna Puja

 don't belong to every place. You don't hanker after any particular food, or any particular type of people. You can adjust yourself into any circumstances, family, people. Nothing bothers you because you are in the Virata. Everything is absorbed by the Virata so you do not feel anything. The Virata suffers not you. That is the stage I want all of you to reach and to become absolutely free. Nothing can impress, influence or lure you, You stand on yourself esteem and the understanding about yourself that you are a Sahaj Yogi and that you are connected with this power and you are sitting in the Kingdom of God. because you become part and parcel of the whole. You can feel everywhere, and be effective everywhere. You must keep saying that, you are all my brothers, you are all my sisters. I love all of them. The whole Sahaj Yoga is my family. Your whole attention should move like that. This is not orly mine. It is everyone's. Everyone has a right. This movement starts going from individual to collective. Such a personality is then the most effective one for any kind of collective work. You must rise above Vishuddhl. If you do not then you can never be Sahaj Yogis. At that point we can never doubt Sahaj Yoga, That's how doubtless awareness can come to us. At the Virata stage there is no doubt left, May God Bless You. The Divine Cool Breeze 18

 Shri Durga Kali Puja St. Denis, Paris 25-7-1992. became like lotuses so fragrant and beautiful. You have to fight it out. I am always with you will all my powers, but you have to fight this society. You have to save so many people and rescue them. Durga or Kall is the destroying from of the goddess, of all the evil and negativity. We have to do this in France because in general, day by day, France is going down. While you people are coming up. The rest of France is in the most pitiable condifion. Today's Puja is to give courage in your hearts. See all around you. You are all nicely enjoying yourself in the tealm of God, and what about the rest of the people. What is going to be the future of this horrible Mooladhara place. Now Freud has been discovered as a fraudulent man and there are books after so many years when he has already deceived the people all over the world. You must take up upon yourself to talk against this kind of anarchy that is working out the destruction of your families. Now this is Krita Yuga, so you will have to pay for whotever you have done on moss scale or Individual soale. If that is the case then France hoas to pay a lot and this Catholic Church has to pay more. They have condemned every incarnation -and every other prophet. They have fortured and forced people and taking all their ideas into their own control. They have made people confess, giving them left Vishuddi. They treated women as nothing. If the wormen decide I'm sure that they can very easily work it out. Ask for the ascent of this country. I know I have worked very hard and you are all there. I'm very happy to see that you all are there to fulfil the desire of the Divine, because now you should know in a very big way masses and masses of people will be destroyed not from without but from within, suddenly you hear so many villains disappear with this disease. Also you must protect yourself. Always give yourself a bandhan, Always lead a clean life. There are certain hyglenic rules of Sahaja Yoga. Please try to follow that. Do not neglect it. If somebody get AIDS do not have him in Sahaja Yoga, whatever may be the conditions or reasons. You have to be very careful. Also I would say, never treat an AIDS patient, Actually they have two types of people. One who is drrogant and the other one that thinks it is better that they should die. They have no will to live. They are either right-sided or left-sided. They can never ascend. May be next generation may be better off if they come back, but as far as this generation is concerned you should know that your responsibility is very great. Gradually by movement from Catholic Church to Freud you haven't got your own personality to understand what is right and what is wrong. The laws are so funny, it depends on the mood of the magistrate. I have never seen such stupid laws as here. Of course in Arnerica there is no justice and do what they like, but here they have no sense of law. Every womoan must dress in such a way that she should be attractive. For what? All kinds of bathroorn cultures. This comes out of drinking. If you drink too much next morning you are so lethargic that you just take a French bath and go. So French Sahaj Yogis must understand that your task is much more difficult than the task of other countrles. Because this country lacks complete wisdom. It is not there in your institutions or government nor in any education. Thus concept of wisdom is that you are egolstical. People have lost their senses and like blotting paper whatever they think is destructive, horrible, sub human they try to absorb. Sahaj Yogis must get hold of books and find out where are we. All the Sahaja Yogis must take a vow that they will fight the society and try to save their country and their country men from complete It is much worse than the gate of hell. It is a mire of filth, You are born here and you have Shri Durga Kal Puja 19

 disaster. There will be no war. Only they will fight thernselves and die. Its a very serlous matter and for that we decided to have this puja of Durga today that all negativity should be destroyed. deliberation, you must think that what can we do to change this? Why not write some books or experiences? Write your experiences. How French parents behave, grand parents behave. What is happening in this country. They are living in fool's paradise. They don't know how destruction is just hanging over their heads. Though you are saved you have to think of others. That is what Sahaj Yoga is. kali wanted to protect the Bhaktas only but you have to protect many more people. You have all the powers. So use them. You can do it. So many deities build up the body of Kal. Every part of Her body was created and looked after by a diety. Later on it is reflected in you all. God has made human beings in his own image. I would say I have made you in my own image. All the dieties oare at your disposal. They are all with you and it is the deities who have brought forth all the beauty that you have, They have made all this beautiful congregation. This beautiful transfor- mation 1 think the whole Europe can be and they have created such angelic divided into two types, The Anglo-Saxons and Latins. The Latins are lett sided and Anglo Saxons are right sided. Now here people are on the left side so here Catholic Church is prospering. The left side gets incurable diseases. You have to work it out through the Guru pada - the status of a Guru for ladies and men. Every Guru has a duty to cleanse the Society in which he lives. Christ fought if alone. So many saints fought it alone. They were treated very bodly and put in jail but they fought. in the same way you have to stand on truth and fight it because you are saints. people out of you. They are always working it out. But you have to have the drive. You had pure desire to ascend but for what? You have to have the light, but for what? You want to become Gurus, for what? To save people for their salvation. Only through your channels, I can work out Sahaja Yoga. It's nota question of killing one Roksha. God alone knows how many there are. And they are everywhere. They were there within you. Now they have gone out. You have to do full justice to Sahaja Yoga. Kall's puja is always done in the night after 12. It all works out but you have to have May God Bless you. The Divine Cool Breeze 20

 Russian Tour 1992 120 Sahaja Yogis were given a free ride to Keive on another Chartered plane,. In a very touching welcome the Sahaja Yogis dressed in traditional costumes recelved Shri Mataji. The public programme was held in an open stadium and 15000 people. She gave them realisation just by asking them to extend their hands towards her, Shri Mataji's arrival in Russia filled new hope in the hearts of Russian Sahaja Yogis. They forget all the problems of this country as they basked in the sunshine of her radiant smile. In a Medical Conference at Moscow with 300 doctors Shri Mataji openly declared that Sahaja Yoga is META science. The doctors were convinced of the medical remedies of Sahaja Yoga and wanted their realisation. The Mahalaxmi Puja, over 2000 Sahaja Yogis attended it at St. Petersbourgh was the greatest blessing. Shri Mataji spoke for over 11/2 hours. The Russians poured their hearts in all the songs they had learnt in Sanskrit, Hindi and Marathi. Shri Mataji was very pleased and showered all her blessings on Russia. She blessed several weddings and distributed pIesents to al the Yogis. Next day we took a charter flight to Togalithi Shri. Mataji had never been here before yet there were over 15,000 Sahaja Yogis, The response at the public programme was so overwhelming that Shri Mataji invited everyone to a Seminar on the shores of the Volga. They sang and danced for hours. It was like ganapatipule I commented; "No, it is much more than that" she observed. "I am fulfilled" she said. The next, over 1000 Sahaja Yogis were present, the day with tears streaming down Yogis bade farewell to their beloved mother at the air- port Shri Mataji consoled them saying that "I am always in your hearts". How did thousands of Russions recognise her instantly considering that they had no exposure to Spirituality or God for over 2 generations? The mayor of the City of Councillors specially invited her to the City Council and honoured her. They prayed for her blessings and guidance and offered land for an Ashram. One afternoon while waiting for a cruser Shri Mataji spontaneously cured several children who has been effected by Chernohl raditions. Obviously the Spirit is ever resilient. 21 Russian Tour 1992

 Diet for Jaundice/Hepatitis and Overheated Liver as Suggested By Shri Mataji Drink every morning and evening one glass of radish leaf juice. Drink in the morning one glass of kokum syrup. Holding an ice-pack with the left hand, place it on the liver, with the right hand toward the pieture of H. H. Shri Mataji and meditate without any candle light or diya (lamp) in front of Shri Mataji's picture. You can eat Bengali sweets. No fried food, red meat or fat under any circumstances. No fish or dairy products at all except buttermilk in which butter has been skimmed off. No cheese at all. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. Liv 52 tablets : 3-4 tablets per day for two months. 8. bunenot All citrus fruits are O.K. (no mango, apple, banana, 9. papaya or chikku) 10. Sugar cane juice or sugar cane is very good. 11. No butter at all. 12. No Arud daal (Arhar/Tuar) Boiled rice, all vegetables, moong daal are O.K. 13. 14. No chillies in food. 15. Ginger, potato, onion, and cucumber are O.K. 16. Regular intake of lemon juice with vibrated sugar is O.K. 17. No ice cream. 18. Amla Ka muraba is good and can be taken with both meals. 19. Silver varak on food is good. 20. All vegetables fruits grown under the earth are O.K. 21. No groundnuts, no ground nut oil. Groundnut oil is very bad for liver. Sunflower oil in little quantity is alright. The Divine Cool Breeze 22

 DACHA Above Lapiz Lakes and Sunny Dales Through Rambling Lanes and, Whispering Boughs Neighbouring enchanting vales of ancient lores and prospering shops Behold the Shrine of Madona Russia. Brick by Brick built with love and Prayer Minsk Marble, Siberian Birches & Togliatti Carvings Singing greenery Vibrant flowers, Laden with fruits, the garden of Vaikuntha The Butterfly chases the Bee and asks whence comes the Adishakti O Russia awaken, thy Saviour is come To take away thy woes Gone shall be all mental anguish Gone shall be the cries of hungry children Shri Mahalaxmi has Blessed thy land with milk & honey filled thy coffers with Abundance galore Where thy may eat, wask & Dwell Beware! the spirit of Mother Russia is awake None dare cast an evil eye Wash away thy tears The Blossom time has come Glory to the Goddess Shri Nirmala Ma All Russia Bows at your Lotus feet And welcomes you with its Golden heart 23 Dacha



----------------------

1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. IV, No. 8 & 9
INDEX
1)
Shri Matajis Talk To Sahaja Yogis, Australia
Shri Buddha Puja
2)
Shri Krishna Puja
3)
Shri Durga Kali Puja
4)
5)
Russian Tour 1992
Liver Diet
6)
The Divine Cool Breeze
1.
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9.pdf-page-1.txt 
 SAHAJA YOGIS
SHRI MATAJI'S TALK TO
ON 1ST MARCH, 1992
at Glenrock, Australia.
coordinate with you people, but you always have
a direct relationship with Me. So far all these
people who believed in God, had no direct
connection. But now you have. So why not use
Me? And if there are leaders, you have to ask the
leaders,
themselves and start preaching people, We don't
like preaching. We have had enough of it. There is
no néed to preach others. If you have to preach.
Preach yourself but not to others.
Today I wanted to talk to you about
certain matters where people get quite confused.
There are certain things we must understand in
Sahaja Yoga.
TL First point, there is no fundamentalism in
sahaja yoga, Nobody should use My words, or say
Mother said so, nobody should. That is how all
these hierarchies have been built, in the churches,
everywhete. Everybody can read, everybody can
find out. That is a way of controlling people by
saying Mother said so. That shows that you are
frying to use My words to tell people off. You are
not in charge.
Nobody should take things upon
One has to understand that it is a living
process. We can understand from a cell at the
end of a root. It has intelligence, it is completely in
control of itself. And it has a direct connection with
the divine power. So it moves by itself, but the
attention is on the collective, like the roots of tree.
It moves in such a direction that there is no
argument, there is no quarrelling, in the sense,
there is no obstacle. Now supposing. there is a big
obstacle like a stone it goes round it. Encircles
many a times for the future tree that has to come.
If I say something in the programme of
sahaja yogis, I say it because it is heart to heart
talk between My children and Myself. And it
should not be just sent over, through your
computers all over the world, without consulting,
without censoring it by the leader. There is no
haste in sahaja yoga. So that should not be done.
Now this I have said, definitely.
So from the past what do you get is the
relative idea as to where you have reached. And
from the future, you have to know how far you
have to go. This is very important thing to
understand, Because, these things creep into the
western mind very easily. They don't want to have
direct relationships with Me. That's how you will
start forming groups. One person will stand up
Mother says so. Somebody will use My tapes,
anything, There is no need, at all, for you, to get to
these things and listen to them. if they want to
create something they should talk to Me directly,
and not to do it themselves on their own, which is
a very wrong attitude towards sahaja yoga. So first
of all we must know it is a living process. Youi
cannot put on all we must know it is a living
process. You cannot put on it artificial types of
things which will curb the growth of sahaja yoga.
It's very important to understand. I find that
nobody should take over from the people don't understand sahaja yoga. You
cannot mould into any pattern. It moulds by itself,
Whatever I have sald nobody remembers,
only they use My name. Mother said so in 1970. In
1970 I never spoke in English. So all this historical
utterances should not be used. We live in the
present. That time may be, the situation is different.
May be because sahaja yogis were just coming to
sahaja yoga, may be they needed some sort of a
guideline. It isa journey. You are passing through
a slope, then you have to use a different type of
method. Now you are walking on a plain land.
Then you don't behave as if you are climbing a
plain land. Then you don't behave as if you are
olimbing a mountain. So it is a journey of sahaja
yoga to mountain. So it is a journey of sahaja
yoga - to our destination. The destination is that,
we have to emancipate maximum number of
human beings into sahaja yoga.
T But that should not be taken over. I again
tell you -
leaders. I have appointed the leaders just to
works by itself.
Talk to Sahaj Yogis
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9.pdf-page-2.txt 
 You have to have marriages. But this
marriage problem comes when women don't
know how to adjust, mainly,. I must tell you. The first
thing is, you have to really spoil your husbands.
Actually they should entirely depend on you for
everything. Then, what will they do. But in a loving
manner. Not in an oppressive way, Do not
demand anything, do not expect anything. Just
be gentle, kind, express your love. Then they get
used to it. They can't live without it. These tricks
should have been told to you by your parents, but
they might have been the same as you are, So
you don't know the tricks of the trade. After
marriage we have to say, we are, we. Shouldn't
say 1. And also understand, you see men are
different from women. You are the preserver of the
society. They are the creator. You have to have
much more patience and compassion. Which you
have, no doubt. You must take to your feminine
qualities and you will be amazed you are shakti for
men. You are the power for men. That's why men
must respect women. if they don't respect
women, not their romanticism and nonsense. But
as personality if they don't respect. then they
suffer everyway, specially materially. Materially
they suffer and also reputation wise. Some women
are extremely demanding and expecting too
much. Perhaps may be they see those pictures of
Romeo Juliet and things like that. But if you see
Romeo Juliet, you will see what Shakespeare
wanted to communicate. He was an avadhuta.
So we cannot have any hierarchy. Never.
These hierarchies ultimately become a barrier
between you and Me. Which I don't like. All the
leaders are told that whatever letters you get,
whatever things you have. You should send it over
to Me. I would like to see then Myself. But
sometimes they do, some of the leaders specially
in Australia I had a very bad experience. But now
you have a very wise leader here and a very
sensible person. I don't think there is anything
wrong with him. Only thing I think he is rather too
mild sometimes with some people. He should have
told. Yesterday I had to suffer so much because of
two ladies. Because he never told them how
horrible they were. So I had to absorb all their
nonsense quite a lot. Because, if a leader is not
mild you'il sit on his head. If he is little strict you'll
get after him.
Only thing one has to realise, that
everything is a living process and through some
sort of a coordinator, Mother is trying to work out
in a more simpler manner. For example, if
everybody writes to me for a small little thing,
sometimes write for everything.
thing, sometimes that I really laugh. There is no
need to ask Me, like Mother we cannot get Indian
spices here. All these stupid things.
Absolutely useless
Then second is about the husbands or
about the wives. Because you should not see
those films or those televisions, which if you see
invariably show the fight between husband and
wife. So if you go on seeing that you will learn you
will pick it up. It's like a parrot you know. You pick
up all the words which are to be said to your
husband, harsh words, or to your wife. And then
you work it out that way.
He wanted to communicate that these are
ll
futile enterprise. Both of them died. They could
never enjoy companionship.
We had so many problems like this, in
England also. So I asked them, what books you
read? Most of them read books of rornance. But
romance before marriage. There are no books
about romance after the marriage. So naturally
there is a problem. After marriage is quarreling,
before mariage romance. So why marry? And
when I said that man is the head of the family, it
doesn't mean that man should dominate a
woman. Supposing I say that he is your leader, it
doesn't mean that he should dominate you. If
head of the family starts dominating, if the brain of
the body starts dominating, what will happen to
this body. It's stupid, to conclude like that. But you
are the heart of the family. Brain can die, but
heart dies the last.
And so many questions could have been
easily solved. I think to work out a marriage is only
question of a woman, not so much of man.
Normally men don't want to marry, normally.
Though they have no responsibility, they don't
have to produce children, anything. But still they
don't want to marry. They are sort of little bit
afraid. In the west specially, not in India. In India
men want to marry because they get somebody
who will spoil them, who will never answer them,
listen them, be humble. But here in the west I have
seen men don't want to marry. One fellow I told
to get married, he
that you have
disappeared, for three days.
The Divine Cool Breeze
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9.pdf-page-3.txt 
 So try to understand, there should be a
But going to sormebody's house is now
becoming a problem for Me. Because if I go to
somebody's house that person gets the ego O
She came to my house. So again, you are not to
say that mother this is my house. Mother this is Your
house. If I go there it is well and good. If I don't go
there well and good. What does it matter?
complete integration between heart and brain.
And children are the attention in the society of
sahaja yoga. So here, how can you have such an
idea that if I say the head, then he dominates the
heart. How can it be? So they pick up few words
from here and there and use it for justifying their
own weaknesses in sahaja yoga. But this kind of
escape is not going to help you to rise. You are
golng
benevolence.
Now again I tell you nothing has to be sent
through your IBM or anything, without the
consultation and censoring by the leader. It can
land Me into great difficulties and fomorrow
could be in jail. Why don't you understand? And
you write whatever you feel like. So this kind of
irresponsible behaviour, I can't understand. And
things I never said also can be said. This shows
immaturity, and haste. Such things should be
consulted. And use your discretion, You need to
consult your leader, which are vital, important.
Specially things which are written down and
published. Things which circulate, is extremely
important to be seen by the leaders., There is no
hurry about it. Any book written, any tapes to be
released, anything. Should be done with the
cormplete consent and understanding of the
leader. I would say the leader must sign those
papers. Then I can hold hirm responsible. But if you
are arbitrary and start doing things then it could
be dangerous.
against yourself. Is
not for
your
What I am telling you, is that if you try to
accept all these outdated Ideas in sahaja yoga,
you'll go down, you'll rot. We are fresh and new.
We are living. We don't accept these kind of Ideas
about men or women. But when I said that man is
the head of the family, that doesn't mean that
you dominate your wife and torture her. Nor does
it mean, that the leader should dominate. They
should use their wisdom, love, compassion, and
guide you in the proper way.
Thave received a letter which is very funny
that own leader's wife, not the leader, but the
wife, forbade the sahaja yoginis not to come to
the house and to the programme because I could
not go to her house. Can you imagine? This is
absurd. Now if I tell her, she'll be mnore harsh on
that person. But by doing that she doesn't know
how much she is missing points in sahaja yoga. I
can go anywhere I feel like. But she should have
taken the blame upon herself. Also, there is a thing
that this is my house. This is the biggest nonsense.
Mother should come to my house. With Indians
specially, it is too much. Please come to my house
Mother. Come and have dinner with me. Who are
Simple things I will tell you what. They asked
Me Mother, what do You think of starting a Vishwa
Nirmala Dharma in Melbourne? I sald alright. I
didn't know It is going to be an association, there
is going to be an election and all, nothing. Vishwa
Nirmala Dharma is everywhere. But they don't
have any association nothing, It is just a kind of a
society which is just spreading Vishwa Nirmala
Dharma. There is no sort of any organisation about
it. We only have Trusts. And we don't want to have
any electioning or all that. Again, if some wrong
type of people get in, then sahaja yoga will be
ousted completely. So you can only have Trusts.
And if you want to do something else you can
form it separately but it should not be Vishwa
Nirmala Dharma or sahaja yoga. Nothing doing.
Because I said yes that doesn't mean that you
should go that far with forming this, that,
association and all that. It is a news to Me. Airight,
whatever has been done has to be rectified. And
we have to bring it down to a proper level. There
should be people who should be elected as good
you? You are a sahaja yogi. So your house is Mine,
you are Mine, everything is Mine. What is there to
come to your house? Then you are separate. All
you houses are Mine. If I go there it doesn't mean
that I love you more that anybody else.
Like somebody asked Me, why did You
take Your birth in Christian religion. I said I had to
take My birth somewhere. Better was for Christians
because Christians are absolutely fundamentalists,
mentally. That's more dangerous. Muslims you can
make them out they are fundamentalists because,
they do not have that finesse about them. Openly
they are fundamentalists. But Christians, are very
great fundamentalists.
Taik to Sahaj Yogis
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9.pdf-page-4.txt 
 On food yes. Like in England they osked for baked
beans in the the morning. Now these horible
tinned baked beans which you been giving to
them, are not at suitable for Indian climate.
people who are in sahaja yoga, who so far have
been doing, everything in a straight forward
manner and who have been very very sensible
about it.
You see, if you see the western health of a
person, you go to India you get diarrhoea. You
cannot stand heat you cannot stand cold
Anything that changes you feel so slck you are
tired all the time. You must introspect. You work a
little and you are tired. What is the reason? The
reason is, you think foo much. Same with your
marriages. You start thinking, what are my
priorities, what should I do, start analysing. Just do
it what you want to do. This thinking too much is
responsible for your susceptibility to diseases: Of
course mooladhara is one of the most important
chakras, no doubt. If the mooladhara is weak, you
catch it. you can catch any disease. Also the
secret diseases, herpes and all these things are
very common in the west. But not in India, very
few. Because of a strong moladhara. So now first
problem is, how to strengthen your mooladhara.
There is also a suggestion that we should
project ourselves to outside things. If it means that
we have to go to other organisations, is wrong. All
these organisations are dead organisations. They
are not living organisation. But if they want to
come to us alright. But we should not go and
break our heads with them. Because you land up
not only with opposition but you will catch from
them. Negativity, Try to understand. We have to
be very careful. You can only have sahaja yogis
who are seekers, who are honeşt, who are
humble, who do not want any money or power
out of sahaja yoga. It will grow. It has grown.
Two people came from Australia and see
how many are there. It will definitely grow, no
doubt. But do not try to organise it. You cannot
organise. Once you start organising, then the
growth can be stunted. Like you have seen
bonsai. Bonsai when they cut it and organise it, it
becomes a small tree. But I haven't seen any tree
which grows, if it is organised grows more. At the
most you can nourish it, at the most you can
water it, at the most you can see the needs of this,
But you cannot just, make it grow more.
The second one is the kind of food you are
eating here is not so fresh. Try to eat fresh food. At
least in Australia you can get it. As far as possible,
take to more carbohydrates. If your are thinking
too much best is to take to carbohydrates. You
are so much worried about putting on weight. I
don't know why you want to be skinny. What is the
need? On the contrary a person who has little
plumpness absorbs vibrations much better. But do
you know the vibrations sit on the fat, "medhe
sthhitah". That way they go on the nerves.
Because nerve is made of fat, your brain is also
made of fat.
All organisations cut the growth. In the
beginning It may look that by organising it, it has
increased. Even religions like Christianity, Islam,
Buddhism, Hinduism etc., when organised and
grown artificially is empty and hollow. We really
want substantial people, substantial dharma -
Innate, within ourselves. We don't have to take to
these artificial things. We are using lots of artificial
manure now. And people are revoiting against
thing. Because they think all these artificial things
are harmful to us. So allow it to work out through
the grace of this divine power, in a more natural
manner than putting artificial organisations,
artificial this and that. In grows like a business. But
ultimately comes to recession. All those who had
education in Harvard, are responsible all over the
world and all over the world there is recession.
So, whatever is pumped into your head
you accept. That is why the entrepreneurs are
definitely controlling. You have no idea. Because
we don't have that wisdom to see. Now they sald
alright, you shouldn't put any oil on your head,
alright? Never put any oil. So you become bald.
So they can sell wigs. You can put oll, before,
previous night. Just to make your hair grow
properly you must give them nourishment. Why do
you starve them? What's wrong with ol I Just don't
understand. You must massage your body, is a
very good idea. Also massage your head. You
must look after yourself. But just because there's a
fashion not to put oil you lust do not have any oil
anywhere near you.
So now, regarding your children. I have
been really studying the nature of western
chldren. Their attention is never on the right things.
Not on studies, I should say, not at all on studies.
The Divine Cool Breeze
6.
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9.pdf-page-5.txt 
 They all used to put oil if you see films say,
about thirty years back. Nobody had dry hair, all
shining nice hair. They were supposed to be quite
good looking. And this bhootish type of hair then
when you have all the bhoots will take over,
because they will think this is the head for me. So
try to understand what is good for your body and
what you should do. Massaging your body is a
Without oll, I cannot exist,
because My work is on Sahastrara. It's very
soothing to massage your hair, very soothing for
You are realised souls, there's
vibrations flowing, should massage your head
nicely. Take about an hour on a Saturday.
Saturday is the day of Shani, is the day of Saturn,
the day of Shri Krishna. He is so fond of butter and
hygiene. Then bathing. All these little little things
are very important for you and for your children.
So the hyglene part is very poor, personal
hygiene. Of course your houses will be clean,
the carpet
immediately you will pick it up. Because this
carpet may be sold later on. Whatever is saleable,
you look after it. Now your teeth can also be
saleable. You need not neglect them. But you will
not be careful. Whatever is saleable you are very
careful. Your house very careful, your carpets very
caretul. But whatever is not saleable, is not worth
it. Now in sahaja yoga, we should know, that
nothing is saleable. Whatever we have and own,
we'll keep it with ourselves, of give it to our
children, or give it as presents to others. We are
not going to sell anything. Everybody is a seller.
House is to be sold, very particular about the
house. If something goes wrong, you will shout at
children. We were surprised, that these children
were morecareful about nonsensical things like
carpets than their teeth. Something fell down on
the carpet, immediately they all rushed and
cleaned the carpet. We started wondering what's
the matter with them. That's not their job. That's
the training they have. Whatever saleable, they try
to put right. So we must change our mind and say
that whatever we own we are not going to sell it.
absolutely. If anything falls on
very good thing.
your nerves.
oil.
Also you people are very fond of sun I can
understand that. I don't know why in Australia you
are so fond of sun when it is so much. But
because it Is a fashion in west, we are all going to
the sun, to the sea, and spoiling your skin. Your skin
cannot have the glow. While you see, if you do
not use sun-bathing as some sort of a treatment,
it's alright. Indians used to wonder about the
English. There was a saying, that an Englishman
and a mad dog in the sun. Even a sane dog won't
go. All such things should be understood.
Personal hygiene should also be seen. Use
lot of water to wash your hands and when you are
using toilets water should be used everytime.
Otherwise your mooladhara can never be alright.
Your children I am surprised, they don't want to
brush their teeth. And if you tell them you have to
brush, they start crying. If you tell them you have
to have a bath, they start crying. Imagine in that
sweltering heat of India they don't want to have a
bath. And they smell. But when you tell them, "Our
parents also smell like that". Their mouths smell. In
India atleast twice we must brush - once in the
morning, once in the evening minimum. Evening
time we all brush our teeth, In India. It's very
important. Now these are such small things which
our culture in India has already taught us, long
time back. So the way, is when your children are
growing, you take them in the bathroom, make a
fun out of it. Now let's see the wall brush our teeth.
You brush your teeth, I'll brush my teeth. Now see
whose are whiter. Like that. Make a fun out of it.
You are the one who can teach them good
Or sometimes we have to sell the house,
alright. It's not so important. In any way whether
the house is clean or dirty you'll fetch the same
price. That's My experience, whether you
decorate or nat. On the contrary they like
undecorated houses.
So now, this is what is materialism. That we
try to get things just for selling off. On the contrary
we have to look out what are the beautiful things
made by hand. What can we have? Whatever is
made by hand, by people. You can have few.
And that can be given to your children, to their
progeny.
You must find out why the child is crying in
My programme. Must be something wrong, must
be some badha. If a child cries in My presence, or
is afraid that means there is some sort of badha,
which you should try to remove. So now we have
to change our attitude towards ourselves, we are
specialy blessed people, we have to look after
our body, look after our children, we have to look
Talk to Sahaj Yogis
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9.pdf-page-6.txt 
 despite all that, people don't understand why My
husband allows me to do that. Because he knows
it gives him all the blessings. He told openly to
sahaja yogis that all these awards I have got
because of my Wife. But She is working for God. I
wanted to say also you donated lot's of money. Is
the generositfy. And if you donate then you get it
also from another thing. But I don't want it for My
personal thing at all. But is a sign of your
generosity. That is a common thing from all the
leaders. Melbourne leader says that nobody wants
to pay, Only they want to take advantage of
sahaja yoga.: It is not a very good thing from
Lakshmi point of view.
of much greater
after things which
importance than material things. That is the spirit.
afe
So ultimately we come to the point that
the spirit which has given us all this beauty, which
has given us such moonlight in our life, such
sunshine in our work, which has made us so sweet.
After all what we have done for the spirit to satisfy
it, to enjoy it. So the most important thing for us is
our spirit. And we should seek the comfort of the
spirit. The more you think about your spirit. the
deeper you'll go. And the joy you'll get will be also
very deep and you'l settle down very nicely,
embedded in spirituality enjoy the collectivity.
In general I can talk to you about things
Also one has to understand that, once you
that firstly that you have to ask your leaders if you
have to do anything extraordinary. Now it is your
discretiorni. And the last but not the least is this- all
the leaders complain that no one wants to pay
any money whatsoever for sahaja yoga. Now you
see actually as you know that, whatever money
you give me for pujas I buy silver for you. And you
are given the equal amount of silver as one would
glve to Europeans. But as far as the puja money is
concerned it is very low. First they used to give me
just one dollar. Of course it was all in coins which
I brought it back. But otherwise whatever is there,
Is. I am not using it for. Myself I don't need it. I
should nomally, because It's given to Me. But I just
thought that instead of that if I give you silver you
will have silver for puja which is very important.
And that it will be very auspicious. But the way
people want to pay is rather reluctant. I agree you
people are now sunning into problem about
money. But may be, one of the reasons may be
that, do yau know you pay the lowest in the whole
world. No cone pays so low as that. Atleast they
pay 21 and 11 in India. Minimum. So whatever it is,
whatever suits you. I am not going to say anything,
whether you collect less or more i am going to
give you silver because your are so many people.
Now I have to do that. I always put the maximum
amount between you and Europe. You are also a
continent as Europe is.
join sahaja yoga whether you pay or not pay or
anything, you think you are a liability. That's very
wrong also. For every smnall thing they want help.
Of course they are to be helped. We try to help
people who haven't got money. But they become
sort of liabilities. And they expect so much from
other sahaja yogis or from Me also. You marry
sormeone then that person becornes a headache.
Letters after letters, telephanes after telephones is
not proper. Of course some child is sick, you can
inform Me. But a child is hot tempered, he is
misbehaving, is on My head. May be you have
been hot tempered, you are fighting with your
wife is fighting with you, may be that. Why not
correct that point?
Even the smallest thing they think should be
done by sahaja yoga. Sahaja yaga must look after
this thing, sahaja yaga must do that. So ane should
understand that to you sahaja yoga, is a liability
not you are a liability to sahaja yoga. That's the
best attitude. Of course in a way you are a liability.
But what should your attitude? Now you are
matured enough, When the son grows up and
matures then he looks ofter the parents. In the
same way you have to look after sahaja yoga
rather than sahaja yoga looking after you all the
time. And pestering sahaja yogis about it.
This has to be understood very well, that
sahaja yoga is not liable for you. You are liable for
sahaja yoga. Sahaja yoga has given you so much.
God has done so much for you. What have you
done for God, always think like that. If you start
thinking like that, the more work you put in for
sahaja yoga, the more you exert your mind for
sahaja yoga in a proper, living, balanced manner,
But one has to understand, that atleast we
should really think of doing something for sahaja
yoga. What can we do for sahaja yoga? As you
know very well, that, i have used My husband's
money quite a lot. And again I am going to work
out something in Australia it will be very good for
people. And I can involve My money will them. But
The Divine Cool Breeze
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9.pdf-page-7.txt 
 sahaja yoga is a prayer, is a rapport, is a oneness
with God, is what we can call the worship. And
once you start doing that you will not bother who
criticises you, what people say to you, nothing. But
you'll feel such relationships and understanding.
the more you ate helped, the more you grow, the
more you enjoy. And so, foday's lecture is for all of
you in a way because I don't know what applies
to whom. But you should not put it on somebody
else but take it for yourself. That we arenot going
to be liabilities on sahaja yoga but a support. We
have to look after sahaja yoga. Which is a very
beautiful attitude, I don't need sahaja yoga. But I
am worried about sahaja yoga, about sahaja
yogis. To Me they are all My liabilities. I have to
look after them, I have to worry about them, I
have to listen to them. I receive letters and all that.
I mean this kind of work if sormebody has to do,
nobody would accept. In every way I have to
support. Because My Spirit gets satisfied. I am not
doing for your satisfaction. I am doing for My own
satistaction. It's seifishness, So when you reach that
Selfhood you will understand what this self needs.
And you will put your mind to it. And you will be
surprised that when you start doing something for
others, for sahaja yoga it's very much rewarding.
And very much like a prayer. Everything is a
prayer, In sahaja yoga, whatever you do for
am sure this Shiv Puja will establish
definitely at a much higher level, I am sure. And
you will know when you are. Here we are in direct
confact with our Spirit. Here we know about our
Spirit. We are obliged to our Spirit. We are obliged
to our spirit. What it has done to us. We respect it.
And that's how I have seen there's certain
change. And a very great height suddenly they
achieve it. And I am Sure this will happen to
,
Australians. Now forget your small differences-
fighting for power, fighting for money, nonsense.
Try to be alright. There are some people who got
caught up because of this nonsense in Melbourne.
They should all cleanse thermselves out, put
themselves tight, look after fhemselves. All My
blessings with you.
May God bless you all.
Talk to Sahaj Yogis
www
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9.pdf-page-8.txt 
 despite all that, people don't understand why My
husband allows me to do that. Because he knows
it gives him all the blessings. He told openly to
sahaja yogis that all these awards I have got
because of my Wife. But She is working for God. I
wanted to say also you donated lot's of money. Is
the generosity. And if you donate then you get it
also from another thing. But I don't want it for My
personal thing at all. But is a sign of your
generosity. That is a common thing from all the
leaders. Melbourne leader says that nobody wants
to pay. Only they want to take advantage of
sahaja yoga. It is not a very good thing from
Lakshmi point of view.
of much greater
after things which
importance than material things. That is the spirit.
are
So ultimately we come to the point that
the spirit which has given us all this beauty, which
has given us such moonlight in our life, such
sunshine in our wark, which has made us so sweet.
After all what we have done for the spirit to satisfy
it, to enjoy it. So the most important thing for us is
our spirit. And we should seek the comfort of the
spirit. The more you think about your spirit, the
deeper you'll go, And the Joy you'll get will be also
very deep arnd you'll settle down very nicely,
embedded in spirituality enjoy the collectivity.
In general I can talk to you about things
Also one has to understand that, once you
that firstly that you have fo ask your leaders if you.
have to do anything extraordinary. Now it is your
discretion. And the last but not the least is this - all
the leaders complain that no one wants to pay
any money whatsoever for sahaja yoga. Now you
see actually as you know. that, whafever money
you give me for pujas i buy silver for you. And you
are given the equal armount of silver as one would
give to Europeans. But as far as the puja money is
concerned it is very iow. First they used to give me
just one dollar. Of course it was all in coins which
I brought it back. But ofherwise whatever is there,
Is, I am not using it for. Myself I don't need it.
should normally, because it's given to Me, But I Just
thought that instead of that if I give you silver you
will have silver for puja which is very important.
And that it will be very auspiclous. But the way
people want to pay is rather reluctant,. I agree you
people are now Junning into problem about
money. But may be, one of the reasons may be
that, do you know you pay the lowest in the whole
world. No one pays so low as that. Afleast they
pay 21 and 11 in India. Minimum. So whatever it is,
whatever suits you. I am not going to say anything,
whether you collect less or more I am going to
give you silver because your are so many people.
Now I have to do that, I always put the maximum
amount between you and Europe. You are also a
continent as Europe is.
join sahaja yoga whether you pay or not pay or
anything, you think you are a liability. That's very
wrong also, For every small thing they want help.
Of course they are to be helped. We try to help
people who haven't got money. But they become
sort of liabilities. And they expect so much from
other sahaja yogis or from Me alsa, You marry
someone then that person becornes a headache.
Letters after letters, telephones after telephones is
not proper. Of course some child is sick, you con
inform Me, But a child is hot tempered, he is
misbehaving, is on My head. May be you have
been hot fempered, you are fighting with your
wife is fighting with you, may be that. Why not
correct that point?
Even the smallest thing they think should be
done by sahaja yoga. Sahaja yoga must look after
this thing, sahaja yoga must do that. So one should
understand that to you sahaja yoga, is a liability
not you are a liability to sahaja yoga. That's the
best attitude. Of course in a way you are a liability.
But what should your attitude? Now you are
matured enough. When the son grOws up and
matures then he looks after the parents. In the
same way you have to look after sahaja yoga
rather than sahaja yoga looking after you all the
time. And pestering sahaja yogis about it.
This has to be understood very well, that
sahaja yoga is not liable for you. You are liable for
sahaja yoga. Sahaja yoga has given you so much.
God has dane so much for you. What have you
done for God, always think like that. If you start
thinking like that, the more work you put in for
sahaja yoga, the more you exert your mind for
sahaja yoga in a proper, living, balanced manner,
But one has to understand, that atleast we
should really think of doing something for sahaja
yoga. What can we do for sahaja yoga? As you
know very well, that, I have used My husband's
money quite a lot. And ogain I am going to work
out something in Australia it will be very good for
people. And i can involve My money wil them. But
The Divine Cool Breeze
8.
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9.pdf-page-9.txt 
 sahaja yoga is a prayer, is a rapport, is a oneness
with God, is what we can call the worship. And
once you start doing that you will not bother who
criticises you, what people say to you, nothing. But
you'll feel such relationships and understanding.
the more you are helped, the mote you grow, the
more you enjoy. And so, today's lecture is for all of
you in a way because I don't know what applies
to whom. But you should not put it on somebody
else but take it for yourself. That we arenot going
to be liabilities on sahaja yoga but a support. We
have to look after sahaja yoga. Which is a very
beautiful attitude. I don't need sahaja yoga. But I
am worried about sahaja yoga, about sahaja
yogis. To Me they are all My liabilities. I have to
look after them, I have to worry about them, I
have to listen to them, I recelve letters and all that.
I mean this kind of work if somebody has to do.
nobody would accept. In every way I have to
support. Because My Spirit gets satisfied. I am not
doing for your satisfaction. I am doing for My own
satisfaction. Il's selfishness. So when you reach that
Selfhood you will understand what this self needs.
And you will put your mind to it. And you will be
surprised that when you start daing something for
others, for sahaja yoga it's very much rewarding.
And very much like a prayer. Everything is a
prayer. In sahaja yoga, whatever you do for
I am sure this Shiv Puja will establish
definitely at a much higher level, I am sure. And
you will know when you ale. Here we are in direct
contact with our Spirit. Here we know about our
Spirit. We are obliged to our Spirit. We are obliged
to our spirit. What it has done to us. We respect t.
And that's how I have seen there's certain
change. Anda very great height suddenly they
achieve it. And I am sure this will happen to
Australians. Now forget your small differences-
fighting for power, fighting for money, nonsense.
Try to be alright. There are some people who got
caught up because of this nonsense in Melbourne.
They should all cleanse themselves out, put
thermselves right, look aftet themselves: All My
blessings with you.
May God bless you all.
Talk to Sahaj Yogis
www.
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Shri Buddha Puja
Shudy Camps,
England. 31.5.92
see Buddhists, they do all this, even if they are
Kings. One of the Kings was Ashoka. He tried to
lead a complete ascetic life. It was a very difficult
life and they thought that by doing all that they
will achieve their realisation. Two of his disciples
did get their realisation. But the whole life was dry,
harsh and insipid. There was no fun in it. No
children were allowed, No family life was allowed.
As in every religion all of them got lost into
some sort of a fundamentalism because none of
them got realization and that's why everybody
established their own style of religion. Tao, Zen are
all off-shoots of the sarne. Buddha felt that one
has to seek something beyond life. He was a king's
son, had a nice wife and son, naturally anybody in
that position will be quite satisfied. One day he
saw a sick man, a beggar and a dead man. He
couldn't understand how this misery has come.
What is the need to have this misery. So he gave
up his farmily and luxuries of life and went in search
of the truth, Like many of you have done. He read
all the Upnishads, books to find the truth but he
couldn't got anything. He took complete Sanyasa,
as far as food is concerned. He gave up
everything. Ultimately he was lying under
banyan tree when Adi Shoakti gave him realization.
Also because he was one of the ones marked for
a special place in the virata. He hoad achieved
that.
It wos a Sangha. (Collectivity) but in that
collectivity there was no rapport as they were not
supposed to talk too much. They could only talk
about meditation and of achleving the highest
life. That idea continued in so many religions. Then
they started rnaking people take away the money
of the householders by saying that you hove to
give up everything. Even at the time of Buddha
they had to give up everything. But here it was a
genuine effort of Buddha to take them to
enlightenment. To make them people who were
knowledgeable about the absolute reality. It did
not happen. That is the reason we find that
Buddhists have gone into different types of funny
Buddhism. For example - In Japan, one was not
allowed to kill any animal. So they said we will not
kill any animal but will eat killed animals: They
could kill human beings. Japanese became
expert in killing human beings. How people find
out loopholes. Second type of Buddhism came
when Lao Tze taught about Tao. Tao is the
Kundalini. The people just couldn't understand
what he was talking about. He expressed himself in
paintings etc. To deviate from that kind of a harsh
Buddhism. Somehow despite that it never took
proper roots. There's a river called Yang-tze where
the scene changes every five minutes and the
beautiful mountains take a form and there are lots
of waterfalls. It is said that you should not divert
your attention to these temptations which are
outside. We should see them but move and that is
what is Tao. They went into Art. Basically Buddha
never thought of Art. He said that you have to
introspect and go within deep down and find out
what is the absolute, So the whole thing started
What we must see from his life is that he
discovered and found out that desire is the cause
of all the miseries. He did not know what was the
Pure Desire. That's how he could not explain to
people that they have to take to their awakening
through their Kundalini. As he had followed such a
ascetic life that became the code for the
Buddhists. He used to have at least thousand
people with him barefeet and without any
arrangement for tood or stay. They wore supposed
to shave off their hair conpletely. They wore only
one dress, whether it was warm or cold. They were
not allowed to sing. dance, or entertain
themselves by any method. Food was collected
from the villages they visited, whatever they got as
alms. They would offer their guru and then eat
later. They would go barefeet in the scorching
heat in the mud or rain. They gave up all family
relationships. Even if the husband and wife joined
the Sangha then they were not supposed to
behave like husband and wife. One had to give
up all physical, mental and emotional wants. If you
The Divine Cool Breeze
10
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9.pdf-page-11.txt 
 deviating.
boundless and free expression of God's love. Even
now there are many conditionings which are still
working in us. Sorne of you are very proud of your
nationalities. We cannot mix up with other people.
We are too high for the other people. You are now
universal being so how can you have these stupid
limitations which are mythical. You have the light
within and you can see that you need to drop it
out. If you still cannat drop it out then you must
know that you need more power. You must learn
how to raise your Kundalini and be connected
with Divine Power all the time so that you are in
thoughtless awareness and that you grow within
yourself in depth.
Then the Zen system was also mixed up
with Kundalini, which was started in Japan. In the
Zen systerm they used to hit on the back of the
spinal chord and the chakras, by doing this they
would fry to raise the Kundalini. In the Zen system
they developed very harsh methods of raising the
Kundalini. It went to such a limit that I have met
people who have broken their spinal chords. The
Kundalini will never rise it the spinal chord is
broken. I met the hedd of the Viditama Zen
system. They called me because he was very sick
and they asked me to cure him. I found that he
was not at all a realized Soul and did not know a
word about Kundalini. I asked him what is Zen. It
means Dhyan, to meditate. He was so confused
about Zen. They had no realized souls for many
centuries. Just imagine under what circumstances
you got your realisation without sacrificing, giving
up anything. working out these
penances. Because Buddha is the tapa on the
Agya Chakra. So are Christ and Mahavira. Tapa
mean penance. In Sahaja Yoga penance means
Meditation. For meditation you must know when to
get up. That must be the most Important thing for
a Sahaja Yogi. The rest of the things work out
automatically. To grow in depth you have to
meditate. You don't have to shave your head,
walk barefeet, or starve yourself or give up your
family life. You can sing, dance and entertain
I find a conditioning which is very strong
"My and "Mine' still in Sahaja Yogis. Earlier the
Western people didn't cate for their tamilies, wives
and children. Now I find they stick like glue. The
husband, children and house becomes very
important. The children belong to the Sangha, the
collectivity. You don't think this is your child. If you
think like that you are limiting yourself and getting
into problems. Country-wise also problems are
reducing. We don't like to be racist. in India
Sahaja Yogis want the caste system to go away.
because these are self destructive. So we start
seeing in ouEselves what is self destructive, what
will destroy me, my family, my country and the
whole world. All these ventures which are just the
opposite of your constructive life, you start seeing
and you can stop it. That is only possible If you try
to introspect and dedicate and see that whether
you have that quality. Now all your beautiful
qualities have been awakened by your Kundalini.
All these qualities were there in you, intact. When
the Kundalini started rising she awakened all those
beautiful qualities.
tapasyas,
yourself.
Buddha means Bodha i.e. to know the
reality on your central nervous system. You all
have now become Buddhas without giving up
anything because whatever he gave up was all
non sense. It was a myth. What does it matter if
you listen to music or dance. It doesn't matter at
all. But these ideas went so deep into these
people that you really feel such pity and
compasslon for them. They don't eat food, they
starve, they look worse than T.B. patients. While
you people look like roses, and are beautifully
enjoying life. But still, we have to have that
principle of Buddha within ourselves, i.e. we have
to do Tapa. It doesn't mean you starve yourself.
But eat less if you are fond of eating too much.
You should enjoy music which is for your
emancipation, for your awakening and ascent.
We are so bound by conditionings that people
don't understand what is the spirit. Spirit is
Sahaja Yoga is one of the most precious
things a human being should have known long
time back. It is not only talking about God or
saying there is Divinity within you, but the
effectiveness of that. You don't need any science.
You have any problem, then give a bandhan. Its
that simple. Everything you can do with science
you can do with Sahaja Yoga. We are also
computers, Only thing is that you have to develop
your depth Now you are on the right lines. We
don't need thismoden science which can
destroy all of us. You must have self esteem and
understand that you are a Sahaja Yogi and you
Shri Budha Puja
11
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9.pdf-page-12.txt 
 Dhamman Sharnam Gachami'. I surrender myself
to my Dhararn. It is not the mythical religions which
have gone into some provisions. It means I
surrender myself to the innate religion within
myself, which is righteousness etc. The third thing
he said 'Sangam Sharnarn Gachami', I surrender
myself to collectivity. You must meet at least once
a month, even in the name of picnic etc. You are
part and parcel of the whole. The microcosm hos
become the macrocosm, that you are part and
parcel of the Virata and you have to become
aware of it. That is how things work out very fast
and that's how we discover a negative person or
one who is not, or an egoist and who is not egoist.
We discover people who are Sahaj Yogis and who
claim themselves to be Sahaj Yogis and we give
them up. Without being collective. You can never
understand the value of collective. It gives you so
many powers, so much satisfaction and joy that
one must pay attention to collectivity first in Sahaja
Yougl, Even
become collective. While coming to collective
you don't have to criticize others call them names
or find faults. But introspect that, when everybody
is enjoying themselves why am I the one sitting
down and trying to find faults. If you can pay
attention to yourself as far as the defects are
concerned then I'm sure you will become much
more collective than when you see the defects in
other people.
have to achieve that state where you become
absolutely capable of whatever sclence can do.
You become the embo diment of all the powers.
Some people come and tell me "Mother we
cannot open our heart". Can't you feel
compassion? I have seen people having an open
heart for a dog or cat, but not for their children
sometimes, It is the place where the spirit exists
and it emits Its light and its the first place where
you see the light of a person who is full of love. This
may be because you have only ego but no self
esteern.
Buddha is the killer of ego. He is moving on
your Pingala Nadi and settles down on left side, He
is the controller of our ego and he has to
compensate this right side. A right sided person
never laughs or smiles. But they have shown
Buddha as being fat and loughing. He controls the
tight side by just laughing. He makes fun on himself
and sees every drama but see with your
enlightened consciousness the stupidity of it and
enjoy the stupidity. Like Elizabeth Taylor getting
married going for her honeymoon and you can
see the stupidity rather than getting enamoured of
such an inouspicious person. How you react to
things depends upon your attention with the
chitta. If it is something Divine than you have a
rapt attention. But if it is something stupid or
humorous you can see the essence of it. With that
attention you see to the essence of everything
relative to reality. Compared to reality it is stupid.
It could be mythical or false, hypocritical and all
kinds of things which are not reality. But if you are
a Sahaja Yogi you should be able to see that point
and enjoy. Children do that very easily, upto a
certain age. Your reaction depends on your
which is enlightened. Enlightened
different mianner than
if there is something missing you just
Sahaja Yoga is the most practical because
it is absolute reality so with all these powers.
understanding and compassionate love you have
to be sure about yourself and know that you are
all the time protected, guided, looked after,
nourished and helped to grow by this Divine Power
which is all pervading.
attention
attention reacts in a a
stupid, confused or negative attention. One has to
Judge how you react. Like I told a 'punk' who said
"What wrong', that "you had no identity and self
esteern and that's why you try to paint yourself
and try to show something which you are not. Why
don't you become what you are". Later he
became a Sahaja Yogi. We have to accept what
May God Bless You.
we are and we are the spirit.
Buddha has four things which all of you
should say every morning. First he says 'Buddham
Sharanam Gachami'. It means I surrender myself
to my awakened attention. Then he said
The Divine Cool Breeze
12
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Shri Krishna Puja
241
Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
CABELLA, ITALY 197.92 AyuT
problems, like Aids, immoral life etc.
We have done this puja many times and
understood Shri Krishna's advent which was over
5000 years back. Now what his manifestation and
what he wanted to be accomplished has to be
done in this Kali Yuga. Kali Yuga is going into a
new realm of Sat Yuga but in between there is
Kirta Yuga where this all pervading power of God's
love is going to act. Shri Krishna was the
incarnation of diplomacy, so he plays around
quite a lot and ultimately brings through the
untruth and the falsehood. In doing that he judges
people. It is very important that Shri Krishna's
powers of diplomacy were to be manifested this
time when it is the last judgement. Now whatever
you have done wrong before, whatever Karmas
have been done in ignorance or dellberately, all
of them will be paid back. Those pujas which you
have done In previous lives and this life will be also
rewarded. This is all done through Shree Krshna's
principles of collectivity, where he collectively sees
the situation.
All these countries who think no end of
themselves are finished. This is also Shri Krishna's
work because he is Kubera. He is the one who is
the power of wealth. He gave lot of weaith to all
these countries. Now they don't know what to do
with it. Specially these last twenty years have been
really remartkable. All over the world there has
been some sort of complete change or exposure.
also suffering
because of our past deeds. We had a caste
system which is the greatest headache for us.
Everywhere every country will have to face what it
has done. Shri Krishna's own style was that he
never belleved in caste, He himself was born in a
cowherd's caste, Then he became a King. He
lived like an ordinary person. He would take the
cows grazing, look after and bring them home. His
life was very human. The way he used to tease his
mother and other ladies. This is extremely human,
child-like and sweet. Behind that also there was a
The Indians are
In Krita Yuga all these diseases
have started cropping up. One of them is drug
addiction. These drugs are made in Bolivia and
Columbia, where the aboriginals were finished off.
People went in Nicaragua to help them and
brought back all these drugs to Washington. In
every elite Society they discuss which is the best
drugs. So destruction has started from inside. I had
told them earlier not to indulge into Freudian
practises and keep to morality otherwise you will
Aids,
great significance. Shri Radha was Mahalaxmi and
she used to put her feet and take bath In the river
Jamuna. The ladies would take the water from the
same river and carry on their heads the same
pitcher. Shri Krishna wanted to raise their Kundalini
so he used to hit the pitcher from the back and
the water which was vibrated would fall on their
backs and raise their Kundalini.
In the Raas (dance) it woas (Ra - energy
Dha- sustain) Radha who had the energy. In the
Raas they would play with the energy. That's how
he wanted to have a collective awakening of the
Gopas an Gopies. Then he had to leave and fight
Kamsa. In his own lifetime as a child and grown up
he punished all kinds of devils. in this Kali Yuga also
he is acting. You have seen that how gradually he
has finished so many false Gurus one by one.
Somebody called themselves as Shri Krishna,
somebody called themselves as God, etc. He
exposed them and finished them all. They are
quite frightened of us because we are standing on
have problems. So now they have
Schizophrenia and all kinds of secret diseases,
because they made every other country nervous.
The English came to India as
ordinary traders and ruled the Indians for 300 years
and they left us in three pieces and now in their
own country they have problems of all kinds. First
of all nobody wants to call themselves as English.
They call themselves as Weish, Scots or Irish. There
is always a bomb scare in London. The English who
tried to divide us are automatically divided and
other
now fighting each other. There are
13
Shri Krishna Puja
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9.pdf-page-14.txt 
 cloth before their mouth and all kinds of nonsense.
truth.
Shri Krishna resides in our Vishuddhi.
At that time Shri Krishna came. His own
Many people hove this problem of left Vishuddhi.
It Is because we are very social. In the Western
society the social system is rigid that anybody can
collapse. Now its better, because of revolt and
culture. Earlier If you picked up one spoon in the
Wrong way, you are finished, The French have
made it much worse by making a big science out
of alcohol and what glass goes with what alcohol.
The whole collective was made so rigid. I thought
Indian collective is rigid because of certain
conditions, but in the West it is such a conditioning
in the heads of the people that some of the
conditioning you cannot remove.
cousin became a Tirthankara and that made Shri
Krishna think about this kind of stupid ritualism. Like
they will get up in the morning, put water In the
Tulsi, throw water here and there and won't see
untouchables or take water from them. You can't
eat this, you can't move like that. All kinds of
restrictions even with timings, etc. This firme is not
good, that you should not do, to such an extent
that the whole movernent of our country was
round these rituais. There were some people in
Bombay who would go to Lucknow. and
everytime they would come back they would
shave their heads. Because there were so many
old people in their families that everytime anyone
died they would shave their heads. Such horrible
rituals existed. Even now in South India there are a
lot of rituals. They are frightened to get out of it.
They think if they get out of it they are sinners and
will go to hell.
It comes from the Catholic Church and
when it cormes from Freud who was absolutely a
devil, they just give up all those conditioning and
take to that. I
Church is predominant in any countfry they are
following Freud, In India this collective rigidity was
there because Shri Rama was a very formal
person. In the West it is all mental. if you make this
kind of hair or put oil then you are a lunatic. All
kinds of funny ideas were given and people
started following. If you don't put oll at all you will
become bald. It was entrepreneurship, so that
they could sell their things. In England you have
wear a tail coat if you had to see the Queen. So
one has to borrow this tail coat, and everybody
looks like Charlle Chaplin.
have seen where the Catholic
In the West the whole life style is ritualistic.
There is no freedom, So there was a revolt by the
hippies etc. and they fought it and then it went to
another extreme. From one extreme to another
extreme. When Shri Krishna came on this earth he
sald this is all a Leela a play. if you are in the water
you are afraid of the water. But if you get into the
boat you can see the water. If you know how to
swim you can even save the people who are in
the water. He says if you develop a witness state
then you see the whole thing as a drama. Nothing
matters and you see the problemn. Because you
are out of it you can solve the problem. This was
his great Advent. The first step towards your ascent
is that you have to become a Saakshi. You have
to become the Buddha.
This kind of stupid rigidity that came
into the West has really made them very nervous.
People are so nervous here. If you tell them that I
am going to come and have food with you she
will collapse, is it caring for the public opinion or
her own conditioning. But to an Indian housewife
if you tell you are going to come she will be the
happiest person. Here if you say I would like to
come and see you in the evening, theyw ill say,
"Come to the pub," because they are so nervous.
They are not sure of themselves. This has come
from these norms that have been created foday,
In India also we have spiritualism where you must
be very serious. Like there are people who pick out
their hair with their hands. They are not supposed
to use scissors or go to a barber. The condition in
some communities became so horrible that they
said even if you breathe you might take in some
insects or organisms. So they put sorme sort of a
In Sahaja Yoga there are different types of
people from different areas and different cultures:
The door is open to everyone. If an Indian comes
in he will be all the time watchful about others. He
will say "Mother, this man is not doing this or that".
He will find faults with others all the time. In the
West they will start finding fault with themselves.
Who is interested to know what wrong who has
done. If a lotus is there no one wants to know how
many filthy things are there in the pond. You are
now a lotus. But in the West they must confess.
Every moment you are changing, So what is there
to confess. The life is so formal that people suffer
The Divine Cool Breeze
14
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9.pdf-page-15.txt 
 They got after that lady and said who are you to
shout. Then they announced that all the fights are
cancelled. See the power of his love for his mother
that the whole sky couldn't bear it. They said we
have never seen such a miracle that in a second
the sky got overcast heavily. You must know your
powers. Witness yourself. It is the introspection. But
with left Vishuddhi you will always say. "How can I
have any powers, after all I've done this or that.
I'm no good'. It is because that left Vishuddhi is all
the time telling that you are good for nothing. It is
making a hole in your brain which takes away all
the sense, and you accept it.
from guilt for the smallest thing this Catholic
Church has conditioned you so much.
This left Vishuddhi is Vishnu Maya. Once
you have this left Vishuddhi you develop all the
problems of Vishnu Maya. One of them is the
heart. Vishnu maya is lke electricity. If you have
Vishnu Maya problem then you become lethargic.
I'm so guilty. You become depressed. That Vishnu
maya principal disappears from you. She is the
one who is quick, fast and she is the light and
announces to the whole world what Shri Krishna is
Sahaja Yagis who feel guilty say that if we do any
work outside our ego will come up. So we don't
want to do. It is absurd., If you give light to a
candle and if you give light to a candle and the
light says I don't want to give fight because maybe
this light might develop an ego. It is absurd. To get
out of this left Vishuddhi is to becorne absolutely
dynamic in Sahaja Yoga. Left Vishuddhi is very
depressive action on the whole being. A person
who has left Vishuddhi is always a very slow person
to do anything for Sahaj Yoga. You have not been
given light to hide it. You have been given light to
work it out, to think dynamically and how to
arrange and organise. If you are guilty you will all
the time say 'Mother, it is very difficult, etc."
In the beginning no Sahaj Yogi would give
realisation in India. It is so happened that my car
failed and I was late by two hours. There was a big
meeting and they did not know what to do so
they started giving realisation and then
realized that they can give realisation. You know
what you can do. You know whateer you say
happens. Whatever you want you cani get: Try
and Try. If you don't do it you will be all the time
half-baked. Take the experience of your powers.
See how dynamic you are. Don't have formalities
about it. Just use it fully and you will be amazed
you have so many powers. In the same way if one
wants to paint something, go ahead and do it
and don't be afraid of criticism. Just paint or sing
or do anything boldly and go in a big way. You will
be amazed at yourself how you have achieved it
and how you are doing it. First thing to know is that
you have powers. Have faith in yourself. If you
have left Vishuddhi, The Vishuddhi, the Vishnu
Maya won't work out. Be like Vishnu Maya. Say 1
am a Sahaja Yogl. I am not an ordinary person.
they
For a Sahaj Yogi it is important to witness
himself. That is the introspection. Where was 1? I
have come here." Do not indulge too much In the
past, but see what you have got in such a short
time. You have come into the Kingdom of God.
I was travelling
with Wolfgang and we had to catch a plane.
When we reached the airport the ground hostess
started shouting at me for delaying the flight. They
need not have waited for me. But they waited
and shouted also. All the passengers were on the
plane but still it did not take off. We found out
there was a snag and the snag was being looked
into since half-an-hour. Because she shouted at
me Wolfgang was in tears. He was feeling so sad
that mother has been insulted like this. The power
of his love was so great that the fifty people or so
on the balcony watching us, felt a tremendous
cool breeze. A big blow came to them and when
they opened their eyes they saw that the whole
sky was filled with clouds. There was not a single
cloud and in one second the whole sky filled up.
Then they asked us to get out as they could not
take off. When we came back it started raining.
You have dll the powers. For e.g.
Another side of this left Vishuddhi is that it
tries to give an explanation. Like you will say
"Telephone someone." He will say, He will not be
there Mother." Why give an explanation. You just
avoid. Vishnumaya never avoids. Once she has to
shine she shines, whatever she is. In the same way
we have to be like that. We have to know that we
are special people, You are chosen, you are
angelic and you have entered into the Kingdom
of God and it will all work out. Sahaj Yoga is not
meant for useless people. It is meant for people of
character, for sorneone special. You have now
got your realisation and this Vishriumaya principle
has to be expressed, and has to be shown. Don't
be afraid that your ego will come. Doesn't matter.
15
Shri Krishna Puja
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9.pdf-page-16.txt 
 also with the speech. Your gestures should show
very heart felt emotions. In Sahaja Yoga you hold
each others hands and the vibrations start flowing
among yourself. It shows it is the communication.
These hands are really the beginning of the
collectivity. The most important things are the
hands which act for your collectivity. There are
many angels and ganas who are standing behind
you. They also give help to you whenever you
want to communicate sornething. They also do
your jobs very well. Whatever is expressed in your
hands or through your hands they pick up
immediately.
You will also see your ego. The second part of Shri
Krishna's play is that in this you see your ego.
There was a Maharastrian lady who would
not believe she had a right side. She came to see
me in Rome and fell down on the tight side
completely. Then she realised that her right side
was not alright. So to know whether you have a
right or left, a very good method is of meditation.
The third situation is to accept whatever is
wrong with you. If you do not accept then you are
not being kind to yourself. Right Vishuddhi people
will always try to correct me. If I say anything they
will say 'No'. They will contradict me or try to put
their own ideas. Then they discover that it was
Wrong. They should not have said it. It is a habit aof
saying 'no' to things. I also test you. If I say in the
daytirne it is 9 O'clock in the night. You just say
"Yes" Try to see. I test you. Some people say if
Mother has said it is is so, it is so. Then it starts
building up their faith very well and I can see that
how they are coming into the realm of real faith.
Then when I say something absurd they will just
smile. They will know that Mother is just testing us.
You have to test yourself. Like Moharnmed Sahib
has said ' Your hands will speak and they will give
witness agalnst you'. On your hands you will know:
Now these hands are the blessings of Shri Krishna.
They come out from the same Vishuddhi. There
are two chakras of 'Shri and 'Lalita'. With these
hands we can feel the vibrations. If your right or
left Vishuddhi are too strong you may nof feel.
That doesn't mean you haven't got realisation. You
have got. You just work out your hands.
Vishuddhi has sixteen petals and all
ear, nose, throat, eyes are guided by this. Also the
sub plexus of the Vishuddhí is the Hamsa Chakra.
We have these eyes to see and communicate.
The pure eyes communicate pure love. With the
pure eyes you can cleanse people, help others,
you can bring peace. The purification of the eyes
takes place through your Vishuddhi and Agya.
Both these have to work out. The nose is very
important. Nose has to be pure l.e. you should be
able to discard whatever is smelling badly and
you should be able to accept whatever is
fragrant. Nose is the speciality of Shri Krishna
because he is the Kubera and Kubera has given
the nose to the Goddess. Some people have a
bad habit of moving their nose just to show
disapproval. This is insulting yourself. Also we
neglect our teeth. The reason for neglect is
laziness. At least twice or thrice you must brush
your teeth. More important is to change the brush.
Also you have to use butter, salt or oil to rub your
gums. If you rub your gums properly you will never
have problems with your teeth and your gums. In
the evening you must brush your teeth otherwise
the mouth smells horrible. Also there are people
who eat breakfast without brushing their teeth.
Teeth are very important. On the teeth depend all
the quatities of your Vishuddhi. Avoid a gesture
where you clench your teeth. It is dangerous for
your tooth.
For working your hands you see that you
don't use them for useless things. This is very
important because you have special hands. These
hands are the ones with which you spread the
collectivity. Like some people who talk will go on
waving their hands about a lot. There is no need to
use your hands so much all the time. When you
use them it should be decent, regulated and
should be very indicative and useful. Just showing
off your hands is not good. Do not use Shri Krishna's
fingers to order people about. Have respect.
These hands are to be used for callectivity. You
can say Namaste to thousands of people. I don't
like shaking hands. You may get all kinds of pins
and needles and problems from another person.
When you talk to people you can suggest your
softness and sweetness frorm your children and
A person who is spiritually endowed has an
expression which can never be aggressive. He
may not be good looking and attractive. But the
expression on the face is absolutely sweet. That is
also the blessing of Shri Krishna, I have seen people
one year after realization. I was surprised that their
faces had changed to much that I could not
The Divine Cool Breeze
16,
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Ghazni sit under a tree and he turned Into Shri
Krishna. Mahmad said that under my nose the
Brahmins were were making money and looting
people. I couldn't do anything so Shri Krishna
came. You must have cormplete falth In the power
of Shri Krishna which is within you. If you have
ascended fully ouf of this then he will not trouble
you. If you have left Vishuddhi, then he will trouble
you. Be careful because Shri Krishno will take your
test and make you so miserable that you will not
know what happened. Shri Krishna cannot be
controlled by any one. He does what he thinks
proper. He usually punishes much more than your
Mother. She is Ati Raudra and Ati Saumya. She is
very hard and very soft, He is not, He will make you
alright. You should be sure that you should have
your Vishuddhis alright and also Shri Krishna
manifesting on others. You don't have to do
anything. He will look after you and work it out.
Left Vishuddhi is a disease of the West. Why should
you feel guilty? You have not murdered anyone.
recognise. The whole face becomes mild, soft,
peaceful and very joyous. All the qualities of Shri
Krishna can be expressed on your face. You can
be sometimes very mischievous to look at. So
many expressions there are which come on the
face and give you a very sweet feeling. Some
people have a habit of loaking in the mirror all the
time, It gives one a kind of a funny ego. It is better
to look at Shri Krishna's photograph than to look at
yourself, so that your face will become that of Shri
Krishna. It is very dangerOus to all the fime watch
your face in the mirror. Do not pay so much
attention and importance to your own self. But see
to yourseff which is within - to your spirit. If you look
after that side all these things will happen in such
a beautiful manner,
ini
The hair is also looked after by Shri Krishna.
He is very fond of anything that is like butter. So put
ol in your hair. If you don't you will become bald.
In the olden days in the West everyone used to put
oll. If you don't want to put oil in the daytime you
can wash it off. At least once a week you must oll
your hair. Shri Krishna's star is Saturn (Shani). If he
gets after somebody nobody can do anything
Like if Saturn gets after someone that person is
finished. Sornetimes it is seven years of 21/2 years
he is after you. This Saturn of Shri Krishna is a quality
within us that supposing if somebody troubles us,
we don't have to do anything. This Shri Krishna will
work it out. You can inform the all pervading
Power and through that this man or woman or
party will be hounded. Automatically it will
happen. But you must know that you have the
powers of Shri Krishna by which if he gets after
someone then nobody can save him. He is the last
one who plays around but he doesn't forgive. He
gives a long rope to hang yourself, but he never
forgives. He says you have to pay for It except
when you transcend. If you become a Sahaja
Yogi and have transcended then he won't do
anything to you.
Now we corme to Virata and before that
we have to cross the Hamsa. Without that we
cannot reach the Virata, Hamsa is the Divine
Discretion, It must be within us. Once you develop
that you never commit mistakes. With this
discretion you have a complete understanding as
to what has to be done or not to be done. In
many Sahaja Yogis discretion has come even with
the left Vishuddhi. With Divine Discretion the first
thing that happens is that people get impressed
by you. Its teal collectivity. This is a very important
point one has to know. While introspecting yourself
you just see if you have developed this quality of
Divine discretion or not. Like some Sahaja Yogis will
fell people they have a bhoot in them. He may be
having but the Divine discretion is not to tell him
just yet, but to remove it. Divine Discretion gives
you a complete understanding as to what is the
way to handle another person, or collective; how
to talk to others, how to impress on others the right
thing. If you have no Divine Discretion you will start
speaking what you should not speak and saying at
a time when you should not say and you will have
no sense of any discretion. The hamsa Chakra
physically, mentally and spiritually must be kept
alright. Once you get into Verity then all your ideas
of separatism and differentiation goes. You do not
have any more ideas of racist, nationality, city,
village, etc. At that stage you don't belong to
anybody. You belong to every place and you
Mohammed Ghazni looted Somnath and
the temple of Mahadeva, Shri Krishna carne as
Ghazni.
Mahadeva got out of the temple and was
running. Hanumana ran after him, A one point
Mahadeva sat down and Hanumana said "you
are the God of Gods, then why are you running.
What are you afraid of? He said 'You don't know
this Mohammed Ghazni'. Then he saw Mahamud
that
Hanurnan
of
Mahmud
saw
17
Shri Krishna Puja
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9.pdf-page-18.txt 
 don't belong to every place. You don't hanker
after any particular food, or any particular type of
people. You can adjust yourself into any
circumstances, family, people. Nothing bothers
you because you are in the Virata. Everything is
absorbed by the Virata so you do not feel
anything. The Virata suffers not you. That is the
stage I want all of you to reach and to become
absolutely free. Nothing can impress, influence or
lure you, You stand on yourself esteem and the
understanding about yourself that you are a Sahaj
Yogi and that you are connected with this power
and you are sitting in the Kingdom of God.
because you become part and parcel of the
whole. You can feel everywhere, and be effective
everywhere. You must keep saying that, you are
all my brothers, you are all my sisters. I love all of
them. The whole Sahaj Yoga is my family. Your
whole attention should move like that. This is not
orly mine. It is everyone's. Everyone has a right.
This movement starts going from individual to
collective. Such a personality is then the most
effective one for any kind of collective work. You
must rise above Vishuddhl. If you do not then you
can never be Sahaj Yogis. At that point we can
never doubt Sahaj Yoga, That's how doubtless
awareness can come to us.
At the Virata stage there is no doubt left,
May God Bless You.
The Divine Cool Breeze
18
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9.pdf-page-19.txt 
 Shri Durga Kali Puja
St. Denis,
Paris 25-7-1992.
became like lotuses so fragrant and beautiful. You
have to fight it out. I am always with you will all my
powers, but you have to fight this society. You
have to save so many people and rescue them.
Durga or Kall is the destroying from of the
goddess, of all the evil and negativity. We have to
do this in France because in general, day by day,
France is going down. While you people are
coming up. The rest of France is in the most
pitiable condifion.
Today's Puja is to give courage in your
hearts. See all around you. You are all nicely
enjoying yourself in the tealm of God, and what
about the rest of the people. What is going to be
the future of this horrible Mooladhara place. Now
Freud has been discovered as a fraudulent man
and there are books after so many years when he
has already deceived the people all over the
world. You must take up upon yourself to talk
against this kind of anarchy that is working out the
destruction of your families.
Now this is Krita Yuga, so you will have to
pay for whotever you have done on moss scale or
Individual soale. If that is the case then France hoas
to pay a lot and this Catholic Church has to pay
more. They have condemned every incarnation
-and every other prophet. They have fortured and
forced people and taking all their ideas into their
own control. They have made people confess,
giving them left Vishuddi. They treated women as
nothing.
If the wormen decide I'm sure that they can
very easily work it out. Ask for the ascent of this
country. I know I have worked very hard and you
are all there. I'm very happy to see that you all are
there to fulfil the desire of the Divine, because now
you should know in a very big way masses and
masses of people will be destroyed not from
without but from within, suddenly you hear so
many villains disappear with this disease. Also you
must protect yourself. Always give yourself a
bandhan, Always lead a clean life. There are
certain hyglenic rules of Sahaja Yoga. Please try to
follow that. Do not neglect it. If somebody get
AIDS do not have him in Sahaja Yoga, whatever
may be the conditions or reasons. You have to be
very careful. Also I would say, never treat an AIDS
patient, Actually they have two types of people.
One who is drrogant and the other one that thinks
it is better that they should die. They have no will
to live. They are either right-sided or left-sided.
They can never ascend. May be next generation
may be better off if they come back, but as far as
this generation is concerned you should know that
your responsibility is very great.
Gradually by movement from Catholic
Church to Freud you haven't got your own
personality to understand what is right and what is
wrong. The laws are so funny, it depends on the
mood of the magistrate. I have never seen such
stupid laws as here. Of course in Arnerica there is
no justice and do what they like, but here they
have no sense of law. Every womoan must dress in
such a way that she should be attractive. For
what? All kinds of bathroorn cultures. This comes
out of drinking. If you drink too much next morning
you are so lethargic that you just take a French
bath and go.
So French Sahaj Yogis must understand
that your task is much more difficult than the task
of other countrles. Because this country lacks
complete wisdom. It is not there in your institutions
or government nor in any education. Thus
concept of wisdom is that you are egolstical.
People have lost their senses and like blotting
paper whatever they think is destructive, horrible,
sub human they try to absorb. Sahaj Yogis must
get hold of books and find out where are we.
All the Sahaja Yogis must take a vow that
they will fight the society and try to save their
country and their country men from complete
It is much worse than the gate of hell. It is
a mire of filth, You are born here and you have
Shri Durga Kal Puja
19
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9.pdf-page-20.txt 
 disaster. There will be no war. Only they will fight
thernselves and die. Its a very serlous matter and
for that we decided to have this puja of Durga
today that all negativity should be destroyed.
deliberation, you must think that what can we do
to change this? Why not write some books or
experiences?
Write your experiences. How French
parents behave, grand parents behave. What is
happening in this country. They are living in fool's
paradise. They don't know how destruction is just
hanging over their heads. Though you are saved
you have to think of others. That is what Sahaj
Yoga is. kali wanted to protect the Bhaktas only
but you have to protect many more people. You
have all the powers. So use them. You can do it.
So many deities build up the body of Kal.
Every part of Her body was created and looked
after by a diety. Later on it is reflected in you all.
God has made human beings in his own image. I
would say I have made you in my own image. All
the dieties oare at your disposal. They are all with
you and it is the deities who have brought forth all
the beauty that you have, They have made all this
beautiful congregation. This beautiful transfor-
mation
1 think the whole Europe can be
and they have created such angelic
divided into two types, The Anglo-Saxons and
Latins. The Latins are lett sided and Anglo Saxons
are right sided. Now here people are on the left
side so here Catholic Church is prospering. The left
side gets incurable diseases. You have to work it
out through the Guru pada - the status of a Guru
for ladies and men. Every Guru has a duty to
cleanse the Society in which he lives. Christ fought
if alone. So many saints fought it alone. They were
treated very bodly and put in jail but they fought.
in the same way you have to stand on truth and
fight it because you are saints.
people out of you. They are always working it out.
But you have to have the drive. You had pure
desire to ascend but for what? You have to have
the light, but for what? You want to become
Gurus, for what? To save people for their salvation.
Only through your channels, I can work out Sahaja
Yoga. It's nota question of killing one Roksha. God
alone knows how many there are. And they are
everywhere. They were there within you. Now they
have gone out. You have to do full justice to
Sahaja Yoga.
Kall's puja is always done in the night after
12. It all works out but you have to have
May God Bless you.
The Divine Cool Breeze
20
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Russian Tour 1992
120 Sahaja Yogis were given a free ride to
Keive on another Chartered plane,. In a very
touching welcome the Sahaja Yogis dressed in
traditional costumes recelved Shri Mataji. The
public programme was held in an open stadium
and 15000 people. She gave them realisation just
by asking them to extend their hands towards her,
Shri Mataji's arrival in Russia filled new hope
in the hearts of Russian Sahaja Yogis. They forget
all the problems of this country as they basked in
the sunshine of her radiant smile.
In a Medical Conference at Moscow with
300 doctors Shri Mataji openly declared that
Sahaja Yoga is META science. The doctors were
convinced of the medical remedies of Sahaja
Yoga and wanted their realisation.
The Mahalaxmi Puja, over 2000 Sahaja
Yogis attended it at St. Petersbourgh was the
greatest blessing. Shri Mataji spoke for over 11/2
hours. The Russians poured their hearts in all the
songs they had learnt in Sanskrit, Hindi and
Marathi. Shri Mataji was very pleased and
showered all her blessings on Russia. She blessed
several weddings and distributed pIesents to al
the Yogis.
Next day we took a charter flight to
Togalithi Shri. Mataji had never been here before
yet there were over 15,000 Sahaja Yogis, The
response at the public programme was so
overwhelming that Shri Mataji invited everyone to
a Seminar on the shores of the Volga. They sang
and danced for hours. It was like ganapatipule I
commented; "No, it is much more than that" she
observed. "I am fulfilled" she said.
The next, over 1000 Sahaja Yogis were
present, the day with tears streaming down Yogis
bade farewell to their beloved mother at the air-
port Shri Mataji consoled them saying that "I am
always in your hearts". How did thousands of
Russions recognise her instantly considering that
they had no exposure to Spirituality or God for
over 2 generations?
The mayor of the City of Councillors
specially invited her to the City Council and
honoured her. They prayed for her blessings and
guidance and offered land for an Ashram.
One afternoon while waiting for a cruser Shri
Mataji spontaneously cured several children who
has been effected by Chernohl raditions.
Obviously the Spirit is ever resilient.
21
Russian Tour 1992
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Diet for Jaundice/Hepatitis and
Overheated Liver as Suggested By
Shri Mataji
Drink every morning and evening one glass of radish
leaf juice.
Drink in the morning one glass of kokum syrup.
Holding an ice-pack with the left hand, place it on the
liver, with the right hand toward the pieture of H. H.
Shri Mataji and meditate without any candle light or
diya (lamp) in front of Shri Mataji's picture.
You can eat Bengali sweets.
No fried food, red meat or fat under any circumstances.
No fish or dairy products at all except buttermilk in
which butter has been skimmed off.
No cheese at all.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
Liv 52 tablets : 3-4 tablets per day for two months.
8.
bunenot
All citrus fruits are O.K. (no mango, apple, banana,
9.
papaya or chikku)
10.
Sugar cane juice or sugar cane is very good.
11.
No butter at all.
12. No Arud daal (Arhar/Tuar)
Boiled rice, all vegetables, moong daal are O.K.
13.
14. No chillies in food.
15. Ginger, potato, onion, and cucumber are O.K.
16. Regular intake of lemon juice with vibrated sugar is
O.K.
17. No ice cream.
18. Amla Ka muraba is good and can be taken with both
meals.
19. Silver varak on food is good.
20. All vegetables fruits grown under the earth are O.K.
21. No groundnuts, no ground nut oil. Groundnut oil is very
bad for liver. Sunflower oil in little quantity is alright.
The Divine Cool Breeze
22
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9.pdf-page-23.txt 
 DACHA
Above Lapiz Lakes and Sunny Dales
Through Rambling Lanes and, Whispering Boughs
Neighbouring enchanting vales of ancient lores and prospering shops
Behold the Shrine of Madona Russia.
Brick by Brick built with love and Prayer
Minsk Marble, Siberian Birches & Togliatti Carvings
Singing greenery Vibrant flowers,
Laden with fruits, the garden of Vaikuntha
The Butterfly chases the Bee and asks whence comes the Adishakti
O Russia awaken, thy Saviour is come
To take away thy woes
Gone shall be all mental anguish
Gone shall be the cries of hungry children
Shri Mahalaxmi has Blessed thy land with milk & honey
filled thy coffers with Abundance galore
Where thy may eat, wask & Dwell
Beware! the spirit of Mother Russia is awake
None dare cast an evil eye
Wash away thy tears
The Blossom time has come
Glory to the Goddess Shri Nirmala Ma
All Russia Bows at your Lotus feet
And welcomes you with its Golden heart
23
Dacha
