Maha Saraswati Puja Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Caleutta 3-2-92 (Transalted from Hindi) In this Kali Yuga it very difficult to recognize the Mother. We cannot even know our own mother then to know me is even more difficult. But the depth of this Yoga bhumi is working in you. I have seen that whichever Sahaja Yogi has come from this part becomes very deep. And I am surprised that where I spent so many years and worked such a lot, the people there are not so deep. They do not have such beautifül collectivity as is here. The specialitY, of this land is that the collectivity and love is absolutely selfless and unselfish: I have been very pleased to see this and may you We use the swadisthanonly for reading, writing and we have progressed in these fields. But there is a further state than this about which we don't think, and that is why there is imbalance. When you see there is lot of art, literature, etc. and people say there is no union of Saraswati and Laxmi. This means that whatever you are doing when you go into its deeper aspect, then you think why there is no union with Laxmi. In Sahaja Yoga both meet at the Agya chakra. You keep on working but you do not get the result that you desire, When you come into Agya chakra you realise why we have not got that state which so many artists have got. Why are we living in poverty ? Till we do not reach that state where we see both aspects with correct perspective we cannot progress. To unite Kala (Art) with Laxmi we need proper vision. progress, It is very important that there should be worship of Maha Saraswati here. The Devi has blessed this land and everything is so green here. The reason for poverty and suffering here is because the worship of Saraswati has been very limited. The puja of Saraswati is done here only to increase our artistic talents or to become scholars. No doubt the people here have progressed on the scholastic and artistic fronts. People here are verY intelligent and proud. But still why is there poverty? Why is there jealousy towards a person who has more money than you? One must understand what formula we are lacking which we must get. One of our greatest weaknesses is stubbornness, If they have made an elephant they will go on making elephants. If they sing in a particular way they will go on singing in that way. If you tell them to change it they may get angry. At Agya if you contemplate then you realise that stubbornness does not let you go beyond Agya chakra. "We are Bengalis. intellectuals." We have this stubbornness that we have the We greatest artists, The work of Saraswati is on the right side, When She works on the Swadhistan and when this goes on the left side then the sense of art grows. Bengal is very famous in every art field. In music, drama, sculpture and literature. There are very famous people in these art forms here. Art is the light of the Divine. You cannot see it but it has vibrations. are great people in Bengal. But if you want to rise above that we must realise that we do not have to compromise. I don't say that you destroy art. But you must think of art in a balanced manner. I am telling you something practical, that we have a certain laziness in us by which we can aso . A person thinks that by creating something new I will have to exert. For learning something new our brains are a bit slow. Because of this slow brain we are not able to learn anything by which we can unite with Laxmi, Like I told sorme artisans not to make such elaborate purses but to make simple lines. He said, this was not possible. We will make It like the way we are used to. We cannot make it the way you want. "You cannot make any suggestions. So there must Is very beautifully created and become stubbom. recognised by all the people all over the world is aesthetically rich. If you put your hands towards it you will find vibrations flowing from them, especially if it is made by a realised soul. The people who live here are very devotional and the art forms here are easily understood by all. People of Bengal are perfectionists. But we have developed only one side of the Swadhistan and have neglected the other. Maha Saraswati Puļa

 be an understanding; then the brain opens out. But if you are stubborn and say that whatever I do is correcti and what anyone tells me is not so, This slubbornness can have a very great effect on a person's entire life. We are fike and will remain so. When the change comes it is in a very Sahaja way and in this Sahaja way you find the union with Laxmi. Artists are very stubbom. If you tell them please change this a bit they will not do that. To put the agya chakra right we must first put right this strange ego which says that whatever we do and the way we do is right and no other Suggestion or method is correct. songs, art forms which were offered in the name of God are still living today. Like today's film music comes and dles down. But the songs of Kabir, Gynaneshwoar are still remembered. Through their self realisation they obtained the Maha Saraswati shakti and whatever they wrote or created that light was of a unique kind. These were creations that united the world into one. One should not only move on Saraswati tattwa as this limits you. One should move on Maha Saraswati tattwa. If Saraswati tattwa is the seed then the tree is Maha Saraswati. Till you do not make this seed into the Maha Saraswati till then you cannot merge with Maha Laxmi. The gift of Mahalaxmi within you is that you get your self-realisation. All the three, i.e. Mahalaxrni, Maha Saraswati and Maha Kali meet at Agya. In every subtle way there is an ego. So one should introspect within as to why we believe in such a thing. I am sitting in a limited field then how can l enlighten the whole world? I have said many times look towards yourself. I know many people belleve me and worship me as the Devi., but what is the benefit for me in this ? i am what I am. You are the ones who have achieved. You carme to Sahaja Yoga and frorm, Saraswati tattwa you reached Maha Saraswati tattwa. You have gained not me. You should not be satisfied by just believing in me. You will have to believe in yourself and lift yourself. This feeling that you are Hindus, Muslims, Christians, Brahma Samajis etc has no base. You dre nothing but a human being You were born a human. You have branded yourseif that you are sornething You are neither Bengali or Marathi. You are just human beings: Bybranding yourself you cieate more problems. These brands become important that you cannot see anything beyond it. Till this catch does not release this blindness will not go because you see everything in sucha way that only your way is right. In the west It is even more so. If you put anything into their brains and tell them that it is good, then they will follow it blindly. The critics there also criticize every art form so much. Another critic will refute what the first critic has refuted. Nothing comes to you from within yourself and your brain. Whatever others have filled in is accepted. Each is branded. By this the ego rises and a person thinks that he is a very great personality and very unique from others. He becomes an individual. so Now you know the science of Sahaja Yoga. Your candie has been lit. Not this candle has to enlighten thousands of others. To love me is beautiful. But there isa further state than this. Beyond joy there is another state called Niranand. Thai state of Niranand will come to your Mother when she will see that Her children have gone even further than Her. But these small petty things still stuck with Maharastrians it is even more, that we are stuck in small pettinesses. I feel it must be the demerits of past lives. If he had good merits then he would immediately open his heart and start emitting fragrance like a flower. The essence of truth is that we are all one, are whole, are a totality. When you go in opposition to it then you become individualistic and go on becoming more and more separate. It is true that one leaf does not resemble another but ol of them are on the same tree, They are all a part and parcel of the Virata. When we separate ourselves then the Saraswati tattwa which should become Maha Saraswati does not. When you live in Maha Saraswati tattwa you start seeing in your daily life that you are the whole, and we are one. So when an artist creates he makes some such thing that one accepts from the heart. All the works that we do of Saraswati should be dedicated and surrendered to the Divine. if such works will be immnortal, All poems, music, us must be given up. In In Maha Sarawati one should be efficacious and active. In Mahakali tattwa you absorb and you desire. I want to do this or that. I like this or that. I like this. To activate these desires is the work of Maha Saraswati. Some people wish that Sahaja Yoga spreads. But in this respect what did you do for it to spread? How many people did you give this happens then ll The Divine Cool Breeze 2.

 You do get the benefit. You may have grown very self realisation to? How many did you talk to about Sahaja Yoga? One journalist told me how he was deep in your Mother's love. Whatis the use of such impressed by the young boys and girls who were so peacefully and in a dignified manner putting posters, I was very impressed by that, You must put your desires into action, Your desites will finish when your action will start. You should desire what can be done, for to desire something which cannot be fulfilled is a calamity. a deep pol in which no one fils water. If you think on Agya what sort of work I should do, you go into Nirvichara (thoughtlessness) then you will get inspiralion from inside. There are many deep people here but now we have to share that depth. Like in a pond some lotuses bloom and the insects feel proud of the lotuses. But you are still an insect. Whats the use. There are nmany rich and many poor here. Even the rich have similar problems to the poor. They tell me that there is labour problems and that is why our factories are closed. But the rich must remember that the labour is your part and parcel. You cannot do anything without them. You do not even know how to move a finger; you just keep sitting on a chair. What have you done for the labour? Everything cannot be solved with money. They raise a flag, you raise their money. Then they again raise a flag and this goes on. Have you done something for their welfare? First learn their culture. There are big industrialists who do not know their culture. The labour are very large hearled. But if you deal with them with haughtiness then they can be the greatest enemies. Stay with Ihem, meet them, get to know them. I call this enlightened entrepreneurs. Go to their homes, ask after their problems. You do this little for them and they will be at your service for life. It is not necessary that you give money for everything. If you give money they may go straight to the liquor shops or keep women. Think of them as a part and parcel of yourself and get to know their hearts. And then all you labour problems wilI be solved. In the Vedas it is said that if you do not have the Vid (knowledge) then what is the use of Veda. They tried fo awaken the Pancha Mahabhutas. It was a result of which science came inta our country. The scientific research done here was much greater than what research is being done touay. Through Sahaja Yoga you can also get the control of the Pancha Mahabhutas But here you are still saying 'Mother, my moer on brother or family is ill You are a Sahaja Yogi. You want Mother to do everything. Why cant you? Just try to give to others. I keep repeating again and again that you do something. Of course I will cure but you can cure better than me, if you are not able to cure then come to me. The more you use your powers the more they will grow. But have faith in yourself. If mother has said so then we must have got these powers within and we must increase them. Now depth has come in Sahaja Yoga but the giving of it is still not so much. You have to give now. When you become active and Maha Saraswati chakra is awakened you will be amazed where this country will reach. But this disease of laziness is there throught out India. Sahaja Yoga people make lots of excuses as to why they cant do. For example "I am afraid of the masses or my family etc." Sahaja Yoga is not for cowards. There is so much black magic and tantrism here and I have been cleaning it. For removal of Kall vidya you will have to pay special attention and work it out. The people here are limited only till Saraswati and not Maha Saraswati. You are Sahaja Yogis, things will get alright themselves. But you have to follow the methods of Sahaja Yoga. You will have to leave your narrow view points and spread. Till you do not rise from within you cannot spread on the outside. In Sahaja Yoga meditation is very important. Meditate for five minutes at five in the motning and ten minutes at night. With this you will keep getting cleansed and will receive blessings. All the time you are being guided. You are also enjoying and growing. This puja today is for the whole of India as this disease of laziness is there in the whole of India. We are not at all active. We have very strong desires but no action. You should get together and talk about what you can do by which you can spread Sahaja Yoga. We bought lands for various purposes. They are just tying there rotting. TIll I dont come to India they cannot even make a People still think that it enough to keep on loving Mother, serving Her and praying to Her. It is fine. Maha Saraswatl Puja

 small road, or even a small hut. I cant understand that there are so many poeple still nothing gets done. When I go away you all separate and go your own way. Just two or three people work. Sahaja Yoga is a collective work and not just the work of two or three people. One must underst and that each Sahaja Yogi is a part of Sahaja Yoga. If one finger is hurt the whole body feels the pain. Everything is spontaneous, Sahaja. But this narrow mindedness does not let go of you, and this Ignorance that we are something important. You have gained so much depth and got so much. Now you must glve it to others. Tomorrow you can sit in my place and do my work. When this, happens only then will Sahaja Yoga grow. I bless you that now many people may emerge after this puja who will do this work of spreading Sahaja Yoga. The Divine Cool Breeze

 Birthday Puja Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Delhi 21-3-92 (Translated from Hindi) You have celebrated my birthday with so much love. You got your self realisation, and the speciol thing is that you became something and gained something. I am what I am. I don't have to becorne anything. It is such a great thing that you got self enlightened through your Spirit. All Sahaja Yogis have now become so good and dharmic. If you see people who belong to other religions they follow their rules and regulations with great difficulty: they fast, go to the Himalaya stand on their heads and do various things but still their Spirit is not enlightened. They will believe in some guru or God, but do they try to become like that guru? To believe means nothing when their gurus' shaktis and qualities have not enlightened them. No religion is bad in itseif. It is the way people have followed them. Some went into the.right and some into the left. dead body. Even in Nepal the left side has grown so much that they do tantrik vidya, bhoot and shamshan vidya. Thus two types of people were created in Buddha Dharma. Buddha has no connection with them and vice versa. The same thing is there in Christianity, They wanted to gain some powers within so they crucified people and did all sorts of things in the name of Christ, Even now you will see in Arrmenia how they kiled thousands of people in Azerbaijan. When they used to kill they would take the Bhle in one hand as if God was with them. and they think that only their religion is correct and the Muslims are bad. The Muslims do the same thing. Islam is beautiful and a tremendous religion. Even great Muslim scholars say that there is a lot of difference between Muslims and Islam. They feel it is because they are not educated, Buf education also creates foolish people. Like Kabir has sald "By reading the pandits have become foolish." Till the spirit is not enlightened nothing is going to happen. You cannot imbibe any religion within. It will not enter. It will just remain on the outside and then you will get lost. Either you become money oriented or power-oriented. But never spirit oriented. The right sided ones became ascetics. They made very laborious and complicated paths. They thought if Buddha got enlightened through so much suffering and through a very difficult path why should we not follow the same it not more laborious poths. So many people became entangled in these paths. Eating only once, sleeping on the ground, living in cold weather with little clothing, staying alone etc. They completely suppressed what was given to them by nature. By suppressing their natural instincts and behaviour palterns one aggressive. Such people have a lot of anger in them. By suppressing anger it grows more. Such people sometimes go into the supra-conscious. They may then gain such powers or siddhis by which they can dominate others. For example Hitler. Hitler's guru was a Lama monk and he learnt from him how to control and subdue people. Buddha had created such a high dharma on how to reach Nirvana and that religion went into the right side. When the Spirit gels enlighted then a person unexpectedly finds that tattwa within himself. He does not have to struggle. This feeling comes within spontaneously, In Hinduism it is told that the same spirit resides in everyone. Then how can we have class and caste consciousness? One should think that the one who wrote Ramayana was a robber and a fisherman. Ram did not write the becomes very irritable and Ramayana. Ram ate the half eaten berries of Shabari who was a low caste woman. The Gita was alsa written by Vyas who was the illegitimate son of a low caste woman. All this was done to show that there is something lacking within ourselves that we have created castes and class. The one who is inclined towards God and knows Him is a Brahmin. So then Valmiki was a Brahmin. Great incarnations came and refuted this again ond again that you are a Brahmin by birth. Kabir's Then the other type of people went into the left side and tantrism was born. There are places in Ladakh where they will pray to the hand of a 5) Birthday Puja

 guru was a Brahmin and he accepted Kabir a weaver as his disciple. Namdev was a great poet saint of Maharashtra who was a tailor. Namdev's poems are included in the Granth Sahib, the holy Book of the Sikhs. Guru Nanak recognized all this because he was an enlightened soul. The ones who reach there understand who is real and who is false. We should have compossion towards the people who are following these false things in the name of religion because we know they are blind. Like Kabir has said "How can I explain when the whole world is blind. Some will say 1 am Christian, Hindu or Muslim. You are making yourselves will not do It. You do not listen to dirty nonsense because now you have become so pure. If you do have to go to some such dirty place you will go as witness looking at it as a drama. You have now got the witnessing power within you. There is lot of love for each other. You may go anywhere in the world and you will find Sahaja Yogis will look after you with so much joy. Of course some people take advantage and tell lies: Even then they are looked after. One person went to Madras and told them lies that Shri Mataji has sent him. He asked for a horse, for various things and they gave it to him with great love, Later on I got to know that this rogue had gone there on his own, I have seen that people bear it even though they suffer, but will never complain. But I have seen that if someone says anything against me you cannot bear it. And this is the proof af your love for me. separate. In Sahaja Yaga you have understood that the essence of all relligions is the same. When we believe in all religions then this fundamentalism which is spreading in the world will finish off. You should not only realise that all religions are one but it should be Imbibed within. It should sink within. In Sahaja Yoga there are Hindus, Muslims, Christians, Sikhs and Buddhists. When you believe in one Vishva Dhama then all the religious are in that one religion. This is the wisdom. And then you believe in all the incarnations and saints. You You have glven me so much love and I have great faith that the dream I had of the whole world getting realisation will be tulfilled. Till this does not happen the world will not improve. We have all sorts of problems. Ecclogical, economic, political and family problems. The responsibility of this lies with human beings because they have created these problens. But when man changes and universal brotherhood enters within him then what would be the need to fight. Then all these problems will get solved by themselves. Whenever you read the paper you should collectively desire that the Punjab problem be solved and it will be solved. The problems of poverty will not be temoved by shouting remove poverty.' We are in the middle of the river. Neither are we too tich or too poor, When this current grows then the poor and the rich will both come in. And in this way our problem will be solved. it happen by talking make cannot or Intellectualising. It happens by the light of the spirit which sinks deep within you, then you don't need to say. You are Sahaja Yogis so you just cannot tell lies, sleal, torture or kill anyone. Now you cannot do anything that is bad. You do not try to pull anyone down or get into competitions. You are sitting in profound satisfaction and meditation and know that everything is getting done. Even in your married life there is deep understanding between husband and wife and no husband or wife will look at other men or women even though there. are many beautiful women and handsome men. This outer attraction which happens to others does not touch you. You have respect for yourself. Your eyes are steady now and even such thoughts do not enter your mind. Even other people are impressed by you. How you live in such peace and harmony. All your faces shine so much. The kind of love we have in Sahaja Yoga is not there in any society. The followers of other gurus look like they are jjust about to enter into a hospital. That is why you should have self respect and there should be something special about you. You pray to me and tell me thoat you have benefited. But you are behind these beneficial pujas. If you were not like this you could go on praying and it would not have worked out. Are there less proyers or Pujas in temples? But nothing goes inside. They do so much offering to the Devi and Gods but still it does not go in. They are just the same. They go on committing sins and atrocifies. There is nothing. People tell me that I cure so many and do not take any money. But neither do you take money. You will not kill, steal or make anyone a widow. You connot kidnap anyone's child. You do not smoke or drink or take drugs. You will not go to any dirty places or make obscene paintings or read dirty books. I don't need to say. You yourself 61 The Divine Cool Breeze

 special about them. Now Sahaja Yoga has spread so many countries. i never thought that in my lifetirne it would happen. The dream that I had has really come true. So we must remember that we are not, just simple Sahaja Yogis but we are special. We should try to make as many people yogis as possible. Then only can the world benefit and we will benefit. all have these powers. And I desire that all my powers also come within you. A mother always thinks that all her powers come within her children and they oll become great stalwarts. You are sitting in such joy and taking the pleosures of Nirvana for which many had to struggle. All this has come to you in such a Sahaja Way. This is your punyas of previous lives. My biessings are always with you but this thought is always there that when I leave you rny heart is wrenched. But when I think of the people in the other places walting for me then I feel that those are my children.,, I travel a lot but when I see you my heart fills with joy and I never have time to think of my age. Today is my birthday but your birthday should also be celebrated. At every birthday you grow in age but with this growth in age if maturity does not come then its no use. You are olso growing in Sahaja Yoga but it is important that we grow in maturity. Once you are mature you will become like a large tree and benefit others. You May God Bless You. Birthday Puja 7 coww.

 Felicitation ceremony on H. H. Shri Mataji's Birthday Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Delhi 21-3-92 I bow to all the seekers of truth. At the very Sahib. They all talked about Formless Divinity. outset we have to know that truth is what it is. We cannot conceptualize it. We have to know it. Unfortunately at this human awareness level we cannot know the truth. We have to become the Spirit. Whatever I am telling you today need not be accepted and there is no need to have blind faith because all of them have praised Sahaja Yoga so much. Keep your mind open like a scientist and as I put before you this hypothesis and if it works then as honest people you have to accept it because it is for your benevolence and the benevolence of the whole world. In Sahaja Yoga we have people from all kinds of races, nationalities, teligions and political systems. But there is such a beautiful brotherhood amongst them. It hos been achieved without any effort. They have become so beautiful because there is very little distance between our selves and reality. If we can cover that distance and absorb that reality then you will be amazed how fantastic, glorious and wonderful you are. Human beings are the same. Whether you talk of formless or form it is just a talk. Like if you talk of flowers or honey you do not get the honey. Talks are just words. Shri Adi Shankarcharya has called them "Shabda Jalam i.e, the web of words. How to go beyond the web of words. Through Kundalini awakening. It is not a new thing to this country, Sahaja Yoga is also not new. It has been expressed in all the scriptures that unless you become the Spirit and are reborn you cannot know religion. It cannot be known through mental efforts which everyone knows. Recently the Armenians killed the Muslims and before going to kill they used to read the Bible. How can that be? Imagine Christians doing that. Even Islam is one of the best religions but nobody has understood what Mohammed Sahib has said that you have to know it. Know comes from the Sanskrit word Gyana. Early Christians also were called Gnostics. It means to know on your central nervous system, and not on a mental level. If you see the world we have problems like ecological, political, economical, family problems etc. The centre point of all these problems is the human being. Somehow if we can transform this human being to a new awareness of universality then all these problerms can be solved, All the saints and great philosophers the world over have spoken about the spirit. All the scriptures have spoken about the Spirit. All these religions which were very great and pure and absolutely real got into a mess because people who followed them were eilher money oriented or power-oriented. They were never spirit-oriented. They never bothered to achieve their ascent. Both Buddha and Mahavira never spoke of God because they thought that if they did so people will start organising God into this or that religion. So they talked about the formless which is the Spirit. They Insisted that you should have your self-realisation. It was the same with Guru Nanak and Mohammed That is why as soon as Paul took over Christ's disciples ran away and when Thormas came to India he hid all the knowledge about reality in a Jar in Egypt. This was because he would have been prosecuted by the people who were interested in organising the religion, and making money out of it. As a result of all these non-sensical people they said better not talk of religion. In the name of religion they then murder and kill. How can it be a religious act? Human beings can make a mess of everything. That does not mean there is no divinity or reality. At that time very few people got realisation. Raja Janaka gave tealisation to only one person Nachiketa. it was a very siow process. One Guru gave realisation to only one disciple. Then in the twelfth century Dynaneshwar requested his guru to atleast allow him to write about it in a simple language. In his book The Divine Cool Breeze

 Gynaneshwoari he wtote about the kundalini in the sixth chapter. But the people in charge of religion did not allow anyone to read that chapter even though it was written in a local language. It has also been written about fourteen thousand years back by Markandeya in Sanskrit. in the sixth century Adi Shankaryacharya also brought it to the public but that was also denied. centres are the ones which are the foundations of physical, mental and spiritual being. When you put these centres right then you are alright. We have here in Delhi, Doctors who have gol their M.D. In the cures of Sahaja Yoga. Many diseases which are incurable can be cured easily through Sahaja Yoga. This is because when the Kundalini passes through these centres she enlightens, nourishes and integrates these centres Its not like one part of the body is treated and another is neglected, but in totality you are alright. She puts you in the central path of balance, With this light you becorne a wise person because you empty your mind. It is colled thoughtless awareness. At that time you become absolutely peaceful. When it is established well then you become full of doubtless awareness which means In Maharashtra they all sing Ramdas' poem saying "O Mother, give me the Yoga, give me connection with the Divine power." From ages they have been singing not knowing what they have being singing about. Then the development came through Guru Nanak, Kabirdas, Ramdas Swarmi, Tukaram. All these great saints incarnated in this country, specially Kabirdas and Nanak Sahib very clearly talked about Kundalini. But still people misunderstood because there was no way to know it. So in these modern times I thought that whatever is the discovery for one person has to be for the mnasses. Otherwise only one person knowing it would not be accepted. That's why they crucified and poisoned them. When they died then of course they built temples in their names. Till they lived nobody accepted them. you become so powerful thai you can give realisation to others, cure people, talk about Sahaja Yoga as your own knowledge. I have guided whenever they have asked questions and things about it but much has come from within and the enlightenment has shown them these scriptures are very different from the way people are following them. They can now see the enlightenment of these great souls who came on this earth to help us. So somehow or the other I managed a method by which you could raise the Kundalini of the masses. When the Kundlaini rises she connects you to this all pervading power. This all pervading power does ali the living work. Look at these flowers: lok at our eyes; we take them all for granted. The eyes are a great work of a very delicate camera. What about our brain? It is another great computer already programmed. We just accept it but do not want to know how it works. We accept all the living processes blind folded and we are not at all concerned as to how these flowers have come out of this mother earth. In the evolutionary process we are now standing on the edge of our last breakthrough and that is self realisation and the whole world has to get it, I don't know whether the whole world will get it or not but they way it moving in Sahaja Yoga in thousands everywhere, I feel that lats of people in my life time will get realisation. Not only that but will form that beautiful society which doesn't fight. have violence, doesn't cheat, is not ambltious, does not quarrel, doesn't talk ill of others and doesn't cut each others throat. These ideas do not how their heights are maintained or how their colours are reproduced from a small seed. But this all pervading power is pure love. This pure love, this energy is the one that does all these beautiful delicate things. Once you are connected with your Spirit, it gets enlightened. come into their heads. They ore extremely moral. They don't look at other women and do not frouble their children. They are the most low abiding people and I don't have to tell them don't do. All their bad habits drop out. I have seen one boy who came to me who was a drug addict., He could not see me as he was in half coma. Next morning he gave up drugs completely. Now a days short of appointing military to fight drug menace they are trying everything. No need. Just awaken them. In the little light of that awakening you see yourself. You see whats wrong with you and also have the power to throw it away, Like the It enlightens your attention. As your attention Is enlightened you become a different personality altogether. First of all you become collectivaly conscious: It means that you know about others and their subtle centres as also you know about your own centres on your finger tips. You know your problems and the problems of others. These Fellcitatlon Ceremony

 snake in your hand. If it is darkness you might say that this is not a snake but a rope. But if there is a little light you see its a snake and you throw it away. That's how it has worked. for Mr Gorbachov that If is now subsided quite a lot. Now another problem have of fundamentalism and Sahaja Yoga is the only way we can solve it because we believe in all the religions prophets, saints and incarnations. We belleve in all the essences of the religions and worship all of them. So how can we fight. There cannot be fundamentalism. This is the solution today for all the people who believe in one There are so many Doctors in Delhi who have done wonders and have taken up Sahaja Yoga as a scientific system of the Divine and they have brought it down to the level of medical science. Even in Canada we have a doctor who has worked it out how dead souls act. There are some scientists who have found how the carbon is on the Mooladhara and how it works. These scientists have taken it up seriously and are trying to work it out. There are some Muslirms who are trying to write Quran Enlightened. Sornebody has written Gita Enlightened already, All these efforts are done for no payment at all. I don't take oany money because after all for living work how much money do we pay to mother earth. We cannot pay for it. But all of the Sahaja Yogis also don't take any money. They are working very hard and are going all over the world to help. We have another doctor who has worked very hard in Russia. The Germans came to Russia to help. They felt it their duty to rectify what their forefathers had done. Such love and attention you cant belleve that they are Germans. religion and rest are all wtong. I am very happy and thankful for all those who have sent me all these bèautiful flowers reminding me of their love for me. Whenever I leave an airport I feel rmy heart drenched with al the people who are there and I start thinking when will I meet them again. Then I go to another airport and I see the others standing there and singing and I say its alright, I have to be here also. It is such a satisfying thing. I never feel my age or anything. It is so energy giving to see so many people are enjoying their life, their children. family life and social life. We have to create this new and beautiful world. We are not going to allow this beautiful world to be destroyed by the stupidity of a few people but wisdom has to come to all of us. Iwas born on this day and I did not know that I will achieve anything in my life time, My fother who was a realised soul used to tell me "Don't talk about any reality till you find out the enmasse evolution of people. Just don't say a word because you will create another Quran or Bible or something which is of no use. So first of all see to it that you achieve that state for human beings." I am so happy that it is spreading so fast not because of me but because of all of them that once they get the light they enlighten other people. So also 1 thank you all very much for this celebration and in my heart I also celebrate the way you people have come up. You have achieved so much for your achievements. congratulate you all. It is so beautiful within yourself. It is so magnanimous and righteous; so moral. All that starts manifesting and that is how humanity has to emancipate. They are giving me all this credit but I would say that give credit to them also because they are very honest and intelligent people. They could see the point very clearly. In these modern days when people just talk of science and technology, to accept divine technology is a very difficult thing. But when they see the results they are honest and accept it and understand it that how we are going to work out the problems of this. world specially the political problems. Thank God Thank you very much. The Dlvine Cool Breeze 10

 Shivratri Puja Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi New Castle, Australia 1-3-1992 Sadashiva, the God Almighty is impressed on your heart as the Spirit, the Shiva. We have to understand that so many people carne on this earth at different times In different countries. They talked to different people about righteousness, Dharma about how to elevate yourself. All of therm have said that you have to believe in God. You have to become the Spirit. They knew that without the attention being filled with the light of the Spirit, you will not be able to understand spirituality. You have the Spirit within you which is all the fime in witness state. Why have all the religions failed? Because they did not get their self realisation and become the Spirit. So there is a tremendous difference between you and all the others. They are hypocrites. They intellectualize it. They explain it very well but you can see very clearly that they haven't absorbed spirituality. That absorption is impossible without self-realisation. Buddha and Mahavira both never spoke about God. They said to just get your self-realisation. Most of the books speak of spirituality and what you have to achieve and what is the purpose of teligion. All that is spoken and written very well and they tell you what you have to be or what is good or evil. Even the first step where the Dharma has to be established where people are not to cheat each other. There has to be justice, collectivity, love and understanding. No jealousies or hypocrisy; where Its a different race, different community. Infact a different civilisation is to be created. of Sahaja Yoga. Very unique, wonderful angel like people have been created. The only problem is that you have to keep to your angelic foundations. Sornetimes you fall or falter. But you rise into your awareniess and try to locate new dimensions that are available to you. And all this is possible because you really belong to the chosen ones. You must also know that you are very special people. Sometimnes Sahaja Yogis don't realise and they don't have self esteen. You will have the wisdom to understand what is your role in this lifetime. This state is only possible if you see other people who are lost in the Maya of nonsense. Now you are a special community. Whatever are the Dharmas aspects. you can imbibe them. Spontaneously you don't have to exert, or do penance or work it out. You can do it in a Sahaja way. You can have all these qualities without any difficulties. It is the easiest thing for you to be righteous than to be otherwise. It is easier for you to be honest than to be otherwise. This speciality you have has been the vision of all the saints, prophets and Incarnations. People gave lectures upon lectures that you must do like this ar that. They think by educa ting people with these principles they will be alright. But it goes as ego into their heads as the education is only through your ego and not Sahaja. It is something that is put on you from outside. But for you it is very easy. You can imbibe all the aspects of Dharrna easily. I know people, who used to take drugs, torture people, beat them. One person used to carry a revolver with him always. Now he has become such a quiet, silent and beautiful person. So now you are that special people. Those people who have not got their realisation cannot get to their Dharma easily. It is tremendous of Sahaja Yogis that they have achieved that state of the Spirit. You can absorb Dharma without any difficulty. You will not kill or be violent. You will stick to the truth. The most important thing is that you have rapport with God Almighty and you are in a way knowledgeable about God. There is awe not fear. You wont cheat Sahaja Yoga for money or fight for power or materlal things. All your attention will be for the expansion of your awareness in the light of the Spirit. This is the vision of your Mother because Shiva is just a witness. But now he must have lots of hope after seeing the people that are created out The second point which is very easy for you is to love and care for another person. You would love to do that. You would like to care for people who are Sahaja Yogis. If you see a non Sahaja Yogi who who is suffering you will immediately see that the person gets help. One gentleman told me Shlvratid Puja 11)

 feeling of oneness as if they are part and parcel of us. It is surptising that the Americans sent a television for the Russians. It must have been the Spirit of Shri Krishna trying to help the spirit of right Agya. that he would love to do some work for Sahaja Yoga but he had no money. I told him to come the next day and I would glve it to him. Next day he never came back. On asking he told me that a gentleman who was sitting with me gave him the money. In Sahaja Yoga we immediately run to the help of someone In need of money. The six countries like Rormania, Bulgaria, Russia, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary have been helped by one country or the other. Even the East Asian countries were helped by Australians. I never asked them to do so. They made tickets for them and brought them to India. They looked after the Russians, They were full of compassion and love without feeling that they had done something, Nobody ever asked how much was spent or how much we have to give. I reached Hungary and found 125 Romanians there. My heart was really filled with such Joy. They secretly helped each other and brought gifts just for their satisfaction and not to oblige anyone. Imagine countrles like England, France, Spain, Italy. Switzerland who are very aggressive, and went out not to help anyone but to establish their empires or destroy or convert people and did all kind of things in the name of God and religion. But when you go to other countries you just want to help. It works out so spontaneously in your heart that you should help and work it out. Ils not only in Europe that they are working it out but have even been working in Turkey. Now a physicist has gone to Japan. He is not Japanese. He is using some sort of show on the streets to attract the people and telling about Sahaja Yoga. Also the collectivity you have now Is tremendous. Even the Indians are happy that an ashram is being bought in Brisbane. This is because the heart has become so large, because Shivo is shining there. The Spirit is shining. It has become such a large heart that it can encompass the whole universe, You have all become universal people. You don't only read about Vishva Nirmala Dharma but you try to follow it and imbibe it within yourself. Once upona time Australia was full of racialism. They did exactly the opposite of what Christ said. So did other religions. They are all fundamentalists. This is because they are just reading their holy books. If the book goes inside they will realise that all the books are talking of the same thing under different narnes. But you have got that unlversal thing thanks to your spirit that was there intact and has started shining so that now we have a new community, a new civilisation of people who are extremely honest to themselves and each other. They are non violent and absolutely law abiding, very very loving and affectionate., At the same time they very constructive and intelligent. They understand Sahajha Yoga which is such a subtle subject. Once your spirit is enlightened it goes into your head without any difficulty. You don't know how difficult is this subject of Sahaja Yoga. It is such a fulfilment of the desire of the divine that This transformation that has taken place has brought out all the beauty of your heart, your compassion, your love and you want to give security to others without expecting or demanding anything. Then you all enjoy living in a simple place like this under a tent, listening to me you don't want any comfort. You just seek the comfort of your Spirit and enjoy the whole place and the nature. I have seen Sahaja Yogis gradually becoming extremely conscious of the ecological problems. All over the world they have started using things which are natural and artistic. They have also become generous. We call it 'Audarya' which is the sign of an incarnation, This generosity is among my own children, They enjoy giving things to others rather than keeping things to themselves. It has happened all over the world. The Sahaja Yogis are sacrificing their time, money and everything to spread Sahaja Yoga and help others: to accommodate all kinds of things, all kinds of people within themselves. Such collective wisdom is there. This compassion, this love. this are your divinity is expressed when you are collective. You are enjoying each other, you enjoy collective life. Individualism is against the Spirit of the whole but we have our own varieties. You may live in other countries, other atrmosphere and traditions but we have the same faith, the faith which is enlightened and is not blind faith. That firstly you are realised souls and secondly there is an all pervading power. We have the same type of worship whether it is Christ, Mohammed Sahib or Shiva. We all worship in the same way. We don't have a difference of opinion about that like one The Divine Cool Breeze 12

 your heads etc. But still you have to sacrifice your time and your attention. The attention is so pure that you cannot enjoy all what other people do. Like going to the pub or listening to rock music. I find all of you have become so clean and beautiful. Your chakras are so clean. Is it that your purva punyas are working out? But still I would say that you must know your self-esteem that you are Sahaja Yogis. That dignity and that wisdom has to be there. The compassion, love and unity of purpose should be there. All over the world you have brothers and sisters. You have Rakhi sisters, you have very pure relationships. Anything impure is just thrown out in a Sahaja manner. Those who don't fit into it just get out of it. We have very beautiful families and children. churches church becoming ten Hinduisms. We are all Sahaja Yogis and we have all got the same principle binding ina Sahaja manner. Also you archelype. For the people who are nor in Sahaja Yoga you will be a model for them. They will see that you don't drink or smoke or take drugs, and don't boast about it. They don't hate anyone and ten and ate now becoming an dynamic and creative. They are so are constructive and self-contented and are not at all competitive. They do not give problems to nature or anyone. They have become such beautiful people.. So now you must understand that you hove to be models of good behaviour, good language, decent life, & decorum. And not fighting with husband or wife. The Mayor of Cabella told me that he was surprised that these people could sit for hours together. They are so spellbound they don't feel tired. He thought they are special people. They do nothing but just enjoy. Once we had Guru Puja for six hours and the villagers of Cabella were surprised how they could sit so silently. They thought you are angels. They said that these people don't torture us but are kind to us and look after us. They try to bring joy. First they used to call me Princess, then they started calling me GoddesS and they said you are Madonna. Whatever best they could think of they started saying. They now want to come to Sahaja Yoga. They gave me the land behind Cabella at a very nominal price which they did not give to Prince Dorio who was willing to pay a large sum for it. The whole village is getting a transformation and the dedication you have is remarkable. The way you are dedicated to Sahaja Yoga every non Sahaja Yogi will be changed. Mohammed Sahib came and talked of it. He never made a rigid teligion. It was very flexible. He said that you must get the knowledge so according to them the knowledge was to tead the book, to interpret it and get intellectual. After that came Guru Nanaka. You know what happened to Sikhs and where they have gone. Sikh means the one who has learnt the Divine Laws. If you are not connected you cannot follow the Divine laws. But you know them. As soon GS you go against them you can feel it on your hands and your central nervous system. You start judging yourself all the time and you want to put yourself right because you don't like it that way. Many ideas about your personal life that your wife husband or child should spoll you are all finished now. Now you want to marry a real Sahaja Yogini or Yogi. After that marriage becomes a blessing. It is quite a penance to come to such a tar-flung place and to travel in Maharashtra, but you enjoy it. You were missing the buses. It was an adventure for you. All this tapasya and penance becomes an adventure. Like the musicians who went to Russia and got lost. The whole description of it was tremendous, like an adventure. Now you have been achleving things without even about it., This is the blessings of your Spirit and the blessings of Shiva. never expected all this love, affection and care. The way you want to express your love for me, this dedication and your sacrifice; the way you are sacrificing your time and putting in effort. You came all the way to this far flung place for puja. All the gain you have from this puja is only possible when you are a realised soul, otherwise it is useless to do any puja or worship. People go to church sing a few songs and come back. They are just the same and after that go to the pub. because they think that pub is the only place Ihey can get some joy. One has to sacrifice. Though I must say that Sahaja Yoga is the easiest thing. You don't have to go to the Himalayas, stand on thinking The spirit is the witness and you develop that witness state. To you all this politics and economics looks very ridiculous. You see it as sornething absurd. The Russian Sahaja Yogls did not feel the problems of politics and lack of food. They said, : "We have got the spiritual food. Let these people fight and do whatever, we are not bothered." Shlvratıl Puja 13

 They were not bothered about the coup. "We are in the kingdom of God, why should we worry of these contentment. It is so beautiful, You have so many working everything for me. I don't have to desire. But you have to desire. You have to pray. You have to ask. The wider you become the wider your prayers will become for a wider world, reglon and not limited to your children, family, city but unlimited areas will come. So become very conscious and olert about whatever is happening in the world. Put your attention there and try to find out whats wrong with it. We are not worried about a small ashram but about the whole world. Find out where the wong is and what can we desire because if we can operate the Divine power then why not work it out ourselves. Your attention can go to any place. It can go to Nicaragua or Israel, or Saddam Hussain or any place you want to work out. It is mobile and universal. Just start expanding you heart, mind and your attention. worldly kingdoms and things." Such brothers and sisters. You are people who have understood what is God and what is Sadashiva. Now you have faith in Him which is not blind. You also know that His powers work and His laws work. All other laws are useless. You have seen and experienced in your fifetime how miracles are taking place and how things are working out. You desire and it works. But we still have people who are mediocre and very dull people. They cannot understand Sahaja or how much they can gain out of it. You shouldn't worry about them. You have to think about the whole collective which is good and forget about one or two useless people, If they corne up then well and good and if they don't then we are not going to force them. We will be getting more and more people. The greatest thing you have got is the greatest integration within your being, your heart, mind, your lives and your attention. There is no quarrel between your heart and brain and mind. Whatever your brain thinks your heart accepts and vice versa. Your attention is completely integrated with your heart and brain. You have got that power that can surpass all the temptations and you have got the spirit and you can give up what you want. You integrate among yourself, amnong different states and different countries. The whole cosmos is integrated, woven and governed by Divine laws, This integration gives you a complete understanding of Sahaja Yoga mentally, emotionally and spiritually. Your faith in me is great as 1 am quite a camouflage and it is not easy to understand me. On one side I am Divine on the other side I am very human. All these prophets never understood human beings. They neer knew that they ore not enlightened people and no use talking to them of these great things. It is like explaining to a blind person about colours. A person who has no Bhakti or Gyana is just vacant. I had to fill in myself with all these things. I had to study human beings and their problems and how to work it out. Now it has worked. The divinity in you has started expressing itself and such beautiful divine lights are sitting before me, I bless you frorm my heart where resides the Shiva, the Sadashiva and He blesses you. He is an absolute innocent personality. He is beyond any attachments. He is the one who is watching all of you with such adimiration. His joy knows no bounds. Also you have so many powers but some of you still do not want to exert. One word of prayer from you is very powerful than thousands of these asking. You are extremely powerful and whatever you desire works out. You have other powers of giving realisation also. You have so many powers but most of the time you will bring people to me to be cured. Use your powers. Don't be afraid. You will be amazed how these powers work out and how you become more embedded in your faith in yourself. You are so very powerful in collective and also in individual. Whatever you want you can have. I am desireless because the Divine power is It is a great day for us to celebrate this Shiva Puja here. I hope all of you respect the principle of Shiva within you. That is the most important. Look after your vibrations which pulsates in your being because the Spirit has awakened in yout attention, in your central nervous system and that's the rmost important thing you have to do. The rest of it is Sahaja. your May God Bless You. 14 The Divine Cool Breeze

 Easter Puja Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi 19-4-92 ROME, ITALY The resurrection of Christ took place to open our Agya because it was avery subile centre: With the ideas people had from their conditioning and ego where so much clogging was of the agya chakra that the passing of the Kundalini was Impossible through it. So the play of resurrection fook place, as Christ was nothing but Chaitanya. In the death of Christ we have to understand that we have achieved our resurrection. Also what was supposed to be the past had died. This repentance that we have, the conditioning we have are dead. But still among the Christian nations the ego has not subsided as it should have been. It may be that Christ was never worshipped in the right way, The ego did not allow the West to see what they are doing and how far they are going. They would repenf about something that is far-fetched. Repentance was meant for out ego. then British government and had no loyalties with the Indians. When my father was arrested, they threw us out of the Christian community. They threw me out of school when I was just six or seven years old, because my father was a congressman and freedom fighter. All the Christian nations have been extremely cruel and dominating and today they are there at the heim of affairs. This subtle ego which was the properly of some monarchs has now become avalable to all the ordinary people in democratic countries. All these countries are full of destruction. Americans are also extremely dominating and egoistical to such an extent that they are idiotic. They follow Christ who was the source of wisdom. So we have to see Christian history. There was Peter who was very egaistical and once Christ said that you are Satan. He also said that you will deny me. Then Paul came up. He found Peter. He being a great bureaucrat wooed him and took him into his own confidence and told him to join hands with him. This sinister man edited the Bible. He is full of ego and has distorted what Christ sald. He fought with Mathew and could not accept the Immaculate conception, He had no idea about the reality, the rniracles that exist with divinity. But Mathew stuck on to his own gospel. John ran away and started his own style which he called Gnostics. So this devil entered into the atena of such a great religion as Christianity, The Bible which they use now as authority has,such words that people start thinking no end of themselves. The Christian invaded other nations countries, and cornpletely annihilated races after races. They were followers of Christ and took the Bible in their hand. These so called Christians have done such horrible things in the name of Christ. It was because of this ego.. Anywhete if they are Christians they are extremely aggressive, and vlolent and they think that the whole world belongs to them. Even Hitler believed in the Catholic religion. This great sacrifice of Christ never taught them any lesson. They thought they have the right to rule the whole world, plunder and destroy everyone. What contrast it is to the life of Christ. The ego grew so much that today the Christians have lost their sense of maryadas completely. The Christians have no morality of any kind left in them. They have no respect for law, no respect for God. They have no respect for chastity which was the main point of Christ. I found the Christians in India dominating people. Why are they using the name of Christ to dominate others. The British also manoeuvred in such a manner that the Indians believed that Christ was born in England. They used to dress up fike the English and behave in a very arrogant manner. They joined hands with the Firstly they suggest that if you become the members of a Church you are chosen. In Sahaja Yoga also we have twelve types of Sahaja Yogis. Some of them are very weak, because they have too much ego. They cannot carry on with anyone. They shout at people; they disturb others. They think no erd of themselves. They are always aggressive. They cannot be collective. They never show any love. This type of Sahaja Yogis are there who one by one are showing their colours. Some dogmatic, and Easter Puja 15

 of them are learning. Christ had hardly three and a half years to work out all this. One of his disciples Peter would be such a sinister fellow that just for his self-interest and glory he would put such words in the Bible, Even with Mohammed Sahib it introspect or not? Are we Sahaja Yogis who are self-apinionated and self-glorified. Fourth kind of Sahaja Yogi waiship Mataji in the house, but they cant come to the collective because it is a little far away. But if they have to go to meet their son they will go miles together. If they have to do something for their family or some business they wilI run after it. In Sahaja Yoga nobody is asked to give up their jobs or life styles, but priority is to be seen. They are very busy with their work and earnings etc. and they are just after earninga name, and no tirhe for God. They will bow lo Mother and want all the protection from Her for our work, for our creativity. There are some Sahaja Yogis who still think that money is very important. In Sahaja Yoga we get money whenever we want. Some of them say "I am starting a business, because 0.001 percent I want to give to Sahaja Yoga. After all it is all yours Mother This kind of attitude comes when you think that money is very important. Some people cannot see God, they cannot see subtler advantage of this money. They calculate every pie meticulously. They don't want that their hard earned money should be wasted about thelr spirituality. Some people wont buy a book of Sahaja Yoga. They wont buy a tape. They will copy it. It is not that it is necessary to spend but the attitude, In the Buddhist religion there are so many 'don'ts' that if I put even one to Sahaja Yogis they will all run away. Firstly you cannot make any Prophet. You cannot buy any land. You can eat your food Just once a day. You have to be vegetarian. The followers of all the great incarnations have done so much wrong to the people who brought beautiful religions to us. That's why we are completely deviated from the path of truth. happened. He said that there will be resurrection time. He talked of the future. If he was the last then how can you have resurrection? But the seal of Prophet does not mean that no prophet can corne down. He was Adi Guru so he called himself "seal. He didn't say that I have sealed. But crooked people take advantage of these little words and start using them for their purposes because they are very self-centered. So another type of Sahaja Yogls are extremely self-centred. Some of them know their own wives, their children and thelr house. To them it is very important. Some people came to Bombay with their children but didn't come for the Puja in Delhi. They are more worried about their children than about Sahaja Yoga or about their own emancipation. They try to remove their husbands from the ashrams. They try to find excuses on how to get out of the collectivity, You are judged all the time and you judge yourself. Christ was not crucified by Jews. It Is a wrong Idea. How could the Jews who were Just like slaves Crucify Christ. It was the Roman empire who crucified him. They thought that he was becoming very powerful. The blame was put on the Jews. The rulers can always do such a thing. The early Christians were mostly Jews. Christ himself was a Jew. Then the Christians thought that they have every right to blame the Jews because they thought that Christ was crucified by the Jews. The idea was put forward by Paul because he didn't want to take any blame on the Rornan empire. Then all the Christians were busy hating the Jews. It was thousands of years ago and because somebody crucified somebody for that they are hated. in that way all the white race must be hated for generations together. Because they have not only crucified one man but million of people. Are we going to blame their children and their children? Those who are really honest want to adhere to the path of truth have to all the time introspect and find out how far we are from the truth. Another type of Sahaja Yogis are the enjoying festivals kind. They will club together, because they have a feeling of belonging to something, or to a group, Then you start getting into all kinds of conditioning, rules and tegulations and you start binding yourself. You feel very happy. In some sects you must have clean shaven head or beards or moustaches. They don't understand that reality is full of varieties. There must be variety. That is how there is aesthetics and saundarya, How can you be a personality without Another type of Sahaja Yogis we have is that they try to blame somebody all the time. Such people can never improve. They should introspect. Introspection is missing very much in the West except in Russia. Only thing if you go to some church and confess to some deaf and dumb Of priest you are saved. Let us face ourselves. Do we 16 The Divine Cool Breeze

 doubting. This still lingers on even when they are quite surrendered about it. But then there are people who do not doubt anything. They understand that it is Param Chaitanya which is helping. They start realising that we have got powers, and that we are connected with the Divine. We have powers. Sometimes they also doubt, Some will not do anything because they are afraid that their ego will come up. They are frightened of their ego. Then this ego follows very subtly. But there are people who know that they have been blessed with powers and these powers can be diseovered more and more within yourself. They have faith in themselves, they have faith in Sahaja Yoga. They have complete faith in me and this Param Chaitanya, They are very simple people and they work out variety? How can you be bound by these nonsensical ideas. Variety gives you an inner and outer personality. When you start enjoying this personality then only you are a Sahaja Yogi. You should be a personality that watches oneself. But on the other hand we become slaves of our ideas of personality and we start projecting our personality through our ego and try to show that we are something very special. Sahaja Yoga is just the opposite. We are all a personality. We are all saints and are tai be tespected as saints We need not have the same type of personality. We may have different styles of talking, delivering things, expression of Divine love. We are absolutely free because we have the light. We know how far we have to go and what is the tight way. When such people come up understanding that Sahaja Yoga is complete freedom. You have the light that is why there is complete freedom. The religions that have been preached by these incarnations just become part and parcel of you. Then you really become a real Christian and real Muslim and then yOu realise that all religions are like a part of the ocean. You are in a way the real religious personality. The basis of religion is the ascent. There is another type of Sahaja Yogi who is fully empowered. They discover their own power. in that introspection they see and are sure about it and there are no doubts That is the state of Nirvikalpa. You have faith in me and worship me to receive something from me. But know that: have made you also something great. But you have to develop your powers also Don't only depend on the powers that I have. Do not try ta extract powers which are from your Mother. Try to tise onto the same level. You can try. You have to work out through introspection. You have got all these powers within yourself. You have to grow and take up responsibility without feeling responsible. We have to go ahead of all the other disciples. Unless and until we do that we may drown Sahaja Yoga Into an ocean of another There are people who are worried about their own light and they want that this light should be there all the fime burning and this light should not only enlighten them but enlighten others. They work for it. They take up responsibility. They do not sit in a jungle meditating, You have to work. You have to work out Sahaja Yoga for others. You have to glve them this beautiful feeling of oneness with the Divine. You have to enjoy all that. Sahaja Yoga is to fill up your cups to be given to many others who are there. They do not come to me for small things. The vision should be of that great universe that has to be enlightened. This universal religion has to be brought into the lives of people through realisation, and awakening of Kundalini. They work very hard and spare no efforts to see that people receive reallsation. to also develop our introspection. nonsense. We have personalities understanding, and our proofs of reality. through and Today is the day of our resurrection. We have to pass through these twelve stages, to reach the higher state. They call the highest state the fourteenth state where you are just an instrument where you are insensitive about what you are, playing into the hands of Param Chaitanya. Christ accepted his crucification because He had to play that role. Try to reduce hate which starts showing up in the collectivity. As -soon as this i ness' is finished all the powers will start coming up. But a little of this ego is subtly there. That I am doing this. It is an anti-Christ activity. So the construction of the mind starts working and they start criticizing others. Then there are Sahaja Yogis who realise that Param Chaitanya is working everything and working through them: They are the instrument. Sometimes if it fails they start It's like a flute which is hollow. If there is any obstruction it cannot play. Out of all the ideas and Easter Pula 17

 conditioning we have, the worst is the Ego that T am doing that. This should go away because we can never enjoy if we think that way. through these fourteen planes that are within us. Then we burst through all these and come out as beautiful lotuses. Easter is suggestive of eggs being offered so that these eggs can become the birds. u cannot jump into the ocean of joy as You long as you think that I am doing it. May God Bless You. So we are talking about our resurrection The Divine Cool Breeze 18

 Sahasrara Puja Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Cabella, Italy, 10 May 1992 Today we are celebrating the Sahosrara day. Pertiaps you have not realised what a day it must hove been. Without opening the Sahasarara, God, Religion and all talk of divinity was a myth. People believed in Him but it was just a belief. And science was about to obliterate the value systems and all proof of God AlImighty. In history when science established itself, the people who are incharge of the helm of affairs in different religions tried to cope with the findings of the science. Augustine tried to show it in the Bible. It started looking like all the scriptures are a stupidity and were just mythical. Quran had lots of things that described the biology of today. They could not belleve that human beings were specially created by God. They thought that it was just a matter of chance that the animals acquired a situation by which they became human beings. Thus all the time divinity was challenged, and there was no way of giving a pioof ot whatever was said in the Bible, Quran, Gita Upnishads or Torah because it was still just a faith. Very few people got their realisation and when they talked people did not believe them, and thought that they are Just trying to propound their own theories. So it all became a kind of a dead science Every cell has got a programme in it, just like a computer. According to that prograrnme the development takes place. So many computer like cells are already programmed and so a very mysterious sort of thing has come before the scientists. They are not able to explain it. Sahaja Yogaihas proved thatitis the Will and the desire of God which is doing all the work. All this chaitanya and Adi Shakti is the Will of God the Will God is working out everything very harmoniously. The earth was created by a bang which was very harmonious. Everything that was done was by His will. You are now feeling the Will of God on your finger tips: After realisation you have discovered the absolute sclence which is the Will of God. You know that we have cured people through Sahaja Yoga. So many things work out automatically after realisation, but people don't want to believe. In the beginning the people wouldn't believe when the scientists fold them something. But now you see that science is changing all the time. Theories are being challenged. Sahaja Yoga has exposed one to that great truth of science which challenged. We can prove that God is there. The whole creation was done harmoniously by the Will of God. It Will of God has done everything then human beings should not lake the credit for discovering somethings which are created by God. For example if ths carpet is made by someone and you discover Its colours what is so great because it is all there, you cannot create it. The fashioning also was done by the Will of God. If the Will of God is so important it has to be proved. And now after the breaking of Sahasrara you have now felt it. It has come to us so Sahaja that we don't under stand. We just give a bandhan and the things work out. It is much more than that. We have now become part and parcel of that big computer. We have become the channels of that Will of God and are now connected to It which has created all this cannot be People started thinking that whats the use of following these ten commandments or these strict rules of life because by following them you gain nothing. Why should one think of gaining some punyas also? So there was a big derailment of human value system. Also these monolithic organised religions started taking recourse to gaining power or money bécause they thought that's the only way you can control peaple. They were least bothered about delivering the goods that was described in the Bible. Bible itself was tampered a lot with. Peter and Paul tried to spoil most of it. Quran was not touched so much, but stil it dealt more with the right side and so many things are still ambigious. Simultaneously two things have happened. First thing is that now we have a new science of micro-biology in which we have discovered that every cell has got a DNA tape. universe. Sahasrara Puja 19

 So we can manage everything because we have got the absolute science in our hand, which will work out the betterment of the whole world. We can prove it to the scientist that there is a Will of God whlch has done all this creation. Even evolutionarY process is the Will of God. Without His Will nothing could have happened. Now you have seen that we have got the Will of God as our own power. We can use it. So it is very important to be a Sahaja Yogi. Sahaja Yoga is not only for saying "Mother I am full of joy, or I got purified, everything is fine." But for what? Why did you get all these blessings? Why have you been cleansed? So that his knowledge of the Will of God should be apparent in you and should be a part and parcel of you. We have to raise our level. We must come up. It's really useless to give Sahaja Yoga to mediocre and ordinary people because they are good for nothing. They are not going to help us in any way because what Is needed today is people who can really manifest and teflect the Will of God. For that we need very strong people. This will has created the whole universe, the cosmos, mother earth, and everything. Now we exposed to a new dimension that we are the channels of that Will of God. prove His omnipresence you have to be all the time aware that you are Sahaja Yogis. Even now I find Sahaja Yogis telling about their wives, children house, fomilles jobs etc., I start wondering what is their level? Where are they? When are they going to take up the role of what they have got. The omnipotent God who is everywhere, who has done everything and the Will of God that has worked it out has to work through you people and you have to be very strong, sensible, very wise and also very effective. The more effective you become the more energy you will get. Still I feel that Sahaja Yogis are not taking the responsibility of understanding that they have to represent this God Almighty who is omnipresent, omniscient, who knows everything who sees everything and who is potent and Almighty. If you understand that this is what has happened after opening the Sahasrara that you have now got the power which has these three qualities in it. This great power has come to you and for that we don't need very successful people with big names of money. We need people of character, understanding, wisdom and of strength, that whatever may come I and cope with it. I will change and improve myself. I hope all of you have got tid of your illusions. You should also have no illuslons about yourself. If you have any then you should leave Sahaja Yoga. But know that you are chosen for this purpose by God's will, that's why you are here and you have to take up the responsibility of understanding this science which is absolute. Work it out for yourself as well as for others. You have felt my love. But your love must be felt because God love. are will stand by it, take to It So what is our duty and what should we do about it? As a result of Sahasrara being opening out our illusions have vanished. You should have no illusions as to the existence of God Almighty, the power of His Will and the truth about Sahaja Yoga. You should have no doubts at all. While using His power you should be aware that this power is given to you because you are capable of handling It. It is the highest power that you can think of. Take any governor or minister, they can be removed tomorrow; they can become corrupt; and devoid of any knowledge of their own powers. There are many people who just get elected without knowing what they have to do. This is not just a conversion of people. Its not even only transformation but it is a new fashioning of a new human being which has come forward and which is capable of carrying the Will of God further. As a result of your realization firstly your Others must feel that you are is compassionate, loving and understanding. All the time this Will of God is flowing through you. You have to work it out in such a manner that people should know that you are a saint and this power is flowing through you. that has happened is that you The second thing have understood the integration, that in the world there is complete integration which is existing. Children have natural their innate, own God is omnipotent, illusions have gone. omnipresent and omniscient. All His omnipotence and understanding. Normally a good child would always like to share his things, would like to love another child, and protect a little child. This is natural. It won't think whether it has black hair or red hair or skin. Little babies know that one should be careful about the privacy of the body. Children this collective work consciousness you should also know that you are also omnipotent, omnipresent and omniscient. Omniscient means that one sees and knows everything. Part of that power is also within you. To as has done The Divine Cool Breeze 20

 don't want to be made nude before others. It's innate within them. All these innate qualities are within you. Children don't like to steal anything. I have seen children who go to beautiful places or a house, they will always try to keep the beauty of that place. modern times. Then the thoughts are influenced. We read so many books which are some mad ramblings of some mad man like Freud. How could Freud influence the West? This is because you have lost your innate sense and you accept it. That's how Freud became your sort of Jesus Christ. Sex became the most important thing. With a little common sense you can understand that at every moment we are put into this kind of a dormination by a few dom ineering people who have certain ideas. Their ideas become great " He said so." Who is he? What is his life? See for yourself what sort oft a man he is. With your will which you have now wilh this Will of God which has fashioned the whole world and fashioned every cell within you, and still you still are playing in the hands of these entrepreneurs. They are making money out of these vulnerable people and befooling them. On one side you have such a great power, you are chosen for such a great thing and on the other side you have this kind of slavery. Your innate qualities were lost. Luckily by the Kundalini awakening and breaking out of the Sahasrara all these innate qualities which looked like lost, for example your innocence, creativity, religion within, compassion and love for humanity, your power of judgement, wisdom: all these great qualities were in a dormant state. They all got awakened. I don't have to tell you don't do this or that. You yourself realise that this is wrong. You yourself know what is good for you. If you Will want to do wrong you can go ahead but already there is a light within you to see for yourself what is good and what is bad. It has come because of this Sahasrara being opened out to this new dimension of new knowledge. It is not new but is innately built within you and all those innate qualities are now manifesting and you are enjoying them. The countries which are supposed to be under developed have so many, of these qualities in them. Innocence is innately built within us. The Will of God built innocence and auspiciousness. The first thing He did was to create Shri Ganesha. It was She, because the Will of God is Adi Shakti. All this was created to make the whole world very beautiful. Al these innate qualities, all these deities were placed within you. They were specially made so that human beings should become saintly people, and they should have their saintly innate sense. In developed countries our brain was bombarded by all kinds of television and other things and we become very vulnerable. We started getting into the ideas of others. Anybody who is dominating could dominate us. It wasn't only Hitler who dominated people but even fashions have dominated us. People are not able to take to anything that is sensible becouse it is a fashion. Now-a-days there is a fashion to have small skirts. You can't get a long skirt anywhere. Everybody has to wear that kind of a style, otherwise you are not in. As we are bombarded with this all the time so first of all we become slaves of entrepreneurs. I heard that in Belgium you cannot get anything fresh, and you have to take everything from the super market whlch is all tinned. Gradually we are getting absolutely artificial. The food, dress, and attitudes are artificial. This is so because we are bombarded by advertisements, and outside influences and we get lost. We forget our innate sense which is being dominated by all these modern things. Now after science the money became very important. Once this happens then all the entrepreneurs become important because they know how to make money and befool you all the time. But those people who are innately built do not change They have dresses of the same type and do not change. On the contrary they find It very difficult to get out of their traditional achievements. Now you have to get out of your petty Ideas and behaviour. I have heard that Sahaja Yogis throw things all over the place. How can you behave like this? If you do not have a proper discipline of life yourself you cannot carry the Will of God. I respect your freedom and I want that your own Kundalini should awaken that wisdom in you, that greatness and glory in you. Then you will start understanding what is our image worth. It will purify and once you are purified completely like gold which is put in the fire and gold is separated. In the same way the fire of kundalini cleanses you completely. and you start seeing your own glory and nature, and your For Sahaja Yogis It Is important to watch if they are getting this slavery from the entrepreneurs in the Sahasrara Puja 21

 own greatness. So the integration part comes to you easily. First of all we used to have Sahaja Yogis say from England, Spain, Italy etc. They would always have different groups. They would never sit together. Now It is not so. Now I find they are all becoming integrated. The integration of human beings is the most important thing for Sahaja Yoga. It does not come by intelligence but innate understanding that all human beings are made by God, and we have no right to despise anything The second integration that has come to you is that all religions have been born on the same tree of spiritual ife. That all religions are to be worshipped. All incarnations, prophets, and scriptures are to be worshipped. There are delects and problems with those scriptures which can be corrected. Gradually you start entering into the subtler side of divinity to understand that all these people have worked hard to create that atmosphere for Sahaja Yoga. No religion is to be despised or attacked. enlightened is not fully used. Otherwise the integration is partial. The integration of all the chakras comes in. Like whatever you do has to be auspiclous with full attention, It has to be religious. All these centres are absolutely one, Integrated power that you are. The whole life should be integrated. Suppose somebody's husband or wife is not of that level, you shouldn't bother. You should just bother about yourself. Don't expect anything from anybody else. It is your duty which is important. You have to fuifil your duty. You have to work It out yourself. Unless and until you understand that it is your individual being which has achieved it. It is the individual being that has to realise it and become one and integrated with the rest of them. You have to see your gains. 'l have got financial, physical mental gains. I have got joy, happiness.' That is not the only thing. That should not be the only criteria. You should have the understanding of your own personality which is being specially fashioned after many lives for you to corme in this life to get your realisation and to do the further work of the Will of God. Every moment you see miracles taking place you do realise that it is being done by Param Chaitanya. Param Chaitanya is the Will of Adi Shakti. And the Adi Shakti is the Will of God. This is how we will finish off all fundamentalists. In Sahaja Yoga also people should not become fundamentalists. Be very careful. Sometimes you start making Sahaja Yoga fundomentalistic. "Mother sald so". Do not use me anywhere. "Mother sald so" Is the way you want to dominate others. You yourself say because now you have the right, you have an individuality in Sahaja Yoga. Nobody has business to use me arbitrarily. Whatever you have to say you say yourself. You are not bound by any thing I say. It is you who have to stand up and see for yourself what you have to say. You have to now use your will and for that you have to develop yourself and for that you have to have pure will and pure desire of God Almighty. The integration is not only outward but inward also. Earlier whatever we did, our mind used to say one thing, our heart another thing, and our brain another. Now all these three things have become one. Now whatever your brain says is absolutely acceptable to your heart and your attention. You yourself have now become integrated. Many people say 'I want to do it but I cant do it." Now it is not so because now you are completely integrated. You should examine yourself and try to find out whether you are integrated or not. Whatever I do, do I do it with my full heart and full attention? I see that you do with your full heart but full attention is not there. The attention which was the first thing which was These vibrations are like say DNA. They all know how they have to fashion. Like today is very sunny. Everybody is surprised. Two days ago we had havan and it was absolutely sunny. The whole Comos is working for you. You are on the stage now and you have to see to it. If you do not have faith in yourself and are not confident as to what you are how can you help. How can you work out yourself and the problems of the world which are created by human beings only. So we have to absolutely overthrow' all these dominations on us. First from science we can prove everything. We can prove the so called religions. All these ideas that we have about being Hindus, Muslims, Catholics, Protestants have to be thrown away and we have to become a new personality. After realisation you become like the lotus which rose from the mud, Now you have become lotuses and have to throw away all this dead mud otherwise fragments will be there. Throw away all these shackles which are killing you, which are of no use but a burden. This whole fashioning has been done so carefully with such sweetness and such delicacy. So we must respect ourselves. We must The Divine Cool Breeze 22

 have affection and love for others and above all we must have discipline. Ashram life. Such people should get out of Sahaja Yoga. Without collectivity how will you grow and assemble your power? You can be strong by combining together. If you have one stick you can break it but if you put many sticks tagether you cannot break them. It is better to have ten people of good quality than to have a thousand useless people. Now from my life you all know that I work very hard and travel a lot, more than any of you have. This is because I have the Will that I have to bring this world to that state of enjoyment, happiness and divinity where they realise what is their goal and what is the Glory of their Father. I never think that something will go wrong with me or what will happen. I have never bothered you about my family life, my children, Whatever problems I have I am dealing with them myself. But here I get such big letters from Sahaja Yogis writing about their families, etc. Attachment to family is the biggest burden on your heads. They are not your responsibility. It is the responsibility of God Almighty. Can you do better than Him? When you try to take the responsibility then the problems detachment. You cling on to your own things, your own children. If it is belongs to Sahaja Yoga they will just throw it around. How can you call them Divine or saintly? Salntly people are not only responsible for themselves but are responsible for Today we have to take the vow that "Lwill fashion my life according to the Will of God. I will dedicale myself to that. No family, no other considerations," or about anyone Everything can be looked after by the Will of God. You don't have to worry for anything. Just try to understand that you have problerms because you don't want to give those problems to God. There are some people who say that they are not capable enough so they cant do it. This is a stupid statement. You test yourself. Why do we say such a thing? May be you are very money oriented. Some people talk of business in Sahaja Yoga, Or may be there is material attachment. Secondly it could be 'Mamatva'. My family, children etc. or this is 'mine'. Thirdly you may be still clinging on to your old habits and are enjoying your life without virtues. You are capable of doing everything. One should start. understand everyone. Before Sahaja Yoga you were not attached to anyone. You were self-centred. Now you have widened yourself a little more and are now attached to your wife and children. That is alsa selfish. They are not your children but are the children of God. It is very important thing that has happened to you that Sahasrara has opened. Now you can prove the existence of God, His Will, everything to the whole world. Nobody can challenge Sahaja Yoga. Those who will challenge can be told. You should take Sahaja Yoga serlously. People don't even do meditation. How will you grow without meditation? Unless you become thoughtlessly aware, you cannot grow. You have to atleast meditate morning and evening. There are many people who are not even collective by temperament. They do not like Most Important thing is that you should become a proper, compassionate and strong vehicle of God's Will. You do my puja is alright because it helps you a lot. Main thing is that you should all ascend higher and higher. Compete with each other into getting into higher situations. I am sure that this absolute science will one day outshadow the other science and tell people that it is what it is. It is in your hands. Today is the day we celebrate by which we have opened absolutely a new. dimension of great divinity of the proofs of the Divine. It is so important that we can finish all the illusions they have. We can manage that power you all have. May God Bless you. Editor : Shri, Yogi Mahajan Printer & Publisher : P. C. Kulkarni Printed & Published at : The Divine Cool Breeze (Xerox M/cs.) 9. Bhagya Chintamani Sac. Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411 029. Sahasrara Puja 23



----------------------

1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3,4,5.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Maha Saraswati Puja
Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Caleutta 3-2-92 (Transalted from Hindi)
In this Kali Yuga it very difficult to recognize the
Mother. We cannot even know our own mother
then to know me is even more difficult. But the
depth of this Yoga bhumi is working in you. I have
seen that whichever Sahaja Yogi has come from
this part becomes very deep. And I am surprised
that where I spent so many years and worked
such a lot, the people there are not so deep. They
do not have such beautifül collectivity as is here.
The specialitY, of this land is that the collectivity
and love is absolutely selfless and unselfish: I have
been very pleased to see this and may you
We use the swadisthanonly for reading, writing
and we have progressed in these fields.
But there is a further state than this about which
we don't think, and that is why there is imbalance.
When you see there is lot of art, literature, etc. and
people say there is no union of Saraswati and
Laxmi. This means that whatever you are doing
when you go into its deeper aspect, then you think
why there is no union with Laxmi. In Sahaja Yoga
both meet at the Agya chakra. You keep on
working but you do not get the result that you
desire, When you come into Agya chakra you
realise why we have not got that state which so
many artists have got. Why are we living in poverty
? Till we do not reach that state where we see
both aspects with correct perspective we cannot
progress. To unite Kala (Art) with Laxmi we need
proper vision.
progress,
It is very important that there should be worship of
Maha Saraswati here. The Devi has blessed this
land and everything is so green here. The reason
for poverty and suffering here is because the
worship of Saraswati has been very limited. The
puja of Saraswati is done here only to increase our
artistic talents or to become scholars. No doubt
the people here have progressed on the
scholastic and artistic fronts. People here are verY
intelligent and proud. But still why is there poverty?
Why is there jealousy towards a person who has
more money than you? One must understand
what formula we are lacking which we must get.
One of our greatest weaknesses is stubbornness, If
they have made an elephant they will go on
making elephants. If they sing in a particular way
they will go on singing in that way. If you tell them
to change it they may get angry. At Agya if you
contemplate then you realise that stubbornness
does not let you go beyond Agya chakra. "We are
Bengalis.
intellectuals." We have this stubbornness that we
have the
We
greatest
artists,
The work of Saraswati is on the right side, When
She works on the Swadhistan and when this goes
on the left side then the sense of art grows. Bengal
is very famous in every art field. In music, drama,
sculpture and literature. There are very famous
people in these art forms here. Art is the light of the
Divine. You cannot see it but it has vibrations.
are great people in Bengal. But if you want to rise
above that we must realise that we do not have
to compromise. I don't say that you destroy art. But
you must think of art in a balanced manner. I am
telling you something practical, that we have a
certain laziness in us by which we can aso
. A person thinks that by
creating something new I will have to exert. For
learning something new our brains are a bit slow.
Because of this slow brain we are not able to learn
anything by which we can unite with Laxmi, Like I
told sorme artisans not to make such elaborate
purses but to make simple lines. He said, this was
not possible. We will make It like the way we are
used to. We cannot make it the way you want.
"You cannot make any suggestions. So there must
Is very beautifully created and
become stubbom.
recognised by all the people all over the world is
aesthetically rich. If you put your hands towards it
you will find vibrations flowing from them,
especially if it is made by a realised soul. The
people who live here are very devotional and the
art forms here are easily understood by all. People
of Bengal are perfectionists. But we have
developed only one side of the Swadhistan and
have neglected the other.
Maha Saraswati Puļa
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3,4,5.pdf-page-1.txt 
 be an understanding; then the brain opens out.
But if you are stubborn and say that whatever I do
is correcti and what anyone tells me is not so, This
slubbornness can have a very great effect on a
person's entire life. We are fike and will remain so.
When the change comes it is in a very Sahaja way
and in this Sahaja way you find the union with
Laxmi. Artists are very stubbom. If you tell them
please change this a bit they will not do that. To
put the agya chakra right we must first put right
this strange ego which says that whatever we do
and the way we do is right and no other
Suggestion or method is correct.
songs, art forms which were offered in the name of
God are still living today. Like today's film music
comes and dles down. But the songs of Kabir,
Gynaneshwoar are still remembered. Through their
self realisation they obtained the Maha Saraswati
shakti and whatever they wrote or created that
light was of a unique kind. These were creations
that united the world into one. One should not
only move on Saraswati tattwa as this limits you.
One should move on Maha Saraswati tattwa. If
Saraswati tattwa is the seed then the tree is Maha
Saraswati. Till you do not make this seed into the
Maha Saraswati till then you cannot merge with
Maha Laxmi. The gift of Mahalaxmi within you is
that you get your self-realisation. All the three, i.e.
Mahalaxrni, Maha Saraswati and Maha Kali meet
at Agya. In every subtle way there is an ego. So
one should introspect within as to why we believe
in such a thing. I am sitting in a limited field then
how can l enlighten the whole world? I have said
many times look towards yourself. I know many
people belleve me and worship me as the Devi.,
but what is the benefit for me in this ? i am what
I am. You are the ones who have achieved. You
carme to Sahaja Yoga and frorm, Saraswati tattwa
you reached Maha Saraswati tattwa. You have
gained not me. You should not be satisfied by just
believing in me. You will have to believe in yourself
and lift yourself.
This feeling that you are Hindus, Muslims, Christians,
Brahma Samajis etc has no base. You dre nothing
but a human being You were born a human. You
have branded yourseif that you are sornething
You are neither Bengali or Marathi. You are just
human beings: Bybranding yourself you cieate
more problems. These brands become
important that you cannot see anything beyond it.
Till this catch does not release this blindness will not
go because you see everything in sucha way that
only your way is right. In the west It is even more so.
If you put anything into their brains and tell them
that it is good, then they will follow it blindly. The
critics there also criticize every art form so much.
Another critic will refute what the first critic has
refuted. Nothing comes to you from within yourself
and your brain. Whatever others have filled in is
accepted. Each is branded. By this the ego rises
and a person thinks that he is a very great
personality and very unique from others. He
becomes an individual.
so
Now you know the science of Sahaja Yoga. Your
candie has been lit. Not this candle has to
enlighten thousands of others. To love me is
beautiful. But there isa further state than this.
Beyond joy there is another state called Niranand.
Thai state of Niranand will come to your Mother
when she will see that Her children have gone
even further than Her. But these small petty things
still stuck with
Maharastrians it is even more, that we are stuck in
small pettinesses. I feel it must be the demerits of
past lives. If he had good merits then he would
immediately open his heart and start emitting
fragrance like a flower.
The essence of truth is that we are all one, are
whole, are a totality. When you go in opposition to
it then you become individualistic and go on
becoming more and more separate. It is true that
one leaf does not resemble another but ol of
them are on the same tree, They are all a part and
parcel of the Virata. When we separate ourselves
then the Saraswati tattwa which should become
Maha Saraswati does not. When you live in Maha
Saraswati tattwa you start seeing in your daily life
that you are the whole, and we are one. So when
an artist creates he makes some such thing that
one accepts from the heart. All the works that we
do of Saraswati should be dedicated and
surrendered to the Divine. if
such works will be immnortal, All poems, music,
us must be given up. In
In Maha Sarawati one should be efficacious and
active. In Mahakali tattwa you absorb and you
desire. I want to do this or that. I like this or that. I
like this. To activate these desires is the work of
Maha Saraswati. Some people wish that Sahaja
Yoga spreads. But in this respect what did you do
for it to spread? How many people did you give
this happens then ll
The Divine Cool Breeze
2.
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3,4,5.pdf-page-2.txt 
 You do get the benefit. You may have grown very
self realisation to? How many did you talk to about
Sahaja Yoga? One journalist told me how he was deep in your Mother's love. Whatis the use of such
impressed by the young boys and girls who were
so peacefully and in a dignified manner putting
posters, I was very impressed by that, You must put
your desires into action, Your desites will finish
when your action will start. You should desire what
can be done, for to desire something which
cannot be fulfilled is a calamity.
a deep pol in which no one fils water. If you think
on Agya what sort of work I should do, you go
into Nirvichara (thoughtlessness) then you will get
inspiralion from inside. There are many deep
people here but now we have to share that
depth. Like in a pond some lotuses bloom and the
insects feel proud of the lotuses. But you are still an
insect. Whats the use.
There are nmany rich and many poor here. Even
the rich have similar problems to the poor. They tell
me that there is labour problems and that is why
our factories are closed. But the rich must
remember that the labour is your part and parcel.
You cannot do anything without them. You do not
even know how to move a finger; you just keep
sitting on a chair. What have you done for the
labour? Everything cannot be solved with money.
They raise a flag, you raise their money. Then they
again raise a flag and this goes on. Have you
done something for their welfare? First learn their
culture. There are big industrialists who do not
know their culture. The labour are very large
hearled. But if you deal with them with
haughtiness then they can be the greatest
enemies. Stay with Ihem, meet them, get to know
them. I call this enlightened entrepreneurs. Go to
their homes, ask after their problems. You do this
little for them and they will be at your service for
life. It is not necessary that you give money for
everything. If you give money they may go straight
to the liquor shops or keep women. Think of them
as a part and parcel of yourself and get to know
their hearts. And then all you labour problems wilI
be solved.
In the Vedas it is said that if you do not have the
Vid (knowledge) then what is the use of Veda.
They tried fo awaken the Pancha Mahabhutas. It
was a result of which science came inta our
country. The scientific research done here was
much greater than what research is being done
touay. Through Sahaja Yoga you can also get the
control of the Pancha Mahabhutas But here you
are still saying 'Mother, my moer on brother or
family is ill You are a Sahaja Yogi. You want
Mother to do everything. Why cant you? Just try to
give to others. I keep repeating again and again
that you do something. Of course I will cure but
you can cure better than me, if you are not able
to cure then come to me. The more you use your
powers the more they will grow. But have faith in
yourself. If mother has said so then we must have
got these powers within and we must increase
them. Now depth has come in Sahaja Yoga but
the giving of it is still not so much. You have to give
now. When you become active and Maha
Saraswati chakra is awakened you will be amazed
where this country will reach. But this disease of
laziness is there throught out India.
Sahaja Yoga people make lots of excuses as to
why they cant do. For example "I am afraid of the
masses or my family etc." Sahaja Yoga is not for
cowards. There is so much black magic and
tantrism here and I have been cleaning it. For
removal of Kall vidya you will have to pay special
attention and work it out.
The people here are limited only till Saraswati and
not Maha Saraswati. You are Sahaja Yogis, things
will get alright themselves. But you have to follow
the methods of Sahaja Yoga. You will have to
leave your narrow view points and spread. Till you
do not rise from within you cannot spread on the
outside. In Sahaja Yoga meditation is very
important. Meditate for five minutes at five in the
motning and ten minutes at night. With this you will
keep getting cleansed and will receive blessings.
All the time you are being guided. You are also
enjoying and growing.
This puja today is for the whole of India as this
disease of laziness is there in the whole of India.
We are not at all active. We have very strong
desires but no action. You should get together
and talk about what you can do by which you
can spread Sahaja Yoga. We bought lands for
various purposes. They are just tying there rotting.
TIll I dont come to India they cannot even make a
People still think that it enough to keep on loving
Mother, serving Her and praying to Her. It is fine.
Maha Saraswatl Puja
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3,4,5.pdf-page-3.txt 
 small road, or even a small hut. I cant understand
that there are so many poeple still nothing gets
done. When I go away you all separate and go
your own way. Just two or three people work.
Sahaja Yoga is a collective work and not just the
work of two or three people. One must underst
and that each Sahaja Yogi is a part of Sahaja
Yoga. If one finger is hurt the whole body feels the
pain. Everything is spontaneous, Sahaja. But this
narrow mindedness does not let go of you, and
this Ignorance that we are something important.
You have gained so much depth and got so
much. Now you must glve it to others. Tomorrow
you can sit in my place and do my work. When this,
happens only then will Sahaja Yoga grow. I bless
you that now many people may emerge after this
puja who will do this work of spreading Sahaja
Yoga.
The Divine Cool Breeze
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3,4,5.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Birthday Puja
Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Delhi 21-3-92 (Translated from Hindi)
You have celebrated my birthday with so
much love. You got your self realisation, and the
speciol thing is that you became something and
gained something. I am what I am. I don't have to
becorne anything. It is such a great thing that you
got self enlightened through your Spirit. All Sahaja
Yogis have now become so good and dharmic. If
you see people who belong to other religions they
follow their rules and regulations with great
difficulty: they fast, go to the Himalaya stand on
their heads and do various things but still their Spirit
is not enlightened. They will believe in some guru
or God, but do they try to become like that guru?
To believe means nothing when their gurus' shaktis
and qualities have not enlightened them. No
religion is bad in itseif. It is the way people have
followed them. Some went into the.right and some
into the left.
dead body. Even in Nepal the left side has grown
so much that they do tantrik vidya, bhoot and
shamshan vidya. Thus two types of people were
created in Buddha Dharma. Buddha has no
connection with them and vice versa. The same
thing is there in Christianity, They wanted to gain
some powers within so they crucified people and
did all sorts of things in the name of Christ, Even
now you will see in Arrmenia how they kiled
thousands of people in Azerbaijan. When they
used to kill they would take the Bhle in one hand
as if God was with them. and they think that only
their religion is correct and the Muslims are bad.
The Muslims do the same thing. Islam is beautiful
and a tremendous religion. Even great Muslim
scholars say that there is a lot of difference
between Muslims and Islam. They feel it is because
they are not educated, Buf education also
creates foolish people. Like Kabir has sald "By
reading the pandits have become foolish." Till the
spirit is not enlightened nothing is going to
happen. You cannot imbibe any religion within. It
will not enter. It will just remain on the outside and
then you will get lost. Either you become money
oriented or power-oriented. But never spirit
oriented.
The right sided ones became ascetics. They
made very laborious and complicated paths. They
thought if Buddha got enlightened through so
much suffering and through a very difficult path
why should we not follow the same it not more
laborious poths. So many people became
entangled in these paths. Eating only once,
sleeping on the ground, living in cold weather with
little clothing, staying alone etc. They completely
suppressed what was given to them by nature. By
suppressing their natural instincts and behaviour
palterns one
aggressive. Such people have a lot of anger in
them. By suppressing anger it grows more. Such
people sometimes go into the supra-conscious.
They may then gain such powers or siddhis by
which they can dominate others. For example
Hitler. Hitler's guru was a Lama monk and he learnt
from him how to control and subdue people.
Buddha had created such a high dharma on how
to reach Nirvana and that religion went into the
right side.
When the Spirit gels enlighted then a person
unexpectedly finds that tattwa within himself. He
does not have to struggle. This feeling comes
within spontaneously, In Hinduism it is told that the
same spirit resides in everyone. Then how can we
have class and caste consciousness? One should
think that the one who wrote Ramayana was a
robber and a fisherman. Ram did not write the
becomes very irritable and
Ramayana. Ram ate the half eaten berries of
Shabari who was a low caste woman. The Gita
was alsa written by Vyas who was the illegitimate
son of a low caste woman. All this was done to
show that there is something lacking within
ourselves that we have created castes and class.
The one who is inclined towards God and knows
Him is a Brahmin. So then Valmiki was a Brahmin.
Great incarnations came and refuted this again
ond again that you are a Brahmin by birth. Kabir's
Then the other type of people went into the
left side and tantrism was born. There are places in
Ladakh where they will pray to the hand of a
5)
Birthday Puja
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3,4,5.pdf-page-5.txt 
 guru was a Brahmin and he accepted Kabir a
weaver as his disciple. Namdev was a great poet
saint of Maharashtra who was a tailor. Namdev's
poems are included in the Granth Sahib, the holy
Book of the Sikhs. Guru Nanak recognized all this
because he was an enlightened soul. The ones
who reach there understand who is real and who
is false. We should have compossion towards the
people who are following these false things in the
name of religion because we know they are blind.
Like Kabir has said "How can I explain when the
whole world is blind. Some will say 1 am Christian,
Hindu or Muslim. You are making yourselves
will not do It. You do not listen to dirty nonsense
because now you have become so pure. If you
do have to go to some such dirty place you will go
as witness looking at it as a drama. You have now
got the witnessing power within you. There is lot of
love for each other. You may go anywhere in the
world and you will find Sahaja Yogis will look after
you with so much joy. Of course some people take
advantage and tell lies: Even then they are looked
after. One person went to Madras and told them
lies that Shri Mataji has sent him. He asked for a
horse, for various things and they gave it to him
with great love, Later on I got to know that this
rogue had gone there on his own, I have seen that
people bear it even though they suffer, but will
never complain. But I have seen that if someone
says anything against me you cannot bear it. And
this is the proof af your love for me.
separate.
In Sahaja Yaga you have understood that
the essence of all relligions is the same. When we
believe in all religions then this fundamentalism
which is spreading in the world will finish off. You
should not only realise that all religions are one but
it should be Imbibed within. It should sink within. In
Sahaja Yoga there are Hindus, Muslims, Christians,
Sikhs and Buddhists. When you believe in one
Vishva Dhama then all the religious are in that
one religion. This is the wisdom. And then you
believe in all the incarnations and saints. You
You have glven me so much love and I have
great faith that the dream I had of the whole
world getting realisation will be tulfilled. Till this
does not happen the world will not improve. We
have all sorts of problems. Ecclogical, economic,
political and family problems. The responsibility of
this lies with human beings because they have
created these problens. But when man changes
and universal brotherhood enters within him then
what would be the need to fight. Then all these
problems will get solved by themselves. Whenever
you read the paper you should collectively desire
that the Punjab problem be solved and it will be
solved. The problems of poverty will not be
temoved by shouting remove poverty.' We are in
the middle of the river. Neither are we too tich or
too poor, When this current grows then the poor
and the rich will both come in. And in this way our
problem will be solved.
it happen by talking
make
cannot
or
Intellectualising. It happens by the light of the spirit
which sinks deep within you, then you don't need
to say. You are Sahaja Yogis so you just cannot tell
lies, sleal, torture or kill anyone. Now you cannot
do anything that is bad. You do not try to pull
anyone down or get into competitions. You are
sitting in profound satisfaction and meditation and
know that everything is getting done. Even in your
married life there is deep understanding between
husband and wife and no husband or wife will
look at other men or women even though there.
are many beautiful women and handsome men.
This outer attraction which happens to others does
not touch you. You have respect for yourself. Your
eyes are steady now and even such thoughts do
not enter your mind. Even other people are
impressed by you. How you live in such peace and
harmony.
All your faces shine so much. The kind of love
we have in Sahaja Yoga is not there in any society.
The followers of other gurus look like they are jjust
about to enter into a hospital. That is why you
should have self respect and there should be
something special about you. You pray to me and
tell me thoat you have benefited. But you are
behind these beneficial pujas. If you were not like
this you could go on praying and it would not
have worked out. Are there less proyers or Pujas in
temples? But nothing goes inside. They do so
much offering to the Devi and Gods but still it does
not go in. They are just the same. They go on
committing sins and atrocifies. There is nothing.
People tell me that I cure so many and do
not take any money. But neither do you take
money. You will not kill, steal or make anyone a
widow. You connot kidnap anyone's child. You do
not smoke or drink or take drugs. You will not go to
any dirty places or make obscene paintings or
read dirty books. I don't need to say. You yourself
61
The Divine Cool Breeze
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3,4,5.pdf-page-6.txt 
 special about them. Now Sahaja Yoga has spread
so many countries. i never thought that in my
lifetirne it would happen. The dream that I had has
really come true. So we must remember that we
are not, just simple Sahaja Yogis but we are
special. We should try to make as many people
yogis as possible. Then only can the world benefit
and we will benefit.
all have these powers. And I desire that all my
powers also come within you. A mother always
thinks that all her powers come within her children
and they oll become great stalwarts. You are
sitting in such joy and taking the pleosures of
Nirvana for which many had to struggle. All this
has come to you in such a Sahaja Way. This is your
punyas of previous lives. My biessings are always
with you but this thought is always there that when
I leave you rny heart is wrenched. But when I think
of the people in the other places walting for me
then I feel that those are my children.,, I travel a lot
but when I see you my heart fills with joy and I
never have time to think of my age.
Today is my birthday but your birthday
should also be celebrated. At every birthday you
grow in age but with this growth in age if maturity
does not come then its no use. You are olso
growing in Sahaja Yoga but it is important that we
grow in maturity. Once you are mature you will
become like a large tree and benefit others. You
May God Bless You.
Birthday Puja
7
coww.
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3,4,5.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Felicitation ceremony on
H. H. Shri Mataji's Birthday
Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Delhi 21-3-92
I bow to all the seekers of truth. At the very
Sahib. They all talked about Formless Divinity.
outset we have to know that truth is what it is. We
cannot conceptualize it. We have to know it.
Unfortunately at this human awareness level we
cannot know the truth. We have to become the
Spirit. Whatever I am telling you today need not
be accepted and there is no need to have blind
faith because all of them have praised Sahaja
Yoga so much. Keep your mind open like a
scientist and as I put before you this hypothesis
and if it works then as honest people you have to
accept it because it is for your benevolence and
the benevolence of the whole world. In Sahaja
Yoga we have people from all kinds of races,
nationalities, teligions and political systems. But
there is such a beautiful brotherhood amongst
them. It hos been achieved without any effort.
They have become so beautiful because there is
very little distance between our selves and reality.
If we can cover that distance and absorb that
reality then you will be amazed how fantastic,
glorious and wonderful you are.
Human beings are the same. Whether you
talk of formless or form it is just a talk. Like if you talk
of flowers or honey you do not get the honey.
Talks are just words. Shri Adi Shankarcharya has
called them "Shabda Jalam i.e, the web of words.
How to go beyond the web of words. Through
Kundalini awakening. It is not a new thing to this
country, Sahaja Yoga is also not new. It has been
expressed in all the scriptures that unless you
become the Spirit and are reborn you cannot
know religion. It cannot be known through mental
efforts which everyone knows. Recently the
Armenians killed the Muslims and before going to
kill they used to read the Bible. How can that be?
Imagine Christians doing that. Even Islam is one of
the best religions but nobody has understood
what Mohammed Sahib has said that you have to
know it. Know comes from the Sanskrit word
Gyana. Early Christians also were called Gnostics.
It means to know on your central nervous system,
and not on a mental level.
If you see the world we have problems like
ecological, political, economical, family problems
etc. The centre point of all these problems is the
human being. Somehow if we can transform this
human being to a new awareness of universality
then all these problerms can be solved, All the
saints and great philosophers the world over have
spoken about the spirit. All the scriptures have
spoken about the Spirit. All these religions which
were very great and pure and absolutely real got
into a mess because people who followed them
were eilher money oriented or power-oriented.
They were never spirit-oriented. They never
bothered to achieve their ascent. Both Buddha
and Mahavira never spoke of God because they
thought that if they did so people will start
organising God into this or that religion. So they
talked about the formless which is the Spirit. They
Insisted that you should have your self-realisation. It
was the same with Guru Nanak and Mohammed
That is why as soon as Paul took over Christ's
disciples ran away and when Thormas came to
India he hid all the knowledge about reality in a
Jar in Egypt. This was because he would have
been prosecuted by the people who were
interested in organising the religion, and making
money out of it. As a result of all these non-sensical
people they said better not talk of religion. In the
name of religion they then murder and kill. How
can it be a religious act? Human beings can make
a mess of everything. That does not mean there is
no divinity or reality. At that time very few people
got realisation. Raja Janaka gave tealisation to
only one person Nachiketa. it was a very siow
process. One Guru gave realisation to only one
disciple.
Then in the twelfth century Dynaneshwar
requested his guru to atleast allow him to write
about it in a simple language. In his book
The Divine Cool Breeze
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3,4,5.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Gynaneshwoari he wtote about the kundalini in the
sixth chapter. But the people in charge of religion
did not allow anyone to read that chapter even
though it was written in a local language. It has
also been written about fourteen thousand years
back by Markandeya in Sanskrit. in the sixth
century Adi Shankaryacharya also brought it to
the public but that was also denied.
centres are the ones which are the foundations of
physical, mental and spiritual being. When you put
these centres right then you are alright.
We have here in Delhi, Doctors who have
gol their M.D. In the cures of Sahaja Yoga. Many
diseases which are incurable can be cured easily
through Sahaja Yoga. This is because when the
Kundalini passes through these centres she
enlightens, nourishes and integrates these centres
Its not like one part of the body is treated and
another is neglected, but in totality you are alright.
She puts you in the central path of balance, With
this light you becorne a wise person because you
empty your mind. It is colled thoughtless
awareness. At that time you become absolutely
peaceful. When it is established well then you
become full of doubtless awareness which means
In
Maharashtra they all sing Ramdas' poem saying "O
Mother, give me the Yoga, give me
connection with the Divine power." From ages
they have been singing not knowing what they
have being singing about. Then the development
came through Guru Nanak, Kabirdas, Ramdas
Swarmi, Tukaram. All these great saints incarnated
in this country, specially Kabirdas and Nanak Sahib
very clearly talked about Kundalini. But still people
misunderstood because there was no way to
know it. So in these modern times I thought that
whatever is the discovery for one person has to be
for the mnasses. Otherwise only one person
knowing it would not be accepted. That's why
they crucified and poisoned them. When they
died then of course they built temples in their
names. Till they lived nobody accepted them.
you become so powerful thai you can give
realisation to others, cure people, talk about
Sahaja Yoga as your own knowledge. I have
guided whenever they have asked questions and
things about it but much has come from within
and the enlightenment has shown them these
scriptures are very different from the way people
are following them. They can now see the
enlightenment of these great souls who came on
this earth to help us.
So somehow or the other I managed a
method by which you could raise the Kundalini of
the masses. When the Kundlaini rises she connects
you to this all pervading power. This all pervading
power does ali the living work. Look at these
flowers: lok at our eyes; we take them all for
granted. The eyes are a great work of a very
delicate camera. What about our brain? It is
another great computer already programmed.
We just accept it but do not want to know how it
works. We accept all the living processes blind
folded and we are not at all concerned as to how
these flowers have come out of this mother earth.
In the evolutionary process we are now
standing on the edge of our last breakthrough
and that is self realisation and the whole world has
to get it, I don't know whether the whole world will
get it or not but they way it moving in Sahaja Yoga
in thousands everywhere, I feel that lats of people
in my life time will get realisation. Not only that but
will form that beautiful society which doesn't fight.
have violence, doesn't cheat, is not ambltious,
does not quarrel, doesn't talk ill of others and
doesn't cut each others throat. These ideas do not
how their heights are maintained or how their
colours are reproduced from a small seed. But this
all pervading power is pure love. This pure love,
this energy is the one that does all these beautiful
delicate things. Once you are connected with
your Spirit, it gets enlightened.
come into their heads. They ore extremely moral.
They don't look at other women and do not
frouble their children. They are the most low
abiding people and I don't have to tell them don't
do. All their bad habits drop out. I have seen one
boy who came to me who was a drug addict., He
could not see me as he was in half coma. Next
morning he gave up drugs completely. Now a
days short of appointing military to fight drug
menace they are trying everything. No need. Just
awaken them. In the little light of that awakening
you see yourself. You see whats wrong with you
and also have the power to throw it away, Like the
It enlightens your attention. As your attention
Is enlightened you become a different personality
altogether. First of all you become collectivaly
conscious: It means that you know about others
and their subtle centres as also you know about
your own centres on your finger tips. You know
your problems and the problems of others. These
Fellcitatlon Ceremony
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3,4,5.pdf-page-9.txt 
 snake in your hand. If it is darkness you might say
that this is not a snake but a rope. But if there is a
little light you see its a snake and you throw it
away. That's how it has worked.
for Mr Gorbachov that If is now subsided quite a
lot.
Now
another problem
have
of
fundamentalism and Sahaja Yoga is the only way
we can solve it because we believe in all the
religions prophets, saints and incarnations. We
belleve in all the essences of the religions and
worship all of them. So how can we fight. There
cannot be fundamentalism. This is the solution
today for all the people who believe in one
There are so many Doctors in Delhi who
have done wonders and have taken up Sahaja
Yoga as a scientific system of the Divine and they
have brought it down to the level of medical
science. Even in Canada we have a doctor who
has worked it out how dead souls act. There are
some scientists who have found how the carbon is
on the Mooladhara and how it works. These
scientists have taken it up seriously and are trying
to work it out. There are some Muslirms who are
trying to write Quran Enlightened. Sornebody has
written Gita Enlightened already, All these efforts
are done for no payment at all. I don't take oany
money because after all for living work how much
money do we pay to mother earth. We cannot
pay for it. But all of the Sahaja Yogis also don't
take any money. They are working very hard and
are going all over the world to help. We have
another doctor who has worked very hard in
Russia. The Germans came to Russia to help. They
felt it their duty to rectify what their forefathers had
done. Such love and attention you cant belleve
that they are Germans.
religion and rest are all wtong.
I am very happy and thankful for all those
who have sent me all these bèautiful flowers
reminding me of their love for me. Whenever I
leave an airport I feel rmy heart drenched with al
the people who are there and I start thinking when
will I meet them again. Then I go to another airport
and I see the others standing there and singing
and I say its alright, I have to be here also. It is such
a satisfying thing. I never feel my age or anything.
It is so energy giving to see so many people are
enjoying their life, their children. family life and
social life. We have to create this new and
beautiful world. We are not going to allow this
beautiful world to be destroyed by the stupidity of
a few people but wisdom has to come to all of us.
Iwas born on this day and I did not know that I will
achieve anything in my life time, My fother who
was a realised soul used to tell me "Don't talk
about any reality till you find out the enmasse
evolution of people. Just don't say a word
because you will create another Quran or Bible or
something which is of no use. So first of all see to
it that you achieve that state for human beings." I
am so happy that it is spreading so fast not
because of me but because of all of them that
once they get the light they enlighten other
people. So also 1 thank you all very much for this
celebration and in my heart I also celebrate the
way you people have come up. You have
achieved so much for your achievements.
congratulate you all.
It is so beautiful within yourself. It is so
magnanimous and righteous; so moral. All that
starts manifesting and that is how humanity has to
emancipate. They are giving me all this credit but
I would say that give credit to them also because
they are very honest and intelligent people. They
could see the point very clearly. In these modern
days when people just talk of science and
technology, to accept divine technology is a very
difficult thing. But when they see the results they
are honest and accept it and understand it that
how we are going to work out the problems of this.
world specially the political problems. Thank God
Thank you very much.
The Dlvine Cool Breeze
10
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3,4,5.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Shivratri Puja
Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
New Castle, Australia 1-3-1992
Sadashiva, the God Almighty is impressed on
your heart as the Spirit, the Shiva. We have to
understand that so many people carne on this
earth at different times In different countries. They
talked to different people about righteousness,
Dharma about how to elevate yourself. All of therm
have said that you have to believe in God. You
have to become the Spirit. They knew that without
the attention being filled with the light of the Spirit,
you will not be able to understand spirituality. You
have the Spirit within you which is all the fime in
witness state. Why have all the religions failed?
Because they did not get their self realisation and
become the Spirit. So there is a tremendous
difference between you and all the others. They
are hypocrites. They intellectualize it. They explain
it very well but you can see very clearly that they
haven't absorbed spirituality. That absorption is
impossible without self-realisation. Buddha and
Mahavira both never spoke about God. They said
to just get your self-realisation. Most of the books
speak of spirituality and what you have to achieve
and what is the purpose of teligion. All that is
spoken and written very well and they tell you
what you have to be or what is good or evil. Even
the first step where the Dharma has to be
established where people are not to cheat each
other. There has to be justice, collectivity, love and
understanding. No jealousies or hypocrisy; where
Its a different race, different community. Infact a
different civilisation is to be created.
of Sahaja Yoga. Very unique, wonderful angel like
people have been created. The only problem is
that you have to keep to your angelic
foundations. Sornetimes you fall or falter. But you
rise into your awareniess and try to locate new
dimensions that are available to you. And all this is
possible because you really belong to the chosen
ones. You must also know that you are very
special people. Sometimnes Sahaja Yogis don't
realise and they don't have self esteen. You will
have the wisdom to understand what is your role
in this lifetime. This state is only possible if you see
other people who are lost in the Maya of
nonsense. Now you are a special community.
Whatever are the Dharmas aspects. you
can imbibe them. Spontaneously you don't have
to exert, or do penance or work it out. You can do
it in a Sahaja way. You can have all these qualities
without any difficulties. It is the easiest thing for you
to be righteous than to be otherwise. It is easier for
you to be honest than to be otherwise. This
speciality you have has been the vision of all the
saints, prophets and Incarnations. People gave
lectures upon lectures that you must do like this ar
that. They think by educa ting people with these
principles they will be alright. But it goes as ego
into their heads as the education is only through
your ego and not Sahaja. It is something that is put
on you from outside. But for you it is very easy. You
can imbibe all the aspects of Dharrna easily. I
know people, who used to take drugs, torture
people, beat them. One person used to carry a
revolver with him always. Now he has become
such a quiet, silent and beautiful person. So now
you are that special people. Those people who
have not got their realisation cannot get to their
Dharma easily.
It is tremendous of Sahaja Yogis that they
have achieved that state of the Spirit. You can
absorb Dharma without any difficulty. You will not
kill or be violent. You will stick to the truth. The most
important thing is that you have rapport with God
Almighty and you are in a way knowledgeable
about God. There is awe not fear. You wont cheat
Sahaja Yoga for money or fight for power or
materlal things. All your attention will be for the
expansion of your awareness in the light of the
Spirit. This is the vision of your Mother because
Shiva is just a witness. But now he must have lots of
hope after seeing the people that are created out
The second point which is very easy for you
is to love and care for another person. You would
love to do that. You would like to care for people
who are Sahaja Yogis. If you see a non Sahaja
Yogi who who is suffering you will immediately see
that the person gets help. One gentleman told me
Shlvratid Puja
11)
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3,4,5.pdf-page-11.txt 
 feeling of oneness as if they are part and parcel of
us. It is surptising that the Americans sent a
television for the Russians. It must have been the
Spirit of Shri Krishna trying to help the spirit of right
Agya.
that he would love to do some work for Sahaja
Yoga but he had no money. I told him to come
the next day and I would glve it to him. Next day
he never came back. On asking he told me that
a gentleman who was sitting with me gave him
the money. In Sahaja Yoga we immediately run to
the help of someone In need of money. The six
countries like Rormania, Bulgaria, Russia, Poland,
Czechoslovakia, Hungary have been helped by
one country or the other. Even the East Asian
countries were helped by Australians. I never
asked them to do so. They made tickets for them
and brought them to India. They looked after the
Russians, They were full of compassion and love
without feeling that they had done something,
Nobody ever asked how much was spent or how
much we have to give. I reached Hungary and
found 125 Romanians there. My heart was really
filled with such Joy. They secretly helped each
other and brought gifts just for their satisfaction
and not to oblige anyone. Imagine countrles like
England, France, Spain, Italy. Switzerland who are
very aggressive, and went out not to help anyone
but to establish their empires or destroy or convert
people and did all kind of things in the name of
God and religion. But when you go to other
countries you just want to help. It works out so
spontaneously in your heart that you should help
and work it out.
Ils not only in Europe that they are working it
out but have even been working in Turkey. Now a
physicist has gone to Japan. He is not Japanese.
He is using some sort of show on the streets to
attract the people and telling about Sahaja Yoga.
Also the collectivity you have now Is tremendous.
Even the Indians are happy that an ashram is
being bought in Brisbane. This is because the heart
has become so large, because Shivo is shining
there. The Spirit is shining. It has become such a
large heart that it can encompass the whole
universe, You have all become universal people.
You don't only read about Vishva Nirmala Dharma
but you try to follow it and imbibe it within yourself.
Once upona time Australia was full of racialism.
They did exactly the opposite of what Christ said.
So did other religions. They are all fundamentalists.
This is because they are just reading their holy
books. If the book goes inside they will realise that
all the books are talking of the same thing under
different narnes.
But you have got that unlversal thing thanks
to your spirit that was there intact and has started
shining so that now we have a new community, a
new civilisation of people who are extremely
honest to themselves and each other. They are
non violent and absolutely law abiding, very very
loving and affectionate., At the same time they
very constructive and intelligent. They
understand Sahajha Yoga which is such a subtle
subject. Once your spirit is enlightened it goes into
your head without any difficulty. You don't know
how difficult is this subject of Sahaja Yoga. It is
such a fulfilment of the desire of the divine that
This transformation that has taken place has
brought out all the beauty of your heart, your
compassion, your love and you want to give
security to others without expecting or demanding
anything. Then you all enjoy living in a simple
place like this under a tent, listening to me you
don't want any comfort. You just seek the comfort
of your Spirit and enjoy the whole place and the
nature. I have seen Sahaja Yogis gradually
becoming extremely conscious of the ecological
problems. All over the world they have started
using things which are natural and artistic. They
have also become generous. We call it 'Audarya'
which is the sign of an incarnation, This generosity
is among my own children, They enjoy giving
things to others rather than keeping things to
themselves. It has happened all over the world.
The Sahaja Yogis are sacrificing their time, money
and everything to spread Sahaja Yoga and help
others: to accommodate all kinds of things, all
kinds of people within themselves. Such collective
wisdom is there. This compassion, this love. this
are
your divinity is expressed when you are collective.
You are enjoying each other, you enjoy collective
life. Individualism is against the Spirit of the whole
but we have our own varieties. You may live in
other countries, other atrmosphere and traditions
but we have the same faith, the faith which is
enlightened and is not blind faith. That firstly you
are realised souls and secondly there is an all
pervading power. We have the same type of
worship whether it is Christ, Mohammed Sahib or
Shiva. We all worship in the same way. We don't
have a difference of opinion about that like one
The Divine Cool Breeze
12
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3,4,5.pdf-page-12.txt 
 your heads etc. But still you have to sacrifice your
time and your attention. The attention is so pure
that you cannot enjoy all what other people do.
Like going to the pub or listening to rock music. I
find all of you have become so clean and
beautiful. Your chakras are so clean. Is it that your
purva punyas are working out? But still I would say
that you must know your self-esteem that you are
Sahaja Yogis. That dignity and that wisdom has to
be there. The compassion, love and unity of
purpose should be there. All over the world you
have brothers and sisters. You have Rakhi sisters,
you have very pure relationships. Anything impure
is just thrown out in a Sahaja manner. Those who
don't fit into it just get out of it. We have very
beautiful families and children.
churches
church becoming ten
Hinduisms. We are all Sahaja Yogis and we have
all got the same principle binding ina Sahaja
manner. Also you
archelype. For the people who are nor in Sahaja
Yoga you will be a model for them. They will see
that you don't drink or smoke or take drugs, and
don't boast about it. They don't hate anyone and
ten
and
ate now becoming
an
dynamic and creative. They are
so
are
constructive and self-contented and are not at all
competitive. They do not give problems to nature
or anyone. They have become such beautiful
people..
So now you must understand that you hove
to be models of good behaviour, good language,
decent life, & decorum. And not fighting with
husband or wife. The Mayor of Cabella told me
that he was surprised that these people could sit
for hours together. They are so spellbound they
don't feel tired. He thought they are special
people. They do nothing but just enjoy. Once we
had Guru Puja for six hours and the villagers of
Cabella were surprised how they could sit so
silently. They thought you are angels. They said
that these people don't torture us but are kind to
us and look after us. They try to bring joy. First they
used to call me Princess, then they started calling
me GoddesS and they said you are Madonna.
Whatever best they could think of they started
saying. They now want to come to Sahaja Yoga.
They gave me the land behind Cabella at a very
nominal price which they did not give to Prince
Dorio who was willing to pay a large sum for it. The
whole village is getting a transformation and the
dedication you have is remarkable. The way you
are dedicated to Sahaja Yoga every non Sahaja
Yogi will be changed.
Mohammed Sahib came and talked of it. He
never made a rigid teligion. It was very flexible. He
said that you must get the knowledge so
according to them the knowledge was to tead
the book, to interpret it and get intellectual. After
that came Guru Nanaka. You know what
happened to Sikhs and where they have gone.
Sikh means the one who has learnt the Divine
Laws. If you are not connected you cannot follow
the Divine laws. But you know them. As soon GS
you go against them you can feel it on your hands
and your central nervous system. You start judging
yourself all the time and you want to put yourself
right because you don't like it that way. Many
ideas about your personal life that your wife
husband or child should spoll you are all finished
now. Now you want to marry a real Sahaja Yogini
or Yogi. After that marriage becomes a blessing. It
is quite a penance to come to such a tar-flung
place and to travel in Maharashtra, but you enjoy
it. You were missing the buses. It was an adventure
for you. All this tapasya and penance becomes
an adventure. Like the musicians who went to
Russia and got lost. The whole description of it was
tremendous, like an adventure. Now you have
been achleving things without even
about it., This is the blessings of your Spirit and the
blessings of Shiva.
never expected all this love, affection and
care. The way you want to express your love for
me, this dedication and your sacrifice; the way
you are sacrificing your time and putting in effort.
You came all the way to this far flung place for
puja. All the gain you have from this puja is only
possible when you are a realised soul, otherwise it
is useless to do any puja or worship. People go to
church sing a few songs and come back. They are
just the same and after that go to the pub.
because they think that pub is the only place Ihey
can get some joy. One has to sacrifice. Though I
must say that Sahaja Yoga is the easiest thing.
You don't have to go to the Himalayas, stand on
thinking
The spirit is the witness and you develop that
witness state. To you all this politics and economics
looks very ridiculous. You see it as sornething
absurd. The Russian Sahaja Yogls did not feel the
problems of politics and lack of food. They said, :
"We have got the spiritual food. Let these people
fight and do whatever, we are not bothered."
Shlvratıl Puja
13
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3,4,5.pdf-page-13.txt 
 They were not bothered about the coup. "We are
in the kingdom of God, why should we worry of
these
contentment. It is so beautiful, You have so many
working everything for me. I don't have to desire.
But you have to desire. You have to pray. You
have to ask. The wider you become the wider your
prayers will become for a wider world, reglon and
not limited to your children, family, city but
unlimited areas will come. So become very
conscious and olert about whatever is happening
in the world. Put your attention there and try to
find out whats wrong with it. We are not worried
about a small ashram but about the whole world.
Find out where the wong is and what can we
desire because if we can operate the Divine
power then why not work it out ourselves. Your
attention can go to any place. It can go to
Nicaragua or Israel, or Saddam Hussain or any
place you want to work out. It is mobile and
universal. Just start expanding you heart, mind
and your attention.
worldly kingdoms and things." Such
brothers and sisters.
You are people who have understood what
is God and what is Sadashiva. Now you have faith
in Him which is not blind. You also know that His
powers work and His laws work. All other laws are
useless. You have seen and experienced in your
fifetime how miracles are taking place and how
things are working out. You desire and it works. But
we still have people who are mediocre and very
dull people. They cannot understand Sahaja or
how much they can gain out of it. You shouldn't
worry about them. You have to think about the
whole collective which is good and forget about
one or two useless people, If they corne up then
well and good and if they don't then we are not
going to force them. We will be getting more and
more people. The greatest thing you have got is
the greatest integration within your being, your
heart, mind, your lives and your attention. There is
no quarrel between your heart and brain and
mind. Whatever your brain thinks your heart
accepts and vice versa. Your attention is
completely integrated with your heart and brain.
You have got that power that can surpass all the
temptations and you have got the spirit and you
can give up what you want. You integrate among
yourself, amnong different states and different
countries. The whole cosmos is integrated, woven
and governed by Divine laws, This integration gives
you a complete understanding of Sahaja Yoga
mentally, emotionally and spiritually.
Your faith in me is great as 1 am quite a
camouflage and it is not easy to understand me.
On one side I am Divine on the other side I am
very human. All these prophets never understood
human beings. They neer knew that they ore not
enlightened people and no use talking to them of
these great things. It is like explaining to a blind
person about colours. A person who has no Bhakti
or Gyana is just vacant. I had to fill in myself with
all these things. I had to study human beings and
their problems and how to work it out. Now it has
worked. The divinity in you has started expressing
itself and such beautiful divine lights are sitting
before me, I bless you frorm my heart where resides
the Shiva, the Sadashiva and He blesses you. He is
an absolute innocent personality. He is beyond
any attachments. He is the one who is watching
all of you with such adimiration. His joy knows no
bounds.
Also you have so many powers but some of
you still do not want to exert. One word of prayer
from you is very powerful than thousands of these
asking. You are extremely powerful and whatever
you desire works out. You have other powers of
giving realisation also. You have so many powers
but most of the time you will bring people to me to
be cured. Use your powers. Don't be afraid. You
will be amazed how these powers work out and
how you become more embedded in your faith in
yourself. You are so very powerful in collective and
also in individual. Whatever you want you can
have. I am desireless because the Divine power is
It is a great day for us to celebrate this Shiva
Puja here. I hope all of you respect the principle of
Shiva within you. That is the most important. Look
after your vibrations which pulsates in your being
because the Spirit has awakened in yout
attention, in your central nervous system and that's
the rmost important thing you have to do. The rest
of it is Sahaja.
your
May God Bless You.
14
The Divine Cool Breeze
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3,4,5.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Easter Puja
Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
19-4-92 ROME, ITALY
The resurrection of Christ took place to open
our Agya because it was avery subile centre: With
the ideas people had from their conditioning and
ego where so much clogging was of the agya
chakra that the passing of the Kundalini was
Impossible through it. So the play of resurrection
fook place, as Christ was nothing but Chaitanya.
In the death of Christ we have to understand that
we have achieved our resurrection. Also what was
supposed to be the past had died. This
repentance that we have, the conditioning we
have are dead. But still among the Christian
nations the ego has not subsided as it should have
been. It may be that Christ was never worshipped
in the right way, The ego did not allow the West to
see what they are doing and how far they are
going. They would repenf about something that is
far-fetched. Repentance was meant for out ego.
then British government and had no loyalties with
the Indians. When my father was arrested, they
threw us out of the Christian community. They
threw me out of school when I was just six or seven
years old, because my father was a congressman
and freedom fighter.
All the
Christian nations have been
extremely cruel and dominating and today they
are there at the heim of affairs. This subtle ego
which was the properly of some monarchs has
now become avalable to all the ordinary people
in democratic countries. All these countries are full
of destruction. Americans are also extremely
dominating and egoistical to such an extent that
they are idiotic. They follow Christ who was the
source of wisdom. So we have to see Christian
history. There was Peter who was very egaistical
and once Christ said that you are Satan. He also
said that you will deny me. Then Paul came up. He
found Peter. He being a great bureaucrat wooed
him and took him into his own confidence and
told him to join hands with him. This sinister man
edited the Bible. He is full of ego and has distorted
what Christ sald. He fought with Mathew and
could not accept the Immaculate conception, He
had no idea about the reality, the rniracles that
exist with divinity. But Mathew stuck on to his own
gospel. John ran away and started his own style
which he called Gnostics. So this devil entered into
the atena of such a great religion as Christianity,
The Bible which they use now as authority has,such
words that people start thinking no end of
themselves.
The Christian
invaded
other
nations
countries, and cornpletely annihilated races after
races. They were followers of Christ and took the
Bible in their hand. These so called Christians have
done such horrible things in the name of Christ. It
was because of this ego.. Anywhete if they are
Christians they are extremely aggressive, and
vlolent and they think that the whole world
belongs to them. Even Hitler believed in the
Catholic religion. This great sacrifice of Christ never
taught them any lesson. They thought they have
the right to rule the whole world, plunder and
destroy everyone. What contrast it is to the life of
Christ. The ego grew so much that today the
Christians have lost their sense of maryadas
completely. The Christians have no morality of any
kind left in them. They have no respect for law, no
respect for God. They have no respect for chastity
which was the main point of Christ. I found the
Christians in India
dominating people. Why are they using the name
of Christ to dominate others. The British also
manoeuvred in such a manner that the Indians
believed that Christ was born in England. They
used to dress up fike the English and behave in a
very arrogant manner. They joined hands with the
Firstly they suggest that if you become the
members of a Church you are chosen. In Sahaja
Yoga also we have twelve types of Sahaja Yogis.
Some of them are very weak, because they have
too much ego. They cannot carry on with anyone.
They shout at people; they disturb others. They
think no erd of themselves. They are always
aggressive. They cannot be collective. They never
show any love. This type of Sahaja Yogis are there
who one by one are showing their colours. Some
dogmatic, and
Easter Puja
15
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3,4,5.pdf-page-15.txt 
 of them are learning. Christ had hardly three and
a half years to work out all this. One of his disciples
Peter would be such a sinister fellow that just for his
self-interest and glory he would put such words in
the Bible, Even with Mohammed Sahib it
introspect or not? Are we Sahaja Yogis who are
self-apinionated and self-glorified. Fourth kind of
Sahaja Yogi waiship Mataji in the house, but they
cant come to the collective because it is a little
far away. But if they have to go to meet their son
they will go miles together. If they have to do
something for their family or some business they wilI
run after it. In Sahaja Yoga nobody is asked to give
up their jobs or life styles, but priority is to be seen.
They are very busy with their work and earnings
etc. and they are just after earninga name, and
no tirhe for God. They will bow lo Mother and
want all the protection from Her for our work, for
our creativity. There are some Sahaja Yogis who
still think that money is very important. In Sahaja
Yoga we get money whenever we want. Some of
them say "I am starting a business, because 0.001
percent I want to give to Sahaja Yoga. After all it
is all yours Mother This kind of attitude comes
when you think that money is very important.
Some people cannot see God, they cannot see
subtler advantage of this money. They calculate
every pie meticulously. They don't want that their
hard earned money should be wasted about thelr
spirituality. Some people wont buy a book of
Sahaja Yoga. They wont buy a tape. They will
copy it. It is not that it is necessary to spend but the
attitude, In the Buddhist religion there are so many
'don'ts' that if I put even one to Sahaja Yogis they
will all run away. Firstly you cannot make any
Prophet. You cannot buy any land. You can eat
your food Just once a day. You have to be
vegetarian. The followers of all the great
incarnations have done so much wrong to the
people who brought beautiful religions to us. That's
why we are completely deviated from the path of
truth.
happened. He said that there will be resurrection
time. He talked of the future. If he was the last
then how can you have resurrection? But the seal
of Prophet does not mean that no prophet can
corne down. He was Adi Guru so he called himself
"seal. He didn't say that I have sealed. But crooked
people take advantage of these little words and
start using them for their purposes because they
are very self-centered. So another type of Sahaja
Yogls are extremely self-centred. Some of them
know their own wives, their children and thelr
house. To them it is very important. Some people
came to Bombay with their children but didn't
come for the Puja in Delhi. They are more worried
about their children than about Sahaja Yoga or
about their own emancipation. They try to remove
their husbands from the ashrams. They try to find
excuses on how to get out of the collectivity, You
are judged all the time and you judge yourself.
Christ was not crucified by Jews. It Is a wrong
Idea. How could the Jews who were Just like slaves
Crucify Christ. It was the Roman empire who
crucified him. They thought that he was becoming
very powerful. The blame was put on the Jews. The
rulers can always do such a thing. The early
Christians were mostly Jews. Christ himself was a
Jew. Then the Christians thought that they have
every right to blame the Jews because they
thought that Christ was crucified by the Jews. The
idea was put forward by Paul because he didn't
want to take any blame on the Rornan empire.
Then all the Christians were busy hating the Jews.
It was thousands of years ago and because
somebody crucified somebody for that they are
hated. in that way all the white race must be
hated for generations together. Because they
have not only crucified one man but million of
people. Are we going to blame their children and
their children?
Those who are really honest want to adhere
to the path of truth have to all the time introspect
and find out how far we are from the truth.
Another type of Sahaja Yogis are the
enjoying festivals kind. They will club together,
because they have a feeling of belonging to
something, or to a group, Then you start getting
into all kinds of conditioning, rules and tegulations
and you start binding yourself. You feel very
happy. In some sects you must have clean shaven
head or beards or moustaches. They don't
understand that reality is full of varieties. There
must be variety. That is how there is aesthetics and
saundarya, How can you be a personality without
Another type of Sahaja Yogis we have is that
they try to blame somebody all the time. Such
people can never improve. They should introspect.
Introspection is missing very much in the West
except in Russia. Only thing if you go to some
church and confess to some deaf and dumb
Of
priest you are saved. Let us face ourselves. Do we
16
The Divine Cool Breeze
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3,4,5.pdf-page-16.txt 
 doubting. This still lingers on even when they are
quite surrendered about it. But then there are
people who do not doubt anything. They
understand that it is Param Chaitanya which is
helping. They start realising that we have got
powers, and that we are connected with the
Divine. We have powers. Sometimes they also
doubt, Some will not do anything because they
are afraid that their ego will come up. They are
frightened of their ego. Then this ego follows very
subtly. But there are people who know that they
have been blessed with powers and these powers
can be diseovered more and more within yourself.
They have faith in themselves, they have faith in
Sahaja Yoga. They have complete faith in me and
this Param Chaitanya, They are very simple people
and they work out
variety? How can you be bound by these
nonsensical ideas. Variety gives you an inner and
outer personality. When you start enjoying this
personality then only you are a Sahaja Yogi. You
should be a personality that watches oneself. But
on the other hand we become slaves of our ideas
of personality and we start projecting our
personality through our ego and try to show that
we are something very special.
Sahaja Yoga is just the opposite. We are all
a personality. We are all saints and are tai be
tespected as saints We need not have the same
type of personality. We may have different styles
of talking, delivering things, expression of Divine
love. We are absolutely free because we have the
light. We know how far we have to go and what
is the tight way. When such people come up
understanding that Sahaja Yoga is complete
freedom. You have the light that is why there is
complete freedom. The religions that have been
preached by these incarnations just become part
and parcel of you. Then you really become a real
Christian and real Muslim and then yOu realise that
all religions are like a part of the ocean. You are in
a way the real religious personality. The basis of
religion is the ascent.
There is another type of Sahaja Yogi who is
fully empowered. They discover their own power.
in that introspection they see and are sure about
it and there are no doubts That is the state of
Nirvikalpa. You have faith in me and worship me
to receive something from me. But know that:
have made you also something great. But you
have to develop your powers also Don't only
depend on the powers that I have. Do not try ta
extract powers which are from your Mother. Try to
tise onto the same level. You can try. You have to
work out through introspection. You have got all
these powers within yourself. You have to grow
and take up responsibility without feeling
responsible. We have to go ahead of all the other
disciples. Unless and until we do that we may
drown Sahaja Yoga Into an ocean of another
There are people who are worried about
their own light and they want that this light should
be there all the fime burning and this light should
not only enlighten them but enlighten others. They
work for it. They take up responsibility. They do not
sit in a jungle meditating, You have to work. You
have to work out Sahaja Yoga for others. You
have to glve them this beautiful feeling of oneness
with the Divine. You have to enjoy all that. Sahaja
Yoga is to fill up your cups to be given to many
others who are there. They do not come to me for
small things. The vision should be of that great
universe that has to be enlightened. This universal
religion has to be brought into the lives of people
through realisation, and awakening of Kundalini.
They work very hard and spare no efforts to see
that people receive reallsation.
to also develop our
introspection.
nonsense. We have
personalities
understanding, and our proofs of reality.
through
and
Today is the day of our resurrection. We
have to pass through these twelve stages, to
reach the higher state. They call the highest state
the fourteenth state where you are just an
instrument where you are insensitive about what
you are, playing into the hands of Param
Chaitanya. Christ accepted his crucification
because He had to play that role. Try to reduce
hate which starts showing up in the collectivity. As
-soon as this i ness' is finished all the powers will start
coming up.
But a little of this ego is subtly there. That I am
doing this. It is an anti-Christ activity. So the
construction of the mind starts working and they
start criticizing others. Then there are Sahaja Yogis
who realise that Param Chaitanya is working
everything and working through them: They are
the instrument. Sometimes if it fails they start
It's like a flute which is hollow. If there is any
obstruction it cannot play. Out of all the ideas and
Easter Pula
17
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3,4,5.pdf-page-17.txt 
 conditioning we have, the worst is the Ego that T
am doing that. This should go away because we
can never enjoy if we think that way.
through these fourteen planes that are within us.
Then we burst through all these and come out as
beautiful lotuses. Easter is suggestive of eggs being
offered so that these eggs can become the birds.
u cannot jump into the ocean of joy as
You
long as you think that I am doing it.
May God Bless You.
So we are talking about our resurrection
The Divine Cool Breeze
18
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3,4,5.pdf-page-18.txt 
 Sahasrara Puja
Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Cabella, Italy, 10 May 1992
Today we are celebrating the Sahosrara day.
Pertiaps you have not realised what a day it must
hove been. Without opening the Sahasarara,
God, Religion and all talk of divinity was a myth.
People believed in Him but it was just a belief. And
science was about to obliterate the value systems
and all proof of God AlImighty. In history when
science established itself, the people who are
incharge of the helm of affairs in different religions
tried to cope with the findings of the science.
Augustine tried to show it in the Bible. It started
looking like all the scriptures are a stupidity and
were just mythical. Quran had lots of things that
described the biology of today. They could not
belleve that human beings were specially created
by God. They thought that it was just a matter of
chance that the animals acquired a situation by
which they became human beings. Thus all the
time divinity was challenged, and there was no
way of giving a pioof ot whatever was said in the
Bible, Quran, Gita Upnishads or Torah because it
was still just a faith. Very few people got their
realisation and when they talked people did not
believe them, and thought that they are Just trying
to propound their own theories. So it all became a
kind of a dead science
Every cell has got a programme in it, just like a
computer. According to that prograrnme the
development takes place. So many computer like
cells are already programmed and so a very
mysterious sort of thing has come before the
scientists. They are not able to explain it.
Sahaja Yogaihas proved thatitis the Will and the
desire of God which is doing all the work. All this
chaitanya and Adi Shakti is the Will of God the Will
God is working out everything very
harmoniously. The earth was created by a bang
which was very harmonious. Everything that was
done was by His will. You are now feeling the Will
of God on your finger tips: After realisation you
have discovered the absolute sclence which is the
Will of God. You know that we have cured people
through Sahaja Yoga. So many things work out
automatically after realisation, but people don't
want to believe. In the beginning the people
wouldn't believe when the scientists fold them
something. But now you see that science is
changing all the time. Theories are being
challenged. Sahaja Yoga has exposed one to that
great truth of science which
challenged. We can prove that God is there. The
whole creation was done harmoniously by the Will
of God. It Will of God has done everything then
human beings should not lake the credit for
discovering somethings which are created by
God. For example if ths carpet is made by
someone and you discover Its colours what is so
great because it is all there, you cannot create it.
The fashioning also was done by the Will of God.
If the Will of God is so important it has to be
proved. And now after the breaking of Sahasrara
you have now felt it. It has come to us so Sahaja
that we don't under stand. We just give a
bandhan and the things work out. It is much more
than that. We have now become part and parcel
of that big computer. We have become the
channels of that Will of God and are now
connected to It which has created all this
cannot be
People started thinking that whats the use of
following these ten commandments or these strict
rules of life because by following them you gain
nothing. Why should one think of gaining some
punyas also? So there was a big derailment of
human value system. Also these monolithic
organised religions started taking recourse to
gaining power or money bécause they thought
that's the only way you can control peaple. They
were least bothered about delivering the goods
that was described in the Bible. Bible itself was
tampered a lot with. Peter and Paul tried to spoil
most of it. Quran was not touched so much, but
stil it dealt more with the right side and so many
things are still ambigious. Simultaneously two things
have happened. First thing is that now we have a
new science of micro-biology in which we have
discovered that every cell has got a DNA tape.
universe.
Sahasrara Puja
19
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3,4,5.pdf-page-19.txt 
 So we can manage everything because we have
got the absolute science in our hand, which will
work out the betterment of the whole world. We
can prove it to the scientist that there is a Will of
God whlch has done all this creation. Even
evolutionarY process is the Will of God. Without His
Will nothing could have happened. Now you have
seen that we have got the Will of God as our own
power. We can use it. So it is very important to be
a Sahaja Yogi. Sahaja Yoga is not only for saying
"Mother I am full of joy, or I got purified, everything
is fine." But for what? Why did you get all these
blessings? Why have you been cleansed? So that
his knowledge of the Will of God should be
apparent in you and should be a part and parcel
of you. We have to raise our level. We must come
up. It's really useless to give Sahaja Yoga to
mediocre and ordinary people because they are
good for nothing. They are not going to help us in
any way because what Is needed today is people
who can really manifest and teflect the Will of
God. For that we need very strong people. This will
has created the whole universe, the cosmos,
mother earth, and everything. Now we
exposed to a new dimension that we are the
channels of that Will of God.
prove His omnipresence you have to be all the
time aware that you are Sahaja Yogis. Even now I
find Sahaja Yogis telling about their wives, children
house, fomilles jobs etc., I start wondering what is
their level? Where are they? When are they going
to take up the role of what they have got. The
omnipotent God who is everywhere, who has
done everything and the Will of God that has
worked it out has to work through you people and
you have to be very strong, sensible, very wise and
also very effective. The more effective you
become the more energy you will get. Still I feel
that Sahaja Yogis are not taking the responsibility
of understanding that they have to represent this
God Almighty who is omnipresent, omniscient,
who knows everything who sees everything and
who is potent and Almighty.
If you understand that this is what has happened
after opening the Sahasrara that you have now
got the power which has these three qualities in it.
This great power has come to you and for that we
don't need very successful people with big names
of money. We need people of character,
understanding, wisdom and of strength, that
whatever may come I
and cope with it. I will change and improve
myself. I hope all of you have got tid of your
illusions. You should also have no illuslons about
yourself. If you have any then you should leave
Sahaja Yoga. But know that you are chosen for
this purpose by God's will, that's why you are here
and you have to take up the responsibility of
understanding this science which is absolute. Work
it out for yourself as well as for others. You have felt
my love. But your love must be felt because God
love.
are
will stand by it, take to It
So what is our duty and what should we do about
it? As a result of Sahasrara being opening out our
illusions have vanished. You should have no
illusions as to the existence of God Almighty, the
power of His Will and the truth about Sahaja Yoga.
You should have no doubts at all. While using His
power you should be aware that this power is
given to you because you are capable of
handling It. It is the highest power that you can
think of. Take any governor or minister, they can
be removed tomorrow; they can become corrupt;
and devoid of any knowledge of their own
powers. There are many people who just get
elected without knowing what they have to do.
This is not just a conversion of people. Its not even
only transformation but it is a new fashioning of a
new human being which has come forward and
which is capable of carrying the Will of God
further. As a result of your realization firstly your
Others must feel that you are
is
compassionate, loving and understanding. All the
time this Will of God is flowing through you. You
have to work it out in such a manner that people
should know that you are a saint and this power is
flowing through you.
that has happened is that you
The second thing
have understood the integration, that in the world
there is complete integration which is existing.
Children have
natural
their
innate,
own
God is omnipotent,
illusions
have
gone.
omnipresent and omniscient. All His omnipotence
and
understanding. Normally a good child would
always like to share his things, would like to love
another child, and protect a little child. This is
natural. It won't think whether it has black hair or
red hair or skin. Little babies know that one should
be careful about the privacy of the body. Children
this
collective
work
consciousness you should also know that you are
also omnipotent, omnipresent and omniscient.
Omniscient means that one sees and knows
everything. Part of that power is also within you. To
as
has
done
The Divine Cool Breeze
20
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3,4,5.pdf-page-20.txt 
 don't want to be made nude before others. It's
innate within them. All these innate qualities are
within you. Children don't like to steal anything. I
have seen children who go to beautiful places or
a house, they will always try to keep the beauty of
that place.
modern times. Then the thoughts are influenced.
We read so many books which are some mad
ramblings of some mad man like Freud. How could
Freud influence the West? This is because you
have lost your innate sense and you accept it.
That's how Freud became your sort of Jesus Christ.
Sex became the most important thing. With a little
common sense you can understand that at every
moment we are put into this kind of a dormination
by a few dom ineering people who have certain
ideas. Their ideas become great " He said so." Who
is he? What is his life? See for yourself what sort oft
a man he is. With your will which you have now
wilh this Will of God which has fashioned the
whole world and fashioned every cell within you,
and still you still are playing in the hands of these
entrepreneurs. They are making money out of
these vulnerable people and befooling them. On
one side you have such a great power, you are
chosen for such a great thing and on the other
side you have this kind of slavery. Your innate
qualities were lost. Luckily by the Kundalini
awakening and breaking out of the Sahasrara all
these innate qualities which looked like lost, for
example your innocence, creativity, religion within,
compassion and love for humanity, your power of
judgement, wisdom: all these great qualities were
in a dormant state. They all got awakened. I don't
have to tell you don't do this or that. You yourself
realise that this is wrong. You yourself know what is
good for you. If you Will want to do wrong you can
go ahead but already there is a light within you to
see for yourself what is good and what is bad. It
has come because of this Sahasrara being
opened out to this new dimension of new
knowledge. It is not new but is innately built within
you and all those innate qualities are now
manifesting and you are enjoying them.
The countries which are supposed to be under
developed have so many, of these qualities in
them. Innocence is innately built within us. The Will
of God built innocence and auspiciousness. The
first thing He did was to create Shri Ganesha. It
was She, because the Will of God is Adi Shakti. All
this was created to make the whole world very
beautiful. Al these innate qualities, all these deities
were placed within you. They were specially made
so that human beings should become saintly
people, and they should have their saintly innate
sense. In developed countries our brain was
bombarded by all kinds of television and other
things and we become very vulnerable. We
started getting into the ideas of others. Anybody
who is dominating could dominate us. It wasn't
only Hitler who dominated people but even
fashions have dominated us. People are not able
to take to anything that is sensible becouse it is a
fashion. Now-a-days there is a fashion to have
small skirts. You can't get a long skirt anywhere.
Everybody has to wear that kind of a style,
otherwise you are not in.
As we are bombarded with this all the time so first
of all we become slaves of entrepreneurs. I heard
that in Belgium you cannot get anything fresh,
and you have to take everything from the super
market whlch is all tinned. Gradually we are
getting absolutely artificial. The food, dress, and
attitudes are artificial. This is so because we are
bombarded by advertisements, and outside
influences and we get lost. We forget our innate
sense which is being dominated by all these
modern things. Now after science the money
became very important. Once this happens then
all the entrepreneurs become important because
they know how to make money and befool you all
the time. But those people who are innately built
do not change They have dresses of the same
type and do not change. On the contrary they
find It very difficult to get out of their traditional
achievements.
Now you have to get out of your petty Ideas and
behaviour. I have heard that Sahaja Yogis throw
things all over the place. How can you behave like
this? If you do not have a proper discipline of life
yourself you cannot carry the Will of God. I respect
your freedom and I want that your own Kundalini
should awaken that wisdom in you, that greatness
and glory in you. Then you will start understanding
what is our image worth. It will purify and once you
are purified completely like gold which is put in the
fire and gold is separated. In the same way the fire
of kundalini cleanses you completely. and you
start seeing your own glory and nature, and your
For Sahaja Yogis It Is important to watch if they are
getting this slavery from the entrepreneurs in the
Sahasrara Puja
21
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3,4,5.pdf-page-21.txt 
 own greatness. So the integration part comes to
you easily. First of all we used to have Sahaja Yogis
say from England, Spain, Italy etc. They would
always have different groups. They would never sit
together. Now It is not so. Now I find they are all
becoming integrated. The integration of human
beings is the most important thing for Sahaja
Yoga. It does not come by intelligence but innate
understanding that all human beings are made by
God, and we have no right to despise anything
The second integration that has come to you is
that all religions have been born on the same tree
of spiritual ife. That all religions are to be
worshipped. All incarnations, prophets, and
scriptures are to be worshipped. There are delects
and problems with those scriptures which can be
corrected. Gradually you start entering into the
subtler side of divinity to understand that all these
people have worked hard to create that
atmosphere for Sahaja Yoga. No religion is to be
despised or attacked.
enlightened is not fully used. Otherwise the
integration is partial.
The integration of all the chakras comes in. Like
whatever you do has to be auspiclous with full
attention, It has to be religious. All these centres
are absolutely one, Integrated power that you
are. The whole life should be integrated. Suppose
somebody's husband or wife is not of that level,
you shouldn't bother. You should just bother about
yourself. Don't expect anything from anybody else.
It is your duty which is important. You have to fuifil
your duty. You have to work It out yourself. Unless
and until you understand that it is your individual
being which has achieved it. It is the individual
being that has to realise it and become one and
integrated with the rest of them. You have to see
your gains. 'l have got financial, physical mental
gains. I have got joy, happiness.' That is not the
only thing. That should not be the only criteria. You
should have the understanding of your own
personality which is being specially fashioned after
many lives for you to corme in this life to get your
realisation and to do the further work of the Will of
God. Every moment you see miracles taking place
you do realise that it is being done by Param
Chaitanya. Param Chaitanya is the Will of Adi
Shakti. And the Adi Shakti is the Will of God.
This is how we will finish off all fundamentalists. In
Sahaja Yoga also people should not become
fundamentalists. Be very careful. Sometimes you
start making Sahaja Yoga fundomentalistic.
"Mother sald so". Do not use me anywhere.
"Mother sald so" Is the way you want to dominate
others. You yourself say because now you have
the right, you have an individuality in Sahaja Yoga.
Nobody has business to use me arbitrarily.
Whatever you have to say you say yourself. You
are not bound by any thing I say. It is you who
have to stand up and see for yourself what you
have to say. You have to now use your will and for
that you have to develop yourself and for that you
have to have pure will and pure desire of God
Almighty. The integration is not only outward but
inward also. Earlier whatever we did, our mind
used to say one thing, our heart another thing,
and our brain another. Now all these three things
have become one. Now whatever your brain says
is absolutely acceptable to your heart and your
attention. You yourself have now become
integrated. Many people say 'I want to do it but I
cant do it." Now it is not so because now you are
completely integrated. You should examine
yourself and try to find out whether you are
integrated or not. Whatever I do, do I do it with my
full heart and full attention? I see that you do with
your full heart but full attention is not there. The
attention which was the first thing which was
These vibrations are like say DNA. They all know
how they have to fashion. Like today is very sunny.
Everybody is surprised. Two days ago we had
havan and it was absolutely sunny. The whole
Comos is working for you. You are on the stage
now and you have to see to it. If you do not have
faith in yourself and are not confident as to what
you are how can you help. How can you work out
yourself and the problems of the world which are
created by human beings only. So we have to
absolutely overthrow' all these dominations on us.
First from science we can prove everything. We
can prove the so called religions. All these ideas
that we have about being Hindus, Muslims,
Catholics, Protestants have to be thrown away
and we have to become a new personality. After
realisation you become like the lotus which rose
from the mud, Now you have become lotuses and
have to throw away all this dead mud otherwise
fragments will be there. Throw away all these
shackles which are killing you, which are of no use
but a burden. This whole fashioning has been
done so carefully with such sweetness and such
delicacy. So we must respect ourselves. We must
The Divine Cool Breeze
22
 1992_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3,4,5.pdf-page-22.txt 
 have affection and love for others and above all
we must have discipline.
Ashram life. Such people should get out of Sahaja
Yoga. Without collectivity how will you grow and
assemble your power? You can be strong by
combining together. If you have one stick you can
break it but if you put many sticks tagether you
cannot break them. It is better to have ten people
of good quality than to have a thousand useless
people.
Now from my life you all know that I work very hard
and travel a lot, more than any of you have. This
is because I have the Will that I have to bring this
world to that state of enjoyment, happiness and
divinity where they realise what is their goal and
what is the Glory of their Father. I never think that
something will go wrong with me or what will
happen. I have never bothered you about my
family life, my children,
Whatever problems I have I am dealing with them
myself. But here I get such big letters from Sahaja
Yogis writing about their families, etc. Attachment
to family is the biggest burden on your heads. They
are not your responsibility. It is the responsibility of
God Almighty. Can you do better than Him?
When you try to take the responsibility then the
problems
detachment. You cling on to your own things, your
own children. If it is belongs to Sahaja Yoga they
will just throw it around. How can you call them
Divine or saintly? Salntly people are not only
responsible for themselves but are responsible for
Today we have to take the vow that "Lwill fashion
my life according to the Will of God. I will dedicale
myself to that. No family, no other considerations,"
or about anyone
Everything can be looked after by the Will of God.
You don't have to worry for anything. Just try to
understand that you have problerms because you
don't want to give those problems to God. There
are some people who say that they are not
capable enough so they cant do it. This is a stupid
statement. You test yourself. Why do we say such
a thing? May be you are very money oriented.
Some people talk of business in Sahaja Yoga, Or
may be there is material attachment. Secondly it
could be 'Mamatva'. My family, children etc. or
this is 'mine'. Thirdly you may be still clinging on to
your old habits and are enjoying your life without
virtues. You are capable of doing everything.
One
should
start.
understand
everyone.
Before Sahaja Yoga you were not attached to
anyone. You were self-centred. Now you have
widened yourself a little more and are now
attached to your wife and children. That is alsa
selfish. They are not your children but are the
children of God. It is very important thing that has
happened to you that Sahasrara has opened.
Now you can prove the existence of God, His Will,
everything to the whole world. Nobody can
challenge Sahaja Yoga. Those who will challenge
can be told. You should take Sahaja Yoga
serlously. People don't even do meditation. How
will you grow without meditation? Unless you
become thoughtlessly aware, you cannot grow.
You have to atleast meditate morning and
evening. There are many people who are not
even collective by temperament. They do not like
Most Important thing is that you should become a
proper, compassionate and strong vehicle of
God's Will. You do my puja is alright because it
helps you a lot. Main thing is that you should all
ascend higher and higher. Compete with each
other into getting into higher situations. I am sure
that this absolute science will one day outshadow
the other science and tell people that it is what it
is. It is in your hands. Today is the day we celebrate
by which we have opened absolutely a new.
dimension of great divinity of the proofs of the
Divine. It is so important that we can finish all the
illusions they have. We can manage that power
you all have.
May God Bless you.
Editor : Shri, Yogi Mahajan
Printer & Publisher : P. C. Kulkarni
Printed & Published at : The Divine Cool Breeze (Xerox M/cs.)
9. Bhagya Chintamani Sac. Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411 029.
Sahasrara Puja
23
