Shri Ganesha Puja Date 18th December 1993 : Place Chhindwara : Type Puja Speech Language English & Hindi CONTENTS | Transcript | 02 - 03 English 04 - 04 Hindi Marathi || Translation English Hindi Marathi

 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT ENGLISH TALK I am sorry I was delayed. We were supposed to see the Collector and the Tahsildar, as they call him. They have done so much for us; so much they have organized, all the way, and officially they have done so well, that I had to wait for them to thank them very much. I think it's not very much hot for you; see, the wind is blowing, can you imagine! And if you see, there's no, no leaves, leaves are not moving. You always used to go and sit in the sun, so now here it is, you'd better have some of it! I hope you all enjoyed your stay in Jabalpur and the visit to Jabalpur. It was quite interesting. Some people have not yet arrived. I am sorry to say they haven't been able to arrive from Bombay. I think they are more Bombayites, not from the foreign countries, but otherwise I think all of you are here. It's a very unusual thing to happen like this, you see, because My father built this house about eighty years back. He was very imaginative and fond of guests, so he also put up guest bedrooms and guest bathrooms such, and it was a hill station. Now of course, because ofcrowdedness - very cold and a hill station - so people used to come, his friends used to come from Nagpur, so he had made arrangements for them; there were no hotels or anything - so they used to have them. And the people of this place are extremely hospitable, very hospitable. So it was his idea that he should have a house here where his guests would be. His brother had a big house but it was joint and he couldn't receive his guests, so he thought it's better to build a house here, and behind was a huge big compound bigger than this, which I have seen. I was only four years of age when we went away from here, but I remember each and everything about this house, and everything about Chindwara. 6. You know My memory is unusually, very, very sharp. I mean, I remember even My birth, it's to that extent. But I never knew that there would be so many saints coming to visit this place of My birth. I never expected that there would be so many people who will take to Sahaja Yoga in My lifetime, because when I was born I found people were so blind. I thought: "How will I talk about Sahaja Yoga? What will I do? How will it work out?" It's very difficult. My father knew about My mission, and he told Me that: "You'd better find out a way by which You can give Realization en masse. That's what's important, because even if You give Realization one person, is of no use. Also You should not write anything, because You don't create another Bible, Gita, Koran, because books also bind them, so best thing is that You should take to search of human beings, why can't they get their en masse Realization, because now You have come for that purpose." Somehow I worked it out, and really it was surprising, I was really, was not thinking to open Sahasrara, but I was literally forced into it and it worked out. It's working out. You can see, all of you are here. It's very amazing thing that can happen to someone like this, that in the lifetime only, you have come here to see this birthplace of Mine. It was such, such vibrations that My Sahasrara became completely jammed with vibrations: so cool inside, and outside was so hot that I didn't know what was happening. So I'm happy all of you could come and see this place, and a very humble house it was, but in those days it was the most, I mean, well-planned house as such, and was very much appreciated by people. And after that four years I was here, and then we went to Nagpur because we had a, My father had a big practice in Nagpur, he had to go many times down, so they thought: it's better to go. There also he had many houses, and Babamama is going to take you round to see those houses. He says he'll find out time to see wherever I have lived. But Nagpur also is very vibrated place, you can feel it. People are very quiet, it's a very quiet place. So this is a very novel thing: I don't think it has happened in the lifetime of any one of the Incarnations Who came on this earth. Even for Rama Janama Bhoomi we are fighting even today. So you can imagine. Thank God we have got this place, in a way. It's not yet ours, but in a way we are

 Original Transcript : English there, and maybe with your good wishes we will own it very soon. Today's Puja I thought was best to have Shri Ganesha Puja in a short way, because the first Puja here, and I was born here, so it's better that we should have a Ganesha Puja. It would be a nice thing to start with, and I, we have a doctor here. They're all Sahaja Yogis and they are going to help us to do the curing. Actually I always thought: "Which is the place where people will get cured?" So now we'll send all of them here to get cured. It's a, it was a jungle here. All around was jungles, hills, but I think all that's finished and broken now; and we used to get tigers and things; little far away from here is a place called Tameer where they go, could see tigers, but now they are there no doubt, but they are saying that nobody is now going that side, they all go to some reserve places which you have seen yourself, also Kanha Kisli. I hope you enjoyed. How did you enjoy Kanha Kisli? And the River Narmada also I was told you enjoyed very much. I am happy this has happened. It was a little circuitous and quite different from all the Tours you have had so far, but I am happy you all have enjoyed it. I have said so many things about Shri Ganesh, I don't know what to say now any more, but all of you have seen that a place - now see the, this breeze is coming from where? I don't know. You are sending breeze to Me, instead of I doing it! All right. 3.

 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT HINDI TALK यहाँ के रहनेवाले लोग और बाहर से आये हुये जो हिन्दुस्थानी लोग यहाँ पर हैं, ये बड़ी मुझे खुशी की बात है, की हमारे रहते हुये भी हमारा जो जन्मस्थान है, उसका इतना माहात्म्य हो रहा है और उसके लिये इतने लोग यहाँ सात देशों से लोग आये हये हैं। तो ये जो आपका छिंदवाडा जो है, एक क्षेत्रस्थान हो जायेगा और यहाँ अनेक लोग आयेंगे , रहेंगे। और ये सब संत -साधु है, संत हो गये और संतों जैसा इनका जीवन है, कहीं विरक्ति है, कहीं ..... ( अस्पष्ट) है। कोई मतलब नहीं इनको। अपने घर में तो बहत रईसी में रहते हैं। यहाँ आ कर के वो किसी चीज़ की माँग नहीं और हर हालत में ये खुश रहते हैं। इसी तरह से सहजयोग के बहुत से योगी लोग आये हये हैं। अलग- अलग जगह से, मद्रास से आये हुये हैं और आप देख रहे हैं कि हैद्राबाद से आये हुये हैं। विशाखापट्टणम इतना दूर, वहाँ से भी लोग आये हुये हैं। बम्बई से आये हुये हैं, पुना से आये हुये हैं। दिल्ली से तो आये ही हैं बहुत सारे और लखनौ से आये हैं। हर जगह से यहाँ लोग आये हैं। पंजाब से भी आये हैं। इस प्रकार अपने देश से भी अनेक जगह | से लोग आये हये हैं। और यहाँ पूजा में सम्मिलित हैं। ये बड़ी अच्छी बात है कि सारा अपना देश एक भाव से एकत्रित हो जायें । बहुत हमारे यहाँ झगड़े और आफ़तें मची हुई हैं। इन सब से छुट्टी हो जायें और होना ही चाहिये । जब आप अपने अन्दर के धर्म को पहचानते हैं, तो आप जान लेते हैं कि आप सब एक हैं। हमारा कोई ऐसा मठ नहीं है और कोई ऐसा, जैसे गुरुओं के बड़े बड़े काफ़िले हैं, ऐसा कोई मामला नहीं है। हमारे यहाँ तो कोई भी मेंबर भी नहीं है । इसकी कोई संस्था नहीं, ऑर्गनाइझेशन नहीं, कुछ नहीं है। सब अपने आप सारे काम हये हैं। सारे देश की ऐसी स्थिति हो जायें, जहाँ लोग संत हो जायें , तो वहाँ पर कोई भी प्रश्न नहीं रहता । सारे प्रश्न हमारे देश के ऐसे छूट जायें। इन लोगों की गरीबी भी हट गयी और जो कुछ इनकी शिकायतें थीं, शारीरिक, मानसिक, बौद्धिक वो सब ठीक हो गयी। और ये अनन्त चीज़ों से आशीर्वादित हैं । और ये हैरान है कि ये कैसे हो गया! बिल्कुल खास बात नहीं क्योंकि ये समय आया है। सब को होना है। छिंदवाडे में भी होना है, हर जगह होना है। और सब को इसका पूरी तरह से फ़ायदा होना चाहिये। यहाँ पर हमने सेंटर शुरू किया हुआ है। जो लोग छिंदवाडे के हैं वो लोग जरूर इस सेंटर में आयें और अपने को सम्मिलित करें, तो उनको आत्मसाक्षात्कार मिलना कोई मुश्किल नहीं है। एक क्षण में उनको मिल सकता है। जो कबीर ने कहा, जो नानक ने कहा, जो ईसा ने कहा, मोहम्मद ने कहा वो चीज़ आप हैं, ये टाइम आ गया है। इसका फ़ायदा उठाना चाहिये। खास कर के मेरा जन्म यहाँ हुआ है, तो आप लोगों के लिये विशेष बात ये है कि चैतन्य मुझे दिखायी देता है, सारे आकाश में चैतन्य जैसे फैला हुआ हो। तो इस चीज़ को आप समझने की कोशिश करें। और इसको पा लें। ये सब के लिये हैं। इसमें जात-पात कोई चीज़ का बंधन नहीं है । सब लोगों को ये आनन्द इस सृष्टि में मिलें। हमारा सब को अनन्त आशीर्वाद है! 4



----------------------

19931218_Shri Ganesha Puja_Chhindwara.pdf-page0.txt 
 Shri Ganesha Puja
Date
18th December 1993
:
Place
Chhindwara
:
Type
Puja
Speech
Language
English & Hindi
CONTENTS
| Transcript
|
02 - 03
English
04 - 04
Hindi
Marathi
|| Translation
English
Hindi
Marathi
 19931218_Shri Ganesha Puja_Chhindwara.pdf-page1.txt 
 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT
ENGLISH TALK
I am sorry I was delayed. We were supposed to see the Collector and the Tahsildar, as they call
him. They have done so much for us; so much they have organized, all the way, and officially they
have done so well, that I had to wait for them to thank them very much.
I think it's not very much hot for you; see, the wind is blowing, can you imagine! And if you see,
there's no, no leaves, leaves are not moving. You always used to go and sit in the sun, so now here it is,
you'd better have some of it! I hope you all enjoyed your stay in Jabalpur and the visit to Jabalpur. It
was quite interesting. Some people have not yet arrived. I am sorry to say they haven't been able to
arrive from Bombay. I think they are more Bombayites, not from the foreign countries, but otherwise I
think all of you are here.
It's a very unusual thing to happen like this, you see, because My father built this house about
eighty years back. He was very imaginative and fond of guests, so he also put up guest bedrooms and
guest bathrooms such, and it was a hill station. Now of course, because ofcrowdedness - very cold and
a hill station - so people used to come, his friends used to come from Nagpur, so he had made
arrangements for them; there were no hotels or anything - so they used to have them. And the people of
this place are extremely hospitable, very hospitable. So it was his idea that he should have a house
here where his guests would be. His brother had a big house but it was joint and he couldn't receive his
guests, so he thought it's better to build a house here, and behind was a huge big compound bigger than
this, which I have seen. I was only four years of age when we went away from here, but I remember
each and everything about this house, and everything about Chindwara.
6.
You know My memory is unusually, very, very sharp. I mean, I remember even My birth, it's to
that extent. But I never knew that there would be so many saints coming to visit this place of My birth.
I never expected that there would be so many people who will take to Sahaja Yoga in My lifetime,
because when I was born I found people were so blind. I thought: "How will I talk about Sahaja Yoga?
What will I do? How will it work out?" It's very difficult. My father knew about My mission, and he
told Me that: "You'd better find out a way by which You can give Realization en masse. That's what's
important, because even if You give Realization one person, is of no use. Also You should not write
anything, because You don't create another Bible, Gita, Koran, because books also bind them, so best
thing is that You should take to search of human beings, why can't they get their en masse Realization,
because now You have come for that purpose." Somehow I worked it out, and really it was surprising,
I was really, was not thinking to open Sahasrara, but I was literally forced into it and it worked out.
It's working out. You can see, all of you are here. It's very amazing thing that can happen to
someone like this, that in the lifetime only, you have come here to see this birthplace of Mine. It was
such, such vibrations that My Sahasrara became completely jammed with vibrations: so cool inside,
and outside was so hot that I didn't know what was happening. So I'm happy all of you could come and
see this place, and a very humble house it was, but in those days it was the most, I mean, well-planned
house as such, and was very much appreciated by people. And after that four years I was here, and then
we went to Nagpur because we had a, My father had a big practice in Nagpur, he had to go many times
down, so they thought: it's better to go. There also he had many houses, and Babamama is going to
take you round to see those houses. He says he'll find out time to see wherever I have lived. But
Nagpur also is very vibrated place, you can feel it. People are very quiet, it's a very quiet place.
So this is a very novel thing: I don't think it has happened in the lifetime of any one of the
Incarnations Who came on this earth. Even for Rama Janama Bhoomi we are fighting even today. So
you can imagine. Thank God we have got this place, in a way. It's not yet ours, but in a way we are
 19931218_Shri Ganesha Puja_Chhindwara.pdf-page2.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
there, and maybe with your good wishes we will own it very soon.
Today's Puja I thought was best to have Shri Ganesha Puja in a short way, because the first Puja
here, and I was born here, so it's better that we should have a Ganesha Puja. It would be a nice thing to
start with, and I, we have a doctor here. They're all Sahaja Yogis and they are going to help us to do the
curing. Actually I always thought: "Which is the place where people will get cured?" So now we'll
send all of them here to get cured.
It's a, it was a jungle here. All around was jungles, hills, but I think all that's finished and broken
now; and we used to get tigers and things; little far away from here is a place called Tameer where they
go, could see tigers, but now they are there no doubt, but they are saying that nobody is now going that
side, they all go to some reserve places which you have seen yourself, also Kanha Kisli. I hope you
enjoyed. How did you enjoy Kanha Kisli? And the River Narmada also I was told you enjoyed very
much. I am happy this has happened. It was a little circuitous and quite different from all the Tours you
have had so far, but I am happy you all have enjoyed it.
I have said so many things about Shri Ganesh, I don't know what to say now any more, but all of
you have seen that a place - now see the, this breeze is coming from where? I don't know. You are
sending breeze to Me, instead of I doing it!
All right.
3.
 19931218_Shri Ganesha Puja_Chhindwara.pdf-page3.txt 
 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT
HINDI TALK
यहाँ के रहनेवाले लोग और बाहर से आये हुये जो हिन्दुस्थानी लोग यहाँ पर हैं, ये बड़ी मुझे खुशी की बात है,
की हमारे रहते हुये भी हमारा जो जन्मस्थान है, उसका इतना माहात्म्य हो रहा है और उसके लिये इतने लोग यहाँ
सात देशों से लोग आये हये हैं। तो ये जो आपका छिंदवाडा जो है, एक क्षेत्रस्थान हो जायेगा और यहाँ अनेक लोग
आयेंगे , रहेंगे। और ये सब संत -साधु है, संत हो गये और संतों जैसा इनका जीवन है, कहीं विरक्ति है, कहीं .....
( अस्पष्ट) है। कोई मतलब नहीं इनको। अपने घर में तो बहत रईसी में रहते हैं। यहाँ आ कर के वो किसी चीज़ की
माँग नहीं और हर हालत में ये खुश रहते हैं। इसी तरह से सहजयोग के बहुत से योगी लोग आये हये हैं। अलग-
अलग जगह से, मद्रास से आये हुये हैं और आप देख रहे हैं कि हैद्राबाद से आये हुये हैं। विशाखापट्टणम इतना दूर,
वहाँ से भी लोग आये हुये हैं। बम्बई से आये हुये हैं, पुना से आये हुये हैं। दिल्ली से तो आये ही हैं बहुत सारे और
लखनौ से आये हैं। हर जगह से यहाँ लोग आये हैं। पंजाब से भी आये हैं। इस प्रकार अपने देश से भी अनेक जगह
|
से लोग आये हये हैं। और यहाँ पूजा में सम्मिलित हैं।
ये बड़ी अच्छी बात है कि सारा अपना देश एक भाव से एकत्रित हो जायें । बहुत हमारे यहाँ झगड़े और आफ़तें
मची हुई हैं। इन सब से छुट्टी हो जायें और होना ही चाहिये । जब आप अपने अन्दर के धर्म को पहचानते हैं, तो आप
जान लेते हैं कि आप सब एक हैं। हमारा कोई ऐसा मठ नहीं है और कोई ऐसा, जैसे गुरुओं के बड़े बड़े काफ़िले हैं,
ऐसा कोई मामला नहीं है। हमारे यहाँ तो कोई भी मेंबर भी नहीं है । इसकी कोई संस्था नहीं, ऑर्गनाइझेशन नहीं,
कुछ नहीं है। सब अपने आप सारे काम हये हैं। सारे देश की ऐसी स्थिति हो जायें, जहाँ लोग संत हो जायें , तो वहाँ
पर कोई भी प्रश्न नहीं रहता । सारे प्रश्न हमारे देश के ऐसे छूट जायें। इन लोगों की गरीबी भी हट गयी और जो कुछ
इनकी शिकायतें थीं, शारीरिक, मानसिक, बौद्धिक वो सब ठीक हो गयी। और ये अनन्त चीज़ों से आशीर्वादित हैं ।
और ये हैरान है कि ये कैसे हो गया! बिल्कुल खास बात नहीं क्योंकि ये समय आया है। सब को होना है। छिंदवाडे
में भी होना है, हर जगह होना है। और सब को इसका पूरी तरह से फ़ायदा होना चाहिये।
यहाँ पर हमने सेंटर शुरू किया हुआ है। जो लोग छिंदवाडे के हैं वो लोग जरूर इस सेंटर में आयें और अपने
को सम्मिलित करें, तो उनको आत्मसाक्षात्कार मिलना कोई मुश्किल नहीं है। एक क्षण में उनको मिल सकता है।
जो कबीर ने कहा, जो नानक ने कहा, जो ईसा ने कहा, मोहम्मद ने कहा वो चीज़ आप हैं, ये टाइम आ गया है।
इसका फ़ायदा उठाना चाहिये। खास कर के मेरा जन्म यहाँ हुआ है, तो आप लोगों के लिये विशेष बात ये है कि
चैतन्य मुझे दिखायी देता है, सारे आकाश में चैतन्य जैसे फैला हुआ हो। तो इस चीज़ को आप समझने की कोशिश
करें। और इसको पा लें। ये सब के लिये हैं। इसमें जात-पात कोई चीज़ का बंधन नहीं है । सब लोगों को ये आनन्द
इस सृष्टि में मिलें।
हमारा सब को अनन्त आशीर्वाद है!
4
