DIVINE COOL BREEZE REVELATIONS 1993 H. H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI

 DIVINCE COOL BREEZE REVELATIONS 1993 H. H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI

 Copyright: Vishwa Nirmala Dharma Published by: Yogi Mahajan 9 Bhagyachintamani Society Paud Road, Kothrud Pune 411 029 Printed by: Computex Graphics 112 High Tech Indl..Caves Road, Jogeshwari East, Bombay 400 060

 Divine Cool Breeze Revelations - 1993 Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Contents Devi Sukta Special Feature on occasion of Shivratri Maha Shivratri Pujd Song in Praise of Lord Shiva 1 1 2. 3. 13 20 22 4 New Dimensions in Sahaja Yoga 5. Birthday Puja Delhi Press Conference - Delhi Doctors Conference - Delhi Gudi Padwa Message - Delhi Mahavir Jayanti Message Delhi 28 6. 34 7. 38 46 6. 47 10 11. Pallas Athena Puja Greece 48 Easter Puja - Italy 13. Committees assigned by Shri Mataji Shri Rama Puja - Switzerland 15. Shri Adi Shakti Puja Cabella 54 12 61 67 14 76 16. Sahasrara Puja - Cabella 82 89 Guru Puja - Cabella 17 Shri Ganesha Puja 96 18 Russian Tour of Shri Mataji Doctors Conference - Russia 21. 102 19 105 20. 107 Devi Puja Shri Krishan Puja Shri Ganesha Puja 108 22 115 23 Prayer to the Devi Navratri Puja Diwali Puja - Russia Mathers' advice on Puja Press interview in Russia 24 25 26. 27 28. 29. Shri Mahakali Puja - Paris Shri Ganesh PujE- Delhi 30 Shri Krishna Puja Hathnikund 31. 32. Christmas Puja - Ganapatipule

 THE DEVISUKTA (Rigveda 125) I move with Rudras and with Vasus, I move with Adityas and all Gods by My side, And both Mitra and Varuna I support. I support Indra, Agni and the two Asvins. | uphold Soma, the destroyer of the foe. I sustain Tvastri and Pushan and Bhaga. I reward with wealth the offerer of oblation and the devout worshipper pouring the Soma. I am Queen, the Gartherer-up of treasures, the Knower, the first among the Holy Ones. The Devas have established in many places Ma who lives on many planes, in many a form. The man who sees, who breathes, and who hears what is spoken through Me alone obtains his sustenance. There are those who dwell by My side but know not. Hear thou who hast hearing: I tell thee the sacred truth. Yes, I Myself say this, and these My words must needs be welcome to Devas and men! One whom I love I make Mighty - make of him a Brahmana a Sahaj Yogi, a Gifted Man. For Rudra I stretch out the strings of His bow to slay the fierce enemies of the Realised Souls. And for the people, I engage in battle3; and through the earth and the heaven I spread. And on the summit I bringforth the Father. My home is within waters, in the ocean, From where I extend to all existing worlds; and yonder heaven I touch with My forehead. And it is I who, like the wind, breathe forth Chaitanya and set all existing worlds in motion. Beyond heavens and beyond the earth am I, and all this have I expressed in My splendour!

 THE LORD SHIVA He is the Lord God of all, God the Father, and He resides in the heart of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi. "Shiva is all the time, clean, immaculate" Shri Mataji "O Lord, give us the strength and that source of attraction by which we give up all other attractions of all the pleasure of joy, of ego, of everything that we think of, but we should fall into the pure joy form of the Shiva Tattwa, Absolute" Prayer: Shri Mataji "You must love the Lard the God, with all the heart and with all the soul, and will all thy mind. This is the first and great commandment." Shri Jesus "Those who worship the Imperishable, the Infinite, the Transcendent unmanifested, the Omnipotent, the Beyond all thought, the Immutable, the Never changing, the Ever One - who have all the powers of their soul in harmony, and the same loving mind for all; who find joy in the good of all beings - they reach in truth my very Self. Yet greater is the toil of those whose minds are set on the Transcendent, for the path of the Transcendent is hard for mortals to attain." Shri Krishna God be in my head, And in my understanding, God be in my eyes, And in my looking, God be in my mouth, And in my speaking, God be in my heart, And in my loving, God be in my life, And in my devotion. Song: SHRI SHIVA He Is Shiva - The Self - The Spirit Supreme He is the granter of boons and the recorder of tapas, He is the destroyer and he is the preserver He is the husband and father, the universal teacher,

 He is the dancer and master of music, He is the Maha Yogi, pure and immaculate, He is the forgiving and compassionate one In His ultimate form, as Lord Sadashiva, He is beyond image or concept, He is beyond Maya and chitta, He is devoid of attributes, the ultimate - He is the Absolute, Lord God of all - HE resides in the heart of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi. Realisation of the self and God realisation which is the ultimate aim of human life, is not possible to be attained without surrendering to the lotus feet of the Divine Mother. She confers the knowledge of Shiva, the Ultimate. She is also Shiva Shaktyaikya Roopini, i.e. whose form is union of Shiv and Shakti. It is said in the scriptures there is no Shiva without Shakti nor is there any Shakti without Shiva. There is no distinction between them just as there is none between the moon and her shining. Jai Shri Sadashiva ! You are the One to be worshipped - Beyond all, Encompassing all, Friend to all - Lord, how can we praise You ? May our desire every be, to be One with Thee. I AM SHIVA Beyond the ebb and flow and strain, Beyond the waxing and the wane - I am Shiva, I am Shiva By billowed Breath, the causeless cause, I am the great Eternal pause, I am Shiva, I am Shiva Oh joyous front, of endless bliss, Nought is there more or high than this ! I am Shiva, I am Shiva Transcendent far beyond and pure Byy 1, the One, alone, endure | am Shiva I am Shiva. 3

 SPIRIT Spirit is the most precious thing that we have within ourselves. The preciousness of your Spirit is immeasurable and that is why it is called the thing of eternal value. Because it is infinite, we cannot measure. Now, God the Almighty we say is 'Sat-Chit-Anand'. Sat means the Truth". The truth, we understand, in human terminology is relative. But the Truth' I am telling you is the absolute, from where all the relations start. The 'Sat' is the 'Purush', is the God who does not take actual part in the creation itself. but is a catalyst. The example can be like this. That, I am doing all the work I am creating every thing, but I have a light in my hand. Without the light, I cannot do anything. Light is the support of my work. But the light does not, in anyway, do anything about what I do. In the same way, God Almighty is just the witness like a light. But His another quality is the "Chit'. It is 'Attention'. When it is excited (in Sanskrit there is a very good word for excited, it is the pulsation) or when it is pulsated, His attention or when it pulsates, then through His attention, He starts creating. And He had third quality which we call 'Anand'. Anand is the feeling of Joy' That He gets by His perception, His čreation, the joy that He gets. All these three things 'Sat Chit Anand' when they are at a zero point where they meet, then they become principle of "Brahma' When these three things are One, where there is complete silence, nothing is created and nothing is manifested but the 'Joy' is one with the 'Attention' because the 'Attention' has reached to merge into Joy' and Joy' has become one with the "Truth'. This combination of three qualities separate and create three types of phenomena. When 'Joy' starts moving with the creation, the creation starts moving down form first, the 'Sat' or Truth' stage to Asat, i.e. 'untruth' to 'Maya' i.e. 'illusion'. That is one part of the paraboli. Now the another part of the paraboii starts when you are attaining back to God Almighty. That process now gradually starts becoming higher and higher, subtler and subtler and finer and finer. Human joys are much more 4-

 beautiful than that of animals. So the 'Joy' also start changing their mani- festation. In the sense, you start more and more, and wider range of 'Joy" comes into your hands. For example, to a dog beauty has no meaning; decency has no meaning. So at a stage when you reach, when you are a human being, to that extent you develop your 'Sat', which is awareness%3B to that extent you also develop your 'Joy' and to that extent you also develop creative action. Now you see how the 'creativity' of God passes into the hands of Man, when he turns out; how the 'Joy' of God passes into the hands of Man and how His 'Light' comes into the heart of Man as 'Spirit'. It is beautiful. LINGA THE SHIV The lingam represents the transcendent One, the causeless cause of all duality and creation. (Story): In the Lingodbhava Murti it is told how Lord Brahma and Lord Vishnu began to quarrel over who was the Creator, when suddenly before them appeared a Linga which looked like a great Cosmic fire. The two stopped quarrelling and set to discover the beginning and end of the Linga. Brahma, as a boar, burrowed deep into the earth and Vishnu, as the Linga. Realising that there was someone greater than themselves they now humbly offered worship to the great Linga. Pleased with magnificent from with a thousand arms and legs and with the Sun, the Moon, and Fire as His three eyes, He addressed Vishnu and Brahma and told them that they were both born out of His left and right loins respectively. This reality made them all One. Having said this the Mahadeva returned to the Linga.

 SHIVA AS NATRAJ "But that formless God takes a thousand forms in the eyes of His creatures. He is pure and indestructible. His form is infinite and fathomless, He dances in rapture, and waves of form arise from His dance, the body and mind cannnot contain themselves, when they are touched by His great joy" KABIR Shiva, the Mahadeva, Mahayogi, Maheshwara, Parameshwara is Natraj, the Lord of the Dance. Shiva is the Cosmic Dancer and through His dancing He brings about the powers of evolution, maintenance, and finally, the ultimate dissolution of the World. Shiva carries a drum in His upper left hand a tongue of flame. Fire is the means of which the great dissolution will occur. Thus the Lord holds the creation and destruction in His hands. Natraj dances on the prostrate body of a bhoot called Aposmara Purusha, who symbolizes ignorance and the darkness of ignorance. His dancing releases man from the bondage of ignorance and allows him to rise above worldly existence. He dances within a ring, a bandhan, of flame and light which is the AUM, the sound which set the creation into motion. The resulting three gunas are symbolised in the trident and the rhythm of creation is symbolised in the drum His other hands are signifying protection and forgiveness. = 6-

 RUDRA Rudra is the Destructive Power of Shiva, of the Spirit Now, one power which is His nature, is forgiveness. He forgives because we are human beings, we commit mistakes, we do wrong things, we get tempted; our attention is disturbed; so he forgives us. He also forgives us when we spoil our chastity, we do immoral things, we do theving, and we do things that are against God, talk against Him. He also forgives our super facilities, jealousies, our lust, our anger. Also He forgives our attachments, petty jealousies, vanities and also possessiveness. He forgives our egoistical behaviour and also our subordination to wrong things. But every action has a reaction, and when He forgives, He thinks that he has given you a big grace-mark. Its that reaction which builds up within Him, as a wrath against those who are forgiven and try to do greater mistakes. Specially, after realisation, because such a big blessing there is of the Realisation; you have got the light and in the light you are holding onto your plate, then His wrath goes up because he sees how stupid you have been. What I am saying is that, after realisation specially, He is much more sensitive that people who are forgiven and have been given such a big thing like Self-realisation, still they do wrong thing then he is much more wrathful. So, in the balance, the forgiveness starts reducing and the wrathfulness starts increasing. But when He forgives and as a result of that forgiveness you feel the gratitude, then His blessings start flowing towards you. He gives you tremendous capacity to forgive others. He pacifies your anger, He pacifies your lust, He pacifies your greed. Like beautiful dew-drops, His blessings come on our being and we become really beautiful flowers. And we start shining in the sunshine of his blessings. Now He uses His wrath or His destructive power to destroy all that tries to trouble us. He protects realized souls at every point, in every way. Negative forces try to attack a Sahaja Yogi but they are all neutralized by tremendous power of protection. Through his vibratary awareness we are guided into right path. All the beautiful blessings of His are described in the Psalm 23, "The Lord is my Shepherd" its' all described how he looks after His

 you as a shepherd. But He does not look after these evil people. He destroys them. Those who enter into Sahaja Yoga and are still carrying on with their evil nature are destroyed. Those who come to Sahaja Yoga and do not meditate and do not rise, are destroyed or they are thrown out of Sahaja Yoga. Those who murmur against God and live in a way that is not behaving a Sahaja Yogi, He removes them. So by one force, He protects, by another force, He throws away. But his destructive forces when they are built up too much, then we call it "now the Ekadasha Rudra' is active." Now, this Ekadasha Rudra will be expressed when the Kalki itself will start acting, means the destructive power which will destroy all that is negative on this earth and save all that is positive. So it is very necessary for Sahaja Yogis to expendite their Ascent, not to be satisfied with the social life or married life or with all the blessings that God has bestowed upon you. We always see, what God has done for us, how He has been miraculous to us, but we have to see what we have done for ourselves, what are we doing about our own ascent and our growth? Ekadash Rudra Puja, Italy

 THE 23RD PSALM THE LORD IS MY SHEPHERD The Lord's my shepherd, I'll not want He make me down to lie In pastures green, He leadth me the quiet water by. My soul He doth restore again; and me to walk doth make within the paths of righteousness e'en for His own name's sake. yea though I walk in death's dark vale yet will I fear no ill; For Thou art with me, and Thy rod and staff me comfort still. My table Thou hast furnished in presence of my foes My head Thou does with oil anoint and my cup overflows. Goodness and mercy all my life shall surely follow me; And in God's house forever more my dwelling place shall be. "When you have got your Nirvana, what happens to you? Lets see now:" Om, I am neither the mind, intelligence, ego nor Chitta. Neither the ears nor the tongue, nor the senses of smell and sight. Neither Ether nor air, nor fire, nor water, nor earth. | am Eternal Bliss and Awareness. Shiva. I am Shiva. I am

 | am neither the Pranas, nor five Vital Breaths, neither the seven elements of the body nor its firey seeds; nor hands, nor feet, nor tongue, nor all the organs of action. I am Eternal Bliss and Awareness. I am Shiva. I am Shiva Neither greed nor delusion, gluttony nor liking have I. Nothing of Pride or Ego, of Dharma or liberation, neither desire of the mind, nor object for his desiring. I am Eternal Bliss and Awareness. I am Shiva. I am Shiva. Nothing of pleasure and pain, of hatred and vice do 1 know; of mantra of sacred place, of Vedas or Sacrfice; neither the Either, nor the food of the earth for eating. I am Eternal Bliss and Awareness. Iam Shiva. I am Shiva. That of fear I have none; nor any distinctual caste, neither Father nor Mother, not even a birth have I; neither friend nor Comrade, neither disciple nor Guru. I am Eternal Bliss and Awareness. I am Shiva. I am Shiva. "THAT'S WHAT TO ARE: YOU ARE ETERNAL BLISS AND AWARENESS; CONSCIOUSNESS, PURE CONSCIOUS I think thats must be - everybody must remember by Heart and must say in all the Ashrams. Thats a very good way of remembering what you are. 10

 MAHA SHIVRATRI "Who is your father and who is your mother? Who is your husband and who is your wife? For Shiva - He doesn't know all these things. To Him - He and His power are 'inseparable' things. So He stands as singular personality. There is no 'duality' When there is duality then only you say - 'my' wife. You go on saying 'my nose, 'my' ears, 'my' hands, my, my. my, my, my, . go deep down. Till you say 'my' there is some duality. But when I say "I the nose" there is no duality. Shiva the Shakti. Shakti the Shiva. There is no duality- But we live throughout on our duality and because of that there is an attachment. If there is no duality what is the attachment? If you are the light and you are the lämp, then where is the duality? If you are the moon and you are the moonlight then where is the duality? - If you are the sun and you are the sunlight, you are the word and you are the meaning: - then where is the duality? But when there is this separation, there is duality. And because of this separation, you feel attached. Because if you are that, how will you be attached? Do you see that point? Because there is a difference and a distance between you and your's,. That's why you get attached to it. But it's 'me' who is the other? This whole universe is me. Who is the other? Everything is me, who is the other? So who is the other ? Nobody! That's only possible when your Spirit come into your brain and you become part and parcel of Virata itself. Virata is the brain as i told you. Try to understand, if a little colour, limited colour, is dropped into the ocean, the colour loses its identity completely. So the Spirit is like the ocean which has the light in it. And when this ocean pours into the little cup of your brain, the cup loses its identity and everything becomes Spiritual ! Everything ! You can make everything - 11

 Spiritual. Everything. You touch anything it is Spiritual ! The sand becomes Spiritual, the land becomes Spiritual, atmosphere becomes Spiritual, celestial bodies becomes Spiritual. Everything becomes Spiritual. So it is the ocean - that is the Spirit, while your brain is limited. So the detachment from your limited brain has to be brought in. All limitations of brain should be 'broken' so that when this ocean fills that brain; it should break that little cup and 'every bit' of that cup should become colourful. The whole atmosphere, everything, whatever you look at, should be colourful. Colour of the Spirit is the light of the Spirit and this light of the Spirit acts, works, thinks, co-ordinates, does everything. This is the reason today I decided to bring Shiva-Tattwa to the Brain. I'm with you; so you don't need any puja - that way. But that state has to be achieved, and for achieving that state, you need the puja. I hope so many of you will become the Shiva-tattwas in my lifetime. But don't think I'm asking you to suffer. There is no suffering in this kind of an ascent. If you understand that this is the complete joyous state. That is the time when you become Niranand. That's the joy named in the Sahasrara, the name of the joy is Niranand, and you know your Mother's name is Nira. So you become Niranand. So today's worship of Shiva has a special meaning. I hope whatever we do in the outward way, in a gross way, happens also in the subtler way. I am trying to push your Spirts into your brains, but I find it rather difficult sometimes, difficult because your attention is still involved. Try to detach yourself. Temper, lust, greed, everything': try to reduce, try to control. 1 know, some of you may not do much. It's alright. I'll try to tell you many a times; I'll try to help you - but most of you can do it. And you should try that. So on a deeper level, from today we start our Sahaja Yoga, where some of you may not attain. But most of you should try to go deeper. 'Everyone'. For that you don't need persons who are very well educated or well placed. 12 -

 No. Not at all. But people who meditate, dedicate, go deeper,- because they are like the first roots which have to reach, for others, much deeper, so that others can follow. Shiva is all the time clean, pure, immaculate." Shri Mataji MAHA SHIVRATRI PUJA 19.2.1993, Bombay Puja Talk by Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi (translated from Hindi) Shiva Puja is a very great and special puja. The ultimate aim of human beings is to attain the Shiva Tattwa (the essence of Shiva). Shiva tattwa is beyond the brain. It cannot be known through the brain. Till you have got your self realisation you cannot know the self, atma or the Shiva Tattwa. Too much falsehood, myth and blind faith has taken place in the name of Lord Shiva. Till a person is self realised he cannot know Lord Shiva because his nature is such that to know him, a person has first to attain that height where all the great virtues themselves enshrine within. He is said to be the innocent Shankara. Now a days many intellectuals have come up and write all kinds of nonsense that comes from the flight of their intellect and consider the innocence of Lord Shiva of no importance. The more cunning and manipulative a person is, the more famous he becomes, so how can the simple innocence of Lord Shankara be under- stood? In modern times an innocent person is considered to be foolish. But the innocence of Lord Shiva is such that He is everything. Supposing a wealthy person becomes detached, people may steal his wealth but he 13 -

 is not effected by the loss. People may find his innocence strange but when he got detached, the importance of wealth lost its hold on him. He basks in the joy of his own innocence. Where everything is happening and activating by itself, what role has Lord Shiva to play ? He witnesses everything innocently. The Shakti created the universe, all the Gods, Deities and their roles, the role of Lord Shiva is only to witness. In that witnessing everything happens. On whosoever his glance falls, such a person is redeemed. Wherever His attention goes, it blesses. Everything is a play, He does not have to do anything. Like play is for children, similarly it is a play for God. He witnesses. There is another aspect of His innocence. When an innocent, truthful and upright person sees an evil person trying to hustle him, then he gets very angry. His wrath is terrible. A clever person is able to divert his anger and appease it, but an innocent person keeps laughing knowing that no one can effect him. This is a quality of Lord Shiva which should definitely come into Sahaja Yogis. We keep thinking of petty things. How to overcome them. Like Lord Shiva has left everything to the Shakti, in the same way you can leave everything to Her. But that is a state which has to come. The innocence has to come within. Innocence means that no negativity can penetrate you. If a snake is there, let it be, there is nothing to worry. The one who is absolutely pure can not be effected by anything. The one who is in the center, his shakti protects him. These Shaktis reside within us through the Shiva Tattwa. To attain the Shiva Tattwa self realisation is essential. Kundalini is the Shakti and the chakras are the steps. One has to ascend all the steps to attain the Shiva Tattwä. This is the revelation of all the Gods and Deities. This is their job and they are completely absorbed in it. Unlike human beings they do not think about themselves or their rank etc. They are a part and parcel of Lord Shiva. To facilitate human ascent to the Shiva Tattwa is their nature. They need not be lectured or told anything, they are completely submerged in their task. They work in a karma. They do not think they are doing anything. They are thoughtless and unmindful for their powers, like sugar gives sweetness to food, but is unaware that it is sweet. Similarly when Sahaja Yogis act they are not aware of the Shakti within which is behind their actions. If the consciousness comes that I am the doer, I am a leader, etc. then you are not a Sahaja Yogi. Through Sahaja Yoga one becomes a karmi. He keeps performing without even remembering that he is doing anything 14

 He does not even realise that he is loving though others find him very loving We should understand what is self realisation. One is what you are and the other is your reflection in the mirror. The third is the act of witnessing the reflection in the mirror. Thus you are moving in three dimensions. First is the witness, second is the object of the witness and the third is the act of witnessing. All these three can dissolve. How ? If you yourself become the mirror then you can keep witnessing yourself. You can know your own self.. Thus what Tukaram said that if you know your self then nothing else needs. to be done. When all the three dissolve then you get established in the self. When this is established completely then Shiva Tattwa can be said to be established, because it is eternal, immutable and indestructible. When you are established in Shiva Tattwa then you will not feel that you are doing anything. You are basking in yourself. Then you don't think that I have to do anything. A lot of people feel bored because they are unable to see themselves. I enjoy my own company the most. After you have drunk this Thinn nectar innocence comes within. We should know that if we are saints then nothing can destroy us. But After self realisation you become aSahaja Yogi but to become a Shiva yogi you must have paramount faith. During crisis you forget that as a Sahaja Yogi, you are protected by all the Deities, Gannas and doots. The moment your faith falls all of them flee. Doubts That is how this faith is difficult to accept. still enter our minds because we are in the human level. insecurities form in our mind and because of them, our faith is shaken. Secondly, it is not so that we do not commit mistakes. We commit mistakes and because of that a kind of fear comes within us. Shiva is that he is forgiving. He is the ocean of forgiveness. He forgives The nature of Lord all your mistakes so there is no need to have fear. Lord Shiva is fearless You should be fearless. He has no army. There is no need of any money or wealth for the worship of Lord Shiva. There is no need of any gold or silver offerings in his Temples. He is completely free, There is no force in anything that can enhance His power. There is no worldly thing however precious, that can be of any worth to Him. It is very important for us to imbibe this Shiva Tattwa. Today in our society we value money more than necessary. Everything is measured and evalued in terms of money. People are willing to sell everything for a price. Money can be destroyed, used for evil purposes, but the person basking in the Shiva Tattwa has no desire for anything.. He is desireless. His atma is content within itself. He is not worried about the 15 -

 comforts of the body. The body can sleep anywhere, offered or not offered anything to eat. When such a state comes then one has a command over everything. Such a person may not be given anything to eat but with one glance he can feed thousands of people. His body may be without comfort but where ever his attention falls, that person is blessed with abundance. His glance is so benevolent. What is the Shakti through which benevolence acts ? It is the Param Chaitanya, which Shankracharya described as vibrations. The power of vibrations flow from the body of such a person and whoever they touch, is blessed. The earth on which they fall becomes fertile, reaping in abundance flowers and fruits. The woman who comes in contact with these vibrations can become very wise and mature. Vibrations is such a power that is always beneficent. A person who comes to attack or harass you can be transformed. We have to understand the power of transformation potent in vibrations. That is why you must forgive everyone. Why do yau seek vengeance ? There is no need of it, you are Sahaja Yogis, leave everything to vibrations. They understand, think and organise everything. You have attained this power, it flows from you, but have you experienced how many benefits arise from You it ? Those who want to understand it with the brain cannot know it. have seen its miracles, its intelligence is so acute, deep active and powerful and it is always helping you. You are able to command it. We should realise that this great Shiva Tattwa is in everything, it can work in the complete environment. Today the pollution in the environment has created a great crisis. As many Sahaja Yogis there will be, the purer the environment will become. It will cleanse spontaneously. To rightfully direct vibrations we have to realise that we have transcended from human level to Deva (celestial) level. Therefore we should shake off the shackles of human weakness and follies that dominate us and drag us back to the human level. There is a constant conflict between matter and the Atman. As we are made of matter it keeps trying to pull us towards itself. That is why in olden days people used to renounce everything and go to the forest to do austere penance to free themselves of material attachments and thus try and attain self realisation. Whereas in Sahaja Yoga, first you receive your self realisation. First the pinnacle (Kalsha) of the temple is built and then its foundation. This is the only way if the masses are to be given self realisation. Today people have received their self realisation without leaving their family, going to the Himalayas, or facing any 16-



----------------------

1993_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_Revelations.pdf-page-0.txt 
 DIVINE COOL BREEZE
REVELATIONS
1993
H. H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
 1993_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_Revelations.pdf-page-1.txt 
 DIVINCE COOL BREEZE
REVELATIONS 1993
H. H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
 1993_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_Revelations.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Copyright:
Vishwa Nirmala Dharma
Published by:
Yogi Mahajan
9 Bhagyachintamani Society
Paud Road, Kothrud
Pune 411 029
Printed by:
Computex Graphics
112 High Tech Indl..Caves Road,
Jogeshwari East, Bombay 400 060
 1993_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_Revelations.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze Revelations - 1993
Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Contents
Devi Sukta
Special Feature on occasion of Shivratri
Maha Shivratri Pujd
Song in Praise of Lord Shiva
1
1
2.
3.
13
20
22
4
New Dimensions in Sahaja Yoga
5.
Birthday Puja Delhi
Press Conference - Delhi
Doctors Conference - Delhi
Gudi Padwa Message - Delhi
Mahavir Jayanti Message Delhi
28
6.
34
7.
38
46
6.
47
10
11. Pallas Athena Puja Greece
48
Easter Puja - Italy
13. Committees assigned by Shri Mataji
Shri Rama Puja - Switzerland
15. Shri Adi Shakti Puja Cabella
54
12
61
67
14
76
16. Sahasrara Puja - Cabella
82
89
Guru Puja - Cabella
17
Shri Ganesha Puja
96
18
Russian Tour of Shri Mataji
Doctors Conference - Russia
21.
102
19
105
20.
107
Devi Puja
Shri Krishan Puja
Shri Ganesha Puja
108
22
115
23
Prayer to the Devi
Navratri Puja
Diwali Puja - Russia
Mathers' advice on Puja
Press interview in Russia
24
25
26.
27
28.
29. Shri Mahakali Puja - Paris
Shri Ganesh PujE- Delhi
30
Shri Krishna Puja Hathnikund
31.
32. Christmas Puja - Ganapatipule
 1993_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_Revelations.pdf-page-4.txt 
 THE DEVISUKTA (Rigveda 125)
I move with Rudras and with Vasus, I move
with Adityas and all Gods by My side,
And both Mitra and Varuna I support.
I support Indra, Agni and the two Asvins.
| uphold Soma, the destroyer of the foe.
I sustain Tvastri and Pushan and Bhaga.
I reward with wealth the offerer of oblation
and the devout worshipper pouring the Soma.
I am Queen, the Gartherer-up of treasures,
the Knower, the first among the Holy Ones.
The Devas have established in many places
Ma who lives on many planes, in many a form.
The man who sees, who breathes, and who hears what is spoken
through Me alone obtains his sustenance.
There are those who dwell by My side but know not.
Hear thou who hast hearing: I tell thee the sacred truth.
Yes, I Myself say this, and these My words
must needs be welcome to Devas and men!
One whom I love I make Mighty - make of him
a Brahmana a Sahaj Yogi, a Gifted Man.
For Rudra I stretch out the strings of His bow
to slay the fierce enemies of the Realised Souls.
And for the people, I engage in battle3;
and through the earth and the heaven I spread.
And on the summit I bringforth the Father.
My home is within waters, in the ocean,
From where I extend to all existing worlds;
and yonder heaven I touch with My forehead.
And it is I who, like the wind, breathe forth Chaitanya
and set all existing worlds in motion.
Beyond heavens and beyond the earth am I,
and all this have I expressed in My splendour!
 1993_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_Revelations.pdf-page-5.txt 
 THE LORD SHIVA
He is the Lord God of all, God the Father, and He resides in the heart
of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi.
"Shiva is all the time, clean, immaculate" Shri Mataji
"O Lord, give us the strength and that source of attraction by
which we give up all other attractions of all the pleasure of
joy, of ego, of everything that we think of, but we should fall
into the pure joy form of the Shiva Tattwa, Absolute"
Prayer:
Shri Mataji
"You must love the Lard the God, with all the heart and with all the soul,
and will all thy mind. This is the first and great commandment."
Shri Jesus
"Those who worship the Imperishable, the Infinite, the Transcendent
unmanifested, the Omnipotent, the Beyond all thought, the Immutable, the
Never changing, the Ever One - who have all the powers of their soul in
harmony, and the same loving mind for all; who find joy in the good of
all beings - they reach in truth my very Self. Yet greater is the toil of those
whose minds are set on the Transcendent, for the path of the Transcendent
is hard for mortals to attain."
Shri Krishna
God be in my head, And in my understanding,
God be in my eyes, And in my looking,
God be in my mouth, And in my speaking,
God be in my heart, And in my loving,
God be in my life, And in my devotion.
Song:
SHRI SHIVA
He Is Shiva - The Self - The Spirit Supreme
He is the granter of boons and the recorder of tapas,
He is the destroyer and he is the preserver
He is the husband and father, the universal teacher,
 1993_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_Revelations.pdf-page-6.txt 
 He is the dancer and master of music,
He is the Maha Yogi, pure and immaculate,
He is the forgiving and compassionate one
In His ultimate form, as Lord Sadashiva,
He is beyond image or concept,
He is beyond Maya and chitta,
He is devoid of attributes, the ultimate -
He is the Absolute, Lord God of all -
HE resides in the heart of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi.
Realisation of the self and God realisation which is the ultimate aim of
human life, is not possible to be attained without surrendering to the lotus
feet of the Divine Mother.
She confers the knowledge of Shiva, the Ultimate.
She is also Shiva Shaktyaikya Roopini, i.e. whose form is union of Shiv
and Shakti. It is said in the scriptures there is no Shiva without Shakti
nor is there any Shakti without Shiva. There is no distinction between them
just as there is none between the moon and her shining.
Jai Shri Sadashiva !
You are the One to be worshipped -
Beyond all, Encompassing all, Friend to all -
Lord, how can we praise You ?
May our desire every be, to be One with Thee.
I AM SHIVA
Beyond the ebb and flow and strain,
Beyond the waxing and the wane -
I am Shiva, I am Shiva
By billowed Breath, the causeless cause,
I am the great Eternal pause,
I am Shiva, I am Shiva
Oh joyous front, of endless bliss,
Nought is there more or high than this !
I am Shiva, I am Shiva
Transcendent far beyond and pure
Byy
1, the One, alone, endure
| am Shiva I am Shiva.
3
 1993_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_Revelations.pdf-page-7.txt 
 SPIRIT
Spirit is the most precious thing that we have within ourselves. The
preciousness of your Spirit is immeasurable and that is why it is called
the thing of eternal value. Because it is infinite, we cannot measure.
Now, God the Almighty we say is 'Sat-Chit-Anand'. Sat means the Truth".
The truth, we understand, in human terminology is relative. But the Truth'
I am telling you is the absolute, from where all the relations start.
The 'Sat' is the 'Purush', is the God who does not take actual part in the
creation itself. but is a catalyst. The example can be like this. That, I am
doing all the work I am creating every thing, but I have a light in my hand.
Without the light, I cannot do anything. Light is the support of my work. But
the light does not, in anyway, do anything about what I do. In the same
way, God Almighty is just the witness like a light.
But His another quality is the "Chit'. It is 'Attention'. When it is excited (in
Sanskrit there is a very good word for excited, it is the pulsation) or when
it is pulsated, His attention or when it pulsates, then through His attention,
He starts creating.
And He had third quality which we call 'Anand'. Anand is the feeling of
Joy' That He gets by His perception, His čreation, the joy that He gets.
All these three things 'Sat Chit Anand' when they are at a zero point where
they meet, then they become principle of "Brahma'
When these three things are One, where there is complete silence, nothing
is created and nothing is manifested but the 'Joy' is one with the 'Attention'
because the 'Attention' has reached to merge into Joy' and Joy' has
become one with the "Truth'. This combination of three qualities separate
and create three types of phenomena. When 'Joy' starts moving with the
creation, the creation starts moving down form first, the 'Sat' or Truth' stage
to Asat, i.e. 'untruth' to 'Maya' i.e. 'illusion'. That is one part of the paraboli.
Now the another part of the paraboii starts when you are attaining back
to God Almighty. That process now gradually starts becoming higher and
higher, subtler and subtler and finer and finer. Human joys are much more
4-
 1993_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_Revelations.pdf-page-8.txt 
 beautiful than that of animals. So the 'Joy' also start changing their mani-
festation. In the sense, you start more and more, and wider range of 'Joy"
comes into your hands. For example, to a dog beauty has no meaning;
decency has no meaning. So at a stage when you reach, when you are
a human being, to that extent you develop your 'Sat', which is awareness%3B
to that extent you also develop your 'Joy' and to that extent you also develop
creative action. Now you see how the 'creativity' of God passes into the hands
of Man, when he turns out; how the 'Joy' of God passes into the hands of
Man and how His 'Light' comes into the heart of Man as 'Spirit'.
It is beautiful.
LINGA
THE SHIV
The lingam represents the transcendent One, the causeless cause of all
duality and creation.
(Story): In the Lingodbhava Murti it is told how Lord Brahma and Lord Vishnu
began to quarrel over who was the Creator, when suddenly before them
appeared a Linga which looked like a great Cosmic fire. The two stopped
quarrelling and set to discover the beginning and end of the Linga. Brahma,
as a boar, burrowed deep into the earth and Vishnu, as the Linga. Realising
that there was someone greater than themselves they now humbly offered
worship to the great Linga. Pleased with magnificent from with a thousand
arms and legs and with the Sun, the Moon, and Fire as His three eyes, He
addressed Vishnu and Brahma and told them that they were both born out
of His left and right loins respectively. This reality made them all One. Having
said this the Mahadeva returned to the Linga.
 1993_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_Revelations.pdf-page-9.txt 
 SHIVA AS NATRAJ
"But that formless God takes a thousand forms in the eyes of His creatures.
He is pure and indestructible. His form is infinite and fathomless, He dances
in rapture, and waves of form arise from His dance, the body and mind
cannnot contain themselves, when they are touched by His great joy" KABIR
Shiva, the Mahadeva, Mahayogi, Maheshwara, Parameshwara is Natraj, the
Lord of the Dance. Shiva is the Cosmic Dancer and through His dancing
He brings about the powers of evolution, maintenance, and finally, the
ultimate dissolution of the World. Shiva carries a drum in His upper left
hand a tongue of flame. Fire is the means of which the great dissolution
will occur. Thus the Lord holds the creation and destruction in His hands.
Natraj dances on the prostrate body of a bhoot called Aposmara Purusha,
who symbolizes ignorance and the darkness of ignorance. His dancing
releases man from the bondage of ignorance and allows him to rise above
worldly existence.
He dances within a ring, a bandhan, of flame and light which is the AUM,
the sound which set the creation into motion. The resulting three gunas are
symbolised in the trident and the rhythm of creation is symbolised in the drum
His other hands are signifying protection and forgiveness.
= 6-
 1993_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_Revelations.pdf-page-10.txt 
 RUDRA
Rudra is the Destructive Power of Shiva, of the Spirit
Now, one power which is His nature, is forgiveness. He forgives because
we are human beings, we commit mistakes, we do wrong things, we get
tempted; our attention is disturbed; so he forgives us. He also forgives us
when we spoil our chastity, we do immoral things, we do theving, and we
do things that are against God, talk against Him. He also forgives our super
facilities, jealousies, our lust, our anger. Also He forgives our attachments,
petty jealousies, vanities and also possessiveness. He forgives our egoistical
behaviour and also our subordination to wrong things.
But every action has a reaction, and when He forgives, He thinks that he
has given you a big grace-mark. Its that reaction which builds up within
Him, as a wrath against those who are forgiven and try to do greater mistakes.
Specially, after realisation, because such a big blessing there is of the
Realisation; you have got the light and in the light you are holding onto your
plate, then His wrath goes up because he sees how stupid you have been.
What I am saying is that, after realisation specially, He is much more sensitive
that people who are forgiven and have been given such a big thing like
Self-realisation, still they do wrong thing then he is much more wrathful. So,
in the balance, the forgiveness starts reducing and the wrathfulness starts
increasing.
But when He forgives and as a result of that forgiveness you feel the
gratitude, then His blessings start flowing towards you. He gives you
tremendous capacity to forgive others. He pacifies your anger, He pacifies
your lust, He pacifies your greed. Like beautiful dew-drops, His blessings
come on our being and we become really beautiful flowers. And we start
shining in the sunshine of his blessings.
Now He uses His wrath or His destructive power to destroy all that tries
to trouble us. He protects realized souls at every point, in every way. Negative
forces try to attack a Sahaja Yogi but they are all neutralized by
tremendous power of protection. Through his vibratary awareness we are
guided into right path. All the beautiful blessings of His are described in the
Psalm 23, "The Lord is my Shepherd" its' all described how he looks after
His
 1993_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_Revelations.pdf-page-11.txt 
 you as a shepherd.
But He does not look after these evil people. He destroys them. Those
who enter into Sahaja Yoga and are still carrying on with their evil nature
are destroyed. Those who come to Sahaja Yoga and do not meditate and
do not rise, are destroyed or they are thrown out of Sahaja Yoga. Those
who murmur against God and live in a way that is not behaving a Sahaja
Yogi, He removes them. So by one force, He protects, by another force,
He throws away. But his destructive forces when they are built up too much,
then we call it "now the Ekadasha Rudra' is active."
Now, this Ekadasha Rudra will be expressed when the Kalki itself will start
acting, means the destructive power which will destroy all that is negative
on this earth and save all that is positive.
So it is very necessary for Sahaja Yogis to expendite their Ascent, not
to be satisfied with the social life or married life or with all the blessings that
God has bestowed upon you.
We always see, what God has done for us, how He has been miraculous
to us, but we have to see what we have done for ourselves, what are we
doing about our own ascent and our growth?
Ekadash Rudra Puja, Italy
 1993_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_Revelations.pdf-page-12.txt 
 THE 23RD PSALM
THE LORD IS MY SHEPHERD
The Lord's my shepherd, I'll not want
He make me down to lie
In pastures green, He leadth me
the quiet water by.
My soul He doth restore again;
and me to walk doth make
within the paths of righteousness
e'en for His own name's sake.
yea though I walk in death's dark vale
yet will I fear no ill;
For Thou art with me, and Thy rod
and staff me comfort still.
My table Thou hast furnished
in presence of my foes
My head Thou does with oil anoint
and my cup overflows.
Goodness and mercy all my life
shall surely follow me;
And in God's house forever more
my dwelling place shall be.
"When you have got your Nirvana, what happens to you? Lets see now:"
Om, I am neither the mind, intelligence, ego nor Chitta. Neither the ears nor
the tongue, nor the senses of smell and sight. Neither Ether nor air, nor
fire, nor water, nor earth.
| am Eternal Bliss and Awareness.
Shiva.
I am Shiva. I am
 1993_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_Revelations.pdf-page-13.txt 
 | am neither the Pranas, nor five Vital Breaths, neither the seven elements
of the body nor its firey seeds; nor hands, nor feet, nor tongue, nor all the
organs of action.
I am Eternal Bliss and Awareness.
I am Shiva. I am Shiva
Neither greed nor delusion, gluttony nor liking have I. Nothing of Pride or
Ego, of Dharma or liberation, neither desire of the mind, nor object for his
desiring.
I am Eternal Bliss and Awareness.
I am Shiva. I am Shiva.
Nothing of pleasure and pain, of hatred and vice do 1 know; of mantra
of sacred place, of Vedas or Sacrfice; neither the Either, nor the food of
the earth for eating.
I am Eternal Bliss and Awareness.
Iam Shiva. I am Shiva.
That of fear I have none; nor any distinctual caste, neither Father nor
Mother, not even a birth have I; neither friend nor Comrade, neither disciple
nor Guru.
I am Eternal Bliss and Awareness.
I am Shiva. I am Shiva.
"THAT'S WHAT TO ARE: YOU ARE ETERNAL BLISS AND AWARENESS;
CONSCIOUSNESS, PURE CONSCIOUS
I think thats must be - everybody must remember by Heart and must say
in all the Ashrams. Thats a very good way of remembering what you are.
10
 1993_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_Revelations.pdf-page-14.txt 
 MAHA SHIVRATRI
"Who is your father and who is your mother?
Who is your husband and who is your wife?
For Shiva - He doesn't know all these things.
To Him - He and His power are 'inseparable' things.
So He stands as singular personality.
There is no 'duality'
When there is duality then only you say - 'my' wife. You go on saying 'my
nose, 'my' ears, 'my' hands, my, my. my, my, my,
. go deep down.
Till you say 'my' there is some duality. But when I say "I the nose"
there is no duality. Shiva the Shakti. Shakti the Shiva. There is no duality-
But we live throughout on our duality and because of that there is an
attachment. If there is no duality what is the attachment? If you are the light
and you are the lämp, then where is the duality? If you are the moon and
you are the moonlight then where is the duality? - If you are the sun and
you are the sunlight, you are the word and you are the meaning: - then where
is the duality?
But when there is this separation, there is duality. And because of this
separation, you feel attached. Because if you are that, how will you be
attached? Do you see that point? Because there is a difference and a
distance between you and your's,. That's why you get attached to it. But
it's 'me' who is the other? This whole universe is me. Who is the other?
Everything is me, who is the other?
So who is the other ? Nobody!
That's only possible when your Spirit come into your brain and you become
part and parcel of Virata itself. Virata is the brain as i told you.
Try to understand, if a little colour, limited colour, is dropped into the ocean,
the colour loses its identity completely.
So the Spirit is like the ocean which has the light in it. And when this
ocean pours into the little cup of your brain, the cup loses its identity and
everything becomes Spiritual ! Everything ! You can make everything
- 11
 1993_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_Revelations.pdf-page-15.txt 
 Spiritual. Everything. You touch anything it is Spiritual ! The sand becomes
Spiritual, the land becomes Spiritual, atmosphere becomes Spiritual, celestial
bodies becomes Spiritual. Everything becomes Spiritual.
So it is the ocean - that is the Spirit, while your brain is limited.
So the detachment from your limited brain has to be brought in. All
limitations of brain should be 'broken' so that when this ocean fills that
brain; it should break that little cup and 'every bit' of that cup should become
colourful. The whole atmosphere, everything, whatever you look at, should
be colourful. Colour of the Spirit is the light of the Spirit and this light of
the Spirit acts, works, thinks, co-ordinates, does everything.
This is the reason today I decided to bring Shiva-Tattwa to the Brain.
I'm with you; so you don't need any puja - that way. But that state has
to be achieved, and for achieving that state, you need the puja. I hope
so many of you will become the Shiva-tattwas in my lifetime. But don't think
I'm asking you to suffer. There is no suffering in this kind of an ascent.
If you understand that this is the complete joyous state. That is the time
when you become Niranand. That's the joy named in the Sahasrara, the
name of the joy is Niranand, and you know your Mother's name is Nira.
So you become Niranand.
So today's worship of Shiva has a special meaning. I hope whatever we
do in the outward way, in a gross way, happens also in the subtler way.
I am trying to push your Spirts into your brains, but I find it rather difficult
sometimes, difficult because your attention is still involved.
Try to detach yourself.
Temper, lust, greed, everything': try to reduce, try to control.
1 know, some of you may not do much. It's alright. I'll try to tell you
many a times; I'll try to help you - but most of you can do it. And you should
try that.
So on a deeper level, from today we start our Sahaja Yoga, where some
of you may not attain. But most of you should try to go deeper. 'Everyone'.
For that you don't need persons who are very well educated or well placed.
12 -
 1993_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_Revelations.pdf-page-16.txt 
 No. Not at all.
But people who meditate, dedicate, go deeper,- because they are like the
first roots which have to reach, for others, much deeper, so that others can
follow.
Shiva is all the time clean, pure, immaculate."
Shri Mataji
MAHA SHIVRATRI PUJA
19.2.1993, Bombay
Puja Talk by Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
(translated from Hindi)
Shiva Puja is a very great and special puja. The ultimate aim of human
beings is to attain the Shiva Tattwa (the essence of Shiva). Shiva tattwa
is beyond the brain. It cannot be known through the brain. Till you have
got your self realisation you cannot know the self, atma or the Shiva Tattwa.
Too much falsehood, myth and blind faith has taken place in the name of
Lord Shiva. Till a person is self realised he cannot know Lord Shiva because
his nature is such that to know him, a person has first to attain that height
where all the great virtues themselves enshrine within.
He is said to be the innocent Shankara. Now a days many intellectuals
have come up and write all kinds of nonsense that comes from the flight
of their intellect and consider the innocence of Lord Shiva of no importance.
The more cunning and manipulative a person is, the more famous he
becomes, so how can the simple innocence of Lord Shankara be under-
stood? In modern times an innocent person is considered to be foolish.
But the innocence of Lord Shiva is such that He is everything. Supposing
a wealthy person becomes detached, people may steal his wealth but he
13 -
 1993_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_Revelations.pdf-page-17.txt 
 is not effected by the loss. People may find his innocence strange but when
he got detached, the importance of wealth lost its hold on him. He basks
in the joy of his own innocence.
Where everything is happening and activating by itself, what role has Lord
Shiva to play ? He witnesses everything innocently. The Shakti created the
universe, all the Gods, Deities and their roles, the role of Lord Shiva is
only to witness. In that witnessing everything happens. On whosoever his
glance falls, such a person is redeemed. Wherever His attention goes, it
blesses. Everything is a play, He does not have to do anything. Like play
is for children, similarly it is a play for God. He witnesses.
There is another aspect of His innocence. When an innocent, truthful and
upright person sees an evil person trying to hustle him, then he gets very
angry. His wrath is terrible. A clever person is able to divert his anger
and appease it, but an innocent person keeps laughing knowing that no
one can effect him. This is a quality of Lord Shiva which should definitely
come into Sahaja Yogis.
We keep thinking of petty things. How to overcome them. Like Lord Shiva
has left everything to the Shakti, in the same way you can leave everything
to Her. But that is a state which has to come. The innocence has to come
within. Innocence means that no negativity can penetrate you. If a snake
is there, let it be, there is nothing to worry. The one who is absolutely pure
can not be effected by anything. The one who is in the center, his shakti
protects him. These Shaktis reside within us through the Shiva Tattwa. To
attain the Shiva Tattwa self realisation is essential. Kundalini is the Shakti
and the chakras are the steps. One has to ascend all the steps to attain
the Shiva Tattwä. This is the revelation of all the Gods and Deities. This is
their job and they are completely absorbed in it. Unlike human beings they
do not think about themselves or their rank etc. They are a part and parcel
of Lord Shiva. To facilitate human ascent to the Shiva Tattwa is their nature.
They need not be lectured or told anything, they are completely submerged
in their task. They work in a karma. They do not think they are doing
anything. They are thoughtless and unmindful for their powers, like sugar
gives sweetness to food, but is unaware that it is sweet. Similarly when
Sahaja Yogis act they are not aware of the Shakti within which is behind their
actions. If the consciousness comes that I am the doer, I am a leader, etc.
then you are not a Sahaja Yogi. Through Sahaja Yoga one becomes a karmi.
He keeps performing without even remembering that he is doing anything
14
 1993_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_Revelations.pdf-page-18.txt 
 He does not even realise that he is loving though others find him very loving
We should understand what is self realisation. One is what you are and the
other is your reflection in the mirror. The third is the act of witnessing the
reflection in the mirror. Thus you are moving in three dimensions. First is the
witness, second is the object of the witness and the third is the act of
witnessing. All these three can dissolve. How ? If you yourself become the
mirror then you can keep witnessing yourself. You can know your own self..
Thus what Tukaram said that if you know your self then nothing else needs.
to be done. When all the three dissolve then you get established in the self.
When this is established completely then Shiva Tattwa can be said to be
established, because it is eternal, immutable and indestructible. When you
are established in Shiva Tattwa then you will not feel that you are doing
anything. You are basking in yourself. Then you don't think that I have to
do anything. A lot of people feel bored because they are unable to see
themselves. I enjoy my own company the most. After you have drunk this
Thinn
nectar innocence comes within.
We should know that if we are saints then nothing can destroy us. But
After self realisation you become aSahaja
Yogi but to become a Shiva yogi you must have paramount faith. During
crisis you forget that as a Sahaja Yogi, you are protected by all the Deities,
Gannas and doots. The moment your faith falls all of them flee. Doubts
That is how
this faith is difficult to accept.
still enter our minds because we are in the human level.
insecurities form in our mind and because of them, our faith is shaken.
Secondly, it is not so that we do not commit mistakes. We commit mistakes
and because of that a kind of fear comes within us.
Shiva is that he is forgiving. He is the ocean of forgiveness. He forgives
The nature of Lord
all your mistakes so there is no need to have fear. Lord Shiva is fearless
You should be fearless. He has no army. There is no need of any money
or wealth for the worship of Lord Shiva. There is no need of any gold or
silver offerings in his Temples. He is completely free, There is no force in
anything that can enhance His power. There is no worldly thing however
precious, that can be of any worth to Him. It is very important for us to imbibe
this Shiva Tattwa. Today in our society we value money more than necessary.
Everything is measured and evalued in terms of money. People are willing
to sell everything for a price. Money can be destroyed, used for evil purposes,
but the person basking in the Shiva Tattwa has no desire for anything.. He
is desireless. His atma is content within itself. He is not worried about the
15 -
 1993_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_Revelations.pdf-page-19.txt 
 comforts of the body. The body can sleep anywhere, offered or not offered
anything to eat. When such a state comes then one has a command over
everything. Such a person may not be given anything to eat but with one
glance he can feed thousands of people. His body may be without comfort
but where ever his attention falls, that person is blessed with abundance.
His glance is so benevolent.
What is the Shakti through which benevolence acts ? It is the Param
Chaitanya, which Shankracharya described as vibrations. The power of
vibrations flow from the body of such a person and whoever they touch, is
blessed. The earth on which they fall becomes fertile, reaping in abundance
flowers and fruits. The woman who comes in contact with these vibrations
can become very wise and mature. Vibrations is such a power that is always
beneficent. A person who comes to attack or harass you can be transformed.
We have to understand the power of transformation potent in vibrations. That
is why you must forgive everyone. Why do yau seek vengeance ? There is
no need of it, you are Sahaja Yogis, leave everything to vibrations. They
understand, think and organise everything. You have attained this power,
it flows from you, but have you experienced how many benefits arise from
You
it ? Those who want to understand it with the brain cannot know it.
have seen its miracles, its intelligence is so acute, deep active and powerful
and it is always helping you. You are able to command it.
We should realise that this great Shiva Tattwa is in everything, it can work
in the complete environment. Today the pollution in the environment has
created a great crisis. As many Sahaja Yogis there will be, the purer the
environment will become. It will cleanse spontaneously.
To rightfully direct vibrations we have to realise that we have transcended
from human level to Deva (celestial) level. Therefore we should shake off
the shackles of human weakness and follies that dominate us and drag
us back to the human level. There is a constant conflict between matter
and the Atman. As we are made of matter it keeps trying to pull us towards
itself. That is why in olden days people used to renounce everything and
go to the forest to do austere penance to free themselves of material
attachments and thus try and attain self realisation. Whereas in Sahaja Yoga,
first you receive your self realisation. First the pinnacle (Kalsha) of the
temple is built and then its foundation. This is the only way if the masses
are to be given self realisation. Today people have received their self
realisation without leaving their family, going to the Himalayas, or facing any
16-
