Mahashivaratri Puja - Witnessing Power, Surrender Date 14th March 1994 : Place Delhi : Type Puja Speech Language English & Hindi CONTENTS | Transcript | 02 - 06 English Hindi Marathi || Translation English 07 - 10 Hindi 11 - 15 Marathi

 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT ENGLISH TALK It's a great pleasure that from all over the world people have gathered to worship Shiva. Actually we should say it is Sadashiva that we are going to worship today. As you know the difference between Sadashiva and Shri Shiva. Sadashiva is the God Almighty and He is a witness of the play of the Primordial Mother. The combination between Sadashiva and the Primordial Mother Adi Shakti is just like a moon and the moonlight or the sun or the sunlight. We cannot understand such relationship in human being, among human marriages or among human relationships. So whatever the Adi Shakti's creating, which is the desire of Sadashiva, is being witnessed by Him. And when He is watching this creation He is witnessing all of it into all details. He witnesses the whole universe and He also witnesses this Mother Earth, all the creation that is done by the Adi Shakti. His power is of witnessing and the Shakti is this all pervading power of love. So the God Almighty, the Father, the Primordial Father we can say, expresses His desire, His Iccha Shakti as the Primordial Mother and She expresses Her power as love. So the relationship between the two is extremely understanding, very deep, and whatever She's creating, if She finds, if He finds there is some problem or there are people, human beings specially who are trying to obstruct Her work, or even the Gods who are not the deities are trying to express their egos, He is the one who brings forth their destruction. So He is the one who is responsible for the destructive power. of Adi power He is reflected in the hearts of human beings, among all the creations He pulsates. But that pulses, pulsation is the energy of the Primordial Mother. And He can destroy anything that goes against the plans of the Adi Shakti. Adi Shakti is love, She forgives and She loves. She loves her creation. She wants the creation to prosper, to go up to the same level for which it was created. She wants human beings to go to that level where they enter into the Kingdom of God, Kingdom of Sadashiva where there is bliss, there is forgiveness, there's joy. All this is only possible if you have seeking, that you have also a innate desire to be there. This desire within us is reflected as the reflection of the Primordial Mother. Now this desire is there and other mundane desires are also there which stop the progress of your ascent. In Sahaja Yoga we have never tried to overcome the desires by taking sanyasa or running away from the house or for all kinds of things that has been suggested. The first thing that is done is that you get the light of your spirit. Spirit is the reflection of Sadashiva. In that light He shows, He is just showing the path. The spirit is just like a light which is burning and which is showing the path. In that path you yourself become so wise that you walk in the light of wisdom, that you walk in the light of righteousness. Because whatever is destructive is seen through the light of your spirit. You start giving all that is destructive. Nobody has to tell you that give up this, give up that. You yourselfrealize that up this is wrong and we should give up. This was, I should say, my own understanding of human beings because these are the days where people are in complete illusions. They are in a conflict all the time struggling even to exist. Under these circumstances, everything would have failed if you had started with taking a sanyasa and then going to Himalayas and all that. If you have to do this for the masses, something has to be done radical and luckily I've been able to find out a way by which you can get your sprouting, your Realization. Now some people who get Realization have to understand certain things because as you know there are many people who have got Realization. I don't know how many, I don't keep count. But what is lacking in them is surrendering. It's embarrassing to say but is a fact. This is the only condition of

 Original Transcript : English modern Sahaja Yoga that you have to really surrender. If you start using your brain, if you start using other methods to understand Sahaja Yoga, you cannot. You must surrender and as Islam is nothing but surrender, Islam means surrender. And if that surrender is not there it is impossible to establish anyone in the Kingdom of God. Surrender is not that you should give up your family, give up your children, or give up your houses and homes and your properties. Surrendering is here: give up your ego to begin with and then give up your conditionings. For example, the other day I met one gentleman and he is suffering a lot. So I asked him, "Who is your Guru?", so he gave Me one name of a Guru. I said, "He's not done any good to you, will you give him up?" He said, "Tomorrow." I said, "Why not today?" He said, "Today, but I have to throw away all his things. So tomorrow morning I will do it." I said, "All right, do it." "What should I throw away Mother?" I said, "Then all the things with which you worshipped him, throw away, throw away." Then he went around the whole house, found out whatever was there which was used for worshipping him, everything he gathered together, threw in the sea. And then he told the sea that, "I am sorry I have suffered a lot because of this man, now you please don't suffer." 99 So this kind of a very penetrating intelligence if you don't have you cannot give up. One sticks to that. I know of so many who find it so difficult to get rid of their conditionings. That's more difficult than ego. Mundane conditionings and condition schemes that you have. We have first conditioning that supposing you are born in India or England or any place. After Sahaja Yoga I've seen most of the people they suddenly start seeing what's wrong with their countrymen, what's wrong with their country, what's wrong with their religion, what's wrong with the books they were reading. Immediately they start seeing it clearly, that this was the mistake, this is wrong. They all make fun of them. I've seen people all over the world. Nobody says that 'No, no, no, no, because we are English we are the best, we are Russians so we are the best, or we are Indians we are the best'. Immediately they find out what's wrong with them and why these people are not getting Realization. 6- On the other hand they feel such compassion that 'Mother so many people haven't got their Realization. Why shouldn't we try to give them Realization?' This is the double action of this light. Firstly you know that there is light and that you have become the light. So wherever your attention goes you start seeing reality and then you understand that this has been the conditioning of our country, of our society. And then they abhor all that is wrong, they never identify with it. But first thing as I said, is surrendering. In surrendering actually you develop a kind of a state where I would say you become a sanyasi, from within. That means nothing can dominate you, what is a sanyasi is a person who is above everything else. Nothing can stick to him. He just, looks at things and he knows what it is. He may not say, he knows everything and he doesn't do whatever is wrong. He's so detached, that in that detachment only he can see what's wrong with him. He starts seeing his family people, he starts seeing other surroundings, everywhere he starts seeing what's wrong. And he does not identify with them, is very surprising. I have seen it, I mean, I went to Turkey. In Turkey I met one gentleman who was running a big Swiss hotel and he came himselfto Me and said Mother give me Realization. I was surprised because I didn't see this in Switzerland such a anxious personality would ask for Realization, very surprising that in Turkey he should ask for Realization. And I gave him Realization and immediately he said, "I am not going to go back to Switzerland." Just imagine! It's, you see, it is so clear-cut that this light definitely gives you tremendous wisdom and balance. Supposing you are walking and you can't see the road, you may fall down. But if there's little light also you can see it. And this is what Sahaja Yoga has done, is given you very little light. That little light itselfhas been sufficient for you to give up so many things. Now the other side of it is the ego part. Ego is very subtle stuff with human beings. I don't know how they gather it, but they do and some of them have such a gullible ego that with the slightest thing it shoots off. And they get very angry for small things or if they find somebody whom they can dominate, they can dominate also that person. Now this ego when you start seeing it, you just start 3

 Original Transcript : English laughing at yourselfand think that, what's wrong with me. Ego is not like conditioning which is coming from outside but ego is something that comes from within. It can come from anything. Human beings have ego of all kinds of nonsensical things. One day I met one lady and she was very proud and was not even smiling. I said, "What's the matter with this lady, what is she?" So they told Me, "She knows how to make dolls that's why she's so proud." I said, "Eh, to make dolls, she's so proud!" "Yes, you know, she can make dolls, so she's so proud." I said, "What is there, anybody can make dolls, so what is so great?" "No, but she thinks she is very great because she makes dolls." 99 So a man becomes stupid and stupid. That is first sign of a egoistical person. He is so stupid that when you are talking to him, you just get flabbergasted that without paying anything you have got a buffoon before you who is showing all joke, jokes of his buffoonery. Is, eh, something very surprising, Imean, you meet any egoistical person and you just watch him: “I did this, I am, I, I, I.." 99 Then you start seeing the person, what's the matter, he's not even ashamed to say things that should not be said. Then it goes even to the sinful life they lead. They lead a very sinful life, they fond of women, they drink and this and that. Then they start boasting about that also: "I drank that day so much; I had five women around me." They start boasting of that also. So, for a egoistical man there is nothing like shame. He'll go on telling about his nonsensical things and everybody will say 'My God with whom are we talking?" 99 And then, whatever they do they justify. I asked one fellow,"You had such a bad heart attack why do you drink now, give up drinking." He said, "But even this person Kirloskar" - we have one in Poona who is now, I think, 95 – “he drinks". So I said, "You are not Kirloskar, and even if he drinks, what's the use, what is he gaining by that?" "No, no, you see he's very good, because, see, he drinks and he's So successful." "Is he successful without, because of drinking?" But even ordinary reasoning is not there, ordinary reasoning. And in the general way if you see, even if you see the greatest drunkard countries, I have never seen a statue of a man who died of drinking, never. I've not seen in any country people are praising a man because he had ten women or he died of drinking. So far! I don't know how far human beings can go in their ego. Now this ego is spreading very much in modern times where they start saying, "I like this, I don't like this". “What, what you don't like?" "I don't like this kind of a sari, I don't like this kind of clothes, I don't like this." But who are you, you are not going to see yourself, others are going to see. So what difference does it make whether you like it or not? But is very common with young people, to talk like that "I like." And this is a sign ofcomplete destruction. Because ego is not only, is, makes you stupid, you see all these days the way people dress up and we find they are very stupid because "I like it, so what?" Anything they like it, you know, if they want to walk on their heads "I like it, what's wrong?" All kinds of stupidity can be explained through ego. So those who get Realization somehow or other, thank God, see it: This is my ego talking. Then they start laughing at themselves, making fun of themselves: This was my ego. But also in Sahaja Yoga there are people, I said, "Why don't you go and organize?" "Mother because my ego will come up." I said, "What's this?" “My ego will come up so I don't want to organize." How can your ego come up? If you see your ego, supposing you see, er, something is burning, you see it there. How can you get that burning onto yourself? But this is a very subtle type of, er, avoiding work of Sahaja Yoga to say that "No, I'll get into ego." I said, "All right you get into ego, I'll see to it, get in, what happens." So all kinds of things there are which makes a person quite idiotic and stupid. I mean, I don't know how many things I can tell you today. But also I've seen in marriages this is very common. They'll say that, 'Mother, I married this girl at that time but now I don't think I should have been married.' Bah, bah, what, that time, what had happened to you, why didn't you marry at that time? I have to tell you these things because I've been facing all kinds of problems of this stupid, idiotic ego. One has to see it 4

 Original Transcript : English clearly, how this ego is working in me and how it is keeping me down. So when we talk of ascent, we talk of a higher life. We have to become sanyasi like the lotus that comes out of the pond and no water can stay on them. Even the leaves of lotus, no water can stay on them. Just like that we have to become. We don't have to wear Sanyasis dresses, nothing of that. But from inside, a kind of a detached attention is there which immediately locates the problem, within you and without. And also in Sahaja Yoga, you know how to overcome that. It's a very effective, efficient system. But for that again, to achieve that you have to become Shiva within, means detached. As Shiva is completely detached, you have to be detached. And that detachment will give you the same wisdom as Shiva has. Shiva sees, we should say, Sadashiva sees the work of Adi Shakti, silently. He doesn't get proud, he doesn't develop a kind of a ego 'Let me see now what my Iccha Shakti is doing', nothing, he's just watching. But when it comes to destruction, he sees that this part is going to destroy the work, immediately he destroys, removes that portion. In the same way we have to be, we have to see our life itself is a big field. How do we consider ourselves to be? I have seen people talk, "Oh, so what, I am a Sahaja Yogi!" You can't talk like that if you are a Sahaja Yogi. With folded hands you have to say, "I am a Sahaja Yogi". In your behavior, in your talk, in everything, you have to be a person who is extremely humble. If that is not so that means Sahaja Yoga has given you double ego. As it is you know that Shiva is known for his innocence, for his simplicity, his forgiveness. He forgives. He forgives rakshasas; he'll forgive everyone that is his quality. But anybody who goes against the Primordial Mother, he doesn't spare. So this is his, the quality one has to understand, surrendering doesn't mean outside things to be surrendered. What is there, these are all stones, what are you surrendering? Surrendering means cleansing yourselfcompletely, getting completely detached. Detachment is the only way you can rise. Some people get sick, they make such an ado out of it: "I am sick, the whole world should know I am sick, sick, sick, sick, sick." But if you are a Sahaja Yogi, if you just watch, how so, I am sick, all right, let's see. Just like a sport. Just watch. I am sick. So, what's happening now? The temperature is coming nicely, now is going down, just sort of a playful, mirthful attention. Ah, when I came I had temperature, but nobody believes I had temperature. I was so tired in the marriage they said, "You don't look tired." I said, "All right, I'm not tired." In the same way, life also is to be played. It's just a play, and that play has to be seen through the light of wisdom. Nothing is so serious, for Sahaja Yogis nothing is so serious. But he becomes very serious and he makes too much ado about himself. 99 There are lots of things which we have to learn. When we worship Shiva, we praise him. You are this you are that, you are that. When you worship Me also you praise Me, you are this. I am not aware of all that that you say. But you say all right, if you say so, it's all right. You are this you are that, the thousand names of Shiva, thousand name of the Goddess, thousand name of Vishnu. These are their names you are worshipping, what about you people, how many names you can have? Actually in the puja when you take the names of these Shaktis they also get awakened within, no doubt. After puja do feel that way but you don't utilize them. So many people I've seen have come in the puja and you they have got that power within themselves, same powers. But by the time they are out, it's finished, it's gone. So, surrendering has another side: assumption. Assumption that I am a Sahaja Yogi and I can absorb all these powers within myself. So one side is surrendering. Why to surrender? To absorb. Automatically when you are surrendered you absorb. But once you have absorbed, then you should retain and assume within yourself, know that you have these powers. There, where Sahaja Yogis fail more. First time it happened, no Sahaja Yogi would touch anybody raise anybody's Kundalini, this thing, that thing. We had at least fifty Sahaja Yogis by then. I said, "Now what to do, I have prepared these channels and nobody is even raising their fingers. How am I going to work it out?" Very difficult! But once it happened we had a program in Nasik Road and I was staying in Nasik. It's about, think, thirty miles from there. So, we reached halfway and our car failed and nobody no other car was coming, nothing, no support, nothing. I didn't know what to do. But these, all the Sahaja Yogis had I 5

 Original Transcript : English arrived there, and such a big crowd. They started saying, "When is Mataji coming? When is Mataji coming?" Such a pressure! So they said, "It's all right, we'll give you Realization, sit down." And they gave Realization. That's the first time the Sahaja Yogis started knowing that they can give Realization, they can do this, they can do that. They all started after that. So assumption should be there, that I have these powers, I am not going to waste them, I am going to use them, I am going to look after others, I am not going to just keep to myself. This assumption has to come. 6. Once I was traveling by ship and one fellow got caught up in the freeze room and he got pneumonia. So the captain came to Me 'That see this boy has got pneumonia, we have to get some doctor by helicopter.' I said, "Captain, I've given you Realization, you are a doctor." He said "Who, I?" "Yes, you." "If you want, I can go down." "No, no, no, but tell me what to be done." I said "Just go and put your hand on his heart, finished." "I" he said. "Yes, you!" Went down and put his hand and the fellow got all right. He was amazed. He met Me now in the wedding – and he was amazed at himself. "This I can do to anyone?" "Yes, yes, you can!" But if you do not assume, and just sit down meditating, meditating, surrendering ... what's the use? So, you have to do, now after achieving Shiva state you have to start doing the work of Adi Shakti. You should get this desire that we should spread Sahaja Yoga, we have to work it out. But be careful sometimes you might be conditioned, you might be egotistical, watch yourself. With watching you can, I'm sure, you can achieve a lot. We have done, some people who have taken it upon themselves have done it, everywhere, in every country. So the first thing of surrendering is important to reach the state of your Spirit, of Shiva and Sadashiva. But the second state is that you have to now think of others. First it is as they say in Sanskrit is vyashti, means individual gain, you get the individual gain. And then it becomes samashti, means the collective. You have to work it out on collective. People who never even got Realization, nothing of the kind, have been doing so much organization and this and that. While you have got it, so now it is important that you should now extend this light to others. 6.

 HINDI TRANSLATION (English Talk) Scanned from Hindi Chaitanya Lahari चलने लगते हैं। आत्मा के प्रकाश में हर विनाशकारी चीज को आप देख लेते हैं और कर्तव्य परायणता के प्रकाश में चलने लगते हैं। वि्वंसकता को आप त्यागने लगते हैं, किसी को आपको कुछ बताना नहीं पड़ता। आप स्वयं महसूस करते हैं कि यह कार्य गलत है और मुझे यह नहीं करना चाहिए। आजकल क्योंकि मानव भ्रम में फंस गया है अतः उसके बारे में यह मेरी अपनी सुझबूझ थी। मानव हर समय संघर्ष की स्थिति में है यहाँ तक कि अपने अस्तित्व के लिए भी संघर्षरत है। ऐसी स्थिति में यदि सन्यास लेकर आप हिमालय पर चले जाते तो सभी कुछ असफल हो जाता। जनसाधारण के कल्याण के लिए यदि कुछ करना है तो मूलभूत रूप से कोई कार्य होना आवश्यक था और आज हम सदाशिव की पूजा करने वाले हैं। सदा शिव और शिव में यह अन्तर है कि सदाशिव सर्वशक्तिमान परमात्मा है और वे आदि शक्ति की लीला के लेखक हैं। सदाशिव और आदिशक्ति का सम्मिश्रण ऐसा है जैसे चांद और चांदनी का या सुर्य और उसकी धूप का। मानवीय सम्बन्धों या मानवीय विवाहों में हमें ऐसा दिखाई नहीं पड़ता। श्री सदाशिव की इच्छा से आदि शक्ति जो भी कुछ सृष्टि कर रही है श्री सदाशिव इसे देख रहे हैं और इसके साक्षी हैं। पूरे ब्रह्माण्ड एवं पृथ्वी मां को वे साक्षी रूप में देखते हैं। साक्षी भाव उनकी शक्ति है। 'आदि शक्ति' की शक्ति, अतः सर्वव्यापक शक्ति है। सर्वशक्तिमान परमात्मा, 'आदि पिता अपनी इच्छा की अभिव्यक्ति आदि मां के रूप में करते हैं। आदि माँ अपनी शक्ति की अभिव्यक्ति प्रेम के रूप में करती हैं। दोनों (आदि पिता और आदि माँ) के सम्बन्ध बहुत ही सुझ-बुझ से परिपर्ण एवं गहन हैं। जब भी आदि पिता को यह लगता है कि आदि माँ की सृष्टि में कोई समस्या है या कुछ लोग उनके कार्य में विघ्न डाल रहे हैं तो वे उनका विनाश कर देते हैं। विध्वंस शक्ति के लिए वे जिम्मेदार हैं। मानव हृदयों में वे प्रतिबिम्बित हैं। सारी सुष्टि में उन्हीं की धड़कन है पर यह धड़कन आदि-मां की शक्ति है। और जो भी चीज आदि-शक्ति की योजनाओं के विरूद्ध जाए उसका वे विध्वस करते हैं। आदि शक्ति प्रेभ है। अपनी सुष्टि के अपराधों को वे क्षमा करती हैं तथा उसे प्रेम करती हैं। वे चाहती हैं कि उनकी सष्टि समद् हो तथा अपने लक्ष्य को प्राप्त करें वे चाहती हैं कि मानव उस अवस्था तक उन्नत हों जहाँ बह परमात्मा, सदाशिव के साम्राज्य में प्रवेश कर सकें, जहाँ पर आनन्द है जहाँ पर आनन्द, क्षमा एवं सुख शान्ति है। ऐसा तभी सम्भव हो सकता है जब व्यक्ति में जिज्ञासा हो और उस स्थिति को प्राप्त करने की अन्तर्जात इच्छा हो। हमारे अन्दर यह इच्छा आदि माँ के प्रतिबिम्ब के रूप में प्रतिबिम्बित है। इस इच्छा के साथ-साथ मानव में सांसारिक इच्छाएं भी होती हैं जो उत्थान के विकास में बाधा डालती हैं। सहजयोग में सन्यास ले कर या घर का त्याग करके हमने कभी भी इन इच्छाओं को वश में करने का प्रयत्न नहीं किया। इच्छा शक्ति में सौभाग्यवश मैं बह मार्ग खोज सकी जिसके द्वारा आपका अकरण हो सके और आपको आत्मसाक्षात्कार मिल सके। आज बहुत से लोगों को आत्मसाक्षात्कार प्राप्त होता है। उन्हें कुछ बातें समझ लेनी चाहिए। उनमें समर्पण की कमी है। आधुनिक सहजयोग की केवल एक शर्त है कि वास्तविकता में आपको समर्पण करना होगा। अपने मस्तिष्क या अन्य तरीकों के उपयोग से यदि आप सहजयोग को समझना चाहेंगे तो समझ नहीं पाएंगे। समर्फ्ण करना ही होगा। इस्लाम समर्पण के अतिरिक्त कुछ भी नहीं। इस्लाम का अर्थ है समर्पण । समर्पण के अभाव में परमात्मा के साम्राज्य में स्थापित होना असंभव है। समर्पण का अर्थ यह नहीं कि आप अपने परिवार बच्चों और घर का त्याग कर दें। इसका अर्थ है कि आप अपने अहँ एवं बंधनों का त्याग करें। उदाहरणार्थ मैं एक व्यक्ति से मिली जो बहुत कष्ट में था। मैंने उससे पृछा कि तुम्हारा गुरु कौन है? उसने गुरु का नाम बताया। मैंने कहा, "उसने तुम्हारा कोई हित नहीं किया। क्या तम उसे छोड़ दोगे? क्या तुम उसे त्याग दोगे?" उसने कहा "कल"। मैंने पुछा "आज क्यों नहीं।" उसने कहा "आज"। लेकिन मैंने फोटो आदि फेंकने हैं और यह कार्य मैं कल सुबह करूगा। उसने पृछा कि वह कौन-कौन सी वस्तुएं फैंके, मैंने उसे बताया कि ज़िन वस्तुओं से वह उस गुरू की पूजा करता था वे सारी फेंक दें। उसने वे सारी वस्तुएं समुद्र में फेंक दी और समुद्र से कहा।"मुझे खेद है। इस व्यक्ति के हाथों मैंने बहुत कष्ट उठाए है कृपया आप कष्ट न उठाएं। उसके अन्दर इस प्रकार का सूक्ष्म विवेक था। इस प्रकार से आप नहीं त्याग सकते. इनसे चिपके रहते हैं। सर्वप्रथम आपको आत्मा का प्रकाश प्राप्त हो जाता है। आत्मा सदाशिव का प्रतिबिम्ब है, यह जलती हुई उस मशाल की तरह है जो मार्ग दर्शन करती है। इस मार्ग पर आप स्वयं इतने वद्धिमान हो जाते हैं कि आप स्वयं विवेक के प्रकाश में मैं बहुत से ऐसे लोगों को जानती हैं जिन्हें अपने बन्धनों से

 Hindi Translation (English Talk) छुटकारा पाना बहुत कठिन लगता है। यह कार्य अहम् से मुक्ति किसी भी चीज से यह आ सकता है। मानव को सभी प्रकार की मुर्खता पूर्ण बातों का अहम् है। एक दिन मैं एक स्त्री से मिली जो भारत में जन्में हैं। सहजयोग में आते ही लोग अपने देश, इतनी घमंडी थी कि मस्कराती तक न थी। मैंने पुछा कि इस स्त्री देशवासियों धर्म एवं ग्रन्थों की कमियों को देखना शुरू कर देते हैं की क्या समस्या है? उन्होंने मझे बताया कि यह गुड़ियाँ (डोल्स) और जान लेते हैं कि गलती क्या थी। कोई भी यह नहीं कहता कि बनाना जानती है जिसके कारण इसे इतना घमंड है। गडियां तो "क्योंकि हम अग्रेज, रूसी या भारतीय हैं अतः हम ही सर्वश्रेष्ठ कोई भी बना सकता है। व्यक्ति मुर्ख हो जाता है। घमंडी व्यक्ति हैं। वे तरन्त जान लेते हैं कि रूकावट क्या है और यह लोग की पहली पहचान है कि वह "मैं" ग्रस्त हो जाता है। "मैंने यह आत्मसाक्षात्कार को क्यों नहीं पा रहे। दूसरी ओर उन्हें उन लोगों कार्य किया""मैं ऐसा हूँ। ऐसी बाते कहते हुए उसे लज्जा भी पर बहुत दया आती है जिन्हें आत्मसाक्षात्कार प्राप्त नहीं हुआ। नहीं आती। यहां तक कि वह पापमय जीवन व्यतीत करता है। क्यों न हम उन्हें आत्मसाक्षात्कार देने का प्रयत्न करें।" प्रकाश ऐसे लोग पर स्त्री गमन और मदिरापान आदि के शौकीन होते के यह दो कार्य हैं। सर्वप्रथम आप जान लेते हैं कि प्रकाश है और है। इन बातों की वे शेखी बघारते हैं। घमंडी व्यक्ति के लिए लज्जा नाम की कोई चीज नहीं रह जाती। अपने मुर्खता पूर्ण कार्यों की वह डींगे मारता रहता है। और अपने किये को बह सदा उचित देश और समाज के कौन-कौन से बन्धन हैं। सारी त्रटियों से वे ठहराता है। मैंने एक व्यक्ति से पूछा" आपको इतना भयंकर पाने से भी अधिक कठिन है। हमारा पहला बन्धन यह है कि हम आप प्रकाश बन गये हैं। अतःजहाँ भी आपका चित्त जाता है आप वास्तविकता देखने लगते हैं और तब आप समझ लेते हैं कि हमारे 1. हृदय घात हुआ है फिर भी आप शराब क्यों पीते हो? शराब पीना छोड़ दो" उसने यह कह कर अपने किये को उचित ठहराया कि फलां चोटी का उद्योगपति ९५ वर्ष की आय में भी शराब पीता वह पीता है इसीलिए सफल है। तो क्या वह शराब पीने घृणा करने लगते हैं। पर इसके लिए समर्पण प्रथम आवश्यकता है। समर्पण से आपके अन्दर एक ऐसी स्थिति विकसित हो जाती है जो आन्तरिक रूप से सन्यासी बना देती है। इसका अर्थ यह है कि है कोई भी चीज आप पर प्रबल नहीं हो सकती। सन्यासी व्यावेत सभी चीज़ों से ऊपर होता है। उसे कोई चीज पकड़ नहीं सकती। वस्तुओं को देखने मात्र से वह उन्हें जान जाता है। गलत काम वह नहीं करता। कहे या न कहे वह हर चीज की समझता है। वह डो या जो शराब पीकर मर गया हो। इतना निल्लाप होता है कि अपनी निर्लिपता में ही वह जान जाता है कि गलत क्या है। अपने परिवार को वह देखने लगता है। दसरे लोगों को बह देखने लगता है, गलतियों को वह देखने लगता है है, मुझे यह पसन्द हैं यह पसन्द नहीं। यह पूर्ण विनाश के परन्तु किसी भी चीज से वह लिप्त नहीं होता। मैं टर्की में एक चिन्ह हैं क्योंकि अहम् महा मुर्ख है। जिस प्रकार के वेशभषा भद्र पुरुष से मिली। उसने मुझ से आत्मसाक्षात्कार मांगा। मुझे लोग धारण करते है उसी से ही पता लगता है कि वे कितने मुर्ख हैरानी हुई क्योंकि स्विटजरलैंड में मझे यह चीज दिखाई न दी हैं। कहते हैं मुझे यह पसन्द है, इसमें क्या खराबी है। थी। आत्म साक्षात्कार प्राप्त करते ही वह कहने लगा कि"मैं अब भी प्रकार से जब व्यक्ति को आत्म साक्षात्कार प्राप्त हो जाता है स्विटजरलैंड वापस नहीं जाऊँगा"। यह इतना स्पष्ट है और यह ता बह इस मुखेता को देख सकता।"यह मेरा अहम् बोल रहा प्रकाश वास्तव में आपको महान विवेक एवं संतुलन प्रदान करता है। तब वह स्वयं पर हसने लगते हैं और इसका मजाक बनाने है। मान लो कि आप चल रहे हैं परन्त यदि आप सड़क को नहीं लगते है। सहयोग में भी कुछ लोग हैं। कछ लोगों से जब मैं देख सकते तो आप गिर सकते है। परन्त थोड़ा सा प्रकाश भी पूछती हैं कि वे जाकर कार्यक्रमों का आयोजन क्यों नहीं करते तो यदि हो तो आप देख सकते हैं। सहजयोग ने यही किया है। इसने वे कहते हैं, "श्री माता जी इससे मेरा अहम् बढ़ जाएगा"। यदि आपको थोड़ा सा प्रकाश दे दिया है। इस थोड़े से प्रकाश के सहारे आप आपने अहम् को देखते है तो वह कैसे बढ़ सकता है? मान लो आप बहुत सी बुराइयों को त्याग सके है। ै" के कारण ही कामयाब है? तनिक सी भी समझ नहीं है। आप देश के किसी ऐसे सफल व्यक्ति को देखते है जो शराब पीता है। पर शराब पीकर मरने वाले व्यक्ति कि स्थिति को नहीं देखते। कहीं भी ऐसे व्यक्ति की सराहाना नहीं होती जिसकी दस पत्नियां आधुनिक समय में यह अहम् फैल गया है। लोग कहने लगते किसी आप किसी जलती हुई चीज को देख रहे है तो कैसे आप इससे स्वयं को जलने देगे? यह कहना कि 'सहजयोग के कार्य करने से अहम बढ़ जाएगा' इस कार्य में छूटकार पान का अत्यन्त अहम् इसका दूसरा भाग है। मानव के लिए अहम् अति सुक्ष्म है कुछ लोगों में इतना सुक्ष्म अहम् होता है कि जरा सी बात से यह आसमान छुने लगता है। छोटी-छोटी चीजों के लिए वे नाराज हो जाते है या कोई ऐसा व्यक्ति वह खोज लेते है जिस पर वे शासन कर सकें। जब आप अहम् को देखने लगे हैं तो इस पर हंसे और सोचे कि मझे में क्या कमी है। अहम् बन्धन जैसा नहीं है क्योंकि बन्धन बाहर से आते हैं और अहम् आन्तरिक है। मेरा सुक्ष्म तरीका है। विवाहो में भी यह आम बात है। लोग कहते है" श्री माना जी उम समय मैने इस लड़की से शादी कर ली पर अब मझे लगता है कि यह विवाह मझे नहीं करना चाहिए था।" उस समय आपको क्या हुआ था? मझ यह सारी बाते आपका बतानी पड़ रही है 8.

 Hindi Translation (English Talk) हमें बहुत सी बातें सीखनी है। जब हम शिव की पूजा करते हैतो उनका गणगान करते हैं । देवी, शिव और विष्णुजी के सहस्त्र नाम ले कर हम उनकी पूजा करते हैं। लेकिन लोगों के कितने नाम हो सकते हैं। वास्तव में पूजा में जब आप नाम लेते हैं तो वे जागृत हो जाते हैं। पूजा के बाद आपको ऐसा महसूस होता है। परन्तु आप उनका लाभ नहीं उठाते। जो भी लोग शक्ति को प्राप्त करते हैं । परन्तु ज्यों ही वे पूजा से निकलते हैं सब कुछ समाप्त हो जाता क्योंकि इस मुर्खता पूर्ण अहम् की समस्या ओं का मैं सामना करती रही हैं। व्यक्ति को स्पष्ट देखना है कि किस प्रकार उसमें यह अहम् कार्यरत है और उसके पतन का कारण है। उत्थान की बात करते हुए हम उच्च जीवन की बात करते है। हमें सन्यासी सम बनना होगा, तालाब में से जन्में एक कमल की तरह से जिस पर पानी नहीं ठहर सकता। कमल के पत्तों पर भी पानी नहीं ठहर सकता। बिना गेरुए वस्त्र पहने या दिखावा किये हमें ऐसा बनना होगा। परन्तु अन्दर से एक निलिप्त चित होना चाहिए जो तुरन्त आपके अन्दर की समस्याओं को देख सके। सहजयोग के जरिये आप जानते है कि अत्यन्त प्रभावशाली तरीके से किस प्रकार इस पर काबू पाया जा सकता है। इस स्थिति को प्राप्त करने के लिए आपको शिव सा। साक्षी बनना होगा, शिव पूर्णतः निर्लिप्त हैं। यह नि्लिप्सा आपको शिव जैसा विवेक प्रदान करेगी। में आते हैं वे पूजा है। समर्पण का एक अन्य पहलू भी है। यह मान लेना कि मैं एक सहजयागी हैँ और सारी शक्तियों को मैं अपने अन्दर आत्मसात कर सकता हूं एक पहलू समर्पण का है। समर्पण किस लिए करें? आत्मसात करने के लिए स्वतः ही जब आप समर्पित हो जाते हैं तो आप आत्मसात करते हैं। एक बार आत्मसात करने के पुश्चात आपको चाहिए कि उन शक्तियों को अपने अन्दर बनाए रखें, ग्रहण करे और विश्वस्त हों कि आपके अन्दर यह शक्तियां है। यहां आ कर सहजयोगी असफल हो जाते हैं। सहजयोग की शुरूआत में तो कोई सहजयोगी न किसी और को छने के लिए भी तैयार था और न ही किसीकी कण्डलिनी उठाने के लिए तैयार था । मैंने सोचा कि ये माध्यम मैंने तैयार किये हैं । पर इनमें से तो हमारा अपना जीवन बहुत बड़ा क्षेत्र है तो हमें सोचना चाहिए कोई अपना हाथ उठाने के लिए भी तैयार नहीं। किस प्रकार मेैं कि हम कैसे हों मैंने लोगों को यह कहते सुना है"क्या हुआ, मैं यह कार्य करूंगी? नासिक क्षेत्र में हमने एक कार्यक्रम किया। मैं एक सहजयोगी हूँ।" यदि आप सहजयोगी हैं तो हमें इस तरह से नासिक में थी और उनका कार्यक्रम यहां से तीस मील दूर था। बात नहीं करनी चाहिए। हाथ जोड़कर नम्रतापूर्वक आपको यह आधे रास्ते पर जब हम पहुंचे तो हमारी कार खराब हो गयी। कहना है कि मैं एक सहजयोगी हैं। अपनी बातचीत में और सारे सहजयोगी कार्यक्रम में पहंच चुके थे और वहां आई हुई व्यवहार में आपको अत्यंत नम्र व्यक्ति होना है। यदि ऐसा नहीं है जनता बहुत परेशान हो रही थी। तब सहजयोगियों ने कहा कि तो इसका अर्थ ये है कि सहजयोग ने आपको दुगना अह दिया है। "हम आपको आत्मसाक्षात्कार देंगे।" उन्होंने आत्मसाक्षात्कार आप जानते हैं कि शिव अपनी अवोधिता, सहजता और दिया और यह पहला समय था जब सहजयोगियों ने जाना कि वे क्षमाशीलता के कारण प्रसिद्ध हैं। वे राक्षसों को भी क्षमा करते हैं। आत्मसाक्षात्कार दे सकते हैं। इसके बाद सबने आत्मसाक्षात्कार ये उनका गण है परन्तु जो भी व्यक्ति आदिशक्ति के विरूद्ध देना शुरू कर दिया। मान लें कि आपमें ये शक्तियां हैं। मैं इन जाता है उसे बे क्षमा नहीं करते। यह गण व्यक्ति को समझना शक्तियों को व्यर्थ नहीं करूंगा। मैं इनका उपयोग करूंगा। एक बार मैं समुद्री जहाज में यात्रा कर रही थीं। वहां बर्फ जमाने वाले सदा-शिव चुपचाप आदि शक्ति के कार्य को देखते हैं। अहम् विकसित नहीं होता है जो यह कहें कि "देखो अब मेरी इच्छा शक्ति क्या कर रही है। बह मात्र दृष्टा है। परन्तु जब वे विनाश करन पर आते हैं तो देखते हैं कि यह भाग पूरी सृष्टि का विनाश कर देगा, तो वह तुरन्त ही उस भाग को समाप्त कर देते हैं। हमें भी इसी प्रकार करना है। उनमें चाहिए। समपण का अर्थ यह नहीं कि बाह्य वस्तओं का समर्पण कर कमरे में एक व्यक्ति पकड़ गया और उसे निरमोनिया हो गया। दें। समर्पण का अर्थ है कि स्वयं को पूर्णतः शुद्ध कर पू्णतयाकिमोदियां हो गया है और हमें हैलिकॉप्टर से डाक्टर लाना निर्लिप्त हो जाएं। निलिप्सा उत्थान का एक मात्र मार्ग है। कुछ लोग बीमार हो जाते हैं और इस बीमारी को बहुत ही बढ़ा चढ़ा होगा। मैंने उसे कहा कि मैंने तुम्हें आत्मसाक्षात्कार दिया है. अब कर कहते हैं। यदि आप सहजयोगी हैं तो मात्र अपने चित्त से देखें तुम भी एक डाक्टर हो। आप जाकर अपना हाथ उसके हृदय पर कि आप बीमार हैं। यह अत्यंत लीलामय एवं प्रमोदमय चित्त है। जब मैं यहां आई तो मुझे बुखार था परन्त कोई विश्वास नहीं ठीक हो गया। कैप्टन स्वयं पर हैरान था। यदि आप अपनी करता। विवाह में मैं बहुत थक गई थी लेकिन सब कहते थे शक्तियों को ग्रहण नहीं करते, बस बैठकर ध्यान ही करते हैं तो आप थके हुए नहीं लगते। इसी प्रकार जीवन की लीला करनी उसका क्या लाभ हैं? है। जीवन मात्र एक लीला है और ये लीला विवेक के प्रकाश में देखी जानी चाहिए कुछ भी इतना गंभीर नहीं है। सहजयोगियों कार्य करना होगा। आपके अन्दर इच्छा जागृत होनी चाहिए कि के लिए कुछ भी इतना गंभीर नहीं है। कप्तान मेरे पास आया और कहने लगा कि इस लड़के को निर्मानियां हो गया है और हमें हैलिकॉप्टर से डाक्टर लाना रख दो। उसने ऐसा ही किया और वह निमोनिया ग्रस्त व्यकित शिव की अवस्था प्राप्त करने के बाद आपको आदि शक्ति का हम सहजयोग को फैलाएं, इसे कार्यानि्वित करें। परन्तु सावधान

 Hindi Translation (English Talk) 'समष्टि (सामूहिक) बन जाती है। अर्थात आपने इसे सामूहिकता पर कार्यन्वित करना है। जिन लोगों को कभी आत्मसाक्षात्कार प्राप्त नहीं हुआ बे भी बहुत आयोजन करते रहे हैं। पर आपको तो आत्मसाक्षात्कार प्राप्त हो चुका है। अब ये आवश्यक है कि यह प्रकाश आप दूसरे लोगों को भी दें। रहें कि कुछ समय तक आप बन्धन एवं अहम्ग्रस्त हो सकते हैं। स्वयं को सावधानी पूर्वक देखें। सावधानी पूर्वक देखने से आप बहुत कुछ प्राप्त कर सकते हैं, कुछ लोगों ने, देश-देश में, इस कार्य की जिम्मेदारी ली है। समर्पण में पहला कार्य शिव और सदा शिव रूपी अपनी आत्मा की अवस्था को पहुँचना है। दूसरी अवस्था अन्य लोगों के बारे में सोचना है। प्रथम यह व्यष्टि (व्यक्तिगत लाभ) है जो बाद में परमात्मा आपको धन्य करें। 10

 MARATHI TRANSLATION (English Talk) Scanned from Marathi Chaitanya Lahari (परम पूज्य श्री माताजीनी केलेला उपदेश) आज तुम्ही श्री सदाशिवांची पूजा करणार आहात. श्री सदाशिव आणि इच्छाशक्तीमध्ये आदिमाता म्हणून व्यक्त करतात आणि आदिमाता त्यांची शक्ति प्रेमातून व्यक्त करतात. त्यांचे नाते श्री शिव यांच्यातील फरक हा आहे की श्री सदाशिव सर्व अतिशय समजुतीचे आणि गहन आहे त्यांच्या निर्मितीमधे शक्तिमान परमेश्वर असून आदि मातेच्या लीला नाट्याचे जर काही अडचण आहे अथवा त्यांच्या कार्यात अडथळे ।म म लेंखक आहेत. श्री सदाशिव आणि आदिमाता आदिशक्ति आणणारे लोक असतील तर ते त्यांचा (परमपिता) विनाश यांची एकात्मता चंद्र आणि त्याचा प्रकाश किंवा सूर्य आणि घडवून आणतात. सूर्यप्रकाश यांच्या प्रमाणे आहे. मानवी विवाहांच्यात अथवा मामवी नात्यांच्यामधे अशा प्रकारचे संबंध आपण समजू विनाशकारी शक्ति ते सांभाळतात. मानवाच्या हृदयात ते प्रतिबिंबीत होतात. ते सर्व सुष्टितरूपंदित होतात पण ते शकत नाही. आदिशक्ति जे काही निर्माण करीत आहेत ते श्री स्पंदन आदिमातेची शक्ति असते. आणि आदिमातेच्या सदाशिवांची इच्छा आहे. श्री सदाशिव त्याला साक्षी आहेत. योजनेच्या विरोधात काहीही असले तरी त्याचा ते नाश करु आणि ते पहात असतात त्यावेळी ते त्याला साक्षी असतात. शकतात. आदिशक्ती प्रम आहेत. त्या क्षमा करतात. त्या ज्याची निर्मिती करतात.त्याच्यावर त्यांचे प्रेम असते. त्यांची ते सर्व विश्वाचे साक्षी असून ते वा पृथ्वीमातेचेही साक्षी आहेत सर्व सूष्टींची निर्मिती आदिशक्ती करीत असते, त्यांची शक्ति इच्छा असते की त्यांच्या निर्मितीची उन्नति व्हावी व ज्याच्या साठी त्यांना निर्माण केले आहे त्या पातळीपर्यंत त्यांनी उत्क्रांत साक्षीस्वरूपत्याची आहे. अशी आदिशक्तीची शक्ति सर्वव्यापि आहे. व्हावे. त्यांची इच्छा असते की ज्या पातळीवर श्री सर्व शक्तिमान परमेश्वर, आदिपिता आपली सदाशिवांच्या म्हणजे परमेश्वरी राज्यात प्रवेश करता येईल 11

 MarathiTranslation (English Talk) जेथे ईश्वरी आनंद, क्षमाशीलता, आनंद आहेत त्या पातळीपर्यंत मानवाने जावे. तुमच्यामधे मुमूक्षत्व असेल, त्या व्हायला हवे. तुम्ही तुमच्या वुध्दीचा व इतर पध्दतिंचा सहज योग समजण्यास उपयोग करु लागाल तर ते जमणार नाही पातळीवर जाण्याची अंगभूत इच्छा असेल तरच ते सर्व शक्य तुम्ही शरणागत व्हायलाच हवे. इस्लाम याचा अर्थ शरण जाणे होईल. आपल्यातील ही इच्छा आदिमातेचे प्रतिबिंब आहे. आता शरणागति नसल्यास परमेश्वरी राज्यात प्रस्थापित होणे अशक्य आहे. शरणागति याचा अर्थ तुम्ही प्रपंच , कुटुंब घर वगैरे सोडावे हा नाही तर शरणागति म्हणजे तुमच्या ही इच्छा आहे आणि आपल्या प्रगतिच्या आड येणार्या कुय भौतिक स्वरुपाच्या इच्छा पण आहेत, सहजयोगात, संन्यास घेऊन अथवा घर सोडून जाऊन या इच्छेवर मात करण्याचा अहंकाराचा व संस्कारांचा त्याग करणे. उदा.मला एक गृहस्थ भेटले त्यांना फारच त्रास होता. मी "तुमचे गुरू कोण असे विचारल्यावर त्यांनी एका गुरूचे नांव सांगीतले, मी म्हणाले प्रयत्न आपण कधी केला नाही. प्रथम तुमच्या आत्म्याचा प्रकाश तुम्ही मिळविता आत्मा श्री सदाशिवांचे प्रतिविव आहे. आत्मा संदिव जळत राहून त्याने तुमचे काही भले नाही तेव्हा तुम्ही त्यांला सोडणार का?" ते म्हणाले "उद्या" मी म्हणाले " आज का नाही 16 मार्गदर्शन करणाऱ्या प्रकाशा प्रमाणे आहे. त्या मार्गावर स्वतः त्यांनी सागीतले "मला त्यांचे फोटो वगैरे फेकून द्यायचे तुम्हीच इतके सूज्ञ होता की मार्गक्रमण करता. तुम्ही धर्माच्या प्रकाशात चालता कारण त्या सूज्ञतेच्या प्रकाशात तुम्हीं आहेत.तेव्हा मी उद्या करीन ".त्यांनी विचारले की काय काय टाकून बायचे त्यावर मी सांगीतले की ज्याचा उपयोग त्यांची तुमच्या आत्म्याच्या प्रकाशात विनाशकारी गोष्टी दिसन येतात. सर्व विनाशकारी जे काही आहे त्याचा त्याग करु पुजा करण्यास तुम्ही करीत होता ते सर्व टाकून द्या. मग त्यांनी सर्व समुद्रात टाकून दिले व त्यास सांगीतले" क्षमा लागला , हे सोडा, ते सोडा असे कोणी सांगावे लागत नाही. करा, या माणसामुळे मी इतका त्रास काढला पण तुम्ही नका तुमच्या स्वतःच्या लक्षात येते की है चुकीचे आहे आपण करु सहन करू अशी त्यांची कुशाग्र वुध्दी होती.सगळ्यांना सोडणे नये. माणसांच्या या बद्दल माझी ही समजूत होती. कारण सध्याच्या दिवसात लोक पूर्ण पणे भ्नांतिम्ध आहेत. का्यम मेत नाहीत असे अनेक लोक मला माहित आहेत. अहकार जमत नाही,लोक धरून बसतात ज्यांना आपले संस्कार सोडता ते संघर्षात असतात. त्यांना जगण्यासाठी झगडावे लागते. सोडण्यापेक्षा ते अधीक कठीण आहे. अनेक प्रकारचे संस्कार अशा परिस्थितीत तुम्ही संन्यास घेऊन हिमालयात गेला आसतात,आपला पहिला संस्कार असतो की आपला भारतात असता तर सगळेच विधडले असते. असंख्यांच्यासाठी जर जन्म झाला आहे.सहज यौगात आल्यावर लोकांच्या एकदम समजते की त्यांच्या देशात. धर्मात काय चुकते.लगेच त्यांना तुम्हाला करायचे असेल तर काहीतरी मुळातूनच करायला हवे होते आणि सदैवाने , तुम्हाला अंकुरित होऊन साक्षातकारी स्पष्ट दिसून येते की "हे चुकले." असे कोणी म्हणत नाही की आम्ही भारतीय आहेत , इंग्रज आहोत., म्हणून आम्ही होता येईल असा मार्ग शाधून काढणे मला शक्य झाले . आत्मसाक्षातकारी लोकांनी काही गोष्टी समजून घ्यायला सर्वात चांगले आहोत, उलट इतक्या लोकांना अद्याप हव्यात. कारण साक्षातकार मिळालेले अनेक लोक आहेत. आत्मसाक्षातकार मिळला नाही याची त्यांना करूणा वाटते. त्यांच्यात काय करमी असेल तर शरणागति, आधुनिक सहज आणि "आपण त्यांना आत्मसाक्षात्कार का देऊ नये, " असे योगाची ही एकच अट आहे की तुम्हाला खरोखर शरणागत 12

 MarathiTranslation (English Talk) वाटते है प्रकाशाचे दुहेरी कार्य होय दुसर्या वाजूस अहंकार असतो.मणसाच्या कडे अहंकार ही फार सूक्ष्म गोष्ट असते. काहींच्या जबळ इतका अस्थिर अहंकार असतो की थोड्याश्या गोष्टीमुळे तो उफाळून वर येतो. आणि थोड्याश्या गोष्टींच्यामुळे सुध्दा ते संतापतात. प्रथम तुम्हाला समजते की प्रकाश आहे आणि तुम्ही प्रकाश झाले आहात. तेव्हा तुमचे चित्त जाईल तेथे तुम्हाला सत्य दिस लागते आणि तुम्हाला कळते की आपल्या देशाचे, अथवा हुकूमत गाज़विता येईल अशी व्यक्ति शौधून काढतात. आपल्या समाजाचे हे संस्कार होते. मग जे चुकीचे आहे ते त्यांना नकोसे वाटते. ते त्याच्याशी ते समचित्र होत नाहीत हा अहंकार दिसू लागतो तेव्हा तुम्ही हसू लागता आणि माझ्या जवळ काय विवडले आहे त्याचा विचार करता अहंकार हा तर प्रथम शरणागति होते. संस्कारांच्या प्रमाणे वाहेरून येत नाही तर तो आतूनच येतो. द्र तो कशामुळेही येतो. माणसाला अनेक प्रकारच्या निरर्थक गोष्टींचाही अहंकार होतो. एक दिवस मला एक महिला भेटली. ती इतकी गर्विष्ठ होती की, ती हसतसुध्दा नव्हती मी विचारले "या स्त्रिची काय अडचण आहे ? लोक म्हणाले " ती शरणागतिमधे तुम्ही अशी स्थिती विकसित करता की त्यात तुम्ही आंतरवामी संन्यासी होता,याचा अर्थ तुमच्यावर कोणीच प्रभुत्व चालवू शकत नाही. संन्यासी व्यक्ति इतर प्रत्येक गोष्टीच्या वर असते त्याला काहीच चिकटू शकत बाहुल्या वनविते म्हणुन तिला गर्व आहे.". त्यात विशेष काय आहे? कोणीही वाहुल्या बनवू शकते. व्यक्ति अधीक अधीक नाही.केवळ पाहूनच त्याला काय आहे ते समजते तो चुकीचे काहीच करीत नाही बोलून दाखवित नसला तरी त्याला प्रत्येक मूर्ख होत जाते, अहंकारी व्यक्तिची पहिली खूण ही असते तो मी' ने इतका वेढला जातो मी है केले. मी ते केले " गोष्ट समजते तो इतका अनासक्त असतो की अनासक्तीमधेच त्याला चुकीचे काय आहे ते दिसू लागते, तो स्वतःच्या जे बोलू नये ते बौलण्याची लाज पण त्याला वाटत नाही. तो कुटुंबाला पाहु लागताच, दुसर्यांना पाहू लागताच त्याला पापमय जीवन जगत असेल. अशा लोकांना स्वैराचाराची चुकीचे काय आहे ते समजते तो कशाशीच समचित्त होऊन दारू पिण्याची पण आवड असते. मग ते त्याच्या वढाया मारु रहात नाही. मी तुर्कस्तानला गेले होते त्यावेळी एका स्थिस लागतात. अहंकारी माणसाला लाज नावाचा प्रकार नसतो. तो गृहस्थाला भेटले. त्याने माइन्याकडे आत्मसाक्षात्कार मारगीतला, त्याच्या निरर्थक गोष्टींबहल सांगू लागतो. ते लोक त्यांचा स्वित्झर्लंडमधे हे मी पाहिले नसल्याने मलाआश्चर्य वाटले कृत्यांचे समर्थन करु लागतात. मी एका माणसाला विचारले आत्मसाक्षात्कारानंतर लगेच तो गृहस्थ म्हणाला "मी परत " तुला इतका मोठा हार्ट अॅटॅक आला होता तरी तू दारू का जाणार नाही" हे स्पष्ट आहे की हा प्रकाश तुम्हाला निश्चितच पितोस ? दारु पिणे बंद कर." त्याने समर्थन केले की " एक प्रचंड सुज्ञता आणि संतुलन देतो.समजा, तुम्ही चालत आहात मोठा कारखानदार वयाच्या ९५ या वर्षी सुध्दा दारू पितो आणि तुम्हाला रस्ता दिसत नाही तर तुम्ही पडाल सुध्दा.पण ""दारू पिण्यामुळे व दारू पिती व म्हणून तो यशस्वी आहे. थोडासा जरी प्रकाश असेल तरी तुम्हाला दिस लागेल. सहज तो एवढा यशस्वी झाला आहे ?" पण साधा विचार नाही योगाने हेच केले आहे .त्याने तुम्हाला थोडा प्रकाश दिला आहे कितिही माठा दारूवाज असू द्या पण त्याचा कोणी पुतळा ता थोड़ा प्रकाशच तुम्हाला अनेक गोष्टींचा त्याग करण्यास ऊभा केला आहे का ? कोणत्याही देशात दहा बायका पुरेसा आहे. 13

 MarathiTranslation (English Talk) श्रीशिवांच्या बह्दल तुम्हाला बरेच ज्ञान आहे. पण शिवांचे कोणी अहंकार दाखवितो तिसरे कोणी स्वतःचे महत्व दाखविते, सहज योगात आल्या नंतर सुध्दा लोक असा तत्व काय आहे ते तुम्हाला माहित हवे. ते क्षमा करतात. मान सन्मान सुख, दुःख कशाचाही त्यांना स्पश होत नाही. ते वेडेपणा दाखवितात सहज योगात आल्यावर प्रथम शिव सर्वाच्या पासून दूर आहेत. श्री आदिशंकराचार्यांनी म्हटल्या स्थितीला प्राप्त व्हायला हवे, म्हणजे संपूर्ण निरीच्छपणा. प्रमाणे चिदानंद रुपः शिवोहं शिवोहं. आदिशंकराचार्यांच्या त्याच्यासाठी शरणागति महत्वाची. वेळी त्यांनी शिवोहं सांगीतले, याचा अर्थ मी शिव आहे , ती पूर्ण शरण गेल्यावर तुम्ही शिव आणि शक्ति यांच्यात स्थिती मिळवायची प्रथम वैयक्तिक प्रयत्न त्या नंतर पुढच्या येऊ शकता, शिवांना कशाचाच स्पर्श होत नाही त्यांना स्थितीत आदिशक्तिंच्या प्रमाणे कार्यशील व्हायचे या दोन अहंकारही नसतो व संस्कारही नसतात. त्यांच्या लग्नासाठी स्थिती एक झाल्या नाहीत तर शिवांचे स्थान मिळवून काय ते वैलावर आरुढ होउन आले होते. पार्वतिलासुध्दा लाज फायदा? जर शिवच प्रत्येक गोष्ट करु शकले असते तर बाटली की माझा नवरा मुलगा असा काय आला आहे! पण त्यानी हे सर्व निर्मितीचे कार्य कशाला केले असते. त्या शव ते स्वतःच्या समजूतीत रहातात. त्यांच्या वन्हाडात अनेक स्थितीपर्यंत तुम्ही जायला हवे. जिथे तुम्ही पूर्णपणे निरिच्छ विचित्र दिसणारें लोक होते. कारण कोण कसा आहे. कोणचे होता. मग कोणत्याही गोष्टीचा तुम्हाला त्रास होत नाही. कपडे कोणी घातलेत, कोणासारखे कोण दिसतो . याची लोकांनी मला सांगीतले की एक सहज योगी पैसे खातो दुसरा त्यांना जाणीव होत नाही. त्यांच्या या गोष्टी लक्षातच येत 14

 MarathiTranslation (English Talk) नाहीत ते निरिच्छ होऊन वसले आहेत. ते अवोधित आहेत कोणतीही गोष्ट तुम्हाला फर्सविणारी असते. म्हणून बाह्य कारण निरुपयोगी गोष्टी त्यांच्या डोक्यात जात नाहीत. जगात एवंढे चित्त घालणों चुकिचे असते. अनेक लोक कुणाच्या तरी घरी जाऊन विनदिक्कतपणे जगात, विशेषतः आपल्या देशात पाश्चात्य संस्कृति त्यांच्या गालीचाला वगैरे नावे ठेवतात. पण तुम्ही गालीचाला कशी येत आहे ते आपल्याला दिसते लोकांची दृष्टि किती भेटा्यला आलात का माणसाला? कोणी स्त्री. दुसरीच्या साडी वाह्यात आहे ते पण आपल्याला दिसते. इंग्लंडला जिथे श्री वर टीका करते. तुम्हाला माणसाला भेटायचे असते त्याच्या पीसचा सूट घालतात तिथे गांधीजी धोतर नेसून गेले. चित्त तत्वाला भेटा, माणूस काय आहे े समजून घ्या. वाह्यातून आकर्षन घेण्यास लोक असे कपडे परिधान करतात की काय पहाणे ही शिंवांची पध्दत नाही. लोक कारय म्हणतील, मी ते पहायला हवे. पण माणूस जेव्हा आतून मुक्त होतो तेव्हा कसे रहावे, हे व्हायला पाहिजे वगैरशी त्यांचा संबंध नसतो. सत्याशिवाय इतर सर्व गोष्टींचे त्याला महत्व वाटत नाही. त्यांची पहिली पत्नि वारली तेव्हा तिचे मृत शरीर ते पाठीवर सत्याला ओळखणे हे शिवांचे पहिले तत्व आहे. तेव्हाच फक्त घेऊन गेले. कोण तसे करील? पध्दति असाधारण आहेत. आपण आदिशक्तिचे कार्य करु शकतो. कोणी काही म्हणाले पण त्यांचे तत्व त्यांच्या मते काय वरोबर व काय चूक आहे., किंवा अपशब्द उच्चारले तरी काय झाले ? पण आतले तत्व ते समजले पाहिजे. त्यांनी त्यांची पत्नि रावणाला देऊन स्पष्ट असावे. दुसर्यांच्या मधे तत्व विघडले असले तरी काय झाले? तम्ही ठीक करू शकता. तुम्ही दुसर्यांच्यावर टीका टाकली होती कारण त्यांना माहित होते की त्यांची पत्नि देवी आहे रावण तिला काय करु शकत होता? त्याच्या एवजी कराल पण स्वतःवर करणार नाही, तर मग तुम्ही केव्हाच तिच रावणाला ठीक करेल. ठीक होणार नाही. शरणागत होणे म्हणजे तुमच्या आंत जे काही आहे ते सोडून रहायचे. शेवटी शुध्द आणि पवित्र असा प्रत्येक गोष्टीकडे भैतिक दृष्टिकोनातून पहाण्याची जो तुमचा आहे , त्याच्या जवळ तुम्ही आनंदात रहाल आणि आपली प्रवृत्ति असते. वाह्यातील इृष्टि कमी होईल तसे तो तुम्हाला पूर्ण कार्यक्षम वनवेल. आज श्रीशिवाची पूजा आहे आतली दृष्टि उघडेल. व्यक्तिचे आंतरीक मोल समजण्याचा आणि तुम्ही शरणागतिच्या भावनेने येथे बसले आहात. प्रयत्न करायला हवा. आता खेड्यातील काही लोक थोडेसे यड शरणागतिचा दुसरा भाग जो तुमच्यात आहे . तो म्हणजे अशिष्ट पध्दतिने वोलतात. लोकांच्या विविध भाषा असतात. तुम्ही आत्मसाक्षात्कारी आहात. तुम्ही लाखांत एक आहात आणि म्हणून तुम्ही त्यांच्यावर रागवता. पण तुम्ही लक्षात हा आशिर्वाद तुम्हाला मिळाला आहे आणि आपण किती करू घ्यायला हवे ती त्यांची पध्दत आहे. त्याच्यामुळे आपमान शकतो त्याचा तुम्ही विचार करा. बाटून घेण्याची गरज नाही भैतिक जगातील संदर दिसणारी 15



----------------------

19940314_Mahashivaratri Puja - Witnessing Power, Surrender_Delhi.pdf-page0.txt 
 Mahashivaratri Puja -
Witnessing Power, Surrender
Date
14th March 1994
:
Place
Delhi
:
Type
Puja
Speech
Language
English & Hindi
CONTENTS
| Transcript
|
02 - 06
English
Hindi
Marathi
||
Translation
English
07 - 10
Hindi
11 - 15
Marathi
 19940314_Mahashivaratri Puja - Witnessing Power, Surrender_Delhi.pdf-page1.txt 
 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT
ENGLISH TALK
It's a great pleasure that from all over the world people have gathered to worship Shiva. Actually
we should say it is Sadashiva that we are going to worship today. As you know the difference between
Sadashiva and Shri Shiva. Sadashiva is the God Almighty and He is a witness of the play of the
Primordial Mother.
The combination between Sadashiva and the Primordial Mother Adi Shakti is just like a moon
and the moonlight or the sun or the sunlight. We cannot understand such relationship in human being,
among human marriages or among human relationships. So whatever the Adi Shakti's creating, which
is the desire of Sadashiva, is being witnessed by Him. And when He is watching this creation He is
witnessing all of it into all details. He witnesses the whole universe and He also witnesses this Mother
Earth, all the creation that is done by the Adi Shakti. His power is of witnessing and the
Shakti is this all pervading power of love.
So the God Almighty, the Father, the Primordial Father we can say, expresses His desire, His
Iccha Shakti as the Primordial Mother and She expresses Her power as love. So the relationship
between the two is extremely understanding, very deep, and whatever She's creating, if She finds, if
He finds there is some problem or there are people, human beings specially who are trying to obstruct
Her work, or even the Gods who are not the deities are trying to express their egos, He is the one who
brings forth their destruction. So He is the one who is responsible for the destructive power.
of Adi
power
He is reflected in the hearts of human beings, among all the creations He pulsates. But that pulses,
pulsation is the energy of the Primordial Mother. And He can destroy anything that goes against the
plans of the Adi Shakti. Adi Shakti is love, She forgives and She loves. She loves her creation. She
wants the creation to prosper, to go up to the same level for which it was created. She wants human
beings to go to that level where they enter into the Kingdom of God, Kingdom of Sadashiva where
there is bliss, there is forgiveness, there's joy.
All this is only possible if you have seeking, that you have also a innate desire to be there. This
desire within us is reflected as the reflection of the Primordial Mother. Now this desire is there and
other mundane desires are also there which stop the progress of your ascent.
In Sahaja Yoga we have never tried to overcome the desires by taking sanyasa or running away
from the house or for all kinds of things that has been suggested. The first thing that is done is that you
get the light of your spirit. Spirit is the reflection of Sadashiva. In that light He shows, He is just
showing the path. The spirit is just like a light which is burning and which is showing the path. In that
path you yourself become so wise that you walk in the light of wisdom, that you walk in the light of
righteousness. Because whatever is destructive is seen through the light of your spirit. You start giving
all that is destructive. Nobody has to tell you that give up this, give up that. You yourselfrealize that
up
this is wrong and we should give up. This was, I should say, my own understanding of human beings
because these are the days where people are in complete illusions. They are in a conflict all the time
struggling even to exist. Under these circumstances, everything would have failed if you had started
with taking a sanyasa and then going to Himalayas and all that. If you have to do this for the masses,
something has to be done radical and luckily I've been able to find out a way by which you can get your
sprouting, your Realization.
Now some people who get Realization have to understand certain things because as you know
there are many people who have got Realization. I don't know how many, I don't keep count. But what
is lacking in them is surrendering. It's embarrassing to say but is a fact. This is the only condition of
 19940314_Mahashivaratri Puja - Witnessing Power, Surrender_Delhi.pdf-page2.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
modern Sahaja Yoga that you have to really surrender. If you start using your brain, if you start using
other methods to understand Sahaja Yoga, you cannot. You must surrender and as Islam is nothing but
surrender, Islam means surrender. And if that surrender is not there it is impossible to establish anyone
in the Kingdom of God.
Surrender is not that you should give up your family, give up your children, or give up your
houses and homes and your properties. Surrendering is here: give up your ego to begin with and then
give up your conditionings. For example, the other day I met one gentleman and he is suffering a lot.
So I asked him, "Who is your Guru?", so he gave Me one name of a Guru. I said, "He's not done any
good to you, will you give him up?" He said, "Tomorrow." I said, "Why not today?" He said, "Today,
but I have to throw away all his things. So tomorrow morning I will do it." I said, "All right, do it."
"What should I throw away Mother?" I said, "Then all the things with which you worshipped him,
throw away, throw away." Then he went around the whole house, found out whatever was there which
was used for worshipping him, everything he gathered together, threw in the sea. And then he told the
sea that, "I am sorry I have suffered a lot because of this man, now you please don't suffer."
99
So this kind of a very penetrating intelligence if you don't have you cannot give up. One sticks to
that. I know of so many who find it so difficult to get rid of their conditionings. That's more difficult
than ego. Mundane conditionings and condition schemes that you have. We have first conditioning
that supposing you are born in India or England or any place. After Sahaja Yoga I've seen most of the
people they suddenly start seeing what's wrong with their countrymen, what's wrong with their
country, what's wrong with their religion, what's wrong with the books they were reading.
Immediately they start seeing it clearly, that this was the mistake, this is wrong. They all make fun of
them. I've seen people all over the world. Nobody says that 'No, no, no, no, because we are English we
are the best, we are Russians so we are the best, or we are Indians we are the best'. Immediately they
find out what's wrong with them and why these people are not getting Realization.
6-
On the other hand they feel such compassion that 'Mother so many people haven't got their
Realization. Why shouldn't we try to give them Realization?' This is the double action of this light.
Firstly you know that there is light and that you have become the light. So wherever your attention
goes you start seeing reality and then you understand that this has been the conditioning of our
country, of our society. And then they abhor all that is wrong, they never identify with it.
But first thing as I said, is surrendering. In surrendering actually you develop a kind of a state
where I would say you become a sanyasi, from within. That means nothing can dominate you, what is
a sanyasi is a person who is above everything else. Nothing can stick to him. He just, looks at things
and he knows what it is. He may not say, he knows everything and he doesn't do whatever is wrong.
He's so detached, that in that detachment only he can see what's wrong with him. He starts seeing his
family people, he starts seeing other surroundings, everywhere he starts seeing what's wrong. And he
does not identify with them, is very surprising.
I have seen it, I mean, I went to Turkey. In Turkey I met one gentleman who was running a big
Swiss hotel and he came himselfto Me and said Mother give me Realization. I was surprised because I
didn't see this in Switzerland such a anxious personality would ask for Realization, very surprising
that in Turkey he should ask for Realization. And I gave him Realization and immediately he said, "I
am not going to go back to Switzerland." Just imagine!
It's, you see, it is so clear-cut that this light definitely gives you tremendous wisdom and balance.
Supposing you are walking and you can't see the road, you may fall down. But if there's little light also
you can see it. And this is what Sahaja Yoga has done, is given you very little light. That little light
itselfhas been sufficient for you to give up so many things.
Now the other side of it is the ego part. Ego is very subtle stuff with human beings. I don't know
how they gather it, but they do and some of them have such a gullible ego that with the slightest thing it
shoots off. And they get very angry for small things or if they find somebody whom they can
dominate, they can dominate also that person. Now this ego when you start seeing it, you just start
3
 19940314_Mahashivaratri Puja - Witnessing Power, Surrender_Delhi.pdf-page3.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
laughing at yourselfand think that, what's wrong with me.
Ego is not like conditioning which is coming from outside but ego is something that comes from
within. It can come from anything. Human beings have ego of all kinds of nonsensical things. One day
I met one lady and she was very proud and was not even smiling. I said, "What's the matter with this
lady, what is she?" So they told Me, "She knows how to make dolls that's why she's so proud." I said,
"Eh, to make dolls, she's so proud!" "Yes, you know, she can make dolls, so she's so proud." I said,
"What is there, anybody can make dolls, so what is so great?" "No, but she thinks she is very great
because she makes dolls."
99
So a man becomes stupid and stupid. That is first sign of a egoistical person. He is so stupid that
when you are talking to him, you just get flabbergasted that without paying anything you have got a
buffoon before you who is showing all joke, jokes of his buffoonery. Is, eh, something very surprising,
Imean, you meet any egoistical person and you just watch him: “I did this, I am, I, I, I.."
99
Then you start seeing the person, what's the matter, he's not even ashamed to say things that
should not be said. Then it goes even to the sinful life they lead. They lead a very sinful life, they fond
of women, they drink and this and that. Then they start boasting about that also: "I drank that day so
much; I had five women around me." They start boasting of that also. So, for a egoistical man there is
nothing like shame. He'll go on telling about his nonsensical things and everybody will say 'My God
with whom are we talking?"
99
And then, whatever they do they justify. I asked one fellow,"You had such a bad heart attack why
do you drink now, give up drinking." He said, "But even this person Kirloskar" - we have one in Poona
who is now, I think, 95 – “he drinks". So I said, "You are not Kirloskar, and even if he drinks, what's
the use, what is he gaining by that?" "No, no, you see he's very good, because, see, he drinks and he's
So successful." "Is he successful without, because of drinking?"
But even ordinary reasoning is not there, ordinary reasoning. And in the general way if you see,
even if you see the greatest drunkard countries, I have never seen a statue of a man who died of
drinking, never. I've not seen in any country people are praising a man because he had ten women or
he died of drinking. So far! I don't know how far human beings can go in their ego.
Now this ego is spreading very much in modern times where they start saying, "I like this, I don't
like this". “What, what you don't like?" "I don't like this kind of a sari, I don't like this kind of clothes, I
don't like this." But who are you, you are not going to see yourself, others are going to see. So what
difference does it make whether you like it or not? But is very common with young people, to talk like
that "I like." And this is a sign ofcomplete destruction.
Because ego is not only, is, makes you stupid, you see all these days the way people dress up and
we find they are very stupid because "I like it, so what?" Anything they like it, you know, if they want
to walk on their heads "I like it, what's wrong?" All kinds of stupidity can be explained through ego.
So those who get Realization somehow or other, thank God, see it: This is my ego talking. Then they
start laughing at themselves, making fun of themselves: This was my ego.
But also in Sahaja Yoga there are people, I said, "Why don't you go and organize?" "Mother
because my ego will come up." I said, "What's this?" “My ego will come up so I don't want to
organize." How can your ego come up? If you see your ego, supposing you see, er, something is
burning, you see it there. How can you get that burning onto yourself? But this is a very subtle type of,
er, avoiding work of Sahaja Yoga to say that "No, I'll get into ego." I said, "All right you get into ego,
I'll see to it, get in, what happens."
So all kinds of things there are which makes a person quite idiotic and stupid. I mean, I don't know
how many things I can tell you today. But also I've seen in marriages this is very common. They'll say
that, 'Mother, I married this girl at that time but now I don't think I should have been married.' Bah,
bah, what, that time, what had happened to you, why didn't you marry at that time? I have to tell
you
these things because I've been facing all kinds of problems of this stupid, idiotic ego. One has to see it
4
 19940314_Mahashivaratri Puja - Witnessing Power, Surrender_Delhi.pdf-page4.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
clearly, how this ego is working in me and how it is keeping me down.
So when we talk of ascent, we talk of a higher life. We have to become sanyasi like the lotus that
comes out of the pond and no water can stay on them. Even the leaves of lotus, no water can stay on
them. Just like that we have to become. We don't have to wear Sanyasis dresses, nothing of that. But
from inside, a kind of a detached attention is there which immediately locates the problem, within you
and without. And also in Sahaja Yoga, you know how to overcome that. It's a very effective, efficient
system. But for that again, to achieve that you have to become Shiva within, means detached. As
Shiva is completely detached, you have to be detached. And that detachment will give you the same
wisdom as Shiva has. Shiva sees, we should say, Sadashiva sees the work of Adi Shakti, silently. He
doesn't get proud, he doesn't develop a kind of a ego 'Let me see now what my Iccha Shakti is doing',
nothing, he's just watching. But when it comes to destruction, he sees that this part is going to destroy
the work, immediately he destroys, removes that portion. In the same way we have to be, we have to
see our life itself is a big field. How do we consider ourselves to be? I have seen people talk, "Oh, so
what, I am a Sahaja Yogi!" You can't talk like that if you are a Sahaja Yogi. With folded hands you have
to say, "I am a Sahaja Yogi". In your behavior, in your talk, in everything, you have to be a person who
is extremely humble. If that is not so that means Sahaja Yoga has given you double ego. As it is you
know that Shiva is known for his innocence, for his simplicity, his forgiveness. He forgives. He
forgives rakshasas; he'll forgive everyone that is his quality. But anybody who goes against the
Primordial Mother, he doesn't spare.
So this is his, the quality one has to understand, surrendering doesn't mean outside things to be
surrendered. What is there, these are all stones, what are you surrendering? Surrendering means
cleansing yourselfcompletely, getting completely detached. Detachment is the only way you can rise.
Some people get sick, they make such an ado out of it: "I am sick, the whole world should know I am
sick, sick, sick, sick, sick." But if you are a Sahaja Yogi, if you just watch, how so, I am sick, all right,
let's see. Just like a sport. Just watch. I am sick. So, what's happening now? The temperature is coming
nicely, now is going down, just sort of a playful, mirthful attention. Ah, when I came I had
temperature, but nobody believes I had temperature. I was so tired in the marriage they said, "You
don't look tired." I said, "All right, I'm not tired." In the same way, life also is to be played. It's just a
play, and that play has to be seen through the light of wisdom. Nothing is so serious, for Sahaja Yogis
nothing is so serious. But he becomes very serious and he makes too much ado about himself.
99
There are lots of things which we have to learn. When we worship Shiva, we praise him. You are
this you are that, you are that. When you worship Me also you praise Me, you are this. I am not aware
of all that that you say. But you say all right, if you say so, it's all right. You are this you are that, the
thousand names of Shiva, thousand name of the Goddess, thousand name of Vishnu. These are their
names you are worshipping, what about you people, how many names you can have? Actually in the
puja when you take the names of these Shaktis they also get awakened within, no doubt. After puja
do feel that way but you don't utilize them. So many people I've seen have come in the puja and
you
they have got that power within themselves, same powers. But by the time they are out, it's finished,
it's gone. So, surrendering has another side: assumption. Assumption that I am a Sahaja Yogi and I can
absorb all these powers within myself. So one side is surrendering. Why to surrender? To absorb.
Automatically when you are surrendered you absorb. But once you have absorbed, then you should
retain and assume within yourself, know that you have these powers. There, where Sahaja Yogis fail
more. First time it happened, no Sahaja Yogi would touch anybody raise anybody's Kundalini, this
thing, that thing. We had at least fifty Sahaja Yogis by then. I said, "Now what to do, I have prepared
these channels and nobody is even raising their fingers. How am I going to work it out?" Very
difficult!
But once it happened we had a program in Nasik Road and I was staying in Nasik. It's about,
think, thirty miles from there. So, we reached halfway and our car failed and nobody no other car was
coming, nothing, no support, nothing. I didn't know what to do. But these, all the Sahaja Yogis had
I
5
 19940314_Mahashivaratri Puja - Witnessing Power, Surrender_Delhi.pdf-page5.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
arrived there, and such a big crowd. They started saying, "When is Mataji coming? When is Mataji
coming?" Such a pressure! So they said, "It's all right, we'll give you Realization, sit down." And they
gave Realization. That's the first time the Sahaja Yogis started knowing that they can give Realization,
they can do this, they can do that. They all started after that. So assumption should be there, that I have
these
powers, I am not going to waste them, I am going to use them, I am going to look after others, I
am not going to just keep to myself. This assumption has to come.
6.
Once I was traveling by ship and one fellow got caught up in the freeze room and he got
pneumonia. So the captain came to Me 'That see this boy has got pneumonia, we have to get some
doctor by helicopter.' I said, "Captain, I've given you Realization, you are a doctor." He said "Who, I?"
"Yes, you." "If you want, I can go down." "No, no, no, but tell me what to be done." I said "Just go and
put your hand on his heart, finished." "I" he said. "Yes, you!" Went down and put his hand and the
fellow got all right. He was amazed. He met Me now in the wedding – and he was amazed at himself.
"This I can do to anyone?" "Yes, yes, you can!" But if you do not assume, and just sit down meditating,
meditating, surrendering ... what's the use? So, you have to do, now after achieving Shiva state you
have to start doing the work of Adi Shakti. You should get this desire that we should spread Sahaja
Yoga, we have to work it out.
But be careful sometimes you might be conditioned, you might be egotistical, watch yourself.
With watching you can, I'm sure, you can achieve a lot. We have done, some people who have taken it
upon themselves have done it, everywhere, in every country.
So the first thing of surrendering is important to reach the state of your Spirit, of Shiva and
Sadashiva. But the second state is that you have to now think of others. First it is as they say in Sanskrit
is vyashti, means individual gain, you get the individual gain. And then it becomes samashti, means
the collective. You have to work it out on collective. People who never even got Realization, nothing
of the kind, have been doing so much organization and this and that. While you have got it, so now it is
important that you should now extend this light to others.
6.
 19940314_Mahashivaratri Puja - Witnessing Power, Surrender_Delhi.pdf-page6.txt 
 HINDI TRANSLATION
(English Talk)
Scanned from Hindi Chaitanya Lahari
चलने लगते हैं। आत्मा के प्रकाश में हर विनाशकारी चीज को
आप देख लेते हैं और कर्तव्य परायणता के प्रकाश में चलने
लगते हैं। वि्वंसकता को आप त्यागने लगते हैं, किसी को
आपको कुछ बताना नहीं पड़ता। आप स्वयं महसूस करते हैं कि
यह कार्य गलत है और मुझे यह नहीं करना चाहिए। आजकल
क्योंकि मानव भ्रम में फंस गया है अतः उसके बारे में यह मेरी
अपनी सुझबूझ थी। मानव हर समय संघर्ष की स्थिति में है यहाँ
तक कि अपने अस्तित्व के लिए भी संघर्षरत है। ऐसी स्थिति में
यदि सन्यास लेकर आप हिमालय पर चले जाते तो सभी कुछ
असफल हो जाता। जनसाधारण के कल्याण के लिए यदि कुछ
करना है तो मूलभूत रूप से कोई कार्य होना आवश्यक था और
आज हम सदाशिव की पूजा करने वाले हैं। सदा शिव और
शिव में यह अन्तर है कि सदाशिव सर्वशक्तिमान परमात्मा है
और वे आदि शक्ति की लीला के लेखक हैं। सदाशिव और
आदिशक्ति का सम्मिश्रण ऐसा है जैसे चांद और चांदनी का या
सुर्य और उसकी धूप का। मानवीय सम्बन्धों या मानवीय
विवाहों में हमें ऐसा दिखाई नहीं पड़ता। श्री सदाशिव की इच्छा
से आदि शक्ति जो भी कुछ सृष्टि कर रही है श्री सदाशिव इसे
देख रहे हैं और इसके साक्षी हैं। पूरे ब्रह्माण्ड एवं पृथ्वी मां को वे
साक्षी रूप में देखते हैं। साक्षी भाव उनकी शक्ति है। 'आदि
शक्ति' की शक्ति, अतः सर्वव्यापक शक्ति है।
सर्वशक्तिमान परमात्मा, 'आदि पिता
अपनी इच्छा की अभिव्यक्ति आदि मां के रूप में करते हैं। आदि
माँ अपनी शक्ति की अभिव्यक्ति प्रेम के रूप में करती हैं। दोनों
(आदि पिता और आदि माँ) के सम्बन्ध बहुत ही सुझ-बुझ से
परिपर्ण एवं गहन हैं। जब भी आदि पिता को यह लगता है कि
आदि माँ की सृष्टि में कोई समस्या है या कुछ लोग उनके कार्य में
विघ्न डाल रहे हैं तो वे उनका विनाश कर देते हैं। विध्वंस शक्ति
के लिए वे जिम्मेदार हैं। मानव हृदयों में वे प्रतिबिम्बित हैं। सारी
सुष्टि में उन्हीं की धड़कन है पर यह धड़कन आदि-मां की
शक्ति है। और जो भी चीज आदि-शक्ति की योजनाओं के
विरूद्ध जाए उसका वे विध्वस करते हैं। आदि शक्ति प्रेभ है।
अपनी सुष्टि के अपराधों को वे क्षमा करती हैं तथा उसे प्रेम करती
हैं। वे चाहती हैं कि उनकी सष्टि समद् हो तथा अपने लक्ष्य को
प्राप्त करें वे चाहती हैं कि मानव उस अवस्था तक उन्नत हों
जहाँ बह परमात्मा, सदाशिव के साम्राज्य में प्रवेश कर सकें,
जहाँ पर आनन्द है जहाँ पर आनन्द, क्षमा एवं सुख शान्ति है।
ऐसा तभी सम्भव हो सकता है जब व्यक्ति में जिज्ञासा हो और
उस स्थिति को प्राप्त करने की अन्तर्जात इच्छा हो। हमारे अन्दर
यह इच्छा आदि माँ के प्रतिबिम्ब के रूप में प्रतिबिम्बित है। इस
इच्छा के साथ-साथ मानव में सांसारिक इच्छाएं भी होती हैं जो
उत्थान के विकास में बाधा डालती हैं। सहजयोग में सन्यास ले
कर या घर का त्याग करके हमने कभी भी इन इच्छाओं को वश
में करने का प्रयत्न नहीं किया।
इच्छा शक्ति में
सौभाग्यवश मैं बह मार्ग खोज सकी जिसके द्वारा आपका अकरण
हो सके और आपको आत्मसाक्षात्कार मिल सके।
आज बहुत से लोगों को आत्मसाक्षात्कार प्राप्त होता है। उन्हें
कुछ बातें समझ लेनी चाहिए। उनमें समर्पण की कमी है।
आधुनिक सहजयोग की केवल एक शर्त है कि वास्तविकता में
आपको समर्पण करना होगा। अपने मस्तिष्क या अन्य तरीकों के
उपयोग से यदि आप सहजयोग को समझना चाहेंगे तो समझ
नहीं पाएंगे। समर्फ्ण करना ही होगा। इस्लाम समर्पण के
अतिरिक्त कुछ भी नहीं। इस्लाम का अर्थ है समर्पण । समर्पण के
अभाव में परमात्मा के साम्राज्य में स्थापित होना असंभव है।
समर्पण का अर्थ यह नहीं कि आप अपने परिवार बच्चों और घर
का त्याग कर दें। इसका अर्थ है कि आप अपने अहँ एवं
बंधनों का त्याग करें। उदाहरणार्थ मैं एक व्यक्ति से मिली जो
बहुत कष्ट में था। मैंने उससे पृछा कि तुम्हारा गुरु कौन है?
उसने गुरु का नाम बताया। मैंने कहा, "उसने तुम्हारा कोई हित
नहीं किया। क्या तम उसे छोड़ दोगे? क्या तुम उसे त्याग दोगे?"
उसने कहा "कल"। मैंने पुछा "आज क्यों नहीं।" उसने कहा
"आज"। लेकिन मैंने फोटो आदि फेंकने हैं और यह कार्य मैं कल
सुबह करूगा। उसने पृछा कि वह कौन-कौन सी वस्तुएं फैंके,
मैंने उसे बताया कि ज़िन वस्तुओं से वह उस गुरू की पूजा करता
था वे सारी फेंक दें। उसने वे सारी वस्तुएं समुद्र में फेंक दी और
समुद्र से कहा।"मुझे खेद है। इस व्यक्ति के हाथों मैंने बहुत
कष्ट उठाए है कृपया आप कष्ट न उठाएं। उसके अन्दर इस
प्रकार का सूक्ष्म विवेक था। इस प्रकार से आप नहीं त्याग सकते.
इनसे चिपके रहते हैं।
सर्वप्रथम आपको आत्मा का प्रकाश प्राप्त हो जाता है।
आत्मा सदाशिव का प्रतिबिम्ब है, यह जलती हुई उस मशाल
की तरह है जो मार्ग दर्शन करती है। इस मार्ग पर आप स्वयं
इतने वद्धिमान हो जाते हैं कि आप स्वयं विवेक के प्रकाश में
मैं बहुत से ऐसे लोगों को जानती हैं जिन्हें अपने बन्धनों से
 19940314_Mahashivaratri Puja - Witnessing Power, Surrender_Delhi.pdf-page7.txt 
 Hindi Translation (English Talk)
छुटकारा पाना बहुत कठिन लगता है। यह कार्य अहम् से मुक्ति किसी भी चीज से यह आ सकता है। मानव को सभी प्रकार की
मुर्खता पूर्ण बातों का अहम् है। एक दिन मैं एक स्त्री से मिली जो
भारत में जन्में हैं। सहजयोग में आते ही लोग अपने देश, इतनी घमंडी थी कि मस्कराती तक न थी। मैंने पुछा कि इस स्त्री
देशवासियों धर्म एवं ग्रन्थों की कमियों को देखना शुरू कर देते हैं की क्या समस्या है? उन्होंने मझे बताया कि यह गुड़ियाँ (डोल्स)
और जान लेते हैं कि गलती क्या थी। कोई भी यह नहीं कहता कि बनाना जानती है जिसके कारण इसे इतना घमंड है। गडियां तो
"क्योंकि हम अग्रेज, रूसी या भारतीय हैं अतः हम ही सर्वश्रेष्ठ कोई भी बना सकता है। व्यक्ति मुर्ख हो जाता है। घमंडी व्यक्ति
हैं। वे तरन्त जान लेते हैं कि रूकावट क्या है और यह लोग की पहली पहचान है कि वह "मैं" ग्रस्त हो जाता है। "मैंने यह
आत्मसाक्षात्कार को क्यों नहीं पा रहे। दूसरी ओर उन्हें उन लोगों कार्य किया""मैं ऐसा हूँ। ऐसी बाते कहते हुए उसे लज्जा भी
पर बहुत दया आती है जिन्हें आत्मसाक्षात्कार प्राप्त नहीं हुआ। नहीं आती। यहां तक कि वह पापमय जीवन व्यतीत करता है।
क्यों न हम उन्हें आत्मसाक्षात्कार देने का प्रयत्न करें।" प्रकाश ऐसे लोग पर स्त्री गमन और मदिरापान आदि के शौकीन होते
के यह दो कार्य हैं। सर्वप्रथम आप जान लेते हैं कि प्रकाश है और है। इन बातों की वे शेखी बघारते हैं। घमंडी व्यक्ति के लिए लज्जा
नाम की कोई चीज नहीं रह जाती। अपने मुर्खता पूर्ण कार्यों की
वह डींगे मारता रहता है। और अपने किये को बह सदा उचित
देश और समाज के कौन-कौन से बन्धन हैं। सारी त्रटियों से वे ठहराता है। मैंने एक व्यक्ति से पूछा" आपको इतना भयंकर
पाने से भी अधिक कठिन है। हमारा पहला बन्धन यह है कि हम
आप प्रकाश बन गये हैं। अतःजहाँ भी आपका चित्त जाता है आप
वास्तविकता देखने लगते हैं और तब आप समझ लेते हैं कि हमारे
1.
हृदय
घात हुआ है फिर भी आप शराब क्यों पीते हो? शराब पीना
छोड़ दो" उसने यह कह कर अपने किये को उचित ठहराया कि
फलां चोटी का उद्योगपति ९५ वर्ष की आय में भी शराब पीता
वह पीता है इसीलिए सफल है। तो क्या वह शराब पीने
घृणा करने लगते हैं।
पर इसके लिए समर्पण प्रथम आवश्यकता है। समर्पण से
आपके अन्दर एक ऐसी स्थिति विकसित हो जाती है जो
आन्तरिक रूप से सन्यासी बना देती है। इसका अर्थ यह है कि है
कोई भी चीज आप पर प्रबल नहीं हो सकती। सन्यासी व्यावेत
सभी चीज़ों से ऊपर होता है। उसे कोई चीज पकड़ नहीं सकती।
वस्तुओं को देखने मात्र से वह उन्हें जान जाता है। गलत काम
वह नहीं करता। कहे या न कहे वह हर चीज की समझता है। वह डो या जो शराब पीकर मर गया हो।
इतना निल्लाप होता है कि अपनी निर्लिपता में ही वह जान जाता
है कि गलत क्या है। अपने परिवार को वह देखने लगता है। दसरे
लोगों को बह देखने लगता है, गलतियों को वह देखने लगता है है, मुझे यह पसन्द हैं यह पसन्द नहीं। यह पूर्ण विनाश के
परन्तु किसी भी चीज से वह लिप्त नहीं होता। मैं टर्की में एक चिन्ह हैं क्योंकि अहम् महा मुर्ख है। जिस प्रकार के वेशभषा
भद्र पुरुष से मिली। उसने मुझ से आत्मसाक्षात्कार मांगा। मुझे लोग धारण करते है उसी से ही पता लगता है कि वे कितने मुर्ख
हैरानी हुई क्योंकि स्विटजरलैंड में मझे यह चीज दिखाई न दी हैं। कहते हैं मुझे यह पसन्द है, इसमें क्या खराबी है।
थी। आत्म साक्षात्कार प्राप्त करते ही वह कहने लगा कि"मैं अब भी प्रकार से जब व्यक्ति को आत्म साक्षात्कार प्राप्त हो जाता है
स्विटजरलैंड वापस नहीं जाऊँगा"। यह इतना स्पष्ट है और यह ता बह इस मुखेता को देख सकता।"यह मेरा अहम् बोल रहा
प्रकाश वास्तव में आपको महान विवेक एवं संतुलन प्रदान करता है। तब वह स्वयं पर हसने लगते हैं और इसका मजाक बनाने
है। मान लो कि आप चल रहे हैं परन्त यदि आप सड़क को नहीं लगते है। सहयोग में भी कुछ लोग हैं। कछ लोगों से जब मैं
देख सकते तो आप गिर सकते है। परन्त थोड़ा सा प्रकाश भी पूछती हैं कि वे जाकर कार्यक्रमों का आयोजन क्यों नहीं करते तो
यदि हो तो आप देख सकते हैं। सहजयोग ने यही किया है। इसने वे कहते हैं, "श्री माता जी इससे मेरा अहम् बढ़ जाएगा"। यदि
आपको थोड़ा सा प्रकाश दे दिया है। इस थोड़े से प्रकाश के सहारे आप आपने अहम् को देखते है तो वह कैसे बढ़ सकता है? मान लो
आप बहुत सी बुराइयों को त्याग सके है।
ै"
के कारण ही कामयाब है? तनिक सी भी समझ नहीं है। आप
देश के किसी ऐसे सफल व्यक्ति को देखते है जो शराब पीता है।
पर शराब पीकर मरने वाले व्यक्ति कि स्थिति को नहीं देखते।
कहीं भी ऐसे व्यक्ति की सराहाना नहीं होती जिसकी दस पत्नियां
आधुनिक समय में यह अहम् फैल गया है। लोग कहने लगते
किसी
आप किसी जलती हुई चीज को देख रहे है तो कैसे आप इससे
स्वयं को जलने देगे? यह कहना कि 'सहजयोग के कार्य करने से
अहम बढ़ जाएगा' इस कार्य में छूटकार पान का अत्यन्त
अहम् इसका दूसरा भाग है। मानव के लिए अहम् अति सुक्ष्म
है कुछ लोगों में इतना सुक्ष्म अहम् होता है कि जरा सी बात से
यह आसमान छुने लगता है। छोटी-छोटी चीजों के लिए वे
नाराज हो जाते है या कोई ऐसा व्यक्ति वह खोज लेते है जिस पर
वे शासन कर सकें। जब आप अहम् को देखने लगे हैं तो इस पर
हंसे और सोचे कि मझे में क्या कमी है। अहम् बन्धन जैसा नहीं
है क्योंकि बन्धन बाहर से आते हैं और अहम् आन्तरिक है।
मेरा
सुक्ष्म तरीका है।
विवाहो में भी यह आम बात है। लोग कहते है" श्री माना जी
उम समय मैने इस लड़की से शादी कर ली पर अब मझे लगता है
कि यह विवाह मझे नहीं करना चाहिए था।" उस समय आपको
क्या हुआ था? मझ यह सारी बाते आपका बतानी पड़ रही है
8.
 19940314_Mahashivaratri Puja - Witnessing Power, Surrender_Delhi.pdf-page8.txt 
 Hindi Translation (English Talk)
हमें बहुत सी बातें सीखनी है। जब हम शिव की पूजा करते
हैतो उनका गणगान करते हैं । देवी, शिव और विष्णुजी के सहस्त्र नाम
ले कर हम उनकी पूजा करते हैं। लेकिन लोगों के कितने नाम हो
सकते हैं। वास्तव में पूजा में जब आप नाम लेते हैं तो वे जागृत
हो जाते हैं। पूजा के बाद आपको ऐसा महसूस होता है। परन्तु
आप उनका लाभ नहीं उठाते। जो भी लोग
शक्ति को प्राप्त करते हैं । परन्तु ज्यों ही वे पूजा से निकलते हैं
सब कुछ समाप्त हो जाता
क्योंकि इस मुर्खता पूर्ण अहम् की समस्या ओं का मैं सामना करती
रही हैं। व्यक्ति को स्पष्ट देखना है कि किस प्रकार उसमें यह
अहम् कार्यरत है और उसके पतन का कारण है। उत्थान की
बात करते हुए हम उच्च जीवन की बात करते है। हमें सन्यासी
सम बनना होगा, तालाब में से जन्में एक कमल की तरह से जिस
पर पानी नहीं ठहर सकता। कमल के पत्तों पर भी पानी नहीं ठहर
सकता। बिना गेरुए वस्त्र पहने या दिखावा किये हमें ऐसा बनना
होगा। परन्तु अन्दर से एक निलिप्त चित होना चाहिए जो तुरन्त
आपके अन्दर की समस्याओं को देख सके। सहजयोग के जरिये
आप जानते है कि अत्यन्त प्रभावशाली तरीके से किस प्रकार इस
पर काबू पाया जा सकता है। इस स्थिति को प्राप्त करने के लिए
आपको शिव सा। साक्षी बनना होगा, शिव पूर्णतः निर्लिप्त हैं।
यह नि्लिप्सा आपको शिव जैसा विवेक प्रदान करेगी।
में आते हैं वे
पूजा
है।
समर्पण का एक अन्य पहलू भी है। यह मान लेना कि मैं एक
सहजयागी हैँ और सारी शक्तियों को मैं अपने अन्दर आत्मसात
कर सकता हूं एक पहलू समर्पण का है। समर्पण किस लिए करें?
आत्मसात करने के लिए स्वतः ही जब आप समर्पित हो जाते हैं
तो आप आत्मसात करते हैं। एक बार आत्मसात करने के
पुश्चात आपको चाहिए कि उन शक्तियों को अपने अन्दर बनाए
रखें, ग्रहण करे और विश्वस्त हों कि आपके अन्दर यह शक्तियां
है। यहां आ कर सहजयोगी असफल हो जाते हैं। सहजयोग की
शुरूआत में तो कोई सहजयोगी न किसी और को छने के लिए भी
तैयार था और न ही किसीकी कण्डलिनी उठाने के लिए तैयार
था । मैंने सोचा कि ये माध्यम मैंने तैयार किये हैं । पर इनमें से तो
हमारा अपना जीवन बहुत बड़ा क्षेत्र है तो हमें सोचना चाहिए कोई अपना हाथ उठाने के लिए भी तैयार नहीं। किस प्रकार मेैं
कि हम कैसे हों मैंने लोगों को यह कहते सुना है"क्या हुआ, मैं यह कार्य करूंगी? नासिक क्षेत्र में हमने एक कार्यक्रम किया। मैं
एक सहजयोगी हूँ।" यदि आप सहजयोगी हैं तो हमें इस तरह से नासिक में थी और उनका कार्यक्रम यहां से तीस मील दूर था।
बात नहीं करनी चाहिए। हाथ जोड़कर नम्रतापूर्वक आपको यह आधे रास्ते पर जब हम पहुंचे तो हमारी कार खराब हो गयी।
कहना है कि मैं एक सहजयोगी हैं। अपनी बातचीत में और सारे सहजयोगी कार्यक्रम में पहंच चुके थे और वहां आई हुई
व्यवहार में आपको अत्यंत नम्र व्यक्ति होना है। यदि ऐसा नहीं है जनता बहुत परेशान हो रही थी। तब सहजयोगियों ने कहा कि
तो इसका अर्थ ये है कि सहजयोग ने आपको दुगना अह दिया है। "हम आपको आत्मसाक्षात्कार देंगे।" उन्होंने आत्मसाक्षात्कार
आप जानते हैं कि शिव अपनी अवोधिता, सहजता और दिया और यह पहला समय था जब सहजयोगियों ने जाना कि वे
क्षमाशीलता के कारण प्रसिद्ध हैं। वे राक्षसों को भी क्षमा करते हैं। आत्मसाक्षात्कार दे सकते हैं। इसके बाद सबने आत्मसाक्षात्कार
ये उनका गण है परन्तु जो भी व्यक्ति आदिशक्ति के विरूद्ध देना शुरू कर दिया। मान लें कि आपमें ये शक्तियां हैं। मैं इन
जाता है उसे बे क्षमा नहीं करते। यह गण व्यक्ति को समझना शक्तियों को व्यर्थ नहीं करूंगा। मैं इनका उपयोग करूंगा। एक
बार मैं समुद्री जहाज में यात्रा कर रही थीं। वहां बर्फ जमाने वाले
सदा-शिव चुपचाप आदि शक्ति के कार्य को देखते हैं।
अहम् विकसित नहीं होता है जो यह कहें कि "देखो अब मेरी
इच्छा शक्ति क्या कर रही है। बह मात्र दृष्टा है। परन्तु जब वे
विनाश करन पर आते हैं तो देखते हैं कि यह भाग पूरी सृष्टि का
विनाश कर देगा, तो वह तुरन्त ही उस भाग को समाप्त कर देते
हैं। हमें भी इसी प्रकार करना है।
उनमें
चाहिए।
समपण का अर्थ यह नहीं कि बाह्य वस्तओं का समर्पण कर कमरे में एक व्यक्ति पकड़ गया और उसे निरमोनिया हो गया।
दें। समर्पण का अर्थ है कि स्वयं को पूर्णतः शुद्ध कर पू्णतयाकिमोदियां हो गया है और हमें हैलिकॉप्टर से डाक्टर लाना
निर्लिप्त हो जाएं। निलिप्सा उत्थान का एक मात्र मार्ग है। कुछ
लोग बीमार हो जाते हैं और इस बीमारी को बहुत ही बढ़ा चढ़ा होगा। मैंने उसे कहा कि मैंने तुम्हें आत्मसाक्षात्कार दिया है. अब
कर कहते हैं। यदि आप सहजयोगी हैं तो मात्र अपने चित्त से देखें तुम भी एक डाक्टर हो। आप जाकर अपना हाथ उसके हृदय पर
कि आप बीमार हैं। यह अत्यंत लीलामय एवं प्रमोदमय चित्त है।
जब मैं यहां आई तो मुझे बुखार था परन्त कोई विश्वास नहीं ठीक हो गया। कैप्टन स्वयं पर हैरान था। यदि आप अपनी
करता। विवाह में मैं बहुत थक गई थी लेकिन सब कहते थे शक्तियों को ग्रहण नहीं करते, बस बैठकर ध्यान ही करते हैं तो
आप थके हुए नहीं लगते। इसी प्रकार जीवन की लीला करनी उसका क्या लाभ हैं?
है। जीवन मात्र एक लीला है और ये लीला विवेक के प्रकाश में
देखी जानी चाहिए कुछ भी इतना गंभीर नहीं है। सहजयोगियों कार्य करना होगा। आपके अन्दर इच्छा जागृत होनी चाहिए कि
के लिए कुछ भी इतना गंभीर नहीं है।
कप्तान मेरे पास आया और कहने लगा कि इस लड़के को
निर्मानियां हो गया है और हमें हैलिकॉप्टर से डाक्टर लाना
रख दो। उसने ऐसा ही किया और वह निमोनिया ग्रस्त व्यकित
शिव की अवस्था प्राप्त करने के बाद आपको आदि शक्ति का
हम सहजयोग को फैलाएं, इसे कार्यानि्वित करें। परन्तु सावधान
 19940314_Mahashivaratri Puja - Witnessing Power, Surrender_Delhi.pdf-page9.txt 
 Hindi Translation (English Talk)
'समष्टि (सामूहिक) बन जाती है। अर्थात आपने इसे सामूहिकता
पर कार्यन्वित करना है। जिन लोगों को कभी आत्मसाक्षात्कार
प्राप्त नहीं हुआ बे भी बहुत आयोजन करते रहे हैं। पर आपको
तो आत्मसाक्षात्कार प्राप्त हो चुका है। अब ये आवश्यक है कि
यह प्रकाश आप दूसरे लोगों को भी दें।
रहें कि कुछ समय तक आप बन्धन एवं अहम्ग्रस्त हो सकते हैं।
स्वयं को सावधानी पूर्वक देखें। सावधानी पूर्वक देखने से आप
बहुत कुछ प्राप्त कर सकते हैं, कुछ लोगों ने, देश-देश में, इस
कार्य की जिम्मेदारी ली है।
समर्पण में पहला कार्य शिव और सदा शिव रूपी अपनी
आत्मा की अवस्था को पहुँचना है। दूसरी अवस्था अन्य लोगों
के बारे में सोचना है। प्रथम यह व्यष्टि (व्यक्तिगत लाभ) है जो बाद में
परमात्मा आपको धन्य करें।
10
 19940314_Mahashivaratri Puja - Witnessing Power, Surrender_Delhi.pdf-page10.txt 
 MARATHI TRANSLATION
(English Talk)
Scanned from Marathi Chaitanya Lahari
(परम पूज्य श्री माताजीनी केलेला उपदेश) आज तुम्ही
श्री सदाशिवांची पूजा करणार आहात. श्री सदाशिव आणि
इच्छाशक्तीमध्ये आदिमाता म्हणून व्यक्त करतात आणि
आदिमाता त्यांची शक्ति प्रेमातून व्यक्त करतात. त्यांचे नाते
श्री शिव यांच्यातील फरक हा आहे की श्री सदाशिव सर्व अतिशय समजुतीचे आणि गहन आहे त्यांच्या निर्मितीमधे
शक्तिमान परमेश्वर असून आदि मातेच्या लीला नाट्याचे जर काही अडचण आहे अथवा त्यांच्या कार्यात अडथळे
।म
म
लेंखक आहेत. श्री सदाशिव आणि आदिमाता आदिशक्ति
आणणारे लोक असतील तर ते त्यांचा (परमपिता) विनाश
यांची एकात्मता चंद्र आणि त्याचा प्रकाश किंवा सूर्य आणि
घडवून आणतात.
सूर्यप्रकाश यांच्या प्रमाणे आहे. मानवी विवाहांच्यात अथवा
मामवी नात्यांच्यामधे अशा प्रकारचे संबंध आपण समजू
विनाशकारी शक्ति ते सांभाळतात. मानवाच्या हृदयात
ते प्रतिबिंबीत होतात. ते सर्व सुष्टितरूपंदित होतात पण ते
शकत नाही. आदिशक्ति जे काही निर्माण करीत आहेत ते श्री
स्पंदन आदिमातेची शक्ति असते. आणि आदिमातेच्या
सदाशिवांची इच्छा आहे. श्री सदाशिव त्याला साक्षी आहेत.
योजनेच्या विरोधात काहीही असले तरी त्याचा ते नाश करु
आणि ते पहात असतात त्यावेळी ते त्याला साक्षी असतात.
शकतात. आदिशक्ती प्रम आहेत. त्या क्षमा करतात. त्या
ज्याची निर्मिती करतात.त्याच्यावर त्यांचे प्रेम असते. त्यांची
ते सर्व विश्वाचे साक्षी असून ते वा पृथ्वीमातेचेही साक्षी आहेत
सर्व सूष्टींची निर्मिती आदिशक्ती करीत असते, त्यांची शक्ति
इच्छा असते की त्यांच्या निर्मितीची उन्नति व्हावी व ज्याच्या
साठी त्यांना निर्माण केले आहे त्या पातळीपर्यंत त्यांनी उत्क्रांत
साक्षीस्वरूपत्याची आहे. अशी आदिशक्तीची शक्ति सर्वव्यापि
आहे.
व्हावे. त्यांची इच्छा असते की ज्या पातळीवर श्री
सर्व शक्तिमान परमेश्वर, आदिपिता आपली सदाशिवांच्या म्हणजे परमेश्वरी राज्यात प्रवेश करता येईल
11
 19940314_Mahashivaratri Puja - Witnessing Power, Surrender_Delhi.pdf-page11.txt 
 MarathiTranslation (English Talk)
जेथे ईश्वरी आनंद, क्षमाशीलता, आनंद आहेत त्या
पातळीपर्यंत मानवाने जावे. तुमच्यामधे मुमूक्षत्व असेल, त्या
व्हायला हवे. तुम्ही तुमच्या वुध्दीचा व इतर पध्दतिंचा सहज
योग समजण्यास उपयोग करु लागाल तर ते जमणार नाही
पातळीवर जाण्याची अंगभूत इच्छा असेल तरच ते सर्व शक्य
तुम्ही शरणागत व्हायलाच हवे. इस्लाम याचा अर्थ शरण जाणे
होईल. आपल्यातील ही इच्छा आदिमातेचे प्रतिबिंब आहे. आता
शरणागति नसल्यास परमेश्वरी राज्यात प्रस्थापित होणे
अशक्य आहे. शरणागति याचा अर्थ तुम्ही प्रपंच , कुटुंब
घर वगैरे सोडावे हा नाही तर शरणागति म्हणजे तुमच्या
ही इच्छा आहे आणि आपल्या प्रगतिच्या आड येणार्या
कुय
भौतिक स्वरुपाच्या इच्छा पण आहेत, सहजयोगात, संन्यास
घेऊन अथवा घर सोडून जाऊन या इच्छेवर मात करण्याचा
अहंकाराचा व संस्कारांचा त्याग करणे. उदा.मला एक गृहस्थ
भेटले त्यांना फारच त्रास होता. मी "तुमचे गुरू कोण असे
विचारल्यावर त्यांनी एका गुरूचे नांव सांगीतले, मी म्हणाले
प्रयत्न आपण कधी केला नाही.
प्रथम तुमच्या आत्म्याचा प्रकाश तुम्ही मिळविता आत्मा
श्री सदाशिवांचे प्रतिविव आहे. आत्मा संदिव जळत राहून
त्याने तुमचे काही भले नाही तेव्हा तुम्ही त्यांला सोडणार
का?" ते म्हणाले "उद्या" मी म्हणाले " आज का नाही
16
मार्गदर्शन करणाऱ्या प्रकाशा प्रमाणे आहे. त्या मार्गावर स्वतः
त्यांनी सागीतले "मला त्यांचे फोटो वगैरे फेकून द्यायचे
तुम्हीच इतके सूज्ञ होता की
मार्गक्रमण करता. तुम्ही धर्माच्या प्रकाशात चालता कारण
त्या सूज्ञतेच्या प्रकाशात तुम्हीं
आहेत.तेव्हा मी उद्या करीन ".त्यांनी विचारले की काय काय
टाकून बायचे त्यावर मी सांगीतले की ज्याचा उपयोग त्यांची
तुमच्या आत्म्याच्या प्रकाशात विनाशकारी गोष्टी दिसन
येतात. सर्व विनाशकारी जे काही आहे त्याचा त्याग करु
पुजा करण्यास तुम्ही करीत होता ते सर्व टाकून द्या. मग
त्यांनी सर्व समुद्रात टाकून दिले व त्यास सांगीतले" क्षमा
लागला , हे सोडा, ते सोडा असे कोणी सांगावे लागत नाही.
करा, या माणसामुळे मी इतका त्रास काढला पण तुम्ही नका
तुमच्या स्वतःच्या लक्षात येते की है चुकीचे आहे आपण करु
सहन करू अशी त्यांची कुशाग्र वुध्दी होती.सगळ्यांना सोडणे
नये. माणसांच्या या बद्दल माझी ही समजूत होती. कारण
सध्याच्या दिवसात लोक पूर्ण पणे भ्नांतिम्ध आहेत. का्यम मेत नाहीत असे अनेक लोक मला माहित आहेत. अहकार
जमत नाही,लोक धरून बसतात ज्यांना आपले संस्कार सोडता
ते संघर्षात असतात. त्यांना जगण्यासाठी झगडावे लागते.
सोडण्यापेक्षा ते अधीक कठीण आहे. अनेक प्रकारचे संस्कार
अशा परिस्थितीत तुम्ही संन्यास घेऊन हिमालयात गेला
आसतात,आपला पहिला संस्कार असतो की आपला भारतात
असता तर सगळेच विधडले असते. असंख्यांच्यासाठी जर
जन्म झाला आहे.सहज यौगात आल्यावर लोकांच्या एकदम
समजते की त्यांच्या देशात. धर्मात काय चुकते.लगेच त्यांना
तुम्हाला करायचे असेल तर काहीतरी मुळातूनच करायला हवे
होते आणि सदैवाने , तुम्हाला अंकुरित होऊन साक्षातकारी
स्पष्ट दिसून येते की "हे चुकले." असे कोणी म्हणत नाही
की आम्ही भारतीय आहेत , इंग्रज आहोत., म्हणून आम्ही
होता येईल असा मार्ग शाधून काढणे मला शक्य झाले .
आत्मसाक्षातकारी लोकांनी काही गोष्टी समजून घ्यायला
सर्वात चांगले आहोत, उलट इतक्या लोकांना अद्याप
हव्यात. कारण साक्षातकार मिळालेले अनेक लोक आहेत.
आत्मसाक्षातकार मिळला नाही याची त्यांना करूणा वाटते.
त्यांच्यात काय करमी असेल तर शरणागति, आधुनिक सहज
आणि "आपण त्यांना आत्मसाक्षात्कार का देऊ नये, " असे
योगाची ही एकच अट आहे की तुम्हाला खरोखर शरणागत
12
 19940314_Mahashivaratri Puja - Witnessing Power, Surrender_Delhi.pdf-page12.txt 
 MarathiTranslation (English Talk)
वाटते है प्रकाशाचे दुहेरी कार्य होय
दुसर्या वाजूस अहंकार असतो.मणसाच्या कडे अहंकार
ही फार सूक्ष्म गोष्ट असते. काहींच्या जबळ इतका अस्थिर
अहंकार असतो की थोड्याश्या गोष्टीमुळे तो उफाळून वर
येतो. आणि थोड्याश्या गोष्टींच्यामुळे सुध्दा ते संतापतात.
प्रथम तुम्हाला समजते की प्रकाश आहे आणि तुम्ही
प्रकाश झाले आहात. तेव्हा तुमचे चित्त जाईल तेथे तुम्हाला
सत्य दिस लागते आणि तुम्हाला कळते की आपल्या देशाचे,
अथवा हुकूमत गाज़विता येईल अशी व्यक्ति शौधून काढतात.
आपल्या समाजाचे हे संस्कार होते. मग जे चुकीचे आहे ते
त्यांना नकोसे वाटते. ते त्याच्याशी ते समचित्र होत नाहीत
हा अहंकार दिसू लागतो तेव्हा तुम्ही हसू लागता आणि माझ्या
जवळ काय विवडले आहे त्याचा विचार करता अहंकार हा
तर प्रथम शरणागति होते.
संस्कारांच्या प्रमाणे वाहेरून येत नाही तर तो आतूनच येतो.
द्र
तो कशामुळेही येतो. माणसाला अनेक प्रकारच्या निरर्थक
गोष्टींचाही अहंकार होतो. एक दिवस मला एक महिला भेटली.
ती इतकी गर्विष्ठ होती की, ती हसतसुध्दा नव्हती मी
विचारले "या स्त्रिची काय अडचण आहे ? लोक म्हणाले " ती
शरणागतिमधे तुम्ही अशी स्थिती विकसित करता की
त्यात तुम्ही आंतरवामी संन्यासी होता,याचा अर्थ तुमच्यावर
कोणीच प्रभुत्व चालवू शकत नाही. संन्यासी व्यक्ति इतर
प्रत्येक गोष्टीच्या वर असते त्याला काहीच चिकटू शकत
बाहुल्या वनविते म्हणुन तिला गर्व आहे.". त्यात विशेष काय
आहे? कोणीही वाहुल्या बनवू शकते. व्यक्ति अधीक अधीक
नाही.केवळ पाहूनच त्याला काय आहे ते समजते तो चुकीचे
काहीच करीत नाही बोलून दाखवित नसला तरी त्याला प्रत्येक
मूर्ख होत जाते, अहंकारी व्यक्तिची पहिली खूण ही असते
तो मी' ने इतका वेढला जातो मी है केले. मी ते केले "
गोष्ट समजते तो इतका अनासक्त असतो की अनासक्तीमधेच
त्याला चुकीचे काय आहे ते दिसू लागते, तो स्वतःच्या
जे बोलू नये ते बौलण्याची लाज पण त्याला वाटत नाही. तो
कुटुंबाला पाहु लागताच,
दुसर्यांना
पाहू लागताच त्याला
पापमय जीवन जगत असेल. अशा लोकांना स्वैराचाराची
चुकीचे काय आहे ते समजते तो कशाशीच समचित्त होऊन
दारू पिण्याची पण आवड असते. मग ते त्याच्या वढाया मारु
रहात नाही. मी तुर्कस्तानला गेले होते त्यावेळी एका स्थिस
लागतात. अहंकारी माणसाला लाज नावाचा प्रकार नसतो. तो
गृहस्थाला भेटले. त्याने माइन्याकडे आत्मसाक्षात्कार मारगीतला,
त्याच्या निरर्थक गोष्टींबहल सांगू लागतो. ते लोक त्यांचा
स्वित्झर्लंडमधे हे मी पाहिले नसल्याने मलाआश्चर्य वाटले
कृत्यांचे समर्थन करु लागतात. मी एका माणसाला विचारले
आत्मसाक्षात्कारानंतर लगेच तो गृहस्थ म्हणाला "मी परत
" तुला इतका मोठा हार्ट अॅटॅक आला होता तरी तू दारू का
जाणार नाही" हे स्पष्ट आहे की हा प्रकाश तुम्हाला निश्चितच
पितोस ? दारु पिणे बंद कर." त्याने समर्थन केले की " एक
प्रचंड सुज्ञता आणि संतुलन देतो.समजा, तुम्ही चालत आहात
मोठा कारखानदार वयाच्या ९५ या वर्षी सुध्दा दारू पितो
आणि तुम्हाला रस्ता दिसत नाही तर तुम्ही पडाल सुध्दा.पण
""दारू पिण्यामुळे
व दारू पिती व म्हणून तो यशस्वी आहे.
थोडासा जरी प्रकाश असेल तरी तुम्हाला दिस लागेल. सहज
तो एवढा यशस्वी झाला आहे ?" पण साधा विचार नाही
योगाने हेच केले आहे .त्याने तुम्हाला थोडा प्रकाश दिला आहे
कितिही माठा दारूवाज असू द्या पण त्याचा कोणी पुतळा
ता थोड़ा प्रकाशच तुम्हाला अनेक गोष्टींचा त्याग करण्यास
ऊभा केला आहे का ? कोणत्याही देशात दहा बायका
पुरेसा आहे.
13
 19940314_Mahashivaratri Puja - Witnessing Power, Surrender_Delhi.pdf-page13.txt 
 MarathiTranslation (English Talk)
श्रीशिवांच्या बह्दल तुम्हाला बरेच ज्ञान आहे. पण शिवांचे कोणी अहंकार दाखवितो तिसरे कोणी स्वतःचे महत्व
दाखविते, सहज योगात आल्या नंतर सुध्दा लोक असा
तत्व काय आहे ते तुम्हाला माहित हवे. ते क्षमा करतात. मान
सन्मान सुख, दुःख कशाचाही त्यांना स्पश होत नाही. ते
वेडेपणा दाखवितात सहज योगात आल्यावर प्रथम शिव
सर्वाच्या पासून दूर आहेत. श्री आदिशंकराचार्यांनी म्हटल्या
स्थितीला प्राप्त व्हायला हवे, म्हणजे संपूर्ण निरीच्छपणा.
प्रमाणे चिदानंद रुपः शिवोहं शिवोहं. आदिशंकराचार्यांच्या त्याच्यासाठी शरणागति महत्वाची.
वेळी त्यांनी शिवोहं सांगीतले, याचा अर्थ मी शिव आहे , ती
पूर्ण शरण गेल्यावर तुम्ही शिव आणि शक्ति यांच्यात
स्थिती मिळवायची प्रथम वैयक्तिक प्रयत्न त्या नंतर पुढच्या
येऊ शकता, शिवांना कशाचाच स्पर्श होत नाही त्यांना
स्थितीत आदिशक्तिंच्या प्रमाणे कार्यशील व्हायचे या दोन
अहंकारही नसतो व संस्कारही नसतात. त्यांच्या लग्नासाठी
स्थिती एक झाल्या नाहीत तर शिवांचे स्थान मिळवून काय
ते वैलावर आरुढ होउन आले होते. पार्वतिलासुध्दा लाज
फायदा? जर शिवच प्रत्येक गोष्ट करु शकले असते तर
बाटली की माझा नवरा मुलगा असा काय आला आहे! पण
त्यानी हे सर्व निर्मितीचे कार्य कशाला केले असते. त्या शव
ते स्वतःच्या समजूतीत रहातात. त्यांच्या वन्हाडात अनेक
स्थितीपर्यंत तुम्ही जायला हवे. जिथे तुम्ही पूर्णपणे निरिच्छ
विचित्र दिसणारें लोक होते. कारण कोण कसा आहे. कोणचे
होता. मग कोणत्याही गोष्टीचा तुम्हाला त्रास होत नाही.
कपडे कोणी घातलेत, कोणासारखे कोण दिसतो . याची
लोकांनी मला सांगीतले की एक सहज योगी पैसे खातो दुसरा
त्यांना जाणीव होत नाही. त्यांच्या या गोष्टी लक्षातच येत
14
 19940314_Mahashivaratri Puja - Witnessing Power, Surrender_Delhi.pdf-page14.txt 
 MarathiTranslation (English Talk)
नाहीत ते निरिच्छ होऊन वसले आहेत. ते अवोधित आहेत
कोणतीही गोष्ट तुम्हाला फर्सविणारी असते. म्हणून बाह्य
कारण निरुपयोगी गोष्टी त्यांच्या डोक्यात जात नाहीत.
जगात एवंढे चित्त घालणों चुकिचे असते.
अनेक लोक कुणाच्या तरी घरी जाऊन विनदिक्कतपणे
जगात, विशेषतः आपल्या देशात पाश्चात्य संस्कृति
त्यांच्या गालीचाला वगैरे नावे ठेवतात. पण तुम्ही गालीचाला
कशी येत आहे ते आपल्याला दिसते लोकांची दृष्टि किती
भेटा्यला आलात का माणसाला? कोणी स्त्री. दुसरीच्या साडी
वाह्यात आहे ते पण आपल्याला दिसते. इंग्लंडला जिथे श्री
वर टीका करते. तुम्हाला माणसाला भेटायचे असते त्याच्या
पीसचा सूट घालतात तिथे गांधीजी धोतर नेसून गेले. चित्त
तत्वाला भेटा, माणूस काय आहे े समजून घ्या. वाह्यातून
आकर्षन घेण्यास लोक असे कपडे परिधान करतात की काय
पहाणे ही शिंवांची पध्दत नाही. लोक कारय म्हणतील, मी
ते पहायला हवे. पण माणूस जेव्हा आतून मुक्त होतो तेव्हा
कसे रहावे, हे व्हायला पाहिजे वगैरशी त्यांचा संबंध नसतो.
सत्याशिवाय इतर सर्व गोष्टींचे त्याला महत्व वाटत नाही.
त्यांची पहिली पत्नि वारली तेव्हा तिचे मृत शरीर ते पाठीवर
सत्याला ओळखणे हे शिवांचे पहिले तत्व आहे. तेव्हाच फक्त
घेऊन गेले. कोण तसे करील? पध्दति असाधारण आहेत.
आपण आदिशक्तिचे कार्य करु शकतो. कोणी काही म्हणाले
पण त्यांचे तत्व त्यांच्या मते काय वरोबर व काय चूक आहे.,
किंवा अपशब्द उच्चारले तरी काय झाले ? पण आतले तत्व
ते समजले पाहिजे. त्यांनी त्यांची पत्नि रावणाला देऊन
स्पष्ट असावे. दुसर्यांच्या मधे तत्व विघडले असले तरी काय
झाले? तम्ही ठीक करू शकता. तुम्ही दुसर्यांच्यावर टीका
टाकली होती कारण त्यांना माहित होते की त्यांची पत्नि देवी
आहे रावण तिला काय करु शकत होता? त्याच्या एवजी
कराल पण स्वतःवर करणार नाही, तर मग तुम्ही केव्हाच
तिच रावणाला ठीक करेल.
ठीक होणार नाही. शरणागत होणे म्हणजे तुमच्या आंत जे
काही आहे ते सोडून रहायचे. शेवटी शुध्द आणि पवित्र असा
प्रत्येक गोष्टीकडे भैतिक दृष्टिकोनातून पहाण्याची
जो तुमचा आहे , त्याच्या जवळ तुम्ही आनंदात रहाल आणि
आपली प्रवृत्ति असते.
वाह्यातील इृष्टि कमी होईल तसे
तो तुम्हाला पूर्ण कार्यक्षम वनवेल. आज श्रीशिवाची पूजा आहे
आतली दृष्टि उघडेल. व्यक्तिचे आंतरीक मोल समजण्याचा
आणि तुम्ही शरणागतिच्या भावनेने येथे बसले आहात.
प्रयत्न करायला हवा. आता खेड्यातील काही लोक थोडेसे
यड
शरणागतिचा दुसरा भाग जो तुमच्यात आहे . तो म्हणजे
अशिष्ट पध्दतिने वोलतात. लोकांच्या विविध भाषा असतात.
तुम्ही आत्मसाक्षात्कारी आहात. तुम्ही लाखांत एक आहात
आणि म्हणून तुम्ही त्यांच्यावर रागवता. पण तुम्ही लक्षात
हा आशिर्वाद तुम्हाला मिळाला आहे आणि आपण किती करू
घ्यायला हवे ती त्यांची पध्दत आहे. त्याच्यामुळे आपमान
शकतो त्याचा तुम्ही विचार करा.
बाटून घेण्याची गरज नाही भैतिक जगातील संदर दिसणारी
15
