DIVINE COOL BREEZE Vol. VI, Issue1 & 2 Contents Prayer to the Devi 1. Navratri Puja 2. Diwali Puja - Russia 3. Mother's Advice on Puja Press Interview at Russia (Synopsis) Editor : Yogi Mohojan Published by : The Divine Cool Breeze 9, Bhuyochintamani Soc., Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411 029 Printed By: Computex Graphics, 112 High Tech Indi Centre Caves Road, Jogeshwari East, Bombay 400 060 Vol. VI Issue 1&2 1 Divine Cool Breeze 5.

 PRAYER TO THE DEVI O Goddess, remover of affliction, be gracious, be gracious, O Mother of the entire world. Be gracious, O Queen of the universe, protect the universe. You, O Goddess, are the Queen of all that moves and does not move. You alone are the support of the world, because you exist in the form of earth. By you who exist in the form of the water, the whole world is filled, O inviolable warrior. O you who dwell in the form of intelligence in the hearts of all beings, O giver of heaven and liberation, O Goddess, O Narayani, praise be fo you. O power of creation, preservation, and destruction, O eternal one, O basis of all qualities of matter, O one who is filled with qualities of matter, O Narayani, praise be to you. one whose hands and feet are everywhere, whose eyes, head, and mouth are everywhere, O one whose ears and nose are everywhere, O Narayani, praise be to you. O one whose form is everything, O Queen of all, O one endowed with all powers, Protect us from all fears, O Goddess, O Durga, O Goddess, praise be to you. When satisfied, you ward of all diseases; but when angry you destroy all that is desired. Those who take refuge in you do not become afflicted; yea, those who take refuge in you become a refuge. Be gracious to those who have bowed before you, O Goddess, O remover of the misfortune of the universe. O you who are worthy of praise by the dwellers of the three worlds, be a boon giver to the worlds." 1. Selected verses from the "Narayani Stuti", Devi Mahalmya which the Gods sung to the Goddess after her killing of the Demons Shumbha ond Nishumbha. Vol. VI - Issue 1&2 Divine Cool Breeze 2.

 NAVRATRI PUJA 24TH OF OCTOBER 1993 The Devi has many forms but it is the embodiment of the Shakti. Adi Shakti gives Shakti to all these embodiments and so there are many Goddesses. At different times they came on this earth ond did all that was necessary for the ascent of the people who were seekers. Especially the one we know of, Jagadamba, Durga. She was trying to protect all the seekers of truth and destroy all evil forces. Without the ascent of human beings they do not know the truth, and that's why, whatever they try to do is a mental projection. This mental projection, if it is not substantiated by truth, and by dharma, it declines. In sanskrit they call it "gnani". When this gnani takes place, then incarnations are born to solve the problem. In all incarnations of the Goddess there have been many incarnated satanic forces, She had to fight with them and destroy them. This destruction was not for destruction's sake that the evil forces had to be destroyed, but evil forces always try to put down the seekers and the saints and try to harm them. All these destructive forces do not come at the same time, norm rmally at different times it is easy to handle. The embodiment of an incarnation is to save, to protect the people who are seekers because they are the most important people in the realm of spirituality. If they are not seeking the truth then in the eyes of God, they are just useless lives that have come and will be finished. They have no value and dignity, they have no understanding of anything. In the judgement of the Divine love we have two types of people. One who are seekers of truth and another who are not. They may be good people, they may be nice people they will be doing good work, social work, missionary work, etc. But if they are not seeking the truth, then they do not come into that category where God has to incarnate, So try to understand the preciousness and importance of seekers. That is what you have been : seeking. If you take the percentage of seekers it is very, very (..small) but it is very important. Becouse, let's say, one little part of gold is much more valuable than mounds of steel. In the same way a seeker is much more valuable in the growth of spirituality. The whole universe was created, the whole atmosphere was built, all the evolution took. place for what? That human beings should know the truth. But the modern atmosphere, is a very big curse, the greatest evil than all the Shumba, Nishumbas and all that, the worst of all is materialism, because materialism makes you gross. In your seeking also when you are rising, subtly that materialism catches you. When people come to Sahaja Yoga, they go deep into themselves, all the inner knowledge they want to know, what is called as Atma Gyan. Atma Gyan means two things : the knowledge about the Spirit and the knowledge about yourself. This state is the state for which people have been doing all kinds of things, going to the Himalayas, meditating in the cold without much clothes on, living in the caves with some fruits. All kinds of tapasya they would do because the seeking was so deep, so urgent and they could not get out of that force of seeking. But in the modern times, materialism retards that hankering, that dedication. It's maddening for people when they are seekers. I've seen before coming to Sahaja Yoga, people spend a lot of money, go to various places, go to Himalayas, Nepal, Japan, etc. But after they have become the spirit for the growth of their new awarneness, the progress Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VI - Issue 1&2

 is retarded. Also one should understand that after so much of running about you find something so precious, so you settle down, and you feel very satisfied about it, that part is all right. But later on your growth should not stop. That stops because one of the main reasons is materialism. Because of materialism your faith in yourself is also less. Now as you have seen that the Gods pray to the Goddess and She came and killed all the negative forces. The reason was the earnest desire of the Gods compelled Her fo take an incarnation. Such a sincere desire of ascent that they could not get sometimes food, even water, and they worked so hard for their ascent which was disturbed by negative forces. Their call from the heart was so desperate, genuine and sincere that the Goddess had to take birth on this earth to save them, to protect them, and to look after them. But we find that once you have reached a destination, you feel: now better settle down. Now what do you mean settle down with? If after getting realisation you are complete, you are in totality, you are absolutely one with reality, there is nothing to be done, you become a saint. A saint does not need any advertisment, he does not need anything, his message spreads, people see him and know he is a great saint. Somany ysaints did not even leave their houses. A very common saying in India is, "the pillow where you are resting, you should not leave". That was the criteria of a guru. Those who have to seek should come to the guru and climb at least six, seven miles up, and then the guru dosen't meet anyone, he may slap you, hit you, or he'll take your test in many ways. Ultimately he may select one person to give realisation. This hankering, this desperate effort was all the time there. Now we come to Sahaja Yoga in this modern times. You know thatyou have got realisation, you all know that you are better than others, that you have got rid of so many problems and that you now have become a master of your own. Then the responsibility that you have towards yourself and to your fellow men reduces, because you feel very satisfied with yourself. The other day some sahaja yogini rang me up, she said : I went to the doctor and they put radiation and they found I was pregnant, so what should Ido about the baby? For such a small thing they will ask me. Who choses the name of her son, what is this, what is that. I have to do much more work than any priest has to do. Little, little things they are worried about. That part is alright, that I have to tell you what is to be done at such a point. If they miss the train, they will telephone to me: Mother we have missed the train, now what to do? So I have to tell them, allright give a bandhan, or supposing their father is sick, he has a heart trouble. Then they'll telephone me: Mother my father is sick, he has a heart trouble, he is not a sahaja yogi, what can you do about it? So Mother has to put attention to a father who is not a sahaja yogi. Small, small things they write to me, such small things that you can't imagine, they do not understand what I am here for. Still I've never said that this is a stupid thing to ask me, you should not waste my time, never. But it is to be seen now that if you do not value yourself as realised souls, you can not value my time also, or what is myself. This incarnation can be wasted completely because of this materialistic attitude. In this modern timesI don't know what has gone wrong with human beings, because the most important thing in your life is to ascend and to grow. Take a big vision of the whole thing, why this universe was created, why you were created as human beings, what was the need to do all these things, for what is it done. If you have a very big vision of the whole thing, then try to locate your position; where am 12 And then; how the divine has selected me and now I have become a Sahaja Yogi. So now what is my responsibility, that one has to see. But on the contrary l've seen people who are saying:I want to ask for it. They take the telephone and ask: Mother'should we take our chair or not? That shows they have no value about themselves and no value about me. Both ways. Because they are asking such small things, such silly things, that it is impossible to understand Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VI - Issue 1&2

 how could Sahaja Yogi ask such questions. In this prespective we can see the Goddess, She comes on this earth in different forms at different times to save the seekers of truth and to work out their ascent. Can you imagine? It's a very big difference in the incarnation of the Goddess before Kali Yuga. Why now, is it a different thing: that you have come on this earth to be the Sahaja Yogis. You have to have a body, a mind, feelings, everything, which is just charged with spirituality. How many years in the past you have been seeking God. Then, that you came here, was it a coincidence! Then, what is it? When you have such a great advantage that you have come to Sahaja Yoga because of your seeking and now you have found the satisfaction out of it, what is the responsability that very you have? That the incarnation itself has come on this earth, not only to protect you, to nourish you and to kill the demons. No, She has come on this earth to tell' you about everything that is subtle inside and to tell you what your relationship should be, outside as well as inside. You were never connected with truth, you were never connected with this connected with God Almighty. One has to understand what a great thing has happened, that out of me only, this Kundalini has come out and she has touched these higher centers. How? This was not done before, na, they were just protected, they were just looked after. Nowhere it is written that the Goddess has given realisation to people, nowhere ! She is responsible, She can give, one of Her, names is that, not one but at least ten names are there, that She gives your 'nirvana', that She gives you your freedom, that She introduces you to rebirthing. All these things are written, but, what is happening now is that people have not yet been able to grasp the value of their life in the modern time. all pervading power, you were never See the way people ask questions, the way people's enquiry is on, the way people are worried: now my child is big, what should I do? What should you do? The child is big, put it to school, do what you like! Mother, would you please tell where to put the child? Then you put the child. Have you seen the school, Mother? Nol haven't. Then you go and inspect the school. Imagine Kali Mata doing that! But to that detailed extent a Mother would have to work: You would'nt do that for your own child I know, But then it comes to children, what are they doing? Still materialistic. Today especially is a very great day of the Dussehra. This is the daywhen Ravana was burnt. Effigies of Ravana were burnt all over the place. But it is Shri Rama's victory. It is nof that he made sahaja yogis or he gave realisation, no, his victory was that he killed Ravana. That was done that time for today's preparation, for today's happenings. This was done long time back that these days will come when people will have a proper. value system of the victory of Shri Rama. But it doesn't happen, because this incarnation of Mataji Nirmala Devi, is very different, very illusive, Mahomaya. You are left to yourself to do what you like. Whatever you like you can do. For every small thing they will refer to Mother, but for important things they won't! Sort of a funny use of the whole thing has started, that which is so great, so important, is used for something absolutely nonsensical. See the difference between the incarnations. One incarnation comes in this world to save the people, to bring them out of the maya of maya. But another incarnation which has come is not only just to talk about it, but to give you your realisation and then to look after your small, small things. So when this lady telephoned and asked me: What should I do? Please Mother cure me. It is a very different attitude between the bhaktas of those days and the bhaktas today, there is a very big difference. I said; "You never asked me whether you did all that, it doesn't matter. Now, whatever you have done, it is better I see the child, look after the child, put the child Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VI - Issue 1&2

 right, everything, but you come along". But then I realise this woman is so attached to her child And I telephoned the leader and he said it's terrible, what I saw, there is a terrible attachment to the child. So from one nonsense to another, This incarnation has such a variety of jobs to be done. Even the 64 kalas, the 64 expertise of Shri Ganesha is not sufficient to solve this. Why is it so complicated? After giving self realisation it should be a straight forward march towards your goal and your growth. Why is it that such a complicated nonsense is all the time bothering you? What do you want? We should ask? What do you want? I want a child. After Sahaja Yoga you should not want anything. Why do you. want to have a child? There are so many children, you can look after them. "I want", should go away from your mind that "I want this and I want that". This wanting is over now, what you. is your self realisation. After that, what has happened is that what "I want" is more important. want I want that you should become really detached from materialism. That doesn't mean that you should become like Hare Rama Hare Krishna, no, they are not detached. They are very much attached people. Detachment is a state where nothing can bind you, nothing is important, most important thing is your spiritual ascent, nothing can attract you more than this. This sahaja yogis should understand. Compared to sahaja yogis, what other people have gone through. When I read it, really I feel terrible. Here everything is convenient, come along, enjoy nice food, nice company, it's a festival going on, everything is proper and if something is missing, I'll be the one who will tell the organisers: what is this, you should have done this, you should have done that. Now we come to a point where we have to understand: what do we want? What is the use of killing Shumbas and Nishumbas? Because you are static, you are glued in one place, no progress: So what's the use of doing all these things all the time.and destroy all that negativity? What is the purpose? everybody says. Mother You have given them permission, You have given them license, so now they are the way they are. The other day a young girl came to me, her child was very sick. I asked her: Do you meditate? She kept quiet. I said I can make out that you don't meditate, because I know what it is. So today's main thing is that it is a Dussehra day when the people go, cross the boundaries of their villages and bring gold for the parents. Now what you have to do, is to cross the limits of this materialism, this nonsenscial dwarfy force that is working on you have to transcend and bring, what I said, gold, that is on untarnishable thing, from the borders of Sahaja Yoga. How many of you really are in the field of werk? How many of you are telling about this to people? What are you doing about it? The "surrender" state has to come. Far example you have a problem, let's say a problem that you have no holidays. I know you want to come for puja. Now if you want to come to puja, you just come, not only you'll get a job, but you might get promotion. But you have no faith in yaur ascent you have no faith that you are the chosen one. Now where are we? We are the people who have been blessed with all the have been blessed, but we don't want to practise, we don't want to find out what powers we have got. We are worried about our own children, worried about what sari we are going to wear, or worried about who is the leader and what should we do about leadership. All these things are not going to help us, you're not here for that, try to understand you are here for becoming the spirit and then to spread the light of the spirit. Nothing matters, once you start doing that, you'll be amazed the faith works. It's not blind faith. You don't have to tell Me about it, it just works. It is a matter of a few days, you might get many results of what you have been hankering out. You might get material superficial things, but the question remains. Somebody, let's say, powers. We Divine Cool Breeze 6 Vol. VI - Issue 1&2

 wants to dedicate his life, so called, for Sahaja Yoga. Then what do you do? what do you do if dedicate? First thing is your faith, you must know how is your faith into anything. You you really believe in it or you do not. If you do believe in it, what have you done about it. At this stage you have to introspect. What are you doing? What are we to do? How far do we have to go? It's a very very important time and you are extremely important souls here. But if you don't value your own systems and yourself, why should God worry about you? Why should God try to give you ideas? Why should He try to fake any interest even in you, persons of that kind? We have to see within ourselves, introspect, what havel done for Sahaja Yoga? Except for looking after my children, cooking for the husband, that's all. Men can also think the same way: what have we done? What have we done for sahaja yoga? Just, I want to meet any politicians, I want to meet this person. I want to meet the person, for what? They should come and meet you! But your faith in yourself is very weak. I think that's the main reason for all this fall, is faith in yourself. This faith is such a thing that you know it is so. You have seen my photagraphs, you are heart. It convinced about it. There is nothing to be convinced, but this faith is not one with is just not with your being, it's outside. Alright, Mother will do that, Mother will solve this, Mother will do this. But the whole thing is now, to me it looks like it, that I have to compulsarily tell you to do some sort of a tapasya. You ask somebody : do you meditate? No Mother, So what are you doing here. There is some pain in my knees, so I came to you. Alright, But I don't meditate, I'm very honest. But who is the loser? Not me, l don't need Sahaja Yoga. I'm doing all the tapasya for your Sahaja Yoga. What are you people doing some tapasya for? your You have got your realisation, now you have reached that great state of understanding also of the inner knowledge and also about yourconnection with the Spirit and with God Almighty. All this you know. Despite that it is not yet what it should be from your heart, from your earnest desire. It doesn't help at all anyone to deceive oneself. I'm not saying something for X, Y, Z. I'm saying for all of you. Don't try to cheat yourself. You are here with such a great purpose. This purpose is to correct you and give the freedom of your minds from all this nonsensical destructive forces and then, to spread it all over, talk about it. My own.conviction is this: that something has to happen to sahaja yogis to realise how important it is to work out something that is within us, which is potential, which is just about to bubble up. It's this responsibility, whether you are a Jew,a Christian or anything, it makes no difference. If's all outside. For what you have to do that? You have come intoa new realm of awareness, into a new realm of a higher life where you know of your inner self, where you know all about, what is good and what is not. Everything, after knowing all this, also if you do not grow, then who will you blame? Now, we come to a point to understand the importance of this Kali Yuga, where your Mother is here to help you and also to look after you very tenderly, sweetly to tell you everything. Actually I cannot get angry with anyone for more than one minute to exploin to you sweetly what you should have done and which you can do, and which you have to do. All these things, really I would have been telling you all the time, bringing you round very sweetly and explaining to you and telling you that this is your own power which is within you and which you have to look after and praise it, and also you have got so many books or woys of understanding that. But this inner knowledge which you have is something like this, that, I have an inner knowledge about, let's how to build these things, but I don't do it. It's as simple as that. I just don't do it! I have say the inner knowledge, allright, I'm a P.H.D. but I'm mad. It's like that many people are mentally well equipped in Sahaja Yoga, I know. But as far as the following of Sahaja Yoga is concerned, they ore not there. So I'm warning you now. It's like Christ has said: Some seeds which have sprouted, fell on the street and dried out and died. Now the judgement is gaing on all the time. Divine Cool Breeze 7. Vol. VI Issue 1&2

 Every night you have to meditate and you have to then think about what have you done today, in the whole day, what have we achieved? Everything here works with the time, with the importance of nonsensical things. But what has to work is your faith. I'm going to do things which are fruthful, which are sensible (this is puja) for the right side because you worship Shri Rama, and his bow and everything. But think of this incarnation. Fourteen years he went to jail for a particular reason. For somebody, who has to go even for one year, it's a headache. It's not a jail, but it's what we can call, in the forest that he went, it was like to jail him. He was a king's son, he had no place to live, to sleep, everywhere he went he had to build his own little hut. He had to do it. Why did he do it? Because he had foith in himself, he is Shri Rama and he has to jolly well do these things. He had faith in himself and he had faith in God Almighty that whatever he's doing, he's doing as a will of God. And that is what I have to do, finished, l don'tcare whether I have to face Ravana or I have to face this or that. I am a Sahaja yogi, I don't care. My job is to spread Sahaja Yoga, alright, my job is to cleanse myself up and know myself. This is my work, my job and this is what I have to do. Il'm not bothered ifI get admission in the school or not. I'm not bothered if somebody has to go by by plane that he gets the ticket or not. You just won't believe that you show faith in yourself: youll get the admission, you'll get the ticket, whatever you want is there. It's all there, you don't have to strife for it, you don't have to bother for it. It's just there. In all my life it has been happening. faith is solid like the rock of Gibraltar, no question, because I know what I am and Of course my I know what I'm supposed to do. I have no problem: all the faith. I know everyone and I can that I can make out a flying bird. I may not show that, sometimes I may say alright, this is say good. But I know for definite what I am and what I have to do. In the same way you have to know about yourself, because you are a different category of people. You are not the ones who need protection from God, who need protection from the Mother, no, you have to give protection to others, you have to give light to others, you have to show them the path, so you are here for that purpose, not for getting a house income tax concession. All that nonsense you forget. Jolly well they'll have to give you a concession. I live like that, absolutely. When I'm travelling, I don't even think I'm travelling, I just think that I'm there, that's all! what you call or, One has to change one's language, the style and our understanding should be that we are rough people, we are rough so far as ourselves are concerned, with others we are kind, tender and sweet. Once it happened we had a transfer and we went into a house, but there was nothing to sleep upon, there was one bed, where my husband was sleeping. I said alright, take the challenge, I slept on the ground. Next day I had pain in the body, I fold my body: Behave yourself, you must learn to sleep on stones also and for one month I was sleeping on the ground. You have to be harsh with your body, you have to be harsh with your mind which gives ideas of materialism or of retarding your progresses in spirituality. New escapes, they find out. Ultimately you come to the last point where you do not think about a material life and you don't think of mental life or so called these spiritual lives or anything. But you think that it's alright, you are free from it and now you have become a free person and you can do what you feel like. Supposing you reach a state like that, then you just sit down and reach the state, finished. How are we to believe, what's the proaf that we have reached that state, you must show! There is a myth also in Sahaja Yoga, that he is a very senior sahaja yogi. I don't understand, what is this? How can there be seniority in Sahaja Yoga? It cannot be seniority, no question! Now let's say somebody enters into the sea, some are there for ages standing near the edge Divine Cool Breeze 8. Vol. VI - Issue 1&2

 of the sea holding on to the earth because they are afraid to swim, and some people who have come only yesterday might be jumping and going ahead and enjoying the sea. So how is it. He's a senior. We do not have this seniority business in Sahaja Yoga. Then another thing that we suffer from very much, very common is this, that "Mother said so". Anybody will say: Mother said to me, She called me and She said it. What did She say? Oh you are a very great sahaj yogi, you are this, you are that. Now there are two possibilities, one: I might have said it just to befool him, I am Mahamaya, or maybe I must have said all this just to pamper his ego so that he gets to Sahaja Yoga. Mother said so, you're such a great sahaja yogi, such in sahaj, very bombastic words, very bombastic language he would use. The judgement of a sahaja yogi desen't come from what he claims but from what he achieves. I've seen some sahaja yogis are extremely arrogant, they think no end of themselves, all that is there. So many sahaj yogis I've seen of that kind, that they are very arrogant and that they try to make a big show out of what great people they are. Humpty Dumpties as they call them. Alright, but what about a Sahaja Yogi who is not like that. His style is: he will just watch, he'll witness the whole thing, just enjoy and laugh at what is happening. What is this man talking like this, what is the sense of his talking like this. A person who is a sahaja yogi, is a gem, which you may fake him anywhere, to any place, people will say he's a gem. My own style is that, when I see a person or a sahaja yogi anywhere, first thing, Igo inside myself, then Isee that person in a very different perspective and understanding. Because all these powers are with you also, it is not my power only, only difference between you and me is that I have all faith in myself and you have no faith in yourself. We are at a cross road where we have to understand, who will go higher and who will go lower, you'll have to find out who is the one who is going to achieve something. Where am I compared to that person. It is said that you have to suffer, that you have to do that, nothing of the kind by God's grace, now, what is it, what will happen to a sahaja yogi, how will you know who is a sahaja yogi. How will you know who is just putting a lipservice. The only way is that you evolve, you become like a mirror and you see for yourself what sort of a person he is, and also you see yourself, what you are. Today's lecture is to tell you that all that we have done today is to understand our own values about our own life. We should understand why are we on this earth, what is our purpose and what we have to achieve. With this I give you my all blessings from my heart, I want you to accept my blessings to be the great lights of God's desire. Try to understand in what important times we are born and that you have become such good beautiful people of God. May god bless you. Divine Cool Breeze Vol, VI - Issue 182

 DIWALI PUJA RUSSIA 12/1T/93 (Synopsis) It is so very gratifying to see so many people from all over the world who have come to Russia to worship the Goddess Lakshmi. cannot explain everything intellectually, then you take course to arts to express your self, and take to symbols - what you cannot say verbally or express rationally. This is what an artist and a poet does, that he extends his imagination to such an extent that he creates a symbol. But his mind is limited and can only go upto a point, and if it is not substantiated by truth and reality after sometimes, it falls. The whole linear movement falls down and there is a decline. That is what we find in every area, today especially that everything which was sublime has declined. When you But after self-realizatian, when you have become the spirit your imaginatian touches the reality. Then the symbols which were perverted and misrepresented drop aut and you touch the reality of the symbols. That is exactly what has happened everywhere: For example, in India we have the Goddess of wealth as Lakshmi. This symbol of Lakshmi was described by saints and seers in reality, but later on people did not understand the symbol or the reality behind it, and they thought that the symbol of Lakshmi is money, wealth, gold, silver, diamonds and they started worshipping money. That is how the symbol of wealth, the Goddess Lakshmi was perverted. People don't understand that when they have money, why they start doing wrong things. The symbol of Lakshmi is very different. Firstly, the one who hos Lakshmi has to be a mother, like a mother must have the love of a mather for her children. She has to be a woman, and woman stands for something very sublime. Mother is the source of all the energies. She has patience, love and compassion. A man who has money cannot be happy unless he is compassionate, he uses this money for giving it io the others. What has happened today in the countries which are supposed to be affluent, they have gone all out to destroy themselves with the money they have. They have used money to express their anger, lust and greed. They have wasted this money in trying to show off that they are something very individualistic. Like in America, I met a very man and when Igot to his car, he told me thal the handles of the door open the other way around. Sol said what is the use of this kind of a thing! Anybody can get locked up in your car. He said it is my individuality, it is my genius which has created this, something not so common. When went into his house, they tald me, be careful, this bathroom is very special. If you press this button, you will just jump into this swimming pool. I said, I don't want to go to this bathroom. Then he showed his bedroom, if you press this button your head will go up. I said, I don't want to do these acrobats the whole night, I will sleep on the ground. rich People think sometimes that the Americans or the Europeans or the people who are so called affluent are very happy people. They are not, because they have no wisdom. They go on wasting money like this. These people hod so now this is not sufficient, we have to seek further. Then they took to drugs and all kinds of things. The Lakshmi principle is like this, She is a mother and in two hands She has got pink latuses. rmuch moneythat they did not know what to do. They thought Divine Cool Breeze 10 Vol. VI - Issue 1&2

 A lotus is a flower which comes out of the pond and allows even a thorny insect to come inside. That means a man with Lakshmi must have a whole household which is very beautiful like the lotus, welcoming everyone. This insect with all the thorns in it comes in and sleeps on the corona of that lotus very beautifully and in the night, the lotus covers it so that it doesn't feel the cold. A rich man is not the lakshmi-pati, he is not the one who has the blessings of the Lakshmi. But the rich man with wisdom, we can say has got the blessings of Lakshmi. Like the lotus is soanxious, so hospitable to get guests in his own being and to look after. In the same way, a persan who has money and who is supposed to be blessed by Lakshmi should be hospitable. The surprising thing is all those nations today who look to be affluent, are parasites. They looted all the countries. They formed empires. Like in India, we had the British for three hundred years as our guests, without any visa or immigration they.came. Now, if an Indian has to go to England, it is an impossible situation. Those who go there also are not treated at the same level, Same with America. Thank God, Columbus was coming to India and Sri Hanumana took him to America, otherwise all the Indians would hove been finished. They killed all the Red Indians there and took away all their lands, and now they are supposed to be rich. The sins they have committed have to come back on them. Then we can see about the people who think they are higher races because they can make more money. They have killed people in gas chambers, did all sorts of things. Is that the sign of being higher? If Christ is the symbol of higher personality, then what were his qualities? He was the noblest man, the greatest personality as far as morals are concerned, and such forgiveness, such magnanimity, such glory He was the one who was blessed with Lakshmi. Hewas a satisfied soul. Hewould not do anything wrong. Nobody could purchase him. After coming to Sahaja Yoga, it is important to know that you are blessed with Lakshmi. With one hand she gives. Her nature is to give. Like if one door is open, the air would not come in, but if you open the other door, then only it would circulate. To be satisfied is one of the qualities of a Sahaja Yogi. Some of them do ask for many miracles, that is not the way. Your attitude should be that you are now the spirit and the Spirit doesn't care for the comfort of the mind, body, but for the comfort of the Spirit. Many of you have become the spirit, but you are not aware of your own status; you have to be aware about it. With the other hand she gives protection to all those who worship her and work for her. Anybody who has money has to give protection to people who are employed by him. We have now transcended into an area where you hove no fundamentalism in your head, but you worship all the great incarnations, all the great seers, the prophets. Most of therm did not have any money, but they were satisfied souls. This is the quality of Lakshmi, Ihat she should safisfy. You know that in economics desires are not satiable in general. So what is the desire which is satiable? It is the pure desire, which is the kundalini. When you are absolutely satisfied and know that there is no sense in harkering after money, power and all the nonsensical things, then the Mahalakshmi principle is awakened within you. This Mahalakshmi principle gives you seeking. Then you become a special category of people who William Blake has described as Men of God. Then you dan't have these conditionings of your childhood, of your nationality, or outside religion. But you rise higher and become the Spirit. That is the time when you understand the Lakshmi principle within you. The Lakshmi principle is that you enjoy doing for others. In collective consciousness you want to do for others. Ifyou are still worried about yourself, only about your own comfort, earnings and glory, then you go into imbalance. Vol. VI - Issue 182 11 Divine Cool Breeze

 Lakshmi stands on a lotus completely balanced. Moreover, she does not assert her power that she is the Goddess of money. She is absolutely contented with her self. If you are not contented that means you don't know yourself. You are a half baked Sahaja Yogi. A Sahaja Yogi is a person who is absolutely contented within himself. Because his self, his spirit is the source of all the absolute knowledge, joy and the source of all the enlightenment for his atlentian. Joy is not happiness or unhappiness, which depends on ego, but it is absolute. After realisatian, you don't care for money or anything. If you have it, well and good. If you don't have it, well and good. You are completely detached. Lastly, I will tell you the story of Raja Janaka who was the father of Sri Sita, wife of Sri Rama. He was a king who lived about six thousand years ago. He had to wear all the ornanments and dresses that o king had to wear. But all the saints of those days used to touch his feet. Once Nachiketa, a disciple of one guru asked, why do you touch his feet? After all, he lives like a king. The guru said, you have no idea what he is. If he has mercy on you, he may give you self- realisatian. So Nachiketa went to the king and requested him for self realisatian. Raja Janaka said, I'm sorry, I can't give you self-relizatian. You can take all my property, my everything but I can't give you self-realizatian because yet you haven't got that personality. Nachiketa was disappointed and said, I'll wait till you are ready to test me and see if I could get realizatian. Raja Jankaka said, alright, let's go and have a bath in the river. While they were having a bath, the servant from the palace came and informed him that the palace was an fire. Raja Janaka continued to meditate. After some time the servants again came and said that, the fire is spreading here and your clothes will be burnt. But still Raja Janaka continued to meditate, but Nachiketa collected his clothes and ran out. Then he realised how detached Raja Janaka was about his money, wealth and family, and, look at me, to worry about a small thing like this! He had to dress like that because he was a king. Then he surrendered himself to Raja Janaka and got his self-relisation. In those days it was very difficult to get self-realization, or even to give self-realization. But these are special times the blossom time. They call it the "last judgement", you can call it the "resurrection time" - the "Kayama" as they call it in Koran. It is said that people will come out of their graves and get their resurrection and what is left in the graves is a few bones. No, all these souls which are dead will take human birth and take their self-realization in these special times. you have got your self-realisation because of the good deeds you did in your previous lives as we say poorva punyas. But you must respect it and understand that what you have got is so great. You have to know you are the Spirit now. You are special people. You are going to solve the problems of your country, community, society and families. You'll be solving the problems of the whole world. You are the ones who are going to bring peace on this Earth. You are the ones who are going to create a new world of beautiful Divine people. Now Have faith in yourself. This faith works very fast. It is not a false faith, it is a fact. Grow in Sahaja Yoga and don't be a dwarf. Now you are asking for the blessings of the Lakshmi. First thing, you should ask for is satisfaction; then the generosity. A person who has the blessings of Sri Lakshmi cannot be miserly. You know that blossoming time has come, don't pay attentian to your maladies, troubles. Things will improve definitely. Somebody was telling me he has got pain in the knee. I just felt I get so many times. pain in the knee because I absorb from you, but I never think about it. I never bother, because I see my body all right. Like this machine, if it is spoiled, you should cure it, finished, but all the have no karmas left. It is all finished and now yoU are beautiful new people. The you Divine Cool Breeze 12 Vol. VI - Issue 1&2

 time if you are thinking that this is paining here, this is paining there, I have all this money, I have to do this, do business, that business, finished. Now we have to live in the realm of superconciousness. I can go on speaking on everything sublime and beautiful. But lectures gre nothing but the web of words. You have to go beyond the mind. That is what is my own vision and so many have fulfilled it. I am always yours, wherever you want me to come, I will come. That my love is more than my own will. But you should love yourself and love your self- realisation. May God bless you. Divine Cool Breeze 13 Vol. VI - Issue 1&2

 MOTHER'S ADVICE ON PUJA A Puja or a prayer grows from your heart. Mantras are the words of your Kundalini. But if a mantra is not performed from the heart or if Kundalini is not associated with recitation of Mantras than that Puja becomes a ritual. Best is worship in the heart. You should say the Mantras in Puja but with great faith (Shraddha). You should perform the Puja when Shraddha goes deep so that heart itself gets all Puja performed. At that time, waves of bliss sfart flowing because it is the Spirit that is saying. People pour wine in the glass. Your Puja is like that. In that, wine is your faith and the glass is the recitation of Mantras and the worshipping. When you are drinking that wine forgetting everything how can a thought come! Then only you are bathing in the ocean of bliss. However the Joy that you get after drinking the wine is eternal and ever-present. Secondly you must know that your GURU has been the MOTHER of very great people. The thought of that itself should establish your GURU-TATWA(Guru-priņciple). What tremendous sons I have had. What great personalities. No words can describe and so many of them, one after another, and you are in the same tradition; My disciples. Keep them as your IDEALS: Try to follow them. Read about them, understand them, what they have said, how they have achieved such heights. Recognise them. Respect them. You will establish your GURU-TATWA. Imbibe all the STATUTES within you. Be proud about them. Don't be misguided by what the people are talking. We are going to pull the whole multitude towards ourselves. First of all let us establish our weight, the Gravity. As Mother earth keeps everybody pulling towards the earth, we will be pulling all of them to OURSELVES. Today, all of you must, within yourself, to your SPIRIT, promise that you will be a GURU worthy of your MOTHER. Now the Void is to be established. First of all you must know your GURU and SHE is on every CHAKRA. Imagine what tremendous GURU you have. With that you feel confidence and because of such tremendous GURU everybody is getting realization so easily. If you go to a rich man for alms he is not going to give two pices. Because She is so powerful you are getting your powers just like that. So you have to feel very happy about it, extremely happy and beautiful that you have these powers. At least those who have been in Sahaja Yaga will know it for certain. Those who have come to my lecture for the first time will be a little puzzled. All of you know for definite what it is. So, to understand, for your own Guru-power, you first know who is your GURU? "SAKSHAT - ADISHAKTI! Oh God; it is too much. Then establish your VOID. A Guru does not bend his head before anybody else, specially MY disciples; except for mothers and sisters and you see in some relationship, if itis, you bow to that. But they do not bow to anybody else. Today is the day of Gauri. Gauri is the one who, as a Virgin, created Shri Ganesha. And in the same pattern you have got your realisation. In the same pattern! So you have to use the same power within you, that is of Gauri, that you keep your heart clean. You must have a clean heart, clean thinking, there should be purity in your mind. Of course, the 'bhakti' (devotion) does give that purity, but if there is anything lingering in your mind I have to tell you there are three things that are going to happen from today. First, we have started Vishva Nirmala Dharma. You are under the vision of Shri Ganesh, under the guidance of your Spirit, and under the blessings of God Almighty. But be careful, because once you become that, you have to keep to that Dharma, have to be honest about it. you Divine Cool Breeze 14 Vol. VI - Issue 1&2

 If you have decided to keep to the Dharma from today onwards be careful; anything can happen to you if you get out of the 'Maryadas'. Till you keep the maryadas (boundaries) of Sahaja Yoga, saying - morning, evening, night that "I am a Sahaja Yogi" - nabody can harm you, hurt Nobody can trouble you. On the contrary you will be enjoying life if you keep to the 'maryadas'. But if you leave the 'maryadas' of Sahaja Yaga, you will have big problems. So, this is the second thing I want to tell you, that today we have started the great vision, which was promised long time back to realised souls. you. Everything is fine, just be your Self. Do not get upset with anything, do not get worried or anything. Just try to keep absolutely peaceful. I give you some tests by seeing how much you keep to that situation, of complete peace within yourself. If you have done no wrong, it's alright, doesn't matter, you have not done anything. As long as you have done no wrong there is nothing to worry. And, as it is, even if you have done some wrong, God is there to forgive you. So, don't have any worry; nothing. Have all the strength, have all the courage, and go ahead with this promise onwards. Now the third thing is that with all these things we are doing we must promise to God also that we will know about Sahaja Yoga, through proper understanding, reading every word of it we'll master the knowledge of Sahaja Yoga. We'll keep ourselves clean. And completely surrender our lives to Sahaja Yoga. This is what you have to promise in your heart. Surrendering to Sahaja Yoga is actually surrendering to joy, bliss, peace. In that you are the gainer, nobody is a loser in it. This is how today we have to decide once and for all. Because I see now, Sahaja Yoga is going to take a new turn. Definitely it is going to take. We are going to come up to a stage where thousands and thousands will join hands. But first of all those who are in the foundations - who are the first people must work very hard to keep themselves above all kinds of foolish temptations, all kinds of foolish things you have been doing, which is "Asahaja" (not Sahaja). Language should be sweet, your behaviour should be good, it should be very gentle and soft. You should move like a Yogi, live like a saint, and people should see through you, the greatness of Sahaja yoga. When in Italy I said that England is the heart of the universe, they would not accept it. They were very shocked at this statement. They could not believe that England could be the heart of the universe. One of the reasons was that they felt that the English people were invaded once by Romans, and Romans at that fime also felt that English were very bumptious people. They would not even accept the defeat with the grace of a person who has lost. Even if they were lost, they used to be bumptious. So they could not believe, how could it be that England is the heart of the universe. If this is the heart, what is the situation of the universe? And then they described to me at length the bumptiousness of the English, and then I felt that I have known something like that myself. Now to achieve that calibre should be possible because you are born on the special land of England. T hat possibility must be built within you. But then what is lacking? Why is it, that with all the possibility, with all the great background, with all the merits to be here, why is it we find that Sahaja Yogis, foryears together, do not come up to many others? What is the reason? Heart, if you see, has a pulse rate and it moves with a certain sound,and you can even get it onto a graph and it is so systematic, it is so regularised, it is so 'disciplined - that even a slightest murmur or slightest change shows on the graph; it is a very sensitive thing. And that is what is lacking here, is that discipline of the heart. Vol. VI - Issue 1&2 15 Divine Cool Breeze

 Now when we are celebrating the greatest of the greatest- this Navaratri, there must be something special about it, that we have to cleanse this heart completely, fully, and make it so pure that it purifies all the blood that passes through the whole of the body. So the cells of this heart, which has made this great organ, have to be the 'best', because the cells of the heart within a human body are the best cells, the highest quality, the most sensitive. And it's the heart that expresses the 'anahata' - the sound that is without percussion. While we find that there are some people of calibre, - there are but others who talk more, show off more, and do not have calibre. Cleanse this heart, be the best cells. It is an erratic funny heart which swells up an ego. And whatever one may talk, this is another reading people have, that whatever you may tell them, that time seriously they listen to you and second moment it has no effect on them. So this is another thing we should see that if it is within us let us understand that what we lack is discipline. And that disciplining has fo come, otherwise our calibre cannot improve. But for all that, I think what we should have is innate intelligence. No education, innate intelligence to understand that our calibre has to improve. Now here pulsates the Spirit and not the power. The witness, the one that watches, that is the reflection of the God, who is the Spectator of the Work of the Devi. Actually, what happens that, without rising up to that status, if we also say, alright, we are also watching the Sprit, then we do not achieve that calibre. And with all the blessings, - like seven auras of the heart, we have got seven ashrams. We do not understand that we all have to discipline ourselves. Only to take advantage or to be in the Sahaja yoga, to claim that you are a Sahaja Yogi, is not a sign of being a cell of the heart. And warning has to be given now. Very important at this juncture when Sahaja Yoga is now taking off, - remember this, - the speed has been gained, and it is taking off. Those who will be left behind, will be left behind. So do not get into bumptiousness. First is your character, as everybody says:- "They are very bumptious". Try to be humble and then understand that you have to be in the plane and not left behind on the grounds. It is moving fast. Just now I cannot talk of the higher two centres but let us at least talk of the seven centres. The of these centres, have we been able to develop within ourselves? How can we do it? You power have no time. You are all busy people. And bumptious. So now to develop these powers we have to 'concentrate' on these chakras. Everywhere I went, I was surprised, the questions they asked me, the way they were. Nobody talked about their family, house, jobs, or any other nonsensical things like unemployment and all that. They just asked me, "Mother, how do we develop the power of this chakra, or that chakra or that chakra. And I asked them; "How is it you are asking about a particular chakra?", They said, "Because we find this is missing in us, specially in me, this one is not alright". Now the most fortunate thing is that today is the Navaratri - and that I should be in London and this Navaratri puja should be performed here. No other country is that privileged, because this is the highest puja, the greatest ritual, which you can attend. So why do we do Navaratri? ln the heart, to do Navaratri is to accept the powers of the Shakti to realise the power that all these chakras have got in themselves and that when they are enlightened - how you can express all the of these nine chakras within ourselves. The seven chakras plus the heart and the powers moon makes it nine. There are seven of these, and on top of that, we should say two more centres, which Blake has described surprisingly as "nine centres" clearly. Divine Cool Breeze 16 Vol. VI - Issue 1&2

 Now for a realized soul, there is no need for me to discipline you or to tell you all these things, because I hate to talk in this tone to you today. But I have discovered that if I do not warn yoU now, tomorrow you will blame me that I did not warn you. Take it as a serious warning. Now, after realization there is no need for me to discipline you at all, because you have got the light, you have known what is realization, you have known what it is to be realized, and you have also known how much you have gained out of it, how much your personality has improved. But there is something more that has to be done. It is to see for your self, if you have really disciplined yourself or not. There is no need for any leader to tell you, there is no need for any ashram fellow to tell you, there is no need for any-one to tell you. It is you who is a realized soul, you are your own master, you are your own guru. Imagine you are all gurus, great gurus.and Sadgurus, respected Saints, where all the angels have to shower you with flowers.Think of it! And here you are, bumptiously giving lectures, talking bumptiously. Very embarrassing even for the deities. They do not know what to do, whether to garland you or to shut your mouth! Here you are, in such a great position that you have got realization. That the only thing you have to accept is the beauty of this great Yoga, that you just enlighten your own powers, which are on these seven chakras. I can understand about people who are ignorant, who have ignorance. Then in ignorance, of course how will they talk of innocence? But you are not ignorant people. You are knowledgable, you have got yourenlightenment. And the power of innocence is so great. It makes you absolutely fearless-not bumptious-but fearless. And the greatest thing of innocence is that you are respectful. The sense of respect, if it is not developed within you, if you cannot develop the sense of respect for other Sahaja Yogis, for other people, for the Ashram, for the discipline and your own Self-respect, then it is of no use, even talking of Sahaja Yoga, because that is the very beginning of it. First you do not respect, alright, you are bumptious, alright, you are in a big fool's paradise, as they call it, riding a fast horse, once you have seen the light, you must try to get rid of all the snakes you have been holding on to, - it's a simple thing. - all that is there is alright; is forgiven. But Now, let us see the first chakra, belongs to the power of Gauri, the power of the Mother of Shri Ganesha. Gauri's power.Tremendous they are, aren't they? Because of Her power you have got your realization. Now what have we done to enshrine that power within ourselves? Today is, if it is the first day of Navaratri, let us see what have we done? Have we been able to develop our innocence within ourselves? When people talk, they are so sharp. How can you be sharp if you are innocent? They are so bumptious. How can you be that if you are innocent? People play games. How can you do that if you are innocent? So first of all you have to see yourself, that the power of innocence if it has to live, all the rest of the nonsense has to go away. If you want to have the innocence, all that is anti-innocence has to be dropped out. In your childlike nature only, you can receive the blessings of Gauri, otherwise you cannot. You have to be really childlike, otherwise it is absolutely useless, no use telling you anything becouse you think you are too clever. To such a person, who thinks he is clever, what's the use of talking to such a person, because he already knows everything. So the first power, when you develop, you must learn to sit on the Mother Earth, first of all. You must respect the Mother earth because the first chakra is made out of the Mother Earth. Try to be more settled down with yourself on Mother Earth. And the respect. Seethe trees when they get their flowers, they are not so respectful; but when they are laden by the fruits they bow down to Mother Earth. In the same way, when you have got the fruits of Sahaja Yoga, you must all bow down. Vol. VI - Issue 182 Divine Cool Breeze 17

 Innocence has a special capacity to make a person extremely peaceful. 'Extremely peaceful'. No onger, temper or violence. If a person does not have innocence, peacefulness cannot come in it, because a person who is not innacent is either sly or aggressive. He cannot have peace within his heart. But an innocent person is not bothered, innocently he lives, he enjoys everything in complete peace and harmony. Butthis violence comes when a person becomes clever. Hethinks "I am so clever, that another one is so stupid, I have a right to shout at that person". And the one who is not innocent is 'never' wise. He may be, to look at, look sharp, but he is not wise. Wisdom comes only with innocence. And how much wisdom have you gathered? - that is what one has to see. That is what we have to see. Have we been able to discipline ourselves? Because our growth is very much in the beginning of it. We hove to grow quite a lot. And people do not understand this point in an atmosphere of egoistical temperament, that you have to grow, you have not yet grown. You have to grow a 'lot. And when you grow, you find this wisdom really fragrant with compassion. Your wisdom is fragrant with compassion. When your power of innocence increases, wisdom is apparent. People say, "That fellow is very wise" for example if somebody is crying about his wife, a wise person will say "Oh Baba! just look at this, still busy with his wife". Another one is crying about his house or something. He will say "Oh look at this one still busy with the house". There is no end to it. I have known people get So swollen up that they think they must give a big lecture for ane hour, on Sahaja Yoga. Unless and until they have given one hour lecture, they do not think their ego has manifested itself properly. But a wise person, he doesn't have to talk or speak or do anything. He impresses his silence, his wisdom on others much more easily. You have to explain to yourself, only yourself - So every-one should meditate every day. That is a 'very important thing' which people are doing in all the countries where I am not. Because lam in England, people take me for granted: "Mother is doing everything". So, Iget up at 4 O'clock, take my to meditate. So at least let me meditate for your sake. So everyone must today promise me that they will meditate everyday, Get up in the morning. "We cannot get up in the morning". The whole world can get up, why not the English? But when it was the battle of Waterloo, they were the first to arrive there. They won the war because they were punctual. What has happened to their punctuality today? We are not drinking, we do not have hangovers; we do not sleep late; so why should we not decide today that:- "Every morning I will get up and do my meditation. And while meditating I must concentrate on myself and not on others. And see for is catching, where am I catching? Which chakra I am catching, what have I to do? bath, meditate for you all. I better start doing that again. Otherwise you have no time myself what So on this first day of Navaratri, today as the first day the Gauris' powers must be enlightened within us, and they must express. And they are 'tremendous'. lconnot describe them in one lecture. Think of the Primordial Kundalini. She acts in the Mother earth, She acts in the Universe, She acts in the animals, She acts in the matter, She acts in the human beings. And now She acts in you. She is the one who decides the face and the figure that you are going to have. She is the one who decides what child you should have. She is the one who gives you that particular child that need. She is the One who has got you all these beautiful children. She is the One who you has given you these sparkling faces and sparkling eyes. All this She has done for you, but what about the power that you have within yourself? How much have you manifested that? Divine Cool Breeze 18 Vol. VI - Issue 1&2

 Sahaja Yogis today represent the growth of this Universe, the growth of the human race. Do you follow this point that you are playing such an important role at such a crucial time when the world is about to collapse? And you have great seers like William Blake, you had such great all people who have talked about this time. They have built it up. Traditionally we have built up this. Now in England, the work of Sages that has brought this England fo this stage. Now do you realize that the position of English Sahaja Yogis is 'very important'? But lack of wisdom and bumptiousness without understanding your Self, how can you talk so loud? How can you think of organising everything when you yourself are so weak, sa bumptious? The Primordial is working very hard, no doubt. But whot about you, the individuals, who have got their own Kundalini awakened? How far have you opened Her out? And what is Kundalini is simple thing as you know, is the 'true desire'. So true desire to perfect yourself, to grow yourself. If it is really true desire nothing else is important. All other desires are secondary and tertiary. The most important desire is to grow. And for whose advantage? Is the advantage of yours, and in your advantage only the advantage of the whole world rests. So today I am not going to take the count of the people who meditate every day or not. But I can tell you this much, nextyear, those who do not meditate everyday, he will not be here anymore. Take it from me, is a fact. Everyday you must meditate. Discipline yourself. Now you have come to a new perspective. You have come to a new vision. Now when you see that vision, when know the vision, you cannot just stand there.... Get into it. you Everyone says, Damie was saying too, everybody says that, "Mother you have spent so much time for these English. Why so much time for them? Maybe you might be thinking that because you are very great, that's why I have to serve you people. Think the way you like. But the most important thing is that you are the land of the Heart and I have to cleanse you more, much more than athers. But it's just the other way rounid. Others are going so fast. lam amazed, their vibrations, their sensitivity, their understanding and they have just mastered it, 'everyone' of them. Here it is becoming a very centralised stuff and everybody does not want to understand Sahaja Yoga, but everyone wants to give a lecture. There is no respect for elders. No respect who is older who is younger, and somebody who thinks that because they got realization before others, they are higher, then remember one word of Christ:- that, "First will be the last. So try to understand that it is you who has to grow, it is you who has to manifest these powers. Manifestation of the powers I do not know how far you have understood. Here in England it is - "That feliow just touched me, and now I have become egoistical". If there is one fellow who is egoistical, he just talks to another person, the person goes egoistical. I mean this is not the way to be sensitive. You nave to be sensitive to God and not to bad things. But we are more akin, more vulnerable to bad than to good. So the power of assimilation of good, all these powers are just in your complete reach. But all this should not become a praise, but should become a kind of challenge, a kind of a beautiful curiosity and an advancement for you. Funny people, with tags, such people will have to be warned, and later on may be declared as black listed, I am really very sad today when I see the vibrations, when l see the way things are, people are just in a picnic way in England, I feel so unhappy you do not know. T have always been extremely enamoured, and I have already put up a big show of appreciating your efforts. Just watch within yourself. When a person who has Gauri's power, as soon as he enlers a hall of any place, everybody's Kundalini rises, just to salute. When you have Gauri's power then you stand out because you have that innocent, lustless, greedless, beautiful, sparkling eyes and wherever you turn your eyes, Vol. VI - Issue 1&2 Divine Cool Breeze 19

 even one glance would raise the Kundalini immediately. People who suffer from cancer, suffer from this disease, that disease, all can be cured in no time if you have developed only one power of Gauri. All your problems can be solved. Negativity will go away, and you will become like a lotus, beautiful, fragrant, overpowering all kinds of negativity.: "Become that power'. Just see the substance, you watch within yourself. Each individual should see the substance that is within us. We are worried about a friend, a fiance or a wife or a husband, or this and that. That is not the calibre. The calibre is very low and going lower. That is not a good thing. If My love and compassion is spoiling you I better pull you out of it. Because you are capable of your merits to be born in this country. You 'are' capoable of very great heights. I know that. Of very great heights, which you can achieve. But not by talking about it or thinking about it, but by 'becoming' that great power, so 'become that power, See the collective blessings people have, I was amazed when they told me, they have got this blessing, that blessing. I mean unlimited blessings they have got. And why can't we have that here? What's the problem with us? If we arenot collective, if there is a problem between ourselves, that means there is still some sort of an ego still in-between keeping us out. So let us now promise, within our heart that this has to go into your heart, a very deep feeling for ourselves, "that by God's grace we are born at such a juncture when this thing has happened, that we are the people who are beneficiaries of the blessings of God - that we have got our realisation, that we have risen so high. But now let us spread our wings. In Munich (after being arrogant) they became intense! - even children, 'so intense', listening to every word I was saying, and picking up pearls, precious as diamonds, 'every word' they were noting it down. They are people of determination. If they decide to do good, they will do lot of good. But here (London), as soon as I go away, people start discussing something so nonsensical! Thear it. Iknow the vibrations and everything. We are not intense, we must increase our intensity. That is what is called as 'Shraddha'. Is important, very important. I am sure this year you will make it a point to do 'intense' understanding of Sahaja Yoga. Maybe there is something gone wrong with you in the past and you are conditioned or think too much about it. How can I do it? You can do it, everything, you forget the past. Past has no meaning whatsoever in Sahaja Yoga. You are being completely renovated but just use your mechanism. I work so hard with you people that nothing is wrong with your mechanism. Only thing is that you have no faith in yourself. And those who do not have faith in themselves are always bumptious people. So, first of all, station yourself within your Spirit, within your heart, and fry to develop your powers, inner powers, not of talking and showing off, but inner powers. We are cutting down our wings. Don't become small minded people, worried about small things here and there, nothing is important. If you see in your previous lives-: yaou have had all kinds of foods, you have had all kinds of trips, you have done every kind of marriage, you have done every kind of other norisensical things that people waste their time with. It is over now, finished. Now you do something new. How many people you have married in how many previous lives and houses you had and how many pleasues you have had. Finished now, finish it, This is a special time. The best time of Ritambhara, where youhave to grow. That's the point, the season is that. In this season if you do not grow,you wouldn't grow. You have to take full advantage. With full intensity you have to do Sahaja Yoga. That does not mean that you give up your jobs, or anything. If you are intense in Sahaja Yoga, you will be intense in everything. But there is no intensity. It is a shameful thing that even now in the temple of God (there are still so many people who are possessed by horrible evil things. How can it be?....they do not talk at all or they not eat at all. All this is indiscipline. But going higher to this spiritual life. 'best thing is to Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VI - Issue 1&2 20

 take discipline from your Spirit and you are disciplined automatically. Let the Spirit rule you. It is possible. It is possible because I have seen in such a short time and when I have been there for such a short time, I don't even know the names! Here practically I know all of you by your and by your vibrations also. And they have gone up so much. So, today is a great day, names, a great privilege. Always you are privleged people, like 'House of Lords'. Is true, but maybe one day will come when this House of Lords may be banished completely, You have to behave like Lords. That is why, my humble request is that you must learn to worship discipline. I do not say "Do this, do that", you know what is to be done. And then on top of that, you should not tell me, "I know I should not have..." When you know, why don't you do it? You are empowered. Today let us, with full confidence in ourselves and in our ascent, let us with full intensity attend this Puja and in our hearts decide that, "I am going to discipline myself. Navaratri is beginning with big force. Take full advantage of tremendous Vibrations. It's a great thing today that we are celebrating the Virgin's worship in England. according tn Sahaja Yoga, England is the heart where resides the Spirit of Shiva and that Virgin should be respected and revered and worshipped in England is a great honour, I ihink, for all the Sahaja Yogis. Now one has to ask why such an importance is paid to a Virgin? Why a Virgin is respected to that extent. What are the powers of a Virgin? That she can bear a child of that magnitude that was Christ, that She could create Shri Ganesha out of Her own body, that She could protect innocent, dynamic force of Her children, who are egoless, who have not known what is ego. So this great power and force resides in a person who has lots of 'poorva-punyas', who has done lots of good things in previous lives, who has always understood that Virginity is a power higher than any other power and would save the virginity and chastity with all her effort and care. As you know that within our body She is placed as Kundalini. Mearis She is ihe Virgin. She is untouched. The desire to become Spirit is without any blemish: Nirmal There is no blemish. It's wanting is pure. There is no other desire, but to be one with the Divine. All other desires are finished. As you know, You are blessed. So, instead of complaining, or being aggressive, you must know that it is a great favour to you. The greatest favour; that you are forgiven, completely, that this great blessing has been bestowed upon you. And to come up to it you have to work hard. Not to feel guilty about it; butto be humble, to be thankful. That despite what we have done, - played with ourselves completely - still we are today sitting as God's Devas. The Somrasa which is the Charanamrita, the water that washes the Mother, only 'you'are allowed to drink it, only the devas. You are sitting in that category, and how can you be demanding? Ido not want any one of you, whether men or womeri, to devēlop any guilt in your mind, because that is one thing which is the greatest blernish os you know at a later stage this guilt works in the opposite direction. It is of no help. But when we understand that we have these problems, we hove to be humble about it. Not quilty, but humble. Ifyou are not humble about it, and aggressive about demanding what have you got out of Sahaja Yoga and complaining about it all the time, while not seeing what are your'own' punyas (merits); what do you deserve?? Your Kundalini, despite every blemish, has been raised. You know that. We are today sitting as God's Devas. You have to humble yourself. By seeing your past, whatever mistakes we have committed - I am with you in this. Not to feel guilty. It's very embarrassing as I said to yGu, but please try to face yourself. We have to face ourselves as we are. When we lose aur innocence and our virginity, first thing happeris to us is that we become ego-oriented, and we start thinking "What's wrong"? Your shakti is your Kundalini, and She is virginity. She is your power. She is your strength. Your Innocence is your strength, the day you losi it, thait Divine Cool Breeze 21 Vol. VI - Issue 1&2

 is the day we have committed original sin. For us it is important that we have to be very humble about it and that we achieve something. What? Not the kingdoms and some kind of a luxurious life, but a seat in this Holy Land of Shiva. Shiva is forgiveness. He forgives everyone. Even the Rakshasas (demons) can be forgiven, but can they be given realisation? Even the Pishachas (lady denons) can be forgiven, but can they be given realisation? Forgiven is a different point. One aspect is forgiveness, so that they can remain for a longer period, they may live longer, because of Shiva's forgiveness, So what? But what a wretched life! And the people who are not innocent can never be Joy-giving. They are themselves miserable creatures and make everyone miserable. The arrogance is not a child- like quality. VWe have to be like children. And even when you were not, you were given realisation olright. But now you are sitting with the devas. Even higher than them. So what is our decoration? It is humility. It is simplicity. Not cleverness, arrogance, putting others down, showing off, but a complete surrender, surrendering all your egoistical qualities. Virgin cannot accept ideas which are not universal, She cannot. That's a sign of a Virgin because She is Universal by Nature. All fanaticism, all racialism, casteism, "all" these things which ortificially seperates man from man, woman from woman, nation from nation, will all finish off as soon as you become innocent. But you can't become, by brain-washing, you cannot. By Kundalini awakening, of course you can. But to maintain it, your progress should be 'inward' and not outward. To seek your roots. She is the Moola, She is the roots of your being. She manifests all your roots. So your attention should be towards your roots and not towards your shoots, you have been that. Face yourself, and develop your roots now. All the Western society is without the roots, you can see that. We have lost our roots, let's face it, as Western people, as I am also with you today. We have to find our roots. Let the Virginity be reborn in you. From today you all have to take a vow, - is the New Year's day for us, - "that we will surrender our horrible tempers, dominating natures, asserting behaviours, ego-oriented harshness, domination".I don't know what use it has. Unless and until you surrender that, the lord of Virginity, Shri Ganesha, will not be able to crown your Agnya Chakra. Whatever we have done so far should just give us this. If our past could give the idea as to how humble we have to be with each other, with all the Sahaja Yogis, how kind we have to be, how loving, how universal. You see in a tree which doesn't have roots. It dries out, it doesn't give any shade, afterwards it becomes a horrible dying tree. When it dies, it falls on someone. desert where only thorns can grow. When the whole society becomes so stupid as to hate each other, materialistic, then roses are not going to grow there, lotuses are not going to grow there. While you are the lotuses of this country. You are born in the mud alright, but now.come back to yourself. You were beautiful, you were like lotuses, fell into this mud, become the mud, out of which you come out, because of your true nature. Then you have become now lotuses, but. there is no fragrance. LotUs without a fragrance, one can't understand. Lotus has to have a fragrance. The fragrance that will overcaome the filth of this mud. Yaou have to grow more than Indians can grow. On the contrary the arrogance of people, Iam amazed. They start complaining this, complaining about that, complaining about one another. What do they think of themselves? Who are you? Because the roots are not developed. It grows thorns. I's like a Once you develop your roots, immediately the humility will start coming into your temperament. There is artificial humility, not from the heart. It will only come when you become Virgins, you become innocent. Innocence doesn't only mean morality, doesn't t mean only that. Many people Vol. VI - Issue 1&2 22 Divine Cool Breeze

 think that if you are a moral person; no, it also means a non-materialistic attitude. For people, carpets are more important than their children, morning till evening they will be scaying harsh things just to save few nonsensical things which are going to be left here permanently. Materialism is the 'hit', it's the one that hits you, your innocence. In my own life time I have seen that anything material gives you greater happiness when you can give it to someone. I have seen that way always. I'enjoy' the giving more than the taking. Imean, you try sometimes to give away something, and see how happy you feel. Of course it should not be done because you want to get rid of itl Actually it is done for that only, perhaps, because whatever you possess is a headache in anyway - even the subtlest form. Any possession is like getting possessed. It's slavery. It hinders your freedom to grow. But it goes hand in hand. If materialism means to make things to give others happiness, to present others, as a cup that carries the nectar. If materialism is that cup which gives the nectar of love, then it's alright. But you don't eat the cup do you? To Me, materialism sounds like people eating the cup, and not that nectar. Is cup more important, or the nectar? Supposing there is a golden cup and poison is placed inside that, will you take it because it is in a golden cup? Will anybody knowingly take poison in a golden cup because it is in gold? No common sense! There is no commonsense at all. That material things cannot give you happiness is the basic fact of economics. My innocence takes me to places where things are cheapest. And Iget the maximum 'Joy because I can give it. I know how to give it. That's how I would say, because of the 'real force' of your Spirit which is Virginity, you have lost the sense of joy also You are joy-killers, morning till evening you are killing each others joy, to say harsh things, you see, from this tongue, I was folding my hands before you because I knew it would little bit upset you, so I was just keeping it there, that your mind should not be disturbed so much, In my palms, you see, very carefully I was catching heart to keep it there, so that you should not be hurt so much so that you should not feel your hurt. Because, it was not harsh, but it was truth which was harsh but still, in my palms I was holding it, carefully, so that you should not feel hurt about it. So to hurt anyone, just open your tongue and hurt anyone, one doesn't understand how many ripples of hatred you are creating within yourself. Twenty-four hours are not enough for me te love people. Now years because I have not been able to love people as much as I wanted to. The flow is so great that my body suffers with that flaw, and sometimes I curse myself that why should I carry such load of love within myself? And little excitement with the pooja also, you know what happens to me. I shudder, sometimes, you are calling me for pooja, now what will happen? Then somebody can ask a question sometimes, "Mother did we not suck all your vibrations?" It is obvious, but don't want to say that. Because if I say that your Vishuddhi will be caught up again. You will suck less. , I will be sixty years of age, I don't think I have done justification to these sixty But now the time has come, you are the people who are going to change the mind of God with your good behaviour. The wrathful God. You are going to please Him. Who is going to deserve in this Western world? You tell me, today. You are the ones chosen for this, specially prepared for this, to create an era so that the Deity of compassion should be awakened, for the rest of them. The arrogance you have seen in the spread of Sahaja Yoga what happened. We had a programme where we had say a thousand people. For the next follow up there are only three. Il's typical. Ihave spent most of my precious time in this country (England), and in the West. Despite that the arrogance sometimes baffles me. Arrogance amongst each other, even towards Me sametimes they are so arrogant, I cannot think of anyone being that arrogant to Me, as the way Vol. VI - Issue 1&2 23 Divine Cool Breeze

 they are, The way they talk to Me, the way they behave towards Me, I just can't understand how they can be like that. It's a very delicate work I have to do. You are already wounded people, because you have wounded yourself. Nobady has done this harm to you, you people have nicely wounded yourself, very nicely. Every possible way you have tried to hurt yourself. Now, because of the hurt, the guilt is built in, and you are hurting others. It is as simple as that. So don't hurt yourself, there is no need to hurt yourself but remember that we hove no business to be harsh to anyone. You have to be sweet people. You have to be kind people. (There are also psychologists who have come forward to give you explanation for your harshness, that "Your willpower should be strong. If you don't talk like that others will take advantage". Who can take advantage of the Western people? It is absurd, absolutely absurd. The ones who have done injustice all over the world should say such a thing, it's absurd. I cannot understand how they can give an explanation like that.) Arrogance can be anywhere, any time. Specially women;I was amazed. I went to Belgium, and I found that Belgian housewives were even worse than British housewives! Ah! terrific they are; terrific women! Ah! just horible. Absolutely. You just can't understand. There's no love, no affection, nothing. Showing off, all the time talking about their material things. Absolutely dry sticks, I tell you. And they want Realisation, and they wont to be great, and this, and that. I don't know what they are. Today is the day of Virginity: I have really great hopes from the women of this country (England) specially. Here the men don't talk at all. You see the pattern was worst in Belgium, no man would talk a word. They cannot talk, just, poor things are just shut. They don't talk, strangled, completely strangled by women, believe me. Horrible. What is going to happen to that country, you see, where men cannot talk and women talk, it's horrifying, let's face it up. What have they achieved, the women there. At least in India our Prime Minister is a woman. What are they? Good for nothing, useless, just washing utensils in the house and showing off. I just don't understand. What sacrifices can they go up to? A new page has been turned now in Sahaja Yoga. I must warn you all about it. Don't take liberties too much with Sahaja Yoga. You are not obliging anyone else but yourself. Be careful. Take my warnings always seriously. You all have to come up very well now. It is not only doing my pooja that is going to help you, I can tell you this much, Now, you better worship yourself. You have to worship all the Gods within you. Cleanse them. First is the God and Goddess of Humility, of innocence, of simplicity. Worship that. Unless and until you worship that, you cannot go further, you will not be profected. The woman is known by the amount of sacrifices she makes. It's a challenge. I tell you, for all of you women who are realised souls, to see to it that you humble down yourselves. Your quality cannof improve unless and until you humble down. On everything you assert. For what? It's impossible to worship Virgin when we are so arrogant and strangling type. The Virgin is.a simple woman. She is extremely simple. She does not understand what are your plans, and what is so important everything. Her importance is Her Virginity. That She knows, and She will not allow anybody to touch. That's Her property, that's Her wealth, that's Her greatness. And she's humble because She is not afraid of anyone. She is not aggressive. But She doesn't allow anybody to aggress. Nobody dares aggress a real Virgin. Again I say that a new page has been turned, don'ttake liberties with Sahaja yoga. It has bestowed all the blessings upon you. You have seen the light of day. But be prepared for the night, nobody Vol. VI - Issue 1&2 Divine Cool Breeze 24

 should try to take liberties, try to improve yourself, No more complaints if you can't live in an ashram like that; you better get out of it. It's not for your convenience. Nobody is in need of you. Take it from me. Nobody is in need of you, you have to be in need of yourself if you are seekers, if you want to find your roots, everything is available for you. But you have to be humble, to go down to the roots, not with arrogance. We must understand why we are not progressing. Actually arrogance comes to people who lack self-confidence. Self-confidence is shattered in people whose 'Self is not manifesting. Let your Self manifest. When the Self is not manifesting, you get all kinds of problems and then you complain. Actually the problem resides within you. It is God who has to complain. Think of it. The One who has created this Universe, the One who has created you all with such love and affection, the One who has given you everything under the sun, also the One who has given you realisation, as your Spirit given you light; everything that is possible. And you are complaining against Him? You should not complain about yourself that "I am not alright, I should be alright". Complain about it. Face yourself. Those who do not get their realisation. So many of them, they are very proud, "Oh, I don't feel anything Mother, you know, it's nothing". Then there is to be ashamed; or at least you are missing something! At least! If something is not alright and you should be alright, at least, think like that "I should be alright, I am not alright "On the contrary" No, no, I didn't feel, Oh what, I should feel". Wisdom is the part that is innocence. Complete wisdom you find this among the villagers, or very simple people. They are not planning in anyway. You try to befool them, and you will be amazed, at the end of it you will find. "I am such a big fool myself". Try that with some rustic people, who are very simple, matter of fact who live with Mother earth. You will find that all those so called intellectuals, if they try to befool a simple man like that, after half- an-hour, this educated and very M.A. Ph.D. style, will find that he is the 'biggest fool ever born'. There is a saying in Sanskrit, which is very common, "Vidya vinaye na shobhate" that is "Vidya", even the knowledge, is decorated "shobhate" means "gets decorated or is beautified" only through humility.If an educated man is not humble person then he is not educated at all, in any way. you feel that In normal conditions you see what exactly exists. But if you are ego-oriented, you would never see yourself what exists. You will see some sort of a bloated, you see you will think yourself to be the 'King of Gods' heavens', you see. You can see, if you want to; it's imagination if you put your imagination like that, you can see yourself as anything, which is false, is absolutely false. You are your Self and you must see yourself as your Self, And Spirit is a universal being, is the innocence, is the Virgin within you. Respect it, respect that part of you which is the Virgin, still exists. Because if it was not there, Icould never have given you realisation. Despite every attack it existed there. Be sure on that point. If it had not existed,you could not have got your realisation. The more we are learned in Vidya, into the fechnique of Sahaja Yoga, we have to be humble. That is our decoration, that is our certificate, that is the path into the entrance of every human being, that is the way we are going to be very close to the other seekers. To be humble, to find out ways and methods of being humble, this is the key of Nirmala Vidya: "How to be humble". By humility you will never say, "This is my bothroom, or this my fruit, or this is my food, or this is my table, and this is my glass". Innocence gives you strength to enjoy everything that is there. I mean for me, sometirmes I have to eat with bhoots, and sometimes I have to eat bhoots! Not.only eat with them, but also eat them, is the worst part. So you also should not mind if there are people with bhoots. Ifthey are arrogant, try to give them bandhans, try to control them through all these methods. But if you think by Vol, VI - Issue 1&2 Divine Cool Breeze 25

 arguing with them you will be able to manage them, it's an impossibility. So try Nirmala Vidya, and that is humility, which is the 'myelin sheath' of vibrations. Like every nerve has a myelin sheath covering it, in the same way is the humility, the myelin sheath. If you are humble you will win the battle, if you are not, you will be lost. Then, if you are humble, the whole thing will become a joke for you, 'absolute joke'. If you are humble you can see the stupid, the bhoots and all the arrogant as clowns of this drama. So let us worship our Virginity within ourselves. Let us rise up to that point to mount that diamond of brilliance of our Virginity, in the setting of our humility. You can be angry with others, not with Sahaja Yogis, not with me. Even with others when it is absolutely required. But if you fight among yourselves, and tell people about Sahaja Yoga, nobody is going to believe you. Try to be humble with your Self, and with me. With me is very important. You must understand that it is one of the conditions that Christ has put on 'you' to be careful. Dealing with me, I don't want you to be in any way rude to me, because I can't help it there. Till you are humble with me, everything is in my charge. But as soon as you are rude to me, somebody else and so many of them, thousands of them take charge, and then don't blame me for that. Because you are my proteges, you are under my protection. Supposing you try to make holes in your roof, and then the rain is coming in, what can you do about it? I meon you have already made holes say in your roof. The roof that was to protect, you have made holes, now the rain has to come in. Then if you want that the roof still should protect you from the rain, then I must say that you lack intelligence. That's what it is. So this is another warning. And that is why, today is the day when the Virgin, Gauri, sat down to worship Shiva. She made a Shivalinga and was sitting and putting her sindur on that: "that you look after this, which is the mark of my union to you. I leave it to you, to look after", to Shiva, "You look after me. I surrender to you", with this, That's how Gauri, your Kundalini surrenders to the Spirit. "Now you look after this connection. I forget everything else. I leave it into your hands. Liff me up, you raise me up. I forget all that was me before. Everything I have dropped out. No other desire but just lift me higher and higher. Make me yourself. The rest of it is not important. All other manifestations of this, desires are over. Nowlam absolutely surrendered to you, my Spirit. Lift me higher and higher. Higher and higher, away from all the things that were not the Spirit. Make me complete Spirit, full Spirit. Forget all that was there. That elevation, that ascent, becomes a fast quick trip, a very fast ascent. Just you can do it, if you try at this moment and every moment to give up all that was not the Spirit. Anything that goes against the Spirit must be given up, and that it what is the pure desire, that's what it is, the Kundalini, is the Virgin. Is to be absolutely one with the Spirit. All the rest has 'no' meaning, has no value. This ascent, whatever may be your possessions, to whomsoever you may be married, wherever you are working, whatever is your situation, whatever country, you are the Spirit. And if you are, raised aloft, you will dwell in the beautiful kingdom of God, where all ugliness drops out. Like when the lotus opens out, all the mud drops out, completely. In the same way, let My children become beautiful offerings of Sadashiva. be may your Thave just told them (Indian Sahaja yogis) that you should not try to copy the Western style of ego- oriented society where people use harsh words, because then we think that we have modernised ourselves. They use harsh words, "What do I care?" all these sentences, we have never used, these are unknown to us. To anybody, to say like this, is unmannerly. How can you say like that "I hate youl" But now I have seen people talking like that, "Whoat is wrong with us". "Who are you to say that?". Like that we do not talk. You see this is not the way to talk. Any person Divine Cool Breeze 26 Vol. VI - Issue 1&2 Raya Yo Shewa

 who comes from a good family could not talk like this because it reflects on the family. I am surprised the way people talk here in buses, in taxis, and the way they use the language that's something I can't understand. And so I have asked them that the language be full of love and in our traditional style. Question : Is truth beyond sense perception? Shri Mataji: It is absolutely. Because if what we perceive through our senses, whatever we peceive through our senses is the truth, then we don't have to seek any more! Whatever we perceive through our senses is what is very apparent, gross, not the subtle. What is 'behind' the gross, we cannot perceive. For example, we cannot say how to make an atom. We cannot say how an amoeba is made into a human being. We cannot make one monkey into a human being Can we? through our perception of the senses. We cannot do the subtle thing that is behind the gross. So we cannot perceive through the senses. But once you have perceived it, you can feel it-through your senses, this is the second point. In India we do not scold our children as you do in the West. If we have to scold our chidren, we use language which makes them honourable: Damle Sahab has put on a kurta-pyjama, so, "You are looking like Shivaji Maharaj. Welcome, Shivaji Maharaj". We should speak in such respectful language so that they would not get scared. Correction, if it is to be done, we used to do this way; other side is not proper because it never corrects. See, that the other way you cannot control your children. All the time you are scolding them, insulting them, insulting others. Insulting methods and emotional blackmail and all this nonsense is not at all traditional in this country, and those who try to do this will be thrown out. You should not do them, I con tell in Sahajaj Yoga you cannot do it. you, In Sahaja yoga, we should behave in such a way that we should be dignified, behaving ourstyle, our tradition. Sahaja Yoga tradition is that we talk to people in the most sophisticated manner, the sweetest manner and in the most affectionate, and inviting manner. So when you follow me in things. Iam the way thatlam one the side that I forgive, the way I am loving. Iam affectionate and not the way where I am terrible. Because my terrible nature has sophisticated manner, the sweetest manner and in the most affectionate which you dont have nor an undercurrent of Love manner and inviting manner. And that is how we should all speak. So, this is the first thing | ask, that in your expression of love there should not be a thing that you shout. I do shout at people who have bhoots in them, but by that, the bhoots run away. But, if you shout, you get the bhoots. Bhoots do not run away, they get attuned, so better not do it. If you have My powers; you can do that. But you don't have. If you shout at a person who has bhoots, you get the bhoots. So, be careful, don't try my tricks, you see, I ama different type of a person and I do say things, understandingly, which you do not. So be sweet and inviting. my I am asking for two things now. It is a funny thing that Mother has to ask for a gift. The gift you have to give is, the first thing is that you should express peacefulness through your own character. But it does not mean that people who are peaceful are timid, or who are morbid people who tolerate nonsense. No, but the people who are peaceful resistance. You are notafraid of anything. You are not going to bow down to anything, compromise with anything, but you have that sort of a temperament you should develop and express, -is very important. And the second one is:- that this peace ond all this should express your love-Love to others. In the Ashram, I will like to see loving, caring, affectionate, beautiful attitude for the people who come there. I warit top class persons to be in charge of an Ashram. If the person is mediocre he should not be appointed. People are coming to the Mother's house, treat them with love and affection. Whatever you do, you can starve, but give to others kindness and sweetness, so that the impression on the people Divine Cool Breeze 27 VI - ISSUR 182 Vnl

 is that he is not an arrogant personality. Don't try these tricks with any-body else. You have no right to shout or get angry, because if you should, get back all the bhoots in you, for they are the ones who provoke you. They provoke you to get caught up into it and you get absolutely ruined, the more you try to do so. Therefore, the best thing is to stand in the centre and to have affection and love, the power I have given you. That power you have to develop-that power of love. First, develop that power of love, then you don't have to worry, you don't have to shout, or do anything. Your power will become (Krita) (active), it will work out itself and create that beautiful atmosphere that we do not want to have anybody ruined. But if you shout, people will run away. Specially in ego-oriented society, this will distract them and they will run away. mtty This I give to you, so I have to tell you, that you might be the highest of the highest, first thing that you have to give me today is: in your talk,in your behaviour, in your heart,you will reside me with Love. The second thing I have to ask you is that you be Peaceful. Try to have peace with yourself. Now don't fight with yourself. Now the Western people have one problem, that they fight with themselves."How is this that is happening to me? I am this! I am so bad, I am no good!". If you go on fighting with yourself you will not progress. You should say that "I am so good, what's wrong with me? I have got my realisation, what's wrong with me? There is nothing wrong with me." Have that confidence in ones-self, and then it will work out. You all have to be very peaceful. You have seen my peaceful nature has solved so many problems just like that. You have to achieve that peace within you. The peace has not to be lost at any cost, should not be expressed outside. My peace itself becomes terrible. You don't have that possibility. Don't do it, never do it that way,try to make your forehead relaxed. Many people come to me with face like that(distorted, twisted face) andIsee bhoots sitting on their foreheads, and then Ishout at them, forehead relaxes, "Iam not doing it, Mother is doing it". Relax, if you relax you will find that your heart also opens out - why can't you open your heart? Because you have no trust in yourself. It will open your Agnya, open your Sahasrara, and your heart will open. Once the Sahasrara is open, the heart will open automatically, so you will have a peaceful life. In politics when we talk of communism or of democracy. or capitalism, we are talking of a concept but not of Reality. For me, I am the greatest capitalist I think, because I know my powers and my properties, and I own them. Iam the greatest communist, that despite having everything in life I cannot enjoy my life without sharing it. 'Every moment'of it, 'every moment of it. So the meeting point only comes when all these ideologies become one at the lotus feet of your Spirit. Spirit is the only thing that is at the centre, and at the periphery if you look at thing they look as if they are separate and different. But if you can approach somehow into that state where Spirit resides you will be amazed to see that every-thing integrates, everything co-ordinates, and there is no difference, say, in Mohammed Sahab, Dattatreya, Raja Janaka or Shirdi Sai Nath. There is no difference in their principle, if you can just get your Spirit. But this is a very major for human beings. Because they want to live with concept and not with reality. This is one your step of the problems, which we all have faced throughout in Sahaja Yoga. I found myself very lonely always, where I could not talk of God and His greatness and His Kindness for human beings, in the company of people who were doing work -other work-than of God. It was such a solace and such a hope that people who apparently appear to be in the charge of helm-of-affairs, are also in charge of the helm-of-affairs of Cod.* A day will come when they will tske up their new roles, when they will become aware that it is God who rules **Br Nagendra Singhi anid his sister Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VI - Jssue 1&2 28

 them, it is He who does it, it is He who has created everything and it is He who enjoys everything. For this awareness, as you have very kindly said Sir, it's important that you have to be fort unate seekers. The seeking ultimately has to come to human beings. Because all that is done through mental projections and conceptions has one good point, that it is always exposed and comes to an end. Every set enterprise of human beings only moves in a linear way and at a point drops down. That is why all our conceptions and all our ideas are challenged after some fime. Actually when reality expresses itself as compassion, then you don't do anything about it. For example, to say that I raise your Kundalini, alsol don't know I do that. Because you are all ready, you are all like candles. Iam a candle which is enlightened, and if this candle enlightens another one, I do not think I have done a great job. Because if I am enlightened and then if you are ready, and if I enlighten your candle, then it is just done. This is what reality is. There is no question of having any humility about it, but that is a fact!.I really do not do anything. You are all made for this purpose. God has prepared you like this, and you just have to accept yourself, and if this works out in a simple straight forward manner, you get your realization. Many people think that I have cured people, so I have done any sort of a good deed or maybe some obligation. But to be very frank, that is also a concept. Because what do l do to a person?. When I cure a person I don't do anything. The reason is: when I feel that I am yourself, you are a part and parcel of Me, "it is not that I feel from my brain, but actually it is in my system", 'actually' I feel, that you are a part and parcel of me. When Doctor Saheb's sister was sitting next to me, I 'myself felt the pain within Myself; because her body is part of Me and I am part of her. And I asked her,"Have you got a pain in this portion?" She said "Yes, how do you know?" I said "I cannot tell you at this stage, but you will also know the same way. So, when nobody is the other, then where is the compassion? 1 central nervous So the concept of ego is just...! To be virtuous is a problem these days. If you are virtuous,everybody will attack you. But if you even mention about virtue, you are out for a crucifiction,or you are out for a poisoning, or something people will do. Because of the concept of ego. But in Sahaja Yoga, ego is not a concept but a reality. Because when a person becomes egoistical his Agnya chakra catches, so he comes to the Sahaja Yoga centre and says "Now, see my Agnya has caught up". . Openly without feeling shy about it! Because it is like a saree which has now become black, so I better get it cleaned.He is nat identified. Concepts give you all misidentifications with everything' So when it comes to reality,all these misidentifications just drop out and that is why I have seen people transform so fast. I mean you cannot believe it, how people transform. He says"I am suffering from ego disease If you go to a party, -simple thing I will tell you, -and if you don't drink, everybody will say "Why don't you drink?, you must drink" or they force you, go on forcing you. You say, "Baba,l don't drink". You have to tell some lie. You have to tell for this, to hide this thing from others, to achieve a greater goal, you have to give up some lower goals, of telling lies also. You have to say that" Doctor has told me not drink". "Oh! forget the Doctor". Then if you say that "Now you see the problem is I have allergies, I get into trouble". Somehow you escape. But if you even 'once' say that "Why do you drink?"- Then you are a matron. You are very ego-oriented. You are very interfering. You are trying to show off. In the West, we have lots of seekers, but the Western civilisation is the civilisation of the tree. They are growing without their roots. While we Indians know about the roots,we are not bothered. They are not at all in the knowledge of their roots. The trouble is, they have become so ego- oriented that their concept of ego makes them forget that they have roots. Even to accept that Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VI - Issue 1&2 29

 they have roots, they find it impossible. Under these circumstances what happens, that the ego itself reacts on itself. And that is why all the Western societies today are collapsing under that pressure of ego. But if you have to talk to them it is not possible to tell them. For example, in Sahaja Yoga we believe in a moral life where you are married to a woman and lead a very moral life. But we don't talk about it till you get your realisation. After realisation, automatically, you accept it. But by chance, if you say that you have to be moral, then they just get after you. They say "We have achieved our freedom, and this Victorian Lady, is telling us some out-of-date things, and why should we accept? So the concept of ego itself is so funny, that they do not know that they are catching on their ego chakra. This is also another concept people have. In the United Nations and everything I have seen, that it is only they are working on the concept which they got it from their Unconscious. But in reality they haven't got it on their central nervous system,as you all have got it. They will say"All right, you are brothers and sisters, we must help the nations we must do this," and all that. But when it comes to reality, when it comes to the working of it, you find they do not do it. They just do the other way round. Now, you cannot explain it, you may write books after it and you may write dogmas and you may write many articles about it. But, actually they just can't do it, by temperament, because thev are not the Spirit. In this great ossembly of realised souls which is a very, very great thing, to have so many saints sitting around,- you know that the ego means the catch of the Agnya chakra and it is a reality. Somebody may say, "I have no ego". Alright you have none! Because better not say. But supposing he is a realised soul,he will say "Mother, I have got my Agnya catching, you please take it away". Because it becomes a reality to him. And when it becomes a reality, you must know you are enlightened. If it is all darkness, you do not see. But when there is light you 'seeing' what is wrong with you start seeing that we are all sitting under one roof. 'Any' problem in this hall is going to cause problem to 'all of us'. And that is how you become 'collectively conscious' within yourself. start But when you become the Spirit, the Spirit, being the collective consciousness itself, is the reality, the concept becomes your awareness. In your chetana, you start feeling others within yourself. So what is there, from Canada or from Australia, I feel, when these people meet, the way they love each other, the way they enjoy each other. When these Westerners go to the small villages in India, the way the villagers just embrace them, and the way they become one with each other,- we have never seen people going into politics who go on fighting with each other or saying lies about each other. But just a meeting of these people, like a huge family! The whole system of joy giving and enjoying, is so beautiful that even to watch that itself is like watching a very beautiful drama of Krishna's Leelal I have seen this happening in all parts of the country. When people come from across, they may be Muslims, Hindus, whatever they are, the friendship and the love and the fondness, to do for others, is so great that people are surprised - that how can it be that these people who are living together like this, are so much helpful to each, other, so much loving to each other; there is no question of people who will try to cut each others throat. Because the competition is in leving more, the competition is in giving more, the competition is in understanding. There is no problem in the society of Sahaja Yoga. Sir, you will be happy to know, though our socieiy is not so large. Compared with this universe, ours is a very small society. But you will be amazed we 'never have problems which normal people have. We are really abnormally normall Because we have no angularities, we have no problems. People have become so honest, so courageous,so bold, Divine Cool Breeze 30 Vol. VI - Issue 1&2

 so loving, so giving, I am myself sometimes, I feel so enamoured by this expression of love and the waves of this ocean of love are expressed all over the world. Today, the great day of Holika Dahana, where the symbolism of this occasion is that the Satanic forces were burnt by the innocence of Prahlada. And that is what we have to remember, that when the Sahaja yogis take to innocence and complete dependence on to their vibratory awareness, which is the indication of God's Manifestation through them, they are completely protected,and even a satanic person like Holika could not burn him. And this is the day, today, we have to 'recognise'that as Sahaja Yogis we stand no dangers in life. We are fearless people, but we are humble people, loving people ond anxious to save as many as possible. To raise the whole humanity into another awareness, in the process of your evolution you have to achieve, for which you have to work hard. As Tukarama has said very clearly: "Yerya gabadyache Kam nohe" - This is the work af the Great Viras. Only the courageous can do it. Even if you meet 'one' single Sahaja Yogi some where you will be amazed the way he leads his life. And the way he is so beautiful, that he impresses people immediately; though some people do try to trouble him. But God looks after Sahaja Yogis, is a fact. And Sahaja Yogis, all of you know, how He looks after, and how He just tries to protect you in a very simple and beautiful way. To know God 'itself' is 'such a great blessing', because He is the God Almighty. the God who has all the powers' and all the loved ones. He is our Father, He is waiting for us to enter into His Kingdom, to enjoy that Peace and beauty of His Being, - because He has created Us and He wants His creation to come up to that. Because you know that sometimes one has to face this world, - the difficulties and criticisms, and how people try to insult you and trouble you, where you have to keep your peace. As realized souls,I congratulate you very much. So many realized souls are sitting here today is the greatest honour for any Mother. My age is now quite a lot, as you know, and l'never' felt len years back, that within ten years I will see so many people being realized. My father,as I told you was a very great soul, and he himself had told me that unless and until you find out an 'en masse method' of realization you should not talk about it until it is 'en masse' people are not going to recognise God, nor are they going to recognise ony saints. But today, when it has become the reality, when it is no more a concept; God is no more a concept, it is the reality, the joy and happiness of your Spirit, "Sacchidanand Sthiti", the state of Truth, Aftention and Bliss is just manifested, and I am enjoying that. And this is what one has to recognize, that in this world there are many people who are basically very great Spirits. Only thing you have to approoch them, find them out, and discover them. Now Sahaja yogis are not so much upset as they were about ten years back. Now they know that there are many people in this world who understand Sahaja Yoga.But that is not sufficient. We have to give realization to many. Thousands and thousands of people have to get realization. This is to prove, when you celebrate My Birthday, that this is not any more a Kaliyuga, but KRITA YUGA has started,and that Krita Yuga has to be finished now, to bring the Satyuga on this earth. You cannot pay for God's love. It makes me laugh sometimes. Human beings can never understand His love, because they live in a very limited sphere. His love is unlimited, even this word 'unlimited', and'infinite' we do not understand, because we have not known anything like that.We live with artificialities, fighting,mental projections. All these limited endeavours of human beings, and the experiences they hove, made them so conditioned that it is not easy to understand God. He made all this universe in His compassion and love. He created you as human beings also, in his compassion and love. He doesn't need anything. But He Loves. And you can't Divine Cool Breeze 31 Vol. VI - Issue 1&2

 understand a person who loves beyond any reason, without any reward. Just loves, for love's' sake. We can't think of 'one' human being like that, who can love, only for loves' sake.Only ofter realization, as you grow more and more,you realize that loving is the greatest joy, And then you cannot think of money in relation to Him. To my great country India, I bow, because She is a Yoga Bhoomi. And as Indians, you have a special advantage, because as I told you, that Ashta-Vinayakas all are here, all the Jyotirlingas are here, all the Adi Shakti's Peethas are here, all the three and a half Peethas of the Kundalini are in Maharashtra. All of you know all about it. But there is something more we have to get from the West, and that is the great Saints that are born in the West. It is most surprising that they are 'very' saintly, and once they take to Sahaja Yoga, they really dedicate themselves and they think there is nothing more needed to be done. This is what their life is. So the same way one has to feel. Indians get realization much faster than them. But still, one has to know that in Sahaja Yoga you have to work out in such a way that this Sahaja Yoga becomes a Maha Yoga as predicted by Gyaneshwara. I am sure with all your affection for each other, for me, and for the whole humanity, in My lifetimel will be able to see that you have achieved that grea state within yourself and without, that people would say that the Maha Yoga has really been accomplished by Sahaja yogis. God didn't make this world to get any fruits out of it; nothing. Money and all these concepts are your own. He just made it because He loved. He wanted to express His love, just to manifest that love, He made this world. There is'nothing'else expected. And to put the human mind at that level is an impossibility, I find in the beginning, but gradually they start understanding how forgiving He is, how kind He is, how nice He is. IS So, the first problem I have to face in the West, especially in Paris, was that human beings felt guilty. And this guilt is such a big problem in the West, I just don't understand. You see, why ta feel guilty so much?, and that is one of the hurdles of Sahala Yoga, I have seen, that people start feeling guilty to such an extent that they don't believe they can get self realisation. They think they are sinners, born outright, permanently branded as sinners - and they can never get their realisation. Imean they just brand themselves. It is beyond self pity also. I would say it's even self destructive. If you say something to some-one, instead of saying "I've said it, all right, I've said it and I take the responsibility, it's good", not that. But you come back home and"Oh God, I should not have said that". So you wobble between one kind of action into another kind, from say -into an aggressive to the other one of a receding type. And this wobbling really is very, very,troublesome. It can go on toa much,the oscillation could be so much that it can make you absalutely frantic, diffident,and sometimes useless. On the contrary, God wants to find human beings who are cheerful people, who are happy people, wha are thankful to Him for His Blessings. The most unhappy animal in this world is a human being. Can you believe it? Animals don't know happiness and unhappiness, is also a good point. But the most unhappy human being and the most complicated human being has become so over self-destructive that a destruction force is built within himself. Today I have taken the subject of left Vishuddhi because I felt that I must one day speak on this subject, "that this is absolutely unintelligible to God-that you ore guilty For what? Guilty for what? If you ask yourself you say "Oh we are guilty because we crucified Christ" -At the most. That is the maximum guilt a human heing can say on his head. "We crucified Christ, we tortured all the saints", all right. But by being guilty what do you get? Do you get Him back? Can you ga back and correctthat situation? You cannot. Butharping upon thatyou get into your subconscious Divine Cool Breeze 32 Vol. VI - Issue 182

 mind. You get into a position where you are no more normal to receive the Love of God. You recede into a corner of your mind which is darkness, which is ignorance, which is blindness, where you cannot receive that beautiful ray, that eternal flow that is coming in. You hide yourself back and then you say"What about the sun? I cannot receive it, because I don't deserve it! All ego recedes back into that little pouch, what we call the guilt. this Now, think of that force that has built you up into a human. How with care and love, without your knowledge, without troubling you, even when you were born you never knew what was the pain of the birth; your mother took over, -He has made you a human being so carefully delicately built you up. For what? What is the fruit of this beautiful flower? Why the flower starts eating itself? Have you ever heard of any-one like that? This is the worst disease with which we in the West suffer. French-yes. We had at least double the number of people that we have here today Surprisingly. But all of them had the same problem, and think all their psychologists, psychoanalysts, we can say all books, all the writers, the philosophers, every-one has done to them: and they curse themselves morning till evening, walking with so many wrinkles on their forehead. And if you ask them, they say "Mother, we are very unhappy people". Just like asking unhappiness to come and decorate you. But it has a subtler meaning of which people are not aware. These are the times when you have to get your realisation, this mass realisation has to work out, -is all prophecised. And these are very important times. All the stars are acting to help us. The whole universe is helping us. All the elements are helping us. We are on the stage. But when the actors arrive on the stage they ore finished, they can't act, they can't do anything, they can't play their game. They are so involved with their different roles. And that is why one has to understand the subtler effect of it, then only you will are not less than any atomic bombs built within yourselves. get rid of this guilt. You are playing inta the hands of negative forces. They But to integrate it, to make you feel complete integration with all your being, is only possible if you can,somehow or ather, get to that integrating force-which is still there, and it's quite. dim.That's the last chance, I would say now, that has to be. The way the negative forces have set in motion, of which you may not be aware at all, you may not be aware, you don't know what darkness is there. And to fight it what one has to do is to bring in that light of the Spirit which integrotes. Darkness always disintegrates. When we become aware we don't need organisations and institutions. We don't need them at all. I mean, this only human beings can do to create things & destroy ourselves. But this force which works within our minds, within ourselves, within our beings, where we actually really hate ourselves-sometimes I feel, the way we are destroying ourselves. This force we built within ourselves, thanks to many nonsensical writers and conditioners and people who talk of conditioning, really condition you much more. You should be singing and chirping like a bird you should be laughing and enjoying like a flower. While you find human beings all looking so very unhappy. What's the reason? The reason is that you are'separated' from your own being, The being that integrates you, you are completely disintegrated. When you disintegrate an hydrogen atom you form a very big force built into it. In the same way, you are disintegrating your being,- your physical being on one side, your mental being on another side, your spiritual being on another side. There's no integrating part. And when you cannot feel that integration you feel guilty, but that guilt is just a symtom of a very big destructive force built-in. This is the way we are going to destroy ourselves. No other way.Our destruction is not going to come to us from outside,that can be controlled. It's going to come from within our selves. Everything we do now, after disintegration is further disintegration, building up that negative force within ourselves. Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VI- Issue 1&2 33

 So this awareness is nothing but is the light of the Spirit within you which is missing. The Spirit is watching you alright. It goes up to a point. It sees your stupidity and your limitedness,- and it goes up to a very great extent, I should say-and it's finished, It disappears and a person dies, or he gets into trouble. He becomes crazy, mad, whatever you call it. He develops other diseases like concer, which are caused by another problem here, os you know, of Ekadasha. So these forces are built within us of negativity, when we go to the extremes of negativity. And there's only one thing that will save the situation is Self-realisation. All other things are destroying, are absolutely confusing.But there is only 'one' thing if you can do it saves the whole. Like putting on the light, finished. But people don't understand the importance of Self-realisation. See what's happening to human beings today, and if they are to be saved no use being unhappy You see I have to say I am very unhappy, paint some lines here to show that I am very 'deeply' concerned, you know, worried about the whole world. You want me to weep like you only. But what is the solution you have got, that if ten people are weeping you also join them in weeping? And the 'one and only' method that we have, which has already been told and prescribed and been prophecised, nobody seeks it. See now, in the Bible, "You have to be born again.Christ has to be born in your heart". Divine Cool Breeze 34 Vol. VI - Issue 1&2

 PRESS INTERVIEW AT RUSSIA Synopsis Interview with Prof, Yu. A Voronov, Doctor of Science, Petrovskaya Academy of Science and Arts. St Petersburg, Russia; on the occasion of a special honour bestowed by the academy on Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi at Moscow 13 Nov 1993. A unique honour of honarary member of the 'Academy of Science and Arts (Petrovskaya) was bestowed on Shri Mataji for her outstanding work in promoting world peace; only ten such awards have been given by this academy so far: ane of them was to Albert Einstein but Shri Mataji's work was considered even more far reaching and importont than any scientific discovery made so far Prof Voronov mentioned that science has yet to reach the stage achieved by sahaja yoga Shri Mataji most graciously blessed the award. Shri Mataji began Her talk by talking about Shri Ganesha, the lord of innocence, - who is the eternal child and who stood for purity, innocence and auspiciouness. It is He who later incarnated as Christ. She said that there is an interesting story of how he got a head of an elephant. In meditation, His symbol was seen by people on the Mooladhara. But it was Shri Mataji who told the scientists, how He is there on the Mooladhara which is made of a carbon atom; and it was only when carbon was created, that we had organic chemistry, (and later on came the amino- acids). IT Then Shri Mataji talked about how the carbon atom which has 4 valencies, was photographed by scientists under Her guidance. She said that when it was photographed from the left, its right side, they found the symbol of "omkar" which is the primordial sound. When they photographed from right, its left side, they saw the symbol of "swastika", because it is thus that the valencies move. When they photographed from down upwards, they found the letters of "alpha and omega". Shri Mataji said that it is this what is meant when Shri Jesus Christ said that "I am the Alpha & the Omega". Shri Mataji further spoke about the Soul, which you can see in the sky, after realisation. They appear as long ribbons, and they are the Souls of the dead, which are hanging around. Scientists have found out that there are receptors in cells. Shri Mataji said that there is a receptor in every cell, and that the soul sits on the back, and it sits on every cell as a remote control. Now the scientists have found this out, of what Shri Mataji had told them a long time ago as to how they are affected by dead spirits; and how the soul itself gets possessed; and it gets reflected on v the genes in the chromosomes; and thus it affects all the cells by remote control. Talking to a world authority on Nerology, specialising in and Synapse and Nerves. Shri Mataji further talked about 4 areas of consciousness, found in human beings. (1) The conscious - which is the "present" within us The Sub- Conscious - which is the "past" within us, and covers the past of this life, the past of previous lives and also the collective sub-conscious which has everything that is dead from our creation. All bacterias, viruses, dead spirits, possessions, reside in this area. The sub-conscious area lies to the left of our left Sympathetic Nervous System (Ida Nadi) and hence if our attention moves to the left, we get caught up into various types of psycho- somatic diseases such as cancer, aids, muscular myelitis etc. The people with a (2) Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VI - Issue 1&2 35

 predisposition fo left-side are always crying, clinging, and thinking of past; and it is them who are prone to such attacks. At a lower level, such people tend to get rheumatism and suffer bouts of depression. Epilepsy is due to the possesion of spirit, and can be easily cured. In India, one doctor has got his MD., on such a cure for epilery. Supra - conscious: which is the "future" within us and the area is situated on the right side (3) of our Right Sympathetic Nervous System (Pingala Nadi). The right-sided people are very ambitious, futuristic and always planning things. When such persons die, they go to these areas, and to fulfil their unfulfilled ambitious, they possess living souls. The right sided people thus get various physical & mental diseases. Shri Mataji talked at length about the "liver" and other organs, which are nourished by the second chakra -of " Swadisthana" and how this chakra had a lot of functions to perform. This centre has an important role to supply energy to the cells of the brain, because in order to think, we need the energy. Futuristic people who plan too much, use up a lot of energy; and the Swadisthana has to overwork to supply it; so that the organs which also fall within the purview of this chakra, get neglected. The energy which has to be distributed between the liver, pancreas, spleen, kidneys and intestines, thus is syphoned off for one function. Shri mataji stressed on the function of liver which has to absorb all the poisons of the body as heat and put it in the blood-circulation. Now, when the liver is neglected the heat starts collect and it starts flowing on both the sides. When this heat starts travelling down, and affects the intestines, one gets the problem of 'constipation'; and when it affects the kidneys, it tends to get coagulated and then you have lots of problems. The doctors then put people on dialysis, and they get bankrupt and die. When the heat from the liver rises up, it affects the lungs; (which in terms of Sahaja Yoga, called the right heart); that a person gets asthama'. Again stressing on diseases triggered by the Swadisthana Chakra Shri Mataji talked on diseases like diabetes. Shri Mataji, said that it is a wrong belief, but diabetes has nothing to do with intake of more sugar. She explained how an average Indian villager who takes about 3/4 teaspoones of sugar per cup; but who leads a simple uncomplicated life; never suffers from diabetes. She said that diabetes is normally a disease of beurocrats, politicians and thinkers, because their "pancreas" which are responsible for sugar absorption; are neglected by the swadisthana chakra, which is busy supply energy to their brain which is overworked. Talking about blood cancer, which can be easily cured by practise of Sahaj Yoga; Shri Mataji explained how "spleen" which has a because of our hectic and speedy life-style, leading to blood cancer, if there is a sudden attack of virus from the left-side; to a right-sided person in the shape of any mishap or disappointment. Sudden swings from right to left, lead to this disease. Shri Mataji said that many such documented cases of those who were medically certified to die, have been cured by Sahaja Yoga. function of atfending to emergencies, gets erratic A young atheletic man who is extremely right sided; and who is also addicted to drinking, can suddenly get a massive heart attack at a very young age and die. Another grave disease which con be triggered by non-function of Swadisthana chakra, is the paralysis of the right side (left side in brain). Shri Mataji said that if ance the fundamentals are known, and one knows how to set the centres right, then any diseases can be cured easily. Super-Conscious is the consciousness above the present human consciousness, and the Vol. VI - Issue 1&2 (4) Divine Cool Breeze 36

 area where it is situated is above the brahmarandhra. Talking to a professor of a Literacy Institute geared for Spiritual Life, Shri Mataji talked of the greatness of earlier Russian authors, and how they have contributed to the habit of introspection which they have cultivated among the Russians, which has today made them sensitive, ready and ripe for Sahaja Yoga. Shri Mataji said that she had read Leo Tolstoy in Hindi translation in her youth, and how much she had enjoyed it. An Indian lady has recently translated "Anna Kerenina" in Marathi, with Shri Mataji's help. Speaking to the President of an institute "Peace through culture", Shri Mataji explained how each chakra is officiated by different deities, and that the "Swadisthana" chakra - which is a very important one is presided by "Saraswati", the goddess of learning. Then, Shri Mataji talked about "Matreya" which meons the 3 mothers- Mahalakshmi, Mahasaraswati & Mahakali, and that how Shri Gautama Buddha had talked of the future Buddha, who would come in the form of "Matreya". One of the participants then told Shri Mataji that according to the Russian tradition, Matreya is considered to be the Holy Ghost., and when he refered to the Holy Ghost in the masculine gender. Shri Mataji corrected him by telling him that the Holy Ghost is nof a man, but a woman. She is "Athena" of the Greeks. Talking about organized religion, Shri Mataji paointed out the danger in such a step, as those who organise it, tend to put in their own ideas. She explained that God and the Divine, cannot be organized, as they are much beyond human mind. Talking of Shri Jesus Christ, Shri Mataji showed the point in the centre of the brain at the optic chaisma, which is the Agnyo chakra, and it is there, that He incarnated as Christ. He is the King and He presides everywhere. Shri Mataji said that once you get your realization you get all the powers - and this is of love; which makes you unafraid. She explained this power by an example of Shri Jesus Christ, who was moved by the state of Mary Magdeline, a prostitute, who was being led for execution. When he saw people throw stones at her, He asked only those who had never sinned, to cast the stones. power Powers can be of many types, but Power of Love alone cures and heals. She talked of howin Russia, Rasputin also had powers, but they were evil powers, and how later on, he was born in India as Rajneesh. Shri Mataji then explained that Kundalini is the reflection of Holy Ghost within each of one of us. She said that Paul did a great wrong in removing the Holy Ghost, who is the Primordial Mother, from the Bible. Talking of America, Shri Mataji regretted that the Americans were very primitive people, as far as spirituality was concerned and that the majority of them were idiotic. Compound- ed to that, many of them chosed false gurus, judging them by the material wealth they had. She said that years ago, when she explained them the hazards of leading immoral lives, and how they should do away with problems like homosexuality; they did not heed Her. Even top academic institutions like Harvard University granted their consent for such permissive life- styles and to top itall, the laws of the country and Catholic Church endorsed it. Divine Cool Breeze 37 Vol. VI - Issue 1&2

 Shri Mataji then warned the Russians in categorical terms, that they should not think that the roads in America are paved with gold. They should not look up to them, for they are all going to hell. She said that they did not even heed Christ who said such a subtle thing as "Thou shalt not have adulterous eyes". Today, there are hardly any one there, who do not have them. Talking about Confucius and Loo-Tze, she said that all these Masters talked to people, in the language suitable for the times. Whereas Confuci us came to teach about humanity, LaoTze talked of Tao', which is nothing but "Kundalini". When Shri Mataji was sailing down the Yang-Tse river, she remembered haw Lao-Tse had described this river as Tao. This river is so beautiful on both the sides, that all inspirations of Chinese Paintings come from there: In his poem, Lao-Tse has described Tao as that there are beautiful things on the way, but one should be on the move, should not get attracted, but be a mere witness. When the river (Tao) gets near the ocean, it becomes quiet, and it is only then that it enters the Ocean. Shri Mataji said that Zen system of Japan is also another great thought; but that today, the Japanese are heading to their disaster. In Sahaja Yoga chart, She referred to Japan, as the right heart Talking about the heart chokra, Shri Mataji said that the centre heart is blessed by Jagdamba, the Mother of the Universe who grants security. She explained how in a child, till the age of 12 years, the anti-bodies are created, and loter on they spread to all the parts of the body, but the remote control is suitated here. At this level, human beings commit 2 kinds of sins - against the father and against the mother. Sin against the father is not to believe in him, challenge him, be aggressive and cruel. Sin against the Mother are those of immorality. All the psycho-somatic diseases are fought with the "ganas" which gre the antibodies. In women, if their motherhood is challenged by a roving husband or childlessness, they tend to develap breast-cancer. In America, where this problem of insecurity is acute, the incidence of breast cancer is very high. Talking on the problems faced by science. Shri Mataji said that it is very one-sided. It has made a lot of discoveries about material things, but that cannof solve all problems. It cannot answers questions such as "why we are on this earth". It cannot give a picture of totality. Shri Mataji felt that the worse thing about science is that it is immoral. Unless and until the scientists become moral, we shall have inventions like atom bomb. With the help of a chart, Shri Mataji went on to show how ego and super ego, the two balloon like structures are created at the ends of two channels. She said that because of this it is only the human beings who feel that they are the doers; and hence if is only ego, they who have the problems of "Karma". Animals are under bondage, and they have no Karma problem. She explained how Shri Buddha (the Matreya) who is St. Gabriel, is situated at the ego point and how Shri Mahavira who is St Micheal, is situation at the Super- ego end. Vol. VI - Issue 1&2 Divine Cool Breeze 38

 When the Kundalini rises, She awakens the Christ on the Agnaya, and as a result, these 2 balloons get sucked in. When there is no ego, there is no karma, and this is what is meant by Christ dying for our sins. Shri Mataji stressed that the message of Christ is resurrection and not the cross. By resurrecting Himself, He showed that all can be resurrected. Talking about Shri Rom, Shri Mataji said that He was the benevolent king, as described by Socrates. He was so tuned in to the feelings of his subjects, that he had to send Sita, his wife away, because she had stayed with Ravana, when she was kidnapped by him. Shri Mataji spoke about Lav and Kush, the twin sons of Shri Rama, who were born and brought up in an oshram. About 6000 yrs, ago Lav came to Causacus Mountains to Russia, & aday his descendents are known as Slavs. Kush went to China, and his decendents are called "Kushans" today, and in Indian language, Chinese are colled the Kushans. Shri Mataji then joked that Russians and Chinese ore like twin-brothers. Divine Cool Breeze Val. VI - Issue 182 39



----------------------

1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-0.txt 
 DIVINE COOL BREEZE
Vol. VI, Issue1 & 2
Contents
Prayer to the Devi
1.
Navratri Puja
2.
Diwali Puja - Russia
3.
Mother's Advice on Puja
Press Interview at Russia (Synopsis)
Editor : Yogi Mohojan
Published by : The Divine Cool Breeze
9, Bhuyochintamani Soc., Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411 029
Printed By: Computex Graphics, 112 High Tech Indi Centre
Caves Road, Jogeshwari East, Bombay 400 060
Vol. VI Issue 1&2
1
Divine Cool Breeze
5.
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-1.txt 
 PRAYER TO THE DEVI
O Goddess, remover of affliction, be gracious, be gracious,
O Mother of the entire world.
Be gracious, O Queen of the universe, protect the universe.
You, O Goddess, are the Queen of all that moves and does not move.
You alone are the support of the world, because you exist in the form of earth.
By you who exist in the form of the water, the whole world is filled,
O inviolable warrior.
O you who dwell in the form of intelligence in the hearts of all beings,
O giver
of heaven and liberation, O Goddess, O Narayani, praise be fo you.
O power of creation, preservation, and destruction, O eternal one,
O basis of all qualities of matter, O one who is filled with qualities of matter,
O Narayani, praise be to you.
one whose hands and feet are everywhere, whose eyes, head, and mouth are everywhere,
O one whose ears and nose are everywhere, O Narayani, praise be to you.
O one whose form is everything, O Queen of all, O one endowed with all
powers,
Protect us from all fears, O Goddess, O Durga, O Goddess, praise be to you.
When satisfied, you ward of all diseases; but when angry you destroy all that is desired.
Those who take refuge in you do not become afflicted;
yea, those who take refuge in you become a refuge.
Be gracious to those who have bowed before you, O Goddess,
O remover of the misfortune of the universe.
O you
who are worthy of praise by the dwellers of the three worlds,
be a boon giver to the worlds."
1. Selected verses from the "Narayani Stuti", Devi Mahalmya which the Gods sung to the Goddess after her killing of the Demons
Shumbha ond Nishumbha.
Vol. VI - Issue 1&2
Divine Cool Breeze
2.
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-2.txt 
 NAVRATRI PUJA
24TH OF OCTOBER 1993
The Devi has many forms but it is the embodiment of the Shakti. Adi Shakti gives Shakti
to all these embodiments and so there are many Goddesses. At different times they came on this
earth ond did all that was necessary for the ascent of the people who were seekers. Especially
the one we know of, Jagadamba, Durga. She was trying to protect all the seekers of truth and
destroy all evil forces. Without the ascent of human beings they do not know the truth, and that's
why, whatever they try to do is a mental projection. This mental projection, if it is not substantiated
by truth, and by dharma, it declines. In sanskrit they call it "gnani". When this gnani takes place,
then incarnations are born to solve the problem.
In all incarnations of the Goddess there have been many incarnated satanic forces, She
had to fight with them and destroy them. This destruction was not for destruction's sake that the
evil forces had to be destroyed, but evil forces always try to put down the seekers and the saints
and try to harm them. All these destructive forces do not come at the same time, norm
rmally at
different times it is easy to handle. The embodiment of an incarnation is to save, to protect the
people who are seekers because they are the most important people in the realm of spirituality.
If they are not seeking the truth then in the eyes of God, they are just useless lives that have come
and will be finished. They have no value and dignity, they have no understanding of anything.
In the judgement of the Divine love we have two types of people. One who are seekers
of truth and another who are not. They may be good people, they may be nice people they will
be doing good work, social work, missionary work, etc. But if they are not seeking the truth, then
they do not come into that category where God has to incarnate, So try to understand the
preciousness and importance of seekers. That is what you have been : seeking. If you take the
percentage of seekers it is very, very (..small) but it is very important. Becouse, let's say, one
little part of gold is much more valuable than mounds of steel. In the same way a seeker is much
more valuable in the growth of spirituality.
The whole universe was created, the whole atmosphere was built, all the evolution took.
place for what? That human beings should know the truth. But the modern atmosphere, is a
very big curse, the greatest evil than all the Shumba, Nishumbas and all that, the worst of all
is materialism, because materialism makes you gross. In your seeking also when you are rising,
subtly that materialism catches you. When people come to Sahaja Yoga, they go deep into
themselves, all the inner knowledge they want to know, what is called as Atma Gyan. Atma Gyan
means two things : the knowledge about the Spirit and the knowledge about yourself.
This state is the state for which people have been doing all kinds of things, going to the
Himalayas, meditating in the cold without much clothes on, living in the caves with some fruits.
All kinds of tapasya they would do because the seeking was so deep, so urgent and they could
not get out of that force of seeking. But in the modern times, materialism retards that hankering,
that dedication. It's maddening for people when they are seekers. I've seen before coming to
Sahaja Yoga, people spend a lot of money, go to various places, go to Himalayas, Nepal, Japan,
etc. But after they have become the spirit for the growth of their new awarneness, the progress
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VI - Issue 1&2
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-3.txt 
 is retarded. Also one should understand that after so much of running about you find something
so precious, so you settle down, and you feel very satisfied about it, that part is all right. But later
on your growth should not stop. That stops because one of the main reasons is materialism.
Because of materialism your faith in yourself is also less.
Now as you have seen that the Gods pray to the Goddess and She came and killed all
the negative forces. The reason was the earnest desire of the Gods compelled Her fo take an
incarnation. Such a sincere desire of ascent that they could not get sometimes food, even water,
and they worked so hard for their ascent which was disturbed by negative forces. Their call from
the heart was so desperate, genuine and sincere that the Goddess had to take birth on this earth
to save them, to protect them, and to look after them. But we find that once you have reached
a destination, you feel: now better settle down. Now what do you mean settle down with?
If after getting realisation you are complete, you are in totality, you are absolutely one with
reality, there is nothing to be done, you become a saint. A saint does not need any advertisment,
he does not need anything, his message spreads, people see him and know he is a great saint.
Somany
ysaints did not even leave their houses. A very common saying in India is, "the pillow where
you are resting, you should not leave". That was the criteria of a guru. Those who have to seek
should come to the guru and climb at least six, seven miles up, and then the guru dosen't meet
anyone, he may slap you, hit you, or he'll take your test in many ways. Ultimately he may select
one person to give realisation. This hankering, this desperate effort was all the time there.
Now we come to Sahaja Yoga in this modern times. You know thatyou have got realisation,
you all know that you are better than others, that you have got rid of so many problems and that
you now have become a master of your own. Then the responsibility that you have towards yourself
and to your fellow men reduces, because you feel very satisfied with yourself.
The other day some sahaja yogini rang me up, she said : I went to the doctor and they
put radiation and they found I was pregnant, so what should Ido about the baby? For such a small
thing they will ask me. Who choses the name of her son, what is this, what is that. I have to do
much more work than any priest has to do. Little, little things they are worried about. That part
is alright, that I have to tell you what is to be done at such a point. If they miss the train, they
will telephone to me: Mother we have missed the train, now what to do? So I have to tell them,
allright give a bandhan, or supposing their father is sick, he has a heart trouble. Then they'll
telephone me: Mother my father is sick, he has a heart trouble, he is not a sahaja yogi, what
can you do about it? So Mother has to put attention to a father who is not a sahaja yogi. Small,
small things they write to me, such small things that you can't imagine, they do not understand
what I am here for. Still I've never said that this is a stupid thing to ask me, you should not waste
my time, never. But it is to be seen now that if you do not value yourself as realised souls, you
can not value my time also, or what is myself.
This incarnation can be wasted completely because of this materialistic attitude. In this
modern timesI don't know what has gone wrong with human beings, because the most important
thing in your life is to ascend and to grow. Take a big vision of the whole thing, why this universe
was created, why you were created as human beings, what was the need to do all these things,
for what is it done. If you have a very big vision of the whole thing, then try to locate your position;
where am 12 And then; how the divine has selected me and now I have become a Sahaja Yogi.
So now what is my responsibility, that one has to see. But on the contrary l've seen people who
are saying:I want to ask for it. They take the telephone and ask: Mother'should we take our chair
or not? That shows they have no value about themselves and no value about me. Both ways.
Because they are asking such small things, such silly things, that it is impossible to understand
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VI - Issue 1&2
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-4.txt 
 how could Sahaja Yogi ask such questions.
In this prespective we can see the Goddess, She comes on this earth in different forms
at different times to save the seekers of truth and to work out their ascent. Can you imagine?
It's a very big difference in the incarnation of the Goddess before Kali Yuga. Why now, is it a
different thing: that you have come on this earth to be the Sahaja Yogis. You have to have
a body, a mind, feelings, everything, which is just charged with spirituality. How many years in
the past you have been seeking God. Then, that you came here, was it a coincidence! Then, what
is it? When you have such a great advantage that you have come to Sahaja Yoga because of
your seeking and now you have found the satisfaction out of it, what is the responsability that
very
you have?
That the incarnation itself has come on this earth, not only to protect you, to nourish you
and to kill the demons. No, She has come on this earth to tell' you about everything that is subtle
inside and to tell you what your relationship should be, outside as well as inside. You were never
connected with truth, you were never connected with this
connected with God Almighty. One has to understand what a great thing has happened, that
out of me only, this Kundalini has come out and she has touched these higher centers. How?
This was not done before, na, they were just protected, they were just looked after. Nowhere it
is written that the Goddess has given realisation to people, nowhere ! She is responsible, She
can give, one of Her, names is that, not one but at least ten names are there, that She gives your
'nirvana', that She gives you your freedom, that She introduces you to rebirthing. All these things
are written, but, what is happening now is that people have not yet been able to grasp the value
of their life in the modern time.
all pervading power, you were never
See the way people ask questions, the way people's enquiry is on, the way people are
worried: now my child is big, what should I do? What should you do? The child is big, put it
to school, do what you like! Mother, would you please tell where to put the child? Then you put
the child. Have you seen the school, Mother? Nol haven't. Then you go and inspect the school.
Imagine Kali Mata doing that! But to that detailed extent a Mother would have to work: You
would'nt do that for your own child I know, But then it comes to children, what are they doing?
Still materialistic.
Today especially is a very great day of the Dussehra. This is the daywhen Ravana was burnt.
Effigies of Ravana were burnt all over the place. But it is Shri Rama's victory. It is nof that he made
sahaja yogis or he gave realisation, no, his victory was that he killed Ravana. That was done
that time for today's preparation, for today's happenings. This was done long time back that
these days will come when people will have a proper. value system of the victory of Shri Rama.
But it doesn't happen, because this incarnation of Mataji Nirmala Devi, is very different, very
illusive, Mahomaya. You are left to yourself to do what you like. Whatever you like you can do.
For every small thing they will refer to Mother, but for important things they won't! Sort of a funny
use of the whole thing has started, that which is so great, so important, is used for something
absolutely nonsensical.
See the difference between the incarnations. One incarnation comes in this world to save
the people, to bring them out of the maya of maya. But another incarnation which has come is
not only just to talk about it, but to give you your realisation and then to look after your small,
small things. So when this lady telephoned and asked me: What should I do? Please Mother
cure me. It is a very different attitude between the bhaktas of those days and the bhaktas today,
there is a very big difference. I said; "You never asked me whether you did all that, it doesn't
matter. Now, whatever you have done, it is better I see the child, look after the child, put the child
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VI - Issue 1&2
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-5.txt 
 right, everything, but you come along". But then I realise this woman is so attached to her child
And I telephoned the leader and he said it's terrible, what I saw, there is a terrible attachment
to the child. So from one nonsense to another,
This incarnation has such a variety of jobs to be done. Even the 64 kalas, the 64 expertise
of Shri Ganesha is not sufficient to solve this. Why is it so complicated? After giving self realisation
it should be a straight forward march towards your goal and your growth. Why is it that such
a complicated nonsense is all the time bothering you? What do you want? We should ask? What
do you want? I want a child. After Sahaja Yoga you should not want anything. Why do you.
want to have a child? There are so many children, you can look after them. "I want", should go
away from your mind that "I want this and I want that". This wanting is over now, what you.
is your self realisation. After that, what has happened is that what "I want" is more important.
want
I want that you should become really detached from materialism. That doesn't mean that
you should become like Hare Rama Hare Krishna, no, they are not detached. They are very much
attached people. Detachment is a state where nothing can bind you, nothing is important, most
important thing is your spiritual ascent, nothing can attract you more than this. This sahaja yogis
should understand. Compared to sahaja yogis, what other people have gone through. When I
read it, really I feel terrible. Here everything is convenient, come along, enjoy nice food, nice
company, it's a festival going on, everything is proper and if something is missing, I'll be the one
who will tell the organisers: what is this, you should have done this, you should have done that.
Now we come to a point where we have to understand: what do we want? What is the use
of killing Shumbas and Nishumbas? Because you are static, you are glued in one place, no
progress: So what's the use of doing all these things all the time.and destroy all that negativity?
What is the purpose? everybody says. Mother You have given them permission, You have given
them license, so now they are the way they are. The other day a young girl came to me, her child
was very
sick. I asked her: Do you meditate? She kept quiet. I said I can make out that you don't
meditate, because I know what it is. So today's main thing is that it is a Dussehra day when the
people go, cross the boundaries of their villages and bring gold for the parents. Now what you
have to do, is to cross the limits of this materialism, this nonsenscial dwarfy force that is working
on you have to transcend and bring, what I said, gold, that is on untarnishable thing, from the
borders of Sahaja Yoga.
How many of you really are in the field of werk? How many of you are telling about this
to people? What are you doing about it? The "surrender" state has to come. Far example you
have a problem, let's say a problem that you have no holidays. I know you want to come for
puja. Now if you want to come to puja, you just come, not only you'll get a job, but you might
get promotion. But you have no faith in yaur ascent you have no faith that you are the chosen
one.
Now where are we? We are the people who have been blessed with all the
have been blessed, but we don't want to practise, we don't want to find out what powers we have
got. We are worried about our own children, worried about what sari we are going to wear,
or worried about who is the leader and what should we do about leadership. All these things
are not going to help us, you're not here for that, try to understand you are here for becoming
the spirit and then to spread the light of the spirit. Nothing matters, once you start doing that,
you'll be amazed the faith works. It's not blind faith. You don't have to tell Me about it, it just
works. It is a matter of a few days, you might get many results of what you have been hankering
out. You might get material superficial things, but the question remains. Somebody, let's say,
powers. We
Divine Cool Breeze
6
Vol. VI - Issue 1&2
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-6.txt 
 wants to dedicate his life, so called, for Sahaja Yoga. Then what do you do? what do you do
if
dedicate? First thing is your faith, you must know how is your faith into anything. You
you
really believe in it or you do not. If you do believe in it, what have you done about it. At this stage
you have to introspect. What are you doing? What are we to do? How far do we have to go?
It's a very very important time and you are extremely important souls here. But if you don't
value your own systems and yourself, why should God worry about you? Why should God try
to give you ideas? Why should He try to fake any interest even in you, persons of that kind?
We have to see within ourselves, introspect, what havel done for Sahaja Yoga? Except for looking
after my children, cooking for the husband, that's all. Men can also think the same way: what
have we done? What have we done for sahaja yoga? Just, I want to meet any politicians, I want
to meet this person. I want to meet the person, for what? They should come and meet you! But
your faith in yourself is very weak. I think that's the main reason for all this fall, is faith in yourself.
This faith is such a thing that you know it is so. You have seen my photagraphs, you are
heart. It
convinced about it. There is nothing to be convinced, but this faith is not one with
is just not with your being, it's outside. Alright, Mother will do that, Mother will solve this, Mother
will do this. But the whole thing is now, to me it looks like it, that I have to compulsarily tell you
to do some sort of a tapasya. You ask somebody : do you meditate? No Mother, So what are
you doing here. There is some pain in my knees, so I came to you. Alright, But I don't meditate,
I'm very honest. But who is the loser? Not me, l don't need Sahaja Yoga. I'm doing all the tapasya
for your Sahaja Yoga. What are you people doing some tapasya for?
your
You have got your realisation, now you have reached that great state of understanding
also of the inner knowledge and also about yourconnection with the Spirit and with God Almighty.
All this you know. Despite that it is not yet what it should be from your heart, from your earnest
desire. It doesn't help at all anyone to deceive oneself. I'm not saying something for X, Y, Z. I'm
saying for all of you. Don't try to cheat yourself. You are here with such a great purpose. This
purpose is to correct you and give the freedom of your minds from all this nonsensical destructive
forces and then, to spread it all over, talk about it. My own.conviction is this: that something has
to happen to sahaja yogis to realise how important it is to work out something that is within us,
which is potential, which is just about to bubble up. It's this responsibility, whether you are a
Jew,a Christian or anything, it makes no difference. If's all outside. For what you have to do
that? You have come intoa new realm of awareness, into a new realm of a higher life where
you know of your inner self, where you know all about, what is good and what is not. Everything,
after knowing all this, also if you do not grow, then who will you blame?
Now, we come to a point to understand the importance of this Kali Yuga, where your
Mother is here to help you and also to look after you very tenderly, sweetly to tell you everything.
Actually I cannot get angry with anyone for more than one minute to exploin to you sweetly what
you should have done and which you can do, and which you have to do. All these things, really
I would have been telling you all the time, bringing you round very sweetly and explaining to you
and telling you that this is your own power which is within you and which you have to look after
and praise it, and also you have got so many books or woys of understanding that. But this inner
knowledge which you have is something like this, that, I have an inner knowledge about, let's
how to build these things, but I don't do it. It's as simple as that. I just don't do it! I have
say
the inner knowledge, allright, I'm a P.H.D. but I'm mad. It's like that many people are mentally
well
equipped in Sahaja Yoga, I know. But as far as the following of Sahaja Yoga is concerned,
they ore not there. So I'm warning you now. It's like Christ has said: Some seeds which have
sprouted, fell on the street and dried out and died. Now the judgement is gaing on all the time.
Divine Cool Breeze
7.
Vol. VI Issue 1&2
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Every night you have to meditate and you have to then think about what have you
done
today, in the whole day, what have we achieved? Everything here works with the time, with the
importance of nonsensical things. But what has to work is your faith. I'm going to do things which
are fruthful, which are sensible (this is puja) for the right side because you worship Shri Rama,
and his bow and everything. But think of this incarnation. Fourteen years he went to jail for a
particular reason. For somebody, who has to go even for one year, it's a headache. It's not a
jail, but it's what we can call, in the forest that he went, it was like to jail him. He was a king's
son, he had no place to live, to sleep, everywhere he went he had to build his own little hut. He
had to do it. Why did he do it? Because he had foith in himself, he is Shri Rama and he has to
jolly well do these things. He had faith in himself and he had faith in God Almighty that whatever
he's doing, he's doing as a will of God. And that is what I have to do, finished, l don'tcare whether
I have to face Ravana or I have to face this or that.
I am a Sahaja yogi, I don't care. My job is to spread Sahaja Yoga, alright, my job is to
cleanse myself up and know myself. This is my work, my job and this is what I have to do. Il'm
not bothered ifI get admission in the school or not. I'm not bothered if somebody has to go by
by plane that he gets the ticket or not. You just won't believe that you show faith in yourself: youll
get the admission, you'll get the ticket, whatever you want is there. It's all there, you don't have
to strife for it, you don't have to bother for it. It's just there. In all my life it has been happening.
faith is solid like the rock of Gibraltar, no question, because I know what I am and
Of course
my
I know what I'm supposed to do. I have no problem: all the faith. I know everyone and I can
that I can make out a flying bird. I may not show that, sometimes I may say alright, this is
say
good. But I know for definite what I am and what I have to do.
In the same way you have to know about yourself, because you are a different category
of people. You are not the ones who need protection from God, who need protection from the
Mother, no, you have to give protection to others, you have to give light to others, you have to
show them the path, so you are here for that purpose, not for getting a house
income tax concession. All that nonsense you forget. Jolly well they'll have to give you a
concession. I live like that, absolutely. When I'm travelling, I don't even think I'm travelling, I
just think that I'm there, that's all!
what
you call
or,
One has to change one's language, the style and our understanding should be that we
are rough people, we are rough so far as ourselves are concerned, with others we are kind, tender
and sweet. Once it happened we had a transfer and we went into a house, but there was nothing
to sleep upon, there was one bed, where my husband was sleeping. I said alright, take the
challenge, I slept on the ground. Next day I had pain in the body, I fold my body: Behave yourself,
you must learn to sleep on stones also and for one month I was sleeping on the ground. You
have to be harsh with your body, you have to be harsh with your mind which gives ideas of
materialism or of retarding your progresses in spirituality. New escapes, they find out. Ultimately
you come to the last point where you do not think about a material life and you don't think of
mental life or so called these spiritual lives or anything. But you think that it's alright, you are
free from it and now you have become a free person and you can do what you feel like. Supposing
you reach a state like that, then you just sit down and reach the state, finished.
How are we to believe, what's the proaf that we have reached that state, you must show!
There is a myth also in Sahaja Yoga, that he is a very senior sahaja yogi. I don't understand,
what is this? How can there be seniority in Sahaja Yoga? It cannot be seniority, no question!
Now let's say somebody enters into the sea, some are there for ages standing near the edge
Divine Cool Breeze
8.
Vol. VI - Issue 1&2
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-8.txt 
 of the sea holding on to the earth because they are afraid to swim, and some people who have
come only yesterday might be jumping and going ahead and enjoying the sea. So how is it. He's
a senior. We do not have this seniority business in Sahaja Yoga.
Then another thing that we suffer from very much, very common is this, that "Mother said
so". Anybody will say: Mother said to me, She called me and She said it. What did She say?
Oh
you are a very great sahaj yogi, you are this, you are that. Now there are two possibilities,
one: I might have said it just to befool him, I am Mahamaya, or maybe I must have said all this
just to pamper his ego so that he gets to Sahaja Yoga. Mother said so, you're such a great sahaja
yogi, such in sahaj, very bombastic words, very bombastic language he would use. The
judgement of a sahaja yogi desen't come from what he claims but from what he achieves. I've
seen some sahaja yogis are extremely arrogant, they think no end of themselves, all that is there.
So many sahaj yogis I've seen of that kind, that they are very arrogant and that they try to make
a big show out of what great people they are. Humpty Dumpties as they call them.
Alright, but what about a Sahaja Yogi who is not like that. His style is: he will just watch,
he'll witness the whole thing, just enjoy and laugh at what is happening. What is this man talking
like this, what is the sense of his talking like this. A person who is a sahaja yogi, is a gem, which
you may fake him anywhere, to any place, people will say he's a gem. My own style is that,
when I see a person or a sahaja yogi anywhere, first thing, Igo inside myself, then Isee that person
in a very different perspective and understanding. Because all these powers are with you also,
it is not my power only, only difference between you and me is that I have all faith in myself and
you have no faith in yourself.
We are at a cross road where we have to understand, who will go higher and who will
go lower, you'll have to find out who is the one who is going to achieve something. Where am
I compared to that person. It is said that you have to suffer, that you have to do that, nothing of
the kind by God's grace, now, what is it, what will happen to a sahaja yogi, how will you know
who is a sahaja yogi. How will you know who is just putting a lipservice. The only way is that
you evolve, you become like a mirror and you see for yourself what sort of a person he is, and
also you see yourself, what you are. Today's lecture is to tell you that all that we have done today
is to understand our own values about our own life. We should understand why are we on this
earth, what is our purpose and what we have to achieve.
With this I give you my all blessings from my heart, I want you to accept my blessings to
be the great lights of God's desire. Try to understand in what important times we are born and
that you have become such good beautiful people of God.
May god bless you.
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol, VI - Issue 182
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-9.txt 
 DIWALI PUJA
RUSSIA 12/1T/93
(Synopsis)
It is so very gratifying to see so many people from all over the world who have come to Russia
to worship the Goddess Lakshmi.
cannot explain everything intellectually, then you take course to arts to express your
self, and take to symbols - what you cannot say verbally or express rationally. This is what an artist
and a poet does, that he extends his imagination to such an extent that he creates a symbol. But
his mind is limited and can only go upto a point, and if it is not substantiated by truth and reality
after sometimes, it falls. The whole linear movement falls down and there is a decline. That is
what we find in every area, today especially that everything which was sublime has declined.
When
you
But after self-realizatian, when you have become the spirit your imaginatian touches the reality.
Then the symbols which were perverted and misrepresented drop aut and you touch the reality
of the symbols. That is exactly what has happened everywhere: For example, in India we have
the Goddess of wealth as Lakshmi. This symbol of Lakshmi was described by saints and seers
in reality, but later on people did not understand the symbol or the reality behind it, and they
thought that the symbol of Lakshmi is money, wealth, gold, silver, diamonds and they started
worshipping money. That is how the symbol of wealth, the Goddess Lakshmi was perverted.
People don't understand that when they have money, why they start doing wrong things. The
symbol of Lakshmi is very different. Firstly, the one who hos Lakshmi has to be a mother, like
a mother must have the love of a mather for her children. She has to be a woman, and woman
stands for something very sublime. Mother is the source of all the energies. She has patience,
love and compassion. A man who has money cannot be happy unless he is compassionate, he
uses this money for giving it io the others. What has happened today in the countries which are
supposed to be affluent, they have gone all out to destroy themselves with the money they have.
They have used money to express their anger, lust and greed. They have wasted this money in
trying to show off that they are something very individualistic. Like in America, I met a very
man and when Igot to his car, he told me thal the handles of the door open the other way around.
Sol said what is the use of this kind of a thing! Anybody can get locked up in your car. He said
it is my individuality, it is my genius which has created this, something not so common. When
went into his house, they tald me, be careful, this bathroom is very special. If you press this
button, you will just jump into this swimming pool. I said, I don't want to go to this bathroom.
Then he showed his bedroom, if you press this button your head will go up. I said, I don't want
to do these acrobats the whole night, I will sleep on the ground.
rich
People think sometimes that the Americans or the Europeans or the people who are so called
affluent are very happy people. They are not, because they have no wisdom. They go on wasting
money like this. These people hod so
now this is not sufficient, we have to seek further. Then they took to drugs and all kinds of things.
The Lakshmi principle is like this, She is a mother and in two hands She has got pink latuses.
rmuch moneythat they did not know what to do. They thought
Divine Cool Breeze
10
Vol. VI - Issue 1&2
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-10.txt 
 A lotus is a flower which comes out of the pond and allows even a thorny insect to come inside.
That means a man with Lakshmi must have a whole household which is very beautiful like the
lotus, welcoming everyone. This insect with all the thorns in it comes in and sleeps on the corona
of that lotus very beautifully and in the night, the lotus covers it so that it doesn't feel the cold.
A rich man is not the lakshmi-pati, he is not the one who has the blessings of the Lakshmi. But
the rich man with wisdom, we can say has got the blessings of Lakshmi. Like the lotus is soanxious,
so hospitable to get guests in his own being and to look after. In the same way, a persan who
has money and who is supposed to be blessed by Lakshmi should be hospitable.
The surprising thing is all those nations today who look to be affluent, are parasites. They looted
all the countries. They formed empires. Like in India, we had the British for three hundred years
as our guests, without any visa or immigration they.came. Now, if an Indian has to go to England,
it is an impossible situation. Those who go there also are not treated at the same level, Same
with America. Thank God, Columbus was coming to India and Sri Hanumana took him to
America, otherwise all the Indians would hove been finished.
They killed all the Red Indians there and took away all their lands, and now they are supposed
to be rich. The sins they have committed have to come back on them. Then we can see about
the people who think they are higher races because they can make more money. They have killed
people in gas chambers, did all sorts of things. Is that the sign of being higher? If Christ is the
symbol of higher personality, then what were his qualities? He was the noblest man, the greatest
personality as far as morals are concerned, and such forgiveness, such magnanimity, such glory
He was the one who was blessed with Lakshmi. Hewas a satisfied soul. Hewould not do anything
wrong. Nobody could purchase him.
After coming to Sahaja Yoga, it is important to know that you are blessed with Lakshmi. With one
hand she gives. Her nature is to give. Like if one door is open, the air would not come in, but
if you open the other door, then only it would circulate. To be satisfied is one of the qualities
of a Sahaja Yogi. Some of them do ask for many miracles, that is not the way. Your attitude
should be that you are now the spirit and the Spirit doesn't care for the comfort of the mind, body,
but for the comfort of the Spirit. Many of you have become the spirit, but you are not aware of
your own status; you have to be aware about it.
With the other hand she gives protection to all those who worship her and work for her. Anybody
who has money has to give protection to people who are employed by him.
We have now transcended into an area where you hove no fundamentalism in your head, but
you worship all the great incarnations, all the great seers, the prophets. Most of therm did not
have any money, but they were satisfied souls. This is the quality of Lakshmi, Ihat she should
safisfy. You know that in economics desires are not satiable in general. So what is the desire
which is satiable? It is the pure desire, which is the kundalini. When you are absolutely satisfied
and know that there is no sense in harkering after money, power and all the nonsensical things,
then the Mahalakshmi principle is awakened within you. This Mahalakshmi principle gives you
seeking. Then you become a special category of people who William Blake has described as
Men of God. Then you dan't have these conditionings of your childhood, of your nationality,
or outside religion. But you rise higher and become the Spirit. That is the time when you
understand the Lakshmi principle within you. The Lakshmi principle is that you enjoy doing for
others. In collective consciousness you want to do for others. Ifyou are still worried about yourself,
only about your own comfort, earnings and glory, then you go into imbalance.
Vol. VI - Issue 182
11
Divine Cool Breeze
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Lakshmi stands on a lotus completely balanced. Moreover, she does not assert her power that
she is the Goddess of money. She is absolutely contented with her self. If you are not contented
that means you don't know yourself. You are a half baked Sahaja Yogi. A Sahaja Yogi is a
person who is absolutely contented within himself. Because his self, his spirit is the source of
all the absolute knowledge, joy and the source of all the enlightenment for his atlentian. Joy is
not happiness or unhappiness, which depends on ego, but it is absolute. After realisatian, you
don't care for money or anything. If you have it, well and good. If you don't have it, well and
good. You are completely detached.
Lastly, I will tell you the story of Raja Janaka who was the father of Sri Sita, wife of Sri Rama. He
was a king who lived about six thousand years ago. He had to wear all the ornanments and
dresses that o king had to wear. But all the saints of those days used to touch his feet. Once
Nachiketa, a disciple of one guru asked, why do you touch his feet? After all, he lives like a king.
The guru said, you have no idea what he is. If he has mercy on you, he may give you self-
realisatian. So Nachiketa went to the king and requested him for self realisatian. Raja Janaka
said, I'm sorry, I can't give you self-relizatian. You can take all my property, my everything but
I can't give you self-realizatian because yet you haven't got that personality. Nachiketa was
disappointed and said, I'll wait till you are ready to test me and see if I could get realizatian. Raja
Jankaka said, alright, let's go and have a bath in the river. While they were having a bath, the
servant from the palace came and informed him that the palace was an fire. Raja Janaka
continued to meditate. After some time the servants again came and said that, the fire is spreading
here and your clothes will be burnt. But still Raja Janaka continued to meditate, but Nachiketa
collected his clothes and ran out. Then he realised how detached Raja Janaka was about his
money, wealth and family, and, look at me, to worry about a small thing like this! He had to
dress like that because he was a king. Then he surrendered himself to Raja Janaka and got his
self-relisation.
In those days it was very difficult to get self-realization, or even to give self-realization. But these
are special times the blossom time. They call it the "last judgement", you can call it the
"resurrection time" - the "Kayama" as they call it in Koran. It is said that people will come out of
their graves and get their resurrection and what is left in the graves is a few bones. No, all these
souls which are dead will take human birth and take their self-realization in these special times.
you have got your self-realisation because of the good deeds you did in your previous lives
as we say poorva punyas. But you must respect it and understand that what you have got is so
great. You have to know you are the Spirit now. You are special people. You are going to solve
the problems of your country, community, society and families. You'll be solving the problems
of the whole world. You are the ones who are going to bring peace on this Earth. You are the
ones who are going to create a new world of beautiful Divine people.
Now
Have faith in yourself. This faith works very fast. It is not a false faith, it is a fact. Grow in Sahaja
Yoga and don't be a dwarf.
Now you are asking for the blessings of the Lakshmi. First thing, you should ask for is satisfaction;
then the generosity. A person who has the blessings of Sri Lakshmi cannot be miserly. You know
that
blossoming time has come, don't pay attentian to your maladies, troubles. Things will improve
definitely. Somebody was telling me he has got pain in the knee. I just felt I get so many times.
pain in the knee because I absorb from you, but I never think about it. I never bother, because
I see my body all right. Like this machine, if it is spoiled, you should cure it, finished, but all the
have no karmas left. It is all finished and now yoU are beautiful new people. The
you
Divine Cool Breeze
12
Vol. VI - Issue 1&2
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-12.txt 
 time if you are thinking that this is paining here, this is paining there, I have all this money, I have
to do this, do business, that business, finished. Now we have to live in the realm of
superconciousness. I can go on speaking on everything sublime and beautiful. But lectures
gre nothing but the web of words. You have to go beyond the mind. That is what is my own
vision and so many have fulfilled it. I am always yours, wherever you want me to come, I will
come. That my love is more than my own will. But you should love yourself and love your self-
realisation.
May God bless you.
Divine Cool Breeze
13
Vol. VI - Issue 1&2
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-13.txt 
 MOTHER'S ADVICE ON PUJA
A Puja or a prayer grows from your heart. Mantras are the words of your Kundalini. But if a
mantra is not performed from the heart or if Kundalini is not associated with recitation of Mantras
than that Puja becomes a ritual. Best is worship in the heart. You should say the Mantras in Puja
but with great faith (Shraddha). You should perform the Puja when Shraddha goes deep so that
heart itself gets all Puja performed. At that time, waves of bliss sfart flowing because it is the
Spirit that is saying. People pour wine in the glass. Your Puja is like that. In that, wine is your
faith and the glass is the recitation of Mantras and the worshipping. When you are drinking that
wine forgetting everything how can a thought come! Then only you are bathing in the ocean of
bliss. However the Joy that you get after drinking the wine is eternal and ever-present.
Secondly you must know that your GURU has been the MOTHER of very great people. The thought
of that itself should establish your GURU-TATWA(Guru-priņciple). What tremendous sons I have
had. What great personalities. No words can describe and so many of them, one after another,
and
you are in the same tradition; My disciples. Keep them as your IDEALS: Try to follow them.
Read about them, understand them, what they have said, how they have achieved such heights.
Recognise them. Respect them. You will establish your GURU-TATWA. Imbibe all the STATUTES
within you. Be proud about them. Don't be misguided by what the people are talking. We are
going to pull the whole multitude towards ourselves. First of all let us establish our weight, the
Gravity. As Mother earth keeps everybody pulling towards the earth, we will be pulling all of
them to OURSELVES. Today, all of you must, within yourself, to your SPIRIT, promise that you
will be a GURU worthy of your MOTHER.
Now the Void is to be established. First of all you must know your GURU and SHE is on every
CHAKRA. Imagine what tremendous GURU you have. With that you feel confidence and because
of such tremendous GURU everybody is getting realization so easily. If you go to a rich man
for alms he is not going to give two pices. Because She is so powerful you are getting your powers
just like that. So you have to feel very happy about it, extremely happy and beautiful that you
have these powers. At least those who have been in Sahaja Yaga will know it for certain. Those
who have come to my lecture for the first time will be a little puzzled. All of you know for definite
what it is. So, to understand, for your own Guru-power, you first know who is your GURU?
"SAKSHAT - ADISHAKTI! Oh God; it is too much. Then establish your VOID.
A Guru does not bend his head before anybody else, specially MY disciples; except for mothers
and sisters and you see in some relationship, if itis, you bow to that. But they do not bow to anybody
else.
Today is the day of Gauri. Gauri is the one who, as a Virgin, created Shri Ganesha. And in the
same pattern you have got your realisation. In the same pattern! So you have to use the same
power within you, that is of Gauri, that you keep your heart clean. You must have a clean heart,
clean thinking, there should be purity in your mind. Of course, the 'bhakti' (devotion) does give
that purity, but if there is anything lingering in your mind I have to tell you there are three things
that are going to happen from today. First, we have started Vishva Nirmala Dharma. You are
under the vision of Shri Ganesh, under the guidance of your Spirit, and under the blessings of
God Almighty. But be careful, because once you become that, you have to keep to that Dharma,
have to be honest about it.
you
Divine Cool Breeze
14
Vol. VI - Issue 1&2
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-14.txt 
 If you have decided to keep to the Dharma from today onwards be careful; anything can happen
to you if you get out of the 'Maryadas'. Till you keep the maryadas (boundaries) of Sahaja Yoga,
saying - morning, evening, night that "I am a Sahaja Yogi" - nabody can harm you, hurt
Nobody can trouble you. On the contrary you will be enjoying life if you keep to the 'maryadas'.
But if you leave the 'maryadas' of Sahaja Yaga, you will have big problems. So, this is the second
thing I want to tell you, that today we have started the great vision, which was promised long time
back to realised souls.
you.
Everything is fine, just be your Self. Do not get upset with anything, do not get worried or anything.
Just try to keep absolutely peaceful. I give you some tests by seeing how much you keep to that
situation, of complete peace within yourself. If you have done no wrong, it's alright, doesn't
matter, you have not done anything. As long as you have done no wrong there is nothing to
worry. And, as it is, even if you have done some wrong, God is there to forgive you. So, don't
have any worry; nothing. Have all the strength, have all the courage, and go ahead with this
promise onwards.
Now the third thing is that with all these things we are doing we must promise to God also that
we will know about Sahaja Yoga, through proper understanding, reading every word of it we'll
master the knowledge of Sahaja Yoga. We'll keep ourselves clean. And completely surrender
our lives to Sahaja Yoga. This is what you have to promise in your heart. Surrendering to Sahaja
Yoga is actually surrendering to joy, bliss, peace. In that you are the gainer, nobody is a loser
in it. This is how today we have to decide once and for all.
Because I see now, Sahaja Yoga is going to take a new turn. Definitely it is going to take. We
are going to come up to a stage where thousands and thousands will join hands. But first of all
those who are in the foundations - who are the first people must work very hard to keep
themselves above all kinds of foolish temptations, all kinds of foolish things you have been doing,
which is "Asahaja" (not Sahaja). Language should be sweet, your behaviour should be good, it
should be very gentle and soft. You should move like a Yogi, live like a saint, and people should
see through you, the greatness of Sahaja yoga.
When in Italy I said that England is the heart of the universe, they would not accept it. They were
very shocked at this statement. They could not believe that England could be the heart of the
universe. One of the reasons was that they felt that the English people were invaded once by
Romans, and Romans at that fime also felt that English were very bumptious people. They would
not even accept the defeat with the grace of a person who has lost. Even if they were lost, they
used to be bumptious. So they could not believe, how could it be that England is the heart of
the universe. If this is the heart, what is the situation of the universe? And then they described
to me at length the bumptiousness of the English, and then I felt that I have known something
like that myself.
Now to achieve that calibre should be possible because you are born on the special land of
England. T hat possibility must be built within you. But then what is lacking? Why is it, that with
all the possibility, with all the great background, with all the merits to be here, why is it we find
that Sahaja Yogis, foryears together, do not come up to many others? What is the reason? Heart,
if you see, has a pulse rate and it moves with a certain sound,and you can even get it onto a graph
and it is so systematic, it is so regularised, it is so 'disciplined - that even a slightest murmur or
slightest change shows on the graph; it is a very sensitive thing. And that is what is lacking here,
is that discipline of the heart.
Vol. VI - Issue 1&2
15
Divine Cool Breeze
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-15.txt 
 Now when we are celebrating the greatest of the greatest- this Navaratri, there must be something
special about it, that we have to cleanse this heart completely, fully, and make it so pure that it
purifies all the blood that passes through the whole of the body. So the cells of this heart, which
has made this great organ, have to be the 'best', because the cells of the heart within a human
body are the best cells, the highest quality, the most sensitive. And it's the heart that expresses
the 'anahata' - the sound that is without percussion. While we find that there are some people
of calibre, - there are but others who talk more, show off more, and do not have calibre. Cleanse
this heart, be the best cells.
It is an erratic funny heart which swells up an ego. And whatever one may talk, this is another
reading people have, that whatever you may tell them, that time seriously they listen to you and
second moment it has no effect on them. So this is another thing we should see that if it is within
us let us understand that what we lack is discipline. And that disciplining has fo come, otherwise
our calibre cannot improve. But for all that, I think what we should have is innate intelligence.
No education, innate intelligence to understand that our calibre has to improve. Now here
pulsates the Spirit and not the power. The witness, the one that watches, that is the reflection
of the God, who is the Spectator of the Work of the Devi. Actually, what happens that, without
rising up to that status, if we also say, alright, we are also watching the Sprit, then we do not
achieve that calibre. And with all the blessings, - like seven auras of the heart, we have got
seven ashrams. We do not understand that we all have to discipline ourselves. Only to take
advantage or to be in the Sahaja yoga, to claim that you are a Sahaja Yogi, is not a sign of being
a cell of the heart.
And warning has to be given now. Very important at this juncture when Sahaja Yoga is now taking
off, - remember this, - the speed has been gained, and it is taking off. Those who will be left
behind, will be left behind. So do not get into bumptiousness. First is your character, as everybody
says:- "They are very bumptious". Try to be humble and then understand that you have to be
in the plane and not left behind on the grounds. It is moving fast.
Just now I cannot talk of the higher two centres but let us at least talk of the seven centres. The
of these centres, have we been able to develop within ourselves? How can we do it? You
power
have no time. You are all busy people. And bumptious. So now to develop these powers we
have to 'concentrate' on these chakras. Everywhere I went, I was surprised, the questions they
asked me, the way they were. Nobody talked about their family, house, jobs, or any other
nonsensical things like unemployment and all that. They just asked me, "Mother, how do we
develop the power of this chakra, or that chakra or that chakra. And I asked them; "How is it
you are asking about a particular chakra?", They said, "Because we find this is missing in us,
specially in me, this one is not alright".
Now the most fortunate thing is that today is the Navaratri - and that I should be in London and
this Navaratri puja should be performed here. No other country is that privileged, because this
is the highest puja, the greatest ritual, which you can attend. So why do we do Navaratri? ln
the heart, to do Navaratri is to accept the powers of the Shakti to realise the power that all these
chakras have got in themselves and that when they are enlightened - how you can express all
the
of these nine chakras within ourselves. The seven chakras plus the heart and the
powers
moon makes it nine. There are seven of these, and on top of that, we should say two more
centres, which Blake has described surprisingly as "nine centres" clearly.
Divine Cool Breeze
16
Vol. VI - Issue 1&2
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Now for a realized soul, there is no need for me to discipline you or to tell you all these things,
because I hate to talk in this tone to you today. But I have discovered that if I do not warn yoU
now, tomorrow you will blame me that I did not warn you. Take it as a serious warning. Now,
after realization there is no need for me to discipline you at all, because you have got the light,
you have known what is realization, you have known what it is to be realized, and you have also
known how much you have gained out of it, how much your personality has improved. But there
is something more that has to be done. It is to see for your self, if you have really disciplined yourself
or not.
There is no need for any leader to tell you, there is no need for any ashram fellow to tell you, there
is no need for any-one to tell you. It is you who is a realized soul, you are your own master, you
are your own guru. Imagine you are all gurus, great gurus.and Sadgurus, respected Saints, where
all the angels have to shower you with flowers.Think of it! And here you are, bumptiously giving
lectures, talking bumptiously. Very embarrassing even for the deities. They do not know what
to do, whether to garland you or to shut your mouth! Here you are, in such a great position that
you have got realization. That the only thing you have to accept is the beauty of this great Yoga,
that
you just enlighten your own powers, which are on these seven chakras.
I can understand about people who are ignorant, who have ignorance. Then in ignorance, of
course how will they talk of innocence? But you are not ignorant people. You are knowledgable,
you have got yourenlightenment. And the power of innocence is so great. It makes you absolutely
fearless-not bumptious-but fearless. And the greatest thing of innocence is that you are
respectful. The sense of respect, if it is not developed within you, if you cannot develop the sense
of respect for other Sahaja Yogis, for other people, for the Ashram, for the discipline and your
own Self-respect, then it is of no use, even talking of Sahaja Yoga, because that is the very
beginning of it. First you do not respect, alright, you are bumptious, alright, you are in a big
fool's paradise, as they call it, riding a fast horse,
once you have seen the light, you must try to get rid of all the snakes you have been holding
on to, - it's a simple thing.
- all that is there is alright; is forgiven. But
Now, let us see the first chakra, belongs to the power of Gauri, the power of the Mother of Shri
Ganesha. Gauri's power.Tremendous they are, aren't they? Because of Her power you have
got your realization. Now what have we done to enshrine that power within ourselves? Today
is, if it is the first day of Navaratri, let us see what have we done? Have we been able to develop
our innocence within ourselves? When people talk, they are so sharp. How can you be sharp
if you are innocent? They are so bumptious. How can you be that if you are innocent? People
play games. How can you do that if you are innocent? So first of all you have to see yourself,
that the power of innocence if it has to live, all the rest of the nonsense has to go away. If you
want to have the innocence, all that is anti-innocence has to be dropped out.
In your childlike nature only, you can receive the blessings of Gauri, otherwise you cannot. You
have to be really childlike, otherwise it is absolutely useless, no use telling you anything becouse
you think you are too clever. To such a person, who thinks he is clever, what's the use of talking
to such a person, because he already knows everything. So the first power, when you develop,
you must learn to sit on the Mother Earth, first of all. You must respect the Mother earth because
the first chakra is made out of the Mother Earth. Try to be more settled down with yourself on
Mother Earth. And the respect. Seethe trees when they get their flowers, they are not so respectful;
but when they are laden by the fruits they bow down to Mother Earth. In the same way, when
you have got the fruits of Sahaja Yoga, you must all bow down.
Vol. VI - Issue 182
Divine Cool Breeze
17
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Innocence has a special capacity to make a person extremely peaceful. 'Extremely peaceful'. No
onger, temper or violence. If a person does not have innocence, peacefulness cannot come in
it, because a person who is not innacent is either sly or aggressive. He cannot have peace within
his heart. But an innocent person is not bothered, innocently he lives, he enjoys everything in
complete peace and harmony. Butthis violence comes when a person becomes clever. Hethinks
"I am so clever, that another one is so stupid, I have a right to shout at that person". And the
one who is not innocent is 'never' wise. He may be, to look at, look sharp, but he is not wise.
Wisdom comes only with innocence. And how much wisdom have you gathered? - that is what
one has to see.
That is what we have to see. Have we been able to discipline ourselves? Because our growth
is very much in the beginning of it. We hove to grow quite a lot. And people do not understand
this point in an atmosphere of egoistical temperament, that you have to grow, you have not yet
grown. You have to grow a 'lot. And when you grow, you find this wisdom really fragrant with
compassion. Your wisdom is fragrant with compassion.
When
your power of innocence increases, wisdom is apparent. People say, "That fellow is very
wise" for example if somebody is crying about his wife, a wise person will say "Oh Baba! just look
at this, still busy with his wife". Another one is crying about his house or something. He will say
"Oh look at this one still busy with the house". There is no end to it. I have known people get
So swollen up that they think they must give a big lecture for ane hour, on Sahaja Yoga. Unless
and until they have given one hour lecture, they do not think their ego has manifested itself
properly. But a wise person, he doesn't have to talk or speak or do anything. He impresses his
silence, his wisdom on others much more easily.
You have to explain to yourself, only yourself - So every-one should meditate every day. That
is a 'very important thing' which people are doing in all the countries where I am not. Because
lam in England, people take me for granted: "Mother is doing everything". So, Iget up at 4 O'clock,
take my
to meditate. So at least let me meditate for your sake. So everyone must today promise me that
they will meditate everyday, Get up in the morning. "We cannot get up in the morning". The
whole world can get up, why not the English? But when it was the battle of Waterloo, they were
the first to arrive there. They won the war because they were punctual. What has happened to
their punctuality today? We are not drinking, we do not have hangovers; we do not sleep late;
so why should we not decide today that:- "Every morning I will get up and do my meditation.
And while meditating I must concentrate on myself and not on others. And see for
is catching, where am I catching? Which chakra I am catching, what have I to do?
bath, meditate for you all. I better start doing that again. Otherwise you have no time
myself what
So on this first day of Navaratri, today as the first day the Gauris' powers must be enlightened
within us, and they must express. And they are 'tremendous'. lconnot describe them in one lecture.
Think of the Primordial Kundalini. She acts in the Mother earth, She acts in the Universe, She
acts in the animals, She acts in the matter, She acts in the human beings. And now She acts in
you. She is the one who decides the face and the figure that you are going to have. She is the
one who decides what child you should have. She is the one who gives you that particular child
that
need. She is the One who has got you all these beautiful children. She is the One who
you
has given you these sparkling faces and sparkling eyes. All this She has done for you, but what
about the power that you have within yourself? How much have you manifested that?
Divine Cool Breeze
18
Vol. VI - Issue 1&2
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-18.txt 
 Sahaja Yogis today represent the growth of this Universe, the growth of the human race. Do
you follow this point that you are playing such an important role at such a crucial time when
the world is about to collapse? And you have great seers like William Blake, you had such great
all
people who have talked about this time. They have built it up. Traditionally we have built
up
this. Now in England, the work of Sages that has brought this England fo this stage. Now do
you realize that the position of English Sahaja Yogis is 'very important'? But lack of wisdom and
bumptiousness without understanding your Self, how can you talk so loud? How can you think
of organising everything when you yourself are so weak, sa bumptious?
The Primordial is working very hard, no doubt. But whot about you, the individuals, who have
got their own Kundalini awakened? How far have you opened Her out? And what is Kundalini
is simple thing as you know, is the 'true desire'. So true desire to perfect yourself, to grow yourself.
If it is really true desire nothing else is important. All other desires are secondary and tertiary.
The most important desire is to grow. And for whose advantage? Is the advantage of yours, and
in your advantage only the advantage of the whole world rests.
So today I am not going to take the count of the people who meditate every day or not. But I
can tell you this much, nextyear, those who do not meditate everyday, he will not be here anymore.
Take it from me, is a fact. Everyday you must meditate. Discipline yourself. Now you have come
to a new perspective. You have come to a new vision. Now when you see that vision, when
know the vision, you cannot just stand there.... Get into it.
you
Everyone says, Damie was saying too, everybody says that, "Mother you have spent so much
time for these English. Why so much time for them? Maybe you might be thinking that because
you are very great, that's why I have to serve you people. Think the way you like. But the most
important thing is that you are the land of the Heart and I have to cleanse you more, much more
than athers. But it's just the other way rounid. Others are going so fast. lam amazed, their
vibrations, their sensitivity, their understanding and they have just mastered it, 'everyone' of them.
Here it is becoming a very centralised stuff and everybody does not want to understand Sahaja
Yoga, but everyone wants to give a lecture. There is no respect for elders. No respect who is
older who is younger, and somebody who thinks that because they got realization before others,
they are higher, then remember one word of Christ:- that, "First will be the last. So try to
understand that it is you who has to grow, it is you who has to manifest these powers. Manifestation
of the powers I do not know how far you have understood.
Here in England it is - "That feliow just touched me, and now I have become egoistical". If there
is one fellow who is egoistical, he just talks to another person, the person goes egoistical. I mean
this is not the way to be sensitive. You nave to be sensitive to God and not to bad things. But
we are more akin, more vulnerable to bad than to good. So the power of assimilation of good,
all these powers are just in your complete reach. But all this should not become a praise, but
should become a kind of challenge, a kind of a beautiful curiosity and an advancement for you.
Funny people, with tags, such people will have to be warned, and later on may be declared as
black listed, I am really very sad today when I see the vibrations, when l see the way things are,
people are just in a picnic way in England, I feel so unhappy you do not know. T have always
been extremely enamoured, and I have already put up a big show of appreciating your efforts.
Just watch within yourself.
When a person who has Gauri's power, as soon as he enlers a hall of any place, everybody's
Kundalini rises, just to salute. When you have Gauri's power then you stand out because you
have that innocent, lustless, greedless, beautiful, sparkling eyes and wherever you turn your eyes,
Vol. VI - Issue 1&2
Divine Cool Breeze
19
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-19.txt 
 even one glance would raise the Kundalini immediately. People who suffer from cancer, suffer
from this disease, that disease, all can be cured in no time if you have developed only one power
of Gauri. All your problems can be solved. Negativity will go away, and you will become like
a lotus, beautiful, fragrant, overpowering all kinds of negativity.:
"Become that power'. Just see the substance, you watch within yourself. Each individual should
see the substance that is within us. We are worried about a friend, a fiance or a wife or a husband,
or this and that. That is not the calibre. The calibre is very low and going lower. That is not a
good thing. If My love and compassion is spoiling you I better pull you out of it. Because you
are capable of your merits to be born in this country. You 'are' capoable of very great heights.
I know that. Of very great heights, which you can achieve. But not by talking about it or thinking
about it, but by 'becoming' that great power, so 'become that power,
See the collective blessings people have, I was amazed when they told me, they have got this
blessing, that blessing. I mean unlimited blessings they have got. And why can't we have that
here? What's the problem with us? If we arenot collective, if there is a problem between ourselves,
that means there is still some sort of an ego still in-between keeping us out. So let us now promise,
within our heart that this has to go into your heart, a very deep feeling for ourselves, "that by God's
grace we are born at such a juncture when this thing has happened, that we are the people who
are beneficiaries of the blessings of God - that we have got our realisation, that we have risen
so high. But now let us spread our wings.
In Munich (after being arrogant) they became intense! - even children, 'so intense', listening to
every word I was saying, and picking up pearls, precious as diamonds, 'every word' they were
noting it down. They are people of determination. If they decide to do good, they will do lot of
good. But here (London), as soon as I go away, people start discussing something so nonsensical!
Thear it. Iknow the vibrations and everything. We are not intense, we must increase our intensity.
That is what is called as 'Shraddha'. Is important, very important. I am sure this year you will
make it a point to do 'intense' understanding of Sahaja Yoga. Maybe there is something gone
wrong with you in the past and you are conditioned or think too much about it. How can I do
it? You can do it, everything, you forget the past. Past has no meaning whatsoever in Sahaja
Yoga. You are being completely renovated but just use your mechanism. I work so hard with
you people that nothing is wrong with your mechanism. Only thing is that you have no faith in
yourself. And those who do not have faith in themselves are always bumptious people. So, first
of all, station yourself within your Spirit, within your heart, and fry to develop your powers, inner
powers, not of talking and showing off, but inner powers.
We are cutting down our wings. Don't become small minded people, worried about small things
here and there, nothing is important. If you see in your previous lives-: yaou have had all kinds
of foods, you have had all kinds of trips, you have done every kind of marriage, you have done
every kind of other norisensical things that people waste their time with. It is over now, finished.
Now you do something new. How many people you have married in how many previous lives
and houses you had and how many pleasues you have had. Finished now, finish it, This is a
special time. The best time of Ritambhara, where youhave to grow. That's the point, the season
is that. In this season if you do not grow,you wouldn't grow. You have to take full advantage.
With full intensity you have to do Sahaja Yoga. That does not mean that you give up your jobs,
or anything. If you are intense in Sahaja Yoga, you will be intense in everything. But there is
no intensity. It is a shameful thing that even now in the temple of God (there are still so many
people who are possessed by horrible evil things. How can it be?....they do not talk at all or
they not eat at all. All this is indiscipline. But going higher to this spiritual life. 'best thing is to
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VI - Issue 1&2
20
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-20.txt 
 take discipline from your Spirit and you are disciplined automatically. Let the Spirit rule you. It
is possible. It is possible because I have seen in such a short time and when I have been there
for such a short time, I don't even know the names! Here practically I know all of you by your
and by your vibrations also. And they have gone up so much. So, today is a great day,
names,
a great privilege. Always you are privleged people, like 'House of Lords'. Is true, but maybe one
day will come when this House of Lords may be banished completely, You have to behave like
Lords. That is why, my humble request is that you must learn to worship discipline. I do not say
"Do this, do that", you know what is to be done. And then on top of that, you should not tell me,
"I know I should not have..." When you know, why don't you do it? You are empowered. Today
let us, with full confidence in ourselves and in our ascent, let us with full intensity attend this Puja
and in our hearts decide that, "I am going to discipline myself. Navaratri is beginning with
big force. Take full advantage of tremendous Vibrations.
It's a great thing today that we are celebrating the Virgin's worship in England.
according tn Sahaja Yoga, England is the heart where resides the Spirit of Shiva and that Virgin
should be respected and revered and worshipped in England is a great honour, I ihink, for all
the Sahaja Yogis. Now one has to ask why such an importance is paid to a Virgin? Why a Virgin
is respected to that extent. What are the powers of a Virgin? That she can bear a child of that
magnitude that was Christ, that She could create Shri Ganesha out of Her own body, that She
could protect innocent, dynamic force of Her children, who are egoless, who have not known what
is ego. So this great power and force resides in a person who has lots of 'poorva-punyas', who
has done lots of good things in previous lives, who has always understood that Virginity is a
power higher than any other power and would save the virginity and chastity with all her effort
and care. As you know that within our body She is placed as Kundalini. Mearis She is ihe Virgin.
She is untouched. The desire to become Spirit is without any blemish: Nirmal There is no blemish.
It's wanting is pure. There is no other desire, but to be one with the Divine. All other desires are
finished.
As you know,
You are blessed. So, instead of complaining, or being aggressive, you must know that it is a
great favour to you. The greatest favour; that you are forgiven, completely, that this great blessing
has been bestowed upon you. And to come up to it you have to work hard. Not to feel guilty
about it; butto be humble, to be thankful. That despite what we have done, - played with ourselves
completely - still we are today sitting as God's Devas. The Somrasa which is the Charanamrita,
the water that washes the Mother, only 'you'are allowed to drink it, only the devas. You are sitting
in that category, and how can you be demanding?
Ido not want any one of you, whether men or womeri, to devēlop any guilt in your mind, because
that is one thing which is the greatest blernish os you know at a later stage this guilt works in the
opposite direction. It is of no help. But when we understand that we have these problems, we
hove to be humble about it. Not quilty, but humble. Ifyou are not humble about it, and aggressive
about demanding what have you got out of Sahaja Yoga and complaining about it all the time,
while not seeing what are your'own' punyas (merits); what do you deserve?? Your Kundalini, despite
every blemish, has been raised. You know that.
We are today sitting as God's Devas. You have to humble yourself. By seeing your past, whatever
mistakes we have committed - I am with you in this. Not to feel guilty. It's very embarrassing
as I said to yGu, but please try to face yourself. We have to face ourselves as we are. When we
lose aur innocence and our virginity, first thing happeris to us is that we become ego-oriented,
and we start thinking "What's wrong"? Your shakti is your Kundalini, and She is virginity. She
is your power. She is your strength. Your Innocence is your strength, the day you losi it, thait
Divine Cool Breeze
21
Vol. VI - Issue 1&2
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-21.txt 
 is the day we have committed original sin. For us it is important that we have to be very humble
about it and that we achieve something. What? Not the kingdoms and some kind of a luxurious
life, but a seat in this Holy Land of Shiva.
Shiva is forgiveness. He forgives everyone. Even the Rakshasas (demons) can be forgiven, but
can they be given realisation? Even the Pishachas (lady denons) can be forgiven, but can they
be given realisation? Forgiven is a different point. One aspect is forgiveness, so that they can
remain for a longer period, they may live longer, because of Shiva's forgiveness, So what? But
what a wretched life! And the people who are not innocent can never be Joy-giving. They are
themselves miserable creatures and make everyone miserable. The arrogance is not a child-
like quality. VWe have to be like children. And even when you were not, you were given realisation
olright. But now you are sitting with the devas. Even higher than them. So what is our decoration?
It is humility. It is simplicity. Not cleverness, arrogance, putting others down, showing off, but
a complete surrender, surrendering all your egoistical qualities.
Virgin cannot accept ideas which are not universal, She cannot. That's a sign of a Virgin because
She is Universal by Nature. All fanaticism, all racialism, casteism, "all" these things which
ortificially seperates man from man, woman from woman, nation from nation, will all finish off
as soon as you become innocent. But you can't become, by brain-washing, you cannot. By
Kundalini awakening, of course you can. But to maintain it, your progress should be 'inward'
and not outward. To seek your roots. She is the Moola, She is the roots of your being. She
manifests all your roots. So your attention should be towards your roots and not towards your
shoots, you have been that. Face yourself, and develop your roots now. All the Western society
is without the roots, you can see that. We have lost our roots, let's face it, as Western people,
as I am also with you today. We have to find our roots.
Let the Virginity be reborn in you. From today you all have to take a vow, - is the New Year's day
for us, - "that we will surrender our horrible tempers, dominating natures, asserting behaviours,
ego-oriented harshness, domination".I don't know what use it has. Unless and until you
surrender that, the lord of Virginity, Shri Ganesha, will not be able to crown your Agnya Chakra.
Whatever we have done so far should just give us this. If our past could give the idea as to how
humble we have to be with each other, with all the Sahaja Yogis, how kind we have to be, how
loving, how universal.
You see in a tree which doesn't have roots. It dries out, it doesn't give any shade, afterwards it
becomes a horrible dying tree. When it dies, it falls on someone.
desert where only thorns can grow. When the whole society becomes so stupid as to hate each
other, materialistic, then roses are not going to grow there, lotuses are not going to grow there.
While you are the lotuses of this country. You are born in the mud alright, but now.come back
to yourself. You were beautiful, you were like lotuses, fell into this mud, become the mud, out
of which you come out, because of your true nature. Then you have become now lotuses, but.
there is no fragrance. LotUs without a fragrance, one can't understand. Lotus has to have a
fragrance. The fragrance that will overcaome the filth of this mud. Yaou have to grow more than
Indians can grow. On the contrary the arrogance of people, Iam amazed. They start complaining
this, complaining about that, complaining about one another. What do they think of themselves?
Who are you? Because the roots are not developed.
It grows thorns. I's like a
Once you develop your roots, immediately the humility will start coming into your temperament.
There is artificial humility, not from the heart. It will only come when you become Virgins, you
become innocent. Innocence doesn't only mean morality, doesn't
t mean only that. Many people
Vol. VI - Issue 1&2
22
Divine Cool Breeze
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-22.txt 
 think that if you are a moral person; no, it also means a non-materialistic attitude. For people,
carpets are more important than their children, morning till evening they will be scaying harsh
things just to save few nonsensical things which are going to be left here permanently.
Materialism is the 'hit', it's the one that hits you, your innocence.
In my own life time I have seen that anything material gives you greater happiness when you can
give it to someone. I have seen that way always. I'enjoy' the giving more than the taking. Imean,
you try sometimes to give away something, and see how happy you feel. Of course it should
not be done because you want to get rid of itl Actually it is done for that only, perhaps, because
whatever you possess is a headache in anyway - even the subtlest form. Any possession is like
getting possessed. It's slavery. It hinders your freedom to grow. But it goes hand in hand.
If materialism means to make things to give others happiness, to present others, as a cup that
carries the nectar. If materialism is that cup which gives the nectar of love, then it's alright. But
you don't eat the cup do you? To Me, materialism sounds like people eating the cup, and not
that nectar. Is cup more important, or the nectar? Supposing there is a golden cup and poison
is placed inside that, will you take it because it is in a golden cup? Will anybody knowingly take
poison in a golden cup because it is in gold? No common sense! There is no commonsense
at all. That material things cannot give you happiness is the basic fact of economics.
My innocence takes me to places where things are cheapest. And Iget the maximum 'Joy because
I can give it. I know how to give it. That's how I would say, because of the 'real force' of your
Spirit which is Virginity, you have lost the sense of joy also You are joy-killers, morning till evening
you are killing each others joy, to say harsh things, you see, from this tongue, I was folding my
hands before you because I knew it would little bit upset you, so I was just keeping it there, that
your mind should not be disturbed so much, In my palms, you see, very carefully I was catching
heart to keep it there, so that you should not be hurt so much so that you should not feel
your
hurt. Because, it was not harsh, but it was truth which was harsh but still, in my palms I was
holding it, carefully, so that you should not feel hurt about it.
So to hurt anyone, just open your tongue and hurt anyone, one doesn't understand how many
ripples of hatred you are creating within yourself. Twenty-four hours are not enough for me te
love people. Now
years because I have not been able to love people as much as I wanted to. The flow is so great
that my body suffers with that flaw, and sometimes I curse myself that why should I carry such load
of love within myself? And little excitement with the pooja also, you know what happens to me.
I shudder, sometimes, you are calling me for pooja, now what will happen? Then somebody
can ask a question sometimes, "Mother did we not suck all your vibrations?" It is obvious, but
don't want to say that. Because if I say that your Vishuddhi will be caught up again. You will
suck less.
, I will be sixty years of age, I don't think I have done justification to these sixty
But now the time has come, you are the people who are going to change the mind of God with
your good behaviour. The wrathful God. You are going to please Him. Who is going to deserve
in this Western world? You tell me, today. You are the ones chosen for this, specially prepared
for this, to create an era so that the Deity of compassion should be awakened, for the rest of them.
The arrogance you have seen in the spread of Sahaja Yoga what happened. We had a
programme where we had say a thousand people. For the next follow up there are only three.
Il's typical. Ihave spent most of my precious time in this country (England), and in the West. Despite
that the arrogance sometimes baffles me. Arrogance amongst each other, even towards Me
sametimes they are so arrogant, I cannot think of anyone being that arrogant to Me, as the way
Vol. VI - Issue 1&2
23
Divine Cool Breeze
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-23.txt 
 they are, The way they talk to Me, the way they behave towards Me, I just can't understand how
they can be like that.
It's a very delicate work I have to do. You are already wounded people, because you have wounded
yourself. Nobady has done this harm to you, you people have nicely wounded yourself, very
nicely. Every possible way you have tried to hurt yourself. Now, because of the hurt, the guilt
is built in, and you are hurting others. It is as simple as that. So don't hurt yourself, there is no
need to hurt yourself but remember that we hove no business to be harsh to anyone. You have
to be sweet people. You have to be kind people. (There are also psychologists who have come
forward to give you explanation for your harshness, that "Your willpower should be strong. If
you don't talk like that others will take advantage". Who can take advantage of the Western
people? It is absurd, absolutely absurd. The ones who have done injustice all over the world should
say such a thing, it's absurd. I cannot understand how they can give an explanation like that.)
Arrogance can be anywhere, any time. Specially women;I was amazed. I went to Belgium, and
I found that Belgian housewives were even worse than British housewives! Ah! terrific they are;
terrific women! Ah! just horible. Absolutely. You just can't understand. There's no love, no
affection, nothing. Showing off, all the time talking about their material things. Absolutely dry
sticks, I tell you. And they want Realisation, and they wont to be great, and this, and that. I don't
know what they are.
Today is the day of Virginity: I have really great hopes from the women of this country (England)
specially. Here the men don't talk at all. You see the pattern was worst in Belgium, no man would
talk a word. They cannot talk, just, poor things are just shut. They don't talk, strangled, completely
strangled by women, believe me. Horrible. What is going to happen to that country, you see,
where men cannot talk and women talk, it's horrifying, let's face it up. What have they achieved,
the women there. At least in India our Prime Minister is a woman. What are they? Good for
nothing, useless, just washing utensils in the house and showing off. I just don't understand.
What sacrifices can they go up to?
A new page has been turned now in Sahaja Yoga. I must warn you all about it. Don't take liberties
too much with Sahaja Yoga. You are not obliging anyone else but yourself. Be careful. Take
my warnings always seriously. You all have to come up very well now. It is not only doing my
pooja that is going to help you, I can tell you this much, Now, you better worship yourself. You
have to worship all the Gods within you. Cleanse them. First is the God and Goddess of Humility,
of innocence, of simplicity. Worship that. Unless and until you worship that, you cannot go
further, you will not be profected.
The woman is known by the amount of sacrifices she makes. It's a challenge. I tell you, for all
of you women who are realised souls, to see to it that you humble down yourselves. Your quality
cannof improve unless and until you humble down. On everything you assert. For what? It's
impossible to worship Virgin when we are so arrogant and strangling type. The Virgin is.a simple
woman. She is extremely simple. She does not understand what are your plans, and what is
so important everything. Her importance is Her Virginity. That She knows, and She will not allow
anybody to touch. That's Her property, that's Her wealth, that's Her greatness. And she's humble
because She is not afraid of anyone. She is not aggressive. But She doesn't allow anybody to
aggress. Nobody dares aggress a real Virgin.
Again I say that a new page has been turned, don'ttake liberties with Sahaja yoga. It has bestowed
all the blessings upon you. You have seen the light of day. But be prepared for the night, nobody
Vol. VI - Issue 1&2
Divine Cool Breeze
24
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-24.txt 
 should try to take liberties, try to improve yourself, No more complaints if you can't live in an
ashram like that; you better get out of it. It's not for your convenience. Nobody is in need of you.
Take it from me. Nobody is in need of you, you have to be in need of yourself if you are seekers,
if you want to find your roots, everything is available for you. But you have to be humble, to go
down to the roots, not with arrogance.
We must understand why we are not progressing. Actually arrogance comes to people who lack
self-confidence. Self-confidence is shattered in people whose 'Self is not manifesting. Let your
Self manifest. When the Self is not manifesting, you get all kinds of problems and then you
complain. Actually the problem resides within you. It is God who has to complain. Think of it.
The One who has created this Universe, the One who has created you all with such love and
affection, the One who has given you everything under the sun, also the One who has given you
realisation, as your Spirit given you light; everything that is possible. And you are complaining
against Him? You should not complain about yourself that "I am not alright, I should be alright".
Complain about it. Face yourself.
Those who do not get their realisation. So many of them, they are very proud, "Oh, I don't feel
anything Mother, you know, it's nothing". Then there is to be ashamed; or at least
you are missing something! At least! If something is not alright and you should be alright, at
least, think like that "I should be alright, I am not alright "On the contrary" No, no, I didn't feel,
Oh what, I should feel". Wisdom is the part that is innocence. Complete wisdom you find this
among the villagers, or very simple people. They are not planning in anyway. You try to befool
them, and you will be amazed, at the end of it you will find. "I am such a big fool myself". Try
that with some rustic people, who are very simple, matter of fact who live with Mother earth. You
will find that all those so called intellectuals, if they try to befool a simple man like that, after half-
an-hour, this educated and very M.A. Ph.D. style, will find that he is the 'biggest fool ever born'.
There is a saying in Sanskrit, which is very common, "Vidya vinaye na shobhate" that is "Vidya",
even the knowledge, is decorated "shobhate" means "gets decorated or is beautified" only through
humility.If an educated man is not humble person then he is not educated at all, in any way.
you feel that
In normal conditions you see what exactly exists. But if you are ego-oriented, you would never
see yourself what exists. You will see some sort of a bloated, you see you will think yourself to
be the 'King of Gods' heavens', you see. You can see, if you want to; it's imagination if you put
your imagination like that, you can see yourself as anything, which is false, is absolutely false.
You are your Self and you must see yourself as your Self, And Spirit is a universal being, is the
innocence, is the Virgin within you. Respect it, respect that part of you which is the Virgin, still
exists. Because if it was not there, Icould never have given you realisation. Despite every attack
it existed there. Be sure on that point. If it had not existed,you could not have got your realisation.
The more we are learned in Vidya, into the fechnique of Sahaja Yoga, we have to be humble.
That is our decoration, that is our certificate, that is the path into the entrance of every human
being, that is the way we are going to be very close to the other seekers. To be humble, to find
out ways and methods of being humble, this is the key of Nirmala Vidya: "How to be humble".
By humility you will never say, "This is my bothroom, or this my fruit, or this is my food, or this
is my table, and this is my glass".
Innocence gives you strength to enjoy everything that is there. I mean for me, sometirmes I have
to eat with bhoots, and sometimes I have to eat bhoots! Not.only eat with them, but also eat them,
is the worst part. So you also should not mind if there are people with bhoots. Ifthey are arrogant,
try to give them bandhans, try to control them through all these methods. But if you think by
Vol, VI - Issue 1&2
Divine Cool Breeze
25
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-25.txt 
 arguing with them you will be able to manage them, it's an impossibility. So try Nirmala Vidya,
and that is humility, which is the 'myelin sheath' of vibrations. Like every nerve has a myelin sheath
covering it, in the same way is the humility, the myelin sheath. If you are humble you will win
the battle, if you are not, you will be lost. Then, if you are humble, the whole thing will become
a joke for you, 'absolute joke'. If you are humble you can see the stupid, the bhoots and all the
arrogant as clowns of this drama.
So let us worship our Virginity within ourselves. Let us rise up to that point to mount that diamond
of brilliance of our Virginity, in the setting of our humility. You can be angry with others, not with
Sahaja Yogis, not with me. Even with others when it is absolutely required. But if you fight among
yourselves, and tell people about Sahaja Yoga, nobody is going to believe you.
Try to be humble with your Self, and with me. With me is very important. You must understand
that it is one of the conditions that Christ has put on 'you' to be careful. Dealing with me, I don't
want you to be in any way rude to me, because I can't help it there. Till you are humble with me,
everything is in my charge. But as soon as you are rude to me, somebody else and so many
of them, thousands of them take charge, and then don't blame me for that. Because you are
my proteges, you are under my protection. Supposing you try to make holes in your roof, and
then
the rain is coming in, what can you do about it? I meon you have already made holes
say
in your roof. The roof that was to protect, you have made holes, now the rain has to come in.
Then if you want that the roof still should protect you from the rain, then I must say that you lack
intelligence. That's what it is. So this is another warning.
And that is why, today is the day when the Virgin, Gauri, sat down to worship Shiva. She made
a Shivalinga and was sitting and putting her sindur on that: "that you look after this, which is the
mark of my union to you. I leave it to you, to look after", to Shiva, "You look after me. I surrender
to you", with this, That's how Gauri, your Kundalini surrenders to the Spirit. "Now you look after
this connection. I forget everything else. I leave it into your hands. Liff me up, you raise me up.
I forget all that was me before. Everything I have dropped out. No other desire but just lift me
higher and higher. Make me yourself. The rest of it is not important. All other manifestations
of this, desires are over. Nowlam absolutely surrendered to you, my Spirit. Lift me higher and
higher. Higher and higher, away from all the things that were not the Spirit. Make me complete
Spirit, full Spirit.
Forget all that was there. That elevation, that ascent, becomes a fast quick trip, a very fast ascent.
Just you can do it, if you try at this moment and every moment to give up all that was not the Spirit.
Anything that goes against the Spirit must be given up, and that it what is the pure desire, that's
what it is, the Kundalini, is the Virgin. Is to be absolutely one with the Spirit. All the rest has 'no'
meaning, has no value. This ascent, whatever may be your possessions, to whomsoever you
may be married, wherever you are working, whatever is your situation, whatever
country, you are the Spirit. And if you are, raised aloft, you will dwell in the beautiful kingdom
of God, where all ugliness drops out. Like when the lotus opens out, all the mud drops out,
completely. In the same way, let My children become beautiful offerings of Sadashiva.
be
may
your
Thave just told them (Indian Sahaja yogis) that you should not try to copy the Western style of ego-
oriented society where people use harsh words, because then we think that we have modernised
ourselves. They use harsh words, "What do I care?" all these sentences, we have never used,
these are unknown to us. To anybody, to say like this, is unmannerly. How can you say
like
that "I hate youl" But now I have seen people talking like that, "Whoat is wrong with us". "Who
are you to say that?". Like that we do not talk. You see this is not the way to talk. Any person
Divine Cool Breeze
26
Vol. VI - Issue 1&2
Raya
Yo Shewa
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-26.txt 
 who comes from a good family could not talk like this because it reflects on the family. I am
surprised the way people talk here in buses, in taxis, and the way they use the language that's
something I can't understand. And so I have asked them that the language be full of love and
in our traditional style.
Question : Is truth beyond sense perception?
Shri Mataji: It is absolutely. Because if what we perceive through our senses, whatever we peceive
through our senses is the truth, then we don't have to seek any more! Whatever we perceive
through our senses is what is very apparent, gross, not the subtle. What is 'behind' the gross,
we cannot perceive. For example, we cannot say how to make an atom. We cannot say how
an amoeba is made into a human being. We cannot make one monkey into a human being
Can we? through our perception of the senses. We cannot do the subtle thing that is behind
the gross. So we cannot perceive through the senses. But once you have perceived it, you can
feel it-through your senses, this is the second point.
In India we do not scold our children as you do in the West. If we have to scold our chidren,
we use language which makes them honourable: Damle Sahab has put on a kurta-pyjama, so,
"You are looking like Shivaji Maharaj. Welcome, Shivaji Maharaj". We should speak in such
respectful language so that they would not get scared. Correction, if it is to be done, we used
to do this way; other side is not proper because it never corrects. See, that the other way you
cannot control your children. All the time you are scolding them, insulting them, insulting others.
Insulting methods and emotional blackmail and all this nonsense is not at all traditional in this
country, and those who try to do this will be thrown out. You should not do them, I con tell
in Sahajaj Yoga you cannot do it.
you,
In Sahaja yoga, we should behave in such a way that we should be dignified, behaving ourstyle,
our tradition. Sahaja Yoga tradition is that we talk to people in the most sophisticated manner,
the sweetest manner and in the most affectionate, and inviting manner. So when you follow me
in things. Iam the way thatlam one the side that I forgive, the way I am loving. Iam affectionate
and not the way where I am terrible. Because my terrible nature has sophisticated manner, the
sweetest manner and in the most affectionate which you dont have nor an undercurrent of
Love manner and inviting manner. And that is how we should all speak. So, this is the first thing
| ask, that in your expression of love there should not be a thing that you shout. I do shout at
people who have bhoots in them, but by that, the bhoots run away. But, if you shout, you get
the bhoots. Bhoots do not run away, they get attuned, so better not do it. If you have My powers;
you can do that. But you don't have. If you shout at a person who has bhoots, you get the bhoots.
So, be careful, don't try my tricks, you see, I ama different type of a person and I do say things,
understandingly, which you do not. So be sweet and inviting.
my
I am asking for two things now. It is a funny thing that Mother has to ask for a gift. The gift you
have to give is, the first thing is that you should express peacefulness through your own character.
But it does not mean that people who are peaceful are timid, or who are morbid people who
tolerate nonsense. No, but the people who are peaceful resistance. You are notafraid of anything.
You are not going to bow down to anything, compromise with anything, but you have that sort
of a temperament you should develop and express, -is very important. And the second one is:-
that this peace ond all this should express your love-Love to others. In the Ashram, I will like to
see loving, caring, affectionate, beautiful attitude for the people who come there. I warit top class
persons to be in charge of an Ashram. If the person is mediocre he should not be appointed.
People are coming to the Mother's house, treat them with love and affection. Whatever you do,
you can starve, but give to others kindness and sweetness, so that the impression on the people
Divine Cool Breeze
27
VI - ISSUR 182
Vnl
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-27.txt 
 is that he is not an arrogant personality.
Don't try these tricks with any-body else. You have no right to shout or get angry, because if you
should, get back all the bhoots in you, for they are the ones who provoke you. They provoke you
to get caught up into it and you get absolutely ruined, the more you try to do so. Therefore, the
best thing is to stand in the centre and to have affection and love, the power I have given you.
That power you have to develop-that power of love. First, develop that power of love, then you
don't have to worry, you don't have to shout, or do anything. Your power will become (Krita)
(active), it will work out itself and create that beautiful atmosphere that we do not want to have
anybody ruined. But if you shout, people will run away. Specially in ego-oriented society, this
will distract them and they will run away.
mtty
This I give to you, so I have to tell you, that you might be the highest of the highest, first thing
that you have to give me today is: in your talk,in your behaviour, in your heart,you will reside
me with Love. The second thing I have to ask you is that you be Peaceful. Try to have peace with
yourself. Now don't fight with yourself. Now the Western people have one problem, that they
fight with themselves."How is this that is happening to me? I am this! I am so bad, I am no
good!". If you go on fighting with yourself you will not progress. You should say that "I am so
good, what's wrong with me? I have got my realisation, what's wrong with me? There is nothing
wrong with me." Have that confidence in ones-self, and then it will work out. You all have to
be very peaceful.
You have seen my peaceful nature has solved so many problems just like that. You have to achieve
that peace within you. The peace has not to be lost at any cost, should not be expressed outside.
My peace
itself becomes terrible. You don't have that possibility. Don't do it, never do it that
way,try to make your forehead relaxed. Many people come to me with face like that(distorted,
twisted face) andIsee bhoots sitting on their foreheads, and then Ishout at them, forehead relaxes,
"Iam not doing it, Mother is doing it". Relax, if you relax you will find that your heart also opens
out - why can't you open your heart? Because you have no trust in yourself. It will open your
Agnya, open your Sahasrara, and your heart will open. Once the Sahasrara is open, the heart
will open automatically, so you will have a peaceful life.
In politics when we talk of communism or of democracy. or capitalism, we are talking of a concept
but not of Reality. For me, I am the greatest capitalist I think, because I know my powers and
my properties, and I own them. Iam the greatest communist, that despite having everything in
life I cannot enjoy my life without sharing it. 'Every moment'of it, 'every moment of it. So the
meeting point only comes when all these ideologies become one at the lotus feet of your Spirit.
Spirit is the only thing that is at the centre, and at the periphery if you look at thing they look as
if they are separate and different. But if you can approach somehow into that state where
Spirit resides you will be amazed to see that every-thing integrates, everything co-ordinates, and
there is no difference, say, in Mohammed Sahab, Dattatreya, Raja Janaka or Shirdi Sai Nath.
There is no difference in their principle, if you can just get your Spirit. But this is a very major
for human beings. Because they want to live with concept and not with reality. This is one
your
step
of the problems, which we all have faced throughout in Sahaja Yoga.
I found myself very lonely always, where I could not talk of God and His greatness and His
Kindness for human beings, in the company of people who were doing work -other work-than
of God. It was such a solace and such a hope that people who apparently appear to be in the
charge of helm-of-affairs, are also in charge of the helm-of-affairs of Cod.* A day will come
when they will tske up their new roles, when they will become aware that it is God who rules
**Br Nagendra Singhi anid his sister
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VI - Jssue 1&2
28
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-28.txt 
 them, it is He who does it, it is He who has created everything and it is He who enjoys everything.
For this awareness, as you have very kindly said Sir, it's important that you have to be fort unate
seekers. The seeking ultimately has to come to human beings. Because all that is done through
mental projections and conceptions has one good point, that it is always exposed and comes
to an end. Every set enterprise of human beings only moves in a linear way and at a point
drops down. That is why all our conceptions and all our ideas are challenged after some fime.
Actually when reality expresses itself as compassion, then you don't do anything about it. For
example, to say that I raise your Kundalini, alsol don't know I do that. Because you are all ready,
you are all like candles. Iam a candle which is enlightened, and if this candle enlightens another
one, I do not think I have done a great job. Because if I am enlightened and then if you are ready,
and if I enlighten your candle, then it is just done. This is what reality is. There is no question
of having any humility about it, but that is a fact!.I really do not do anything. You are all made
for this purpose. God has prepared you like this, and you just have to accept yourself, and if
this works out in a simple straight forward manner, you get your realization.
Many people think that I have cured people, so I have done any sort of a good deed or maybe
some obligation. But to be very frank, that is also a concept. Because what do l do to a person?.
When I cure a person I don't do anything. The reason is: when I feel that I am yourself, you are
a part and parcel of Me, "it is not that I feel from my brain, but actually it is in my
system", 'actually' I feel, that you are a part and parcel of me. When Doctor Saheb's sister was
sitting next to me, I 'myself felt the pain within Myself; because her body is part of Me and I am
part of her. And I asked her,"Have you got a pain in this portion?" She said "Yes, how do you
know?" I said "I cannot tell you at this stage, but you will also know the same way. So, when
nobody is the other, then where is the compassion?
1
central nervous
So the concept of ego is just...! To be virtuous is a problem these days. If you are
virtuous,everybody will attack you. But if you even mention about virtue, you are out for a
crucifiction,or you are out for a poisoning, or something people will do. Because of the concept
of ego. But in Sahaja Yoga, ego is not a concept but a reality. Because when a person becomes
egoistical his Agnya chakra catches, so he comes to the Sahaja Yoga centre and says "Now, see
my Agnya has caught up". . Openly without feeling
shy about it! Because it is like a saree which has now become black, so I better get it cleaned.He
is nat identified. Concepts give you all misidentifications with everything' So when it comes to
reality,all these misidentifications just drop out and that is why I have seen people transform so
fast. I mean you cannot believe it, how people transform.
He says"I am suffering from ego disease
If you go to a party, -simple thing I will tell you, -and if you don't drink, everybody will say "Why
don't
you drink?, you must drink" or they force you, go on forcing you. You say, "Baba,l don't
drink". You have to tell some lie. You have to tell for this, to hide this thing from others, to
achieve a greater goal, you have to give up some lower goals, of telling lies also. You have to
say that" Doctor has told me not drink". "Oh! forget the Doctor". Then if you say that "Now
you see the problem is I have allergies, I get into trouble". Somehow you escape. But if you
even 'once' say that "Why do you drink?"- Then you are a matron. You are very ego-oriented.
You are very interfering. You are trying to show off.
In the West, we have lots of seekers, but the Western civilisation is the civilisation of the tree. They
are growing without their roots. While we Indians know about the roots,we are not bothered.
They are not at all in the knowledge of their roots. The trouble is, they have become so ego-
oriented that their concept of ego makes them forget that they have roots. Even to accept that
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VI - Issue 1&2
29
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-29.txt 
 they have roots, they find it impossible. Under these circumstances what happens, that the ego
itself reacts on itself. And that is why all the Western societies today are collapsing under that
pressure of ego. But if you have to talk to them it is not possible to tell them.
For example, in Sahaja Yoga we believe in a moral life where you are married to a woman and
lead a very moral life. But we don't talk about it till you get your realisation. After realisation,
automatically, you accept it. But by chance, if you say that you have to be moral, then they just
get after you. They say "We have achieved our freedom, and this Victorian Lady, is telling us
some out-of-date things, and why should we accept? So the concept of ego itself is so funny,
that they do not know that they are catching on their ego chakra.
This is also another concept people have. In the United Nations and everything I have seen, that
it is only they are working on the concept which they got it from their Unconscious. But in reality
they haven't got it on their central nervous system,as you all have got it. They will say"All right,
you are brothers and sisters, we must help the nations we must do this," and all that. But when
it comes to reality, when it comes to the working of it, you find they do not do it. They just do the
other way round. Now, you cannot explain it, you may write books after it and you may write
dogmas and you may write many articles about it. But, actually they just can't do it, by
temperament, because thev are not the Spirit.
In this great ossembly of realised souls which is a very, very great thing, to have so many saints
sitting around,- you know that the ego means the catch of the Agnya chakra and it is a reality.
Somebody may say, "I have no ego". Alright you have none! Because better not say. But
supposing he is a realised soul,he will say "Mother, I have got my Agnya catching, you please
take it away". Because it becomes a reality to him. And when it becomes a reality, you must
know
you are enlightened. If it is all darkness, you do not see. But when there is light you
'seeing' what is wrong with you start seeing that we are all sitting under one roof. 'Any' problem
in this hall is going to cause problem to 'all of us'. And that is how you become 'collectively
conscious' within yourself.
start
But when you become the Spirit, the Spirit, being the collective consciousness itself, is the reality,
the concept becomes your awareness. In your chetana, you start feeling others within yourself.
So what is there, from Canada or from Australia, I feel, when these people meet, the way they
love each other, the way they enjoy each other. When these Westerners go to the small villages
in India, the way the villagers just embrace them, and the way they become one with each other,-
we have never seen people going into politics who go on fighting with each other or saying lies
about each other. But just a meeting of these people, like a huge family! The whole system of
joy giving and enjoying, is so beautiful that even to watch that itself is like watching a very beautiful
drama of Krishna's Leelal
I have seen this happening in all parts of the country. When people come from across, they may
be Muslims, Hindus, whatever they are, the friendship and the love and the fondness, to do for
others, is so great that people are surprised - that how can it be that these people who are living
together like this, are so much helpful to each, other, so much loving to each other; there is no
question of people who will try to cut each others throat. Because the competition is in leving
more, the competition is in giving more, the competition is in understanding. There is no problem
in the society of Sahaja Yoga. Sir, you will be happy to know, though our socieiy is not so large.
Compared with this universe, ours is a very small society. But you will be amazed we 'never
have problems which normal people have. We are really abnormally normall Because we have
no angularities, we have no problems. People have become so honest, so courageous,so bold,
Divine Cool Breeze
30
Vol. VI - Issue 1&2
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-30.txt 
 so loving, so giving, I am myself sometimes, I feel so enamoured by this expression of love and
the waves of this ocean of love are expressed all over the world.
Today, the great day of Holika Dahana, where the symbolism of this occasion is that the Satanic
forces were burnt by the innocence of Prahlada. And that is what we have to remember, that
when the Sahaja yogis take to innocence and complete dependence on to their vibratory
awareness, which is the indication of God's Manifestation through them, they are completely
protected,and even a satanic person like Holika could not burn him. And this is the day, today,
we have to 'recognise'that as Sahaja Yogis we stand no dangers in life. We are fearless people,
but we are humble people, loving people ond anxious to save as many as possible. To raise
the whole humanity into another awareness, in the process of your evolution you have to achieve,
for which you have to work hard. As Tukarama has said very clearly: "Yerya gabadyache Kam
nohe" - This is the work af the Great Viras. Only the courageous can do it.
Even if you meet 'one' single Sahaja Yogi some where you will be amazed the way he leads
his life. And the way he is so beautiful, that he impresses people immediately; though some
people do try to trouble him. But God looks after Sahaja Yogis, is a fact. And Sahaja Yogis,
all of you know, how He looks after, and how He just tries to protect you in a very simple and
beautiful way. To know God 'itself' is 'such a great blessing', because He is the God Almighty.
the God who has all the powers' and all the loved ones. He is our Father, He is waiting for us
to enter into His Kingdom, to enjoy that Peace and beauty of His Being, - because He has created
Us and He wants His creation to come up to that.
Because you know that sometimes one has to face this world, - the difficulties and criticisms,
and how people try to insult you and trouble you, where you have to keep your peace. As realized
souls,I congratulate you very much. So many realized souls are sitting here today is the greatest
honour for any Mother. My age is now quite a lot, as you know, and l'never' felt len years back,
that within ten years I will see so many people being realized. My father,as I told you was a very
great soul, and he himself had told me that unless and until you find out an 'en masse method'
of realization you should not talk about it until it is 'en masse' people are not going to recognise
God, nor are they going to recognise ony saints. But today, when it has become the reality, when
it is no more a concept; God is no more a concept, it is the reality, the joy and happiness of your
Spirit, "Sacchidanand Sthiti", the state of Truth, Aftention and Bliss is just manifested, and I am
enjoying that.
And this is what one has to recognize, that in this world there are many people who are basically
very great Spirits. Only thing you have to approoch them, find them out, and discover them.
Now Sahaja yogis are not so much upset as they were about ten years back. Now they know
that there are many people in this world who understand Sahaja Yoga.But that is not sufficient.
We have to give realization to many. Thousands and thousands of people have to get realization.
This is to prove, when you celebrate My Birthday, that this is not any more a Kaliyuga, but KRITA
YUGA has started,and that Krita Yuga has to be finished now, to bring the Satyuga on this earth.
You cannot pay for God's love. It makes me laugh sometimes. Human beings can never
understand His love, because they live in a very limited sphere. His love is unlimited, even this
word 'unlimited', and'infinite' we do not understand, because we have not known anything like
that.We live with artificialities, fighting,mental projections. All these limited endeavours of human
beings, and the experiences they hove, made them so conditioned that it is not easy to understand
God. He made all this universe in His compassion and love. He created you as human beings
also, in his compassion and love. He doesn't need anything. But He Loves. And you can't
Divine Cool Breeze
31
Vol. VI - Issue 1&2
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-31.txt 
 understand a person who loves beyond any reason, without any reward. Just loves, for love's'
sake. We can't think of 'one' human being like that, who can love, only for loves' sake.Only
ofter realization, as you grow more and more,you realize that loving is the greatest joy, And
then you cannot think of money in relation to Him.
To my great country India, I bow, because She is a Yoga Bhoomi. And as Indians, you have a
special advantage, because as I told you, that Ashta-Vinayakas all are here, all the Jyotirlingas
are here, all the Adi Shakti's Peethas are here, all the three and a half Peethas of the Kundalini
are in Maharashtra. All of you know all about it. But there is something more we have to get
from the West, and that is the great Saints that are born in the West. It is most surprising that
they are 'very' saintly, and once they take to Sahaja Yoga, they really dedicate themselves and
they think there is nothing more needed to be done. This is what their life is. So the same way
one has to feel. Indians get realization much faster than them. But still, one has to know that
in Sahaja Yoga you have to work out in such a way that this Sahaja Yoga becomes a Maha Yoga
as predicted by Gyaneshwara. I am sure with all your affection for each other, for me, and for
the whole humanity, in My lifetimel will be able to see that you have achieved that grea state
within yourself and without, that people would say that the Maha Yoga has really been
accomplished by Sahaja yogis.
God didn't make this world to get any fruits out of it; nothing. Money and all these concepts are
your own. He just made it because He loved. He wanted to express His love, just to manifest that
love, He made this world. There is'nothing'else expected. And to put the human mind at that
level is an impossibility, I find in the beginning, but gradually they start understanding how
forgiving He is, how kind He is, how nice He is.
IS
So, the first problem I have to face in the West, especially in Paris, was that human beings felt
guilty. And this guilt is such a big problem in the West, I just don't understand. You see, why
ta feel guilty so much?, and that is one of the hurdles of Sahala Yoga, I have seen, that people
start feeling guilty to such an extent that they don't believe they can get self realisation. They think
they are sinners, born outright, permanently branded as sinners - and they can never get their
realisation. Imean they just brand themselves. It is beyond self pity also. I would say it's even
self destructive.
If you say something to some-one, instead of saying "I've said it, all right, I've said it and I take
the responsibility, it's good", not that. But you come back home and"Oh God, I should not have
said that". So you wobble between one kind of action into another kind, from say -into an
aggressive to the other one of a receding type. And this wobbling really is very, very,troublesome.
It can go on toa much,the oscillation could be so much that it can make you absalutely
frantic, diffident,and sometimes useless. On the contrary, God wants to find human beings who
are cheerful people, who are happy people, wha are thankful to Him for His Blessings. The most
unhappy animal in this world is a human being. Can you believe it? Animals don't know
happiness and unhappiness, is also a good point. But the most unhappy human being and the
most complicated human being has become so over self-destructive that a destruction force is
built within himself.
Today I have taken the subject of left Vishuddhi because I felt that I must one day speak on this
subject, "that this is absolutely unintelligible to God-that you ore guilty For what? Guilty for what?
If you ask yourself you say "Oh we are guilty because we crucified Christ" -At the most. That is
the maximum guilt a human heing can say on his head. "We crucified Christ, we tortured all
the saints", all right. But by being guilty what do you get? Do you get Him back? Can you ga
back and correctthat situation? You cannot. Butharping upon thatyou get into your subconscious
Divine Cool Breeze
32
Vol. VI - Issue 182
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-32.txt 
 mind. You get into a position where you are no more normal to receive the Love of God. You
recede into a corner of your mind which is darkness, which is ignorance, which is blindness,
where you cannot receive that beautiful ray, that eternal flow that is coming in. You hide yourself
back and then you say"What about the sun? I cannot receive it, because I don't deserve it! All
ego recedes back into that little pouch, what we call the guilt.
this
Now, think of that force that has built you up into a human. How with care and love, without
your knowledge, without troubling you, even when you were born you never knew what was the
pain of the birth; your mother took over, -He has made you a human being so carefully delicately
built you up. For what? What is the fruit of this beautiful flower? Why the flower starts eating
itself? Have you ever heard of any-one like that? This is the worst disease with which we in the
West suffer. French-yes. We had at least double the number of people that we have here today
Surprisingly. But all of them had the same problem, and think all their psychologists,
psychoanalysts, we can say all books, all the writers, the philosophers, every-one has done to
them: and they curse themselves morning till evening, walking with so many wrinkles on their
forehead. And if you ask them, they say "Mother, we are very unhappy people". Just like asking
unhappiness to come and decorate you.
But it has a subtler meaning of which people are not aware. These are the times when you have
to get your realisation, this mass realisation has to work out, -is all prophecised. And these are
very important times. All the stars are acting to help us. The whole universe is helping us. All
the elements are helping us. We are on the stage. But when the actors arrive on the stage they
ore finished, they can't act, they can't do anything, they can't play their game. They are so
involved with their different roles. And that is why one has to understand the subtler effect of
it, then only you will
are not less than any atomic bombs built within yourselves.
get rid of this guilt. You are playing inta the hands of negative forces. They
But to integrate it, to make you feel complete integration with all your being, is only possible if
you can,somehow or ather, get to that integrating force-which is still there, and it's quite.
dim.That's the last chance, I would say now, that has to be. The way the negative forces have
set in motion, of which you may not be aware at all, you may not be aware, you don't know what
darkness is there. And to fight it what one has to do is to bring in that light of the Spirit which
integrotes. Darkness always disintegrates. When we become aware we don't need organisations
and institutions. We don't need them at all.
I mean, this only human beings can do to create things & destroy ourselves. But this force which
works within our minds, within ourselves, within our beings, where we actually really hate
ourselves-sometimes I feel, the way we are destroying ourselves. This force we built within
ourselves, thanks to many nonsensical writers and conditioners and people who talk of
conditioning, really condition you much more. You should be singing and chirping like a bird you
should be laughing and enjoying like a flower. While you find human beings all looking so very
unhappy. What's the reason? The reason is that you are'separated' from your own being, The
being that integrates you, you are completely disintegrated. When you disintegrate an hydrogen
atom you form a very big force built into it. In the same way, you are disintegrating your being,-
your physical being on one side, your mental being on another side, your spiritual being on
another side. There's no integrating part. And when you cannot feel that integration you feel
guilty, but that guilt is just a symtom of a very big destructive force built-in. This is the way we
are going to destroy ourselves. No other way.Our destruction is not going to come to us from
outside,that can be controlled. It's going to come from within our selves. Everything we do
now,
after disintegration is further disintegration, building up that negative force within ourselves.
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VI- Issue 1&2
33
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-33.txt 
 So this awareness is nothing but is the light of the Spirit within you which is missing. The Spirit is
watching you alright. It goes up to a point. It sees your stupidity and your limitedness,- and it
goes up to a very great extent, I should say-and it's finished, It disappears and a person dies,
or he gets into trouble. He becomes crazy, mad, whatever you call it. He develops other diseases
like concer, which are caused by another problem here, os you know, of Ekadasha. So these
forces are built within us of negativity, when we go to the extremes of negativity.
And there's only one thing that will save the situation is Self-realisation. All other things are
destroying, are absolutely confusing.But there is only 'one' thing if you can do it saves the whole.
Like putting on the light, finished. But people don't understand the importance of Self-realisation.
See what's happening to human beings today, and if they are to be saved no use being unhappy
You see I have to say I am very unhappy, paint some lines here to show that I am very 'deeply'
concerned, you know, worried about the whole world. You want me to weep like you only. But
what is the solution you have got, that if ten people are weeping you also join them in weeping?
And the 'one and only' method that we have, which has already been told and prescribed and
been prophecised, nobody seeks it. See now, in the Bible, "You have to be born again.Christ
has to be born in your heart".
Divine Cool Breeze
34
Vol. VI - Issue 1&2
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-34.txt 
 PRESS INTERVIEW AT RUSSIA
Synopsis
Interview with Prof, Yu. A Voronov, Doctor of Science, Petrovskaya Academy of Science and Arts.
St Petersburg, Russia; on the occasion of a special honour bestowed by the academy on Her
Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi at Moscow 13 Nov 1993.
A unique honour of honarary member of the 'Academy of Science and Arts (Petrovskaya) was
bestowed on Shri Mataji for her outstanding work in promoting world peace; only ten such awards
have been given by this academy so far: ane of them was to Albert Einstein but Shri Mataji's work
was considered even more far reaching and importont than any scientific discovery made so far
Prof Voronov mentioned that science has yet to reach the stage achieved by sahaja yoga Shri
Mataji most graciously blessed the award.
Shri Mataji began Her talk by talking about Shri Ganesha, the lord of innocence, - who is the
eternal child and who stood for purity, innocence and auspiciouness. It is He who later incarnated
as Christ. She said that there is an interesting story of how he got a head of an elephant. In
meditation, His symbol was seen by people on the Mooladhara. But it was Shri Mataji who told
the scientists, how He is there on the Mooladhara which is made of a carbon atom; and it was
only when carbon was created, that we had organic chemistry, (and later on came the amino-
acids).
IT
Then Shri Mataji talked about how the carbon atom which has 4 valencies, was
photographed by scientists under Her guidance. She said that when it was photographed from
the left, its right side, they found the symbol of "omkar" which is the primordial sound. When
they photographed from right, its left side, they saw the symbol of "swastika", because it is thus
that the valencies move. When they photographed from down upwards, they found the letters
of "alpha and omega". Shri Mataji said that it is this what is meant when Shri Jesus Christ said
that "I am the Alpha & the Omega".
Shri Mataji further spoke about the Soul, which you can see in the sky, after realisation.
They appear as long ribbons, and they are the Souls of the dead, which are hanging around.
Scientists have found out that there are receptors in cells. Shri Mataji said that there is a receptor
in every cell, and that the soul sits on the back, and it sits on every cell as a remote control. Now
the scientists have found this out, of what Shri Mataji had told them a long time ago as to how
they are affected by dead spirits; and how the soul itself gets possessed; and it gets reflected on v
the genes in the chromosomes; and thus it affects all the cells by remote control.
Talking to a world authority on Nerology, specialising in and Synapse and Nerves. Shri
Mataji further talked about 4 areas of consciousness, found in human beings.
(1)
The conscious - which is the "present" within us
The Sub- Conscious - which is the "past" within us, and covers the past of this life, the past
of previous lives and also the collective sub-conscious which has everything that is dead
from our creation. All bacterias, viruses, dead spirits, possessions, reside in this area. The
sub-conscious area lies to the left of our left Sympathetic Nervous System (Ida Nadi)
and hence if our attention moves to the left, we get caught up into various types of psycho-
somatic diseases such as cancer, aids, muscular myelitis etc. The people with a
(2)
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VI - Issue 1&2
35
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-35.txt 
 predisposition fo left-side are always crying, clinging, and thinking of past; and it is them
who are prone to such attacks. At a lower level, such people tend to get rheumatism and
suffer bouts of depression. Epilepsy is due to the possesion of spirit, and can be easily
cured. In India, one doctor has got his MD., on such a cure for epilery.
Supra - conscious: which is the "future" within us and the area is situated on the right side
(3)
of our Right Sympathetic Nervous System (Pingala Nadi). The right-sided people are very
ambitious, futuristic and always planning things. When such persons die, they go to these
areas, and to fulfil their unfulfilled ambitious, they possess living souls. The right sided
people thus get various physical & mental diseases.
Shri Mataji talked at length about the "liver" and other organs, which are nourished by the second
chakra -of " Swadisthana" and how this chakra had a lot of functions to perform. This centre
has an important role to supply energy to the cells of the brain, because in order to think, we
need the energy. Futuristic people who plan too much, use up a lot of energy; and the Swadisthana
has to overwork to supply it; so that the organs which also fall within the purview of this chakra,
get neglected. The energy which has to be distributed between the liver, pancreas, spleen, kidneys
and intestines, thus is syphoned off for one function.
Shri mataji stressed on the function of liver which has to absorb all the poisons of the body as
heat and put it in the blood-circulation. Now, when the liver is neglected the heat starts collect
and it starts flowing on both the sides.
When this heat starts travelling down, and affects the intestines, one gets the problem of
'constipation'; and when it affects the kidneys, it tends to get coagulated and then you have lots
of problems. The doctors then put people on dialysis, and they get bankrupt and die. When
the heat from the liver rises up, it affects the lungs; (which in terms of Sahaja Yoga, called the
right heart); that a person gets asthama'.
Again stressing on diseases triggered by the Swadisthana Chakra Shri Mataji talked on diseases
like diabetes. Shri Mataji, said that it is a wrong belief, but diabetes has nothing to do with intake
of more sugar. She explained how an average Indian villager who takes about 3/4 teaspoones
of sugar per cup; but who leads a simple uncomplicated life; never suffers from diabetes. She
said that diabetes is normally a disease of beurocrats, politicians and thinkers, because their
"pancreas" which are responsible for sugar absorption; are neglected by the swadisthana chakra,
which is busy supply energy to their brain which is overworked.
Talking about blood cancer, which can be easily cured by practise of Sahaj Yoga; Shri
Mataji explained how "spleen" which has a
because of our hectic and speedy life-style, leading to blood cancer, if there is a sudden attack
of virus from the left-side; to a right-sided person in the shape of any mishap or disappointment.
Sudden swings from right to left, lead to this disease. Shri Mataji said that many such documented
cases of those who were medically certified to die, have been cured by Sahaja Yoga.
function of atfending to emergencies, gets erratic
A young atheletic man who is extremely right sided; and who is also addicted to drinking,
can suddenly get a massive heart attack at a very young age and die.
Another grave disease which con be triggered by non-function of Swadisthana chakra,
is the paralysis of the right side (left side in brain). Shri Mataji said that if ance the fundamentals
are known, and one knows how to set the centres right, then any diseases can be cured easily.
Super-Conscious is the consciousness above the present human consciousness, and the
Vol. VI - Issue 1&2
(4)
Divine Cool Breeze
36
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-36.txt 
 area where it is situated is above the brahmarandhra.
Talking to a professor of a Literacy Institute geared for Spiritual Life, Shri Mataji talked
of the greatness of earlier Russian authors, and how they have contributed to the habit
of introspection which they have cultivated among the Russians, which has today made
them sensitive, ready and ripe for Sahaja Yoga. Shri Mataji said that she had read Leo
Tolstoy in Hindi translation in her youth, and how much she had enjoyed it. An Indian
lady has recently translated "Anna Kerenina" in Marathi, with Shri Mataji's help.
Speaking to the President of an institute "Peace through culture", Shri Mataji explained how
each chakra is officiated by different deities, and that the "Swadisthana" chakra - which
is a very important one is presided by "Saraswati", the goddess of learning. Then, Shri
Mataji talked about "Matreya" which meons the 3 mothers- Mahalakshmi, Mahasaraswati
& Mahakali, and that how Shri Gautama Buddha had talked of the future Buddha, who
would come in the form of "Matreya".
One of the participants then told Shri Mataji that according to the Russian tradition,
Matreya is considered to be the Holy Ghost., and when he refered to the Holy Ghost in
the masculine gender. Shri Mataji corrected him by telling him that the Holy Ghost is nof
a man, but a woman. She is "Athena" of the Greeks.
Talking about organized religion, Shri Mataji paointed out the danger in such a step, as
those who organise it, tend to put in their own ideas. She explained that God and the
Divine, cannot be organized, as they are much beyond human mind.
Talking of Shri Jesus Christ, Shri Mataji showed the point in the centre of the brain at the
optic chaisma, which is the Agnyo chakra, and it is there, that He incarnated as Christ. He
is the King and He presides everywhere.
Shri Mataji said that once you get your realization you get all the powers - and this
is of love; which makes you unafraid. She explained this power by an example of Shri
Jesus Christ, who was moved by the state of Mary Magdeline, a prostitute, who was being
led for execution. When he saw people throw stones at her, He asked only those who
had never sinned, to cast the stones.
power
Powers can be of many types, but Power of Love alone cures and heals. She talked of
howin Russia, Rasputin also had powers, but they were evil powers, and how later on,
he was born in India as Rajneesh.
Shri Mataji then explained that Kundalini is the reflection of Holy Ghost within each of one
of us. She said that Paul did a great wrong in removing the Holy Ghost, who is the
Primordial Mother, from the Bible.
Talking of America, Shri Mataji regretted that the Americans were very primitive people,
as far as spirituality was concerned and that the majority of them were idiotic. Compound-
ed to that, many of them chosed false gurus, judging them by the material wealth they
had. She said that years ago, when she explained them the hazards of leading immoral
lives, and how they should do away with problems like homosexuality; they did not heed
Her. Even top academic institutions like Harvard University granted their consent for such
permissive life- styles and to top itall, the laws of the country and Catholic Church endorsed
it.
Divine Cool Breeze
37
Vol. VI - Issue 1&2
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-37.txt 
 Shri Mataji then warned the Russians in categorical terms, that they should not think that
the roads in America are paved with gold. They should not look up to them, for they are
all going to hell.
She said that they did not even heed Christ who said such a subtle thing as "Thou shalt
not have adulterous eyes". Today, there are hardly any one there, who do not have them.
Talking about Confucius and Loo-Tze, she said that all these Masters talked to people, in
the language suitable for the times. Whereas Confuci us came to teach about humanity,
LaoTze talked of Tao', which is nothing but "Kundalini". When Shri Mataji was sailing down
the Yang-Tse river, she remembered haw Lao-Tse had described this river as Tao. This
river is so beautiful on both the sides, that all inspirations of Chinese Paintings come from
there: In his poem, Lao-Tse has described Tao as that there are beautiful things on the way,
but one should be on the move, should not get attracted, but be a mere witness. When
the river (Tao) gets near the ocean, it becomes quiet, and it is only then that it enters the
Ocean.
Shri Mataji said that Zen system of Japan is also another great thought; but that today,
the Japanese are heading to their disaster. In Sahaja Yoga chart, She referred to Japan,
as the right heart
Talking about the heart chokra, Shri Mataji said that the centre heart is blessed by
Jagdamba, the Mother of the Universe who grants security. She explained how in a child,
till the age of 12 years, the anti-bodies are created, and loter on they spread to all the
parts of the body, but the remote control is suitated here. At this level, human beings
commit 2 kinds of sins - against the father and against the mother. Sin against the father
is not to believe in him, challenge him, be aggressive and cruel. Sin against the Mother
are those of immorality. All the psycho-somatic diseases are fought with the "ganas" which
gre the antibodies. In women, if their motherhood is challenged by a roving husband or
childlessness, they tend to develap breast-cancer. In America, where this problem of
insecurity is acute, the incidence of breast cancer is very high.
Talking on the problems faced by science. Shri Mataji said that it is very one-sided. It has
made a lot of discoveries about material things, but that cannof solve all problems. It
cannot answers questions such as "why we are on this earth". It cannot give a picture of
totality. Shri Mataji felt that the worse thing about science is that it is immoral. Unless and
until the scientists become moral, we shall have inventions like atom bomb.
With the help of a chart, Shri Mataji went on to show how ego and super ego, the two
balloon like structures are created at the ends of two channels. She said that because of
this
it is only the human beings who feel that they are the doers; and hence if is only
ego,
they who have the problems of "Karma". Animals are under bondage, and they have no
Karma problem. She explained how Shri Buddha (the Matreya) who is St. Gabriel, is
situated at the ego point and how Shri Mahavira who is St Micheal, is situation at the Super-
ego end.
Vol. VI - Issue 1&2
Divine Cool Breeze
38
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-38.txt 
 When the Kundalini rises, She awakens the Christ on the Agnaya, and as a result, these
2 balloons get sucked in. When there is no ego, there is no karma, and this is what is
meant by Christ dying for our sins. Shri Mataji stressed that the message of Christ is
resurrection and not the cross. By resurrecting Himself, He showed that all can be
resurrected.
Talking about Shri Rom, Shri Mataji said that He was the benevolent king, as described
by Socrates. He was so tuned in to the feelings of his subjects, that he had to send Sita,
his wife away, because she had stayed with Ravana, when she was kidnapped by him. Shri
Mataji spoke about Lav and Kush, the twin sons of Shri Rama, who were born and brought
up in an oshram. About 6000 yrs, ago Lav came to Causacus Mountains to Russia, &
aday his descendents are known as Slavs. Kush went to China, and his decendents are
called "Kushans" today, and in Indian language, Chinese are colled the Kushans. Shri
Mataji then joked that Russians and Chinese ore like twin-brothers.
Divine Cool Breeze
Val. VI - Issue 182
39
