DIVINE COOL BREEZE / Issue 9 & 10 Vol. V It's Mahamaya that protects you. Nobody can destroy Sahaja Yogis unless and until they want to be destroyed, ...H.H. Shri Mataji - Sahasrara Puja'94. VOL.VI - -1- Issue 9 & 10 DIVINE COOL BREEZE

 Oh Holiest One, on behalf of all the huinanrace, We humbly ask forthe boonof Your Darshan at the SAHASRARA PUJA IN CABELLA on the 8 th. of May 1994, all Your children of the worlad. 69. re world

 SHRIMATAJI So many lives we have been waiting forthis time to come. Now our dreams become true. You, the Goddess of the Sahasrara, have incarnated Yoursetf. You have opened the Lotus of our Sahasrara and gently merged us into the absolute Love and stillness of Your Beeing. With hearts overflowing we want to express our gratitude but find that we have nothing to give You, because everything is You and belongs to You. Not to let us feel ashamed, inYour Compossion, You gave us our free Will, so that We have one thing left to offer fto You-our heart. Every string of our heart longs for You.Every cell of our beings long to flow into your Infinity Please allow us to offer our hearts onthe occasion of the Sahasrara Puja 1994. соте. olus

 Contents 3. Sahasrara Puja- Cabella 8.5.94 Young President's Conference, Goa Australia Tour Talks - 1994 Easter Puja - Australia 3.4.94 11 2. 3. 19 20 4. DIVINE COOL BREEZE VOL VI - Issue 9 & 10 -2-

 SAHASRARA PUJA TALK BY H. H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI CABELLA 08/05/94 (Synopsis) Today is the unique combination of Mother's day in many countries and Sahasrara day for Sahaja Yogis. This is the most important day in the history of human evolution because all other events, incarnation and ventures in the spiritual atmosphere have been of no avail On the contrary they have gone into a kind at a cocoon, which has no door, banging against closed walls, creating problems out of something auspicious and extremely beautifully. Spiritually, it's not possible to find faults with the incarnations in whose names all the religious came, but this cocoon is the Mahamaya. Mahamaya does not create this. This cocoon is created by the basic ignorance of human beings and their misidentifications. The human nature is such that it identifies itself easily, with untruth. Anything that is truthful human beings find it very difficult to comprise with. The trouble with the truth is that it cannot compromise. So all kinds of ignorance falsehood and destructive forces gather together somehow or the other, to attract human mind. It is perhaps the ego of man which makes him feel ättracted to those things, for they all pamper his ego. The most difficult centre that we have to cross is the centre of Agya. This centre is one that takes us either to the left or to the right, if you try to push it too much. Thus. we land up into the hold of ignorance which is being looked after by Mahamaya. They say that at Sahasrara when the Goddess will appear, She will be Mahamaya. Is it possible to be anything else in the world of today to come on this earth? Any type of incarnation could have been in great trouble because human beings in their ego, are the highest in Kali Yuga. So they are quiet stupid and they are capable of doing any kind of harm or violance to a Divine personality. It is not at all possible to exist in this world as anything else than Mahamaya. But it also acts upon the people who are seekers as it has many facets, By one facet, it covers your Sahasrara, the seekers are tested, If you are more enarmoured by people who are something odd, who wear odd dresses, who show odd things as so many false Gurus have done or absurd or something very cheapish. That attracts the attention of human beings, because of Mahamaya or we can say that it is the Mahamaya which judges the person. Mahamaya is like a mirror, whatever you are you see yourself in the mirror. The mirror has no responsibility, if you look like a monkey. VOLVI-Issue 9 & 10 DIVINE COOL BREEZE

 you look like a monkey. If you look like a queen, you look like a queen. It has no power nor any intention of giving you wrong ideas or something that is false. It is there, whatever it is truth. So in a way to say that Mahamaya is the one which delude is wrong. On the contrary when you look at the mirror you see yourself as what you are. Now supposing you are a person who is a very cruel person, your face in the mirror will look like a cruel person, but the problem comes in when the Mahamaya acts. You don't see your image, you turn your face away from it. Don't want to see, don't want to know, you look at the mirror and you see something horrible, you just turn your face and deny the truth. "How can I be like that, I can't be like that I am very good, nothing wrong with me, nothing wrong, I am perfectly alright." Then, the third aspect of Mahamaya is that you are again attracted towards it in the sense, that you again see your mirror. You go on seeing your mirror again and again. You see the whole world also in the mirror. As a result you start getting a feeling what am I doing? Who am 1? What is this world? Where am I born? This is the beginning of your search. You don't feel satisfied with it, so it is a very great help of the Mahamaya. People who came to me for the first time if they see me taking water they how can She be something just needing water or if I am taking say Coca Cola, they will say Wah! How can She take Coca Cola, She should never take anything like that, She should only take nectar. The another aspect of Mahamaya is that people come to see Me, some of them start shaking, so they think we are great energy that's why it's happening. It has happened with many people so they get wrong impressions because of their own reactions to it. Their reaction that wah! We went there, we got all the energy, we were shaking, shaking and shaking so we are something great. This kind of a happening makes them more egoist but on the contrary if they see somebody else shaking it has happened and ask them who you are? So they will say we are certified mads from such hospital. Then they will start thinking little bit 'Oh! God' we are also mad or what? Why are we shaking, we should not shake. If they are certified mad, and they are shaking and we are shaking and then they start relatively seeing things. say The relative understanding helps to overcome that kind of curtain that you have, that you do not want to face the truth. Once it starts happening to you, relatively you see comparison with other people. Once you see that, you ascent. Then you start settling in Sahaja Yoga. Mahamaya is very important without that you cannot face me, you cannot sit here, you cannot talk to me, you cannot get into DIVINE COOL BREEZE -4- VOL.VI - Issue 9 & 10

 the same car driving and also you cannot drive me. Everything would be impossible I would be hanging on the air somewhere and you would be all here and it would be a big mess. I need not be before you, I can be just here in Nirakar-in formless but how to communicate, how to have a rapport. For that, one has to come in the form of Mahamaya so that there is no fear, there is no distance, one can come close and understand, because if this knowledge has to be given, if realisation has to be given, people have to atleast sit before the Mahamaya. Otherwise, if they all run away what's the use to create that extremely human personality in Sahasrara, she comes as Mahamaya. Sahasrara is the most powerful Chakra because it is the seventh Chakra's combination and many others. At the Sahasrara you can do anything, you can manage the sun, moon, earth, temperature, everything. But through Mahamaya, things work out very normally and they should workout normally. For example, they may say Mother there is atmosphere full of all these ecological problems, why don't you clear them. If it is cleared, people will go on producing. It is the problem of human beings and if it is corrected by Me they will take it for granted. They have to face those problems and change their habits. They have to understand, they are the ones who are destroying themselves. Otherwise, if somebody is there just to cleanse it out, they will never change. Miraculously one can do lots of things, one can say, 'Mother as You solve the problems of Sahaja Yogis, why don't you solve the problems of others?' To solve their problems is not the end of my work, nor is the purpose, but to make them equiped so that they can solve their own problem, that's what I have to do. You have to be your own Doctor, you have to be your own Guru, but without Mahamaya you cannot do it, because she knows how far to go, in correcting and controlling, how far to go, because human beings at large have their own freedom. Sahaja Yogis have not that kind of stupid freedom but they have freedom of the spirit. So, to solve their problems is perfectly alright, because they must have most freedom. But what's the use of giving freedom to other people who are going on and on, without realising what wrong they are doing to the whole world. For them it is necessary to come to Sahaja Yoga. That's why it's the Mahamaya Swarup. Maybe if I had came as Mother Mary or Radha or somebody like that, then they would have been all here nicely singing songs and all that. That's not the point. Now you have to mature, you have to be something and you have to grow, for VOL.VI - Issue 9 & 10 -5- DIVINE COOL BREEZE

 that it is important that you have to come to Sahaja Yoga first of all. Then you have to grow in Sahaja Yoga, otherwise this Mahamaya will go on acting and playing tricks with you. Sahasrara is that Virata's area. Virata is Vishnu who became Rama and then became Krishna. So this is a leela. His leela is a play and to make the play alright it has to be in the form of Mahamaya. There are so many loopholes, also sometimes people can discover things very easily, one of them is this Param Chaitanya. This Param Chaitanya acts, shows My photographs, exposes Me in all kinds of unbelievable manner which has never happened. I am myself amazed. This time when we were in Brisbane, they took a photograph of a rainbow outside the ashram. What appeared in the sky was very remarkable. A painting that I always liked of a Mother and child. This Param, Chaitanya is trying to expose this Mahamaya swarupa to make you understand what is Mahamaya. It is trying to express itself, I have not in any way told or asked this Param Chaitanya to do any such things. But it is true, because it thinks even now the people who are following Mother are not of that level as what they should be. Some of them faulter horribly, suprisingly I cannot believe. Sahaja Yoga, after seeing all My photographs they can still go to any limit of stupidity. I don't know how far this Param Chaitanya will be spontaneously acting like this, but this shows one thing for definite that it wants you to be perfectly settled in your faith, which is not a blind faith. Most of these photographs can be challenged by anybody who is an intellectual, can find out some ways and methods that you must have done this. But as Sahaja Yogis you know that we have done nothing and it has come out. We don't show them to outsiders we only show this to the Sahaja Yogis. So what is the purpose, that Sahaja Yogis should now try to understand that they have to grow. Now this growth has to be two sided. After coming to One is your side,- how much time do I spend thinking about Sahaja Yoga and how much about my personal life, education and business, duties, jobs, family. Because it is important as the brain has to think and Virata is there, so in Sahasrara how much energy do you use to think about Sahaja Yoga. How can we spread Sahaja Yoga. What should we do? What should we work it out? How much I should support, in which way? How it can be in every living moment? How I look at everything, I see Sahaja working in it. What is this Sahaja culture? Am I in the Sahaja culture? How much I am impressed by culture, fashions and things. What and how have I to gain to grow in my mental capacity to be a Sahaja Yogi. For a person who is a Sahaja personality in everything he sees Sahaja whether cupboards, carpets, statues, light, etc. VOL.VI - Issue 9 & 10 -6- DIVINE COOL BREEZE

 These pillars are standing at an angle, just imagine to support it how you have to bend on one side, what do we do in Sahaja we have to bend towards divinity. See like that all ideas go moving towards Sahaja. The whole thinking is Sahaja. Such a married life also between husband and wife, they all the time talk of Sahaja, no firvolous talk, how it is Sahaja to be husband and wife what is the relationship. The most interesting thing in Sahaja is that you see everything that you do, you think of Sahaja way. How you can judge yourself in this Mahamaya? How far do you go really to think about Sahaja? All other worries like how much money I can get out of this business, how much pleasure I can get, how much physical problems can be solved, all these gains are nothing compared to your maturity in Sahaja Yoga. The mind takes over and it starts thinking and thinking. It goes on wandering on various things, maybe your wife, your children, your house, this and that. But if you think in a Sahaja way, you think I should do something that my children must be Sahaja. I should make a house which will be useful to Sahaja. I should behave in such a manner that I am a Sahaja Yogi. The maturity in you should grow in such a way that you feel it, firstly is the peace. When a person is not peaceful then his mind is like a wobbling instrument. He cannot think properly, see properly, understand properly. You tell him something, he understands something else. Today the whole world is wobbling. In palitics a new party was dismantled, the other old party is in, now it is this one which is to be dismantled. Everything is going upside down through this Mahamaya. The way the world is inter-wared, is not war, it's not cold war, it's a funny type of warfame, which cannot be described in words. There is no peace in their mind to see what they are doing, what is their responsibility. The media is taking to horrible things, it was never so before. We have read beautiful articles in media itself but today it is difficult. Then it is materialistic one, marketing this, marketing that, marketing human beings. They are taking away children, women. They are selling the children, women, all kinds of things are going on. Marketing God, marketing spirituality. For this kind of a perverse world of today, Mahamaya is needed by which she shows that you have to pay through your noses for what you are doing in this life. Say a man who is very wavered, very destructive, drinks and smokes, goes away with women, etc, within two years he is bankrupt. So the reward is already there whatever he was doing is there to see. Another man goes on with nonsensical things he gets Aids, he gets other diseases of very incurable nature, we call it 'Rokada Devi,' means cash payment, the Godess which gives cash VOL.VI Issue 9 & 10 DIVINE COOL BREEZE -7-

 payment. You do this alright, you have it. You have done this, alright enjoy this. It is really this Mahamaya specially who is now very much active, sometimes I get afraid from Her, the way She is punishing people, but it is so. If you say, "Oh I will enjoy rash driving,' alright, finished. You end up with a limping leg or a broken hand. The law of the Divine at work through Mahamaya. It was not that fast before, as it is today. Supposing there is President of America, such a big position in America, imagine he is challenged by any third rater from the seat. possible? nobody could do it before, because Mahamaya is using all its free will to check the free will of human beings. The so called freedom that we are trying to enjoy has brought us to an end. How is it Today you will read somebody boasting very much about himself and tomorrow you will see him in jail. There was some minister in Italy who wanted Me to meet, I said I don't want to meet him. He had a very bad past and he is in jail already. They are falling into their own traps. This trap is Mahamaya, she creates from your own because you don't want to face yourself, you don't want to know the truth, you want to evade the truth. This is the aspect of Mahamaya that immedialy you have to face yourself. How many things have happened, think of it. Thus big- big tycoons are in jail, very famous people are in jail, all such things are happening, why, because this Mahamaya is the one who wants to teach a lesson. By teaching a lesson to one person it shatteres atleast thousands, because that persons sees the point, as death comes to it or whatever comes to it. Maybe he may not learn How it spreads any lesson as he may be already dead, but others are there. through the media that always gives bad news, in a way, does not know how much good it is doing through Mahamaya. ane Now for your information we are saying many things, smoking is already going out drinking will also go out, what did the Sahaja do? nothing, but the Mahamaya did it. Doctors have asked people now you don't smoke, otherwise you will get cancer. The Mahamaya creates that kind of an incident. Single incident is sufficient for the people to be extremely cautious It is such a panicked world, so much insecurity today suddenly you find the cows are giving poisoned milk there is something else happening, the water is getting polluted, then find there are needles which are infected, so everybody is so nervous and thinking about saving their lives. So they start thinking about it but if you come to Sahaja none of these things can trouble you, because this is the aspect of Mahamaya, that she protects. Nobody can destroy Sahaja Yogis, unless and untill they want to be destroyed. It's their desire, nobody can touch them. DIVINE COOL BREEZE -8- VOL.VI - Issue 9 & 10

 When they talk of miracles like the other day one boy from Australia, a new Sahaja Yogi, was going on a motorbike and he was in great speed and suddenly from both the sides two trucks came and they hit him, but instead of getting hit, he was just pushed out, just like a shuttlecock. He fell on the other side and he was not at all hurt, he got up and they were surprised, His bike was shattered but this person was perfectly alright. They couldn't understand how this boy was saved? There are so many stories how this Mahamaya is protecting Sahaja Yogis. Also r in dreams she protects. It is very surprising how people get dreams and how they get their medicines and treatments. How they understand about the dangers that are there, how in dreams they are told about, how other people are, how they behave, you don't have to know, it is conscious mind but into very very deep sushipti state you know what is good for you, what is bad for you, somehow they know, it is that knowledge which is intution, which comes through Mahamaya. She is the one that gives you this intutive knowledge what's to be done? of problems, and you do. How to get out There is someone who tries to trouble the Sahaja Yogis, Mahamaya allows him, upto a point and suddenly she acts. So the people are amazed, Sahaja Yogis are amazed how this man has became like this. This Mahamaya is like my saree as you say, is protecting. She is very beautiful, kind, caring, compassionate, affectionate and delicate. She handles you and she is very angry and kills the people who try to spoil the work of God, like rakshakas and devils. A very good aspect of Mahamaya is that She transforms you. Everything is in brain for human beings. If you are crook, you are a crook. If you are a person who hates others, it's all in the brain. If you are addicted to something, it's all in the brain. It's a very complicated conditioning in the head. So this Sahasrara is very important no doubt, but the power of Virata and Viratangava can only be effective if there is Mahamaya rule and She in Her own sweet ways opens, dislodges all this conditionings which make you ugly, which make you horrible, which make you hot tempered. She is the one who is like Mother Earth given all that She has to make you really very joyous, happy so that you enjoy "niranand", nothing but "anand". Nothing but joy and this is what is the Sahasrara but it is only possible when your Brahmananda is to be opened out, otherwise you cannot enter into subtleness of divine love, compassion of that ever flowing Mahamaya. From outside I have told you what She is, but frorn inside when you enter, penetrate into Her through the -9. VOL.VI - Issue 9 & 10 DIVINE COOL BREEZE

 Brahmananda, then this Mahamaya, which is an incarnation as you know of this all pervading power, becomes very different on one side. She tries to teach you lessons, She tries to destroy the evil, that is destructive and on the other side She loves you, protects you very delicately, guides you. Her love is without any expectations. She loves because she cannot help but to love. So in that love you are drenched, you enjoy. Everybody knows that they are close to Her, absolutely close. Whenever they want they can always ask Her help, wherever they are. The Sahasrara is very important because through this With this we accumulate all kinds of nonsense.. In the world in only we react. which we are living we have to be something like the lotuses who cannot be tarnished, who cannot be effected by all the ills that are going on. This is what is the test, is the 'pariksha', that at this difficult time we can blossorn and create fragrance and get so many others to this beautiful atmosphere. It is a kind of a beautiful playful war, you can say, against what is supposed to be negative. What is the power of this negativity, what is the power of these conditioning. What is the power of there stupidity. That anybody can see, so you develop the psyche, the vision so clearly you understand that you are the ones who are responsible, you are the cells in this Sahasrara of this brain and you all have to act. I was yesterday anarmoured when you said that these lights have to enlighten many lights. This was really a very great promise for me. Coming to Sahaja Yoga is just not for your personal limited personalities and their problems, but on one side you have to grow and on the other side everyone has to grow through you, this is the second side which you should look after. Today ofcourse I am very happy. That in my life time I could see the manifestation of Mahamaya. It is beautiful that this door is opened just now for you to be able to enter into the Kingdom of God and to enjoy the heavenly bliss and the protection. Have faith in it, do not get disturbed by small things, and i am sure it will work out in a very great way. If you get that complete faith and complete surrendering I am sure it will work out very well. May God Bless You VOL.VI Issue 9 & 10 DIVINE COOL BREEZE -10-

 HER HOLINESS SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA L "Spirituality in the 21st Century" Address tu Young Presidents and Chief Executives of Companies FEBRUARY 16-20, 1994, GOA I bow to all the seekers of truth. At the very outset I would like to point out that truth is what it is. You cannot change it, you cannt conceptualise it a.id you cannot describe it. You have to be the truth urself, otherwise it's just a talk and talk. Whateverlam going to tell you today I would request you not to believe it hdfolded. We have suffered a lot by believing in thin blindfolded. Please kee, your mi dopen like a scientist. If it works out, and if yo- out, that is the truth. If the expe.ence of the truth is actualised in you, Lerstand the absolute truth on your central nervous system, then onlv you have to you DCHEVE, definitely. Then, you have to believe because you are honest and to know that this is for the benevolence of your person, your individual being, your family, your country and the whole world at large. So the ti. Is, that you are not this heaismind, these emotions, these conditionings. this ego, but you are the nsam That's why at this human awareness, you cannot know, unfortunately, the tru. as human beings, and there is a little hreakthrough left, which has to actualise. It'sk just giving big claims and big things, but it has to actualise. And if it actualisen she will know the second truth is that there is a very subtle power of divine emou may thesu tree you take them f ed. How from one coconui rev heasnese things, never bothered because this iSving proce.s. Who runs our h RUonat you want. You its autonomous nervous system. But who is the "auto"? We nev dian thing is done by is living because we carnot enswer it. This is the living proce nmutinubonurse.. takes place spontaneously. rourevolutionary process, we have come to this stage At the very outset I must tell you that you cannot market it. It's ul to market it. It's hypocritical to market it and for that people have to pay individually and collectively. That's one thing that you cannot market. Because, it's your own power which resides within you which we call here as Kundalini, because Kundal sa coil. It resides within and it is awakened effortlessly, Sahaja. "Saha" means oorn with you, "ja" means you spontaneous. There are so many things which are today in these modern times, that I start wondering how many will have the discretion to choose the truth? The first thing you must know who are the disciples? What are they doing? What is their kno ledge? -11- I - Issue 9 & 10 DIVINE COOL BREEZE VOLVI

 What powers they have got? Because if you become spiritual, it's your resurrection complete. All your powers are awakened. Of course, after realisation, or we can say after the first germination, you have to practice it a little deeply and work it out, your connection with this all pervading power. This connection is the only yoga, where you are united with that all pervading power. United for ever! That's the new birth as they call it, that a realised soul, in Sanskrit language is called as Dvijaha, means born twice and it means also a bird. Bird which is an egg then becomes the bird and becomes free and learns to fly. In the same way a realised soul is born again. First as a normal human being and then as a realised soul. You don't have to certify, you don't have to have an organisation, you don't have to pay for it. It is an experience of this all pervading power, which is, we can call it in the biblical words, is the 'cool breeze of the Holy Ghost'. In Adi Shankaracharya's book of revelation, he has called it Salilam Salilam, means the one which is a very cool, soothing breeze. Then you feel the cool breeze on your fontanelle bone area. This fontanelle bone area is called 'Brahmarandra', because this all pervading power is called as Brahma Chaitanya. "Randra' means the whole, so the whole thing comes out and you start feeling the cool breeze out of your tna head. Then you relax. Your wrinkles start vanishing, your worries start vanishing, the tręss and strain that you all people have goes away, permanently, because you can call it an opening here. And you become a relaxed person. lig jusv let us see the problems of the young presidents. One of the greatest problems of you hang presidents is that when they work they get into stress and strain, it's very is the seconcause you think you are working, you think you are doing something. you never think you are doing. The first state we call it we are doing Today ofcourse s built up, so we are very happy. When it is pampered we are happier, bt Mahamaypunctured we feel unhappy, there's no joy because joy is not a dual state, it's singular. So what happens, that when it is connected with this all pervading power, which is extremely alert, very intelligent and extremely communicative. Ther communicates is very surprising, that you feel you are in bliss. Because whatever you want to do is just before you and you are surprised how you have developed this or that. Even in business, you want to meet somebody, immediately you will know what sort of a person he is. You will also know how to treat him, then you will also know what sort of a challenge to take, what to discuss. it way The light of the spirit enlightens your attention. AIl of us! There would have been no quarreling, there would have been no fighting, there would have been no theories, no -12- DIVINE COOL BREEZE VOL.VI - Issue 9 & 10

 dogmas, no different religions. Because, everybody knows the same thing. As I am sitting before you, you can see it clearly. If you know the absolute truth on your fingertips, why should you quarrel, why should you have wars, why should you kill each other? You see, the first thing happens to you, that you become absolutely clear-cut about the whole totality. You know the whole reality, what it is. Just now we are in darkness, because that breakthrough has not taken place. Secondly, we talk of religion because people always ask me questions, "Mother, why these religions are so troublesome?" "Why they are fighting", Because they are in darkness. Whether you are Christian, Hindu, Muslim, anything you can commit any sin. There is no compulsion. The religion has to be born inside you. It should make you righteous from within, it's not from outside. Then there is no problem about that only. The opportunities to expand are vast. So potential is your being. Perhaps you do not know how glorious you are. You don't know also, what you can do, what powers you have got. VWe are not aware of it. We are not aware of ourselves. That's the only problem you are facing today. Once we've managed to know ourselves and the complete working of this machinery, the science of divine love, then the whole life changes like that. There are some people sitting here who are today very big people. They once had problems and problems. But, after coming to Sahaja Yoga they have become abso- lutely dynamic. At the same time they are compassionate. At the same time they think of collectivity. In India the Goddess for wealth is Laxmi. She earns for you when She is awakened in you. You make money and wealth. But it's not still the Laxmi. You may have a big car, you may be doing wrong things. But, then you don't do all these things, you become really righteous and the Divine power helps you to get what you want. You don't have to worry to play some tricks or intrigues, nothing. The whole thing is done by this Divine power. It looks after you. You must have faith in yourself, of course. Then, secondly when you look at Shri Laxmi, She has two lotuses in Her hand. That means such a person has to be extremely warm. There should be warmth, you should want your children, your wife, neighbours, everybody. With small little things you should try to give them this Shri Laxmi. Little, little things, even a flower. But with heart, not superficially. If a young boy of 25 is playing tennis in his tournaments say. Now everything is so money oriented that, I mean the way they play is shocking. Then he also drinks, thinks too much. He can get a massive heart attack, which is absolutely fatal. Then, for also -13- DIVINE COOL BREEZE Issue 9 & 10 VOL.VI

 elderly people who think too much, who do all kinds of plannings. One day suddenly you find they had a heart attack. Sometimes, they get one just to give them a warning. Second, another warning, third finished. Heart is a big problem these days. It's not that their hearts are made of stone that they break. But the main problem is the way they are using their energy into one direction of no value. But nowlam seeing another phenomena that is people are getting paralysed suddenly. Diabetes plus too much thinking can give paralysis at a very young age. This is not to frighten you, but to give you hope that you can get overit permanently. It can be done, is done, and will be done, but how many miss it out, I cannot say. It's a business which is a Divine business where you have to get to it, establish it, understand it and work it out. When you start giving realisation to others, because this is another power of the spirit, that you can give realisation to others, you can save so many lives, you can save your children. You can do such a lot of work without taking any money for it. And, it's so joy giving, you can't understand the joy of saving somebody without doing anything. If you don't have the pure desire I cannot work it out, nobody can work it out. If you put the stones in the mother earth, will it sprout? No. But if you put the seed, it will. Because the seed has the built-in possibility to sprout and the mother earth has the capacity to sprout. It's just built-in, it doesn't have to do anything, it's spontaneous, its Sahaja. It's as simple as that, and this is a special time when it is working out. Materialism that has just got hold of us and is taking us to recession has to be understood in proper way. It is just a reaction of an action. Childishness with which we have done overproduction. There is no proper wisdom to understand what we should have done. This time in Delhi, I wanted to buy some big bangles because our hands are a little softer than that of the Western people. So, I asked them for big bangles. AndI was surprised that they said, "No, we are exporting to America and to England." I said, "For what, why are they asking for bangles?" They said, "The men have decided to wear bangles there". In India, if you give bangles to somebody he'll be shocked because it's an insult to his manliness. If somebody becomes a coward, they give bangles to that person in India. All this kind of craze, it starts like children have crazes. But, children will play fora while, throw away. Like that they have a craze and throw away. Anothercraze, throw away. If you ask them, why do you do it? They will say, "What's wrong?". They used to put -14- DIVINE COOL BREEZE VOL.VI- Isue 9 & 10

 some red oxide in their head to make the head look red, I don't know what is the need, I said, "Why do you do it?" Because they started losing their eyesight. "What's wrong?" I said, "Wrong is your eyesight, you are losing". So, "What's wrong?" I mean how to tell them now. It's stupidity, idiotic. But, I will call it a childishness. The maturity is not there to understand why should we do it. And such another craze is to become young. To look young. You have to be proud that you are old. In our country, the old are respected very much. They have a say in every matter. Now, my granddaughter is getting married, without me and my husband no decision will be taken. Because, they think we are wiser people. But, if you start behaving like children. Who will take our decisions? If you don't show dignity, should children take any instruction from you. why The other day I saw a docurnentary, there the ladies and gentlemen from Hollywood of about 90 years, were having a big party. They were going to do the shake dance, but all of them when they were getting out of the car, were shaking already. I said, "What's the use to have another shake dance?" We also shake at certain age, isn't it? But, we have kept our dignity and we have shown them the right path. But, not in a way to shout or anything. But at the age of 16 years they say you must treat your children like your friends. But first you must develop them up to the 16th year. You should keep them company. Here the women are also working. Also, Divine plan was like that, that I should do it after my daughters were married. Supposing, at a young age I had started, no woman is safe in this world. So, as an old woman is all right, you are very safe. I started my work when I was 47 years of age and the first country I visited was Iran and second was America. But, I found it already full of all kinds of marketing gurus. They said, "Why don't you take money?" I said, "You cannot pay for it, I'm honest". I went to Boston, you'll be surprised, they asked me, "How many Roles Royce's you have?" | said, "I have none". "You're not in the business?" "No, no, it's not a business". "Then we don't want you". They canceled me completely, would not take me on the television. San Diego was even worse. They wouldn't even publish my advertisement. I said, "Why?" He said, "Because you say homosexuality can be cured. Why do you want to cure homosexuality?" "Because, it is abnormal" DIVINE COOL BREEZE -15- VOL VI Issue 9 & 1D

 "No, we don't want". I said, "All right, you don't want, doesn't matter, but publish my this thing". "No, no we will not". Because, the person who was taking the advertisement he said, "I'm homosexual, my editor is homosexual, our president is homosexual", The whole place seemed to be homosexual. So I said, "You need me most". They didn't publish. I was so shocked, because whatever is filthy, unholy, the Christians should know. Because Christ has gone to such a subtle extent to say, "Thou shalt not have adulterous eyes". I've yet to see people there who don't look at women, whatever may be their age. With Sahaja Yoga, your eyes become extremely pure and innocent. And the attention you pay to anyone is affected. He gets peace, balance, not only that but he can even get realisation and cured. Such an eye of innocence and love which is a pure love which is Niraj, without any demand it just loves and enjoys the love. The state of joy. You enjoy each and everything. Every leaf how it has turned. How these trees, have come up and how they are turning this way, though they should go towards the sea. Everything becomes such a cosmic integration, you start seeing the whole thing in such a beauty. In America I have known of some great poets. William Blake in England and everywhere we have great poets who were all realised souls. Mozart and Strauss were realised souls. But you can make it out only when you can feel the vibrations. The cool from them. Mona Lisa, you just can feel. Some beautiful things like Notre Dam itself, has got vibrations. So many things have got vibrations, which only you will know when you are a realised soul. How will you know whether this man is a thug or has come from a jail or he is a real person? Relatively, a person who has got cancer, immediately you can feel it on your fingers You don't have to go to the rigmarole or the whole grueling of hospitals. The one who is getting it also knows. He also knows that he is going to get his heart attack. He walks up to the hospital and says that I'm getting a heart attack, please look after me. Such a person, becomes extremely patient, loving, caring and a personality of a very different nature. Actually, it helps the most to people who are thinking of the future. Because, it gives you wisdom and Divine discretion. But, above all, it gives you a complete sense of reality, "and, the power to face it. Because if you are in the waves and you are afraid of the waves but somebody takes you out and puts you on a boat, you can see, you can DIVINE COOL BREEZE -16- VOL.VI Isue 9 & 10

 enjoy the waves. But, if you know how to swim, you can jump in and save many. This is all potential within you, it's there and the time has come to happen. It's for your good, for your business, health, everything. As a mother I would say that you don't have to pay. There's no problem of Kundalini. Also, there are some books I have read where they say the Kundalini burns you up. I've never seen anything like that. It's just there and it's your own and you get it. In all the Western countries now we have our centers. Excellent people, such deep people who are working it out. It's very amazing how these people are so much deeply involved in their seeking. How far they have gone to seek the truth. You don't have to give up anything, you don't have to fast, don't have to give up your family, nothing. It is something eternal that happens, and you get the knowledge what is within. T have come here just to announce this great news to you. To give you this message that you can save yourself, save the whole world today, from it's destruction. Not by talking about peace. I've met many people who talk about peace. You can't go near them. The way they are hot tempered. How can they be talking of peace? They get awards of peace by other people who are equally the same. Peace has to be within. When this Kundalini rises it stops these thoughts, you are in the present, you are fully aware into thoughtless awareness and there you grow spiritually. Then all the thoughts that come to you, mostly, are from inspiratión which are full of wisdom and truth. But, firstly you must have full faith in yourself that you can get it. Not to feel guilty. I mean, especially in the West all the time sorry. It's nothing to feel sorry. You have done nothing wrong. Not to feel guilty. You should know that you are a human being and it is your birthright to get your realisation. Firstly, not to feel guilty. It's very important. It is very simple if you just say l'm not guilty at all. If you were guilty you would have been in jail. How are you here? I mean, after all you are not God, you can make mistakes, so it's all right. But there's nothing to be guilty, you just face it and finish it off. But you carry it all the time here on the left side and what you develop is an angina or a spondylitis. Everybody carrying a dog collar around, because they're feeling guilty. If Itell them they don't believe me, but it's a fact. Question When the Kundalini rises can it rise in many ways and also through the left shoulder and also is there any danger associated with the rising of the Kundalini? DIVINE COOL BREEZE VOL.VI - Issue 9 & 10 -17-

 There is no danger. First of all, She is your Mother, your individual Mother and She has been with you since long. From your last lives. She has recorded everything that you are up to or whatever are your own qualities. She knows you very well and She is anxious to give you a rebirth. So there is no danger. When your Mother She took up all the problems upon herself. She didn't give you any problems. She is a very loving Mother who knows how to rise and how to give very smooth birth to you. But some people do have problems in their chakras. So She may stop, She may just a little bit, create heat, that's all. But I've not seen anything going wrong with it. There's gave you birth only one way it can rise, through the middle path as Buddha has described. VOL.VI - Isue 9 & 10 DIVINE COOL BREEZE -18-

 H.H.SHRI MATAJI'S AUSTRALASIATOUR TALKS AT MELBOURNE PICNIC Shri Mataji began by saying that Nature and Spirituality go together very well, that one encourages the other. She then moved onto another topic and discussed how nega- tivity comes in such a camouflage that it is hard for us to make it out and that we can go along with it until we find ourselves in great danger, and where great damage can be done to Sahaja Yoga. We must come out of it and realise the value of ourown being and not let ourselves be suppressed, oppressed or led astray. She said that some of the new people who had come were better than the older people who can become power oriented, or behave as if they were masters of Sahaja Yoga and this only results in bringing people down. She said that we all have to practice Sahaja Yoga very well, we should be careful of charismatic people who talk too much, and speak against people, they should not be listened to and we should not get involved in their domain. She said that if there is a problem with the leader, She will know about it, but She may want to test how far we can understand the situation, that we should have the power to discriminate good from wrong. Shri Mataji said that Sahaja Yoga is working in 60 nations and that Her attention is everywhere, after all we are Her children and She has special concern for us all. It is for the betterment of our lives that Sahaja Yoga has come, to enable us to enjoy the kingdom of God. Everything is for us, but if we are not sensitive to what is good for us we may fall into a trap. She went on to say that we have to meditate, morning and night. She said that in the beginning She knows that we found meditation boring but gradually we will grow into it, and see the benefits. She told us that She cannot meditate for us, we have to grow ourselves. Shri Mataji asked us to see what a unique time we have been born into and what special people we must be to be in Sahaja Yoga. We must have been special people and have done something great, otherwise we would not be here. We did not come here to gain materially, orforsome other reason, we came for our ascent, so now is the time to make the best of it. She then spoke about western children and said that the children in the school did not want to study, rather they wanted to play all the time. Children should know the value of their lives mostly they are realised souls and intelligent, sometimes too intelligent. We should try to get them interested in higher things and we should try to spend time teaching them, because they have to come up Issue 9 & 10 DIVINE COOL BREEZE VOL.VI -19-

 TALK ATTHE CONCERT NIGHT Shri Mataji began by saying that Australia had the second position in relation to numbers of Sahaja Yogis next to Austria, if one excluded the Eastern Bloc, Russia and India. She said that people in Australia write Her very long letters, She suggested that we keep the letters shorter as She can tell on Vibrations the nature of the problem. She said that most people write to Her about personal problems, what She wants to hear about is the spreading of Sahaja Yoga and how it is working out. Shri Mataji then went on to talk about how all people who call themselves Sahaja Yogis should contribute to the funds of Sahaja Yoga, some people are very miserly and some are very generous. On the whole everyone should be a little generous, those who do not pay are those who do not understand Sahaja Yoga. She went on to say that Sahaja Yoga has given us so much yet some cannot contribute to the running of Sahaja Yoga. She posed the question as to who is responsible for our recession. Sahaja Yoga should not be treated as a side issue. She then said that meditation is the most important thing and it must be done with respect and dedication. The second thing we must do She said is that we should not form groups. Rather we should be going across ourcity and to smaller places and trying to spread Sahaja Yoga If we do this then we can multiply like anything, we are all duty bound to do this. She said the nature of light is to spread out, we have to spread Sahaja Yoga as much as possible. She said: "First of all you have a duty to spread Sahaja Yoga, secondly it is for you to enjoy Sahaja Yoga but also to see that by your behaviour you do not trouble Sahaja Yoga all over the world." Shri Mataji reported that the leaders have said that most Sahaja Yogis are excellent but as far as working for Sahaja Yoga only a few are available, this is not the way of showing Vour sense of gratitude, if we wish to show oursense of gratitude then we must run to ask what we can do. Shri Mataji told us of the last Public Programme in Pune where the Yuva Shakti had built 35 large gates on the road leading to the programme and they had advertised all over Pune, 100,000 people received their self-realisation. In Bombay the programme was held in Shivaji Park where 130,000 people attended, it was reported that it was the largest crowd ever gathered at the Park, surpassing crowds which even Gandhiji had drawn. All of this She said was done by Sahaja Yogis, to them Sahaja Yoga is their life, it is their aim, their totality. DIVINE COOL BREEZE -20- Isue 9 & 10 VOL.VI

 The problems in our society are usually related to economic or political concerns, it is like this in every Western society, but the main problem we are facing in our societies is morality, all kinds of filthy things are happening and our children are suffering. Shri Mataji then said that women are responsible for our society, they have to change it, they should not do things which are wrong and they should not allow their children to do anything which is wrong. Shri Mataji said that She was told that no one is allowed to correct others children, anyone can correct children. She said that no parent should feel bad if someone corrects their child, in fact the parent should thank that person. In India other are allowed to correct children, that is why Indian children are very much better, they are disciplined not only by their parents but by the whole society, and the idea is that they are children of the whole society. Shri Mataji then went on to say that in the West one finds that if anything belongs to someone else then it is spoilt, if it is theirs then they keep it carefully, this is not Sahaja Culture, we should train.our children in this way Shri Mataji then gave a short discourse after the concert. She said that music is for the spirit and that Her aspiration is that Indian music spreads all over the world. In Her travels She has seen so many musicians abroad that Her desire is being fulfilled, many people are taking to Indian music. She said that the beauty of Indian music is that it is Divine music, it starts and ends with the Omkara. Whatever is ones nature, or religion, or other outside things, we enjoy this music because it is for the spirit, this is why we can listen to this music so easily. If we were not Sahaja Yogis we would not be able to. She then praised the performance of the young girls from Dharamsala, saying how beauti- fully they sang, and the young students studying dance. She said in 18 months it would be impossible to achieve their level of expertise without Sahaja Yoga. With Indian music one cannot learn unless one dedicates, this is the way to get to the real classical music, it is not like jazz, one has to know everything about it, this is very difficult. Shri Mataji ended by saying that with Sahaja Yoga we can have a universal understanding of music. DIVINE COOL BREEZE 21 VOL.VI Issue 9 & 10

 H.H. SHRI MATAJI'S EASTER PUJATALK AUSTRALIA 03/04/94 (Synopsis) Shri Mataji began by saying that this was an important Puja both for Australia and for the world because it has the greatest message, which we have actualised now, we have to understand the message of Christ Shri Mataji related how She was reading the news- paper and people today reject this or that part of Christ who are they:. She said, because they can write, how can they say such things? The subject of spirituality cannot be dealt with by people who are not self-realised - it is beyond their mind. Shri Mataji said how surprising it is that She is celebrating this Puja in Australia the land of the Mooladhara - the Mooladhara is manifested in the Agnya. Australia is the country where the Mooladhara was established and later on it was manifested in the life of Christ on the Agnya Chakra. Among all the non Indian countries the maximum growth in Sahaja Yoga took place in Australia, now the maximum growth has taken place in Russia which is the right Agnya and the Eastern Bloc countries. South East Asia countries are mainly composed of peaple who racially are Chinese and they worship Buddha who is on the left Agnya. Australia is helping in looking afterthese countries, Thailand, Hong Kong, Taiwan which are influenced by Buddha. All this is working out like a plan. There was once a great saint who made some great mistake, so God cursed him to a Tand which connected India and Africa. This land was then brought down to this point and he was told to make something out of it, the saints name was Trishankar which are now the stars of our Southern Cross and which are mentioned in the Puranas. God made him into a star hanging over this land and he was told that he was to go there and make a heaven for human beings there. There are many good points about Australia, one being that we belong to a multicultural society where other cultures are preserved and where people are helped through the system of justice. This is a very good thing to develop a multicultural society, and this comes after the resurrection of political thought. People have a curiosity and knowledge about the other cultures which are around them. This shows a sense of Collectivity in our genes, that our country still believes in a rmulticultural society. All of these things are the manifestation of the Shri Ganesha qualities. If you have a group of 10 people without the purity of Shri Ganesha they cannot exist together, because there will always be a conflict, people will become extremely super- ficial. The relationship between husband and wife is established by Shri Ganesha, He gives us the idea about how to enjoy our married life. DIVINE COOL BREEZE VOLVI = Issue 9 & 10 -22-

 For a human being their main object of life is resurrection, they have to rise above the lemptations of life, Christ came as a human being but He was not a human being, because there was no matter in Him, He was the Omkara, this is why He could walk on the water. The message of Christ was resurrection which is very important. Here you get the three day holiday where people do the opposite of what they should do. For us Christ should be a model of what our life should be. Pure eyes, how is this possible, there is lust and greed in the eyes of Westerners. The main problems of Christian nations is that they have become too materialistic, peoples eyes are looking and reacting, they cannot witness. Thinking and reaction can take people to any level of bestiality. In Sahaja Yoga a new world of innocent people have been created on this Earth in Her own lifetime. We should all realise that we all belong to a much higher type of people and that there is no justification for Yogi to indulge into such dirty stuff because we are beyond it. Sahaja Yogis have developed a new sense of beauty and cleanliness, which is a speciality that we have, Sahaja any which was a potential within us. Christ is the support of the Universe - this purity, this auspiciousness was made into an egg, then it was broken into two. The first half is Shri Ganesha, the second portion evolved and matured into Christ. She said that many may say how can on egg be in two forms but we must remember that these are Divine happenings which are different to what we see in the mundane world. Christ is not dead. His body may be in Kashmir as they say but He is the Spirit, and the Spirit is a great living personality. Other Divine personalities who had to do things which were human in nature, but Christ never behaved as other Divine incarnations did - Shri Rama cried for His wife - Shri Krishna married so many times because His wives were His powers. Although these were incarnations they had to do things that Human Beings did. Christ never did - He lived and died as a Divine personality. Sahaja Yogis are now resurrected from ordinary human beings to the Divine level - it was easy for Christ, but we are coming from human life to a higher life, because we are going beyond our mind, it is not difficult, we should just feel that we are there. We know about our inner being, we are washed in the Kundalini and we can really change the world if we remember that the message of Christ is resurrection. After resurrection our attention should not be on human life through our job, through our children. A person who is Divine has all the relations but is not attached. If one is attached then we should try to understand that Divinity has not fully manifested. We have to test ourselves in relation to how kind we are to others, how farwe are helpful to others, how far we are being collective. We have to help each other. -23- DIVINE COOL BREEZE VOL.VI- Issue 9 & 10

 If we see someone in difficulty, we should try to help that person as part and parcel of the whole, the attention of the collective should be such that we feel one with the collective. There are no problems but we must have full assessment of ourselves. We are the pure spirit and we should have full understanding of people because we have come from human life and have become Divine, we know more of human life than Christ did. We should try to understand those who come to Sahaja Yoga, as soon as they come we should not say that they are a bhoot. We should not yield to human powers which still linger in us or in our society, we have to keep to our own style, to our own style of behaviour. We will be amazed that the rest of the world will worship us, they will not hang us but will worship us in our own lifetimes. This is going to happen, but we should try to understand that we are being resurrected for a purpose and that purpose is to transform this world into a beautiful place, for which all of us have to put full attention. We should try to follow people who have achieved a certain height- a new path, through our lives we should try to create light for others to follow. PROTOCOL TOWARDS SHRI MATAJI - The time has come that from now on nobody shouldwaste themost precious time of our Holy Mother. Nobody should go to Shri Mataji to be cured from something unless Shri Mataji Her- self grants some time. The respective leader should be consulted first. - Whenever going to H.H. Shri Mataji, think to whom we are going. This helps to keep our attitude and protocols correct. - Whenever Shri Matajiis sitting on the stage we should always come from the back side to Her, neverfrom the front. -Nobody should fall before ortouch Shri Mataji's Lotus Feet when She is arriving and walking to the stage. -Never leave before Shri Mataji does. Any time we do anything for Shri Mataji, it must be like a puja. We should not let protocol become the reli- gion, as it has with so many religions. - Advice for ladies; if they have the blessing of doing puja on stage to Shri Mataji, they have to follow Her advice and decisions, not do some- Anotherpoint was that we have to respect also the protocols between each of us yogis when we are meeting, talking or doing something together. thing of their own, especially when decorating the Lotus feet. Editor: Published by: Printed By: Yogi Mahajan The Divine Cool Breeze, 9 Bhagyachintamani Society, Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411 029 Computex Graphics, 112 High Tech Indi. Centre, Caves Road, Jogeshwari East, Bombay 400 060 DIVINE COOL BREEZE -24- VOL.VI Issue 9 & 10



----------------------

1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-0.txt 
 DIVINE COOL BREEZE
/
Issue 9 & 10
Vol. V
It's Mahamaya that protects you.
Nobody can destroy Sahaja Yogis
unless and until they want to be destroyed,
...H.H. Shri Mataji - Sahasrara Puja'94.
VOL.VI -
-1-
Issue 9 & 10
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-1.txt 
 Oh Holiest One,
on behalf of all the huinanrace,
We humbly ask forthe boonof Your
Darshan at the
SAHASRARA PUJA
IN CABELLA
on the 8 th. of May 1994,
all Your children of the worlad.
69.
re world
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-2.txt 
 SHRIMATAJI
So many lives we have been waiting forthis
time to come. Now our dreams become true.
You, the Goddess of the Sahasrara, have
incarnated Yoursetf. You have opened the
Lotus of our Sahasrara and gently merged us
into the absolute Love and stillness of Your
Beeing. With hearts overflowing we want to
express our gratitude but find that we have
nothing to give You, because everything is
You and belongs to You.
Not to let us feel ashamed, inYour Compossion,
You gave us our free Will, so that We have one
thing left to offer fto You-our heart. Every
string of our heart longs for You.Every cell of
our beings long to flow into your Infinity
Please allow us to offer our hearts onthe
occasion of the Sahasrara Puja 1994.
соте.
olus
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Contents
3.
Sahasrara Puja- Cabella 8.5.94
Young President's Conference, Goa
Australia Tour Talks - 1994
Easter Puja - Australia 3.4.94
11
2.
3.
19
20
4.
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
VOL VI - Issue 9 & 10
-2-
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-4.txt 
 SAHASRARA PUJA TALK
BY H. H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
CABELLA 08/05/94 (Synopsis)
Today is the unique combination of Mother's day in many countries and Sahasrara
day for Sahaja Yogis. This is the most important day in the history of human
evolution because all other events, incarnation and ventures in the spiritual
atmosphere have been of no avail On the contrary they have gone into a kind
at a cocoon, which has no door, banging against closed walls, creating problems
out of something auspicious and extremely beautifully.
Spiritually, it's not possible to find faults with the incarnations in whose names all
the religious came, but this cocoon is the Mahamaya. Mahamaya does not create
this. This cocoon is created by the basic ignorance of human beings and their
misidentifications. The human nature is such that it identifies itself easily, with
untruth. Anything that is truthful human beings find it very difficult to comprise with.
The trouble with the truth is that it cannot compromise. So all kinds of ignorance
falsehood and destructive forces gather together somehow or the other, to attract
human mind. It is perhaps the ego of man which makes him feel ättracted to those
things, for they all pamper his ego.
The most difficult centre that we have to cross is the centre of Agya. This centre
is one that takes us either to the left or to the right, if you try to push it too much.
Thus. we land up into the hold of ignorance which is being looked after by
Mahamaya.
They say that at Sahasrara when the Goddess will appear, She will be Mahamaya.
Is it possible to be anything else in the world of today to come on this earth? Any
type of incarnation could have been in great trouble because human beings in their
ego, are the highest in Kali Yuga. So they are quiet stupid and they are capable
of doing any kind of harm or violance to a Divine personality. It is not at all possible
to exist in this world as anything else than Mahamaya. But it also acts upon the
people who are seekers as it has many facets, By one facet, it covers your
Sahasrara, the seekers are tested, If you are more enarmoured by people who
are something odd, who wear odd dresses, who show odd things as so many false
Gurus have done or absurd or something very cheapish. That attracts the attention
of human beings, because of Mahamaya or we can say that it is the Mahamaya
which judges the person. Mahamaya is like a mirror, whatever you are you see
yourself in the mirror. The mirror has no responsibility, if you look like a monkey.
VOLVI-Issue 9 & 10
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-5.txt 
 you look like a monkey. If you look like a queen, you look like a queen. It has
no power nor any intention of giving you wrong ideas or something that is false.
It is there, whatever it is truth. So in a way to say that Mahamaya is the one
which delude is wrong. On the contrary when you look at the mirror you see yourself
as what you are. Now supposing you are a person who is a very cruel person,
your face in the mirror will look like a cruel person, but the problem comes in when
the Mahamaya acts. You don't see your image, you turn your face away from it.
Don't want to see, don't want to know, you look at the mirror and you see something
horrible, you just turn your face and deny the truth. "How can I be like that, I
can't be like that I am very good, nothing wrong with me, nothing wrong, I am
perfectly alright."
Then, the third aspect of Mahamaya is that you are again attracted towards it in
the sense, that you again see your mirror. You go on seeing your mirror again
and again. You see the whole world also in the mirror. As a result you start getting
a feeling what am I doing? Who am 1? What is this world? Where am I born?
This is the beginning of your search. You don't feel satisfied with it, so it is a
very great help of the Mahamaya.
People who came to me for the first time if they see me taking water they
how can She be something just needing water or if I am taking say Coca Cola,
they will say Wah! How can She take Coca Cola, She should never take anything
like that, She should only take nectar. The another aspect of Mahamaya is that
people come to see Me, some of them start shaking, so they think we are great
energy that's why it's happening. It has happened with many people so they get
wrong impressions because of their own reactions to it. Their reaction that wah!
We went there, we got all the energy, we were shaking, shaking and shaking so
we are something great. This kind of a happening makes them more egoist but
on the contrary if they see somebody else shaking it has happened and ask them
who you are? So they will say we are certified mads from such hospital. Then
they will start thinking little bit 'Oh! God' we are also mad or what? Why are we
shaking, we should not shake. If they are certified mad, and they are shaking
and we are shaking and then they start relatively seeing things.
say
The relative understanding helps to overcome that kind of curtain that you have,
that you do not want to face the truth. Once it starts happening to you, relatively
you see comparison with other people. Once you see that, you ascent. Then
you start settling in Sahaja Yoga. Mahamaya is very important without that you
cannot face me, you cannot sit here, you cannot talk to me, you cannot get into
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
-4-
VOL.VI - Issue 9 & 10
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-6.txt 
 the same car driving and also you cannot drive me. Everything would be impossible
I would be hanging on the air somewhere and you would be all here and it would
be a big mess.
I need not be before you, I can be just here in Nirakar-in formless but how to
communicate, how to have a rapport. For that, one has to come in the form of
Mahamaya so that there is no fear, there is no distance, one can come close and
understand, because if this knowledge has to be given, if realisation has to be given,
people have to atleast sit before the Mahamaya. Otherwise, if they all run away
what's the use to create that extremely human personality in Sahasrara, she comes
as Mahamaya.
Sahasrara is the most powerful Chakra because it is the seventh Chakra's
combination and many others. At the Sahasrara you can do anything, you can
manage the sun, moon, earth, temperature, everything. But through Mahamaya,
things work out very normally and they should workout normally. For example, they
may say Mother there is atmosphere full of all these ecological problems, why don't
you clear them. If it is cleared, people will go on producing. It is the problem
of human beings and if it is corrected by Me they will take it for granted. They
have to face those problems and change their habits. They have to understand,
they are the ones who are destroying themselves. Otherwise, if somebody is there
just to cleanse it out, they will never change.
Miraculously one can do lots of things, one can say, 'Mother as You solve the
problems of Sahaja Yogis, why don't you solve the problems of others?' To solve
their problems is not the end of my work, nor is the purpose, but to make them
equiped so that they can solve their own problem, that's what I have to do. You
have to be your own Doctor, you have to be your own Guru, but without Mahamaya
you cannot do it, because she knows how far to go, in correcting and controlling,
how far to go, because human beings at large have their own freedom. Sahaja
Yogis have not that kind of stupid freedom but they have freedom of the spirit.
So, to solve their problems is perfectly alright, because they must have most
freedom. But what's the use of giving freedom to other people who are going on
and on, without realising what wrong they are doing to the whole world. For them
it is necessary to come to Sahaja Yoga. That's why it's the Mahamaya Swarup.
Maybe if I had came as Mother Mary or Radha or somebody like that, then they
would have been all here nicely singing songs and all that. That's not the point.
Now you have to mature, you have to be something and you have to grow, for
VOL.VI - Issue 9 & 10
-5-
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-7.txt 
 that it is important that you have to come to Sahaja Yoga first of all. Then you
have to grow in Sahaja Yoga, otherwise this Mahamaya will go on acting and playing
tricks with you. Sahasrara is that Virata's area. Virata is Vishnu who became Rama
and then became Krishna. So this is a leela. His leela is a play and to make
the play alright it has to be in the form of Mahamaya.
There are so many loopholes, also sometimes people can discover things very
easily, one of them is this Param Chaitanya. This Param Chaitanya acts, shows
My photographs, exposes Me in all kinds of unbelievable manner which has never
happened. I am myself amazed. This time when we were in Brisbane, they took
a photograph of a rainbow outside the ashram. What appeared in the sky was
very remarkable. A painting that I always liked of a Mother and child. This Param,
Chaitanya is trying to expose this Mahamaya swarupa to make you understand what
is Mahamaya. It is trying to express itself, I have not in any way told or asked
this Param Chaitanya to do any such things. But it is true, because it thinks even
now the people who are following Mother are not of that level as what they should
be. Some of them faulter horribly, suprisingly I cannot believe.
Sahaja Yoga, after seeing all My photographs they can still go to any limit of
stupidity. I don't know how far this Param Chaitanya will be spontaneously acting
like this, but this shows one thing for definite that it wants you to be perfectly settled
in your faith, which is not a blind faith. Most of these photographs can be challenged
by anybody who is an intellectual, can find out some ways and methods that you
must have done this. But as Sahaja Yogis you know that we have done nothing
and it has come out. We don't show them to outsiders we only show this to the
Sahaja Yogis. So what is the purpose, that Sahaja Yogis should now try to
understand that they have to grow. Now this growth has to be two sided.
After coming to
One is your side,- how much time do I spend thinking about Sahaja Yoga and how
much about my personal life, education and business, duties, jobs, family. Because
it is important as the brain has to think and Virata is there, so in Sahasrara how
much energy do you use to think about Sahaja Yoga. How can we spread Sahaja
Yoga. What should we do? What should we work it out? How much I should
support, in which way? How it can be in every living moment? How I look at
everything, I see Sahaja working in it. What is this Sahaja culture? Am I in the
Sahaja culture? How much I am impressed by culture, fashions and things. What
and how have I to gain to grow in my mental capacity to be a Sahaja Yogi. For
a person who is a Sahaja personality in everything he sees Sahaja whether
cupboards, carpets, statues, light, etc.
VOL.VI - Issue 9 & 10
-6-
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-8.txt 
 These pillars are standing at an angle, just imagine to support it how you have
to bend on one side, what do we do in Sahaja we have to bend towards divinity.
See like that all ideas go moving towards Sahaja. The whole thinking is Sahaja.
Such a married life also between husband and wife, they all the time talk of Sahaja,
no firvolous talk, how it is Sahaja to be husband and wife what is the relationship.
The most interesting thing in Sahaja is that you see everything that you do, you
think of Sahaja way.
How you can judge yourself in this Mahamaya? How far do you go really to think
about Sahaja? All other worries like how much money I can get out of this business,
how much pleasure I can get, how much physical problems can be solved, all these
gains are nothing compared to your maturity in Sahaja Yoga. The mind takes over
and it starts thinking and thinking. It goes on wandering on various things, maybe
your wife, your children, your house, this and that. But if you think in a Sahaja
way, you think I should do something that my children must be Sahaja. I should
make a house which will be useful to Sahaja. I should behave in such a manner
that I am a Sahaja Yogi.
The maturity in you should grow in such a way that you feel it, firstly is the peace.
When a person is not peaceful then his mind is like a wobbling instrument. He
cannot think properly, see properly, understand properly. You tell him something,
he understands something else. Today the whole world is wobbling. In palitics
a new party was dismantled, the other old party is in, now it is this one which is
to be dismantled. Everything is going upside down through this Mahamaya.
The way the world is inter-wared, is not war, it's not cold war, it's a funny type
of warfame, which cannot be described in words. There is no peace in their mind
to see what they are doing, what is their responsibility. The media is taking to
horrible things, it was never so before. We have read beautiful articles in media
itself but today it is difficult. Then it is materialistic one, marketing this, marketing
that, marketing human beings. They are taking away children, women. They are
selling the children, women, all kinds of things are going on. Marketing God,
marketing spirituality. For this kind of a perverse world of today, Mahamaya is
needed by which she shows that you have to pay through your noses for what
you are doing in this life. Say a man who is very wavered, very destructive, drinks
and smokes, goes away with women, etc, within two years he is bankrupt. So the
reward is already there whatever he was doing is there to see. Another man goes
on with nonsensical things he gets Aids, he gets other diseases of very incurable
nature, we call it 'Rokada Devi,' means cash payment, the Godess which gives cash
VOL.VI Issue 9 & 10
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
-7-
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-9.txt 
 payment. You do this alright, you have it. You have done this, alright enjoy this.
It is really this Mahamaya specially who is now very much active, sometimes I get
afraid from Her, the way She is punishing people, but it is so. If you say, "Oh
I will enjoy rash driving,' alright, finished. You end up with a limping leg or a broken
hand. The law of the Divine at work through Mahamaya. It was not that fast before,
as it is today. Supposing there is President of America, such a big position in
America, imagine he is challenged by any third rater from the seat.
possible? nobody could do it before, because Mahamaya is using all its free will
to check the free will of human beings. The so called freedom that we are trying
to enjoy has brought us to an end.
How is it
Today you will read somebody boasting very much about himself and tomorrow you
will see him in jail. There was some minister in Italy who wanted Me to meet, I
said I don't want to meet him. He had a very bad past and he is in jail already.
They are falling into their own traps. This trap is Mahamaya, she creates from
your own because you don't want to face yourself, you don't want to know the truth,
you want to evade the truth. This is the aspect of Mahamaya that immedialy you
have to face yourself. How many things have happened, think of it. Thus big-
big tycoons are in jail, very famous people are in jail, all such things are happening,
why, because this Mahamaya is the one who wants to teach a lesson. By teaching
a lesson to one person it shatteres atleast thousands, because that persons sees
the point, as death comes to it or whatever comes to it. Maybe he may not learn
How it spreads
any lesson as he may be already dead, but others are there.
through the media that always gives bad news, in a way, does not know how much
good it is doing through Mahamaya.
ane
Now for your information we are saying many things, smoking is already going out
drinking will also go out, what did the Sahaja do? nothing, but the Mahamaya did
it. Doctors have asked people now you don't smoke, otherwise you will get cancer.
The Mahamaya creates that kind of an incident. Single incident is sufficient for
the people to be extremely cautious
It is such a panicked world, so much insecurity today suddenly you find the cows
are giving poisoned milk there is something else happening, the water is getting
polluted, then find there are needles which are infected, so everybody is so nervous
and thinking about saving their lives. So they start thinking about it but if you come
to Sahaja none of these things can trouble you, because this is the aspect of
Mahamaya, that she protects. Nobody can destroy Sahaja Yogis, unless and untill
they want to be destroyed. It's their desire, nobody can touch them.
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
-8-
VOL.VI - Issue 9 & 10
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-10.txt 
 When they talk of miracles like the other day one boy from Australia, a new Sahaja
Yogi, was going on a motorbike and he was in great speed and suddenly from
both the sides two trucks came and they hit him, but instead of getting hit, he was
just pushed out, just like a shuttlecock. He fell on the other side and he was not
at all hurt, he got up and they were surprised, His bike was shattered but this
person was perfectly alright. They couldn't understand how this boy was saved?
There are so many stories how this Mahamaya is protecting Sahaja Yogis. Also r
in dreams she protects. It is very surprising how people get dreams and how they
get their medicines and treatments. How they understand about the dangers that
are there, how in dreams they are told about, how other people are, how they
behave, you don't have to know, it is conscious mind but into very very deep sushipti
state you know what is good for you, what is bad for you, somehow they know,
it is that knowledge which is intution, which comes through Mahamaya. She is the
one that gives you this intutive knowledge what's to be done?
of problems, and you do.
How to get out
There is someone who tries to trouble the Sahaja Yogis, Mahamaya allows him,
upto a point and suddenly she acts. So the people are amazed, Sahaja Yogis
are amazed how this man has became like this. This Mahamaya is like my saree
as you say, is protecting. She is very beautiful, kind, caring, compassionate,
affectionate and delicate. She handles you and she is very angry and kills the
people who try to spoil the work of God, like rakshakas and devils.
A very good aspect of Mahamaya is that She transforms you. Everything is in brain
for human beings. If you are crook, you are a crook. If you are a person who
hates others, it's all in the brain. If you are addicted to something, it's all in the
brain. It's a very complicated conditioning in the head. So this Sahasrara is very
important no doubt, but the power of Virata and Viratangava can only be effective
if there is Mahamaya rule and She in Her own sweet ways opens, dislodges all
this conditionings which make you ugly, which make you horrible, which make you
hot tempered.
She is the one who is like Mother Earth given all that She has to make you really
very joyous, happy so that you enjoy "niranand", nothing but "anand". Nothing
but joy and this is what is the Sahasrara but it is only possible when your
Brahmananda is to be opened out, otherwise you cannot enter into subtleness of
divine love, compassion of that ever flowing Mahamaya. From outside I have told
you what She is, but frorn inside when you enter, penetrate into Her through the
-9.
VOL.VI - Issue 9 & 10
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Brahmananda, then this Mahamaya, which is an incarnation as you know of this
all pervading power, becomes very different on one side. She tries to teach you
lessons, She tries to destroy the evil, that is destructive and on the other side She
loves you, protects you very delicately, guides you.
Her love is without any expectations. She loves because she cannot help but to
love. So in that love you are drenched, you enjoy. Everybody knows that they
are close to Her, absolutely close. Whenever they want they can always ask Her
help, wherever they are. The Sahasrara is very important because through this
With this we accumulate all kinds of nonsense.. In the world in
only we react.
which we are living we have to be something like the lotuses who cannot be
tarnished, who cannot be effected by all the ills that are going on. This is what
is the test, is the 'pariksha', that at this difficult time we can blossorn and create
fragrance and get so many others to this beautiful atmosphere. It is a kind of a
beautiful playful war, you can say, against what is supposed to be negative. What
is the power of this negativity, what is the power of these conditioning. What is
the power of there stupidity. That anybody can see, so you develop the psyche,
the vision so clearly you understand that you are the ones who are responsible,
you are the cells in this Sahasrara of this brain and you all have to act.
I was yesterday anarmoured when you said that these lights have to enlighten many
lights. This was really a very great promise for me. Coming to Sahaja Yoga is
just not for your personal limited personalities and their problems, but on one side
you have to grow and on the other side everyone has to grow through you, this
is the second side which you should look after.
Today ofcourse I am very happy. That in my life time I could see the manifestation
of Mahamaya. It is beautiful that this door is opened just now for you to be able
to enter into the Kingdom of God and to enjoy the heavenly bliss and the protection.
Have faith in it, do not get disturbed by small things, and i am sure it will work
out in a very great way. If you get that complete faith and complete surrendering
I am sure it will work out very well.
May God Bless You
VOL.VI Issue 9 & 10
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
-10-
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-12.txt 
 HER HOLINESS SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA L
"Spirituality in the 21st Century"
Address tu Young Presidents and Chief Executives of Companies
FEBRUARY 16-20, 1994, GOA
I bow to all the seekers of truth.
At the very outset I would like to point out that truth is what it is. You cannot change it,
you cannt conceptualise it a.id you cannot describe it. You have to be the truth
urself, otherwise it's just a talk and talk. Whateverlam going to tell you today I would
request you not to believe it hdfolded. We have suffered a lot by believing in thin
blindfolded. Please kee, your mi dopen like a scientist. If it works out, and if yo-
out, that is the truth. If the expe.ence of the truth is actualised in you,
Lerstand the absolute truth on your central nervous system, then onlv you have to
you
DCHEVE, definitely. Then, you have to believe because you are honest and to know that
this is for the benevolence of your person, your individual being, your family, your
country and the whole world at large.
So the ti. Is, that you are not this heaismind, these emotions, these conditionings.
this ego, but you are the nsam That's why at this human awareness, you cannot
know, unfortunately, the tru.
as human beings, and there is a little hreakthrough left, which has to actualise. It'sk
just giving big claims and big things, but it has to actualise. And if it actualisen she
will know the second truth is that there is a very subtle power of divine emou may
thesu tree you take them f ed. How from one coconui rev heasnese things,
never bothered because this iSving proce.s. Who runs our h RUonat you want. You
its autonomous nervous system. But who is the "auto"? We nev dian thing is done by
is living because we carnot enswer it. This is the living proce nmutinubonurse..
takes place spontaneously.
rourevolutionary process, we have come to this stage
At the very outset I must tell you that you cannot market it. It's ul to market it. It's
hypocritical to market it and for that people have to pay individually and collectively.
That's one thing that you cannot market. Because, it's your own power which resides
within you which we call here as Kundalini, because Kundal sa coil. It resides within
and it is awakened effortlessly, Sahaja. "Saha" means oorn with you, "ja" means
you
spontaneous. There are so many things which are today in these modern times, that I
start wondering how many will have the discretion to choose the truth? The first thing
you must know who are the disciples? What are they doing? What is their kno ledge?
-11-
I - Issue 9 & 10
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
VOLVI
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-13.txt 
 What powers they have got? Because if you become spiritual, it's your resurrection
complete. All your powers are awakened.
Of course, after realisation, or we can say after the first germination, you have to
practice it a little deeply and work it out, your connection with this all pervading power.
This connection is the only yoga, where you are united with that all pervading power.
United for ever! That's the new birth as they call it, that a realised soul, in Sanskrit
language is called as Dvijaha, means born twice and it means also a bird. Bird which
is an egg then becomes the bird and becomes free and learns to fly. In the same way
a realised soul is born again. First as a normal human being and then as a realised soul.
You don't have to certify, you don't have to have an organisation, you don't have to pay
for it. It is an experience of this all pervading power, which is, we can call it in the biblical
words, is the 'cool breeze of the Holy Ghost'. In Adi Shankaracharya's book of
revelation, he has called it Salilam Salilam, means the one which is a very cool, soothing
breeze. Then you feel the cool breeze on your fontanelle bone area. This fontanelle
bone area is called 'Brahmarandra', because this all pervading power is called as
Brahma Chaitanya. "Randra' means the whole, so the whole thing comes out and you
start feeling the cool breeze out of your tna head. Then you relax. Your wrinkles start
vanishing, your worries start vanishing, the tręss and strain that you all people have
goes away, permanently, because you can call it an opening here. And you become a
relaxed person.
lig
jusv let us see the problems of the young presidents. One of the greatest problems of
you hang presidents is that when they work they get into stress and strain, it's very
is the seconcause you think you are working, you think you are doing something.
you never think you are doing. The first state we call it we are doing
Today ofcourse s built up, so we are very happy. When it is pampered we are happier,
bt Mahamaypunctured we feel unhappy, there's no joy because joy is not a dual state,
it's singular. So what happens, that when it is connected with this all pervading power,
which is extremely alert, very intelligent and extremely communicative. Ther
communicates is very surprising, that you feel you are in bliss. Because whatever you
want to do is just before you and you are surprised how you have developed this or that.
Even in business, you want to meet somebody, immediately you will know what sort of
a person he is. You will also know how to treat him, then you will also know what sort
of a challenge to take, what to discuss.
it
way
The light of the spirit enlightens your attention. AIl of us! There would have been no
quarreling, there would have been no fighting, there would have been no theories, no
-12-
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
VOL.VI - Issue 9 & 10
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-14.txt 
 dogmas, no different religions. Because, everybody knows the same thing. As I am
sitting before you, you can see it clearly. If you know the absolute truth on your
fingertips, why should you quarrel, why should you have wars, why should you kill each
other? You see, the first thing happens to you, that you become absolutely clear-cut
about the whole totality. You know the whole reality, what it is. Just now we are in
darkness, because that breakthrough has not taken place.
Secondly, we talk of religion because people always ask me questions, "Mother, why
these religions are so troublesome?" "Why they are fighting", Because they are in
darkness. Whether you are Christian, Hindu, Muslim, anything you can commit any sin.
There is no compulsion. The religion has to be born inside you. It should make you
righteous from within, it's not from outside. Then there is no problem about that only.
The opportunities to expand are vast. So potential is your being. Perhaps you do not
know how glorious you are. You don't know also, what you can do, what powers you
have got. VWe are not aware of it. We are not aware of ourselves. That's the only
problem you are facing today. Once we've managed to know ourselves and the
complete working of this machinery, the science of divine love, then the whole life
changes like that.
There are some people sitting here who are today very big people. They once had
problems and problems. But, after coming to Sahaja Yoga they have become abso-
lutely dynamic. At the same time they are compassionate. At the same time they think
of collectivity. In India the Goddess for wealth is Laxmi. She earns for you when She
is awakened in you. You make money and wealth. But it's not still the Laxmi. You may
have a big car, you may be doing wrong things. But, then you don't do all these things,
you become really righteous and the Divine power helps you to get what you want. You
don't have to worry to play some tricks or intrigues, nothing. The whole thing is done by
this Divine power. It looks after you. You must have faith in yourself, of course.
Then, secondly when you look at Shri Laxmi, She has two lotuses in Her hand. That
means such a person has to be extremely warm. There should be warmth, you should
want your children, your wife, neighbours, everybody. With small little things you
should try to give them this Shri Laxmi. Little, little things, even a flower. But with heart,
not superficially.
If a young boy of 25 is playing tennis in his tournaments say. Now everything is so
money oriented that, I mean the way they play is shocking. Then he also drinks, thinks
too much. He can get a massive heart attack, which is absolutely fatal. Then, for also
-13-
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
Issue 9 & 10
VOL.VI
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-15.txt 
 elderly people who think too much, who do all kinds of plannings. One day suddenly you
find they had a heart attack. Sometimes, they get one just to give them a warning.
Second, another warning, third finished. Heart is a big problem these days. It's not that
their hearts are made of stone that they break. But the main problem is the way they are
using their energy into one direction of no value.
But nowlam seeing another phenomena that is people are getting paralysed suddenly.
Diabetes plus too much thinking can give paralysis at a very young age. This is not to
frighten you, but to give you hope that you can get overit permanently. It can be done,
is done, and will be done, but how many miss it out, I cannot say. It's a business which
is a Divine business where you have to get to it, establish it, understand it and work it
out. When you start giving realisation to others, because this is another power of the
spirit, that you can give realisation to others, you can save so many lives, you can save
your children. You can do such a lot of work without taking any money for it. And, it's
so joy giving, you can't understand the joy of saving somebody without doing anything.
If you don't have the pure desire I cannot work it out, nobody can work it out. If you put
the stones in the mother earth, will it sprout? No. But if you put the seed, it will. Because
the seed has the built-in possibility to sprout and the mother earth has the capacity to
sprout. It's just built-in, it doesn't have to do anything, it's spontaneous, its Sahaja. It's
as simple as that, and this is a special time when it is working out.
Materialism that has just got hold of us and is taking us to recession has to be
understood in proper way. It is just a reaction of an action. Childishness with which we
have done overproduction. There is no proper wisdom to understand what we should
have done.
This time in Delhi, I wanted to buy some big bangles because our hands are a little softer
than that of the Western people. So, I asked them for big bangles. AndI was surprised
that they said, "No, we are exporting to America and to England." I said, "For what, why
are they asking for bangles?" They said, "The men have decided to wear bangles
there". In India, if you give bangles to somebody he'll be shocked because it's an insult
to his manliness. If somebody becomes a coward, they give bangles to that person in
India.
All this kind of craze, it starts like children have crazes. But, children will play fora while,
throw away. Like that they have a craze and throw away. Anothercraze, throw away.
If you ask them, why do you do it? They will say, "What's wrong?". They used to put
-14-
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
VOL.VI- Isue 9 & 10
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-16.txt 
 some red oxide in their head to make the head look red, I don't know what is the need,
I said, "Why do you do it?" Because they started losing their eyesight. "What's wrong?"
I said, "Wrong is your eyesight, you are losing". So, "What's wrong?" I mean how to tell
them now. It's stupidity, idiotic. But, I will call it a childishness. The maturity is not there
to understand why should we do it.
And such another craze is to become young. To look young. You have to be proud that
you are old. In our country, the old are respected very much. They have a say in every
matter. Now, my granddaughter is getting married, without me and my husband no
decision will be taken. Because, they think we are wiser people. But, if you start
behaving like children. Who will take our decisions? If you don't show dignity,
should children take any instruction from you.
why
The other day I saw a docurnentary, there the ladies and gentlemen from Hollywood of
about 90 years, were having a big party. They were going to do the shake dance, but
all of them when they were getting out of the car, were shaking already. I said, "What's
the use to have another shake dance?" We also shake at certain age, isn't it? But, we
have kept our dignity and we have shown them the right path. But, not in a way to shout
or anything. But at the age of 16 years they say you must treat your children like your
friends. But first you must develop them up to the 16th year. You should keep them
company.
Here the women are also working. Also, Divine plan was like that, that I should do it after
my daughters were married. Supposing, at a young age I had started, no woman is safe
in this world. So, as an old woman is all right, you are very safe.
I started my work when I was 47 years of age and the first country I visited was Iran and
second was America. But, I found it already full of all kinds of marketing gurus. They
said, "Why don't you take money?" I said, "You cannot pay for it, I'm honest". I went
to Boston, you'll be surprised, they asked me, "How many Roles Royce's you have?" |
said, "I have none". "You're not in the business?" "No, no, it's not a business". "Then
we don't want you". They canceled me completely, would not take me on the television.
San Diego was even worse. They wouldn't even publish my advertisement. I said,
"Why?" He said, "Because you say homosexuality can be cured. Why do you want to
cure homosexuality?"
"Because, it is abnormal"
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
-15-
VOL VI
Issue 9 & 1D
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-17.txt 
 "No, we don't want".
I said, "All right, you don't want, doesn't matter, but publish my this thing".
"No, no we will not". Because, the person who was taking the advertisement he said,
"I'm homosexual, my editor is homosexual, our president is homosexual", The whole
place seemed to be homosexual.
So I said, "You need me most". They didn't publish. I was so shocked, because
whatever is filthy, unholy, the Christians should know. Because Christ has gone to such
a subtle extent to say, "Thou shalt not have adulterous eyes". I've yet to see people
there who don't look at women, whatever may be their age.
With Sahaja Yoga, your eyes become extremely pure and innocent. And the attention
you pay to anyone is affected. He gets peace, balance, not only that but he can even
get realisation and cured. Such an eye of innocence and love which is a pure love which
is Niraj, without any demand it just loves and enjoys the love. The state of joy. You enjoy
each and everything. Every leaf how it has turned. How these trees, have come up and
how they are turning this way, though they should go towards the sea. Everything
becomes such a cosmic integration, you start seeing the whole thing in such a beauty.
In America I have known of some great poets. William Blake in England and everywhere
we have great poets who were all realised souls. Mozart and Strauss were realised
souls. But you can make it out only when you can feel the vibrations. The cool from
them. Mona Lisa, you just can feel. Some beautiful things like Notre Dam itself, has got
vibrations. So many things have got vibrations, which only you will know when you are
a realised soul. How will you know whether this man is a thug or has come from a jail
or he is a real person?
Relatively, a person who has got cancer, immediately you can feel it on your fingers
You don't have to go to the rigmarole or the whole grueling of hospitals. The one who
is getting it also knows. He also knows that he is going to get his heart attack. He walks
up to the hospital and says that I'm getting a heart attack, please look after me. Such
a person, becomes extremely patient, loving, caring and a personality of a very different
nature. Actually, it helps the most to people who are thinking of the future. Because, it
gives you wisdom and Divine discretion. But, above all, it gives you a complete sense
of reality, "and, the power to face it. Because if you are in the waves and you are afraid
of the waves but somebody takes you out and puts you on a boat, you can see, you can
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
-16-
VOL.VI Isue 9 & 10
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-18.txt 
 enjoy the waves. But, if you know how to swim, you can jump in and save many.
This is all potential within you, it's there and the time has come to happen. It's for your
good, for your business, health, everything. As a mother I would say that you don't have
to pay. There's no problem of Kundalini. Also, there are some books I have read where
they say the Kundalini burns you up. I've never seen anything like that. It's just there
and it's your own and you get it.
In all the Western countries now we have our centers. Excellent people, such deep
people who are working it out. It's very amazing how these people are so much deeply
involved in their seeking. How far they have gone to seek the truth. You don't have to
give up anything, you don't have to fast, don't have to give up your family, nothing. It
is something eternal that happens, and you get the knowledge what is within.
T have come here just to announce this great news to you. To give you this message
that you can save yourself, save the whole world today, from it's destruction. Not by
talking about peace. I've met many people who talk about peace. You can't go near
them. The way they are hot tempered. How can they be talking of peace? They get
awards of peace by other people who are equally the same. Peace has to be within.
When this Kundalini rises it stops these thoughts, you are in the present, you are fully
aware into thoughtless awareness and there you grow spiritually. Then all the thoughts
that come to you, mostly, are from inspiratión which are full of wisdom and truth. But,
firstly you must have full faith in yourself that you can get it. Not to feel guilty. I mean,
especially in the West all the time sorry. It's nothing to feel sorry. You have done nothing
wrong. Not to feel guilty. You should know that you are a human being and it is your
birthright to get your realisation.
Firstly, not to feel guilty. It's very important. It is very simple if you just say l'm not guilty
at all. If you were guilty you would have been in jail. How are you here? I mean, after
all you are not God, you can make mistakes, so it's all right. But there's nothing to be
guilty, you just face it and finish it off. But you carry it all the time here on the left side
and what you develop is an angina or a spondylitis. Everybody carrying a dog collar
around, because they're feeling guilty. If Itell them they don't believe me, but it's a fact.
Question
When the Kundalini rises can it rise in many ways and also through the left shoulder and
also is there any danger associated with the rising of the Kundalini?
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
VOL.VI - Issue 9 & 10
-17-
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-19.txt 
 There is no danger. First of all, She is your Mother, your individual Mother and She has
been with you since long. From your last lives. She has recorded everything that you
are up to or whatever are your own qualities. She knows you very well and She is
anxious to give you a rebirth. So there is no danger. When your Mother
She took up all the problems upon herself. She didn't give you any problems. She is
a very loving Mother who knows how to rise and how to give very smooth birth to you.
But some people do have problems in their chakras. So She may stop, She may just a
little bit, create heat, that's all. But I've not seen anything going wrong with it. There's
gave you birth
only one way it can rise, through the middle path as Buddha has described.
VOL.VI - Isue 9 & 10
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
-18-
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-20.txt 
 H.H.SHRI MATAJI'S AUSTRALASIATOUR
TALKS AT MELBOURNE PICNIC
Shri Mataji began by saying that Nature and Spirituality go together very well, that one
encourages the other. She then moved onto another topic and discussed how nega-
tivity comes in such a camouflage that it is hard for us to make it out and that we can go
along with it until we find ourselves in great danger, and where great damage can be
done to Sahaja Yoga. We must come out of it and realise the value of ourown being and
not let ourselves be suppressed, oppressed or led astray. She said that some of the
new people who had come were better than the older people who can become power
oriented, or behave as if they were masters of Sahaja Yoga and this only results in
bringing people down. She said that we all have to practice Sahaja Yoga very well, we
should be careful of charismatic people who talk too much, and speak against people,
they should not be listened to and we should not get involved in their domain. She said
that if there is a problem with the leader, She will know about it, but She may want to test
how far we can understand the situation, that we should have the power to discriminate
good from wrong.
Shri Mataji said that Sahaja Yoga is working in 60 nations and that Her attention is
everywhere, after all we are Her children and She has special concern for us all. It is for
the betterment of our lives that Sahaja Yoga has come, to enable us to enjoy the
kingdom of God. Everything is for us, but if we are not sensitive to what is good for us
we may fall into a trap. She went on to say that we have to meditate, morning and night.
She said that in the beginning She knows that we found meditation boring but gradually
we will grow into it, and see the benefits. She told us that She cannot meditate for us,
we have to grow ourselves.
Shri Mataji asked us to see what a unique time we have been born into and what special
people we must be to be in Sahaja Yoga. We must have been special people and have
done something great, otherwise we would not be here. We did not come here to gain
materially, orforsome other reason, we came for our ascent, so now is the time to make
the best of it.
She then spoke about western children and said that the children in the school did not
want to study, rather they wanted to play all the time. Children should know the value
of their lives mostly they are realised souls and intelligent, sometimes too intelligent. We
should try to get them interested in higher things and we should try to spend time
teaching them, because they have to come up
Issue 9 & 10
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
VOL.VI
-19-
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-21.txt 
 TALK ATTHE CONCERT NIGHT
Shri Mataji began by saying that Australia had the second position in relation to numbers
of Sahaja Yogis next to Austria, if one excluded the Eastern Bloc, Russia and India. She
said that people in Australia write Her very long letters, She suggested that we keep the
letters shorter as She can tell on Vibrations the nature of the problem. She said that
most people write to Her about personal problems, what She wants to hear about is the
spreading of Sahaja Yoga and how it is working out.
Shri Mataji then went on to talk about how all people who call themselves Sahaja Yogis
should contribute to the funds of Sahaja Yoga, some people are very miserly and some
are very generous. On the whole everyone should be a little generous, those who do
not pay are those who do not understand Sahaja Yoga. She went on to say that Sahaja
Yoga has given us so much yet some cannot contribute to the running of Sahaja Yoga.
She posed the question as to who is responsible for our recession. Sahaja Yoga should
not be treated as a side issue. She then said that meditation is the most important thing
and it must be done with respect and dedication.
The second thing we must do She said is that we should not form groups. Rather we
should be going across ourcity and to smaller places and trying to spread Sahaja Yoga
If we do this then we can multiply like anything, we are all duty bound to do this. She said
the nature of light is to spread out, we have to spread Sahaja Yoga as much as possible.
She said:
"First of all you have a duty to spread Sahaja Yoga,
secondly it is for you to enjoy Sahaja Yoga but also
to see that by your behaviour you do not trouble
Sahaja Yoga all over the world."
Shri Mataji reported that the leaders have said that most Sahaja Yogis are excellent but
as far as working for Sahaja Yoga only a few are available, this is not the way of showing
Vour
sense of gratitude, if we wish to show oursense of gratitude then we must run to ask
what we can do. Shri Mataji told us of the last Public Programme in Pune where the Yuva
Shakti had built 35 large gates on the road leading to the programme and they had
advertised all over Pune, 100,000 people received their self-realisation. In Bombay the
programme was held in Shivaji Park where 130,000 people attended, it was reported
that it was the largest crowd ever gathered at the Park, surpassing crowds which even
Gandhiji had drawn. All of this She said was done by Sahaja Yogis, to them Sahaja Yoga
is their life, it is their aim, their totality.
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
-20-
Isue 9 & 10
VOL.VI
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-22.txt 
 The problems in our society are usually related to economic or political concerns, it is
like this in every Western society, but the main problem we are facing in our societies
is morality, all kinds of filthy things are happening and our children are suffering. Shri
Mataji then said that women are responsible for our society, they have to change it, they
should not do things which are wrong and they should not allow their children to do
anything which is wrong. Shri Mataji said that She was told that no one is allowed to
correct others children, anyone can correct children. She said that no parent should
feel bad if someone corrects their child, in fact the parent should thank that person. In
India other are allowed to correct children, that is why Indian children are very much
better, they are disciplined not only by their parents but by the whole society, and the
idea is that they are children of the whole society.
Shri Mataji then went on to say that in the West one finds that if anything belongs to
someone else then it is spoilt, if it is theirs then they keep it carefully, this is not Sahaja
Culture, we should train.our children in this way
Shri Mataji then gave a short discourse after the concert. She said that music is for the
spirit and that Her aspiration is that Indian music spreads all over the world. In Her
travels She has seen so many musicians abroad that Her desire is being fulfilled, many
people are taking to Indian music. She said that the beauty of Indian music is that it is
Divine music, it starts and ends with the Omkara. Whatever is ones nature, or religion,
or other outside things, we enjoy this music because it is for the spirit, this is why we can
listen to this music so easily. If we were not Sahaja Yogis we would not be able to. She
then praised the performance of the young girls from Dharamsala, saying how beauti-
fully they sang, and the young students studying dance. She said in 18 months it would
be impossible to achieve their level of expertise without Sahaja Yoga.
With Indian music one cannot learn unless one dedicates, this is the way to get to the
real classical music, it is not like jazz, one has to know everything about it, this is very
difficult. Shri Mataji ended by saying that with Sahaja Yoga we can have a universal
understanding of music.
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
21
VOL.VI Issue 9 & 10
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-23.txt 
 H.H. SHRI MATAJI'S EASTER PUJATALK
AUSTRALIA 03/04/94 (Synopsis)
Shri Mataji began by saying that this was an important Puja both for Australia and for the
world because it has the greatest message, which we have actualised now, we have to
understand the message of Christ Shri Mataji related how She was reading the news-
paper and people today reject this or that part of Christ who are they:. She said,
because they can write, how can they say such things? The subject of spirituality
cannot be dealt with by people who are not self-realised - it is beyond their mind.
Shri Mataji said how surprising it is that She is celebrating this Puja in Australia the land
of the Mooladhara - the Mooladhara is manifested in the Agnya. Australia is the country
where the Mooladhara was established and later on it was manifested in the life of Christ
on the Agnya Chakra. Among all the non Indian countries the maximum growth in
Sahaja Yoga took place in Australia, now the maximum growth has taken place in
Russia which is the right Agnya and the Eastern Bloc countries. South East Asia
countries are mainly composed of peaple who racially are Chinese and they worship
Buddha who is on the left Agnya. Australia is helping in looking afterthese countries,
Thailand, Hong Kong, Taiwan which are influenced by Buddha. All this is working out
like a plan.
There was once a great saint who made some great mistake, so God cursed him to a
Tand which connected India and Africa. This land was then brought down to this point
and he was told to make something out of it, the saints name was Trishankar which are
now the stars of our Southern Cross and which are mentioned in the Puranas. God
made him into a star hanging over this land and he was told that he was to go there and
make a heaven for human beings there.
There are many good points about Australia, one being that we belong to a multicultural
society where other cultures are preserved and where people are helped through the
system of justice. This is a very good thing to develop a multicultural society, and this
comes after the resurrection of political thought. People have a curiosity and knowledge
about the other cultures which are around them. This shows a sense of Collectivity in
our genes, that our country still believes in a rmulticultural society. All of these things are
the manifestation of the Shri Ganesha qualities.
If you have a group of 10 people without the purity of Shri Ganesha they cannot exist
together, because there will always be a conflict, people will become extremely super-
ficial. The relationship between husband and wife is established by Shri Ganesha, He
gives us the idea about how to enjoy our married life.
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
VOLVI = Issue 9 & 10
-22-
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-24.txt 
 For a human being their main object of life is resurrection, they have to rise above the
lemptations of life, Christ came as a human being but He was not a human being,
because there was no matter in Him, He was the Omkara, this is why He could walk on
the water. The message of Christ was resurrection which is very important. Here you
get the three day holiday where people do the opposite of what they should do. For us
Christ should be a model of what our life should be. Pure eyes, how is this possible,
there is lust and greed in the eyes of Westerners.
The main problems of Christian nations is that they have become too materialistic,
peoples eyes are looking and reacting, they cannot witness. Thinking and reaction can
take people to any level of bestiality. In Sahaja Yoga a new world of innocent people
have been created on this Earth in Her own lifetime. We should all realise that we all
belong to a much higher type of people and that there is no justification for
Yogi to indulge into such dirty stuff because we are beyond it. Sahaja Yogis have
developed a new sense of beauty and cleanliness, which is a speciality that we have,
Sahaja
any
which was a potential within us.
Christ is the support of the Universe - this purity, this auspiciousness was made into an
egg, then it was broken into two. The first half is Shri Ganesha, the second portion
evolved and matured into Christ. She said that many may say how can on egg be in two
forms but we must remember that these are Divine happenings which are different to
what we see in the mundane world. Christ is not dead. His body may be in Kashmir as
they say but He is the Spirit, and the Spirit is a great living personality. Other Divine
personalities who had to do things which were human in nature, but Christ never
behaved as other Divine incarnations did - Shri Rama cried for His wife - Shri Krishna
married so many times because His wives were His powers. Although these were
incarnations they had to do things that Human Beings did. Christ never did - He lived
and died as a Divine personality. Sahaja Yogis are now resurrected from ordinary
human beings to the Divine level - it was easy for Christ, but we are coming from human
life to a higher life, because we are going beyond our mind, it is not difficult, we should
just feel that we are there.
We know about our inner being, we are washed in the Kundalini and we can really
change the world if we remember that the message of Christ is resurrection. After
resurrection our attention should not be on human life through our job, through our
children. A person who is Divine has all the relations but is not attached. If one is
attached then we should try to understand that Divinity has not fully manifested. We
have to test ourselves in relation to how kind we are to others, how farwe are helpful to
others, how far we are being collective. We have to help each other.
-23-
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
VOL.VI- Issue 9 & 10
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-25.txt 
 If we see someone in difficulty, we should try to help that person as part and parcel of
the whole, the attention of the collective should be such that we feel one with the
collective. There are no problems but we must have full assessment of ourselves. We
are the pure spirit and we should have full understanding of people because we have
come from human life and have become Divine, we know more of human life than Christ
did. We should try to understand those who come to Sahaja Yoga, as soon as they
come we should not say that they are a bhoot.
We should not yield to human powers which still linger in us or in our society, we have
to keep to our own style, to our own style of behaviour. We will be amazed that the rest
of the world will worship us, they will not hang us but will worship us in our own lifetimes.
This is going to happen, but we should try to understand that we are being resurrected
for a purpose and that purpose is to transform this world into a beautiful place, for which
all of us have to put full attention. We should try to follow people who have achieved a
certain height- a new path, through our lives we should try to create light for others to
follow.
PROTOCOL TOWARDS SHRI MATAJI
- The time has come that from now on nobody
shouldwaste themost precious time of our Holy
Mother. Nobody should go to Shri Mataji to be
cured from something unless Shri Mataji Her-
self grants some time. The respective leader
should be consulted first.
- Whenever going to H.H. Shri Mataji, think to
whom we are going. This helps to keep our
attitude and protocols correct.
- Whenever Shri Matajiis sitting on the stage we
should always come from the back side to Her,
neverfrom the front.
-Nobody should fall before ortouch Shri Mataji's
Lotus Feet when She is arriving and walking to
the stage.
-Never leave before Shri Mataji does.
Any time we do anything for Shri Mataji, it must
be like a puja.
We should not let protocol become the reli-
gion, as it has with so many religions.
- Advice for ladies; if they have the blessing of
doing puja on stage to Shri Mataji, they have to
follow Her advice and decisions, not do some-
Anotherpoint was that we have to respect also
the protocols between each of us yogis when
we are meeting, talking or doing something
together.
thing of their own, especially when decorating
the Lotus feet.
Editor:
Published by:
Printed By:
Yogi Mahajan
The Divine Cool Breeze, 9 Bhagyachintamani Society, Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411 029
Computex Graphics, 112 High Tech Indi. Centre, Caves Road, Jogeshwari East, Bombay 400 060
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
-24-
VOL.VI Issue 9 & 10
