DIVINE COOL BREEZE Vol. VI Issue 7 & 8 You have now entered the Kingdom of God, have faith that you are capable of transforming this world. ...HH Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi

 DIVINE COOL BREEZE Vol. VI, Issue 7 & 8 (BIRTHDAY SPECIAL) Contents Praise to the Goddess 1. 71st Birthday Felicitation Ceremony -Calcutta 2. 6. Birthday Puja - Calcutta 3. 15 Shri Mataji's Horoscope 4. 18 Talk at Kala Kshetra Programme 5. Yogi Mahajan The Divine Cool Breeze, 9 Bhagyachintamani Society, Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411 029 Computex Graphics, 112 High Tech Indl. Centre, Caves Road, Jogeshwari East, Bombay 400 060 Editor: Published by: Printed By: VOL.VI - Issue 7 & 8 -1- DIVINE COOL BREEZE 2.

 Praise to the Goddess Hallowed be thy name of Adi Shakti Shri Nirmala Devi The most Magnificient, most Beneficient, most Merciful May by Her abundant grace we learn How to please Her How to offer Her prayer How to abide Her will How to express our Heartfelt Love and Devotion. Let us all gather to pray to Her on Her 71st Birthday. On the Sacred Soil of golden Bengal Where the visionary Tagore foresaw the World gathering to anoint the Great Mother, Where the poet Bankim Chandra evoked Bharat Mate "Vande Materam" to shake off the brunt of Tyranny Let us gather to offer an ode of Thanks a deed of Love a gift of devotfion a leaf or a flower At Her luminious lotus feet. Let us pray to Her the Saviour of the World To Redeem all humanity To comfort our Soul To Council our misplaced intellect To Cleanse our evil thoughts. Please, O Mother of the Universe Be with us forever and ever Forgive us our innocent trespasses and lead us to our fulfilliment For we are lost without Your light of love Please, O Most Compassionate Mother Please allow Your children to celebrate Your advent Please Bless us. Om Twameva Sakshat Shri Ganapati Shri Ganesha Namo Namah. - Yogi Mahajan - Issue 7 & 8 DIVINE COOL BREEZE -2- VOL.VI

 BIRTHDAY SPECIAL ISS UE Shri Mataji's 71st Birthday Felicitation Ceremony was held at Kala Mandir Hall at Calcutta on the morning of 21st March 1994. All Her children had gathered from all over the world to celebrate this most important event of our era. General Joshi, Chief of Army Staff specially flew in to felicitate our Divine Mother. It was the most touching ceremony, when our hearts lept out to Shri Mataji, we truely became an ocean of love. Everyone was drenched in joy of love. Shri Mataji was very pleased with the great care and affection the Calcutta collectivity had bestowed upon all the guests. They had poured out their hearts in every arrangement, love was that tangible...... DIVINE COOL BREEZE -3- VOL.VI - Issue 7 & 8

 71ST BIRTHDAY FELICITATION CEREMONY SPEECH BY H.H.SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI CALCUTTA 21ST MARCH, 1994, (SYNOPSIS) I am not at all aware how things are working out, how Sahaja Yoga is spreading all over the world, how you people have come to Sahaja Yoga. It's a very special time. It's the blossom time. In this blossom time, it is all organized that this should happen. I am just a medium I think and not aware as to how things are working out. Only thing my heart was filled with such feelings of gratitude to you that you have taken to Sahaja Yoga. It's very difficult because it is a very subtle knowledge and in this gross world where it has become even worse during modern times (Kali Yuga). I never thought that I would create even 12 Sahaja Yogis. Now I know this is the time. I didn't know then that this is the time, that all over the world people will take to truth. Truth will prevail. So much false-hood all around, in every walk of life, in every dimension of our personality we accept all kinds of illusions. In this condition of illusory expectations that there should be so many people who would want to know the truth, is the most remarkable thing. To me it's a surprise. Wherever there is this black art there will be poverty, like Kerala has black art, in Bengal there is black art. The sooner this black art goes away, the better, because not only they do something to you physically, mentally but to your Kundalini also they harm. Also they harm you very much financially. They take money and people have become very poor. But then somehow this love of Mother that Bengalis have. Here a little girl is also a "Maa". Once a minister came to see me who was a communist. He said "Mother I'm sorry. I was delayed because I went to the Kali temple to worship." I said, "You are a communist, why are you worshipping at Kali temple." He said, "What, am I going to forget Mother because I am a Communist. I better give up Communism because my Mother is everything." I was surprised at him that though he is a communist he believed in Mother. So the mother-hood *is very much worshipped in Bengal and that is the basis of their very loving nature. They are extremely tolerant people. You don't know how a Mother feels proud of her children. It's a very deep feeling of your own growth, your own achievements children have come up so much. So many poets, orators, musicians and that your all areas of human endeavour, business men, beaurocrats. I'm surprised that how they have accepted Sahaja Yoga so well, surrendered completely and have shown such results, as if somebody has sparked them. VOL.VI - Issue 7 & 8 DIVINE COOL BREEZE -4-

 This power of Kundalini is within you. It is there, only we must utilize it. What covers it, is your ego or your conditioning. Allow your Kundalini to grow, and it will really show you how great and glorious you are. It is not me who is doing it. It is your Kundalini which is working it out. One thing, she knows me. That's all. This transformation that has taken place also shows your purva janma punyas and your intelligence, the way you have accepted. Even Kabira got lost. He said, "How to make them understand the whole worid is blind." All of them got fed up and said better take samadhi, because these people are not going to take this sukshama (subtle) knowledge. But today what you find, it's ready. This is the Blossom time and to me its the joy of the Mother of seeing this world changing. So many people thought about it that they want to have this kind of world, Buddha, Mahavira, Christ, Krishna, Ram, Lao-tze everyone said the same, that we have to achieve that world, that we have to enter into the Kingdom of God. I am surprised and also so much gratified that you people have taken to it so seriously and you are working it out in every country. If I could do it alone, why should I convert you to Sahaja Yoga? It has to have channels, as pure as yourself. Otherwise it cannot work out. That's how it is spreading. You have all the powers. Try to assume those powers. Like a beggar is made a King then he sits on the throne and still he's begging, then what is the use of making him the King. Now you have entered into the Kingdom of God, have faith in that and that you are all capable of transforming this world. You are the people who are really chosen, so responsibility is created and in Sahaja Yoga you don't have to do anything, pay or stand on your head, or fast or give up your family, nothing. Only thing you must have is pure desire, which is the power of Kundalini and keep your connection intact. Be collective and always think of others who have not got it. Don't get angry with them. You must have patience. Have mercy on them and with that mercy you will be surprised you can get as many people to Sahaja Yoga. Another surprising thing is that in the West the people have become so innocent. There are people who have become so sweet and so mild, so beautiful, so dynamic, so affectionate, at the same time such compassion, such understanding. They are all of such a high quality, angel-like people and I wonder how it has happened. This was all there, only they got it. So I must congratulate you, instead of congratulating me, because whatever I am, I have been like that. I have not achieved anything. You have achieved and that's what I congratulate you for. Many diseases have been cured. One gentleman who had undergone bypass surgery was told that he would have to undergo anothet one. He prayed that "Mother, please I don't want to have an operation." When he went for his check- up they found that his aorta which was clogged, had opened out. He had become DIVINE COOL BREEZE VOL.VI - Issue 7 & 8 -5-

 a normal person. He became normal and even played tennis. Infact two doctors who are not Sahaja Yogis have got their M.D. on Sahaja Yoga. It is happening everywhere. People are getting cured, their mental health is better, family life and jobs are better, their business is better. Relationships are very good but one thing is there we must keep 'Shudh Iccha' (Pure Desire), means we must meditate. its very important. I really have no words to what you are telling about me. It reminds me that once Rabindranath Tagore wrote a poem. The poem was so good that everybedy made comments. He read it and he said, "I never knew I wrote all this." It is not what I do that's so important. It is how you receive it and how you reciprocate. That is important and that has happened in the Kali Yuga. I have to thank you again and again. You are in for a very prosperous and beautiful life. May God Bless You. 71ST BIRTHDAY PUJA TALK BY H.H.SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI CALCUTTA 21ST MARCH, 1994. (SYNOPSIS) Every year we have birthdays of various people and every year we make a vow that this year I will not do this or I will not do that. This is a very good way of seeing how far we have come in life. Many people who really have achieved a very great height in their spiritual life did not need a Birthday, as they felt everyday is a Birthday to start, to go ahead, to understand, to learn. Everyday is a new year for them. In our own life we see that our surroundings change very slowly. Sometimes it is shocking, sometimes you are surprised that how the surrounding are not changing? But in a subtle way there is a tremendous change that is happening within us and without. The whole atmosphere today is governed by human beings. I don't know how far Paramchaitanya works it out, but it is for us to open ourselves to new dimensions in our lives. For example, if we find through our introspection, we locate that we still have these old subtle nonsensical things still hanging around us, we don't have to vow for it. You have to just witness it, and the destructive path it is taking you to, immediately you will give up. You don't have to worry that you have to put a vow upon yourself because now you are "Samarth', means you are absolutely empowered. Whatever you think is wrong, your attention Itself on it will gradually remove the doubts. DIVINE COOL BREEZE VOL.VI - Issue 7 & 8 -6-

 About having those problems, those connections, conditionings and ego that are lingering still, definitely you will drop them. With your attention it will run away. Then you will realize that everyday your attention is getting purified, getting powerful, and compassionate. Normally whatever reaction you have in your attention just disap- pears and you start witnessing the whole thing and your power of attention through that witnessing force acts, and it works. It works not only on you but on everything, that surrounds you. Firstly through your meditation, in that state of meditation you expand within yourself. You stay in the present. The other day somebody asked me where was your last birthday, I forgot. Otherwise my memory is good. Perhaps every time, every day you live in the present and you grow, so you forget, when and where this growth has taken place. My own growth has been like this, that everytime I go to a place, I find very nice new people coming in and some of the horrible ones from the old lot disappearing. It's something like when the tree grows, the leaves go on falling and new leaves start coming. But in Sahaja Yoga it is something different. I find, that on the tree of Sahaja Yoga very few leaves falls off, and you sometimes face a lush garden of beautiful people. To me it's like a miraculous fire works. It starts like a small line and then opens up into several beautiful patterns. It is impossible to envisage or visualize what will happen to us, to Sahaja Yoga and to all of mankind I have never learnt to imagine things, but the vision that you see is really remarkable, that I see all Sahaja Yogis drenched in Divine Love and expressing themselves in a very beautiful and very deep manner. This when it comes in, makes your attention absolutely enrapt in such Divine Bliss that you forget that moment. One of those moments are when you celebrate my Birthday. I even forget how many years I have lived on this earth, Because as I told you it does not leave any mark of time, of date, of years in that blissful state. As if sometimes you can think that you went to see something beautiful like Taj Mahal, without knowing what it is, and suddenly you find such a beautiful building. Unexpectedly, you just get speechless. Invariably you forget the time at such a moment. You will forget how you came there. All the story behind all that finishes off as soon as you see the reality of the vision. This reality of the vision is something beyond even my thinking and imagination. I cannot even now sometime believe that there are so many Sahaja Yogis who have got this subtle knowledge. I never knew that there were so many seekers to begin with. I never knew that there were such subtle people on this earth. All over the world wherever I went, suddenly I find facing so many beautiful seekers. Time stops for that moment. Nothing is recorded except for the experience. This experience is in an abstract form. You cannot describe. It is beyond words and beyond any description. At that time you really become thoughtless and that is the DIVINE COOL BREEZE VOL.VI - Issue 7 & 8 -7-

 time we have to really enjoy. The greatest curse of modern times is the watch, or the time we keep. All the time we are just seeing the time. We have crossed the limits of time 'Kalateet'. Try to understand why we have crossed because time moves according to us. You can experience it. The other day I was coming from Delhi and in my household everybody seems to be very particular about time. So they were after my life, come along, we are getting late. When I reached there they said the plane is still waiting. It was not necessary for you to hurry up. It will take at least 15-20 minutes for you to go. Also the name of airport makes people really jumpy. They have to go to the aeroplane is like as if some war is on. So far luckily I have never missed a plane or a train in my life though I travel quite a lot. I have everytime found that invariably the plane itself is waiting for me. Like once we were in Prague we were supposed to go to Poland via Vienna. We had a great Sahaja Yogi who told me that the plane will be leaving at 11 o'ciock. From the airport he rings me up that the plane is leaving at 9.30. So I was ready, I just jumped into the car, we reached the airport, we were late by 15 minute and the ground lady started shouting at me. This Sahaja Yogi could not bear it, and felt that it was his mistake as he had told me a wrong time, that's why this lady is shouting at my Mother. He couldn't bear it. He was very unhappy. So we went into the aeroplane with this lady shouting behind. We saw that the pilot and engineers were busy with some correction of the machinery. This Sahaja Yogi was so upset that tears started rolling down his eyes. They were sitting behind me and I turned around and told him, its alright, don't worry.. He said, "No Mother because of me she could say all these things to you. I can't bear it." And he could not stop crying. Within one minute the sky which was absolutely clear was covered with big clouds like a huge big elephant walking into the whole area. All the Sahaja Yogis who were standing on top of the airport saw it happening. The whole sky became absolutely jet black. I said, "See, the tears of this gentleman has such powers." Then the airport people told us that this plane is out of order we have to get down. We got down and came back to the lounge. Then he went to this ground hostess and told her, "Now whom should we shout at. Now the plane is not going. Should we shout at you. How dare you shout at my Mother?" But all the people at the airport who were under the same regime style got such a fright. The manager said that for your plane there is still five hours and we will give you permission to go out of the airport, and he took me by special train. I o I went out and did some shopping and when we came back all the airport staff was rather, stunned by us that ours was the only plane that was leaving. The traffic had stopped. When we walked down to board the plane the gentlemen there said, "Mother can you help meI have a terrible back pain." Another Lady asked me to put my hand on her shoulder which was paining. I put my hand on her shoulder and she started feeling alright. Then I thought better board the plane and the couldn't understand this reaction. So -8- - Isue 7 & 8 DIVINE COOL BREEZE VOLVI

 same gentleman asked me to put my hand on his back. I said, "I have to board the plane. He said, "I will walk with you." We walked together for about two minutes and he said I'm alright. The whole atmosphere changed. It had such a tremendous effect on these people who were under a regime, I was amazed how the tears of this Sahaja Yogi had worked this wonder. Imagine the moment the tears started rolling down. His eyes that moment just manifested a big drama and ultimately what we found that people at the airport became extremely humble and respectful. When we start thinking of time we have to understand that time is our slave. We are not slaves of time. There are thousand and one stories I can tell you how by delaying, or getting late in a place by not caring for the time I've seen such beautiful manifestations, beautiful dramas, The Art of The Divine Power, that I was amazed how people worry so much about the time. If time is really necessary, if we are all watching our time every year as our birthday and if you think that time is very important, it is in a way. In these modern times we really need that time for meditation; for collective meetings and for Sahaja Yoga. I know when there was the war of independence in this country where my parents fought with all their "Tan, Man, Dhan" (body, soul and wealth), that time I remembered how they never cared for anything. They went all out because it was very important to get this country free from the clutches of the empire. This was so important that they had to meet somebody at such a point, that man is supposing escaping from the jail, they could not afford to just neglect that important time or meeting because everything had become an emergency for them. Nobody told them or gave them lectures. For them it was from inside. Today is the same situation. It is an emergency. A very subtle emergency, that nothing is more important than spreading Sahaja Yoga. If some people will miss it and not know about it, we will be responsible for that. At the time of Christ, Buddha, there were no aeroplanes to travel. There were not these loud speakers, or other communications and televisions etc. All these things have come now, they have manifested now. It is the work of Param Chaitanya, through scientists, and other knowledge all this manifestation has taken place. Also these people didn't have to face people, nor were they supposed to give realisation to people in such a big way. All these inventions and what you see today as modern ventures which we have got, are all for Sahaja Yoga. Without Sahaja Yoga you cannot imagine what would happen to this world. The first and foremost thing is that, we have no more peace within our hearts. We talk of peace, and know of people who have got awards in peace, but have no peace in their hearts. Unless and until we human beings have peace, there cannot be peace in the whole world. It is we who create wars. It is we who do kinds of violence. It is we who have the possibility of people getting into the Kingdom of God. So peace can be only achieved by establishing peace in the hearts of the people, DIVINE COOL BREEZE -9- VOL.VI Issue 7 & 8

 and that is only possibile when you achieve the state of thoughtless awareness. You remain in the present and you will be amazed that there you will be standing like a rock because you will have reality in your hand. You can work out the way you like. Actually I don't work out anything whatsoever. It's the Param Chaitanya which works it out. In the same way it will work for you also. But you must have faith in yourself and absolute faith in Sahaja Yoga. Absolute. That's the only way we can achieve that, many many people, most of the people of the world should enter into the Kingdom of God. That's the most important thing. More than all these worldly things, or nonsensical things. The attention should be in how many people we are going to bring to Sahaja Yoga. How many we are going to save? What are we going to do about it? When you have to think about it every morning how can you remember the time and date. When you are in emergency now and you knew this emergency is to be fulfilled then how can you just pay attention to all worldly things, all worldly achievements. That will take its own course you don't have to worry, it works out automatically. Only thing is where you really need your own diversion, and your own focussing is Sahaja Yoga, in and out. If we really want peace on this earth, if we want progress for ourselves, if we want all kinds of physical, emotional and mental problems being solved all for our good, why not we come to Sahaja Yoga where we don't have to do anything, except for raising our Kundalini, meditating for very little time and to achieve that state of joy. Today my feelings are really full of joy, because now I can see how things are happening, how one person can produce thousands and thousands of Sahaja Yogis. I saw one miracle. I told once, that one seed has all the thousand trees it is going to produce, and when I saw a new technique of tissue culture I was amazed to see that on seed there were so many little little primules that had come out. In the same way you are all capable. And you all can do it, but what is needed is faith in yourself and also complete sincerity about Sahaja Yoga. If that happens today you have really celebrated my birthday. If you think that my Birthday is important, then for me very important is that everybody gets their spiritual Birthday. May God Bless You. DIVINE COOL BREEZE VOL.VI- Issue 7 & 8 -10-

 To the honoured member of the Petrovsky Academy of Arts and Sciences Most deeply respected Mrs. Nirmala Srivastava, You as the only honoured member of our Academy amongst the women of the planet earth, we heartily congratulate with a firm entry into the new decade of your fruitful and creative work which is aimed at the spiritual evolution of all the nations of the earth in accordance with your highly moral teaching. We especially value your efforts in the realm of strengthening the friendship between two great nations India and Russia and wish you success in the future in this noble field. Vice President YURIY A. VORONOV PREDICTION FROM NADI GRANTH A transcript of what Shri Mataji said as She translated the Marathi version of Nadi Granth in Sholapur, early 1982. ...here they have tried to establish how astrology is so correct, and whatever is predicted is also coming correct. But, this is about two thousand years back, one of the great astrologers of this place (not Sholapur but little downward, Karnataka) he described about this thing. So clear-cut that, you'll be amazed, that he said that this great yogi will come on this earth on the Meenarash (is the Pisces). I'm just on the cusp of the Pisces and the Aries. But that's not so important. Then he that, gradually, we'll start seeing miracles, from 1964 to 66. He says that, maybe, little bit. But he says the real change, Manvantar in the age, the New Age, he will start from 1970. And by 1980 it will take its grip. A!right? That time, by this new method, the New Age will be formed and the old one, Vaivastha.., there's one another, we have yugas, system of the yugas, will be over, and that Yuga is in Kali yuga. So that's how Kali Yuga will be finished, from 1970. Will be, start receding says DIVINE COOL BREEZE -11- - Issue 7 & 8 VOL.VI

 back, Kali Yuga. And a New Age of active divinity will start, Krita Yuga. That time, the Sun will rule in a new way, the Sun. The axis of Earth will be reduced and the speed of the Earth will be reduced, gradually. That time a great Mahayogi will be born, who will be completely Parambrahma. Completely Parambrahma. That's Mel And He will possess all the powers to do or not to do. Means Mahakali and Mahalaxmi, all the powers, all the powers. Before this, people used to go into bhakti, devotion, jnana means reading, Patanjali Yoga, and then they used to get their mokshas. But, this new method that this Mahayogi will bring in, the pure power within you, your chakras will rise and as a result the Kundalini Shakti will be awakened and will be enlightening. Because of this new method of Maha Yoga you will see with your own eyes and you'll get it in this body in your lifetime, the Realization. And you'll get the joy of Realization. (Question: What's his name, Mother?) His name was Bhujender, Bhujender Kaka. His name was Kaka Bhujender. Acharya Kaka Bhujender. Sattwacharya. You don't have to sacrifice this body. Many people, great saints, sacrificed their body in living condition, they went into a cave and shut themselves and died. That's not necessary with this new method. You won't die, either. Means, you will achieve your spirit. The realized souls, the saints who are realized, the Brahmananda; the joy of the Brahma, by this new yoga. And they won't have to go into samadhi. Just without doing anything like that, they will get their realization. And they will enjoy the joy of Brahma. Sahaja samadhi. This is Sahaja samadhi according to... Among millions, at first one will get realization. You understand your own positions, you see the way sometimes we fritter away our atiention on nonsensical things, you realize that among millions you are one. This is written here. We fritter away our attention in useless things like my husband, my wife, my children, this, that, and that. It is written here that among millions, one will be selected. Do you follow that point? Then all the human race can get over their death or their destruction by this You'll have to lead a life, a married life, a normal life, may not marry but like a normal householder. Otherwise you cannot get this yoga siddhi, like if you become a big saint and a "sadhu baba" or a guru or something great, you cannot get it. You have to be a normal householder, maybe married, may not be married it is not the point, samsari, means living on this earth, in the "brass tacks" as you say. Grass roots. Down to the basics. Then all your diseases will disappear so fast with this yoga that you won't need anything like a hospital. yoga. In the beginning these great yogis - you people also - only by touching people you can cure people. Is a fact. Like the Ardhanarinateshwara, is Shiva, that will be the state. Human beings, their old age will disappear, their body will remain as DIVINE COOL BREEZE VOL.VI - Isue 7 & 8 -12-

 it is, and they will have a body which is divine. What a promise! So don't worry too much about your bodily comforts. Alright? Then may some of you, if you want you can fly in the air also (laughter) with that body. Also they can become subtle and can enter into the body of of others, to get them cured. That already you are doing. They will not be touched by the fire and any weapons. Also you will be able to see these subtle things with your own eyes. You can see them. This will not only happen in India, but all over the world. India is a country of great punyas, that's why there are powers which will look after the protection of this country, and this country will gradually rise. that already you are doing enter into the body He says that the Third World War . they may go for a third World War, and they will have to suffer for it. After that this great Incarnation will interfere, and all the countries will come together with the understanding of collective oneness. And they will understand that war is so horrible. In a very big city (I don't know which one) a conference of all the countries will be held. There not the politicians but the yogis will direct them. Yogis ... he calls you yogis throughout. This may be the Third World War we had with China recently; he says that because of China's aggressive policies and the Third World War we'll have to bear a lot of problems, you see. But through prayers, we'll be able to unite all the countries. By the new inventions of Science, the Divine knowledge and the Science will become One. With the science, we'll be able to establish the existence of God and of Spirit. That is how there will be no difference, there will be co-ordination between, corelationship between the science and the Spirit, or the Divine knowledge. Already we are getting it because you see on My photograph people get vibrations, it's a science, on the television, mantras, all that, if you start curing through scientific methods, you are also using the science for that purpose. You can prove that these things can be carried by magnetic forces, by sound, all these things. Then he says that because of ignorance and because of maya, yogis had to suffer a lot to become collectively conscious, brahmaika, to feel the Brahma. But now - and they had to do lot of penance, that was so difficult - you'll become "sahaja". This is the word, sahaja. sa-ha-ja prapta hua, sahaja. And n't have to give up anything to achieve Brahma. you don In the new yoga system, when it will manifest in the different countries, in the New Age, the administration will be governed by people who have their own powers of yoga, depending on how far you are in your yoga. And their qualities as Yogis. That will be the determining factor. They will be able to create a society which will completely fulfil their desires and their necessities, and people won't need to have money accumulated with them. The poverty and sickness will be completely finished and in their absence the country, the samaj, the society will be healthy and restful and without any anger. They have also given the name of Jacqueline Murray, she's an American lady, DIVINE COOL BREEZE VOL.VI - Isue 7 & 8 -13-

 Jacqueline Murray. This woman had predicted about Me, and she had said that a great personality will be born in India, a lady; she said about 1924, 1 was born in 1923. "About", correct, you see. But Cheiro has said that by 1980 the new Advent will start a New Age. There's a difference of ten years. There's a lady called Alice Bailey, she's supraconscious I believe, and in supra- conscious state she has said that there will be a new yoga which will come, by which people will be connected to the Holy Ghost. There's a danger of a third world war, and is inevitable, but it may be avoided if people develop love for each other with this yoga. Now this is another thing, hah, this one is a tape about what Gyaneshwar has said about this new age, what will happen. Translation of that is with me but it is in Marathi, I will have to translate it into English. That how people will become realized and what will happen, how they will love each other, all these things he has said it, Gyaneshwar, and it is sung in this record... EXTRACT FROM NADIGRANTHA This is an extract from the Nadigrantha by Mr. Shantaram Athvale. In this book he gives informations about several different nadigranthas which are the great, ancient books on astrology like Bhrigu Samhita, Satya Nadi, Kak Nadi, etc. In this particular extract the author refers to the writings from Kak Nadi written by Kakayyar Bhujander who was a great astrologer and seeker who lived nearly 2000 years ago. "While Jupiter is in Pisces a great Yogi will incarnate on the Earth. By 1970 it will have become quite evident to many people that a new era will have started. Kaliyuga will end and Krutayuga will start. The axis of the Earth will depress and the Earth's orbit will come closer and closer to the Sun. Human life will undergo a complete revolution. A great Yogi will incarnate at this time. This Yogi will be the Incarnation of Parabrahma (!!) and will have all the divine powers. Until this time a yogi or devotee could achieve the bliss of Moksha and find the ultimate meaning of his life only by following the path of devotion, knowledge and Patanjali Yoga. But he would have to go through severe penance in order to awaken the sleeping powers of various chakras of his body and finally enlighten the Kundalini Power. By the new method of yoga devised by the great Yogi, human beings will be able to attain the joy of Moksha within one lifetime. It would no longer be necessary - Isue 7 & 8 -14- VOLVI DIVINE COOL BREEZE

 to sacrifice one's body or to die in order to achieve Moksha. The Brahmananda which so far only great saints had been able to experience and then only by entering into the Samadhi state at the point of death, due to his new type of yoga could be achieved by ordinary human beings without entering Samadhi state while dying. In the beginning it would be possible for one person in crores to attain this Yoga and Moksha. However, after some time the whole human race with the help of this Yoga will be able to defeat itself. People won't have to worry about food, shelter or clothing. While living ordinary lives, people will achieve Yoga - Union with God. There will be no necessity for hospitals, as there will be no diseases. In the beginning the great Yogi will be able to heal diseases with a mere touch. Old age with it's destruction of the body will not exist and people will possess heavenly bodies. The world will have to suffer the consequences of a third world war. This world war would end by interference of the Great Yogi. In the end all the nations of the world will come together with the feeling of oneness. They will agree on the destructiveness of war. There will be a great international conference in a big city of the world. Yogis will lead this conference rather than intellectuals or politicians. Then the world will recover from the aftermath of war. The whole of the humanity will understand the importance of prayer and all the nations will unite together. Due to new scientific discoveries, science and religions would become one. With the help of the science the existence of God and the Soul could be proved. The veil of ignorance and Maya would be drawn aside and Brahmananda, Moksha which could previously only be attained by yogis as a result of very hard work and severe penance would become easily available to many human beings. In this new era every person would have his position in the system according to his individual qualities and merit. It will be possible to fulfill people's needs and desires and so it will no longer be necessary to accumulate money. Without poverty and diseases society will be healthy and carefree. DIVINE COOL BREEZE VOL.VI - Issue 7 & 8 -15-

 SHRI MATAJI'S HOROSCOPE GIVEN DURING THE AUSTRALIA TOUR, 1991 Shri Ganeshaya Namah, I seek the blessings of Lord Shri Ganesha while making the comparative study and analysis of horoscopes of different Divine personalities a very pleasant and astounding observation has been made. This study has been described in great detail with specific analysis of the horoscope of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi. The Divine personalities studied are Lord Krishna, Lord Buddha, Lord Christ, Prophet Mohammed, Guru Nanak Dev, Shri Chaitanya Maha-Prabhu, Adi Shankarancharya and Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi. The data on the horoscopes for all others is taken from notable horoscopes by Shri B. V. Raman, the world famous astrologer. It is observed from the various planetary combinations that the following combina- tions are very rare and are indicative of the Divinity of the person. These are: 1. Gajkesari Yoga or 5th, 9th position of the Moon and Jupiter. This indicates past Punyas, Punya Sanchaya or highly religious past lives. 2. Saturn aspects the Lagna, it shows the concern for the Masses and the ability for Tapasya - Penance. 3. Ketu the Mokshakarak planet should be in the 9th Dharmasthana showing the Dharma that is established within and not outwardly and the truthfulness. This planet gives the capacity to go all alone. 4. Lagna being aspected by Jupiter and Lagnesh aspected by Jupiter is an added strength giving one the capacity to become World Guru (Jagatguru). 5. Venus or Mercury is the ruling planet in all the cases. If both are there it is excellent because both the planets are Dnyan Karak. It may be noted that these combinations are present in the horoscopes of all the above mentioned personalities in different quantums (Ansha). In case of Shri Mataji all these combinations are present in full strength. No. 4 combination and No. 5 combination is particularly observed to be very strong in case of Shri Mataji as compared to others. Shri Mataji is born in Gemini Lagna (whose Lord is Mercury) with Moon is Bharani Nakshatra (whose Lord is Venus), which means She is under the ruling aspect of Mercury and Venus. DIVINE COOL BREEZE -16- VOL.VI Issue 7 & 8

 Shri Mataji is born, 13 years and 11 month balance of Venus Dasha. Meaning Pleasant and Happy Childhood 03- 1923 21 - 11.13 21 - 02 - 1937 Thereafter Sun's period for 6 years Indicates Tapa-Period; spiritual and Political activity of Intense Nature 6. 02 - 1947 21-02 Thereafter Moon Period for 10 years Indicating clear headedness and deep contemplation of Mass enlightenment (Political and Spiritual Activity) 10 02 - 1953 21 Then Mars period of 7 years Indicating Travelling and lot of changes 7. 21 - 02 - 1960 Then Rahu's period of 18 years Rahu is a Divine planet giver of Intricate knowledge of Brahma. Inner soul searching, Search for Enmass awakening 18 21 - 02 1978 Then Jupiters' period of 16 years spreading of Sahaja Yoga - the Guru principle throughout the world 16 21 - 02 - 1994 Thereafter Saturn will govern for 19 years when it will spread Sahaja Yoga in the whole world. Saturn means the masses, the Virata and Shri Mataji will witness Kalki (Mercury) Power manifesting over the whole world. 19 21 - 02- 2013 According to the birth horoscope and Sahaja Horoscope of 5-5-1970, Jupiter passed through Libra. Jupiter will again pass through Libra in 1993 and Sahaja Yoga will blossom in the entire world. -17- DIVINE COOL BREEZE VOL.VI - Isue 7 & 8

 Shri Mataji is born with Rahu Nakshatra in Ascendant Mercury (Gemini) and Moon in Bharanj (Venus) Nakshatra, clearly indicates that Rahu means Films, TV, Radio, (that is ether principle) and Venus means Music, film personalities, artists can help. Mercury is the ruling planet of the present day politics (Sahaja can enter through present political system). In the early Indian Politics at the time of Jawahar Lal Nehru and Mahatma Gandhi, the ruling planet was Venus. Thereafter the ruling planet of Indian politics has been Mercury as all the important political events took place on Wednesday. It may be noted here that Shri Mataji has both Venus and Mercury as Her ruling planets. Thus She has full sway over the past and future of Indian Politics. This is further confirmed from the horoscope of 5.5.1970 (Sahaja horoscope) which is almost identical with Shri Mataji's horoscope, having Gajkesri with Jupiter in Libra, Saturn aspecting Sahaja lagna, Sun exalted. From this we see that from 15 August 1990, Sun's period is up until 15 August 1996 during which all great souls will be attracted to Sahaja Yoga and have their inner (spiritual ascent) purification and then from 15 August 1996 for 10 years the Moon's Dasa is starting that is it goes to the Masses, and the work is completed up until 15th August 2006. Mer Ven Sal Moon 1 Moon Rahu Rahu Mars Gemini Sun Mer 16 Л Sun 12/ Jupiter Ketu 11 Mer | Jupiter Ketu 7. /10 Sahaja Yoga Horoscope - 05.05.1970 at 5.30 DIVINE COOL BREEZE VOL.VI - Isue 7 & 8 -18- Issue 7 & 10, www. wwww.

 1. Three planets Saturn, Sun, Moon are Ucch Abhilashi = Exaltion 2. Saturn, Jupiter are retrograde (Vakri) = Double strength Venus is totally free from any malefic aspects giving her the name of Nishkalanka Avatar with (10-5) Divine combinations, just pointing to us who She is. I bow to the Almighty God Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi who is the Nishkalanka Avatar of which our Puranas are speaking from centuries. Lalit Bhandari TALK BY H.H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI BEFORETHE BALLET BY (KALA KSHETRA) CALCUTTA 20-3-1994 (SYNOPSIS) Here, where the River Ganges meets the great sea, there has been such a big manifestation of artists and art of very delicate nature. Firstly, Bengalis are extremely emotional, lovable, loving people. They are not materialists. They care more for human beings, and for the human feelings. As I've told you always, the greatest novelist I've ever known was Sharat Chandra Chatterjee who was the one who would just touch your heart and make you understand. Every subject he has dealt and his art of writing is so beautiful, as if he understands human beings and their problems and how with love, you can solve it. Sahaja Yoga is very close with any art, because it is the expression of the heart. When the imagination of an artist reaches the reality then that artist becomes Sahaja automatically. We have had many artists and poets like that who have through their imagination reached the depth of reality, and that's how he brought on all the essences by which they can cure many things which they cannot cure with anything else;-social problems, political problems, which looks so formidable are shown through their delicate brush or their delicate writings. You can solve these problems through the suggestion they have given through various arts, is something very remarkable. Drama plays a very big part in our cultural life. It's coming from ancient times. They say that the drama, the natya shastra started in India, when Arjuna was going for war, his wife asked him to bring a puppet. So this is the first sign that in this country there were artists who used to act like pantomimes or dramatists. This natya shastra started in our country long time back. DIVINE COOL BREEZE VOL.VI - Issue 7 & 8 -19-

 The greatest thing of Bengalis is that they are very patriotic people, and culturally they are very Indian. They cannot take to any other culture very easily. Where the women are respected as Mother, even the little girls are called as Maa. This sangam that has come here is really a very big venture for the upliftment of an artist. Otherwise we are taking to the very cheap type of artistic impression in our country. We have taken to something that requires no art, some sort of an acrobatic show that we have on the stage, by which we think that we have made the stage very active. All this kind of a nonsensical stuff is still coming in our big cities, and films. This nonsense has to be outwitted by real art. I am very happy such a Sangam has been established, which will definitely give. (atleast our children), the real sense of the expression of our manifestation of joy and happiness and all the things that they have to face in life. This "Jatayu moksha" is a very nice subject, it suggests a bird, a condor fighting Ravana who was such a mighty person. But he went and fought to save Sitaji. His way expresses a person who believes in truth, honesty, respect of women, who fights such a mighty person. He knew he would be lost, but he fights, and he gets very badly injured but he is not bothered about that. That injury was there till Shri Rama gave him moksha, shows that all his sufferings were finished once he got moksha. In Sahaja Yoga you don't have to do all this. You don't have to get injured, or fight. But in a way there is a big fight within yourself and that fight is that when we try to see ourselves as something very great, very egoistical and then we start fighting with our ego. Like Jatayu which is the feeling of righteousness. This righteousness gets injured many a times. How Sahaja Yoga has come to show that you don't have to fight. You have to just ask for your realisation. It is the time that has brought this for you. I don't know I should have any credit for it. Anybody could have done it who would have been born in this time, it has happened. So you have to know that already the moksha that so many Sahaja Yogis achieved, they will enjoy the drama much more than anything else, because they will realize that they had struggled. They had to struggle with themselves for their seeking. Ultimately they got their realization. This will definitely give you greater hope that we can spread Sahaja Yoga all over. Art is a part and parcel of a human being, is the potential of a human being. We have to develop art because Sahaja Yoga is nothing but to enjoy the Kingdom of God and if you do not have art, what will you enjoy. But it has to be pure art. Purity is important and in Indian culture purity and respect is maintained even till today. VOL.VI - Issue 7 & 8 -20- DIVINE COOL BREEZE



----------------------

1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-0.txt 
 DIVINE COOL BREEZE
Vol. VI
Issue 7 & 8
You have now entered the Kingdom of God,
have faith that you are capable of transforming this world.
...HH Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-1.txt 
 DIVINE COOL BREEZE
Vol. VI, Issue 7 & 8
(BIRTHDAY SPECIAL)
Contents
Praise to the Goddess
1.
71st Birthday Felicitation Ceremony -Calcutta
2.
6.
Birthday Puja - Calcutta
3.
15
Shri Mataji's Horoscope
4.
18
Talk at Kala Kshetra Programme
5.
Yogi Mahajan
The Divine Cool Breeze, 9 Bhagyachintamani Society, Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411 029
Computex Graphics, 112 High Tech Indl. Centre, Caves Road, Jogeshwari East, Bombay 400 060
Editor:
Published by:
Printed By:
VOL.VI - Issue 7 & 8
-1-
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
2.
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Praise to the Goddess
Hallowed be thy name of Adi Shakti Shri Nirmala Devi
The most Magnificient, most Beneficient, most Merciful
May by Her abundant grace we learn
How to please Her
How to offer Her prayer
How to abide Her will
How to express our Heartfelt Love and Devotion.
Let us all gather to pray to Her on Her 71st Birthday.
On the Sacred Soil of golden Bengal
Where the visionary Tagore foresaw the World
gathering to anoint the Great Mother,
Where the poet Bankim Chandra evoked Bharat Mate "Vande Materam"
to shake off the brunt of Tyranny
Let us gather to offer an ode of Thanks
a deed of Love
a gift of devotfion
a leaf or a flower
At Her luminious lotus feet.
Let us pray to Her the Saviour of the World
To Redeem all humanity
To comfort our Soul
To Council our misplaced intellect
To Cleanse our evil thoughts.
Please, O Mother of the Universe
Be with us forever and ever
Forgive us our innocent trespasses
and lead us to our fulfilliment
For we are lost without Your light of love
Please, O Most Compassionate Mother
Please allow Your children to celebrate Your advent
Please Bless us.
Om Twameva Sakshat Shri Ganapati Shri Ganesha Namo Namah.
- Yogi Mahajan
- Issue 7 & 8
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
-2-
VOL.VI
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-3.txt 
 BIRTHDAY SPECIAL ISS UE
Shri Mataji's 71st Birthday Felicitation Ceremony
was held at Kala Mandir Hall at Calcutta on the
morning of 21st March 1994. All Her children had
gathered from all over the world to celebrate this
most important event of our era. General Joshi,
Chief of Army Staff specially flew in to felicitate our
Divine Mother.
It was the most touching ceremony, when our hearts
lept out to Shri Mataji, we truely became an ocean
of love. Everyone was drenched in joy of love. Shri
Mataji was very pleased with the great care and
affection the Calcutta collectivity had bestowed upon
all the guests. They had poured out their hearts in
every arrangement, love was that tangible......
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
-3-
VOL.VI - Issue 7 & 8
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-4.txt 
 71ST BIRTHDAY FELICITATION CEREMONY
SPEECH BY H.H.SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
CALCUTTA 21ST MARCH, 1994, (SYNOPSIS)
I am not at all aware how things are working out, how Sahaja Yoga is spreading
all over the world, how you people have come to Sahaja Yoga. It's a very special
time. It's the blossom time. In this blossom time, it is all organized that this should
happen. I am just a medium I think and not aware as to how things are working
out. Only thing my heart was filled with such feelings of gratitude to you that you
have taken to Sahaja Yoga. It's very difficult because it is a very subtle knowledge
and in this gross world where it has become even worse during modern times (Kali
Yuga). I never thought that I would create even 12 Sahaja Yogis. Now I know this
is the time. I didn't know then that this is the time, that all over the world people
will take to truth. Truth will prevail.
So much false-hood all around, in every walk of life, in every dimension of our
personality we accept all kinds of illusions. In this condition of illusory expectations
that there should be so many people who would want to know the truth, is the
most remarkable thing. To me it's a surprise.
Wherever there is this black art there will be poverty, like Kerala has black art,
in Bengal there is black art. The sooner this black art goes away, the better, because
not only they do something to you physically, mentally but to your Kundalini also
they harm. Also they harm you very much financially. They take money and people
have become very poor. But then somehow this love of Mother that Bengalis have.
Here a little girl is also a "Maa". Once a minister came to see me who was a
communist. He said "Mother I'm sorry. I was delayed because I went to the Kali
temple to worship." I said, "You are a communist, why are you worshipping at Kali
temple." He said, "What, am I going to forget Mother because I am a Communist.
I better give up Communism because my Mother is everything." I was surprised
at him that though he is a communist he believed in Mother. So the mother-hood
*is very much worshipped in Bengal and that is the basis of their very loving nature.
They are extremely tolerant people. You don't know how a Mother feels proud of
her children. It's a very deep feeling of your own growth, your own achievements
children have come up so much. So many poets, orators, musicians and
that
your
all areas of human endeavour, business men, beaurocrats. I'm surprised that how
they have accepted Sahaja Yoga so well, surrendered completely and have shown
such results, as if somebody has sparked them.
VOL.VI - Issue 7 & 8
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
-4-
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-5.txt 
 This power of Kundalini is within you. It is there, only we must utilize it. What covers
it, is your ego or your conditioning. Allow your Kundalini to grow, and it will really
show you how great and glorious you are. It is not me who is doing it. It is your
Kundalini which is working it out. One thing, she knows me. That's all. This
transformation that has taken place also shows your purva janma punyas and your
intelligence, the way you have accepted. Even Kabira got lost. He said, "How to
make them understand the whole worid is blind." All of them got fed up and said
better take samadhi, because these people are not going to take this sukshama
(subtle) knowledge. But today what you find, it's ready. This is the Blossom time
and to me its the joy of the Mother of seeing this world changing.
So many people thought about it that they want to have this kind of world, Buddha,
Mahavira, Christ, Krishna, Ram, Lao-tze everyone said the same, that we have to
achieve that world, that we have to enter into the Kingdom of God. I am surprised
and also so much gratified that you people have taken to it so seriously and you
are working it out in every country. If I could do it alone, why should I convert you
to Sahaja Yoga? It has to have channels, as pure as yourself. Otherwise it cannot
work out. That's how it is spreading.
You have all the powers. Try to assume those powers. Like a beggar is made a
King then he sits on the throne and still he's begging, then what is the use of making
him the King. Now you have entered into the Kingdom of God, have faith in that
and that you are all capable of transforming this world. You are the people who
are really chosen, so responsibility is created and in Sahaja Yoga you don't have
to do anything, pay or stand on your head, or fast or give up your family, nothing.
Only thing you must have is pure desire, which is the power of Kundalini and keep
your connection intact. Be collective and always think of others who have not got
it. Don't get angry with them. You must have patience. Have mercy on them and
with that mercy you will be surprised you can get as many people to Sahaja Yoga.
Another surprising thing is that in the West the people have become so innocent.
There are people who have become so sweet and so mild, so beautiful, so dynamic,
so affectionate, at the same time such compassion, such understanding. They are
all of such a high quality, angel-like people and I wonder how it has happened.
This was all there, only they got it. So I must congratulate you, instead of
congratulating me, because whatever I am, I have been like that. I have not achieved
anything. You have achieved and that's what I congratulate you for.
Many diseases have been cured. One gentleman who had undergone bypass
surgery was told that he would have to undergo anothet one. He prayed that
"Mother, please I don't want to have an operation." When he went for his check-
up they found that his aorta which was clogged, had opened out. He had become
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
VOL.VI - Issue 7 & 8
-5-
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-6.txt 
 a normal person. He became normal and even played tennis. Infact two doctors
who are not Sahaja Yogis have got their M.D. on Sahaja Yoga. It is happening
everywhere. People are getting cured, their mental health is better, family life and
jobs are better, their business is better. Relationships are very good but one thing
is there we must keep 'Shudh Iccha' (Pure Desire), means we must meditate. its
very important.
I really have no words to what you are telling about me. It reminds me that once
Rabindranath Tagore wrote a poem. The poem was so good that everybedy made
comments. He read it and he said, "I never knew I wrote all this." It is not what
I do that's so important. It is how you receive it and how you reciprocate. That
is important and that has happened in the Kali Yuga. I have to thank you again
and again. You are in for a very prosperous and beautiful life.
May God Bless You.
71ST BIRTHDAY PUJA
TALK BY H.H.SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
CALCUTTA 21ST MARCH, 1994. (SYNOPSIS)
Every year we have birthdays of various people and every year we make a vow
that this year I will not do this or I will not do that. This is a very good way of
seeing how far we have come in life. Many people who really have achieved a
very great height in their spiritual life did not need a Birthday, as they felt everyday
is a Birthday to start, to go ahead, to understand, to learn. Everyday is a new year
for them. In our own life we see that our surroundings change very slowly.
Sometimes it is shocking, sometimes you are surprised that how the surrounding
are not changing? But in a subtle way there is a tremendous change that is
happening within us and without. The whole atmosphere today is governed by
human beings. I don't know how far Paramchaitanya works it out, but it is for us
to open ourselves to new dimensions in our lives. For example, if we find through
our introspection, we locate that we still have these old subtle nonsensical things
still hanging around us, we don't have to vow for it. You have to just witness it,
and the destructive path it is taking you to, immediately you will give up. You don't
have to worry that you have to put a vow upon yourself because now you are
"Samarth', means you are absolutely empowered. Whatever you think is wrong, your
attention Itself on it will gradually remove the doubts.
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
VOL.VI - Issue 7 & 8
-6-
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-7.txt 
 About having those problems, those connections, conditionings and ego that are
lingering still, definitely you will drop them. With your attention it will run away. Then
you will realize that everyday your attention is getting purified, getting powerful, and
compassionate. Normally whatever reaction you have in your attention just disap-
pears and you start witnessing the whole thing and your power of attention through
that witnessing force acts, and it works. It works not only on you but on everything,
that surrounds you. Firstly through your meditation, in that state of meditation you
expand within yourself. You stay in the present. The other day somebody asked
me where was your last birthday, I forgot. Otherwise my memory is good. Perhaps
every time, every day you live in the present and you grow, so you forget, when
and where this growth has taken place.
My own growth has been like this, that everytime I go to a place, I find very nice
new people coming in and some of the horrible ones from the old lot disappearing.
It's something like when the tree grows, the leaves go on falling and new leaves
start coming. But in Sahaja Yoga it is something different. I find, that on the tree
of Sahaja Yoga very few leaves falls off, and you sometimes face a lush garden
of beautiful people. To me it's like a miraculous fire works. It starts like a small
line and then opens up into several beautiful patterns. It is impossible to envisage
or visualize what will happen to us, to Sahaja Yoga and to all of mankind I have
never learnt to imagine things, but the vision that you see is really remarkable,
that I see all Sahaja Yogis drenched in Divine Love and expressing themselves
in a very beautiful and very deep manner. This when it comes in, makes your
attention absolutely enrapt in such Divine Bliss that you forget that moment. One
of those moments are when you celebrate my Birthday.
I even forget how many years I have lived on this earth, Because as I told you
it does not leave any mark of time, of date, of years in that blissful state. As if
sometimes you can think that you went to see something beautiful like Taj Mahal,
without knowing what it is, and suddenly you find such a beautiful building.
Unexpectedly, you just get speechless. Invariably you forget the time at such a
moment. You will forget how you came there. All the story behind all that finishes
off as soon as you see the reality of the vision. This reality of the vision is something
beyond even my thinking and imagination.
I cannot even now sometime believe that there are so many Sahaja Yogis who
have got this subtle knowledge. I never knew that there were so many seekers
to begin with. I never knew that there were such subtle people on this earth. All
over the world wherever I went, suddenly I find facing so many beautiful seekers.
Time stops for that moment. Nothing is recorded except for the experience. This
experience is in an abstract form. You cannot describe. It is beyond words and
beyond any description. At that time you really become thoughtless and that is the
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
VOL.VI - Issue 7 & 8
-7-
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-8.txt 
 time we have to really enjoy.
The greatest curse of modern times is the watch, or the time we keep. All the time
we are just seeing the time. We have crossed the limits of time 'Kalateet'. Try to
understand why we have crossed because time moves according to us. You can
experience it. The other day I was coming from Delhi and in my household
everybody seems to be very particular about time. So they were after my life, come
along, we are getting late. When I reached there they said the plane is still waiting.
It was not necessary for you to hurry up. It will take at least 15-20 minutes for
you to go. Also the name of airport makes people really jumpy. They have to go
to the aeroplane is like as if some war is on. So far luckily I have never missed
a plane or a train in my life though I travel quite a lot. I have everytime found
that invariably the plane itself is waiting for me. Like once we were in Prague we
were supposed to go to Poland via Vienna. We had a great Sahaja Yogi who told
me that the plane will be leaving at 11 o'ciock. From the airport he rings me up
that the plane is leaving at 9.30. So I was ready, I just jumped into the car, we
reached the airport, we were late by 15 minute and the ground lady started shouting
at me. This Sahaja Yogi could not bear it, and felt that it was his mistake as he
had told me a wrong time, that's why this lady is shouting at my Mother. He couldn't
bear it. He was very unhappy. So we went into the aeroplane with this lady shouting
behind. We saw that the pilot and engineers were busy with some correction of
the machinery. This Sahaja Yogi was so upset that tears started rolling down his
eyes. They were sitting behind me and I turned around and told him, its alright,
don't worry.. He said, "No Mother because of me she could say all these things
to you. I can't bear it." And he could not stop crying. Within one minute the sky
which was absolutely clear was covered with big clouds like a huge big elephant
walking into the whole area. All the Sahaja Yogis who were standing on top of
the airport saw it happening. The whole sky became absolutely jet black. I
said, "See, the tears of this gentleman has such powers." Then the airport people
told us that this plane is out of order we have to get down. We got down and
came back to the lounge. Then he went to this ground hostess and told her, "Now
whom should we shout at. Now the plane is not going. Should we shout at you.
How dare you shout at my Mother?" But all the people at the airport who were
under the same regime style got such a fright. The manager said that for your
plane there is still five hours and we will give you permission to go out of the airport,
and he took me by special train. I o I went
out and did some shopping and when we came back all the airport staff was rather,
stunned by us that ours was the only plane that was leaving. The traffic had
stopped. When we walked down to board the plane the gentlemen there said,
"Mother can you help meI have a terrible back pain." Another Lady asked me
to put my hand on her shoulder which was paining. I put my hand on her shoulder
and she started feeling alright. Then I thought better board the plane and the
couldn't understand this reaction. So
-8-
- Isue 7 & 8
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
VOLVI
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-9.txt 
 same gentleman asked me to put my hand on his back. I said, "I have to board
the plane. He said, "I will walk with you." We walked together for about two minutes
and he said I'm alright. The whole atmosphere changed. It had such a tremendous
effect on these people who were under a regime, I was amazed how the tears
of this Sahaja Yogi had worked this wonder. Imagine the moment the tears started
rolling down. His eyes that moment just manifested a big drama and ultimately what
we found that people at the airport became extremely humble and respectful. When
we start thinking of time we have to understand that time is our slave. We are not
slaves of time. There are thousand and one stories I can tell you how by delaying,
or getting late in a place by not caring for the time I've seen such beautiful
manifestations, beautiful dramas, The Art of The Divine Power, that I was amazed
how people worry so much about the time.
If time is really necessary, if we are all watching our time every year as our birthday
and if you think that time is very important, it is in a way. In these modern times
we really need that time for meditation; for collective meetings and for Sahaja Yoga.
I know when there was the war of independence in this country where my parents
fought with all their "Tan, Man, Dhan" (body, soul and wealth), that time I
remembered how they never cared for anything. They went all out because it was
very important to get this country free from the clutches of the empire. This was
so important that they had to meet somebody at such a point, that man is supposing
escaping from the jail, they could not afford to just neglect that important time or
meeting because everything had become an emergency for them. Nobody told them
or gave them lectures. For them it was from inside. Today is the same situation.
It is an emergency. A very subtle emergency, that nothing is more important than
spreading Sahaja Yoga. If some people will miss it and not know about it, we will
be responsible for that. At the time of Christ, Buddha, there were no aeroplanes
to travel. There were not these loud speakers, or other communications and
televisions etc. All these things have come now, they have manifested now. It is
the work of Param Chaitanya, through scientists, and other knowledge all this
manifestation has taken place. Also these people didn't have to face people, nor
were they supposed to give realisation to people in such a big way. All these
inventions and what you see today as modern ventures which we have got, are
all for Sahaja Yoga.
Without Sahaja Yoga you cannot imagine what would happen to this world. The
first and foremost thing is that, we have no more peace within our hearts. We talk
of peace, and know of people who have got awards in peace, but have no peace
in their hearts. Unless and until we human beings have peace, there cannot be
peace in the whole world. It is we who create wars. It is we who do kinds of violence.
It is we who have the possibility of people getting into the Kingdom of God. So
peace can be only achieved by establishing peace in the hearts of the people,
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
-9-
VOL.VI Issue 7 & 8
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-10.txt 
 and that is only possibile when you achieve the state of thoughtless awareness.
You remain in the present and you will be amazed that there you will be standing
like a rock because you will have reality in your hand. You can work out the way
you like. Actually I don't work out anything whatsoever. It's the Param Chaitanya
which works it out. In the same way it will work for you also. But you must have
faith in yourself and absolute faith in Sahaja Yoga. Absolute. That's the only way
we can achieve that, many many people, most of the people of the world should
enter into the Kingdom of God. That's the most important thing. More than all these
worldly things, or nonsensical things.
The attention should be in how many people we are going to bring to Sahaja Yoga.
How many we are going to save? What are we going to do about it? When you
have to think about it every morning how can you remember the time and date.
When you are in emergency now and you knew this emergency is to be fulfilled
then how can you just pay attention to all worldly things, all worldly achievements.
That will take its own course you don't have to worry, it works out automatically.
Only thing is where you really need your own diversion, and your own focussing
is Sahaja Yoga, in and out. If we really want peace on this earth, if we want progress
for ourselves, if we want all kinds of physical, emotional and mental problems being
solved all for our good, why not we come to Sahaja Yoga where we don't have
to do anything, except for raising our Kundalini, meditating for very little time and
to achieve that state of joy.
Today my feelings are really full of joy, because now I can see how things are
happening, how one person can produce thousands and thousands of Sahaja Yogis.
I saw one miracle. I told once, that one seed has all the thousand trees it is going
to produce, and when I saw a new technique of tissue culture I was amazed to
see that on seed there were so many little little primules that had come out. In
the same way you are all capable. And you all can do it, but what is needed is
faith in yourself and also complete sincerity about Sahaja Yoga. If that happens
today you have really celebrated my birthday. If you think that my Birthday is
important, then for me very important is that everybody gets their spiritual Birthday.
May God Bless You.
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
VOL.VI- Issue 7 & 8
-10-
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-11.txt 
 To the honoured member of
the Petrovsky Academy of
Arts and Sciences
Most deeply respected Mrs. Nirmala Srivastava,
You as the only honoured member of our Academy amongst the
women of the planet earth, we heartily congratulate with a firm
entry into the new decade of your fruitful and creative work which
is aimed at the spiritual evolution of all the nations of the earth
in accordance with your highly moral teaching.
We especially value your efforts in the realm of strengthening the
friendship between two great nations India and Russia and wish
you success in the future in this noble field.
Vice President YURIY A. VORONOV
PREDICTION FROM NADI GRANTH
A transcript of what Shri Mataji said as She translated the Marathi version of Nadi
Granth in Sholapur, early 1982.
...here they have tried to establish how astrology is so correct, and whatever is
predicted is also coming correct. But, this is about two thousand years back, one
of the great astrologers of this place (not Sholapur but little downward, Karnataka)
he described about this thing. So clear-cut that, you'll be amazed, that he said that
this great yogi will come on this earth on the Meenarash (is the Pisces). I'm just
on the cusp of the Pisces and the Aries. But that's not so important. Then he
that, gradually, we'll start seeing miracles, from 1964 to 66. He says that, maybe,
little bit. But he says the real change, Manvantar in the age, the New Age, he will
start from 1970. And by 1980 it will take its grip. A!right? That time, by this new
method, the New Age will be formed and the old one, Vaivastha.., there's one
another, we have yugas, system of the yugas, will be over, and that Yuga is in
Kali yuga. So that's how Kali Yuga will be finished, from 1970. Will be, start receding
says
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
-11-
- Issue 7 & 8
VOL.VI
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-12.txt 
 back, Kali Yuga. And a New Age of active divinity will start, Krita Yuga. That time,
the Sun will rule in a new way, the Sun. The axis of Earth will be reduced and
the speed of the Earth will be reduced, gradually. That time a great Mahayogi will
be born, who will be completely Parambrahma. Completely Parambrahma. That's
Mel And He will possess all the powers to do or not to do. Means Mahakali and
Mahalaxmi, all the powers, all the powers.
Before this, people used to go into bhakti, devotion, jnana means reading, Patanjali
Yoga, and then they used to get their mokshas. But, this new method that this
Mahayogi will bring in, the pure power within you, your chakras will rise and as
a result the Kundalini Shakti will be awakened and will be enlightening. Because
of this new method of Maha Yoga you will see with your own eyes and you'll get
it in this body in your lifetime, the Realization. And you'll get the joy of Realization.
(Question: What's his name, Mother?) His name was Bhujender, Bhujender Kaka.
His name was Kaka Bhujender. Acharya Kaka Bhujender. Sattwacharya.
You don't have to sacrifice this body. Many people, great saints, sacrificed their
body in living condition, they went into a cave and shut themselves and died. That's
not necessary with this new method. You won't die, either. Means, you will achieve
your spirit. The realized souls, the saints who are realized, the Brahmananda; the
joy of the Brahma, by this new yoga. And they won't have to go into samadhi. Just
without doing anything like that, they will get their realization. And they will enjoy
the joy of Brahma. Sahaja samadhi. This is Sahaja samadhi according to... Among
millions, at first one will get realization. You understand your own positions, you
see the way sometimes we fritter away our atiention on nonsensical things, you
realize that among millions you are one. This is written here. We fritter away our
attention in useless things like my husband, my wife, my children, this, that, and
that. It is written here that among millions, one will be selected. Do you follow that
point?
Then all the human race can get over their death or their destruction by this
You'll have to lead a life, a married life, a normal life, may not marry but like a
normal householder. Otherwise you cannot get this yoga siddhi, like if you become
a big saint and a "sadhu baba" or a guru or something great, you cannot get it.
You have to be a normal householder, maybe married, may not be married it is
not the point, samsari, means living on this earth, in the "brass tacks" as you say.
Grass roots. Down to the basics. Then all your diseases will disappear so fast with
this yoga that you won't need anything like a hospital.
yoga.
In the beginning these great yogis - you people also - only by touching people
you can cure people. Is a fact. Like the Ardhanarinateshwara, is Shiva, that will
be the state. Human beings, their old age will disappear, their body will remain as
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
VOL.VI - Isue 7 & 8
-12-
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-13.txt 
 it is, and they will have a body which is divine. What a promise! So don't worry
too much about your bodily comforts. Alright? Then may some of you, if you want
you can fly in the air also (laughter) with that body. Also they can become subtle
and can enter into the body of
of others, to get them cured. That already you are doing. They will not be touched
by the fire and any weapons. Also you will be able to see these subtle things with
your own eyes. You can see them. This will not only happen in India, but all over
the world. India is a country of great punyas, that's why there are powers which
will look after the protection of this country, and this country will gradually rise.
that already you are doing enter into the body
He says that the Third World War . they may go for a third World War, and they
will have to suffer for it. After that this great Incarnation will interfere, and all the
countries will come together with the understanding of collective oneness. And they
will understand that war is so horrible. In a very big city (I don't know which one)
a conference of all the countries will be held. There not the politicians but the yogis
will direct them. Yogis ... he calls you yogis throughout. This may be the Third World
War we had with China recently; he says that because of China's aggressive policies
and the Third World War we'll have to bear a lot of problems, you see. But through
prayers, we'll be able to unite all the countries. By the new inventions of Science,
the Divine knowledge and the Science will become One. With the science, we'll be
able to establish the existence of God and of Spirit. That is how there will be no
difference, there will be co-ordination between, corelationship between the science
and the Spirit, or the Divine knowledge. Already we are getting it because you see
on My photograph people get vibrations, it's a science, on the television, mantras,
all that, if you start curing through scientific methods, you are also using the science
for that purpose. You can prove that these things can be carried by magnetic forces,
by sound, all these things. Then he says that because of ignorance and because
of maya, yogis had to suffer a lot to become collectively conscious, brahmaika, to
feel the Brahma. But now - and they had to do lot of penance, that was so difficult
- you'll become "sahaja". This is the word, sahaja. sa-ha-ja prapta hua, sahaja. And
n't have to give up anything to achieve Brahma.
you don
In the new yoga system, when it will manifest in the different countries, in the New
Age, the administration will be governed by people who have their own powers of
yoga, depending on how far you are in your yoga. And their qualities as Yogis.
That will be the determining factor. They will be able to create a society which will
completely fulfil their desires and their necessities, and people won't need to have
money accumulated with them. The poverty and sickness will be completely finished
and in their absence the country, the samaj, the society will be healthy and restful
and without any anger.
They have also given the name of Jacqueline Murray, she's an American lady,
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
VOL.VI - Isue 7 & 8
-13-
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Jacqueline Murray. This woman had predicted about Me, and she had said that
a great personality will be born in India, a lady; she said about 1924, 1 was born
in 1923. "About", correct, you see.
But Cheiro has said that by 1980 the new Advent will start a New Age. There's
a difference of ten years.
There's a lady called Alice Bailey, she's supraconscious I believe, and in supra-
conscious state she has said that there will be a new yoga which will come, by
which people will be connected to the Holy Ghost.
There's a danger of a third world war, and is inevitable, but it may be avoided if
people develop love for each other with this yoga.
Now this is another thing, hah, this one is a tape about what Gyaneshwar has said
about this new age, what will happen. Translation of that is with me but it is in
Marathi, I will have to translate it into English. That how people will become realized
and what will happen, how they will love each other, all these things he has said
it, Gyaneshwar, and it is sung in this record...
EXTRACT FROM NADIGRANTHA
This is an extract from the Nadigrantha by Mr. Shantaram Athvale. In this book he
gives informations about several different nadigranthas which are the great, ancient
books on astrology like Bhrigu Samhita, Satya Nadi, Kak Nadi, etc. In this particular
extract the author refers to the writings from Kak Nadi written by Kakayyar Bhujander
who was a great astrologer and seeker who lived nearly 2000 years ago.
"While Jupiter is in Pisces a great Yogi will incarnate on the Earth. By 1970 it will
have become quite evident to many people that a new era will have started. Kaliyuga
will end and Krutayuga will start. The axis of the Earth will depress and the Earth's
orbit will come closer and closer to the Sun. Human life will undergo a complete
revolution. A great Yogi will incarnate at this time. This Yogi will be the Incarnation
of Parabrahma (!!) and will have all the divine powers.
Until this time a yogi or devotee could achieve the bliss of Moksha and find the
ultimate meaning of his life only by following the path of devotion, knowledge and
Patanjali Yoga. But he would have to go through severe penance in order to awaken
the sleeping powers of various chakras of his body and finally enlighten the
Kundalini Power.
By the new method of yoga devised by the great Yogi, human beings will be able
to attain the joy of Moksha within one lifetime. It would no longer be necessary
- Isue 7 & 8
-14-
VOLVI
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-15.txt 
 to sacrifice one's body or to die in order to achieve Moksha. The Brahmananda
which so far only great saints had been able to experience and then only by entering
into the Samadhi state at the point of death, due to his new type of yoga could
be achieved by ordinary human beings without entering Samadhi state while dying.
In the beginning it would be possible for one person in crores to attain this Yoga
and Moksha. However, after some time the whole human race with the help of this
Yoga will be able to defeat itself. People won't have to worry about food, shelter
or clothing. While living ordinary lives, people will achieve Yoga - Union with God.
There will be no necessity for hospitals, as there will be no diseases.
In the beginning the great Yogi will be able to heal diseases with a mere touch.
Old age with it's destruction of the body will not exist and people will possess
heavenly bodies.
The world will have to suffer the consequences of a third world war. This world
war would end by interference of the Great Yogi. In the end all the nations of the
world will come together with the feeling of oneness. They will agree on the
destructiveness of war. There will be a great international conference in a big city
of the world. Yogis will lead this conference rather than intellectuals or politicians.
Then the world will recover from the aftermath of war. The whole of the humanity
will understand the importance of prayer and all the nations will unite together.
Due to new scientific discoveries, science and religions would become one. With
the help of the science the existence of God and the Soul could be proved. The
veil of ignorance and Maya would be drawn aside and Brahmananda, Moksha which
could previously only be attained by yogis as a result of very hard work and severe
penance would become easily available to many human beings.
In this new era every person would have his position in the system according to
his individual qualities and merit. It will be possible to fulfill people's needs and
desires and so it will no longer be necessary to accumulate money. Without poverty
and diseases society will be healthy and carefree.
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
VOL.VI - Issue 7 & 8
-15-
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-16.txt 
 SHRI MATAJI'S HOROSCOPE
GIVEN DURING THE AUSTRALIA TOUR, 1991
Shri Ganeshaya Namah, I seek the blessings of Lord Shri Ganesha while making
the comparative study and analysis of horoscopes of different Divine personalities
a very pleasant and astounding observation has been made. This study has been
described in great detail with specific analysis of the horoscope of Shri Mataji
Nirmala Devi. The Divine personalities studied are Lord Krishna, Lord Buddha, Lord
Christ, Prophet Mohammed, Guru Nanak Dev, Shri Chaitanya Maha-Prabhu, Adi
Shankarancharya and Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi. The data on the horoscopes for
all others is taken from notable horoscopes by Shri B. V. Raman, the world famous
astrologer.
It is observed from the various planetary combinations that the following combina-
tions are very rare and are indicative of the Divinity of the person. These are:
1. Gajkesari Yoga or 5th, 9th position of the Moon and Jupiter. This indicates past
Punyas, Punya Sanchaya or highly religious past lives.
2. Saturn aspects the Lagna, it shows the concern for the Masses and the ability
for Tapasya - Penance.
3. Ketu the Mokshakarak planet should be in the 9th Dharmasthana showing the
Dharma that is established within and not outwardly and the truthfulness. This planet
gives the capacity to go all alone.
4. Lagna being aspected by Jupiter and Lagnesh aspected by Jupiter is an added
strength giving one the capacity to become World Guru (Jagatguru).
5. Venus or Mercury is the ruling planet in all the cases. If both are there it is
excellent because both the planets are Dnyan Karak.
It may be noted that these combinations are present in the horoscopes of all the
above mentioned personalities in different quantums (Ansha). In case of Shri Mataji
all these combinations are present in full strength. No. 4 combination and No. 5
combination is particularly observed to be very strong in case of Shri Mataji as
compared to others. Shri Mataji is born in Gemini Lagna (whose Lord is Mercury)
with Moon is Bharani Nakshatra (whose Lord is Venus), which means She is under
the ruling aspect of Mercury and Venus.
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
-16-
VOL.VI Issue 7 & 8
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Shri Mataji is born,
13 years and 11 month balance of Venus Dasha.
Meaning Pleasant and Happy Childhood
03- 1923
21 -
11.13
21 - 02 - 1937
Thereafter Sun's period for 6 years
Indicates Tapa-Period; spiritual and
Political activity of Intense Nature
6.
02 - 1947
21-02
Thereafter Moon Period for 10 years
Indicating clear headedness and deep
contemplation of Mass enlightenment
(Political and Spiritual Activity)
10
02 - 1953
21
Then Mars period of 7 years
Indicating Travelling and lot of changes
7.
21 - 02 - 1960
Then Rahu's period of 18 years
Rahu is a Divine planet giver of Intricate
knowledge of Brahma. Inner soul searching,
Search for Enmass awakening
18
21 - 02 1978
Then Jupiters' period of 16 years
spreading of Sahaja Yoga - the Guru
principle throughout the world
16
21 - 02 - 1994
Thereafter Saturn will govern for 19 years
when it will spread Sahaja Yoga in the
whole world. Saturn means the masses, the
Virata and Shri Mataji will witness Kalki
(Mercury) Power manifesting over the whole
world.
19
21 - 02- 2013
According to the birth horoscope and Sahaja Horoscope of 5-5-1970, Jupiter passed
through Libra. Jupiter will again pass through Libra in 1993 and Sahaja Yoga will
blossom in the entire world.
-17-
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
VOL.VI - Isue 7 & 8
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-18.txt 
 Shri Mataji is born with Rahu Nakshatra in Ascendant Mercury (Gemini) and Moon
in Bharanj (Venus) Nakshatra, clearly indicates that Rahu means Films, TV, Radio,
(that is ether principle) and Venus means Music, film personalities, artists can help.
Mercury is the ruling planet of the present day politics (Sahaja can enter through
present political system).
In the early Indian Politics at the time of Jawahar Lal Nehru and Mahatma Gandhi,
the ruling planet was Venus. Thereafter the ruling planet of Indian politics has been
Mercury as all the important political events took place on Wednesday. It may be
noted here that Shri Mataji has both Venus and Mercury as Her ruling planets. Thus
She has full sway over the past and future of Indian Politics.
This is further confirmed from the horoscope of 5.5.1970 (Sahaja horoscope) which
is almost identical with Shri Mataji's horoscope, having Gajkesri with Jupiter in Libra,
Saturn aspecting Sahaja lagna, Sun exalted. From this we see that from 15 August
1990, Sun's period is up until 15 August 1996 during which all great souls will be
attracted to Sahaja Yoga and have their inner (spiritual ascent) purification and then
from 15 August 1996 for 10 years the Moon's Dasa is starting that is it goes to
the Masses, and the work is completed up until 15th August 2006.
Mer
Ven
Sal
Moon
1 Moon
Rahu
Rahu
Mars
Gemini
Sun
Mer
16
Л
Sun
12/
Jupiter
Ketu
11 Mer
| Jupiter
Ketu
7.
/10
Sahaja Yoga Horoscope - 05.05.1970 at 5.30
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
VOL.VI - Isue 7 & 8
-18-
Issue 7 &
10,
www.
wwww.
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-19.txt 
 1. Three planets Saturn, Sun, Moon are Ucch Abhilashi = Exaltion
2. Saturn, Jupiter are retrograde (Vakri) = Double strength
Venus is totally free from any malefic aspects giving her the name of Nishkalanka
Avatar with (10-5) Divine combinations, just pointing to us who She is.
I bow to the Almighty God Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi who is the Nishkalanka Avatar
of which our Puranas are speaking from centuries.
Lalit Bhandari
TALK BY H.H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
BEFORETHE BALLET BY (KALA KSHETRA)
CALCUTTA 20-3-1994 (SYNOPSIS)
Here, where the River Ganges meets the great sea, there has been such a big
manifestation of artists and art of very delicate nature. Firstly, Bengalis are extremely
emotional, lovable, loving people. They are not materialists. They care more for
human beings, and for the human feelings. As I've told you always, the greatest
novelist I've ever known was Sharat Chandra Chatterjee who was the one who would
just touch your heart and make you understand. Every subject he has dealt and
his art of writing is so beautiful, as if he understands human beings and their
problems and how with love, you can solve it.
Sahaja Yoga is very close with any art, because it is the expression of the heart.
When the imagination of an artist reaches the reality then that artist becomes Sahaja
automatically. We have had many artists and poets like that who have through their
imagination reached the depth of reality, and that's how he brought on all the
essences by which they can cure many things which they cannot cure with anything
else;-social problems, political problems, which looks so formidable are shown
through their delicate brush or their delicate writings. You can solve these problems
through the suggestion they have given through various arts, is something very
remarkable.
Drama plays a very big part in our cultural life. It's coming from ancient times. They
say that the drama, the natya shastra started in India, when Arjuna was going for
war, his wife asked him to bring a puppet. So this is the first sign that in this country
there were artists who used to act like pantomimes or dramatists. This natya shastra
started in our country long time back.
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
VOL.VI - Issue 7 & 8
-19-
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-20.txt 
 The greatest thing of Bengalis is that they are very patriotic people, and culturally
they are very Indian. They cannot take to any other culture very easily. Where the
women are respected as Mother, even the little girls are called as Maa. This sangam
that has come here is really a very big venture for the upliftment of an artist.
Otherwise we are taking to the very cheap type of artistic impression in our country.
We have taken to something that requires no art, some sort of an acrobatic show
that we have on the stage, by which we think that we have made the stage very
active. All this kind of a nonsensical stuff is still coming in our big cities, and films.
This nonsense has to be outwitted by real art.
I am very happy such a Sangam has been established, which will definitely give.
(atleast our children), the real sense of the expression of our manifestation of joy
and happiness and all the things that they have to face in life.
This "Jatayu moksha" is a very nice subject, it suggests a bird, a condor fighting
Ravana who was such a mighty person. But he went and fought to save Sitaji.
His way expresses a person who believes in truth, honesty, respect of women, who
fights such a mighty person. He knew he would be lost, but he fights, and he gets
very badly injured but he is not bothered about that. That injury was there till Shri
Rama gave him moksha, shows that all his sufferings were finished once he got
moksha.
In Sahaja Yoga you don't have to do all this. You don't have to get injured, or
fight. But in a way there is a big fight within yourself and that fight is that when
we try to see ourselves as something very great, very egoistical and then we start
fighting with our ego. Like Jatayu which is the feeling of righteousness. This
righteousness gets injured many a times. How Sahaja Yoga has come to show that
you don't have to fight. You have to just ask for your realisation. It is the time that
has brought this for you. I don't know I should have any credit for it. Anybody could
have done it who would have been born in this time, it has happened. So you
have to know that already the moksha that so many Sahaja Yogis achieved, they
will enjoy the drama much more than anything else, because they will realize that
they had struggled. They had to struggle with themselves for their seeking.
Ultimately they got their realization. This will definitely give you greater hope that
we can spread Sahaja Yoga all over.
Art is a part and parcel of a human being, is the potential of a human being. We
have to develop art because Sahaja Yoga is nothing but to enjoy the Kingdom of
God and if you do not have art, what will you enjoy. But it has to be pure art.
Purity is important and in Indian culture purity and respect is maintained even till
today.
VOL.VI - Issue 7 & 8
-20-
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
