THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE VOL VI ISSUE 3 & 4 CONTENTS Page 1. Prayer to Shri Mataji 2 2. Shri Mahakali Puja - Paris 3. Shri Ganesha Puja - Delhi 6. 4. Shri Krishna Puja - Hatnikund 11 5. Christmas Puja 16 Ganapatipule Edited by: Yogi Mahajan - 9 Bhagyachintamani Society, Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411 029 Printed by: Computex Graphics, 112 High Tech Indl. Centre, Caves Road, Jogeshwari (E), Bombay 400 060 Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VI - Issue 3&4

 PRAYER TOSHRIMATAJI shriMother, Please give us Your love so wehavecompassion for one another. Make us humble so we are sweet to eachother. SO Giveusa sense of respect so we donot belittle others. Grueus the conafidence to act fromour hearts. Make us completelycontent so that we desire only the joy of our ascEnt. who You are. And Mother forgive usfor weeannot comprehend1 Give us the sensivity to perceive the subtle. Let us feel Youu in our bearts. Mother we will cleanour heartsfor You. Amen. JaishriMataji Divine Cool Breeze. Vol. VI-Issue 3&4

 MAHAKALI PUJA TALK HER HOLINESS SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI 11.07.93- Paris (Synopsis) Today we have decided to have the puja of the Devi. This time we are nottalking about Adi Shakti, about Kundalini, or about Saraswati, Mahalakshmi. We are talking aboutthe Mahakali. That's the Goddess which is the first onewhich comes firstand establishes Shri Ganeshain the form of Gauri. She is the complete form of Mahasarswati and Mahalakshmi. Outof Heronly these energies emit. So She's the one who is the powerof desire of God and within us also, She creates desires. These desires within us start emitting outside and we develop a kind of a reaction to all desires. The first and foremost desires., the most primitive, is to feed yourself, and this is given to us by the Goddess. It is very important that we should feed ourselves sufficiently enough to exist on this earth, and also we have seen that when this kind of desire grows very much more than normal, then you become slaves of this desire and any amount of food cannot satisfy you. But this desire starts acting through your ego so it satisfies you. And alsothose people who are manufacturing food orwho are supplying food in hotels and all that, now how to satisfy your desires. So they bring it in a way, show it around, place it before you so that you approve of it, . and then they serve it. They know how to befool you and you feel quite happy also. So this desire gets completely controlled by your ego: And when it becomes a kind of a collective desire and a collective ego expression, then you become like gluttons,. sophisticated. Of course, ifyourego is not therethen people would like to see to please others by feeding them. This desire reacts and then the new desire come in through the blessings of Mahakali-that you like to see others eating the food. You enjoy when others eat the food cooked by you, served by you, given by you. Youjust want to watch. This gives you satisfaction. But food, any extent you may go, you will never be satisfied. Now in the western life today, it has become very important to ask the child everyday, "What will you have ?" In olden days the food was cooked for all the family. Butnow you must ask the child, "What will you have?" than the child will say, "I'll have this". Nowsupposing you don't have thatin the fridge, you are finished. Howwill you please that boy in his ego because he wants a particular thing? So gradually we build up even the ego of our children. We have to say, "This is cooked, this is nice, and you eat this." It's the duty of the parents not to allow children to grow their ego by what they want. You should know what they haveto have. Soactually the blessings of the Devi on this point is that She gives you a desire that you should serve others. Alsa you then get concerned about people who are starving, want to find out why they are starving. Anotherextreme of this could be that some people think that they should not eat somuch, a kind of a sacrificing nonsense. Whatever one has to eat, oneshould eat. There is no wisdom in this kind of austerity. And when people enterinto this kind of austerity, then they have sufferings and troubles and such people become extremely ascetic and hot tempered. So a person who is hungry is as bad a person who is overfed. I think hungry is worse. The second desire that comes to you is that everyone should love you. This comes because it makes you a good persor, You know that everybody likes goodness, so people try to be good to Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VI - Issue 3&4

 others, nice to others. By pleasing others they think others will like them very much, again out of bounds and then all the time you try to please others so that you become absolutely slavish. You become so artificial that people can make out that there is nothing natural in this person, he is just trying to please us. If you please another one with a detached manner, not expecting anything thatshould be done for you or that could be achieved through that pleasing, is very pure pleasing and is very good. But supposing you try to please others only just to take advantage of that person, then you develop hypocrisy of the worsttype, and you get lost. People mock atyou, laughatyou, they are neverpleased. They know that you are a hypocrite and you are doing it for some sort of an advantage or an exploitation. You are not doing it because you to be good really, to be nice. A person wiho is good automatically pleases others, but he does'nt try to please. He is just, his nature is such, his temperament is such that he just pleases people. Nowwhat does the Devido ? Shebrings out the truth before them. Sheshows that what you have been doing for a particularexploitation does'nt work out. Up to a point it does, then Sheexposes them. The exposure starts and with that exposure, they are surprised, "How am lexposed? How am I caught ? How do people know ?" This is the job of the power of Mahakali. She exposes all but itdevelops want that is wrong, falsehood and untruth. Then the third desire people have is to possess material things from which materialism has come. But there is no end to it, because they have no satisfaction in getting one thing... and you cannot enjoy anything thatyou get. This is also human tailing and this human failing creates economics. Economics is created because wants in generalare not satiable. Sowe go on jumping from one thing to another and then become slaves of enterpreneurs.. So much so that you lose your individuality completely. People do it because they are brainless. But for Sahaja Yogis, the Mahakali powerworks and She teaches them, 'All right, this dress suits you, have this one, and it's the best for you. Once for all, your lifelong problemis solved'. The desire is there to impress others with outside things like dress, hairstyles, and other fads. So this kind of stupidity comes in aur heads when we start using our ego. With ego a person becomes absolutely stupid, It is really difficult to tell people to do right things, but wrong thing people take to like that! Forexamplel told everyone that you put oil-if notevery day, just before bath-lots of oil in your head and wash. Now I find many people getting bald, but they didn't put the oil. What can I do about it? Sucha simple thing they would not believe - that you need something for your nourishment. But they will do something which is absurd, nonsensical, withouteven thinking what is going to harm us. Here the Mahakali, what does She do ? She punishes you. Your body is punished. Ifyou wear very tight clothes, you develop problems on your legs. Ifyouwearholey pants, then you getcramps. Anything you do abnormal, you have to pay for it. First you have to pay for doing it, then you have to payfor itphysically. . So many things can be avoided if we just have a simple life. The Mahakali principle in us raises us higher and higher. Despite that, we are pulled down. Then this Mahakali, She comes forward and shows what wrong we have done, how we have gone wrong, how we have missed the point. Then another thing She does, which is very beautiful - She creates an illusion, to test your intelligence,to test your sensibility.. Bhranti Rupena Samsthita. She makes a Bhranti in your head, illusion. Soyou become illusive, or others become illusive, or a situation becomesillusive. And you are lostin it. Then youreally understand that, 'It's awrong thing Ihave done'. This Mahakali power puts this ego right by creating illusion, Bhranti. And this is responsible for many illusions we run after- it's a mirage. Once we are satisfied within ourselves, then we don't run after mirages. Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VI - Issue 3&4 4.

 This illusion, if it is not created, people would be so egoistical that the whole world would be finished. So this is the great work of Mahakali power within us, that She creates illusions. Many people talk about maya. This is Mothers' maya. This is maya, that is maya. It's the work of Mahakali. Shewants to testyou. butin Sahaja Yoga, it's not such a strong one. So to test Sahaja Yogis also, this Mahakali helps you. Sothis is how the illusion corrects you. If there is noillusion, you would never be corrected directly. Supposing I say, "Don't do this." You may not like it. Of course, mostly you like, butsometimes you don't. And then the illusion works and then you realise, "Where was I and where arn I now? Ishould not have done this.. How is it that I have landed into this problem? What has made me so stupid ?' This is something which She does. Another is, She's the one who relaxes you completely. When you are tired and fed up, when you don't know what to do, then She makes you sleep. All day's work you do, ultimately the Mahakali power acts on you, and She makes you sleep, sleep like a child. At that time, all wrong we have doneto ourselves and to others is forgiven. In Herlap we sleep nicely, quietly, and all ourproblems are solved. Inthose dreams, when you are, She brings forth solutions to you. Somany people told Me that 'Mother, You came into my dream and told me that this is the medicine you should take. You came in my dream and told me that this particulartype of life will suit you.' They see Me clearly coming, but there it is not whole of Me but.. the Mahakali powers act. tnto very deep sleep you are, it is called, at the Sushupti. There She appears, in the dream She guides you and tells you. But the greatest thing that Shedoes is give you the sense of chastity and security. When the children are born they have a sense ofchastity, shame, decency, decorous behaviour. Butgradually when they see others misbehaving, theystart misbehaving. Tothem decency becomes a bondage. But naturally She's there to tell you that this is indecent, you should'nt do it, this is wrong. Butas you grow up and mature, you start disrespectingyourchastity, and you start becoming like immature, stupid people. All this if it's understood through meditation, the Mahakali helps you a lot, because She is the one who creates the proper passage for the Kundalini to rise. Mahakali is the same as the Kundalini because She is the residual energy of Mahakali power. Full of Vidya. But the function is different. The function of Mahakali is to protect you, guide you, give you wisdom. And the function ofthe Kundalini is to clense you, to clearitout, not to play about with you, to forgive you and help you to grow properly Now in your life as Sahaja Yogis, you will see how Mahakali helps you in every way. It is so interesting to watch Herwork-how She brings forth all kinds of satisfaction to you. The greed, the temptations and the temper goes away. The most helpful thing She does is that you get rid of your bad habits-absolutely, automatically in the light of the Mahakali power, you do not wantanything destructive to be practised. If you have been practising anything destructive, you try to get rid of it. It's the Mahakali powerwithin you which is awakened, does all these things. And She has made you so beautiful, so angelic. By Her corrections, and by Herillusions, She has made you like this. So don't get so attached to money, to greed, to lust- all these things which are responsible for putting you down. Also possessiveness for children, husband and matter. You just start understanding that the joy is in sharing. Youwantto share everything with others, and thatsharing starts when these Mahakali powers start giving you blessings ofjoy, of sharing, of being collective, of being pure. These blessings come to you from the Mahakali power. So today we are going to worship that Mahakali power. May God bless you. Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VI - Issue 3&4 5,

 GANESHA PUJA TALK HER HOLINESS SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI 5.12.93- Delhi (Synopsis) First thing after the creation of this earth, Shri Parmatma Shri Adi Shakti thought that purity and holiness (Pavitrata) should pervade and it is only afterthis that the "Chaitanya" will be activated in the atmospherre. Now this Param Chaitanya is presenteverywhere but it can be active only if it takes a form within you. Ifyou are not pure or yourthoughts are not pure oryouare on a different plane, then you cannotgo deepinto your being. This "subtlety"which you have received in a very Sahajway, is the handiwork of Shri Ganesha. Shri Ganesha is the donor of Param Chaitanya and it is He who is present in Chaitanya form on every chakra. It is impossible for the Kundalini to rise, unless and until all the Chakras become pure and holy, and even if it manages to rise, it will keep on falling down again and again. There is a Mother and son relationship between the Kundaliniand Shri Ganesha. All of you know rabath and as She scrubbed Herself, from the dust this story that when Shri Parvati had gone f which was full of vibrations, She created Shri Ganesha, who was made to sitoutside. Shri Ganesha was created by Shri Adi Shakti alone and Shri Sadashiva had no hand in it. From this you willeasily understand how St. Gabriel came to Virgin Mary and told herthat from your womb, "the saviourof the world" is going to be born. Ordinarily, people feel that the unwed woman is a greatest sinner, if she is carrying a child. But for Indians, who can easily accept the story of the creation of Shri Ganesha by Shri Parvati alone in the absence of Shri Sadashiva, this is not difficult. This is how, even Shri Jesus Christwas created. Forthe Foreigners, to acceptand understand this is noteasy, because they equate all men with human being, and eventodaythey are deep in controversy about whatthey referto as 'Immaculate Conception'. Sahaja Yogis have seen a lot of miracles, performed by the Chaitanya, and its effect has rubbed off on you and your attention has been raised to the world. The world thatwe see today is 'Maya' (illusion), butalso that there is a world of Truth (Satya) beyond it. They can know the truth on their finger tips that Shri. Ganesha is present. WhenI went to Greece, I saw that the Premordial Mother, the Adi Shakti had incarnated there as "Athena", and that they had built a temple for Her in Persepolis and outside it they had inscribed that here present is a "Child God". No one knows about this, as to who this 'Child God' is since so many years have passed. Invaders destroyed all their heritage and traditions. Then we went to place where there wasa loose circular slab of stone (like a nabhi), from where there was a flow of strong vibration, and behind it we found a "Svayambhu" of Shri Ganesha. Yet, after this some people did come forward who had their attention on religion, and they felt that religion should be re-established in the world, and that they should be brought up to the level of Vol. VI - Issue 3&4 Divine Cool Breeze

 purity, that when itwas time for their salvation, they would be ready for it. That is why, they had so far paid more attention on such things. They had earlier received the ten commandments from Moses, and byobeying them, they wanted to keep themselves in such a condition as to be ready for relf-realization. In ourcountry also, Guru Nanakand othergreatgurus worked hard for the same thing, thatmankind should observe"dharma", and get theirbalance and thatthey should earn only merits (Punyas) and not gather sins (Pap). Shri Ganesh's work was different. By dent of his own powers, He observes purity. His greatest power is that of"innocence". His head of an elephant suggests that He has no ego and superega. He is a child, an eternal child. Jesus Christ wasHis incarnation in this world. With the help of science, we have been able to prove this, that Shri Ganesh is a power, an energy, and when He takes a shape, it is in the form of Shri Ganesh. Itmeans that only in a heart which is pure, gentle innacent, simple, full of faith, that the power of Shri Ganesh can be awakened. Without the help of Shri Ganesh, Kundalini just cannot be awakened. Kundalini is the Gauri Shakti and at every momentofits ascent Shri Ganesh is there to protect it. Not only that, butafterthe Kundalini pierces through each Chakra, it closes that Chakra, so that the Kundalini cannot slip down again. Now, within us Shri Ganesh is situated at the Mooladhar Chakra, That is the reason why many people have made this mistake, because in Mooladhar which is trangular in shape, only the Kundalini resides, and it is underthis, on the Mooladhar Chakrathat Shri Ganesh is present, and you all are aware whatare his different functions. You have seen some of my photographs in which Shri Ganesh is standing behind and above me. Similarly, He stands for other "Devtas". In India, most of the people are aware about the power ofchastity of Shri Ganesh: and theyrealizethattheyshould alsoobserve chastity forthemselves. The foreigners howeverdo notthink that way. For them desire of sensuality is important. Indians are aware about this, and even ifa few of them do not observe the purity and chastity atleast they act thatthey do. By this, there is one advantage that atieast the cancer of immorality does not openly spread in the Society. In foreign countries, they feel that they are doing some great work-some sortof a adventure, and are quite proud about it. According to Indians, it amounts to foolishness. Ifyou go to America, you will see that Shri Ganesh is conspicuous by His absence. Itis only after the destruction has setin, they havestarted to realize thatthey should observe chastity and thattoo this is felt only among the Sahaj Yogis. The greatest quality of Shri Ganesh is that he is innocent. When you are innocent, you become simple and pure being. Christ has said that when itwill be your time for salvation, you will become like a child. Besides the other powers of Shri Ganesh, itwill be the power ofinnocence alone, which will work at the time of self-realization. The intellectuals cannotunderstand why Shri Ganesha is our special devta. The problem is that until and unless they become subtle they cannot know that all the deities are within us. Now Shri Ganesha has 4 hands and carbon atom has 4 valences. When you see the carbon atom from the left, you see the "Swastika": from the right you see the "Omkar" and when you see it from downwards, you see the sign of "alpha and omega". Jesus Christ has said that, "I am the alpha and the omega"- alpha means the begining and omega means the end. The symbols of alpha and omega (as they are written) are found on the atom. WhenI told all this to the foreigners, in allearnest Vol. VI - Issue 3&4 Divine Cool Breeze

 they started to do research on this. They took the photographs of the carbon atom from 3 different angles, and found this exactly asI had described. From this it is proved that Shri Jesus Christwho said this is verily Shri Ganesha, verily the Omkara, verily the Swastika. Even Hitler used the symbol of Swastika. Now the Swastika which is clock-wise (where itmoves in that direction) stands for innocence and progress, whereas the Swastika which he used had its movement an anti- clockwise direction, and that stands for destruction. Thus, when the energy moves anti-clockwise, it causes a lot of problems, and such a person can getinto various types of uncurable diseases. Yesterday there was a man who came here with the disease of muscles which had started working. Slowly the muscles become weakerand weaker and this is known as Myelitis. This problem is caused when the energy of Shri Ganesha starts moving in the opposite direction (anti-clockwise). Same was the condition of Hitler, when he tried to use the power of Shri Ganesha by using the symbol of Swastika. Astencilwas used to prepare this symbol, and so long as itwas used properly, he met with success, but later on, as soon as the stencil which was used, was turned the other way round and made the Swastika move in an anti-clock direction, he encountered his downfall. Itis truth that it is this wrong use of the symbol, which is responsible for his complete disaster. In Pune, Ihave publicly told the people three or four times to respect Shri Ganesh, do righteous work before Him. Hedoes not like anywrong doings, any thing which is not pious. Tilak had started the worship of Shri Ganesha which spreads over ten days. ButwhatI saw in Pune, truely shocked me. Before the worship of Shri Ganesh, they play vulgar songs, and perform vulgar dances, women dress up indecently, there is a flow of liquor and excessive use of cigarettes etc. Shri Ganesha has the vehicle of victory and so (Jaydul Vahan) I told them that you should fear the wrath of Shri Ganesha. I had also told them in my lectures that this is the meaning of earth element, and if you do not observe protocols there will be an earthquake. That is exactly what happened. On the day of Ganpati Visarjan, all those whowere dancing, in their drunken frenzy found thatall their lands had sunk. We think that all this is happening in the West, so "What is wrong"; without realizing that the force of destruction that sets in is allpowerful-the destruction starts from within an individual. Sitting from here, we cannotfathom the strength of this destructive energy. More than 65% of people are suffering from uncurable diseases. Diseases like Schizophrenia and other unheard of diseases are so widespread that we cannoteven imagine about them. Here, we have all sorts of bacterias, viruses, germs; dirt and grime, but the human beings are clean. Togo against Shree Ganesha, means to do sinagainst the Mother. All this started when dirty people like Freud, came and spoke againstmorality and replaced Jesus Christ, in the minds of the people; who started to worship him. It is besides the point that he died a horrible death, suffering from cancer. By putting your "Shri Ganesh" right, all psychosomatic diseases which appear incurable, can be easily cured. He is a symbol. When things cannot be expressed in words then a symbol is created. Today, some feel that when thesymbols are made, they aremadeby imagination and then one gets lost in them and tend to think in that way, but in Sahaja Yoga, we a reality. Ahuman being has a limited mind and vision, He has to accept that he has to change his stand, if he has to perceive reality as it is, andexperience what he has notexperienced before. In his limited human consciousness, he cannot see the truth. Thatis why, itis important to know and worship Shri Ganesha. Till Shri Ganesha is established in Delhi, the problems, especially political, canprove that these symbols are Divine Cool Breeze 8. Vol. VI - Issue 3&4

 we need pure simple people with child-like innocence. People say that cannot be solved. Forthis how can such people carry outadministration, where aresuch people now? Todaythere are such corrupt people at the helm of affairs, they cheatatevery step, because theyare basically insecure people, they do not realize that the real wealth is his God Alnighty. Ifyou are Sahaj Yogis, you must meditate daily, first on the left channel, then on the right channel and then on both the channels. For the left sideelements make use of lightelementwhich is Ganesh tatva and its work is to remove the darkness. With that our food intake and our digestive system will work well, More than the way we take care of ourexternal body by working it and tending to it daily; it is necessary to remove our dirt from within and after cleansing our interior by looking at it as ifin an mirror and by introspecting, we should invite Shri Ganesha to preside there, not only at the Mooladhar Chakra but at all Chakras. His kingdom extends upto the Agnya chakra. Jesus Christ has said, lam the Path, Iam the way". But He has not said that"l am the destruction". He has left it to the Adi Shakti (Holy Ghost) to go further. All religions they all stress on purity and chastity, which is the main power of Shri Ganesha When a human being does not observe "Maryadas" or does not respects this purity in himself, he lands himselfin grave difficulties, because the power of Shri Ganesha recedes from him. He faces lots of ailments and diseases. Sahaja Yogis should always invite Shri Ganesha, think of Him and whenever faced with bad thoughts, should pray to Him for his power and help. With His hard work and purity, a human being can scale such great heights that it appears likeadream to him. Those who saw Shri Ganesh in Mooladhar Chakra, mistook it and thought that this was Mooladhar, the abode of Kundalini. Because of this, the Tantriks created a lot of problems. Purity and Chastity are our heritage and we should treasure it. "Marriage" as an institution is an offshoot of that heritage. Those who tried to preserve our "Dharma" (the ten masters) have done a lot of work for this. Forexample, Mohammad Sahab, who had three wives, and many talk about this. Butthis was in accordance with the times (Samay-anusar). At that time, somanyyoung men had perished in the wars, thatif he had not shown this way, many youngwomen who had no means of livelihood would have gone a wrong way, because of inavailability of grooms. Marriage as an institution is pure, and that is why, Mohammad Sahab had to marry so many times to preserve the sanctity ofthe women. We have to understand this. Even Shri Krishna had 16000 wives besides the other 5 wives. Now the 16000 were his powers, and 5 were the elements (Panch Mahabhootas). To keep these with Him, He had to give a sanctity to these women by making them His wives. Since, He was a man, and hence people could easily cast aspersions of Him. I amthe Mother, andI can have children, sono one can put me in that situation. In orderto avoid this controversy, He had to make them His wives. Thus, we have to learn to understand why these incarnations did what appears strange. They are the part of "Parmatma" and whatever they did was for the interest of the Society. Shri Ganesha was fully awakened in them. We have to realize that Shri Ganesha cannot be obtained by doing His Puja, singing his praises giving lectures about Him, but that we have to awaken Him within is. In all of you He has been awakened, but it is unsteady, and when it is so, even your attentior become shaky. Such Sahaj Yogis are half baked, situated at the periphery, not yet in the midst cit. Eachone has to maintain honour of his own character. He should maintain the privacy of hi:. own being, and not make an Divine Cool Breeze 6. Vol. VI - Issue 3&4

 openexhibition of it orputit up for sale or by his eyes destroy its sanctity. These are all wrong things one should know that-thatone does not realize by sucha behaviour, one's attention gets totally disturbed. Then the attention can stray anywhere, and you can suffer from any disease or any problems. Anything can happen. To do this "Stuti" (worship Him), there are different forms. Mohammad Sahab also in His "Stuti" of Jesus Christ said that he is "Nishkalanka' (without blemish) in every way even we have to see that we become more and more without any blemishes from day to day. Toachieve this state, we have to make our attention so pure that we just do not do anything wrong, It is not necessary to involve our mind in this. Once we get steady in this state and realize thatwejust cannot do aswrong, then no amount ofevil, dirtand squalor or temptation.can touch us anymore. That is whyIsaythat it is easiest to become innocent and pure and simple like a child. Today I find that in the West children are under constant attact of negativity, as if some destructive force is on them. We have to be very alert thatsuch a force does not come here. Our Indian culture is so very rich and good, that here the children can really flourishwell. Itis yourresponsibility to remainalertand keep awatch on yourchildren and yourself. Children have to be told not to do certain things and reminded that they are Sahaj Yogis. Today. people feel that if you stop children from doing things, you are putting a spoke in theirwheels. In West, the children do whateverthey want to do. Why did you give them birth? What is your responsibility? What have you to do? You have to correct them, "that this what you do is wrong, we would not help you, we won't give you money Otherwise our society willalso go the same way. Nothing good from there is taken in, but all the bad things we still absorb. Isincerely hope that all of you will realize that the work of Shri Ganesha is "Saha;". He is the one who gives you self-realization, helps to keep your chakras pure and clear, gives them lightand keeps you and your sight always moving towards the light. Youhave to realize this one thing from deep within, that we shall notinsult Shri Ganesha in any way. THope that after this Puja, within all of you here in Delhi, a new "Dharma" will be established - a dharma of auspisciousness (Shubh). For a person who is "Shubh", one glance of his is enough to make others alright. As they say the glance is "Kataksh, Kataksh Nirikshan"-means that with every side- oneglance gives full "Nirikshan". Yourmemory will improve. All left-sided things will be destroyed by the awakening of Shri Ganesha. Nowthis is not something that can be got from outside, but it has to come from within. I hopeall of you acquire this and getenlightened byits light, may the awareness of this power spread in the whole "Brahmanand" and the people come to realize it. These are my blessings to you. Talking about Shri Ganesha, is one gets into meditation and the attention goes deep within. It is like the presence of a child amidst the grown-ups and how everyone gets attracted towards the child. It is a kind of "Vatsalaya Rasa" (essence of affection)., This "Vatsalaya"-I hope that all of / you will put this into practice. May God bless you. 10 Val. VI - Issue 3&4 Divine Cool Breeze

 SHRI KRISHNA PUJA TALK HER HOLINESS SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI 11.12.93-Hathnikund (Synopsis) Today we are going to have the pooja of Shri Krishna. In Shri Krishna's life the river Yamuna has played a very great role. Yamuna river is a very deep river and its waters are blue in colour, which is the colour of Shri Krishna. The river Ganges is faster and is much shallowerthan this river. Next year, maybe we can go to Allahabad and see the confluence of these two great rivers. The whole of Haryana has been a very historical place with mythological significance, and you know that here the Pandavas and the Kauravas fought the war at Kurukshetra, and also that all this area has been used since long for meditation. Markandya, whose name you have heard often, meditated here. First he was in Maharashtra where you have seen the "Shapta Shringi" but later he came down here to meditate and wrote his treatise Everywhere you find the place of a pir and realised souls, who are respected till today. This is the area of great spirituality because Shri Krishna lived here. In these days there were no cars and other modes of transport, so he has vibrated all this land so beautifully. He was very fond of playing near the river Yamuna. Of course, his childhood was not spent here, but after he became the king, used to visit this place many a times. We have to understand his character in a very special way. First we had the incarnation of Shri Rama - Shri Vishnu took his birth as Shri Rama but he forgot or was made to forget his own divinity. He lived as an ordinary person, became a benevolent king as described by Socrates. He had also to sacrifice his wife, that was ofcourse very symbolic. In the other part of North India we can of course seethe areas vibrated by Himwhere Hemoved. But in Maharashtra, where He later moved without shoes, walked for miles together, He has vibrated the entire land. This land has been vibrated by many saints and greatincarnations. Shri Krishna on the one hand was like a child and Hewanted to create the atmoshpere of mirth, because after Shri Rama, religion took a very serious turn, and a very austere of religious atmosphere was created. Then the same incarnation took birth as Shri Krishna and He wanted to show the spirituality is not serious, it is a game one has to play. People do not understand Shri Krishna atall. They cannot comprehend from Shri Rama's concept to that of Shri Krishna, which I feel is really much higher, because He had to show thatall this world is just ajoke, is maya, and beyond that is joy. His style was very interesting. In those days they could not have these beautiful pandals, so many disciples, so He tried His own style. When He was a child, there weremany milkmaids called "gopis" who would be taking their bath in the Yamuna. Hewould just break their water pitchers and the water would just flow down their backs. This Yamuna river was vibrated by "Radhaji" - "Ra" means "energy" and "Dha" means "one who sustains", He did not know how to tell them about the "Kundalini", and so He would take stones and throw at the pitchers, making the water flow down their backbone, giving them the blessings of the Kundalini. His style was extremely simple playful, mirthful and nobody understood why Hewas doing all these things. Now when He was a very small child, there were ladies who would take baths, and He would try and rouse their Kundalinis. Hewould take their clothes, hide them, and then vibrated them. Many people don't know the little child, He is so innocent, and He was just teasing them and how He wanted to show that life is nothing butgreatjoy. He would than give them their clothes Later on, He grew up and became the King of Dwarka Nowin ourcountry there are many western intellectuals Divine Cool Breeze 11 Val l. VI - Issue 3&4

 and they try to say that there were two Shri Krishnas'. They want to analyse everything, without understanding spirituality, whatis the subtlety behind it. He had sixteen thousand wives, as they say. They were his powers. Now, as a MotherI can have thousands of children, boys, girls, men and women nobody can say anything about my character. But for men it is very difficult. So He got all his powers born as women, who were married to a King, Actually, they were not married, the king had abducted them and put themin ajail. He saved them from there, brought themout and married them. If you see the accent is on marriage. These are sixteen thousand powers, He had sixteen petals, and thousands of the Sahasrar. So that makes sixteen thousand powers. Then He had five wives, for which also people have objection. Now these five wives are five elements. The essence of them, the casual of them came as his wives and he married them. But He was sucha detached soul. There are so many stories about His detachment. There was one great Rishi-a sage, who had arrived on the other bank of the Yamuna. There was no Yamuna, but there were Rivers Narmada and Tapi. His wives wanted to go and serve the sage. When they went to the riverthey found that it was in floods, and sothey went back to Shri Krishna and told them that they should go to the river and tell them the truth, and by that truth, the riverwillgodown. Theywere surprised. Then they served the sage, gave him food and when they came to the river, they again found it in floods. They were worried and theywent back to the sage and told him that the river was in spate. The sage asked them to tell the river that the sage was on fast and had not eaten anything. They were surprised that he hadeaten like a glutton and yet asked them to tell this. But theywent ahead and told the river as instructed, and immediately the floods receded. They were again suiprised, but they could cross over. Now the point is that these people who are on this level, even when they eat, they don'teat, even though they aremarried, they are completely andabsolutely detached from the work you are doing, the life you are leading. I cannot say how one can get detached thus of course but by meditating. by the Kundalini working out and fixing the Kundalini, properly, itwill work out. You will be amazed howyou will become detached about things and how you can manage things without actually doing them; how you can work out so manythings withouteven feeling tired. This is a statewhich one has gotto achieve, and to know whether you are atthat state ornot, you have to notice how many times you use the word "I" or "me", When you startusing "I"toomuch, you are not detached so try and instrospect. These are allwords of illusion. Once you get detached it is a state, in which you have to grow. You cannot get it by standing on your head. house"). ("I did this", or "I did that", or "this is my child, that is my house So Shri Krishna's message throughout his life was complete detachmenteven when Hewent with Arjunato war. Hesaid that Hewould go only as a charioteer, He would not raise any weapons, He would not fight. He told Arjuna that only if he would agree to that condition, He would go with Him. When Arjuna questioned Him as to how he could kill all his relations, gurus, friends and became depressed aboutit, Shri Krishna told thim thatthe truth was that they were already dead. Anything that is born, has to die. So you have to kill them. Now people can say that Shri Krishna was preaching violence. But it is.not that what he said was thatall those who are "adharmes"who are cruel, are against the tradition of dharma all those have to be killed. Whetheryou Kill them or not, they are already dead, because they have committed so many sins. They are already dead, soyou should not think that you are killing them, butitis the divine who is going to do the so called killing. So the war started. Even in the Gita what he wanted to communicate is not understood by the Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VI - Issue 3&4 12

 people. You can imagine His detachement from the fact that he is preaching philosophywhen the war is already on. The first thing he told to Arjuna was that he should take to "gryana" "Gyana means "Bodh" and that is possible only through enlightenment. Butpeople don'tunderstand this, they think that you can get "gyana" by reading books, reciting of "the gita", or listening to lectures. Now in this country there are manywhogive lectures on Shri Krishnabutin theirown lives They are horrible people. Now Shri Krishna was not a businessman, telling you things slowly, buthe was very straight and said outright to Arjuna that you have to be "Stitha Pragnya" ie. a Sahaj Yogi. Then Arjuna asked him why he wanted him to go to war and do this "Karma." Thatis also very much misunderstood. Only afteryougetyour realisation you can understand whatit is & do your"Karma. He has said it very clearly, that you do whatever action you have to do and put it at my Lotus Feet which is an important statment, as long as you have the sense that you are doing sornething, as long as there is anego or an "I"existing within you Youmay say that you are putting itat the Lotus Feet of God, butyou don't. Shri Krishna realised when Arjuna asked him the question that human nature is not straight forward, and so very diplomatically. he told him to put everything at his Lotus Feet, which he knew, human beings would not do So people have tried that since ages but have not been able to do that because whatever we do we feel responsible for that and so we cannot put it at the Lotus Feet. There have been people who have murdered and said that we have put it at Gods Lotus Feet. This kind of a delusion has let people in this country horrible things like killing travellers in the name of the Goddess. Butwhat Shri Krishna talked of can only be possible after your realisation. When you really feel, you are not doing anything that it works. When we ask a Sahaj Yogito give realisation he says that" it is not working." itis not. "going "etc: This he speaks in the "third person", he becomes the third person, and does not think that he is doing anything. He is raising the kundalini by his own hands, but does not feel that he is doing it. he talks that this chakra is not allright, here it is blocked etc. So his "Karma" or action becomes "akarma" or non action. Even though you are acting, doing everything, but you dont feel you are doing anything. He felt that no body would take to self- realisation so better to put the condition, that place everything atthe Lotus Feetof God. Then Arjuna asked about "bhakti", and Shri Krishna answered himin a very clever way. KnowI am not that clever like Shri Krishna, I say everything in a straight manner Shri Krishna knew that human beings are too clever and if they are to be convinced they cannot be convinced in a straight forward way. So he said that whateverflower, water, fruits you offerto me, I will accept, butnow is the trick but the bhakti is to be done when there is not the other thatis ananya. Ananya means there is nobody else you and me. Means you should be connected to me then only you can do "bhakti". But nobody understands this, or they dontwant to understand what "ananya" means. Itmeans that you are a self-realised soul. Shri Krishna said that this is the bhakti I will accept. So one must have connection, otherwise one as this microphone if it is not connected to the mains, will not work, it is similarly so. Also there is a certain protocol, to be followed because Shri Krishna is an incarnation. Evenif you have to meet a Chief Minister, and you go on calling out his name, you will be arrested. Now Shri Krishna is god almighty and one cannottake his name cheaply by chanting it continuously. Thatis how people have spoiled theirkundalinis and have vishuddhiproblems. They dont feel anything on their hands even though they may be Shri Krishna Bhaktas, because their bhakti is wrong. can getina lot of problems. Just Divine Cool Breeze 13 Vol. VI - Issue 3&4

 Soto understand Shri Krishna you have to be suttle and read between the lines. His mischief, His pranks, His childlike behaviour are all no sweet and beautiful to creat a feeling of innocence and respect. Now when an Indiansees a child, hedevelops a kind offeeling which we call "vat salya", va feeling ofgreat love affection and protection for a child. Butin westwhatIhave seen is that children are somuch underattack. I dont know why they are doing it. There is no feeling of vatsalaya of all butitissomething so cruel Idontknowwhetherthey are possessed, orthere is a kind of influence. oftheir previous lives or whateveritis, but the way they attack the innocence of small children. It is impossible to understand how human beings can do that. So Shri Krishnas child like behaviour makes you feel the love, affection and protection for the little child. Now there is anotherthing about Him, ShriKrishna was connected to the Pandavas. Draupadiwas also His sister. Shri Vishnumayawas born as Draupadi. Also there was His Mother Yashoda, and Radhaji, who was Mahalakshrni, Mother Mary, and Shegave birth to Shri Ganesha, that was lord Jesus Christ In India, no onewould doubt the Immaculate Conception, but for others it is too much to belive. They are all arguing about this. For Indians it is easy to believe because Shri Ganesha was also created in the same way. Now" Ra-Dha"was Mother Mary and it is surprising that if you read the "Devi Mahatyan" itis clearly written who Lord Jesus Christis, that He is the support that is the Mooladhare. Heis referred to as Mahavishnu, Heis the support ofthe universe. Nowall these were related people; but we arestupidly fighting because we do nathave the knowledge of reality. Radhaji wanted to give Him the name of Yashoda. So He is called" Jesu", in hebrew it is "Yesu". Alsoin north India, "Yashada"is called"Jashoda" and thus He became Jesus, You can verify what Isay on your vibrations. So they are all related to each otherand the greatest thing is that they are all divine people. Sowe cannot understand and analyse themor pass remarks about them. Todo this, is a sign of human arrogance because with his limited knowledge, he wants to talk about divinity. Itis beyond the brains or human intelligence. So the only thing we can do is to be humble and surrendered. That is how "Islam" came, and that means "to surrender". But where they are surrendering only they would know. All christiaris, where are they following Christ, or all Hindus where are they following the principle that everybody has a Spiritin theirhearts. How canyou have a caste system, ifeverybody has aspirit. Nowthank God somany people in the world have become Sahaja Yogis. We have transcended all these artificial barrierrs in our divine life. How can the divine divide people; some higher, sorne lower. Only thing is you have to achievethat state in which you see the whole world as a drama, as Shri Krishna has said and You are the witness or":Sakshi" of all that. Thad to tell you the story of Shri Krishnabecause this river Yamuna reminds me ofall those beautiful things He did. Alsolwas happy yesterday whenI sawall you people dancing and enjoying which is very significant, because all these whodid this earlierwere not saints-theywere ordinary people with whom Shri Krishna wanted to hold hands called "ras"-"Ra" means energy and "Sa" means with, and with the energy of Radhaji, they were all getting their enlightenment. All the religion today have lost their form and meaning and have become very corrupt. This is because, it is a mental attitude, which has its own limitations, after some time there is always a decline; because there is no strength of truth in it. That is how we find decline in arts, in music, in everysphere. Now, all you people have found is the one that is eternal, and the truth is love. Truth is Divine Love, which has no consequences the truth, so please try and understand that the truth Divine Cool Breeze 14 Vol. VI - Issue 3&4

 It does not claim anything, does not want anything. Itjust wants to love and when you see this all pervading powerof love being kind, everyone here has had some kind of miracle. This is all done by this all-pervading power of Divine Love to convince you, by doing all theirinteresting things; like showing different types of my photographs; but the best that was done was this time in Navratri whenIsawmyphotographinwhichadifferent kind of background appeared. There was something round and a curtain and something peeping out like a Sun from behind it. Now when I went from there to Russia, Isawthe same scene behind me there. Soeven before it was conceived ordone there, it was seen in Navratri also, supported by the Divine Everybody saw it in Moscow, the whale scene behind me so this is how all sorts of tricks are played by this all pervading power, even when l am not there it seems that l am there. It is working out in so many ways, thatone has to understand that what we think is a miracle is really theplay of this all pervading power of God's Love. Vol. VI-Issue 3&4 15 Divine Cool Breeze

 CHRISTMAS PUJA HER HOLINESS SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI 25.12.93-Ganapatipule (Synopsis) Today we are going to celebrate the birth of Christ. This is a very crucial time because there are some anti- Christ who are in charge of the Christian religion, who are talking against the birth of Christ. They have no authority, they are not realised souls, they have no idea of the Divine. They are saying that Mother Mary was not a virgin, and that Christ was not born this way. Some of you can write to them and ask with what authority they speak thus. In Satya Yug they will all be exposed, because they have no authority to speak thus, as they have not felt the all pervading power. They have no idea how miracles take place. It is only by the blessing of the Divine that a miracle is produced. You all have experienced this blessings of the Divine. Iwill narate a simple example - In Navratri Puja this year, in the photograph that was taken, a curtain background appeared wherein there was a Sunpeeping out from behind a curtain, with eyes, nose and smiling Later when we went to Moscow, the same thing was seen on the stage. The Param Chaitaniya painted the same scene abouta month and a halfago, before it was concieved and done. There are a thousand and one miracles you can talk about. Now when I was flying to Moscow the temperature recorded outside was -20, when we touched Moscow it was -15, but later on in the afternoon it was -4. Nextday it was +10. As time passes it always becomes cooler, but this time it became warmer. This shows that all the elements are helping us. All the other minor and big problems sort out, you will be amazed how things work out. Now the question they ask is why Christ had to be crucified ? Why He could not be saved? Now Christhad to be crucified because he had to pass through the Agnya, which was very narrow. He had to pass through the cross and establish Himself there.. The message of His life is not the Cross, but the message of Resurrection. Hewas Resurrected-thatwas one of the things He did, so that now you can be Resurrected. Every incarnation is something unique. Butthe end of itwas the Resurrection. He did it, because He had to die. Otherwise how can you Resurrect yourself? There are lots of thing which look difficult, butwhich are not. There are some who say that Christ never Resurrected Himself. Actually, He died later on in Kashmir. There is proof of it. But still, people don't believe it, because they know thatif they are in the majority, they cando anything. But this time the majority is not going to help. In fact Mohammed Saheb in the Holy Kuran says that you should only worship the Chastity of the Holy Mother of Christ! He had respected the Mother. But there is no respectto Mother Mary in the Bible. They call Hera Woman', because of Paul, who was anti-Christ, who took over Christanity, tried to spread Christanity. What he wanted was to put in his own importance, and he used Peter, who was the worst disciple of Christ. Christ had told about him "The Satan will take you". There are people who still say, "How can Christ be born to a Virgin ?" Indians worship Shri Ganesha. Shri Ganesha is the same as Christ. We believe that the Mother Herself created the child as Shri Gauri, as Virgin. Thatis our faith. Thus in the West, the faith is all 'rationality', there are people who produce all falsehoods. What is the purpose of the Newspapers publishing all this nonsense. Youhave to understand that rationality can nevermake you understand the truth. It is so limited, so conditioned, so full ofego. How can rationality tell you Divine Cool Breeze 16 Vol. VI - Issue 3&4

 the truth about Christ? We alsonow have scientific proof. I told them thatifyou see from the right to the left, you seea Swastika -because of the carbonatom, people havemade amodel of it. Then if you see fromthe left to the right, you see Ornkara When yousee fromdown below, yousee Alpha and Omega. Christ had said "I am the Alpha and the Omega". "lamthe begining and lam the end". The way He has said Alpha and Omega, you can see clearly, symbolically if you see from down, up. So Omkara on one side, Swastika on another side, joint together, when they ascend and Incarnate, they will becorme the Alpha and Omega. All this does'nt go into the heads of anti Christ. And they cannotunderstand what Divinity can do. You have got your realisation, your second birth - How did you get your second birth ? As you know, Shri Ganesha is very powerfuland Christ had said that if you say anything against the Holy Ghost, I will not tolerate it. Also against Christ, I will not tolerate. Only on that point I have to see that all these horrible people should be destroyed completely. On this occasion of His Birthday, Isay that Christ was born from the same thing as Shri Ganesha. He was the Wisdom, the Source of Wisdom. Ofcourse they did notallow Him to live long, after His work of three or three and a half years, He could lecture. But whatever He said, He was so correct, so wise. Of course they might have tried to dabble with that, but still lots of truth are left in the Bible He spent His lifetime telling them about Italso has another meaning, that truth, He is the first person who talks so clearly about God. You have to be clear about God. We have three other people in the area of "Tapa".Oneis Buddha and the other is Mahavira. Now Buddha and Mahavira were bornata time when ritualismwas taking place of reality. Sothey said. "We will not talk of God. We will only talk about the Chaitanya". Ashtawarka, whowas the Guru of Janaka talked only aboutthe vibrations. Even Nanaka did that. When Namdeva wentdown to Oriya, He said we won'ttalk about God-Don'ttalkaboutHari. Better talk about Param Chaitanya first of all. Because one can reach only Param Chaitanya to reach God. Atthat time, they did'ntwant to talk about God Almighty. Itwas only Jesus Christwho talked . Everybody did that - even about God Almighty , He was very brave, never afraid of anything, no doubt. Jesus Christs' childhood has not been described anywhere. Like we have descriptions of Shri Krishna's childhood, Shri Rama's childhood. This is really sad. Except one incident when He was in an argument with a Pharsee, and they were flabbergasted to see how clever He was and the kind of discretion He had. But later on even though they had shown no regard for Moiher Mary, the people could'nt help showing the same. They said that She had to be some Goddess, otherwise how could Christ take birth from Her. Sotheycalled Her Madonna-Maiden, Virgin. Thenthis Madonna started occupying a place in Churches, everywhere. People regarded Her as Goddess. People started to see Her as The Mother. Itis the people who did this, nol the Bible, not Christanity. She was Mahalakshmi and we know that and we worship Her as Mahalakshmi. She was Radha. Radha also has a son and He was like an egg. Half of the egg was Jesus Christ and half was Shri Ganesha. Butwhen this Child was born, He started crying for His Father. The father was Shri Krishna and the finger for Vishuddhi is the forefinger. Always Jesus puts His hands like this (V sign) towards His Father. Forefinger is Shri Krishna's finger and middle finger is Vishnu. The Mother was Radha - "Ra" means energy and "dha" means the one who sustains it. Sheis the one who called Him"Jesus". Actually in Hebrewit is "Yesu" and also in Marathi Bible, which is a directtranslation from Hebrew, it is Yesu. Yesuis the name ofthe Mother of Shri Krishna YesuorJesus from Yeshoda or Jeshoda And Christ word comes from Krishna. By calling Him Jesus or Yesu and Christ or Krisht, She 17 Vol. V I - Issue 3&4 Divine Cool Breeze

 made iteasy forus to understand how closely Jesus was related to Shri Krishna. Now Shri Krishna incarnated only in India because He would have been too linienta person to incarnate in America, as it is these people did not have any limitations, no maryadas, no sense of 'Dharma'. They are great Adharmis ! So only a person like Christ, who is absolutely pure, wise and does not believe in the Leela part of Shri Krishna could come. Shri Krishna said that this is all Leela, to overcome the strictness of Shri Rama. But Christ did not say so. Despite this, all overwherever Christanity is practised, they say this is all Leela! Adharma is Leela, whateverwrong we do is Leela, we are all innocent! Their logic is so funny ! All self destructive, nonsensical logic. Forus Indians, we have full idea of Dharma, we know what is rightand whatis wrong. More credit I would give to these Christians who are from such countries where they have no idiea about Kundalini, buthave worked so hard, have come up somuch and become suchgreat Sahaja Yogis. It is a blessing of God, because they were genuine and sincere. It is Christ who brought them to Sahaja Yoga. Without Him, it would not have been possible. Here Shri Ganesha is justa symbol, but there He incarnated! He told people what dharma is, which they aresupposed to follow. But yet they are extremely money oriented people-Whatsort of things they have done in the name of God ! Where He was born, it is the most symbolic thing, He was born in a manger, full of straws assermbled together. There were animals. He was born, not as a rich man, but as a very poor person, and in a place very much considered below human standards. This is to show you that you don't need palaces or huge places to be born. You can be born anywhere if you are a pure person. Suchagreat personality was born like this. Nowit is the otherway round. are extremely materialistic, money oriented to such a limit that they are destroying themselves with whatever money they have made. They have no sense of proportion - this is what is happening in the West. And we are trying to followthem! Following their destructiveness, we think People there we are very advanced. Advanced towards doom! We have to be very careful with our children, relations, thatwe don't take to their dirty ways, which they have created in the name of God! Inspite of all this, we have a very largegroup of Sahaja Yogis. Theyareall blessed people-you knowwhat Divinity is, what Christis. Whetheryouareborma Hindu or whatever, we know that Christ belongs to all. Christis universal, Heis thesupportofthe universe, That is mentioned in the 'Devi mahatmaya' so one must understand that. We must not ridicule anyone who is following Christ. We must worship Christ with the same affection, devotion and surrender as we worship Shri Ganesha. I don't think Christians have any faith about Christ, whereas a Sahaja Yogis' faith works because it is enlightened. You must have faith in yourself, in Sahaja Yoga and in the life you are leading. Unless and util this happens to you, you should'nt call yourselfa Sahaja Yogi. There are yetmany people on the periphery who don'tunderstand fully, they understand only mentally and just float into the immense love of God and you should want to give this love to others Still materialism is important with some people. They are materialistic in the sense, they still think of making money in a bad way. Others get attached to theirchildren. This attachment is wrong. Christ neverwanted it. We have to understand and to pay respect to Christ, we must get out of these materialistic ideas. Idon't say that you should go to the Himalaya, take to asceticism, orgive up children like Buddha did, but your detachment to work should be there. You are all there on this earth, but you must develop your detachment. In the begining it is alright, 'My father is sick, My mother is sick'. Not Divine Cool Breeze 18 . VI - Issue 3&4 Vol.

 now. Now the speed of Sahaja Yoga is very fast, and many will be left behind. Sobe careful Do not get entangled by these materialistic ideas. Specially for Indians, they don't like to stay in Ashrams. Indiansjustwantto have their homes where they can dominatetheirwifes and have their special types of food! Ithink that's why people must have said that Indians must fast-to getrid of their tongue desires. They will keep fast but keep thinking offood. Whatis the use ? Christ fasted for 40 days and when Satan tempted Him, He just ignored him. Materialismworks in diffferentways. In the Westitis "My house, my wife, my children". in the East it is "What sort of food leat, what sort of a house and a family I should have". All thesethings are still lingering. As your ascent is becoming subtier, they are also becoming subtler. And they are holding you. Iknow of Sahaja Yogis who want to make a business of Sahaja Yoga. Can younot control yourself? itis very easy Christdid it. You have come here toworship Him. Tryto control these things. It is very important. It does'nt matter. You can live anywhere. Like I have no demands. My body does'nt demandit And that's why I never feel tired. Istay herewith you, Ican just sleep even here. Once I travelled by train from Pune to Hyderabad - Iwas on the wheel - it was so jerky and jumpy. ButIjust felt thatI was going from one star to another starl Another person would have been absolutely angry for all the jumps andjerks. Onthe contrary. Iwas feeling nice, jumping from one starto another! Somy reaction is very different. If there is a crisis, Ibecome completely thoughtless. And a kind oftremendous peace starts flowing out And this is what you can achieve, if you get detached. NOWI have children. Thave grandchildren. I never phone them. They phone me. Inevereven telephonemy Husband. Telephoning is awaste of time. Ihaveatelephoriewithin myselfandIknow all of you are alright But unless and untilyou attain that state of detachment this is difficult. Now Iknowsome Sahaja Yogis they become suddenly very violentand hit others. YouknowIneverraise my hand against my own children. It is not allowed. Nobdy has to raise their hand or touch somebody's body. Youarenottogetangry, notto shout. Otherwise withoutyour knowing you will go down. Be absolutely calm, peaceful and compassionate. Butif you are still attached, you do all this. Sobe careful, not to be angry. Ifthere is suchaperson, let me know. Lookat Christ. He was angry with the people who were selling things nearthe Church. Hetook a big hunter and hit them hard. But He was Christ! Atthe same time, when He was crucified, He said, "O God, My FatherI please forgive them, because they don't know what they are doing"! This is what one has to understand from Him-His character. Howforgiving and loving Hewas. How He looked after and helped peopletowards theiremancipation. In those days of complete chaos and anarchy, He stood up and talked about"truth" and things like "spirif" the "ascent". The people to whom He talked were all blind people, yet He talked. There are lots of myths in the Bible and one of them is that at the time of resurrection, your bodies will come out of the graves. This is not only for Christians, but also forthe Muslims and the Jews. Think of this-Whatremains in the grave after many years ? - only a few bones, and if these bones came Out, how can you give them realisation? Think of it. Itis a big myth. Not possible logically In'Nal Damyanti Akhyan" they have clearly given that when the Kal Yug will come, all these seekers who are seeking in the Hills and mountains will be born again and they will be given theirself realisation I But those who have got it, have to establish themselves. Their Kundalinis will be awakened and that is logical, because that is what we are doing today. Thatis why there is sucha populationexplosion, butlam notsure how Divine Cool Breeze 19 Val. VI- Issue 3&4

 Imany of these will get their self realisation. But those who have got it, have to establish themselveand there also I find that there is some sort of a subtle attachment with people. So for the time being, I feel that you should all surrender youself to the qualities of Christ, which are immense, and the greatest amongst them is that He cannot tolerate anything against the Holy Ghost. Itell you, if you are a Sahaja Yogi and ifyou misbehave, He may perhaps allow you to some extent. Ifwe have to telloff people weshould use Sahaja Yogaways and neverbevoilent or rude. Tam very upset when I hear that even now people are violent in Sahaja Yoga. This comes from a bad liver and you can go in for a liver treatment. But rememberyou.cannotget away with it. It is beter that these people fast for 2 days and punish themselves. Temper is the worst thing and Shri Krishna has said that it is this 'temper thateverything starts. Sowe must control ourtemper and remember that Christwas the embodiment of forgiveness. We are worshipping Him today. How He forgave people, those who crucified Him-they were not the Jews, but the Romans. The Roman authority crucified Him. With this kind of attitude people hated them, troubled and tortured them. Then the Jews hada reaction and they are also equally the same. Itwas neverdone.-that the Magistrate asked the multitudes that whether they should crucify a common thief or this Man. This was never done, Magistrates have to take their own decisions. So this is just to bring a curse on the Jews. Butthank God now we have many Jews in Sahaja Yoga and also centers in Israel. We have also lots of people from Iran who have come to America and who are also Jews and Muslims who are in Sahaja Yoga. I hearthat the Sufis from Turkey arejoining us and also the Sufis from India. Thus, it will work out for everybody. We must all understand how Christ was, how His life was and how He loved the world, He came to this world to be crucified. He knew it and He did it. The way they have given His picture is not correct. He was a very healthy, hefty and tall person. He had to carry the cross. These people who painted Him like a T.B. patient should know that if they had to carry the cross, could they do it ? So all sort of things they have done to harm His personality, to assasinate His character. But you being Sahaja Yogis, should know about Him, have full respect for and faith in Him. He is your elder brother and as Shri Ganesha, He incarnates as your elder brother. Heis there to look afteryouinevery trouble, in every turmoil. He is going to help us in every way, all the time and the only way for us is to surrender, to forgive- the quality of His, we have to imbibe 30 Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VI - Issue 3&4 20



----------------------

1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-0.txt 
 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
VOL VI
ISSUE 3 & 4
CONTENTS
Page
1. Prayer to Shri Mataji
2
2. Shri Mahakali Puja - Paris
3. Shri Ganesha Puja - Delhi
6.
4. Shri Krishna Puja - Hatnikund
11
5. Christmas Puja
16
Ganapatipule
Edited by: Yogi Mahajan - 9 Bhagyachintamani Society, Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411 029
Printed by: Computex Graphics, 112 High Tech Indl. Centre, Caves Road, Jogeshwari (E), Bombay 400 060
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VI - Issue 3&4
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-1.txt 
 PRAYER TOSHRIMATAJI
shriMother,
Please give us Your love so wehavecompassion for one another.
Make us humble so we are sweet to eachother.
SO
Giveusa sense of respect so we donot belittle others.
Grueus the conafidence to act fromour hearts.
Make us completelycontent
so that we desire only the joy of our ascEnt.
who You are.
And Mother forgive usfor weeannot comprehend1
Give us the sensivity to perceive the subtle.
Let us feel Youu in our bearts.
Mother we will cleanour heartsfor You.
Amen.
JaishriMataji
Divine Cool Breeze.
Vol. VI-Issue 3&4
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-2.txt 
 MAHAKALI PUJA TALK
HER HOLINESS SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
11.07.93- Paris (Synopsis)
Today we have decided to have the puja of the Devi. This time we are nottalking about Adi Shakti,
about Kundalini, or about Saraswati, Mahalakshmi. We are talking aboutthe Mahakali. That's the
Goddess which is the first onewhich comes firstand establishes Shri Ganeshain the form of Gauri.
She is the complete form of Mahasarswati and Mahalakshmi. Outof Heronly these energies emit.
So She's the one who is the powerof desire of God and within us also, She creates desires. These
desires within us start emitting outside and we develop a kind of a reaction to all desires.
The first and foremost desires., the most primitive, is to feed yourself, and this is given to us by the
Goddess. It is very important that we should feed ourselves sufficiently enough to exist on this
earth, and also we have seen that when this kind of desire grows very much more than normal,
then you become slaves of this desire and any amount of food cannot satisfy you. But this desire
starts acting through your ego so it satisfies you. And alsothose people who are manufacturing
food orwho are supplying food in hotels and all that, now how to satisfy your desires. So they bring
it in a way, show it around, place it before you so that you approve of it, . and then they serve it.
They know how to befool you and you feel quite happy also. So this desire gets completely
controlled by your ego: And when it becomes a kind of a collective desire and a collective ego
expression, then you become like gluttons,. sophisticated. Of course, ifyourego is not therethen
people would like to see to please others by feeding them. This desire reacts and then the new
desire come in through the blessings of Mahakali-that you like to see others eating the food. You
enjoy when others eat the food cooked by you, served by you, given by you. Youjust want to
watch. This gives you satisfaction. But food, any extent you may go, you will never be satisfied.
Now in the western life today, it has become very important to ask the child everyday, "What will
you have ?" In olden days the food was cooked for all the family. Butnow you must ask the child,
"What will you have?" than the child will say, "I'll have this". Nowsupposing you don't have thatin
the fridge, you are finished. Howwill you please that boy in his ego because he wants a particular
thing? So gradually we build up even the ego of our children. We have to say, "This is cooked,
this is nice, and you eat this." It's the duty of the parents not to allow children to grow their ego by
what they want. You should know what they haveto have.
Soactually the blessings of the Devi on this point is that She gives you a desire that you should
serve others. Alsa you then get concerned about people who are starving, want to find out why
they are starving. Anotherextreme of this could be that some people think that they should not eat
somuch, a kind of a sacrificing nonsense. Whatever one has to eat, oneshould eat. There is no
wisdom in this kind of austerity. And when people enterinto this kind of austerity, then they have
sufferings and troubles and such people become extremely ascetic and hot tempered. So a
person who is hungry is as bad a person who is overfed. I think hungry is worse.
The second desire that comes to you is that everyone should love you. This comes because it
makes you a good persor, You know that everybody likes goodness, so people try to be good to
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VI - Issue 3&4
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-3.txt 
 others, nice to others. By pleasing others they think others will like them very much,
again out of bounds and then all the time you try to please others so that you become absolutely
slavish. You become so artificial that people can make out that there is nothing natural in this
person, he is just trying to please us. If you please another one with a detached manner, not
expecting anything thatshould be done for you or that could be achieved through that pleasing, is
very pure pleasing and is very good. But supposing you try to please others only just to take
advantage of that person, then you develop hypocrisy of the worsttype, and you get lost. People
mock atyou, laughatyou, they are neverpleased. They know that you are a hypocrite and you are
doing it for some sort of an advantage or an exploitation. You are not doing it because you
to be good really, to be nice. A person wiho is good automatically pleases others, but he does'nt
try to please. He is just, his nature is such, his temperament is such that he just pleases people.
Nowwhat does the Devido ? Shebrings out the truth before them. Sheshows that what you have
been doing for a particularexploitation does'nt work out. Up to a point it does, then Sheexposes
them. The exposure starts and with that exposure, they are surprised, "How am lexposed? How
am I caught ? How do people know ?" This is the job of the power of Mahakali. She exposes all
but itdevelops
want
that is wrong, falsehood and untruth.
Then the third desire people have is to possess material things from which materialism has come.
But there is no end to it, because they have no satisfaction in getting one thing... and you cannot
enjoy anything thatyou get. This is also human tailing and this human failing creates economics.
Economics is created because wants in generalare not satiable. Sowe go on jumping from one
thing to another and then become slaves of enterpreneurs.. So much so that you lose your
individuality completely. People do it because they are brainless. But for Sahaja Yogis, the
Mahakali powerworks and She teaches them, 'All right, this dress suits you, have this one, and it's
the best for you. Once for all, your lifelong problemis solved'. The desire is there to impress others
with outside things like dress, hairstyles, and other fads. So this kind of stupidity comes in aur
heads when we start using our ego. With ego a person becomes absolutely stupid, It is really
difficult to tell people to do right things, but wrong thing people take to like that! Forexamplel told
everyone that you put oil-if notevery day, just before bath-lots of oil in your head and wash. Now
I find many people getting bald, but they didn't put the oil. What can I do about it? Sucha simple
thing they would not believe - that you need something for your nourishment. But they will do
something which is absurd, nonsensical, withouteven thinking what is going to harm us. Here the
Mahakali, what does She do ? She punishes you. Your body is punished. Ifyou wear very tight
clothes, you develop problems on your legs. Ifyouwearholey pants, then you getcramps. Anything
you do abnormal, you have to pay for it. First you have to pay for doing it, then you have to payfor
itphysically.
.
So many things can be avoided if we just have a simple life. The Mahakali principle in us raises
us higher and higher. Despite that, we are pulled down. Then this Mahakali, She comes forward
and shows what wrong we have done, how we have gone wrong, how we have missed the point.
Then another thing She does, which is very beautiful - She creates an illusion, to test your
intelligence,to test your sensibility.. Bhranti Rupena Samsthita. She makes a Bhranti in your
head, illusion. Soyou become illusive, or others become illusive, or a situation becomesillusive.
And you are lostin it. Then youreally understand that, 'It's awrong thing Ihave done'. This Mahakali
power puts this ego right by creating illusion, Bhranti. And this is responsible for many illusions we
run after- it's a mirage. Once we are satisfied within ourselves, then we don't run after mirages.
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VI - Issue 3&4
4.
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-4.txt 
 This illusion, if it is not created, people would be so egoistical that the whole world would be
finished. So this is the great work of Mahakali power within us, that She creates illusions. Many
people talk about maya. This is Mothers' maya. This is maya, that is maya. It's the work of
Mahakali. Shewants to testyou. butin Sahaja Yoga, it's not such a strong one. So to test Sahaja
Yogis also, this Mahakali helps you. Sothis is how the illusion corrects you. If there is noillusion,
you would never be corrected directly. Supposing I say, "Don't do this." You may not like it. Of
course, mostly you like, butsometimes you don't. And then the illusion works and then you realise,
"Where was I and where arn I now? Ishould not have done this.. How is it that I have landed
into this problem? What has made me so stupid ?' This is something which She does.
Another is, She's the one who relaxes you completely. When you are tired and fed up, when you
don't know what to do, then She makes you sleep. All day's work you do, ultimately the Mahakali
power acts on you, and She makes you sleep, sleep like a child. At that time, all wrong we have
doneto ourselves and to others is forgiven. In Herlap we sleep nicely, quietly, and all ourproblems
are solved. Inthose dreams, when you are, She brings forth solutions to you. Somany people told
Me that 'Mother, You came into my dream and told me that this is the medicine you should take.
You came in my dream and told me that this particulartype of life will suit you.' They see Me clearly
coming, but there it is not whole of Me but.. the Mahakali powers act. tnto very deep sleep you
are, it is called, at the Sushupti. There She appears, in the dream She guides you
and tells you.
But the greatest thing that Shedoes is give you the sense of chastity and security. When the children
are born they have a sense ofchastity, shame, decency, decorous behaviour. Butgradually when
they see others misbehaving, theystart misbehaving. Tothem decency becomes a bondage. But
naturally She's there to tell you that this is indecent, you should'nt do it, this is wrong. Butas you
grow up and mature, you start disrespectingyourchastity, and you start becoming like immature,
stupid people. All this if it's understood through meditation, the Mahakali helps you a lot, because
She is the one who creates the proper passage for the Kundalini to rise. Mahakali is the same
as the Kundalini because She is the residual energy of Mahakali power. Full of Vidya. But the
function is different. The function of Mahakali is to protect you, guide you, give you wisdom. And
the function ofthe Kundalini is to clense you, to clearitout, not to play about with you, to forgive you
and help you to grow properly
Now in your life as Sahaja Yogis, you will see how Mahakali helps you in every way. It is so
interesting to watch Herwork-how She brings forth all kinds of satisfaction to you. The greed, the
temptations and the temper goes away. The most helpful thing She does is that you get rid of your
bad habits-absolutely, automatically in the light of the Mahakali power, you do not wantanything
destructive to be practised. If you have been practising anything destructive, you try to get rid of
it. It's the Mahakali powerwithin you which is awakened, does all these things. And She has made
you so beautiful, so angelic. By Her corrections, and by Herillusions, She has made you like this.
So don't get so attached to money, to greed, to lust- all these things which are responsible for
putting you down. Also possessiveness for children, husband and matter. You just start
understanding that the joy is in sharing. Youwantto share everything with others, and thatsharing
starts when these Mahakali powers start giving you blessings ofjoy, of sharing, of being collective,
of being pure. These blessings come to you from the Mahakali power. So today we are going to
worship that Mahakali power.
May God bless you.
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VI - Issue 3&4
5,
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-5.txt 
 GANESHA PUJA TALK
HER HOLINESS SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
5.12.93- Delhi (Synopsis)
First thing after the creation of this earth, Shri Parmatma Shri Adi Shakti thought that purity and
holiness (Pavitrata) should pervade and it is only afterthis that the "Chaitanya" will be activated in
the atmospherre. Now this Param Chaitanya is presenteverywhere but it can be active only if it
takes a form within you.
Ifyou are not pure or yourthoughts are not pure oryouare on a different plane, then you cannotgo
deepinto your being. This "subtlety"which you have received in a very Sahajway, is the handiwork
of Shri Ganesha. Shri Ganesha is the donor of Param Chaitanya and it is He who is present in
Chaitanya form on every chakra. It is impossible for the Kundalini to rise, unless and until all the
Chakras become pure and holy, and even if it manages to rise, it will keep on falling down again
and again.
There is a Mother and son relationship between the Kundaliniand Shri Ganesha. All of you know
rabath and as She scrubbed Herself, from the dust
this story that when Shri Parvati had gone f
which was full of vibrations, She created Shri Ganesha, who was made to sitoutside. Shri Ganesha
was created by Shri Adi Shakti alone and Shri Sadashiva had no hand in it. From this you willeasily
understand how St. Gabriel came to Virgin Mary and told herthat from your womb, "the saviourof
the world" is going to be born. Ordinarily, people feel that the unwed woman is a greatest sinner,
if she is carrying a child. But for Indians, who can easily accept the story of the creation of Shri
Ganesha by Shri Parvati alone in the absence of Shri Sadashiva, this is not difficult. This is how,
even Shri Jesus Christwas created. Forthe Foreigners, to acceptand understand this is noteasy,
because they equate all men with human being, and eventodaythey are deep in controversy about
whatthey referto as 'Immaculate Conception'. Sahaja Yogis have seen a lot of miracles, performed
by the Chaitanya, and its effect has rubbed off on you and your attention has been raised to the
world. The world thatwe see today is 'Maya' (illusion), butalso that there is a world of Truth (Satya)
beyond it. They can know the truth on their finger tips that Shri. Ganesha is present.
WhenI went to Greece, I saw that the Premordial Mother, the Adi Shakti had incarnated there as
"Athena", and that they had built a temple for Her in Persepolis and outside it they had inscribed
that here present is a "Child God". No one knows about this, as to who this 'Child God' is since so
many years have passed.
Invaders destroyed all their heritage and traditions. Then we went to place where there wasa loose
circular slab of stone (like a nabhi), from where there was a flow of strong vibration, and behind it
we found a "Svayambhu" of Shri Ganesha.
Yet, after this some people did come forward who had their attention on religion, and they felt that
religion should be re-established in the world, and that they should be brought up to the level of
Vol. VI - Issue 3&4
Divine Cool Breeze
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-6.txt 
 purity, that when itwas time for their salvation, they would be ready for it. That is why, they had so
far paid more attention on such things. They had earlier received the ten commandments from
Moses, and byobeying them, they wanted to keep themselves in such a condition as to be ready
for relf-realization. In ourcountry also, Guru Nanakand othergreatgurus worked hard for the same
thing, thatmankind should observe"dharma", and get theirbalance and thatthey should earn only
merits (Punyas) and not gather sins (Pap).
Shri Ganesh's work was different. By dent of his own powers, He observes purity. His greatest
power is that of"innocence". His head of an elephant suggests that He has no ego and superega.
He is a child, an eternal child. Jesus Christ wasHis incarnation in this world. With the help of
science, we have been able to prove this, that Shri Ganesh is a power, an energy, and when He
takes a shape, it is in the form of Shri Ganesh. Itmeans that only in a heart which is pure, gentle
innacent, simple, full of faith, that the power of Shri Ganesh can be awakened. Without the help of
Shri Ganesh, Kundalini just cannot be awakened. Kundalini is the Gauri Shakti and at every
momentofits ascent Shri Ganesh is there to protect it. Not only that, butafterthe Kundalini pierces
through each Chakra, it closes that Chakra, so that the Kundalini cannot slip down again. Now,
within us Shri Ganesh is situated at the Mooladhar Chakra, That is the reason why many people
have made this mistake, because in Mooladhar which is trangular in shape, only the Kundalini
resides, and it is underthis, on the Mooladhar Chakrathat Shri Ganesh is present, and you all are
aware whatare his different functions.
You have seen some of my photographs in which Shri Ganesh is standing behind and above me.
Similarly, He stands for other "Devtas". In India, most of the people are aware about the power
ofchastity of Shri Ganesh: and theyrealizethattheyshould alsoobserve chastity forthemselves. The
foreigners howeverdo notthink that way. For them desire of sensuality is important. Indians are
aware about this, and even ifa few of them do not observe the purity and chastity atleast they act
thatthey do. By this, there is one advantage that atieast the cancer of immorality does not openly
spread in the Society. In foreign countries, they feel that they are doing some great work-some
sortof a adventure, and are quite proud about it. According to Indians, it amounts to foolishness.
Ifyou go to America, you will see that Shri Ganesh is conspicuous by His absence. Itis only after
the destruction has setin, they havestarted to realize thatthey should observe chastity and thattoo
this is felt only among the Sahaj Yogis.
The greatest quality of Shri Ganesh is that he is innocent. When you are innocent, you become
simple and pure being. Christ has said that when itwill be your time for salvation, you will become
like a child. Besides the other powers of Shri Ganesh, itwill be the power ofinnocence alone, which
will work at the time of self-realization.
The intellectuals cannotunderstand why Shri Ganesha is our special devta. The problem is that
until and unless they become subtle they cannot know that all the deities are within us. Now Shri
Ganesha has 4 hands and carbon atom has 4 valences. When you see the carbon atom from the
left, you see the "Swastika": from the right you see the "Omkar" and when you see it from
downwards, you see the sign of "alpha and omega". Jesus Christ has said that, "I am the alpha
and the omega"- alpha means the begining and omega means the end. The symbols of alpha and
omega (as they are written) are found on the atom. WhenI told all this to the foreigners, in allearnest
Vol. VI - Issue 3&4
Divine Cool Breeze
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-7.txt 
 they started to do research on this. They took the photographs of the carbon atom from 3 different
angles, and found this exactly asI had described. From this it is proved that Shri Jesus Christwho
said this is verily Shri Ganesha, verily the Omkara, verily the Swastika.
Even Hitler used the symbol of Swastika. Now the Swastika which is clock-wise (where itmoves
in that direction) stands for innocence and progress, whereas the Swastika which he used had its
movement an anti- clockwise direction, and that stands for destruction. Thus, when the energy
moves anti-clockwise, it causes a lot of problems, and such a person can getinto various types of
uncurable diseases. Yesterday there was a man who came here with the disease of muscles
which had started working. Slowly the muscles become weakerand weaker and this is known as
Myelitis. This problem is caused when the energy of Shri Ganesha starts moving in the opposite
direction (anti-clockwise). Same was the condition of Hitler, when he tried to use the power of Shri
Ganesha by using the symbol of Swastika. Astencilwas used to prepare this symbol, and so long
as itwas used properly, he met with success, but later on, as soon as the stencil which was used,
was turned the other way round and made the Swastika move in an anti-clock direction, he
encountered his downfall. Itis truth that it is this wrong use of the symbol, which is responsible for
his complete disaster.
In Pune, Ihave publicly told the people three or four times to respect Shri Ganesh, do righteous work
before Him. Hedoes not like anywrong doings, any thing which is not pious. Tilak had started the
worship of Shri Ganesha which spreads over ten days. ButwhatI saw in Pune, truely shocked me.
Before the worship of Shri Ganesh, they play vulgar songs, and perform vulgar dances, women
dress up indecently, there is a flow of liquor and excessive use of cigarettes etc. Shri Ganesha has
the vehicle of victory and so (Jaydul Vahan) I told them that you should fear the wrath of Shri
Ganesha. I had also told them in my lectures that this is the meaning of earth element, and if you
do not observe protocols there will be an earthquake. That is exactly what happened. On the day
of Ganpati Visarjan, all those whowere dancing, in their drunken frenzy found thatall their lands had
sunk. We think that all this is happening in the West, so "What is wrong"; without realizing that the
force of destruction that sets in is allpowerful-the destruction starts from within an individual. Sitting
from here, we cannotfathom the strength of this destructive energy. More than 65% of people are
suffering from uncurable diseases. Diseases like Schizophrenia and other unheard of diseases
are so widespread that we cannoteven imagine about them. Here, we have all sorts of bacterias,
viruses, germs; dirt and grime, but the human beings are clean. Togo against Shree Ganesha,
means to do sinagainst the Mother. All this started when dirty people like Freud, came and spoke
againstmorality and replaced Jesus Christ, in the minds of the people; who started to worship him.
It is besides the point that he died a horrible death, suffering from cancer.
By putting your "Shri Ganesh" right, all psychosomatic diseases which appear incurable, can be
easily cured. He is a symbol. When things cannot be expressed in words then a symbol is created.
Today, some feel that when thesymbols are made, they aremadeby imagination and then one gets
lost in them and tend to think in that way, but in Sahaja Yoga, we
a reality. Ahuman being has a limited mind and vision, He has to accept that he has to change his
stand, if he has to perceive reality as it is, andexperience what he has notexperienced before. In
his limited human consciousness, he cannot see the truth. Thatis why, itis important to know and
worship Shri Ganesha. Till Shri Ganesha is established in Delhi, the problems, especially political,
canprove that these symbols are
Divine Cool Breeze
8.
Vol. VI - Issue 3&4
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-8.txt 
 we need pure simple people with child-like innocence.
People say that
cannot be solved. Forthis
how can such people carry outadministration, where aresuch people now? Todaythere are such
corrupt people at the helm of affairs, they cheatatevery step, because theyare basically insecure
people, they do not realize that the real wealth is his God Alnighty.
Ifyou are Sahaj Yogis, you must meditate daily, first on the left channel, then on the right channel
and then on both the channels. For the left sideelements make use of lightelementwhich is Ganesh
tatva and its work is to remove the darkness. With that our food intake and our digestive system
will work well, More than the way we take care of ourexternal body by working it and tending to it
daily; it is necessary to remove our dirt from within and after cleansing our interior by looking at it
as ifin an mirror and by introspecting, we should invite Shri Ganesha to preside there, not only at
the Mooladhar Chakra but at all Chakras. His kingdom extends upto the Agnya chakra. Jesus
Christ has said, lam the Path, Iam the way". But He has not said that"l am the destruction". He
has left it to the Adi Shakti (Holy Ghost) to go further.
All religions they all stress on purity and chastity, which is the main power of Shri Ganesha When
a human being does not observe "Maryadas" or does not respects this purity in himself, he lands
himselfin grave difficulties, because the power of Shri Ganesha recedes from him. He faces lots
of ailments and diseases. Sahaja Yogis should always invite Shri Ganesha, think of Him and
whenever faced with bad thoughts, should pray to Him for his power and help. With His hard work
and purity, a human being can scale such great heights that it appears likeadream to him. Those
who saw Shri Ganesh in Mooladhar Chakra, mistook it and thought that this was Mooladhar, the
abode of Kundalini. Because of this, the Tantriks created a lot of problems.
Purity and Chastity are our heritage and we should treasure it. "Marriage" as an institution is an
offshoot of that heritage. Those who tried to preserve our "Dharma" (the ten masters) have done
a lot of work for this. Forexample, Mohammad Sahab, who had three wives, and many talk about
this. Butthis was in accordance with the times (Samay-anusar). At that time, somanyyoung men
had perished in the wars, thatif he had not shown this way, many youngwomen who had no means
of livelihood would have gone a wrong way, because of inavailability of grooms. Marriage as an
institution is pure, and that is why, Mohammad Sahab had to marry so many times to preserve the
sanctity ofthe women. We have to understand this. Even Shri Krishna had 16000 wives besides
the other 5 wives. Now the 16000 were his powers, and 5 were the elements (Panch
Mahabhootas). To keep these with Him, He had to give a sanctity to these women by making
them His wives. Since, He was a man, and hence people could easily cast aspersions of Him. I
amthe Mother, andI can have children, sono one can put me in that situation. In orderto avoid this
controversy, He had to make them His wives. Thus, we have to learn to understand why these
incarnations did what appears strange. They are the part of "Parmatma" and whatever they did
was for the interest of the Society. Shri Ganesha was fully awakened in them.
We have to realize that Shri Ganesha cannot be obtained by doing His Puja, singing his praises
giving lectures about Him, but that we have to awaken Him within is. In all of you He has been
awakened, but it is unsteady, and when it is so, even your attentior become shaky. Such Sahaj
Yogis are half baked, situated at the periphery, not yet in the midst cit. Eachone has to maintain
honour of his own character. He should maintain the privacy of hi:. own being, and not make an
Divine Cool Breeze
6.
Vol. VI - Issue 3&4
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-9.txt 
 openexhibition of it orputit up for sale or by his eyes destroy its sanctity. These are all wrong things
one should know that-thatone does not realize by sucha behaviour, one's attention gets totally
disturbed. Then the attention can stray anywhere, and you can suffer from any disease or any
problems. Anything can happen.
To do this "Stuti" (worship Him), there are different forms. Mohammad Sahab also in His "Stuti"
of Jesus Christ said that he is "Nishkalanka' (without blemish) in every way even we have to see
that we become more and more without any blemishes from day to day. Toachieve this state, we
have to make our attention so pure that we just do not do anything wrong, It is not necessary to
involve our mind in this. Once we get steady in this state and realize thatwejust cannot do aswrong,
then no amount ofevil, dirtand squalor or temptation.can touch us anymore. That is whyIsaythat
it is easiest to become innocent and pure and simple like a child. Today I find that in the West
children are under constant attact of negativity, as if some destructive force is on them. We have
to be very alert thatsuch a force does not come here. Our Indian culture is so very rich and good,
that here the children can really flourishwell. Itis yourresponsibility to remainalertand keep awatch
on yourchildren and yourself. Children have to be told not to do certain things and reminded that
they are Sahaj Yogis. Today. people feel that if you stop children from doing things, you are putting
a spoke in theirwheels. In West, the children do whateverthey want to do. Why did you give them
birth?
What is your responsibility? What have you to do? You have to correct them, "that this what you
do is wrong, we would not help you, we won't give you money
Otherwise our society willalso go the same way. Nothing good from there is taken in, but all the
bad things we still absorb. Isincerely hope that all of you will realize that the work of Shri Ganesha
is "Saha;". He is the one who gives you self-realization, helps to keep your chakras pure and clear,
gives them lightand keeps you and your sight always moving towards the light. Youhave to realize
this one thing from deep within, that we shall notinsult Shri Ganesha in any way.
THope that after this Puja, within all of you here in Delhi, a new "Dharma" will be established - a
dharma of auspisciousness (Shubh). For a person who is "Shubh", one glance of his is enough
to make others alright. As they say the glance is "Kataksh, Kataksh Nirikshan"-means that with
every side- oneglance gives full "Nirikshan". Yourmemory will improve. All left-sided things will
be destroyed by the awakening of Shri Ganesha. Nowthis is not something that can be got from
outside, but it has to come from within. I hopeall of you acquire this and getenlightened byits light,
may the awareness of this power spread in the whole "Brahmanand" and the people come to
realize it. These are my blessings to you.
Talking about Shri Ganesha, is one gets into meditation and the attention goes deep within. It is
like the presence of a child amidst the grown-ups and how everyone gets attracted towards the
child. It is a kind of "Vatsalaya Rasa" (essence of affection)., This "Vatsalaya"-I hope that all of
/
you will put this into practice.
May God bless you.
10
Val. VI - Issue 3&4
Divine Cool Breeze
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-10.txt 
 SHRI KRISHNA PUJA TALK
HER HOLINESS SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
11.12.93-Hathnikund (Synopsis)
Today we are going to have the pooja of Shri Krishna. In Shri Krishna's life the river Yamuna has
played a very great role. Yamuna river is a very deep river and its waters are blue in colour, which
is the colour of Shri Krishna. The river Ganges is faster and is much shallowerthan this river. Next
year, maybe we can go to Allahabad and see the confluence of these two great rivers. The whole
of Haryana has been a very historical place with mythological significance, and you know that here
the Pandavas and the Kauravas fought the war at Kurukshetra, and also that all this area has been
used since long for meditation. Markandya, whose name you have heard often, meditated here.
First he was in Maharashtra where you have seen the "Shapta Shringi" but later he came down
here to meditate and wrote his treatise Everywhere you find the place of a pir and realised souls,
who are respected till today. This is the area of great spirituality because Shri Krishna lived here.
In these days there were no cars and other modes of transport, so he has vibrated all this land so
beautifully. He was very fond of playing near the river Yamuna. Of course, his childhood was not
spent here, but after he became the king, used to visit this place many a times. We have to
understand his character in a very special way. First we had the incarnation of Shri Rama - Shri
Vishnu took his birth as Shri Rama but he forgot or was made to forget his own divinity. He lived
as an ordinary person, became a benevolent king as described by Socrates. He had also to
sacrifice his wife, that was ofcourse very symbolic. In the other part of North India we can of course
seethe areas vibrated by Himwhere Hemoved. But in Maharashtra, where He later moved without
shoes, walked for miles together, He has vibrated the entire land. This land has been vibrated by
many saints and greatincarnations. Shri Krishna on the one hand was like a child and Hewanted
to create the atmoshpere of mirth, because after Shri Rama, religion took a very serious turn, and
a very austere of religious atmosphere was created. Then the same incarnation took birth as Shri
Krishna and He wanted to show the spirituality is not serious, it is a game one has to play. People
do not understand Shri Krishna atall. They cannot comprehend from Shri Rama's concept to that
of Shri Krishna, which I feel is really much higher, because He had to show thatall this world is just
ajoke, is maya, and beyond that is joy. His style was very interesting. In those days they could not
have these beautiful pandals, so many disciples, so He tried His own style. When He was a child,
there weremany milkmaids called "gopis" who would be taking their bath in the Yamuna. Hewould
just break their water pitchers and the water would just flow down their backs. This Yamuna river
was vibrated by "Radhaji" - "Ra" means "energy" and "Dha" means "one who sustains", He did
not know how to tell them about the "Kundalini", and so He would take stones and throw at the
pitchers, making the water flow down their backbone, giving them the blessings of the Kundalini.
His style was extremely simple playful, mirthful and nobody understood why Hewas doing all these
things. Now when He was a very small child, there were ladies who would take baths, and He would
try and rouse their Kundalinis. Hewould take their clothes, hide them, and then vibrated them. Many
people don't know the little child, He is so innocent, and He was just teasing them and how He
wanted to show that life is nothing butgreatjoy. He would than give them their clothes Later on, He
grew up and became the King of Dwarka Nowin ourcountry there are many western intellectuals
Divine Cool Breeze
11
Val
l. VI - Issue 3&4
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-11.txt 
 and they try to say that there were two Shri Krishnas'. They want to analyse everything, without
understanding spirituality, whatis the subtlety behind it. He had sixteen thousand wives, as they say.
They were his powers. Now, as a MotherI can have thousands of children, boys, girls, men and
women nobody can say anything about my character. But for men it is very difficult. So He got all
his powers born as women, who were married to a King, Actually, they were not married, the king
had abducted them and put themin ajail. He saved them from there, brought themout and married
them. If you see the accent is on marriage. These are sixteen thousand powers, He had sixteen
petals, and thousands of the Sahasrar. So that makes sixteen thousand powers. Then He had five
wives, for which also people have objection. Now these five wives are five elements. The essence
of them, the casual of them came as his wives and he married them. But He was sucha detached
soul. There are so many stories about His detachment. There was one great Rishi-a sage, who
had arrived on the other bank of the Yamuna. There was no Yamuna, but there were Rivers
Narmada and Tapi. His wives wanted to go and serve the sage. When they went to the riverthey
found that it was in floods, and sothey went back to Shri Krishna and told them that they should go
to the river and tell them the truth, and by that truth, the riverwillgodown. Theywere surprised. Then
they served the sage, gave him food and when they came to the river, they again found it in floods.
They were worried and theywent back to the sage and told him that the river was in spate. The sage
asked them to tell the river that the sage was on fast and had not eaten anything. They were
surprised that he hadeaten like a glutton and yet asked them to tell this. But theywent ahead and
told the river as instructed, and immediately the floods receded. They were again suiprised, but
they could cross over.
Now the point is that these people who are on this level, even when they eat, they don'teat, even
though they aremarried, they are completely andabsolutely detached from the work you are doing,
the life you are leading. I cannot say how one can get detached thus of course but by meditating.
by the Kundalini working out and fixing the Kundalini, properly, itwill work out. You will be amazed
howyou will become detached about things and how you can manage things without actually doing
them; how you can work out so manythings withouteven feeling tired. This is a statewhich one has
gotto achieve, and to know whether you are atthat state ornot, you have to notice how many times
you use the word "I" or "me",
When you startusing "I"toomuch, you are not detached so try and instrospect. These are allwords
of illusion. Once you get detached it is a state, in which you have to grow. You cannot get it by
standing on your head.
house").
("I did this", or "I did that", or "this is my child, that is my house
So Shri Krishna's message throughout his life was complete detachmenteven when Hewent with
Arjunato war. Hesaid that Hewould go only as a charioteer, He would not raise any weapons, He
would not fight. He told Arjuna that only if he would agree to that condition, He would go with Him.
When Arjuna questioned Him as to how he could kill all his relations, gurus, friends and became
depressed aboutit, Shri Krishna told thim thatthe truth was that they were already dead. Anything
that is born, has to die. So you have to kill them. Now people can say that Shri Krishna was
preaching violence. But it is.not that what he said was thatall those who are "adharmes"who are
cruel, are against the tradition of dharma all those have to be killed. Whetheryou Kill them or not,
they are already dead, because they have committed so many sins. They are already dead, soyou
should not think that you are killing them, butitis the divine who is going to do the so called killing.
So the war started. Even in the Gita what he wanted to communicate is not understood by the
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VI - Issue 3&4
12
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-12.txt 
 people. You can imagine His detachement from the fact that he is preaching philosophywhen the
war is already on. The first thing he told to Arjuna was that he should take to "gryana" "Gyana
means "Bodh" and that is possible only through enlightenment. Butpeople don'tunderstand this,
they think that you can get "gyana" by reading books, reciting of "the gita", or listening to
lectures. Now in this country there are manywhogive lectures on Shri Krishnabutin theirown lives
They are horrible people.
Now Shri Krishna was not a businessman, telling you things slowly, buthe was very straight and
said outright to Arjuna that you have to be "Stitha Pragnya" ie. a Sahaj Yogi.
Then Arjuna asked him why he wanted him to go to war and do this "Karma." Thatis also very much
misunderstood. Only afteryougetyour realisation you can understand whatit is & do your"Karma.
He has said it very clearly, that you do whatever action you have to do and put it at my Lotus Feet
which is an important statment, as long as you have the sense that you are doing sornething, as
long as there is anego or an "I"existing within you Youmay say that you are putting itat the Lotus
Feet of God, butyou don't. Shri Krishna realised when Arjuna asked him the question that human
nature is not straight forward, and so very diplomatically. he told him to put everything at his Lotus
Feet, which he knew, human beings would not do So people have tried that since ages but have
not been able to do that because whatever we do we feel responsible for that and so we cannot
put it at the Lotus Feet. There have been people who have murdered and said that we have put
it at Gods Lotus Feet. This kind of a delusion has let people in this country horrible things like killing
travellers in the name of the Goddess. Butwhat Shri Krishna talked of can only be possible after
your realisation. When you really feel, you are not doing anything that it works. When we ask a
Sahaj Yogito give realisation he says that" it is not working." itis not. "going "etc: This he speaks
in the "third person", he becomes the third person, and does not think that he is doing anything.
He is raising the kundalini by his own hands, but does not feel that he is doing it. he talks that this
chakra is not allright, here it is blocked etc. So his "Karma" or action becomes "akarma" or non
action. Even though you are acting, doing everything, but you dont feel you are doing anything.
He felt that no body would take to self- realisation so better to put the condition, that place
everything atthe Lotus Feetof God. Then Arjuna asked about "bhakti", and Shri Krishna answered
himin a very clever way. KnowI am not that clever like Shri Krishna, I say everything in a straight
manner Shri Krishna knew that human beings are too clever and if they are to be convinced they
cannot be convinced in a straight forward way. So he said that whateverflower, water, fruits you
offerto me, I will accept, butnow is the trick but the bhakti is to be done when there is not the other
thatis ananya. Ananya means there is nobody else you and me. Means you should be connected
to me then only you can do "bhakti". But nobody understands this, or they dontwant to understand
what "ananya" means. Itmeans that you are a self-realised soul. Shri Krishna said that this is the
bhakti I will accept. So one must have connection, otherwise one
as this microphone if it is not connected to the mains, will not work, it is similarly so. Also there is
a certain protocol, to be followed because Shri Krishna is an incarnation. Evenif you have to meet
a Chief Minister, and you go on calling out his name, you will be arrested. Now Shri Krishna is
god almighty and one cannottake his name cheaply by chanting it continuously. Thatis how people
have spoiled theirkundalinis and have vishuddhiproblems. They dont feel anything on their hands
even though they may be Shri Krishna Bhaktas, because their bhakti is wrong.
can getina lot of problems. Just
Divine Cool Breeze
13
Vol. VI - Issue 3&4
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Soto understand Shri Krishna you have to be suttle and read between the lines. His mischief, His
pranks, His childlike behaviour are all no sweet and beautiful to creat a feeling of innocence and
respect. Now when an Indiansees a child, hedevelops a kind offeeling which we call "vat salya",
va feeling ofgreat love affection and protection for a child. Butin westwhatIhave seen is that children
are somuch underattack. I dont know why they are doing it. There is no feeling of vatsalaya of all
butitissomething so cruel Idontknowwhetherthey are possessed, orthere is a kind of influence.
oftheir previous lives or whateveritis, but the way they attack the innocence of small children. It is
impossible to understand how human beings can do that. So Shri Krishnas child like behaviour
makes you feel the love, affection and protection for the little child.
Now there is anotherthing about Him, ShriKrishna was connected to the Pandavas. Draupadiwas
also His sister. Shri Vishnumayawas born as Draupadi. Also there was His Mother Yashoda, and
Radhaji, who was Mahalakshrni, Mother Mary, and Shegave birth to Shri Ganesha, that was lord
Jesus Christ In India, no onewould doubt the Immaculate Conception, but for others it is too much
to belive. They are all arguing about this. For Indians it is easy to believe because Shri Ganesha
was also created in the same way. Now" Ra-Dha"was Mother Mary and it is surprising that if you
read the "Devi Mahatyan" itis clearly written who Lord Jesus Christis, that He is the support that
is the Mooladhare. Heis referred to as Mahavishnu, Heis the support ofthe universe. Nowall these
were related people; but we arestupidly fighting because we do nathave the knowledge of reality.
Radhaji wanted to give Him the name of Yashoda. So He is called" Jesu", in hebrew it is "Yesu".
Alsoin north India, "Yashada"is called"Jashoda" and thus He became Jesus, You can verify what
Isay on your vibrations. So they are all related to each otherand the greatest thing is that they are
all divine people. Sowe cannot understand and analyse themor pass remarks about them. Todo
this, is a sign of human arrogance because with his limited knowledge, he wants to talk about
divinity. Itis beyond the brains or human intelligence. So the only thing we can do is to be humble
and surrendered. That is how "Islam" came, and that means "to surrender". But where they are
surrendering only they would know. All christiaris, where are they following Christ, or all Hindus
where are they following the principle that everybody has a Spiritin theirhearts. How canyou have
a caste system, ifeverybody has aspirit. Nowthank God somany people in the world have become
Sahaja Yogis. We have transcended all these artificial barrierrs in our divine life. How can the
divine divide people; some higher, sorne lower. Only thing is you have to achievethat state in which
you see the whole world as a drama, as Shri Krishna has said and You are the witness or":Sakshi"
of all that.
Thad to tell you the story of Shri Krishnabecause this river Yamuna reminds me ofall those beautiful
things He did. Alsolwas happy yesterday whenI sawall you people dancing and enjoying which
is very significant, because all these whodid this earlierwere not saints-theywere ordinary people
with whom Shri Krishna wanted to hold hands called "ras"-"Ra" means energy and "Sa" means
with, and with the energy of Radhaji, they were all getting their enlightenment.
All the religion today have lost their form and meaning and have become very corrupt. This is
because, it is a mental attitude, which has its own limitations, after some time there is always a
decline; because there is no strength of truth in it. That is how we find decline in arts, in music, in
everysphere. Now, all you people have found
is the one that is eternal, and the truth is love. Truth is Divine Love, which has no consequences
the truth, so please try and understand that the truth
Divine Cool Breeze
14
Vol. VI - Issue 3&4
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-14.txt 
 It does not claim anything, does not want anything. Itjust wants to love and when you see this all
pervading powerof love being kind, everyone here has had some kind of miracle. This is all done
by this all-pervading power of Divine Love to convince you, by doing all theirinteresting things; like
showing different types of my photographs; but the best that was done was this time in Navratri
whenIsawmyphotographinwhichadifferent kind of background appeared. There was something
round and a curtain and something peeping out like a Sun from behind it. Now when I went from
there to Russia, Isawthe same scene behind me there. Soeven before it was conceived ordone
there, it was seen in Navratri also, supported by the Divine Everybody saw it in Moscow, the
whale scene behind me so this is how all sorts of tricks are played by this all pervading power,
even when l am not there it seems that l am there. It is working out in so many ways, thatone has
to understand that what we think is a miracle is really theplay of this all pervading power of God's
Love.
Vol. VI-Issue 3&4
15
Divine Cool Breeze
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-15.txt 
 CHRISTMAS PUJA
HER HOLINESS SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
25.12.93-Ganapatipule (Synopsis)
Today we are going to celebrate the birth of Christ. This is a very crucial time because there are
some anti- Christ who are in charge of the Christian religion, who are talking against the birth of
Christ. They have no authority, they are not realised souls, they have no idea of the Divine. They
are saying that Mother Mary was not a virgin, and that Christ was not born this way. Some of you
can write to them and ask with what authority they speak thus. In Satya Yug they will all be
exposed, because they have no authority to speak thus, as they have not felt the all pervading
power. They have no idea how miracles take place. It is only by the blessing of the Divine that a
miracle is produced. You all have experienced this blessings of the Divine. Iwill narate a simple
example - In Navratri Puja this year, in the photograph that was taken, a curtain background
appeared wherein there was a Sunpeeping out from behind a curtain, with eyes, nose and smiling
Later when we went to Moscow, the same thing was seen on the stage. The Param Chaitaniya
painted the same scene abouta month and a halfago, before it was concieved and done. There
are a thousand and one miracles you can talk about. Now when I was flying to Moscow the
temperature recorded outside was -20, when we touched Moscow it was -15, but later on in the
afternoon it was -4. Nextday it was +10. As time passes it always becomes cooler, but this time
it became warmer. This shows that all the elements are helping us. All the other minor and big
problems sort out, you will be amazed how things work out.
Now the question they ask is why Christ had to be crucified ? Why He could not be saved? Now
Christhad to be crucified because he had to pass through the Agnya, which was very narrow. He
had to pass through the cross and establish Himself there.. The message of His life is not the
Cross, but the message of Resurrection. Hewas Resurrected-thatwas one of the things He did,
so that now you can be Resurrected. Every incarnation is something unique. Butthe end of itwas
the Resurrection. He did it, because He had to die. Otherwise how can you Resurrect yourself?
There are lots of thing which look difficult, butwhich are not. There are some who say that Christ
never Resurrected Himself. Actually, He died later on in Kashmir. There is proof of it. But still,
people don't believe it, because they know thatif they are in the majority, they cando anything. But
this time the majority is not going to help. In fact Mohammed Saheb in the Holy Kuran says that you
should only worship the Chastity of the Holy Mother of Christ! He had respected the Mother. But
there is no respectto Mother Mary in the Bible. They call Hera Woman', because of Paul, who was
anti-Christ, who took over Christanity, tried to spread Christanity. What he wanted was to put in
his own importance, and he used Peter, who was the worst disciple of Christ. Christ had told about
him "The Satan will take you". There are people who still say, "How can Christ be born to a
Virgin ?" Indians worship Shri Ganesha. Shri Ganesha is the same as Christ. We believe that the
Mother Herself created the child as Shri Gauri, as Virgin. Thatis our faith. Thus in the West, the
faith is all 'rationality', there are people who produce all falsehoods. What is the purpose of the
Newspapers publishing all this nonsense. Youhave to understand that rationality can nevermake
you understand the truth. It is so limited, so conditioned, so full ofego. How can rationality tell you
Divine Cool Breeze
16
Vol. VI - Issue 3&4
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-16.txt 
 the truth about Christ? We alsonow have scientific proof. I told them thatifyou see from the right
to the left, you seea Swastika -because of the carbonatom, people havemade amodel of it. Then
if you see fromthe left to the right, you see Ornkara When yousee fromdown below, yousee Alpha
and Omega. Christ had said "I am the Alpha and the Omega".
"lamthe begining and lam the end". The way He has said Alpha and Omega, you can see clearly,
symbolically if you see from down, up. So Omkara on one side, Swastika on another side, joint
together, when they ascend and Incarnate, they will becorme the Alpha and Omega. All this does'nt
go into the heads of anti Christ. And they cannotunderstand what Divinity can do. You have got
your realisation, your second birth - How did you get your second birth ? As you know, Shri
Ganesha is very powerfuland Christ had said that if you say anything against the Holy Ghost, I will
not tolerate it. Also against Christ, I will not tolerate. Only on that point I have to see that all these
horrible people should be destroyed completely. On this occasion of His Birthday, Isay that Christ
was born from the same thing as Shri Ganesha. He was the Wisdom, the Source of Wisdom.
Ofcourse they did notallow Him to live long, after His work of three or three and a half years, He could
lecture. But whatever He said, He was so correct, so wise. Of course they might have tried to
dabble with that, but still lots of truth are left in the Bible He spent His lifetime telling them about
Italso has another meaning, that
truth, He is the first person who talks so clearly about God. You have to be clear about God.
We have three other people in the area of "Tapa".Oneis Buddha and the other is Mahavira. Now
Buddha and Mahavira were bornata time when ritualismwas taking place of reality. Sothey said.
"We will not talk of God. We will only talk about the Chaitanya".
Ashtawarka, whowas the Guru of Janaka talked only aboutthe vibrations. Even Nanaka did that.
When Namdeva wentdown to Oriya, He said we won'ttalk about God-Don'ttalkaboutHari. Better
talk about Param Chaitanya first of all. Because one can reach only Param Chaitanya to reach
God. Atthat time, they did'ntwant to talk about God Almighty. Itwas only Jesus Christwho talked
. Everybody did that - even
about God Almighty , He was very brave, never afraid of anything, no doubt. Jesus Christs'
childhood has not been described anywhere. Like we have descriptions of Shri Krishna's
childhood, Shri Rama's childhood. This is really sad. Except one incident when He was in an
argument with a Pharsee, and they were flabbergasted to see how clever He was and the kind of
discretion He had.
But later on even though they had shown no regard for Moiher Mary, the people could'nt help
showing the same. They said that She had to be some Goddess, otherwise how could Christ take
birth from Her. Sotheycalled Her Madonna-Maiden, Virgin. Thenthis Madonna started occupying
a place in Churches, everywhere. People regarded Her as Goddess. People started to see Her
as The Mother. Itis the people who did this, nol the Bible, not Christanity. She was Mahalakshmi
and we know that and we worship Her as Mahalakshmi. She was Radha. Radha also has a son
and He was like an egg. Half of the egg was Jesus Christ and half was Shri Ganesha. Butwhen
this Child was born, He started crying for His Father. The father was Shri Krishna and the finger
for Vishuddhi is the forefinger. Always Jesus puts His hands like this (V sign) towards His Father.
Forefinger is Shri Krishna's finger and middle finger is Vishnu. The Mother was Radha - "Ra"
means energy and "dha" means the one who sustains it. Sheis the one who called Him"Jesus".
Actually in Hebrewit is "Yesu" and also in Marathi Bible, which is a directtranslation from Hebrew,
it is Yesu. Yesuis the name ofthe Mother of Shri Krishna YesuorJesus from Yeshoda or Jeshoda
And Christ word comes from Krishna. By calling Him Jesus or Yesu and Christ or Krisht, She
17
Vol. V
I - Issue 3&4
Divine Cool Breeze
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-17.txt 
 made iteasy forus to understand how closely Jesus was related to Shri Krishna. Now Shri Krishna
incarnated only in India because He would have been too linienta person to incarnate in America,
as it is these people did not have any limitations, no maryadas, no sense of 'Dharma'. They are
great Adharmis ! So only a person like Christ, who is absolutely pure, wise and does not believe
in the Leela part of Shri Krishna could come. Shri Krishna said that this is all Leela, to overcome
the strictness of Shri Rama. But Christ did not say so. Despite this, all overwherever Christanity
is practised, they say this is all Leela! Adharma is Leela, whateverwrong we do is Leela, we are
all innocent! Their logic is so funny ! All self destructive, nonsensical logic.
Forus Indians, we have full idea of Dharma, we know what is rightand whatis wrong. More credit
I would give to these Christians who are from such countries where they have no idiea about
Kundalini, buthave worked so hard, have come up somuch and become suchgreat Sahaja Yogis.
It is a blessing of God, because they were genuine and sincere. It is Christ who brought them to
Sahaja Yoga. Without Him, it would not have been possible. Here Shri Ganesha is justa symbol,
but there He incarnated! He told people what dharma is, which they aresupposed to follow. But
yet they are extremely money oriented people-Whatsort of things they have done in the name of
God ! Where He was born, it is the most symbolic thing, He was born in a manger, full of straws
assermbled together. There were animals. He was born, not as a rich man, but as a very poor
person, and in a place very much considered below human standards. This is to show you that
you don't need palaces or huge places to be born. You can be born anywhere if you are a pure
person. Suchagreat personality was born like this. Nowit is the otherway round.
are extremely materialistic, money oriented to such a limit that they are destroying themselves
with whatever money they have made. They have no sense of proportion - this is what is
happening in the West. And we are trying to followthem! Following their destructiveness, we think
People there
we are very advanced. Advanced towards doom!
We have to be very careful with our children, relations, thatwe don't take to their dirty ways, which
they have created in the name of God! Inspite of all this, we have a very largegroup of Sahaja Yogis.
Theyareall blessed people-you knowwhat Divinity is, what Christis. Whetheryouareborma Hindu
or whatever, we know that Christ belongs to all. Christis universal, Heis thesupportofthe universe,
That is mentioned in the 'Devi mahatmaya' so one must understand that. We must not ridicule
anyone who is following Christ. We must worship Christ with the same affection, devotion and
surrender as we worship Shri Ganesha. I don't think Christians have any faith about Christ,
whereas a Sahaja Yogis' faith works because it is enlightened. You must have faith in yourself,
in Sahaja Yoga and in the life you are leading. Unless and util this happens to you, you should'nt
call yourselfa Sahaja Yogi. There are yetmany people on the periphery who don'tunderstand fully,
they understand only mentally and just float into the immense love of God and you should want to
give this love to others Still materialism is important with some people. They are materialistic in
the sense, they still think of making money in a bad way. Others get attached to theirchildren. This
attachment is wrong. Christ neverwanted it. We have to understand and to pay respect to Christ,
we must get out of these materialistic ideas.
Idon't say that you should go to the Himalaya, take to asceticism, orgive up children like Buddha
did, but your detachment to work should be there. You are all there on this earth, but you must
develop your detachment. In the begining it is alright, 'My father is sick, My mother is sick'. Not
Divine Cool Breeze
18
. VI - Issue 3&4
Vol.
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-18.txt 
 now. Now the speed of Sahaja Yoga is very fast, and many will be left behind. Sobe careful Do
not get entangled by these materialistic ideas. Specially for Indians, they don't like to stay in
Ashrams. Indiansjustwantto have their homes where they can dominatetheirwifes and have their
special types of food! Ithink that's why people must have said that Indians must fast-to getrid of
their tongue desires. They will keep fast but keep thinking offood. Whatis the use ? Christ fasted
for 40 days and when Satan tempted Him, He just ignored him.
Materialismworks in diffferentways. In the Westitis "My house, my wife, my children". in the East
it is "What sort of food leat, what sort of a house and a family I should have". All thesethings are
still lingering. As your ascent is becoming subtier, they are also becoming subtler. And they are
holding you. Iknow of Sahaja Yogis who want to make a business of Sahaja Yoga. Can younot
control yourself? itis very easy Christdid it. You have come here toworship Him. Tryto control
these things. It is very important. It does'nt matter. You can live anywhere. Like I have no
demands. My body does'nt demandit And that's why I never feel tired. Istay herewith you, Ican
just sleep even here. Once I travelled by train from Pune to Hyderabad - Iwas on the wheel -
it was so jerky and jumpy. ButIjust felt thatI was going from one star to another starl Another
person would have been absolutely angry for all the jumps andjerks. Onthe contrary. Iwas feeling
nice, jumping from one starto another! Somy reaction is very different. If there is a crisis, Ibecome
completely thoughtless. And a kind oftremendous peace starts flowing out And this is what you
can achieve, if you get detached.
NOWI have children. Thave grandchildren. I never phone them. They phone me. Inevereven
telephonemy Husband. Telephoning is awaste of time. Ihaveatelephoriewithin myselfandIknow
all of you are alright But unless and untilyou attain that state of detachment this is difficult. Now
Iknowsome Sahaja Yogis they become suddenly very violentand hit others. YouknowIneverraise
my hand against my own children. It is not allowed. Nobdy has to raise their hand or touch
somebody's body. Youarenottogetangry, notto shout. Otherwise withoutyour knowing you will
go down. Be absolutely calm, peaceful and compassionate. Butif you are still attached, you do
all this. Sobe careful, not to be angry. Ifthere is suchaperson, let me know. Lookat Christ. He
was angry with the people who were selling things nearthe Church. Hetook a big hunter and hit
them hard. But He was Christ! Atthe same time, when He was crucified, He said, "O God, My
FatherI please forgive them, because they don't know what they are doing"!
This is what one has to understand from Him-His character. Howforgiving and loving Hewas. How
He looked after and helped peopletowards theiremancipation. In those days of complete chaos
and anarchy, He stood up and talked about"truth" and things like "spirif" the "ascent". The people
to whom He talked were all blind people, yet He talked. There are lots of myths in the Bible and
one of them is that at the time of resurrection, your bodies will come out of the graves. This is not
only for Christians, but also forthe Muslims and the Jews. Think of this-Whatremains in the grave
after many years ? - only a few bones, and if these bones came Out, how can you give them
realisation? Think of it. Itis a big myth. Not possible logically In'Nal Damyanti Akhyan" they have
clearly given that when the Kal Yug will come, all these seekers who are seeking in the Hills and
mountains will be born again and they will be given theirself realisation I But those who have got
it, have to establish themselves. Their Kundalinis will be awakened and that is logical, because that
is what we are doing today. Thatis why there is sucha populationexplosion, butlam notsure how
Divine Cool Breeze
19
Val. VI- Issue 3&4
 1994_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-19.txt 
 Imany of these will get their self realisation. But those who have got it, have to establish
themselveand there also I find that there is some sort of a subtle attachment with people. So for
the time being, I feel that you should all surrender youself to the qualities of Christ, which are
immense, and the greatest amongst them is that He cannot tolerate anything against the Holy
Ghost.
Itell you, if you are a Sahaja Yogi and ifyou misbehave, He may perhaps allow you to some extent.
Ifwe have to telloff people weshould use Sahaja Yogaways and neverbevoilent or rude. Tam very
upset when I hear that even now people are violent in Sahaja Yoga. This comes from a bad liver
and you can go in for a liver treatment. But rememberyou.cannotget away with it. It is beter that
these people fast for 2 days and punish themselves. Temper is the worst thing and Shri Krishna
has said that it is this 'temper thateverything starts. Sowe must control ourtemper and remember
that Christwas the embodiment of forgiveness.
We are worshipping Him today. How He forgave people, those who crucified Him-they were not
the Jews, but the Romans. The Roman authority crucified Him. With this kind of attitude people
hated them, troubled and tortured them. Then the Jews hada reaction and they are also equally
the same. Itwas neverdone.-that the Magistrate asked the multitudes that whether they should
crucify a common thief or this Man. This was never done, Magistrates have to take their own
decisions. So this is just to bring a curse on the Jews.
Butthank God now we have many Jews in Sahaja Yoga and also centers in Israel. We have also
lots of people from Iran who have come to America and who are also Jews and Muslims who are
in Sahaja Yoga. I hearthat the Sufis from Turkey arejoining us and also the Sufis from India. Thus,
it will work out for everybody. We must all understand how Christ was, how His life was and how
He loved the world, He came to this world to be crucified. He knew it and He did it. The way they
have given His picture is not correct. He was a very healthy, hefty and tall person. He had to carry
the cross. These people who painted Him like a T.B. patient should know that if they had to carry
the cross, could they do it ? So all sort of things they have done to harm His personality, to
assasinate His character. But you being Sahaja Yogis, should know about Him, have full respect
for and faith in Him. He is your elder brother and as Shri Ganesha, He incarnates as your elder
brother. Heis there to look afteryouinevery trouble, in every turmoil. He is going to help us in every
way, all the time and the only way for us is to surrender, to forgive- the quality of His, we have to
imbibe
30
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VI - Issue 3&4
20
