DIVINE COOL BREEZE ISSUE 9 & 10 VOLUME VII Sahaja Yoga is for your benevolence and your kundalini is for benevolence. The ascent is the aim of your life and to perfect it is your job. your H. H. Shri. Mataji Nirmala Devi Adi Kundalini Puja 1995. Cabella, Italy.

 DIVINE COOL BREEZE VOL. VII ISSUE 9 & 10 Contents : 1. Sahasrara Puja, Cabella, Italy. 2. Adi Shakti Puja, Cabella, Italy. 3. Talk to Sahaja Yogis, London. Edited by Published by : Divine Cool Breeze, 9 Bhagyachintamani Soc., Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune - 411 029. Printed by: Golden Arts, 2/11, Bandal Complex, Paud Road, Pune 411 029. Yogi Mahajan Vol. VII Issue 9 & 10 Divine Cool Breeze 1

 SAHASRARA PUJA TALK H. H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI Cabella, Italy. 7th May 1995 (Synopsis) Today it's a great day for all the Sahaja Yogis that on this day, the Sahasrara was opened out. It was just a miracle, because I didn't think that I was at a point where it could be done. So I wanted to wait but some things happened that made me think that it has to be opened. It was in such a situation that I felt not to delay it any more, as it may help these talse gurus to spread this nonsense all over. This is just a Sahaja way of doing things. Now 25 years have passed, you all have gathered during this time, and we have so many others who are not here who have achieved so many things. But perhaps we are not aware of what we have achieved in the real sense of the word. You got your vibrations. You can feel this all pervading power. You are swimming in the ocean of the joy. You are all enjoying the collectivity, you hove transcended many of your limitations. All this has happened to you because it is your right to have it. I don't take any credit for it. Only thing all the time I am pointing out to you is one thing that you have entered in the kingdom of God, and enjoy yourselves. When we see around ourselves, the whole nature enjoys itself. It doesn't bother about anything. They have not got their realisation. They have not felt param chaitanya. But how is it they know that they have to enjoy. The flowers come out for a short time and fade out. But as long as they live they are very hoppy. They don't think of their past or the future. They enjoy the in the present and present they enjoy their fragrance and also they are giving fragrance to others. They are beautiful and they are soothing others. The whole nature is like that. If you look at the birds or anything that we call natural, it's all in a sort of meditative mood. All' these hills and big big mountains, they look as if they are witness to whatever has been happening. Now we have to really first look back at what we have achieved. That is important. Because if you are climbing up a hill, if you look back you get a shock and you may fall down. Normally people say don't look back. But a person who has earned some treasure, he again and again goes Counts it and finds out how much he has got, every time he sees that, he enjoys. To know relatively what we have got and how we have achieved something, will definitely give you the strength of mind and richness of life. and The first thing that has happened to you which is very important is this that you have felt the all pervading power. That shows you must have been the great seekers of truth, honest, sincere and sensible. That just by coming to my programme, felt the vibration and after that, started settling down into it. So many of you have felt it, suddenly they were amazed shocked and surprised. They wanted to test whether it is true or not. But then you were confident, you found that you got definitely new dimension in your life and that you are feeling this all pervading power of Divine Love. That you got out of this in essence, is complete freedom. You have achieved your complete freedom. First of all the freedom has come to you, from your ego. This wall of ego you have crossed. You have got out of the bondàge of this ego which was really so much full of problems for you. So many things this ego does of which you are not aware. If a person is egoist he doesn't mind hurting Divine Cool Breeze 3. Vol. VII Issue 9 & 10

 anyone. He hurts but if he is hurt he doesn't like it, immediately he starts crying. Specially people who have too much ego are very easily hurt. But they don't understand that how many people they have hurt already. And how many are really frightened of such a person. It is sinful to hurt other human being for anything for whatever may be the reason that you feel you should hurt another. The first thing is revenge. The idea of revenge is there that I must take revenge on a person who has hurt me or who has done something wrong to me. This idea of revenge comes when you react, some react very violently. People murder each other in the name of revenge. In the world there is some sort of stupid idea of a revenge. But if you go to the subtle side of revenge what is it what revenge you have taken. Supposing there is somebody who has troubled you; you are angry with that person, and you have killed that person so you have actually saved that person. He won't have to do anything, he is just finished. What is the revenge? The revenge should be only by which a person gets out of his idea of killing others. The revenge that we think we can take on another person is not a revenge, because any action you take in name of revenge comes back to you and hurts you much more. the So much of revenge is going on even in the name of God. Taking revenge because certain people are following some religion, or they are doing something else other than what you are doing. What is happening is that you are just killing people, destroying them who do not even understand what sort of revenge you are taking. People are putting bombs and by that thousands of innocent people have been killed. So what kind of a revenge are you taking? They don't deserve any revenge. This revenge when it explodes can destroy so many innocent people and it will definitely react on you. You cannot get away with it. If's a very long process of this revenge. About the Bermuda Triangle they say, that so many blacks were taken as slaves and drowned there. Their spirits are haunting the people who are passing by and they just drown them. When we take revenge every action has a reaction. So some how you have to get out of that revenge. Just get out of that idea. There is another thing that if you don't take revenge and leave it to God, it acts, not only that, but Divine power takes into it's own control how to really give a good lesson to that person, community or the organisation which is taking revenge on you. You don't have to worry. In these 25 years I have seen people have been extremely unkind to me. Many organisations, so called religions, all kinds of things have been after us. Media has been after us. Take the example of French media, they tried to trouble us so much, doesn't matter, now three of the media people who went to India are now under warrant, if they go to India they will be arrested. I didn't do anything! Secondly the same newspapers are all bankrupt. We didn't do anything about that. We didn't that they should become bankrupt. We didn't take any revenge. Why should go and we? We are not bothered as to what these people have done to us but legally they are now involved in such a way that they are under warrant and they will be arrested if they go to India. The whole of French government is with them, all of them are trying so much but this punishment is on their head. In their life time, they didn't have to die or do anything, in their life time they have got it. say The forgiveness will look after the whole arrangement of how to bring the other person to his proper this path. Once you are out of this idea of revenge you really feel extremely peaceful, because Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VII Issue 9 & 10

 peace that you have is within yourself. It's not unnatural. Its not mental but it just happens to you. So many things are there which have worked out automatically. Now in Turkey there was some boy from England and he went and told the media something against Sahaja Yoga, and it was all published. But in the end he confessed on the T.V. that whatever he said was false. Nobody went and told him, or wrote to him. From your point of view, you must understand that you are not going to get into any mess of taking of any kind because you belong to the government of God. This government is extremely revenge alert, very genuine, extremely efficient and as far as you are concerned, you are the citizens of that great kingdom of God where you should feel absolutely secured. The man who is secured is never afraid. You have also got rid of your fear. I don't know why you are afraid of this or that health, family, children, house. Sahaja Yogis have no wory. worry? That instrument of worry is over. It's finished. It's gone out of order. You are now in a state where it all works out. Why should we you just have no time to worry because you are enjoying yourself. This fear in people works so much that so many people get so many diseases out of fear. Specially diseases of left side. What is there to fear? It is like that you beat the mother earth saying that there is a snake. There is no snake. But you may just feel that and just go on. This fear of an idea about a phantom or some sort of a devil standing somewhere is all nonsense. For you it doesn't exist. Say, in the darkness you are walking and you see forms. It doesn't exist actually. But this fear in man mnakes him think like that. As a result he loses his freedom, and becomes slave to so many people. He is afraid that such and such man will harm me, or trouble me. way The whole concept of fear has ruined our family lives. For example a wife is dominating, or a husband is dominating. There is nothing to fear. By fear only you play into their hands. Supposing there is a wife who is dominating, just make fun out of it. If you cannot make fun in of your wife or your husband, better make it outside saying Oh look at that It is your special quality now that you can really get rid of your fear completely. What is there to be afraid of wife or husband. What can he do to you? At the most he will kill you. So what. You are going to die the presence anyway. The fear of death is another nonsense. Just now you are living then why are you asking me what about death. So many people ask me this question. Why do you want to know about it? I will tell you what about today just now. This is another mad idea that we should know about our death and what is going to happen after. Once you are dead you are finished. You don't have to do anything after that. So what's the use of knowing when you will die, what will happen to you. Whatever has to happen will happen. We never ask when we sleep, what will happen. One has to die at the time whenever one has to die. Because whatever is born has to be dead. But you don't know that you have got eternal life. You can never die. Death is not this body, disappearing. Death is where you are absolutely without any control of your soul. Once you are a realised soul you have all the control and all the power to take your soul wherever you like to be born if you like, if you don't want you will not be born. There are many great souls I know that have taken birth daringly in the society which is very much deteriorating and are in the danger of getting destroyed because of the stupidity they do. So this happening that we are afraid of death is absolutely absurd for Sahaja Yogis. What is there to think even about your death. There is Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VII Issue 9 & 10 5.

 nothing like death for you, because you have got eternal life. It's not that you continue with the same body. You may go on changing your dress but you are living, you are aware and you know even if this body is not there, you will be there all the time available for Sahaja Yoga, for anything that is to be done in the name of reality. You must know your position of an eternal being. What is your work? What is your idea? What you have to do? One has to get rid of this idea of death because death doesn't exist for you, finished. All such people who are afraid of their death, go on having insurances, this that, all headaches. Ultimately what happens, all these worldly things, you leave here when you depart. There is nobody who could even carry a little dust with the soul which is departing. But in your case when you people are not on this earth so called then you don't carry with you all these material things because you have already given up, you have no interest in them. You are not materialistic so your spirit is free. When you die what happens to you is a very simple thing that you feel very liberated, absolutely, and then Its all under your own guidance, your own desire, everything works out. You don't feel that have come out of your body. There should be no fear of death but on the contrary it should be welcomed, because you will feel much more liberated. Much more at ease. You don't have other problems of that you have to carry on in this world because of this body. freedom completely and you can decide what you want to do. feel you your you Now when you become so clean, washed out completely, your mind completely cleansed out from all kinds of conditioning you become like a beautiful mirror. In that mirror one can see the complete picture, of the society in which you live. Complete picture of the government who rules your everything. So clear-cut. For example you ask somebody then he will say what is your politics? if I say my politics is, I have no politics. He will say, what you have no politics. How can you exist without politics? I have no politics. So they will go on asking questions to you which are very much unknown. But for a realised soul, it's just the other way round. A realised soul not only sees but also shows and expresses very clearly. I have been amazed at the way people have been so reflective of the society into which they live and their country. So complete identification is lost. You don't feel identified much. You just see what's wrong with that. You start seeing how you can help, what you should do, how can you work it out and the importance of that becomes your main thing Yesterday the way you brought all the flags. Behind that flag I could see all of you wanted that peace should prevail in those countries. They should get all the joy and peace of Sahaja Yoga. What a feeling it is. It is not like yourselves becoming Sahaja Yogis and sitting in the corner. They want to do it for that country about which they are not identified but with identification they have that deep feeling that they have to work it out, correct it, it is a very different type of personality you develop. tell anybody that why you do like this? What is the need to do this? No, because I have If you to live in this society after all. I belong to this society and I just cannot do what I like. But when you get your realisation you can do what you like. You can do what you like because you only like that which is righteous, that which is good, constructive, and helpful. After realisation there is no restriction for you. All these restrictions of don't, don't, don't, this really enslaves you. But after the realisation you are such a free bird that nothing can enslave you. For example, there are many preachers who preach that you should not drink, you should not smoke, you should not take drugs. You should not do this you should not do that. But it does not stop. It does not help. People struggle, Vol. VII Issue 9 & 10 6. Divine Cool Breeze

 try everything but ultimately they commit suicide, but they cannot get rid of those habits. While now you are so powerful that nothing can stick to you. That's the purity of your character that has come up. It does not allow any nonsensical thing to stick to you. So many Sahaja Yogis told me, how just cannot understand. Mother it is your purify you have given us. their eyes have steadied down, how they have become righteous. How they became so pure. They After Sahaja Yoga the same people are telling us and making fun of the whole thing, For example 1 have heard some Sahaja Yogis talking to each other, "You see in my country this is such and such stupid thing going on. Another says "nobody can beat mine it is much worse" It is a very common competition among the Sahaja Yogis going on. So that we have to see how pure we are becoming and in this purity anything that is dirty of anything that will spoil this purity, we don't like it. We are washed, cleansed, from inside and won't want to take anything like that in ourselves anymore. Then I have seen also the way people have become so compassionate. Its very surprising to see how they have become so compassionate to each other. For example there were two Sahaja Yogis who were not very happy with each other. I didn't know how to make them feel that the other Sahaja Yogi is alright. Does not matter, after all what it there? "No I don't like this thing in him and another would say, "Now I don't like this thing in him." So it went on, I don't like, he says. So I said alright, now well you meditate for sometime, again meditate, meditate and I said now love me? One says I love you more than he loves, I said, "it's a difficult situation." How to make them understand now that you cannot weigh your love, you cannot make a chart out of love somebody you enjoy it. You cannot qualify or quantify it. This was going on with these two gentlemen and I thought now what to do. They are very important and still there is no understanding between them. So the divine power took over, one of them fell very sick suddenly. When he fell sick then this other one felt such a tremendous love for him. Its something nobody can explain that he went and sat with that patient for twenty four hours. He said that if you need any money I have got it. He was a very sensible and a reasonable person on his own and felt this love and affection. I think it is divine's play that they were brought together so close and such compassion. So the force of compassion within you is so do vo you it. It is something within yourself. And if you 50 much, it is very subtle you don't see it. Because on mental level I was telling them, arguing, trying to pacify them. It did not work. But when this force of compassion started acting suddenly into one of them, the other one saw the compassion, the pure compassion and they became great friends. One has to feel the compassion within yourself. I have seen many times that there are many Sahaja Yogis and sometimes I have to correct them or say something, immediately another one will say "mother can you forgive him." I said, I have forgiven him. I have not done anything. "Please forgive mother, please." I feel so happy to hear that in one point, in one condition when it comes to a Sahaja Yogi you support him. I feel happy. It shows you are not only generous but you are filled with compassion. So this source of compassion which is within your heart, you have to just open your heart. If you open that heart it's like opening your Sahasrara. You will be amazed how you can forgive. I have heard reports which disturbs me many times that people are forming different groups and having different ashrams and they don't come to the coflective and all that. I feel very much -concerned. Now what is missing is of course there are some people who think that they must have their separate organisation and why should they be in the collective and all that. It is definite that Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VII Issue 9 & 10

 such a person has not yet achieved that state of compassion. We had one couple who were quarrelling with each other throughout. They used to send me letters after letters, telephones after telephones. I didn't know what to do with them. I thought better they divorce themselves and finish it of. I told them separately that you better divorce and got out of it. The complaints you have is such that they cannot be solved. I said "You are saying that my husband doesn't give me more time. he is always out and he doesn't spend any nice moments with me, we don't go out. The husband said that she always troubles me, that I must take her out, that I must do this, I must do that. I want to do it but I can't do it. So I said "When you take divorce you never can claim anything. You will lose your husband forever. So why do you want to do such a thing. Immediately now this compassion started working. Then I put in a word that supposing anyone of you is sick tomorrow then who will look after each other. This just put them out. You know such little little moments coming in the life of Sahaja Yogis I have seen that suddenly their heart opens and with that they combat all these petty nonsensical ideas which keep them out of each other and out of the collectivity. What gives me the greatest enjoyment is to see how you love each other, care for each other, joke with each other and dance with each other. This is the greatest thing that I enjoy. I don't want to get rid of this idea of mine despite the fact that so many times I find it hard to believe it that how could the Sahaja Yogis behave like this and try to create rifts and distances between the people who are realised souls, because realised souls anywhere in the world, respect each other. Not only respect, care and never talked ill of another realised soul. Never, I don't know if you know about the private lives of the saints but in India how they have behaved towards each other, the way which they have looked after each other. Its so beautiful its so noble. People who care for the feelings of others is not for that what they want to say or what they want to have or they are something special. Also after you have come in Sahaja Yoga, you have lost your specialities. Some of them think that they are very special. Supposing I call some lady to put "alta' on my feet, she starts thinking that she is very special. But I called her because she has a horrible agnya. When somebody told me, "Mother, she thinks that she is very special" | said, really! What makes her think like that, "because you called her to put some 'alta' on your feet." I said, I called her because she had such a horrid, ugly agnya that she will trouble everyone. So I wanted to clear it. So either I should have told her that you are a very egoistical, horrible, all words that are possible. Otherwise she won't understand. It is so surprising. There is some lady who was very nasty to her in-laws and everybody in India and she came to see me. I scolded her, "what business you had to behave like this. Your father was such a racist a word against him. Then why are you talking against these people." She went but you never said out and said, "Oh! Look mother has called me, nobody is allowed to see her." I said, "what's this!" Its a very funny situation with people sometimes. They think they are something special and they. try to make themselves something special. It is becoming really difficult. Now just to show my love and appreciation for something people have done, if I give some present to that impossible situation. I expect if I have done anything good to that person or in any way suggested my concern about a person that person has to become a very good Sahaja Yogi, in the sense the most humble, honest and loving person. Otherwise it has no meaning, no use being good to person or show concern to him, he starts thinking that he is something special. It's an Vol. VII Issue 9 & 10 8. Divine Cool Breeze

 anyone. That means that person jumps into hell. So this one is also another idea of speciality that they have lost their sense of speciality. When a drop becomes an ocean it has become the ocean, but it is not the drop anymore. If anybody thinks I am no more the ocean. You are still the drop. Because unless and until you are the drop how can you feel that I am something special. So you have lost your speciality. You have lost it because all these ideas of speciality comes from your past. One lady I met once long time back, she was very rude, proud and arrogant. This was in Delhi where people are very conscious about their husband's job, this and that. I didn't know even the designation of my husband. special person then know that you are I said, "What's the matter with you? Why are you so rude? What is the problem?" She said, "I am the wife of such and such." | said, "You are the wife or the husband?" She asked me, "What are you doing here?" I said, "I am a housewife." Then My husband came there. She said "Do you know him?" "Yes" I said, "Wwhy?" I thought that there must be something wrong there also. She said "No, I just want to know, how do you know him?" as if I was some criminal or what. | said "he is My husband." "Oh, my Gad, he is "What happened". As if she was stung by a serpent. Maybe her husband was on a much lower position then mine. This stupid idea of being special has to be completely negated in Sahaja Yoga. Not mentally. Mentally if you are saying, "I am not special, 1 am not special" like a mantra, you will become much more. Because you will say, I have said this mantra 23000 times. Who can say So this idea I am something special. I am something great. I am something out of the group. I am something superior to others, just vanishes like I said that you are a drop in the ocean, you have to become the ocean but you are no more a drop. To have any related value there is not any related value system by which you can say that I am higher and he is lower. All this has created all the problems of the world See from our caste system in India. The social system in the west, the racialism in the west also comes from self consciousness that my religion is better, yours is the worst. We are the best. All these things have created problems. It has done no good. It has failed, failed and failed. So in Sahaja Yoga at least don't bring this disease anymore. That I am better, our country is better. This speciality you should drop and the real beauty of your personality you show. For that you don't need a special skin, special body, or a glamorous look! What need is a beautiful heart. And I tell you it's a beautiful heart that attracts. Nothing else. If's the beautiful heart that you want to have. I have known many people like that, gentleman who divorced his first wife, she may not be so good looking, ugly or whatever it was. Then he married another good looking woman. And he ran away from the house, I asked him "Why? you didn't like that woman because she was ugly or whatever it was, why are you running away from this one. He said "she has no heart." And this is what you have a very great generous, beautiful, dharmic heart. You have got it as a present from the Divine and which you must respect. You should be proud of it and enjoy it. As you enjoy your generosity, you should enjoy the all the nature is enjoying itself. To be very meticulous about things, to be all the time correcting other people, is a headache. The best thing is to correct yourselves and laugh at yourself. That is God, he is your husband?" like me?" system, you there was one Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VII Issue 9 & 10

 the best way you can do it. Everybody has some funny things about themselves. I also have, I must confess and I them because I think I try and try but I always forget. For example these spectacles I always forget them. Before coming I tell myself that I need it. I should take it. I must remember it. but invariably I forget it. I tell you I am good at mathematics. But I can't count. I don't know how to sign a cheque. Can you believe if? You have to write a cheque for me. enjoy I have seen with all these meticulous people they always fail because their brain plays tricks on them. For example there was one fellow who told me that the size of your car is such and such. All right then, so the size of the garage should be such and such, I said, all right, so when we built the garage the car could not get in. I said, such a meticulous architect and such a well known person who has got so many awards, how could he make such a mistake. I sill didn't understand this. He said now you better buy a smaller car. I said, atleast now you measure this garage in a proper way. Otherwise if again I buy something it won't enter in. We are so particular, so meticulous, now see these little, little flowers, they are growing on their own. All of them get the sun's rays and they are happy. But these people who are very particular are headache to themselves and ultimately they find that is not so. You have lost that meticulous sense. I know of a Sahaja Yogini. She was running a shop and she said, "Mother I knew each and every price and every thing in this shop. But since I got realisation I have forgotten everything." "So are you happy or unhappy?" She said "I am very happy." | asked "Why?" She said, "because now I am making a big profit." Profit is the main thing. Why should you try to remember each and everything. No tree is systematic. It's unsystematically systematic, some leaves are this side. Some are that side. Some branches on that side. Some are the other side. There is no system. Because then you become a military, if you form a system. In Sahaja Yoga there is no system. We are beyond time. We are beyond all kinds of systems. All our system is what is the unison within ourselves. Like these two hands. They have no system built in, nothing. But they move. To build up a mental system is wrong and against Sahaja Yoga. Some people wrote to me that Mother we want to translate your transcription, do this, do that, I said, "forget it," because if you start planning you will definitely fall into the trap of the system. You will have to follow the systems. "This system is good, that system is good. Why not this way?" Specially in the west people are over systematic. Like people will have the courses built up in the and the forks, how to move, what to eat and how to eat, it is too much. It have to eat spoons food it is straight forward you can eat with your hands. No system is needed. All these systems and norms are too much in the west and you should really try to cut them up. As a result they had anticulture, another kind of stupidity. Where they were building up another kind of system. They said they are hippies now. So they must have hair never washed, never clean with lice. There is no variely. One hippy means another, it is the same. You cannot make them out one from another. If somebody puts a ring here, everybody will put it there without any brains, or understanding. They talk of individuality and of personality. Where is the individuality? There is no individuality. Because you take to anything that your gang calls for, that makes it very fashionable. you Vol. VII Issue 9 & 10 10 Divine Cool Breeze

 In India, "very fashionable" means it is very expensive and very beautiful. It is very elite, very fashionable means everybody likes it. It could be any punky thing or anything. It is fashionable. Finished. It's a fashion means you do not have your own idea, personality or individuality. In Sahaja Yoga you are not bound to any fashion. If you like wearing this, wear whatever you like. You are free to do whatever you like. But as I said that again you will govern yourselves. You will be your own guru, you will be your own master and you will do whatever is good, decent and whatever the Deities like. You will just do it that way because you are a Sahaja Yogi. So life becomes so much you don't about the things which are not there and you are also not worried about the things which are there. Because now when you see something you think all right, I have got it now, I must keep it for somebody. I must do it so. I have got a ring which was quite big I was thinking who has got thick fingers whom I could give it to. I started looking at the fingers of everyone. Whosoever has the thick fingers I will give him. I mean the thought was just the other way around. Supposing you were not a Sahaja Yogi, you will say Oh! such a thick finger, why not take some gold out, why not sell it, or take out the stone, all kinds of nonsensical things you will think but you will not think better to give it to somebody because you cannot wear it. Why not give it to others? Whats wrong? After all its is not fitting you so give it to the other. But this is only possible in Sahaja Yoga. I have seen people are very kind, very sweet to each other, and exactly what the other person wants they will buy and give it to that person. Or may say, I have one. I will give it the other." They do it like that all the time, thinking about others. What should I give? What should I do? It is the expression of joy and compassion within matter for that all the time. Like somebody whose house was burgled in Canada wrote to me "thank God my house has been cleaned out. I didn't know what to do with it: It was a junk." So this kind of an attitude comes in that if you have to do, then give it to some Sahaja Yogi to express your love. But normally people will do the opposite whatever is the junk in house, they will give it as a present. But when you are a Sahaja yogi the whole being has become so beautiful. Just like a flower which wants to give fragrance to others all the time the fragrance of your compassion, love, affection and security. easierl That worry You use inou Its a new age what we say but I say its a new race of human beings that are before me and all this newness has so many beautiful facets that they really sparkle like diamonds. My only blessing to you is that you grow in it, and grow in it and become greater and greater. Never think that you are greater than others. Never thinking that you are special than others. This will definitely soothe you down completely. Somebody might have hurt you somewhere. Doesn't matter. Somebody might have scolded you, doesn't matter. What is your capacity? It is to love another person, be affectionate and kind. I am really amazed how these 25 years have passed with all kinds of stupid problems and nice things, such a mixture but all those things have never disturbed me: I used to act some times that I am angry for something. I used to say the things which I should not have normally said because it was needed to be said. But on the whole like sitting in a very big ship we can say we all are elevated into the realm of Divine love and this is what one has to enjoy. If one person has that love and compassion and that pure love then that person can emit it to others. The rapport of this compassion is extremely beautiful, it cannot be described in the words. Like yesterday I couldn't speak. In what words could I put my feelings. I thought there are no words created on this eacth to express any deep feeling that how you people have taken Sahaja Yoga so well, have understood it. May God Bless You. lis Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VII Issue 9 & 10 11

 ADI KUNDALINI PUJA 1995 H. H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI Cabella, Italy. 4th June 1995 (Synopsis) Today we have gathered here to do the Kundalini Puja or the Adi Shakti Puja. There is a difference which between the two. Adishakti is the total power of God, of His desire while kundalini is the part is reflected in the human beings as Kundalini. So there is difference between the Adi Kundalini and the Adishakti. Adishakti is the para shakti. Is the powers which is beyond all the power which controls all the powers and one of the powers of Adishakti is kundalini. For example the kundalini which is placed within me in the triangular bone is not totality. Ofcourse it is the power which is there to give you your self realisation. It is the power that redeems you, that nourishes you, that enlightens your centers. But there are two other powers that you know which are very powerful which are working through Ida and Pingala. And the third one that is Mahalakshmi which is in the center. Now kundalini's main job is to give you your self realisation, because she is your individual mother: Everyone has the kundalini within himself or herself reflected, whatever may ybe quality of that person. Now as you see reflections fall on everything. Say the reflections of the moon falls on the stone. We don't see any reflection. It then falls on a better reflector say the water. Then we can see the reflection. But when it falls on a mirror. It reflects better.. So that is how the reflection gradually goes on improving. In the same way we have human beings who have different reflections. But they can be improved and they can be made absolutely top class. It is possible. The one power which is the desire. Thouah the kundalini as you see is the power of pure desire. That it does not want anything. It was only to give you self realisation. The other two powers. One of them is the mundane desire. This mundane desire if it becomes nothing but pure desire then kundalini has no problems from the left side. There are two ofther powers that are within you. But if it is not a pure desire but full of other desires, for example the first desire of human being which comes from animals I think is food. He wants food to nourish himself. But human beings don't only take food to nourish. Also for the taste of it, for the beauty of it which is innately working in them. All kinds of ideas we have. Some body can like this, somebody can like that, But the one who understands that the taste of the food is not important, and he can practise it and then it works. It works wonders. Because the lowest desire which is food comes under your control. If you can sometimes go without food, ofcourse not for god, but for yourselves. God does not want you to starve. If you can live without food, if you can enjoy every type of food. Then you have done lot to improve the path of sushumna for the kundalini. I have seen in many cases that kundalini just does not rise. Even if she rises. She falls back. This happens when the person is very self indulgent. He is all the time thinking of the things which are not of very great importance for a spirituality. Apart from that there is another horrible one desire we have that is to grab as much money as that possible to think about. This time I had the bad experience because Sahaja yogis come to me, mother they are asking if we should reduce the price of puja. I was shocked because I never have decided about it. All is decided by the leaders. Then they would like to have bargain as you in a shop you see. Or may be some sort of sale or some sort of this. This is one of the greatest dangers in your evolution. You know that I am working for your projects. I am buying lands for Divine Cool Breeze 12 Vol. VII Issue 9 & 10

 you. I am doing things for you. And for which you need money. But nobody comes forward with the donations. I see they won't they don't understand that it is for you I need to have all this Once suddenly we decided that we could have 50% payment. Immediately so many telephone. "Ah, we have 50% less the bargain price so we are coming for bargaining. It is the sale programming. It is the sale what they do. They offer you something so that they can get a lot more customers and things like this. Sahaja yoga is just opposite of that. You don't have to give anything. You get a lot. But this is not for sale, this is not for sale by any chance. It is a thing where you have to pay because we have to have all these things and I have to pay so many things which you do not know. Like last time we had about I think fifty people who came just free. Some of the leaders know, but some of the leaders they just go on asking like this because I don't know perhaps they want to save money or they want to popularise themselves among the disciples may be that is the reason. So this thinking about money itself is a very detrimental force for your spirituality. Otherwise what others are doing is the same, all the time they are thinking of money. Now if you are thinking of money, thinking of earning more for Sahaja Yoga, to help Sahaja Yoga it's all right. But it is for your own ideas, in the west its very common not in India. I must tell you, India is a poor country. One day Yogi told me I need some money for the school, I said "all right I'll .""No, no", he said "I will collect" and he collected in one meeting 18 lakhs of rupees. Ofcourse I told him now don't take it out what money to pay, don't collect. But so much of money orientation. All the time thinking about money, saving money this things are absolutely against Sahaja yoga. You can ask any one how much I understand about money, I don't understand Banking, I don't know how to count. I am not worried about what money we have, what we have to do with this let us do something about it. give is here IS money Today I don't know why I have to tell about this gross subject. But it has been pointed out to me, "mother you never say anything about it and the people are getting really materialistic." That's very I sad. Even one person who is materialistic will have to go out of Sahaja Yoga. Gradually it will work that way and you will be surprised that you are out af Sahaja Yoga. It is very amazing how after getting realisation also getting on the top of the world we still live in small little holes like rats of this money business. This money has brought so many problems to our world, you can see it clearly. All this economics and all this knowledge of economics where has it gone? Is the world better by it? There is recession going on every where. Everybody is unemployed. In every country you go there is so much unemployment. This is so much that it shows that this economics is also a very artificial science and dealing with the weaknesses of the human beings, not with their strength. If they could know the strength of the human beings, they would have done much better than they have done so far. Now we have so many sophisticated places in the west. They hove everything electrical. We push the buttons and everything is there. Specially these modern planes when I travel I don't know which one to push because they are so slim, so delicate, I think you need special artists to do that. All this is for what? For getting more money and more money But at the same time people are fed up. When all these sophistication are on. They are fed computers, they are fed up with electricity. Fed up with cement, fed up with all kinds of artificial things. Its a fact more in the western countries than in developing countries. They are just fed up. Now this is the force. This is the strength. Why are they fed up? They are fed realised that it does not give you joy. It does not give soothing feelings. It's irritates them. So it is against human mind, human character or human civilisation something inhuman. So now what to and impressing people. up with because they have up Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VII Issue 9 & 10 13

 do? | went to America once. I went to see a friend of mine and all the houses were coloured with the 'cowdung' colour. I said, "Why do they have cowdung all over their houses. What is the matter with them? Why don't they have colour like white or another? These people like very much this sand colour. They said, "Now a days fed up with cement. Now they cannot get so much cowdung here, so they have a special way of making cement colour like cowdung. They mix up the things so that the colour comes like cowdung. | said, "But why cowdung of all the things." So they said that some of them went to India and they had to sleep in the huts which were covered with cowdung. So they found out logically that it the cowdung we have as colour it will be the most soothing colour for us. So there were articles about it and people started using cowdung. So what is the force? So what is the strength? the strength is that they want to live in the natural way. They don't want to have artificial things. So they go in another extreme to have cowdung. Sahaja yoga is in between. Now one has to understand that whether you put cowdung, or cement or anything. It is not going to give you any joy. Say for India, people who have cement houses are great. According to them cement represents luxury and wealth. But in the west If people see cement, my goodness to them cement is something like a grave. So now the positive thing in them is that they want to live with natural things. They want to use natural material. Natural life. But they go to extremes. You see we had anticulture Hippies and all like that. So to get from one extreme to another extreme is also not condusive to a human life because you see a like a primitive person these American people want to have cowdung because they are human being cannot become primitive. Even it you try to dress up your brain is modern. So when they get fed up they go from one to another. They don't realise what is the missing point. In both the things whether you live like a rustic person or very cementive person, any type that you live, the missing point is that in everything there is a competition. Once the fashion, starts then every body is having cane chairs. Now in this competition they miss the point. It is that they miss the joy. A persra who is a realised soul will not desire. Whether it is cement or anything, it is just the same, But it will come to his mind that all these artificial things are ruining human beings so he will say no But he will not have the hair like primitive people. He will not behave like primitive people and will lead a very normal, natural life. So when the mind starts thinking something about it, it will never get to the point of joy. From one end to another. So they think that they are going into balance. They are going into the dharma? But my experience is different. Even those hippies I know them, they used to eat like real gluttons. And they are very much interested in their comforts and they would go to any extent of snatching anything belonging to others. They thought that now they became hippies so they have already become landlords. Because they have given up that, they have given up that. So the mind suggests you money orientation, and competition, all these artificial things. You should change your life style But that does not happen, never. It is just a play of mind from one to another. So how to detach your selves from this idea of money orientation. Whether you wear a sanyasi's dress or you wear a wonderful, very expensive dress it is the same for your you convincing yourself that now I have become a big sanyasi. Because I am wearing a saffron dress. By wearing that kind of dress you can never get rid of any nonsense. So first thing that you have to become is a normal person. There is no need to be abnormal outside. That you are deceiving yourself. If you think by changing your dress or your lifestyle you have become a great sanyasi body. You can't even see your own dress. So it is the same to the eyes. But with the mind start Vol. VII Issue 9 & 10 Divine Cool Breeze 14

 or a detached person from this money orientation then I must say you don't help yourselves. A person who is detached from within helps the kundalini to rise constantly without any catches. So for a Sahaja yogi it is important to introspect, and see for yourselves what is your level. At I told you about the reflector what sort of reflector you are? No use deceiving yourself because Sahaja yoga is for your benevolence and your kundalini is for your benevolence. The ascent is the aim of your life and to perfect it is your job. So you don't have to take to anything outside. It is inside you have to see yourself what sort of attachment you have? The second force which has suddenly come up among Sahaja yogis is that they don't have immoral problems. They have just become moral, most of them 99.999 I think are moral people in Sahaja yoga. There may be here and there. Because they enjoy their morality, they want to be that. Not only that they want their children to be moral, their families to be moral and that is how morality is spreading in Sahaja yoga very fast. In that also one has to understand that it is the innocence which is the force, not the morality like some people write to me that I get up in the moming. I sit before the photograph, I do this, I do that, take my bath and then I do this, I can't understand this, not necessary. You have to cleanse yourself in the night. As you cleanse yourself, your body and once in the morning you have to pray that's all. Is not necessary to have this ritualism, this kind of a role all the time you go every day morning, till evening nonsensical things and then they become fanatics. They start becoming absolutely fanatic about Sahaja yoga. And this fanaticism can be very dangerous because they try to remember everything by heart, this and that, no not necessory. It should be in the heart. otherwise it amounts to lip service. And with the lip service gradually you start feeling you are great, your father is great and this and that. So you are thrown away. You yourself throw yourself out, like a ball, which you hit and it comes back. Like I have seen many people who try to attract themselves in Sahaja yoga are just repelled by themselves not by Sahaja yoga. Sahaja yaga attracts you no doubt but you must have gravity. If you don't have gravity how can you be attracted. The seriousness about it is only this that you should introspect seriously. Find out what's wrong with you. Because this is a great chance for you to ascend. With this kind of a mind, which becomes fanatic in Sahaja yoga starts saying harsh things to others and disturbing the peace of others. Because they think that they are very great Sahaja yogis. Then I think one should introspect and find out why am I'doing it? So many people have the same defects for that they will scold others perhaps may be they think by correcting another person they might be corrected. It is very absurd somelimes the way people look at their problems as if these are the problems of others. Now if 1 am saying this to you, somebody must be counting, I know mother is saying about that one, but never will think that its for me and I have to see myself and introspect and find out what is dragging me down. So this is one of the most important things is that you can not be harsh, you cannot hurt people, you cannot misbehave in that manner and if you can do that you are thrown out of Sahaja yoga by yourself. Nobody has to throw you. You have to be collective. People have to like you and you have to be one of them. If the collectivity is not there kundalini will never rise because she is rising she is trying to give you second birth so that you become one with the whole. The drop becomes the ocean. That's her job. She will never rise in a person if he thinks that he is exclusive, special. Then he should not come to Sahaja yoga. This is another great burden in raising kundalini when people think that they are something special. We have no priest hood and the leadership your Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VII Issue 9 & 10 15

 also is a myth. But sometimes they do behave in such a manner that one is shocked. How could they behave like this. And these serpents you see just suddenly come out and you see them and you are shocked. What are they doing? Where is their attention? What are they worried about? If these stupid ideas walk into their mind tell them shut up. Now I know myself very well. That is the best way to keep you out of these nonsensical things that are working. First of all remember that you all are seekers of truth. You have been seeking, through out the ages for years together, I would say from many lives. And now you have found. So grab it and hold it fast by understanding that this is what you wanted and you got it now. you must Another big problem that comes in the awakening of the kundalini, which I feel is very important to be told to you, is that some of you think that you are very close to me. That you have a special right on me. You don't know, your mother is mahamaya." Be careful. I am telling that again. Never think in that way. No body can be my favourate. I assure you. It can not be It is like mercury, if you put on another metal you know it does not stick. My mind does not stick to anyone. Now supposing somebody is in trouble, somebody has written to me there is some problem, then the thought comes in, but I don't stick to that. I don't stick to anyone. Nor do I have | attachment to anyone, because that will be against the principle of pure love. I cannot be attached. Of course I see your problems very intimately. I would love to solve them. I get worried, but the thought, the attention is going towards that person. You have seen when it is the full moon the tide is much bigger. Does the ocean think what about the moon? Does it think it has to attract the particular ocean? It is just the nature. Swabhava. The nature itself acts. Thatl's the nature. You cannot help it and this nature is the one you should also try to know, adopt and adore becouse it's very helpful. This gives you a great relief from your mind which is all the time thinking and thinking, and does not allow you to have the thought less awareness. If you get attached to someone you are worried about some problems, even your problems sometimes. All the time you think dout your problem or about somebody whom you are attached to. Then this mind starts working, how to solve the problems; what to do and this and that. But then you will stop your agnya conmpletely then how will In any walk of life for the Sahaja Yogi the best way to stop thinking is to think how you to spread Sahaja yoga. Just diverts your attention. This is the greatest pleasure for don't have to pay or anything, just know what powers you have got. At this point I find many again and your kundalini rise? are going for which you, you people are not aware of their powers are not using them. When you don't use your power, also kundalini falls. Why should she work? She is not stupid. If you don't want to use her for what she has to achieve then why should she worry about you? So she just stops off. She has nothing to do with you. Then suddenly you come out. "Mother, I have got this trouble, I have got that trouble. Specially troubles like arthiritis, all such troubles come to people when they don't use their vibrations. Give it to the flowers, give it to the trees give it to anything that is living But don't shirk it. You need not touch the person but the desire should be to whom should I give vibrations. Only worry should be to whom should I put attention to? Where should I put this energy of mine? Once you start using this divine power it starts flowing much much more and your mother the kundalini is very happy with this and then you start seeing wonders. and For that of God Almighty. But when I talk of compassion, I find people are more interested in the Sahaja have to have first of all attention on compassion and love But compassion and love you Vol. VII Issue 9 & 10 Divine Cool Breeze 16

 yogis, who are suffering, who have problems, who have been thrown away from Sahaja yoga. Then they will write to me, mother, please take them back. That's my job not yours. But those who don't love God are not going to achieve much. They have loose tongues, they talk funnily. They don't understand that they are dealing with God Almighty. And this kind of frivolous talking and frivolous behavior is wrong. You must understand that the angels are around you all the time, All the time they are with you, all the time watching you. They will help you, they will support you, they will elevate you. They will cross all kinds of hurdles. You have to love God from all your heart. and all your soul. You can't say things which are not full of protocol. All this is only possible, when you' surrender your ego. God doesn't want anything from you. What can you give to God? This is a funny idea that people have. But it's all right, you can give anything to God. Krishna has said that you can give me a flower. You can give me water. You can give this present, that present I will accept. But he says that only thing what we have to do is that you have to be one with me you have to be connected with me, and this feeling of connection is so satisfying, so joy giving, so nice which cannot be described in words. Then you find your kundalini flowing out with joy for yourselves, and for others. Also the right side arbitrariness, domination, showing off, harshness, cruelties. I don't know how many things there are on the right side. They can be unlimited. But there is a limit for that, is Hitler. So far some others may come to compete with him. So all these also starts destroying this kundalini. I have seen also kundalini of the people which is hurt, wounded, just cannot rise, finished, then I feel that let them take the second birth then only it can work out. Is impossible for such a kundalini to make her rise. If you are selfish, and cruel then this kundalini becomes hurt. A good mother feels hurts when her child misbehaves so this kundalini gets very hurt, because she wants you to have your second birth. She can't just bear it. It makes her absolutely incapable of rising she becomes sick, ill and wounded. So all kinds of aggressiveness should be given up. That is not going to help. You have come to Sahaja yoga. not for saving money or for bargaining because you are seekers. I have seen invariably people who have gone to false Gurus have this kind of money orientation. Because they must have been fleeced completely by the previous gurus. May be I don't know what So say. It is we who can rise through our own goodness and beauty. And it is we who can come up to the level of great Sahaja yogis. Don't keep this power to yourself. It is to be distributed and given to others to make others also very happy and joyous. It is a duty of every Sahaja yogi. Also thinking about Sahaja yoga, not about yourself is the best way to avoid money problems. But once they start thinking about sahaja yoga they start thinking about the defects of the Sahaja yogis. That's not going to help. You have to develop that peace of mind within yourself, by which you can become the witness of yourselves first. You should be able to be witness of yourself and see what are the things that are putting you down because today the world is absolutely chaotic. From this chaotic world you have to rise into a very peaceful and beautiful world and you have to take many into that world for which you have to have the quality. It's not that you just become Sahaja yogis and wear my batch. No. In everyway you can spread Sahaja yoga but be careful because one should not feel that you have done a great job. Whatever you are doing is for your own good not for others. The kundalini was a great mystery before but now it is not anymore. Its all open. You all know about it. You know about its powers. You know how you can achieve your highest goal. So just Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VII Issue 9 & 10 17

 to balance just to lead a mediocre life, os not the way a real true seeker of truth should do. But if you are the real seeker of the truth you should see what's wrong with what I have been doing, with whatever I have been following, what I have to achieve. All the scriptures have said that have to become the spirit. All the scriptures have said that you have to be born again. Only thing what I am doing is what they have said I am trying to do it, and requesting you to do it. Sahaja yoga is not like other religions where people abuse children, do what they like, make money, this that, all nonsense like a Mafia. You are people who are chosen specially, who believe in a good moral life anda peaceful life. So satisfying, so joy giving, so nice which cannot be described in words. You find your kundalini flowing out with joy for yourselves, and for others. you May God Bless you. Vol. VII Issue 9 & 10 Divine Cool Breeze 18

 TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS BY H. H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI London, June 1995 (Synopsis) In nature one goes absolutely thoughtless. All this is built in the trees. How collective they are we have to learn a lot from them. Every leaf is allowed to get the Sun. How they grow, they are organised. How they behave like this. Nobody even thinks. They haven't even got their realisation but what is it that is working out in them. How do they work it out in such a beautiful manner. Because they are under the complete control of the Divine, they don't have to worry. Even the animals are under the control of the Divine, thats why they are called Pashu'. "Paash' means control. Shiva is known as Pashupati. He is the one who looks after them affectionately and in a delicate manner. All this is created for human beings, but human beings don't understand that greenery how very all this world which is created is for their use. It is for use not abuse, and this is the one thing which has to be really felt in the atmosphere, that how they are collective. They have no problem. They live together. Its really a good atmosphere that how they keep to the global cycle. For example we see that the sap rises, then it gives whatever is needed for every part of the tree. Then whatever is left, it can go down iîn the atmosphere, so it doesn't get stuck into one place. I have told you long back that you should not get stuck to anything. If you are detached then it works out very well. But if you are attached you just get worries and problems. Thinking too much about it, your life becomes miserable. If you are detached then the nature takes over. You feel extremely relaxed. But if you are thinking that we have to do this, we have to do that, we have to achieve this, then you start worrying. So two things can happen. One is that you get confused. So you will not achieve any result and you will go on thinking, and thinking. The second thing is how it works. that you will get exhausted completely. But if you are detached as Sahaja Yogis you will be amazed After getting realisation you should try to detached yourself. You have to be in thoughtless awareness. By getting into thoughtless awareness you just detach. Now see your aftachment, how it is? This detachment you can practise, that you can see yourself in the mirror, and know that are not this reflection which you see; but you are much more than the reflection. you What is that within us which looks after everything before realisation. Which looks after the sympathetic nervous system. The little little things it looks after, and tries to keep us on the right path, gives us consciousness. What is that? What is within us that does that? The spirit within come yet into our attention. But there is something within us which makes us think about the truth, which makes us seek the truth and which makes us know that something is wrong in the society. God has not left us without this care. There is something that looks after us. The Kundalini is sleeping and the spirit is in our heart. What do these have within them. It is the SOUL. para has not us Sometimes when people die or they are about to die and they come back to life they say that they passed through some sort of a tunnel. Some have a black tunnel and some have a bright tunnel. Some have a light tunnel. That is the soul within us which starts going up and with that our altention. We feel that we are passing through a tunnel. These souls you can see only after Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VII Issue 9 & 10 19

 realisation, and not before. This soul guides you. It has brought you to Sahaja Yoga and it has told you that you have to seek the truth, you have to get the truth. This is also, perserverance. It is the soul which gets after you and you have to see that people really get so restless about it. All this comes from soul before realisation. This soul compels you to search. When a person dies then this soul comes out. And also his spirit. So we call it as a dead soul. They hang in the air sometimes. If they are realised souls they will become one with the Divine. Whenever they want they can always be born again. But the dead souls who are attached, may be, with their children, house, drinking habits, or something non-sensical, are the ones who trouble us. They can be in groups. They can be of different types. They could be bad with sub- conscious or Supra-conscious activity. But we cannot talk about this to anybody else because they don't know. They don't want to believe that there is something. They believe in religions which say that there are dead souls, dead spirits, but that is only in the church, mosque or temples. But in private life they don't believe that we have all those things hanging around. very Some difficulties we say that cannot be solved could be from these dead souls. So the best way to get rid of them is to have a detached attitude towards them. Now somebody is very attached to a house or something. So these souls are searching for somebody through whom they can satisty their wishes and they enter into the mind of that person. Then everything goes wrong. You cannot do well. You cannot achieve anything. Specially with false Gurus you get all these things. All these things have to be corrected through detachment. Some people are very much attached to their children, then these children will be attached by the dead souls. If you are too much attacked to your money then something will happen and you lose the money. I know so many people who were multi-millionaires, but the greed was still there. So the spirit or whatever entered in them started feeding them that invest here, invest there, and no money was left. Specially the western business is like that. It goes on feeding you to invest here or there and nothing is left with you, Lut loans and debts. much One has to be very detached about money. I'll tell you the story of mine getting into the terra-cotta business There were some persons who were retired. They thought that they must serve their country by doing export. But they could not carry on with each other. Everybody thought that they were the best. So they fought and broke all the cups. I asked one of them "So what do you export?" He said "Fans" I said "Fans? To Switzerland?" They asked "What do you export?" I said "Terra- colta". They were surprised "Terra-cotta? Clay?" But business. I am so detached about it. You see terra-cotta is doing very well everywhere, because I know that people want hand made things. They love it. Then I am helping some people in a village who have one cloth to cover their bodies. It helps also my charitable nature. Also its a global need today that people should use handmade things. Its working out very well, you will be amazed. I don't understand business. But I don't have to think about it. Its all working out. So I have this detachment about it. I have taken no headache upon myself. It is such a pleasure to see these people making something nice everywhere. There are so many beautiful things everywhere. I don't know banking or anything about So if you develop a detachment through thoughtless awareness, then God will think over it, He will look after You should have faith in God, that He is almighty. He does everything. He looks after everything. Why should of life. You don't have to do you. you worrye This is a very good way anything. You have gone beyond time. You have gone beyond these three gunas. You have also Vol. VII Issue 9 & 10 Divine Cool Breeze 20

 gone beyond thought. Whatever you were doing by thought, your mind, your ways, you stop it. In America I gave realisation to one girl who had a shop. She told me "Mother, I knew everything in my shop. I had all the details about what I have. Now I don't care. I in my shop". I said "What is the reason." She said "I am making big profit." I said "Thats the best thing. After all what is the use of carrying all the load on your head and making no profit." One should be prepared to surrender completely and absolutely to the will of God. Whatever He does is for your good. don't know what I have You are Sahaj Yogis. You have to absorb the problems. You can pacify. You can calm down. You have all the powers. Women should understand their own power. Because they don't understand what powers they have, they have all the problems. Also some men have the habit that they start forming groups. behaving in a extremely dominating manner. Its a kind of a pumping station that they have. The air goes into their ego and they start floating in the air and taking everybody out. This kind of a thing is also a sinful thing. Because you are the wife of a leader you have to behave. You cannot hurt people like that. The third type of them are the leaders' wives. They somehow or the other start According to the Shastras there are five kinds of mothers. One of them is the wife of leader, wife of She is a mother and she has to behave like a mother. She has to treat all the disciples, guru. just as a mother does. Supposing her husband the leader is upset with something she must try to soothe him down. She should talk "You see, you should not do like that." This is her job. Not to dominate others. They are doing just what they are not supposed to do. If anyone of them have problems and cannot go to the leader, but will go to the wife of the leader and talk the problem. Sometimes as husband you have to be corrected and as a wife you are have to create and preserve. Its the duty of women. They don't know what is their duty. Its the part of socieły and you not your duty to work like a secretary or some sort of politician. You must know how to manage the marriage and do some justice. But they don't realize that the marriage is not for a show business. Instead of doing such things its better they don't marry. course in Sahaj Yoga you are allowed to divorce. It is a question of freedom. But its better to make your marriage successful if you want to help Sahaj Yoga. Of Another problem which is very dangerous is like somebody has a habit of forming a group against the leader. We have recently a very bad case from America. Wherever she went she formed a group against the leader. It was such a big problem. I told her that you go back to India. She went to commit suicide. She tried to jump in the river but she didn't jump. She said "I am going to commit suicide and she took some "Paradols" or something but she didn't die. So by all these tantrums you are going against yourself. I fold her that you go back to India. She said all the time that "I will not go". "I will do this, do that." Her father got such a big heart attack the next day. She had to go, so this kind of tantrum nature of a woman is very bad. I remember one case in our life. Somebody from my husband's company went to another company, because this government company was not paying him properly. But he did not like the job in the new company very much and the way they were doing somethings. So he asked my husband if he could have the job back. My husband said "I can not do anything. Why did you leave the job, I have nothing to do with " He didn't know what to do. He tried but nothing was working so you. Divine Cool Breeze 21 Vol. VII Issue 9 & 10

 he came to me and told me he wanted to come back "I am a very good officer. I have done a very good job, It was stupid on my part to get another job, I want to come back and serve my country." So when Sir C. P. came home, I told him that this gentleman came to me. He said "Yes. He came to the right person. Now you don't eat my head off, because I have told him, no." I am just telling you, I said "because he thought I am much more generous than you." Sir C. P. said "I am not less generous." I said "All right you do what you want." He agreed. So the job of a woman is much bigger, much higher and much deeper. My husband had hundred people working with him and he told me that you have to look after my people. Not only hundred of them but hundreds of their relations also I tried to help, as far as possible. This is something so satisfying. You create a community of your own. If you need anything they will be there. They will help you. They will be there to look after you. What is important is just to love and try to please others. If women can do that they have achieved their womanhood. On the contrary taking all the tales against others to your husband, doing such things is not the way. Never say anything contrary against others unless and until that person harms you. Always tell something nice. Thats the best way. For example, somebody comes to tell me that mother this person did this to me, that person did that to me I say "I don't understand how you say such things because that person was praising you so much for one hour." Finished. Really, they trust me thats how you can run the family. Everyone you can run. The first thing the women have to know that they have to be compassionate and loving. All their power is in their compassion. That is my power also. Some of you can't even hear me but you don't mind. Its just love. Its so great you know, to feel this beautiful atmosphere of love between you and me. Whatever can be more than that, This England is the heart of the universe. What does the heart love? Compassion and love. So to understand that it is through compassion only we become one. I know so many people in this world who are very rich, very well known, very great writers. I don't know what else, all kinds but they always complain that nobody cares to see us when we are old. I said its the otherway round here. The more old I am becoming, the more I am visited. Nobody seems to know about my age. They said "How do do it? " I said. "Just Compassion, pure love." But they never loved anyone in their lives, they lived like this, so they are alone now. They are talking to their fridges. Can you imagine that they are talking to their fridges." They purchase their friends like that. You should see how much collective you are. How much you help each other. How much you are loving each other. It is very important to introspect like that. Doesn't matter if bad they will be alright, but you should have a good attitude. In Sahaja Yoga those who do not have a good attitude can never progress. Love should be pure. If you love someone, you won't see the bad points of each other. You will always see the good points. You will always support person. Sometimes I have to prepare myself to tell some person. I may say like this, or like that and when I am speaking to him half of his bad vibrations have gone away. Its very easy if you practice that. I am sure little little things you can suggest them. have you you vibrations are your that In England there was a statue of Queen Victoria whose nose was cut. Everybody went with banners and protested and asked. "Who cut the nose. How dare you do that." And they put it back. She was the person who was adored by her country which was under domination you can say. This is what a personality of a woman we have to understand. If it comes to war women becomes like Vol. VII Issue9 & 10 Divine Cool Breeze 22

 Joan of Arc or if it is in peace time she prepares for neutralising the war, to make a peace. She is the one who creates the peace. It is such a powerful thing, that is the real power. Not some sort of a work competing with men. Its such a great work and so much deeper giving compassion. Its important to know what women can do in the field of peace. And bringing compassion into action. Its possible because you are all Sahaj Yogis. Husbands also must respect their wives. Its very important. Where women are not respected, the calamities come, like Bangladesh, which is a country full of calamities because they don't respect their women. Pakistan is full of calamities because they don't respect their women. What about Saudi Arabia? What about Iran? All these countries have problems because the women are not respected. But the women must also respect themselves. Not like in the west where women throw themselves at men. Why should you attract men all the time? Why should you dress up in a way that they should run after you? Such a culture really debases women. We are not prostitutes, we should have our self-respect. I told you the story of a queen who committed suicide because Muslims were going to win them, so just to preserve their chastity they burnt themselves. The power of a woman is compassion but her vehicle that works is her chastity. We should respect our body, children, husbands, everyone, that is important. But also you should respect your society and family.. You must respect yourself. Men and women are complementary. The west has advanced in science and the blacks are complementary. How can they win their trophies if they don't have blacks. What is the use of music. So all these things are complementary. We are totally one. We have to have Indians, and we have to have English. We are complementary. Like we must have the left hand for the right hand. Otherwise how can they be complementary. So one should respect the wives and the wives should respect the husbands because they are complementary. Then there are worries about husband and wife. There are people who go to Ganpatipule and get into the mood of marriage there. As soon as they get out of Ganpatipule they don't want to marry. I have known many kinds of madness but this kind of madness I didn't know. spend so much time on arranging the marriages. If I could have been spared that time have written one more book. The leaders are always worried about individual cases, that this woman doesn't want to be with that man and this man doesn't want to be with that women. whole problem will last and then they will come again for another marriage. People who do not want to marry should not marry. If they marry and do this they will not be allowed to come to Sahaja yoga. Because they get divorce and then blame Sahaja yoga. could The We have to promise under this tree because they are living beings that we are not going to give problems among ourselves. We are going to live very happily our life as husband and wife. Ofcourse if there are any difficult cases, we can work it out. Marriage is an institution. Not that you go on divorcing. Marriage is for having these great souls which want to be born to you. But if you do like have divorce then atleast no more marriages. We should know that in another 10 to 15 years we will see the force that is coming of these children. And they will correct you. They will remove your complications. Allow them to be grown up as Sahaja yogis, and then you will see the difference. How sensible they are. How beautiful they are. Support them. Help them, understand them. this then it will never work out. If you want to all Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VII Issue 9 & 10 23

 We reach a point to understand that we have to move a step forward. Forget all these nonsensical, petty and useless things and problems. What are we going to do for Sahaja yoga? We have the powers. One jump high and it will work. Everybody must think all those things and I am sure it will work out very will May God Bless you. Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VII Issue 9 & 10 24



----------------------

1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-0.txt 
 DIVINE COOL BREEZE
ISSUE 9 & 10
VOLUME VII
Sahaja Yoga is for your benevolence and your kundalini is for
benevolence. The ascent is the aim of your life and to
perfect it is your job.
your
H. H. Shri. Mataji Nirmala Devi
Adi Kundalini Puja 1995.
Cabella, Italy.
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-1.txt 
 DIVINE COOL BREEZE
VOL. VII
ISSUE 9 & 10
Contents :
1. Sahasrara Puja, Cabella, Italy.
2. Adi Shakti Puja, Cabella, Italy.
3. Talk to Sahaja Yogis, London.
Edited by
Published by : Divine Cool Breeze, 9 Bhagyachintamani Soc., Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune - 411 029.
Printed by: Golden Arts, 2/11, Bandal Complex, Paud Road, Pune 411 029.
Yogi Mahajan
Vol. VII Issue 9 & 10
Divine Cool Breeze
1
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-2.txt 
 SAHASRARA PUJA TALK
H. H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
Cabella, Italy. 7th May 1995 (Synopsis)
Today it's a great day for all the Sahaja Yogis that on this day, the Sahasrara was opened out.
It was just a miracle, because I didn't think that I was at a point where it could be done. So I wanted
to wait but some things happened that made me think that it has to be opened. It was in such a
situation that I felt not to delay it any more, as it may help these talse gurus to spread this nonsense
all over. This is just a Sahaja way of doing things.
Now 25 years have passed, you all have gathered during this time, and we have so many others
who are not here who have achieved so many things. But perhaps we are not aware of what we
have achieved in the real sense of the word. You got your vibrations. You can feel this all pervading
power. You are swimming in the ocean of the joy. You are all enjoying the collectivity, you hove
transcended many of your limitations. All this has happened to you because it is your right to have
it. I don't take any credit for it. Only thing all the time I am pointing out to you is one thing that
you have entered in the kingdom of God, and enjoy yourselves.
When we see around ourselves, the whole nature enjoys itself. It doesn't bother about anything.
They have not got their realisation. They have not felt param chaitanya. But how is it they know
that they have to enjoy. The flowers come out for a short time and fade out. But as long as they
live they are very hoppy. They don't think of their past or the future. They enjoy the
in the
present and
present they enjoy their fragrance and also they are giving fragrance to others. They are
beautiful and they are soothing others. The whole nature is like that. If you look at the birds or
anything that we call natural, it's all in a sort of meditative mood. All' these hills and big big
mountains, they look as if they are witness to whatever has been happening.
Now we have to really first look back at what we have achieved. That is important. Because if you
are climbing up a hill, if you look back you get a shock and you may fall down. Normally people
say don't look back. But a person who has earned some treasure, he again and again goes
Counts it and finds out how much he has got, every time he sees that, he enjoys. To know relatively
what we have got and how we have achieved something, will definitely give you the strength of
mind and richness of life.
and
The first thing that has happened to you which is very important is this that you have felt the all
pervading power. That shows you must have been the great seekers of truth, honest, sincere and
sensible. That just by coming to my programme, felt the vibration and after that, started settling
down into it. So many of you have felt it, suddenly they were amazed shocked and surprised. They
wanted to test whether it is true or not. But then you were confident, you found that you got
definitely new dimension in your life and that you are feeling this all pervading power of Divine
Love. That you got out of this in essence, is complete freedom. You have achieved your complete
freedom.
First of all the freedom has come to you, from your ego. This wall of ego you have crossed. You
have got out of the bondàge of this ego which was really so much full of problems for you. So
many things this ego does of which you are not aware. If a person is egoist he doesn't mind hurting
Divine Cool Breeze
3.
Vol. VII Issue 9 & 10
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-3.txt 
 anyone. He hurts but if he is hurt he doesn't like it, immediately he starts crying. Specially people
who have too much ego are very easily hurt. But they don't understand that how many people they
have hurt already. And how many are really frightened of such a person. It is sinful to hurt
other human being for anything for whatever may be the reason that you feel you should hurt
another.
The first thing is revenge. The idea of revenge is there that I must take revenge on a person who
has hurt me or who has done something wrong to me. This idea of revenge comes when you react,
some react very violently. People murder each other in the name of revenge. In the world there is
some sort of stupid idea of a revenge. But if you go to the subtle side of revenge what is it what
revenge you have taken. Supposing there is somebody who has troubled you; you are angry with
that person, and you have killed that person so you have actually saved that person. He won't have
to do anything, he is just finished. What is the revenge? The revenge should be only by which a
person gets out of his idea of killing others. The revenge that we think we can take on another
person is not a revenge, because any action you take in name of revenge comes back to you
and hurts you much more.
the
So much of revenge is going on even in the name of God. Taking revenge because certain people
are following some religion, or they are doing something else other than what you are doing. What
is happening is that you are just killing people, destroying them who do not even understand what
sort of revenge you are taking. People are putting bombs and by that thousands of innocent people
have been killed. So what kind of a revenge are you taking? They don't deserve any revenge. This
revenge when it explodes can destroy so many innocent people and it will definitely react on you.
You cannot get away with it. If's a very long process of this revenge. About the Bermuda Triangle
they say, that so many blacks were taken as slaves and drowned there. Their spirits are haunting
the people who are passing by and they just drown them. When we take revenge every action has
a reaction. So some how you have to get out of that revenge. Just get out of that idea.
There is another thing that if you don't take revenge and leave it to God, it acts, not only that, but
Divine power takes into it's own control how to really give a good lesson to that person, community
or the organisation which is taking revenge on you. You don't have to worry.
In these 25 years I have seen people have been extremely unkind to me. Many organisations, so
called religions, all kinds of things have been after us. Media has been after us. Take the example
of French media, they tried to trouble us so much, doesn't matter, now three of the media people
who went to India are now under warrant, if they go to India they will be arrested. I didn't do
anything! Secondly the same newspapers are all bankrupt. We didn't do anything about that. We
didn't
that they should become bankrupt. We didn't take any revenge. Why should
go and
we? We are not bothered as to what these people have done to us but legally they are now
involved in such a way that they are under warrant and they will be arrested if they go to India.
The whole of French government is with them, all of them are trying so much but this punishment
is on their head. In their life time, they didn't have to die or do anything, in their life time they
have got it.
say
The forgiveness will look after the whole arrangement of how to bring the other person to his
proper
this
path. Once you are out of this idea of revenge you really feel extremely peaceful, because
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VII Issue 9 & 10
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-4.txt 
 peace that you have is within yourself. It's not unnatural. Its not mental but it just happens to you.
So many things are there which have worked out automatically. Now in Turkey there was some
boy from England and he went and told the media something against Sahaja Yoga, and it was
all published. But in the end he confessed on the T.V. that whatever he said was false. Nobody
went and told him, or wrote to him.
From your point of view, you must understand that you are not going to get into any mess of taking
of
any kind because you belong to the government of God. This government is extremely
revenge
alert, very genuine, extremely efficient and as far as you are concerned, you are the citizens of
that great kingdom of God where you should feel absolutely secured. The man who is secured is
never afraid. You have also got rid of your fear. I don't know why you are afraid of this or that
health, family, children, house. Sahaja Yogis have no wory.
worry? That instrument of worry is over. It's finished. It's gone out of order. You are now in a state
where
it all works out. Why should we
you just have no time to worry because you are enjoying yourself.
This fear in people works so much that so many people get so many diseases out of fear. Specially
diseases of left side. What is there to fear? It is like that you beat the mother earth saying that there
is a snake. There is no snake. But you may just feel that and just go on. This fear of an idea
about a phantom or some sort of a devil standing somewhere is all nonsense. For you it doesn't
exist. Say, in the darkness you are walking and you see forms. It doesn't exist actually. But this
fear in man mnakes him think like that. As a result he loses his freedom, and becomes slave to so
many people. He is afraid that such and such man will harm me, or trouble me.
way
The whole concept of fear has ruined our family lives. For example a wife is dominating, or a
husband is dominating. There is nothing to fear. By fear only you play into their hands. Supposing
there is a wife who is dominating, just make fun out of it. If you cannot make fun in
of your wife or your husband, better make it outside saying Oh look at that It is your special
quality now that you can really get rid of your fear completely. What is there to be afraid of wife
or husband. What can he do to you? At the most he will kill you. So what. You are going to die
the presence
anyway.
The fear of death is another nonsense. Just now you are living then why are you asking me what
about death. So many people ask me this question. Why do you want to know about it? I will tell
you what about today just now. This is another mad idea that we should know about our death
and what is going to happen after. Once you are dead you are finished. You don't have to do
anything after that. So what's the use of knowing when you will die, what will happen to you.
Whatever has to happen will happen. We never ask when we sleep, what will happen.
One has to die at the time whenever one has to die. Because whatever is born has to be dead.
But you don't know that you have got eternal life. You can never die. Death is not this body,
disappearing. Death is where you are absolutely without any control of your soul. Once you are
a realised soul you have all the control and all the power to take your soul wherever you like to
be born if you like, if you don't want you will not be born. There are many great souls I know
that have taken birth daringly in the society which is very much deteriorating and are in the danger
of getting destroyed because of the stupidity they do. So this happening that we are afraid of death
is absolutely absurd for Sahaja Yogis. What is there to think even about your death. There is
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VII Issue 9 & 10
5.
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-5.txt 
 nothing like death for you, because you have got eternal life. It's not that you continue with the
same body. You may go on changing your dress but you are living, you are aware and you know
even if this body is not there, you will be there all the time available for Sahaja Yoga, for anything
that is to be done in the name of reality. You must know your position of an eternal being. What
is your work? What is your idea? What you have to do? One has to get rid of this idea of death
because death doesn't exist for you, finished.
All such people who are afraid of their death, go on having insurances, this that, all headaches.
Ultimately what happens, all these worldly things, you leave here when you depart. There is nobody
who could even carry a little dust with the soul which is departing. But in your case when you
people are not on this earth so called then you don't carry with you all these material things
because you have already given up, you have no interest in them. You are not materialistic so your
spirit is free. When you die what happens to you is a very simple thing that you feel very liberated,
absolutely, and then
Its all under your own guidance, your own desire, everything works out. You don't feel that
have come out of your body. There should be no fear of death but on the contrary it should be
welcomed, because you will feel much more liberated. Much more at ease. You don't have other
problems of that you have to carry on in this world because of this body.
freedom completely and you can decide what you want to do.
feel
you
your
you
Now when you become so clean, washed out completely, your mind completely cleansed out from
all kinds of conditioning you become like a beautiful mirror. In that mirror one can see the complete
picture, of the society in which you live. Complete picture of the government who rules your
everything. So clear-cut. For example you ask somebody then he will say what is your politics? if
I say my politics is, I have no politics. He will say, what you have no politics. How can you exist
without politics? I have no politics. So they will go on asking questions to you which are very much
unknown. But for a realised soul, it's just the other way round. A realised soul not only sees but
also shows and expresses very clearly. I have been amazed at the way people have been so
reflective of the society into which they live and their country. So complete identification is lost. You
don't feel identified much. You just see what's wrong with that. You start seeing how you can help,
what you should do, how can you work it out and the importance of that becomes your main thing
Yesterday the way you brought all the flags. Behind that flag I could see all of you wanted that
peace should prevail in those countries. They should get all the joy and peace of Sahaja Yoga.
What a feeling it is. It is not like yourselves becoming Sahaja Yogis and sitting in the corner. They
want to do it for that country about which they are not identified but with identification they have
that deep feeling that they have to work it out, correct it, it is a very different type of personality
you develop.
tell anybody that why you do like this? What is the need to do this? No, because I have
If
you
to live in this society after all. I belong to this society and I just cannot do what I like. But when
you get your realisation you can do what you like. You can do what you like because you only
like that which is righteous, that which is good, constructive, and helpful. After realisation there is
no restriction for you. All these restrictions of don't, don't, don't, this really enslaves you. But after
the realisation you are such a free bird that nothing can enslave you. For example, there are many
preachers who preach that you should not drink, you should not smoke, you should not take drugs.
You should not do this you should not do that. But it does not stop. It does not help. People struggle,
Vol. VII Issue 9 & 10
6.
Divine Cool Breeze
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-6.txt 
 try everything but ultimately they commit suicide, but they cannot get rid of those habits. While now
you are so powerful that nothing can stick to you. That's the purity of your character that has come
up. It does not allow any nonsensical thing to stick to you. So many Sahaja Yogis told me, how
just cannot understand. Mother it is your purify you have given us.
their eyes
have steadied down, how they have become righteous. How they became so pure. They
After Sahaja Yoga the same people are telling us and making fun of the whole thing, For example
1 have heard some Sahaja Yogis talking to each other, "You see in my country this is such and
such stupid thing going on. Another says "nobody can beat mine it is much worse" It is a very
common competition among the Sahaja Yogis going on. So that we have to see how pure we are
becoming and in this purity anything that is dirty of anything that will spoil this purity, we don't
like it. We are washed, cleansed, from inside and won't want to take anything like that in ourselves
anymore. Then I have seen also the way people have become so compassionate. Its very surprising
to see how they have become so compassionate to each other. For example there were two Sahaja
Yogis who were not very happy with each other. I didn't know how to make them feel that the other
Sahaja Yogi is alright. Does not matter, after all what it there? "No I don't like this thing in him
and another would say, "Now I don't like this thing in him." So it went on, I don't like, he
says.
So I said alright, now well you meditate for sometime, again meditate, meditate and I said now
love me? One says I love you more than he loves, I said, "it's a difficult situation." How
to make them understand now that you cannot weigh your love, you cannot make a chart out of
love somebody you enjoy it. You cannot qualify or
quantify it. This was going on with these two gentlemen and I thought now what to do. They are
very important and still there is no understanding between them. So the divine power took over,
one of them fell very sick suddenly. When he fell sick then this other one felt such a tremendous
love for him. Its something nobody can explain that he went and sat with that patient for twenty
four hours. He said that if you need any money I have got it. He was a very sensible and a
reasonable person on his own and felt this love and affection. I think it is divine's play that they
were brought together so close and such compassion. So the force of compassion within you is so
do vo
you
it. It is something within yourself. And if you
50
much, it is very subtle you don't see it. Because on mental level I was telling them, arguing, trying
to pacify them. It did not work. But when this force of compassion started acting suddenly into one
of them, the other one saw the compassion, the pure compassion and they became great friends.
One has to feel the compassion within yourself. I have seen many times that there are many Sahaja
Yogis and sometimes I have to correct them or say something, immediately another one will say
"mother can you forgive him." I said, I have forgiven him. I have not done anything. "Please forgive
mother, please." I feel so happy to hear that in one point, in one condition when it comes to a
Sahaja Yogi you support him. I feel happy. It shows you are not only generous
but
you are filled
with
compassion. So this source of compassion which is within your heart, you have to just open
your heart. If you open that heart it's like opening your Sahasrara. You will be amazed how you
can forgive.
I have heard reports which disturbs me many times that people are forming different groups and
having different ashrams and they don't come to the coflective and all that. I feel very much
-concerned. Now what is missing is of course there are some people who think that they must have
their separate organisation and why should they be in the collective and all that. It is definite that
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VII Issue 9 & 10
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-7.txt 
 such a person has not yet achieved that state of compassion. We had one couple who were
quarrelling with each other throughout. They used to send me letters after letters, telephones after
telephones. I didn't know what to do with them. I thought better they divorce themselves and finish
it of. I told them separately that you better divorce and got out of it. The complaints you have is
such that they cannot be solved. I said "You are saying that my husband doesn't give me more
time. he is always out and he doesn't spend any nice moments with me, we don't go out. The
husband said that she always troubles me, that I must take her out, that I must do this, I must do
that. I want to do it but I can't do it. So I said "When you take divorce you never can claim
anything. You will lose your husband forever. So why do you want to do such a thing. Immediately
now this compassion started working. Then I put in a word that supposing anyone of you is sick
tomorrow then who will look after each other. This just put them out. You know such little little
moments coming in the life of Sahaja Yogis I have seen that suddenly their heart opens and with
that they combat all these petty nonsensical ideas which keep them out of each other and out of
the collectivity.
What gives me the greatest enjoyment is to see how you love each other, care for each other, joke
with each other and dance with each other. This is the greatest thing that I enjoy. I don't want to
get rid of this idea of mine despite the fact that so many times I find it hard to believe it that how
could the Sahaja Yogis behave like this and try to create rifts and distances between the people
who are realised souls, because realised souls anywhere in the world, respect each other. Not only
respect, care and never talked ill of another realised soul. Never, I don't know if you know about
the private lives of the saints but in India how they have behaved towards each other, the way
which they have looked after each other. Its so beautiful its so noble.
People who care for the feelings of others is not for that what they want to say or what they want
to have or they are something special. Also after you have come in Sahaja Yoga, you have lost
your specialities. Some of them think that they are very special. Supposing I call some lady to put
"alta' on my feet, she starts thinking that she is very special. But I called her because she has a
horrible agnya. When somebody told me, "Mother, she thinks that she is very special" | said, really!
What makes her think like that, "because you called her to put some 'alta' on your feet." I said,
I called her because she had such a horrid, ugly agnya that she will trouble everyone. So I wanted
to clear it. So either I should have told her that you are a very egoistical, horrible, all words that
are possible. Otherwise she won't understand. It is so surprising.
There is some lady who was very nasty to her in-laws and everybody in India and she came to
see me. I scolded her, "what business you had to behave like this. Your father was such a racist
a word against him. Then why are you talking against these people." She went
but you never said
out and said, "Oh! Look mother has called me, nobody is allowed to see her." I said, "what's this!"
Its a very funny situation with people sometimes. They think they are something special and they.
try to make themselves something special. It is becoming really difficult.
Now just to show my love and appreciation for something people have done, if I give some present
to that
impossible situation. I expect if I have done anything good to that person or in any way suggested
my concern about a person that person has to become a very good Sahaja Yogi, in the sense the
most humble, honest and loving person. Otherwise it has no meaning, no use being good to
person or show concern to him, he starts thinking that he is something special. It's an
Vol. VII Issue 9 & 10
8.
Divine Cool Breeze
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-8.txt 
 anyone. That means that person jumps into hell. So this one is also another idea of speciality that
they have lost their sense of speciality. When a drop becomes an ocean it has become the ocean,
but it is not the drop anymore. If anybody thinks I am
no more the ocean. You are still the drop. Because unless and until you are the drop how can you
feel that I am something special. So you have lost your speciality. You have lost it because all these
ideas of speciality comes from your past. One lady I met once long time back, she was very rude,
proud and arrogant. This was in Delhi where people are very conscious about their husband's job,
this and that. I didn't know even the designation of my husband.
special person then know that you are
I said, "What's the matter with you? Why are you so rude?
What is the problem?"
She said, "I am the wife of such and such."
| said, "You are the wife or the husband?"
She asked me, "What are you doing here?"
I said, "I am a housewife." Then My husband came there.
She said "Do you know him?"
"Yes" I said, "Wwhy?" I thought that there must be something wrong there also.
She said "No, I just want to know, how do you know him?" as if I was some criminal or what.
| said "he is My husband."
"Oh, my Gad, he is
"What happened". As if she was stung by a serpent.
Maybe her husband was on a much lower position then mine.
This stupid idea of being special has to be completely negated in Sahaja Yoga. Not mentally.
Mentally if you are saying, "I am not special, 1 am not special" like a mantra, you will become
much more. Because you will say, I have said this mantra 23000 times. Who can say
So this idea I am something special. I am something great. I am something out of the group. I am
something superior to others, just vanishes like I said that you are a drop in the ocean, you have
to become the ocean but you are no more a drop. To have any related value there is not
any related value system by which you can say that I am higher and he is lower. All this has
created all the problems of the world See from our caste system in India. The social system in the
west, the racialism in the west also comes from self consciousness that my religion is better, yours
is the worst. We are the best. All these things have created problems. It has done no good. It has
failed, failed and failed. So in Sahaja Yoga at least don't bring this disease anymore. That I am
better, our country is better. This speciality you should drop and the real beauty of your personality
you show. For that you don't need a special skin, special body, or a glamorous look! What
need is a beautiful heart. And I tell you it's a beautiful heart that attracts. Nothing else. If's the
beautiful heart that you want to have. I have known many people like that,
gentleman who divorced his first wife, she may not be so good looking, ugly or whatever it was.
Then he married another good looking woman. And he ran away from the house, I asked him
"Why? you didn't like that woman because she was ugly or whatever it was, why are you running
away from this one. He said "she has no heart." And this is what you have a very great generous,
beautiful, dharmic heart. You have got it as a present from the Divine and which you must respect.
You should be proud of it and enjoy it. As you enjoy your generosity, you should enjoy the
all the nature is enjoying itself. To be very meticulous about things, to be all the time correcting
other people, is a headache. The best thing is to correct yourselves and laugh at yourself. That is
God, he is your husband?"
like me?"
system,
you
there was one
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VII Issue 9 & 10
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-9.txt 
 the best way you can do it. Everybody has some funny things about themselves. I also have, I must
confess and I them because I think I try and try but I always forget. For example these
spectacles I always forget them. Before coming I tell myself that I need it. I should take it. I must
remember it. but invariably I forget it. I tell you I am good at mathematics. But I can't count. I don't
know how to sign a cheque. Can you believe if? You have to write a cheque for me.
enjoy
I have seen with all these meticulous people they always fail because their brain plays tricks on
them. For example there was one fellow who told me that the size of your car is such and such.
All right then, so the size of the garage should be such and such, I said, all right, so when we
built the garage the car could not get in. I said, such a meticulous architect and such a well known
person who has got so many awards, how could he make such a mistake. I sill didn't understand
this. He said now you better buy a smaller car. I said, atleast now you measure this garage in a
proper way. Otherwise if again I buy something it won't enter in.
We are so particular, so meticulous, now see these little, little flowers, they are growing on their
own. All of them get the sun's rays and they are happy. But these people who are very particular
are headache to themselves and ultimately they find that is not so.
You have lost that meticulous sense. I know of a Sahaja Yogini. She was running a shop and she
said, "Mother I knew each and every price and every thing in this shop. But since I got realisation
I have forgotten everything."
"So are you happy or unhappy?"
She said "I am very happy."
| asked "Why?"
She said, "because now I am making a big profit." Profit is the main thing. Why should you try
to remember each and everything. No tree is systematic. It's unsystematically systematic, some
leaves are this side. Some are that side. Some branches on that side. Some are the other side. There
is no system. Because then you become a military, if you form a system. In Sahaja Yoga there is
no system. We are beyond time. We are beyond all kinds of systems. All our system is what is
the unison within ourselves. Like these two hands. They have no system built in, nothing. But they
move. To build up a mental system is wrong and against Sahaja Yoga. Some people wrote to me
that Mother we want to translate your transcription, do this, do that, I said, "forget it," because
if you start planning you will definitely fall into the trap of the system. You will have to follow the
systems. "This system is good, that system is good. Why not this way?"
Specially in the west people are over systematic. Like people will have the courses built up in the
and the forks, how to move, what to eat and how to eat, it is too much. It have to eat
spoons
food it is straight forward you can eat with your hands. No system is needed. All these systems
and norms are too much in the west and you should really try to cut them up. As a result they had
anticulture, another kind of stupidity. Where they were building up another kind of system. They
said they are hippies now. So they must have hair never washed, never clean with lice. There is
no variely. One hippy means another, it is the same. You cannot make them out one from another.
If somebody puts a ring here, everybody will put it there without any brains, or understanding. They
talk of individuality and of personality. Where is the individuality? There is no individuality. Because
you take to anything that your gang calls for, that makes it very fashionable.
you
Vol. VII Issue 9 & 10
10
Divine Cool Breeze
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-10.txt 
 In India, "very fashionable" means it is very expensive and very beautiful. It is very elite, very
fashionable means everybody likes it. It could be any punky thing or anything. It is fashionable.
Finished. It's a fashion means you do not have your own idea, personality or individuality. In
Sahaja Yoga you are not bound to any fashion. If you like wearing this, wear whatever you like.
You are free to do whatever you like. But as I said that again you will govern yourselves. You will
be
your own guru, you will be your own master and you will do whatever is good, decent and
whatever the Deities like. You will just do it that way because you are a Sahaja Yogi. So life
becomes so much you don't about the things which are not there and you are
also not worried about the things which are there. Because now when you see something you think
all right, I have got it now, I must keep it for somebody. I must do it so. I have got a ring which
was quite big I was thinking who has got thick fingers whom I could give it to. I started looking
at the fingers of everyone. Whosoever has the thick fingers I will give him. I mean the thought was
just the other way around. Supposing you were not a Sahaja Yogi, you will say Oh! such a thick
finger, why not take some gold out, why not sell it, or take out the stone, all kinds of nonsensical
things you will think but you will not think better to give it to somebody because you cannot wear
it. Why not give it to others? Whats wrong? After all its is not fitting you so give it to the other.
But this is only possible in Sahaja Yoga. I have seen people are very kind, very sweet to each other,
and exactly what the other person wants they will buy and give it to that person. Or may say,
I have one. I will give it the other." They do it like that all the time, thinking about others. What
should I give? What should I do? It is the expression of joy and compassion within
matter for that all the time. Like somebody whose house was burgled in Canada wrote to me "thank
God my house has been cleaned out. I didn't know what to do with it: It was a junk." So this kind
of an attitude comes in that if you have to do, then give it to some Sahaja Yogi to express your
love. But normally people will do the opposite whatever is the junk in house, they will give it as
a present. But when you are a Sahaja yogi the whole being has become so beautiful. Just like a
flower which wants to give fragrance to others all the time the fragrance of your compassion, love,
affection and security.
easierl That
worry
You use
inou
Its a new age what we say but I say its a new race of human beings that are before me and all
this newness has so many beautiful facets that they really sparkle like diamonds. My only blessing
to you is that you grow in it, and grow in it and become greater and greater. Never think that
you are greater than others. Never thinking that you are special than others. This will definitely
soothe you down completely. Somebody might have hurt you somewhere. Doesn't matter.
Somebody might have scolded you, doesn't matter. What is your capacity? It is to love another
person, be affectionate and kind. I am really amazed how these 25 years have passed with all
kinds of stupid problems and nice things, such a mixture but all those things have never disturbed
me: I used to act some times that I am angry for something. I used to say the things which I should
not have normally said because it was needed to be said. But on the whole like sitting in a very
big ship we can say we all are elevated into the realm of Divine love and this is what one has
to enjoy. If one person has that love and compassion and that pure love then that person can emit
it to others. The rapport of this compassion is extremely beautiful, it cannot be described in the
words. Like yesterday I couldn't speak. In what words could I put my feelings. I thought there are
no words created on this eacth to express any deep feeling that how you people have taken Sahaja
Yoga so well, have understood it. May God Bless You.
lis
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VII Issue 9 & 10
11
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-11.txt 
 ADI KUNDALINI PUJA 1995
H. H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
Cabella, Italy. 4th June 1995 (Synopsis)
Today we have gathered here to do the Kundalini Puja or the Adi Shakti Puja. There is a difference
which
between the two. Adishakti is the total power of God, of His desire while kundalini is the
part
is reflected in the human beings as Kundalini. So there is difference between the Adi Kundalini and
the Adishakti. Adishakti is the para shakti. Is the powers which is beyond all the power which
controls all the powers and one of the powers of Adishakti is kundalini. For example the kundalini
which is placed within me in the triangular bone is not totality. Ofcourse it is the power which is
there to give you your self realisation. It is the power that redeems you, that nourishes you, that
enlightens your centers. But there are two other powers that you know which are very powerful
which are working through Ida and Pingala. And the third one that is Mahalakshmi which is in
the center. Now kundalini's main job is to give you your self realisation, because she is your
individual mother: Everyone has the kundalini within himself or herself reflected, whatever may
ybe
quality of that person. Now as you see reflections fall on everything. Say the reflections of the moon
falls on the stone. We don't see any reflection. It then falls on a better reflector say the water. Then
we can see the reflection. But when it falls on a mirror. It reflects better.. So that is how the reflection
gradually goes on improving. In the same way we have human beings who have different
reflections. But they can be improved and they can be made absolutely top class. It is possible.
The one power which is the desire. Thouah the
kundalini as you see is the power of pure desire. That it does not want anything. It was only to
give you self realisation. The other two powers. One of them is the mundane desire. This mundane
desire if it becomes nothing but pure desire then kundalini has no problems from the left side.
There are two ofther powers that are within you.
But if it is not a pure desire but full of other desires, for example the first desire of human being
which comes from animals I think is food. He wants food to nourish himself. But human beings don't
only take food to nourish. Also for the taste of it, for the beauty of it which is innately working in
them. All kinds of ideas we have. Some body can like this, somebody can like that, But the one
who understands that the taste of the food is not important, and he can practise it and then it works.
It works wonders. Because the lowest desire which is food comes under your control. If you can
sometimes go without food, ofcourse not for god, but for yourselves. God does not want you to
starve. If you can live without food, if you can enjoy every type of food. Then you have done
lot to improve the path of sushumna for the kundalini. I have seen in many cases that kundalini
just does not rise. Even if she rises. She falls back. This happens when the person is very self
indulgent. He is all the time thinking of the things which are not of very great importance for
a
spirituality.
Apart from that there is another horrible one desire we have that is to grab as much money as
that
possible to think about. This time I had the bad experience because Sahaja yogis come to me,
mother they are asking if we should reduce the price of puja. I was shocked because I never
have
decided about it. All is decided by the leaders. Then they would like to have bargain as you
in a shop you see. Or may be some sort of sale or some sort of this. This is one of the greatest
dangers in your evolution. You know that I am working for your projects. I am buying lands for
Divine Cool Breeze
12
Vol. VII Issue 9 & 10
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-12.txt 
 you. I am doing things for you. And for which you need money. But nobody comes forward with
the donations. I see they won't they don't understand that it is for you I need to have all this Once
suddenly we decided that we could have 50% payment. Immediately so many telephone. "Ah, we
have 50% less the bargain price so we are coming for bargaining. It is the sale programming. It
is the sale what they do. They offer you something so that they can get a lot more customers and
things like this. Sahaja yoga is just opposite of that. You don't have to give anything. You get a
lot. But this is not for sale, this is not for sale by any chance. It is a thing where you have to pay
because we have to have all these things and I have to pay so many things which you do not know.
Like last time we had about I think fifty people who came just free. Some of the leaders know, but
some of the leaders they just go on asking like this because I don't know perhaps they want to save
money or they want to popularise themselves among the disciples may be that is the reason. So
this thinking about money itself is a very detrimental force for your spirituality. Otherwise what
others are doing is the same, all the time they are thinking of money. Now if you are thinking of
money, thinking of earning more for Sahaja Yoga, to help Sahaja Yoga it's all right. But it is for
your own ideas, in the west its very common not in India. I must tell you, India is a poor country.
One day Yogi told me I need some money for the school, I said "all right I'll .""No, no", he
said "I will collect" and he collected in one meeting 18 lakhs of rupees. Ofcourse I told him now
don't take it out what money to pay, don't collect. But so much of money orientation. All the time
thinking about money, saving money this things are absolutely against Sahaja yoga. You can ask
any one how much I understand about money, I don't understand Banking, I don't know how to
count. I am not worried about what money we have, what we have to do with this
let us do something about it.
give
is here
IS
money
Today I don't know why I have to tell about this gross subject. But it has been pointed out to me,
"mother you never say anything about it and the people are getting really materialistic." That's very
I sad. Even one person who is materialistic will have to go out of Sahaja Yoga. Gradually it will work
that way and you will be surprised that you are out af Sahaja Yoga. It is very amazing how after
getting realisation also getting on the top of the world we still live in small little holes like rats of
this money business. This money has brought so many problems to our world, you can see it clearly.
All this economics and all this knowledge of economics where has it gone? Is the world better by
it? There is recession going on every where. Everybody is unemployed. In every country you go
there is so much unemployment. This is so much that it shows that this economics is also a very
artificial science and dealing with the weaknesses of the human beings, not with their strength. If
they could know the strength of the human beings, they would have done much better than they
have done so far. Now we have so many sophisticated places in the west. They hove everything
electrical. We push the buttons and everything is there. Specially these modern planes when I travel
I don't know which one to push because they are so slim, so delicate, I think you need special artists
to do that. All this is for what? For getting more money and more money
But at the same time people are fed up. When all these sophistication are on. They are fed
computers, they are fed up with electricity. Fed up with cement, fed up with all kinds of artificial
things. Its a fact more in the western countries than in developing countries. They are just fed up.
Now this is the force. This is the strength. Why are they fed up? They are fed
realised that it does not give you joy. It does not give soothing feelings. It's irritates them. So it is
against human mind, human character or human civilisation something inhuman. So now what to
and
impressing people.
up with
because they have
up
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VII Issue 9 & 10
13
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-13.txt 
 do?
| went to America once. I went to see a friend of mine and all the houses were coloured with the
'cowdung' colour. I said, "Why do they have cowdung all over their houses. What is the matter
with them? Why don't they have colour like white or another? These people like very much this sand
colour. They said, "Now a days
fed up with cement. Now they cannot get so much cowdung here, so they have a special way of
making cement colour like cowdung. They mix up the things so that the colour comes like cowdung.
| said, "But why cowdung of all the things." So they said that some of them went to India and they
had to sleep in the huts which were covered with cowdung. So they found out logically that it the
cowdung we have as colour it will be the most soothing colour for us. So there were articles about
it and people started using cowdung. So what is the force? So what is the strength? the strength
is that they want to live in the natural way. They don't want to have artificial things. So they go
in another extreme to have cowdung. Sahaja yoga is in between. Now one has to understand that
whether you put cowdung, or cement or anything. It is not going to give you any joy. Say for India,
people who have cement houses are great. According to them cement represents luxury and wealth.
But in the west If people see cement, my goodness to them cement is something like a grave. So
now the positive thing in them is that they want to live with natural things. They want to use natural
material. Natural life. But they go to extremes. You see we had anticulture Hippies and all like that.
So to get from one extreme to another extreme is also not condusive to a human life because you
see a like a primitive person
these American people want to have cowdung because they are
human being cannot become primitive. Even it you try to dress up
your brain is modern. So when they get fed up they go from one to another. They don't realise
what is the missing point. In both the things whether you live like a rustic person or very cementive
person, any type that you live, the missing point is that in everything there is a competition. Once
the fashion, starts then every body is having cane chairs. Now in this competition they miss the
point. It is that they miss the joy.
A persra who is a realised soul will not desire. Whether it is cement or anything, it is just the same,
But it will come to his mind that all these artificial things are ruining human beings so he will
say
no But he will not have the hair like primitive people. He will not behave like primitive people and
will lead a very normal, natural life. So when the mind starts thinking something about it, it will
never get to the point of joy. From one end to another. So they think that they are going into
balance. They are going into the dharma? But my experience is different. Even those hippies I know
them, they used to eat like real gluttons. And they are very much interested in their comforts and
they would go to any extent of snatching anything belonging to others. They thought that now they
became hippies so they have already become landlords. Because they have given up that, they
have given up that. So the mind suggests you money orientation, and competition, all these artificial
things. You should change your life style But that does not happen, never. It is just a play of mind
from one to another. So how to detach your selves from this idea of money orientation. Whether
you wear a sanyasi's dress or you wear a wonderful, very expensive dress it is the same for your
you
convincing yourself that now I have become a big sanyasi. Because I am wearing a saffron dress.
By wearing that kind of dress you can never get rid of any nonsense. So first thing that you have
to become is a normal person. There is no need to be abnormal outside. That you are deceiving
yourself. If you think by changing your dress or your lifestyle you have become a great sanyasi
body. You can't even see your own dress. So it is the same to the eyes. But with the mind
start
Vol. VII Issue 9 & 10
Divine Cool Breeze
14
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-14.txt 
 or a detached person from this money orientation then I must say you don't help yourselves.
A person who is detached from within helps the kundalini to rise constantly without any catches.
So for a Sahaja yogi it is important to introspect, and see for yourselves what is your level. At I
told you about the reflector what sort of reflector you are? No use deceiving yourself because
Sahaja yoga is for your benevolence and your kundalini is for your benevolence. The
ascent is the aim of your life and to perfect it is your job. So you don't have to take to
anything outside. It is inside you have to see yourself what sort of attachment you have?
The second force which has suddenly come up among Sahaja yogis is that they don't have immoral
problems. They have just become moral, most of them 99.999 I think are moral people in Sahaja
yoga. There may be here and there. Because they enjoy their morality, they want to be that. Not
only that they want their children to be moral, their families to be moral and that is how morality
is spreading in Sahaja yoga very fast. In that also one has to understand that it is the innocence
which is the force, not the morality like some people write to me that I get up in the moming. I
sit before the photograph, I do this, I do that, take my bath and then I do this, I can't understand
this, not necessary. You have to cleanse yourself in the night. As you cleanse yourself, your body
and once in the morning you have to pray that's all. Is not necessary to have this ritualism, this
kind of a role all the time you go every day morning, till evening nonsensical things and then they
become fanatics. They start becoming absolutely fanatic about Sahaja yoga. And this fanaticism
can be very dangerous because they try to remember everything by heart, this and that, no not
necessory. It should be in the heart. otherwise it amounts to lip service. And with the lip service
gradually you start feeling you are great, your father is great and this and that. So you are thrown
away. You yourself throw yourself out, like a ball, which you hit and it comes back. Like I have
seen many people who try to attract themselves in Sahaja yoga are just repelled by themselves not
by Sahaja yoga. Sahaja yaga attracts you no doubt but you must have gravity. If you don't have
gravity how can you be attracted. The seriousness about it is only this that you should introspect
seriously. Find out what's wrong with you. Because this is a great chance for you to ascend. With
this kind of a mind, which becomes fanatic in Sahaja yoga starts saying harsh things to others and
disturbing the peace of others. Because they think that they are very great Sahaja yogis. Then I
think one should introspect and find out why am I'doing it? So many people have the same defects
for that they will scold others perhaps may be they think by correcting another person they might
be corrected. It is very absurd somelimes the way people look at their problems as if these are the
problems of others. Now if 1 am saying this to you, somebody must be counting, I know mother
is saying about that one, but never will think that its for me and I have to see myself and introspect
and find out what is dragging me down.
So this is one of the most important things is that you can not be harsh, you cannot hurt people,
you cannot misbehave in that manner and if you can do that you are thrown out of Sahaja yoga
by yourself. Nobody has to throw you. You have to be collective. People have to like you and you
have to be one of them. If the collectivity is not there kundalini will never rise because she
is rising she is trying to give you second birth so that you become one with the whole. The drop
becomes the ocean. That's her job. She will never rise in a person if he thinks that he is exclusive,
special. Then he should not come to Sahaja yoga. This is another great burden in raising kundalini
when people think that they are something special. We have no priest hood and the leadership
your
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VII Issue 9 & 10
15
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-15.txt 
 also is a myth. But sometimes they do behave in such a manner that one is shocked. How could
they behave like this. And these serpents you see just suddenly come out and you see them and
you are shocked. What are they doing? Where is their attention? What are they worried about?
If these stupid ideas walk into their mind tell them shut up. Now I know myself very well. That is
the best way to keep you out of these nonsensical things that are working. First of all
remember that you all are seekers of truth. You have been seeking, through out the ages for years
together, I would say from many lives. And now you have found. So grab it and hold it fast by
understanding that this is what you wanted and you got it now.
you must
Another big problem that comes in the awakening of the kundalini, which I feel is very important
to be told to you, is that some of you think that you are very close to me. That you have a special
right on me. You don't know, your mother is mahamaya." Be careful. I am telling that
again. Never think in that way. No body can be my favourate. I assure you. It can not be It is
like mercury, if you put on another metal you know it does not stick. My mind does not stick to
anyone. Now supposing somebody is in trouble, somebody has written to me there is some
problem, then the thought comes in, but I don't stick to that. I don't stick to anyone. Nor do I have
| attachment to anyone, because that will be against the principle of pure love. I cannot be attached.
Of course I see your problems very intimately. I would love to solve them. I get worried, but the
thought, the attention is going towards that person. You have seen when it is the full moon the tide
is much bigger. Does the ocean think what about the moon? Does it think it has to attract the
particular ocean? It is just the nature. Swabhava. The nature itself acts. Thatl's the nature. You
cannot help it and this nature is the one you should also try to know, adopt and adore becouse
it's very helpful. This gives you a great relief from your mind which is all the time thinking and
thinking, and does not allow you to have the thought less awareness. If you get attached to
someone you are worried about some problems, even your problems sometimes. All the time you
think dout your problem or about somebody whom you are attached to. Then this mind starts
working, how to solve the problems; what to do and this and that. But then you will stop your agnya
conmpletely then how will
In any walk of life for the Sahaja Yogi the best way to stop thinking is to think how you
to spread Sahaja yoga. Just diverts your attention. This is the greatest pleasure for
don't have to pay or anything, just know what powers you have got. At this point I find many
again and
your kundalini rise?
are going
for which
you,
you
people are not aware of their powers are not using them. When you don't use your power,
also kundalini falls. Why should she work? She is not stupid. If you don't want to use her for what
she has to achieve then why should she worry about you? So she just stops off. She has nothing
to do with you. Then suddenly you come out. "Mother, I have got this trouble, I have got that
trouble. Specially troubles like arthiritis, all such troubles come to people when they don't use their
vibrations. Give it to the flowers, give it to the trees give it to anything that is living But don't shirk
it. You need not touch the person but the desire should be to whom should I give vibrations. Only
worry should be to whom should I put attention to? Where should I put this energy of mine? Once
you start using this divine power it starts flowing much much more and your mother the kundalini
is very happy with this and then you start seeing wonders.
and
For that
of God Almighty. But when I talk of compassion, I find people are more interested in the Sahaja
have to have first of all attention on compassion and love But compassion and love
you
Vol. VII Issue 9 & 10
Divine Cool Breeze
16
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-16.txt 
 yogis, who are suffering, who have problems, who have been thrown away from Sahaja yoga.
Then they will write to me, mother, please take them back. That's my job not yours. But those who
don't love God are not going to achieve much. They have loose tongues, they talk funnily. They
don't understand that they are dealing with God Almighty. And this kind of frivolous talking and
frivolous behavior is wrong. You must understand that the angels are around you all the time, All
the time they are with you, all the time watching you. They will help you, they will support you,
they will elevate you. They will cross all kinds of hurdles. You have to love God from all your heart.
and all your soul. You can't say things which are not full of protocol. All this is only possible, when
you' surrender your ego. God doesn't want anything from you. What can you give to God? This
is a funny idea that people have. But it's all right, you can give anything to God. Krishna has said
that
you can give me a flower. You can give me water. You can give this present, that present I
will accept. But he says that only thing what we have to do is that you have to be one with me
you have to be connected with me, and this feeling of connection is so satisfying, so joy giving,
so nice which cannot be described in words. Then you find your kundalini flowing out with joy for
yourselves, and for others.
Also the right side arbitrariness, domination, showing off, harshness, cruelties. I don't know how
many things there are on the right side. They can be unlimited. But there is a limit for that, is Hitler.
So far some others may come to compete with him. So all these also starts destroying this kundalini.
I have seen also kundalini of the people which is hurt, wounded, just cannot rise, finished, then
I feel that let them take the second birth then only it can work out. Is impossible for such a kundalini
to make her rise. If you are selfish, and cruel then this kundalini becomes hurt. A good mother feels
hurts when her child misbehaves so this kundalini gets very hurt, because she wants you to have
your second birth. She can't just bear it. It makes her absolutely incapable of rising she becomes
sick, ill and wounded. So all kinds of aggressiveness should be given up. That is not going to help.
You have come to Sahaja yoga. not for saving money or for bargaining because you are seekers.
I have seen invariably people who have gone to false Gurus have this kind of money orientation.
Because they must have been fleeced completely by the previous gurus. May be I don't know what
So say.
It is we who can rise through our own goodness and beauty. And it is we who can come up to
the level of great Sahaja yogis. Don't keep this power to yourself. It is to be distributed and given
to others to make others also very happy and joyous. It is a duty of every Sahaja yogi. Also thinking
about Sahaja yoga, not about yourself is the best way to avoid money problems. But once they
start thinking about sahaja yoga they start thinking about the defects of the Sahaja yogis. That's
not going to help. You have to develop that peace of mind within yourself, by which you can
become the witness of yourselves first. You should be able to be witness of yourself and see what
are the things that are putting you down because today the world is absolutely chaotic. From this
chaotic world you have to rise into a very peaceful and beautiful world and you have to take many
into that world for which you have to have the quality. It's not that you just become Sahaja yogis
and wear my batch. No. In everyway you can spread Sahaja yoga but be careful because one
should not feel that you have done a great job. Whatever you are doing is for your own good
not for others.
The kundalini was a great mystery before but now it is not anymore. Its all open. You all know
about it. You know about its powers. You know how you can achieve your highest goal. So just
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VII Issue 9 & 10
17
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-17.txt 
 to balance just to lead a mediocre life, os not the way a real true seeker of truth should do. But
if
you are the real seeker of the truth you should see what's wrong with what I have been doing,
with whatever I have been following, what I have to achieve. All the scriptures have said that
have to become the spirit. All the scriptures have said that you have to be born again. Only thing
what I am doing is what they have said I am trying to do it, and requesting you to do it. Sahaja
yoga is not like other religions where people abuse children, do what they like, make money, this
that, all nonsense like a Mafia. You are people who are chosen specially, who believe in a good
moral life anda peaceful life. So satisfying, so joy giving, so nice which cannot be described in
words. You find your kundalini flowing out with joy for yourselves, and for others.
you
May God Bless you.
Vol. VII Issue 9 & 10
Divine Cool Breeze
18
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-18.txt 
 TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
BY H. H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
London, June 1995 (Synopsis)
In nature one goes absolutely thoughtless. All this is built in the trees. How collective they
are we have to learn a lot from them. Every leaf is allowed to get the Sun. How they grow,
they are organised. How they behave like this. Nobody even thinks. They haven't even got their
realisation but what is it that is working out in them. How do they work it out in such a beautiful
manner. Because they are under the complete control of the Divine, they don't have to worry. Even
the animals are under the control of the Divine, thats why they are called Pashu'. "Paash' means
control. Shiva is known as Pashupati. He is the one who looks after them affectionately and in a
delicate manner. All this is created for human beings, but human beings don't understand that
greenery
how
very
all this world which is created is for their use.
It is for use not abuse, and this is the one thing which has to be really felt in the atmosphere, that
how they are collective. They have no problem. They live together. Its really a good atmosphere
that how they keep to the global cycle. For example we see that the sap rises, then it gives whatever
is needed for every part of the tree. Then whatever is left, it can go down iîn the atmosphere, so
it doesn't get stuck into one place.
I have told you long back that you should not get stuck to anything. If you are detached then it
works out very well. But if you are attached you just get worries and problems. Thinking too much
about it, your life becomes miserable. If you are detached then the nature takes over. You feel
extremely relaxed. But if you are thinking that we have to do this, we have to do that, we have
to achieve this, then you start worrying. So two things can happen. One is that you get confused.
So you will not achieve any result and you will go on thinking, and thinking. The second thing is
how it works.
that you
will
get exhausted completely. But if you are detached as Sahaja Yogis you will be amazed
After getting realisation you should try to detached yourself. You have to be in thoughtless
awareness. By getting into thoughtless awareness you just detach. Now see your aftachment, how
it is? This detachment you can practise, that you can see yourself in the mirror, and know that
are not this reflection which you see; but you are much more than the reflection.
you
What is that within us which looks after everything before realisation. Which looks after the
sympathetic nervous system. The little little things it looks after, and tries to keep us on the right path,
gives us consciousness. What is that? What is within us that does that? The spirit within
come yet into our attention. But there is something within us which makes us think about the truth,
which makes us seek the truth and which makes us know that something is wrong in the society.
God has not left us without this care. There is something that looks after us. The Kundalini is
sleeping and the spirit is in our heart. What do these have within them. It is the SOUL.
para
has not
us
Sometimes when people die or they are about to die and they come back to life they say that they
passed through some sort of a tunnel. Some have a black tunnel and some have a bright tunnel.
Some have a light tunnel. That is the soul within us which starts going up and with that our
altention. We feel that we are passing through
a tunnel. These souls you can see only after
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VII Issue 9 & 10
19
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-19.txt 
 realisation, and not before. This soul guides you. It has brought you to Sahaja Yoga and it has
told you that you have to seek the truth, you have to get the truth.
This is also, perserverance. It is the soul which gets after you and you have to see that people really
get so restless about it. All this comes from soul before realisation. This soul compels you to search.
When a person dies then this soul comes out. And also his spirit. So we call it as a dead soul.
They hang in the air sometimes. If they are realised souls they will become one with the Divine.
Whenever they want they can always be born again. But the dead souls who are attached, may
be, with their children, house, drinking habits, or something non-sensical, are the ones who trouble
us. They can be in groups. They can be of different types. They could be bad with sub-
conscious or Supra-conscious activity. But we cannot talk about this to anybody else because they
don't know. They don't want to believe that there is something. They believe in religions which say
that there are dead souls, dead spirits, but that is only in the church, mosque or temples. But in
private life they don't believe that we have all those things hanging around.
very
Some difficulties we say that cannot be solved could be from these dead souls. So the best way
to get rid of them is to have a detached attitude towards them. Now somebody is very
attached to a house or something. So these souls are searching for somebody through whom they
can satisty their wishes and they enter into the mind of that person. Then everything goes wrong.
You cannot do well. You cannot achieve anything. Specially with false Gurus you get all these
things. All these things have to be corrected through detachment. Some people are very much
attached to their children, then these children will be attached by the dead souls. If you are too
much attacked to your money then something will happen and you lose the money. I know so many
people who were multi-millionaires, but the greed was still there. So the spirit or whatever entered
in them started feeding them that invest here, invest there, and no money was left. Specially the
western business is like that. It goes on feeding you to invest here or there and nothing is left with
you, Lut loans and debts.
much
One has to be very detached about money. I'll tell you the story of mine getting into the terra-cotta
business There were some persons who were retired. They thought that they must serve their country
by doing export. But they could not carry on with each other. Everybody thought that they were
the best. So they fought and broke all the cups. I asked one of them "So what do you export?"
He said "Fans" I said "Fans? To Switzerland?" They asked "What do you export?" I said "Terra-
colta". They were surprised "Terra-cotta? Clay?" But
business. I am so detached about it. You see terra-cotta is doing very well everywhere, because
I know that people want hand made things. They love it. Then I am helping some people in a village
who have one cloth to cover their bodies. It helps also my charitable nature. Also its a global need
today that people should use handmade things. Its working out very well, you will be amazed. I
don't understand business. But I don't have to think about it. Its all working out. So I have this
detachment about it. I have taken no headache upon myself. It is such a pleasure to see these
people making something nice everywhere. There are so many beautiful things everywhere.
I don't know banking or anything about
So if you
develop a detachment through thoughtless awareness, then God will think over it, He will
look after You should have faith in God, that He is almighty. He does everything. He looks
after everything. Why should of life. You don't have to do
you.
you worrye This is a very good way
anything. You have gone beyond time. You have gone beyond these three gunas. You have also
Vol. VII Issue 9 & 10
Divine Cool Breeze
20
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-20.txt 
 gone beyond thought. Whatever you were doing by thought, your mind, your ways, you stop it.
In America I gave realisation to one girl who had a shop. She told me "Mother, I knew everything
in my shop. I had all the details about what I have. Now I don't care. I
in my shop". I said "What is the reason." She said "I am making big profit." I said "Thats the best
thing. After all what is the use of carrying all the load on your head and making no profit." One
should be prepared to surrender completely and absolutely to the will of God. Whatever He does
is for your good.
don't know what I have
You are Sahaj Yogis. You have to absorb the problems. You can pacify. You can calm down. You
have all the powers. Women should understand their own power. Because they don't understand
what powers they have, they have all the problems. Also some men have the habit that they start
forming groups.
behaving in a extremely dominating manner. Its a kind of a pumping station that they have. The
air goes into their ego and they start floating in the air and taking everybody out. This kind of a
thing is also a sinful thing. Because you are the wife of a leader you have to behave. You cannot
hurt people like that.
The third type of them are the leaders' wives. They somehow or the other start
According to the Shastras there are five kinds of mothers. One of them is the wife of leader, wife
of
She is a mother and she has to behave like a mother. She has to treat all the disciples,
guru.
just as a mother does. Supposing her husband the leader is upset with something she must try to
soothe him down. She should talk "You see, you should not do like that." This is her job. Not to
dominate others. They are doing just what they are not supposed to do. If anyone of them have
problems and cannot go to the leader, but will go to the wife of the leader and talk the problem.
Sometimes as husband you have to be corrected and as a wife you are
have to create and preserve. Its the duty of women. They don't know what is their duty. Its
the part of socieły and
you
not your duty to work like a secretary or some sort of politician.
You must know how to manage the marriage and do some justice. But they don't realize that the
marriage is not for a show business. Instead of doing such things its better they don't marry.
course in Sahaj Yoga you are allowed to divorce. It is a question of freedom. But its better to make
your marriage successful if you want to help Sahaj Yoga.
Of
Another problem which is very dangerous is like somebody has a habit of forming a group against
the leader. We have recently a very bad case from America. Wherever she went she formed a
group against the leader. It was such a big problem. I told her that you go back to India. She went
to commit suicide. She tried to jump in the river but she didn't jump. She said "I am going to commit
suicide and she took some "Paradols" or something but she didn't die. So by all these tantrums
you are going against yourself. I fold her that you go back to India. She said all the time that "I
will not go". "I will do this, do that." Her father got such a big heart attack the next day. She had
to go, so this kind of tantrum nature of a woman is very bad.
I remember one case in our life. Somebody from my husband's company went to another company,
because this government company was not paying him properly. But he did not like the job in the
new company very much and the way they were doing somethings. So he asked my husband if
he could have the job back. My husband said "I can not do anything. Why did you leave the job,
I have nothing to do with " He didn't know what to do. He tried but nothing was working so
you.
Divine Cool Breeze
21
Vol. VII Issue 9 & 10
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-21.txt 
 he came to me and told me he wanted to come back "I am a very good officer. I have done a
very good job, It was stupid on my part to get another job, I want to come back and serve my
country." So when Sir C. P. came home, I told him that this gentleman came to me. He said "Yes.
He came to the right person. Now you don't eat my head off, because I have told him, no." I am
just telling you, I said "because he thought I am much more generous than you." Sir C. P. said
"I am not less generous." I said "All right you do what you want." He agreed. So the job of a
woman is much bigger, much higher and much deeper. My husband had hundred people working
with him and he told me that you have to look after my people. Not only hundred of them but
hundreds of their relations also I tried to help, as far as possible. This is something so satisfying.
You create a community of your own. If you need anything they will be there. They will help you.
They will be there to look after you.
What is important is just to love and try to please others. If women can do that they have achieved
their womanhood. On the contrary taking all the tales against others to your husband, doing such
things is not the way. Never say anything contrary against others unless and until that person harms
you. Always tell something nice. Thats the best way. For example, somebody comes to tell me that
mother this person did this to me, that person did that to me I say "I don't understand how you
say such things because that person was praising you so much for one hour." Finished. Really, they
trust me thats how you can run the family. Everyone you can run. The first thing the women have
to know that they have to be compassionate and loving. All their power is in their compassion. That
is
my power also.
Some of you can't even hear me but you don't mind. Its just love. Its so great you know, to feel
this beautiful atmosphere of love between you and me. Whatever can be more than that, This
England is the heart of the universe. What does the heart love? Compassion and love. So
to understand that it is through compassion only we become one. I know so many people in this
world who are very rich, very well known, very great writers. I don't know what else, all kinds but
they always complain that nobody cares to see us when we are old. I said its the otherway round
here. The more old I am becoming, the more I am visited. Nobody seems to know about my age.
They said "How do do it? " I said. "Just Compassion, pure love." But they never loved anyone
in their lives, they lived like this, so they are alone now. They are talking to their fridges. Can you
imagine that they are talking to their fridges." They purchase their friends like that.
You should see how much collective you are. How much you help each other. How much you are
loving each other. It is very important to introspect like that. Doesn't matter if
bad they will be alright, but you should have a good attitude. In Sahaja Yoga those who do not
have a good attitude can never progress. Love should be pure. If you love someone, you won't see
the bad points of each other. You will always see the good points. You will always support
person. Sometimes I have to prepare myself to tell some person. I may say like this, or like that
and when I am speaking to him half of his bad vibrations have gone away. Its very easy if you
practice that. I am sure little little things you can suggest them.
have
you
you
vibrations are
your
that
In England there was a statue of Queen Victoria whose nose was cut. Everybody went with banners
and protested and asked. "Who cut the nose. How dare you do that." And they put it back. She
was the person who was adored by her country which was under domination you can say. This
is what a personality of a woman we have to understand. If it comes to war women becomes like
Vol. VII Issue9 & 10
Divine Cool Breeze
22
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Joan of Arc or if it is in peace time she prepares for neutralising the war, to make a peace. She
is the one who creates the peace. It is such a powerful thing, that is the real power. Not some sort
of a work competing with men. Its such a great work and so much deeper giving compassion. Its
important to know what women can do in the field of peace. And bringing compassion into action.
Its possible because you are all Sahaj Yogis.
Husbands also must respect their wives. Its very important. Where women are not respected, the
calamities come, like Bangladesh, which is a country full of calamities because they don't respect
their women. Pakistan is full of calamities because they don't respect their women. What about
Saudi Arabia? What about Iran? All these countries have problems because the women are not
respected. But the women must also respect themselves. Not like in the west where women throw
themselves at men. Why should you attract men all the time? Why should you dress up in a way
that they should run after you? Such a culture really debases women. We are not prostitutes, we
should have our self-respect. I told you the story of a queen who committed suicide because Muslims
were going to win them, so just to preserve their chastity they burnt themselves. The power of a
woman is compassion but her vehicle that works is her chastity. We should respect our
body, children, husbands, everyone, that is important. But also you should respect your society and
family.. You must respect yourself. Men and women are complementary. The west has advanced
in science and the blacks are complementary. How can they win their trophies if they don't have
blacks. What is the use of music. So all these things are complementary. We are totally one. We
have to have Indians, and we have to have English. We are complementary. Like we must have
the left hand for the right hand. Otherwise how can they be complementary. So one should respect
the wives and the wives should respect the husbands because they are complementary.
Then there are worries about husband and wife. There are people who go to Ganpatipule and get
into the mood of marriage there. As soon as they get out of Ganpatipule they don't want to marry.
I have known many kinds of madness but this kind of madness I didn't know.
spend so much time on arranging the marriages. If I could have been spared that time
have written one more book. The leaders are always worried about individual cases, that this
woman doesn't want to be with that man and this man doesn't want to be with that women.
whole problem will last and then they will come again for another marriage. People who do not
want to marry should not marry. If they marry and do this they will not be allowed to come to
Sahaja yoga. Because they get divorce and then blame Sahaja yoga.
could
The
We have to promise under this tree because they are living beings that we are not going to give
problems among ourselves. We are going to live very happily our life as husband and wife.
Ofcourse if there are any difficult cases, we can work it out.
Marriage is an institution. Not that you go on divorcing. Marriage is for having these great souls
which want to be born to you. But if you do like
have divorce then atleast no more marriages. We should know that in another 10 to 15 years we
will see the force that is coming of these children. And they will correct you. They will remove
your complications. Allow them to be grown up as Sahaja yogis, and then you will see the
difference. How sensible they are. How beautiful they are. Support them. Help them, understand
them.
this then it will never work out. If you want to
all
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VII Issue 9 & 10
23
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-23.txt 
 We reach a point to understand that we have to move a step forward. Forget all these nonsensical,
petty and useless things and problems. What are we going to do for Sahaja yoga? We have the
powers. One jump high and it will work. Everybody must think all those things and I am sure it
will work out very will
May God Bless you.
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VII Issue 9 & 10
24
