All Sehaja. Yogis siould have iunderstma ld support artistic this vay the ceological pronem itself wll thin speciallvna ade t H.H. Shri Mataji, Adi Shakti Paja. Jaipur.

 DIVINE COOL BREEZE I VOLVII ISSUE 4 & 5 Coments I Adi Shakti Puja - Jaipur 2. Shri Yogeshiwara Puja - New Jersey 3. Talk on Book release of Sir CP Siivastava - 10 Dec. 94 2 Oet.94 -3 Dec 94 Yogi Mahajan :Divine Cool Breeze. 9 Bhagyachir Computex Graphics, 112 High Tech Indl., Caves Road, Jogeshwari East, Bombay 400060 Edited by Published by Printed by ntamani Soc. Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411 029

 SHRI ADI SHAKTI PUJA H. H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI Jaipur 10th Dec. 1994 (Synopsis) We are worshippers of Shakti, followers of Shakti Dhamma and especially Kings and Maharajas, all worship Shakti. Every one has his own Devi and these Devis have different names. The name of Jaipur's Devi is Gangaur. Adi Shakti had incarnated once in Rajasthan. She had manifested in the form of Sati Devi. She has given many blessings that even now are present in the Rajasthani culture. Woman's dharma, husband's dharma, wife's dharma, ruler's dharma - every type of dharma has been nourished by Her Shakti. Sati Devi was herself Gangaur. She was married. But when She was travelling after marriage, some bandits surrounded them, and even killed Her husband. Then She came out of the Palanquin and manifested Her true form, destroying everyone of them, She even gave up Her own physical life. The main thing to realise here is that from childhood to marriage She had never revealed Her true nature to any one, because She was of the form of Mahamaya. Adi Shakti has to be Mahamaya Swaroopa. This is because the tremendous shaktis that come on this earth, first came in the form of Surabhi, who was a cow. All the Gods and Goddesses were present in Her. After that, only once, She came in Rajasthan. My relationship with Rajasthan very old, because my ancestors were from the Sisodia dynasty of Chittorgarh in Rajasthan. is Adi Shakti has limitless shaktis and there is no such shaktis which She does not have, but these shaktis have to be kept hidden. It has two reasons - one is because if the people know that She is Adi Shakti, then all types of peoples may attack Her. Because these people are absolutely wicked, unculitured, uneducated. They are standing against God, earning money in the name of God. All these people, if they know that Adi Shakti is on earth, they will either run away, or will all band together and try that somehow the work of Adi Shakti is not completed in Kali yuga. For this, it is essential that the form of Mahamaya be adopted. Second, in this form a very profound work, a very subtle work has to be done, which no one has ever done till now. That is of collective consciousness. This work has to be done and that too in this way that no one will suffer at all; like you are seated in a boat, and are comfortably taken to the other shore. People who spoke of dharma were alright, but the ones they spoke to were not so. They did not understand dharma and put people into a big confusion. In the name of religion there has been a lot of terrible behaviour. The torture of women, the destruction of children, pillage, loot and destruction. Mahamaya has a great capacity even to hide shortcomings. Having hidden it, then now to digest it. We are not keen to remove our bad points. We are working only to spotting the defect of -1 - DIVINE COOL BREEZE VOL. VII Issue 4 & 5

 others. This is absolutely contrary to what we should be doing. Mahamaya Shakti was created and incarnated so that our defects may be removed. By absorbing Her powers in our body, we can cleanse it. The surprising thing is that possessed people, false gurus - all of them know me very well. I don't know how they are the first to recognise Me. Sahaja Yogis are not able to recognise Me. Maybe their eyes get dazzled. One of the forms of Adi Shakti is Mahakali, which if you see you may be frightened. Elephants can see this, horses can also see this. But is a difficult thing to show anyone else. I do not know how many will be sitting here. But it is very necessary to have the form of Mahakali. As long as Mahakali is not manifested, left side defects settled in you cannot be removed. The left side block means, firstly you keep the things from your past. Secondly, my father was so and so, my father's fatherwas so and so. You keep thinking these things. You are lucky that you cannot remember your past life. But people ask - Mother, who was I in my previous life. One gentleman had troubled Me a lot - "Who was I in my previous life"? I told him, "Look son, the reason I do not talk to you means that something is not alright. you asking Me. It is good enough that you are with Me in this life. Why do you keep asking Me, who was I in my previous life? How is this going to help you?" "No, I need to know". He said, "O.K. If I tell you that you were Maharaja of Jaipur in your previous life, then will you get the throne ? If you go there, every one will chase you away. Then why do you talk of previous life?" I asked. "Because one astrologer had told me that I was a King in my previous life".I said "I can't see the signs of a King in you. The astrologer told you to get money from you". dik Without the form of Mahakali, such mad people cannot be free. Mahakali is needed for people who are filled with bhoots by these gurus. Bhoots of gurus are like this that either you listen to the gurus and become like them. If he tells you to go rob that house then you do so; kill some one then you kill, do this and you do so. Absolutely bound by the guru's command. In the Devi's temple in Calcutta, goats are sacrificed. This point is true, what to do. They cut the goat in front of the Devi, to put the dead spirit from the possessed person into the goat, and relieve the person from the possession. We remove with lemons - we are "vegetarians". By cutting the lemons, they run away. The bhoots of these possessed people can see Mahakali. They see only Her form and they start shaking strongly. Some one may ask, why are they shaking like that. Many types of bhoots possess people. But the surprising thing is that if the ego is possessed by a bhoot, then also they can see Mahakali. There was a programme in Poona. They said, "Mataji is not a brahmin". There cannot be a in our place, only a brahmin can do a programme. So the leader there said, "alright programme we will print in the newspaper that Mataji is not a brahmin. There will not be a programme here. We will have the programme elsewhere". No! No! No! Don't do like this. We don't want to show this. "O.K., then we will have our programme here". No one told Me anything. I don't know how it came into My head, I said whoever is a brahmin amongst you, please put your hands towards me, their hands started shaking like this. They started saying, "Mother, please stop, please stop. We agree that you are Shakti. Please stop this." I said, why are you shaking ? I did not ask -2- DIVINE COOL BREEZE VOL. VII Issue 4 & 5

 you to. You are shaking on your own. They were very proud of being great brahmins. Some one said, "Mother see, there are some brahmins sitting there. Their hands are also shaking". I said, ask them if they are brahmins. "No, sir, we are not brahmins. We are certified lunatics and have come from the lunatic asylum. One lunatic from there went to You, Mataji, and became alright. Thats why we have come. I said, have you understood now ? They are mad, and you are also mad. Both are mad. Then they realised. In the beginning, Mahakali's manifestations were many. Iwas at a loss to understand, if Mahakaliji would reduce Her effect, I might be able to do other work also. All the illnesses of the left side that are called psychosomatic, that are incurable, they can only be cured with the grace of Mahakali, that's why we have to say the mantra of Mahakaili. And as long as you do not manifest Mahakali, these illnesses cannot be cured. So much heat comes out from these people that I cannot understand at all. When you see the subtle form of Mahakali it is ati raudra (very fierce). About the Devi it is said she is 'Adi raudra, ati saumya'. The rudra is very necessary otherwise this negativity will not go away. This will only go away with the rudra form. The eleven rudras of the Ekadesha rudras, all eleven rudras have only the Mahakali Shakti. These are situated in our medha (on the forehead) in 11 chakras. If any man has his ekadesha caught up, then know that he has cancer or some incurable disease. Sahaja Yoga science is absolutely perfect in all respects. You cannot find any fault in it. Now people come with cancer, this, that, even AIDS. Now they say, "Mother, we have not gone to any guru". If you have not been to a guru, your mother or father may have been. If Mahakali's swaroop was not used in Kali Yoga, Sahaja Yoga's work would have been impossible. Because of these negative forces all chakras get caught up. Without improving the chakras, Kundalini will never rise. That is why Mahakali Swaroop is very worshippable and adorable. It does not bring any physical, emotional or mental troubles to anyone. Only with Her form, the negativity runs away. The quarrels between husband and wife are a very big problem nowadays. Because wives are educated, and husbands want that wife be absolutely rustic. If she is not rustic, how to make her rustic - once she is city bred, she is city bred - whether you wear a Lehanga or you wear pants. The mind is city bred. Now those who are city bred, their femininity does come down. There is more masculinity and lesser femininity. The greatest quality of the woman, which is modesty, itself decreases. To protect her modesty, Rani Padmini had burnt herself along with three thousand women, in the fort of Chittorgarh. She had never ventured out with a sword. But when there was a need, then Jhansi Ki Rani stood with a sword in her hand. When the battle was over, the English General Ross had said "Victory is ours, but the glory goes to the queen of Jhansi". In our country there have been many glorious women of great character, devoted to their husbands, very high in the woman's dharma. Such women have been there who minded -3- VOL VII Isue 4 & 5 DIVINE COOLBREEZE

 the house with their understanding. But when Gandhiji gave the call, then these women gave him their bangles and all their omaments. There is the story of Rana Pratap. Rana Pratap saw a leopard take away the chapatti made of grass from his daughter. A doubt came in his mind "why am I doing like this?" Is it for my ego? Why don't I surrender to the enemy, Akbar. So he sat down to write a letter to Akbar. At that moment, his kshatriya wife's shakti was awakened. She took a spear in her hand and stood before her daughter, And said, "I will kill you, because of you this weakness has come inside him". Then Rana Pratap's eyes opened. Women used to put the teeka (tilak) on their husbands and send them to the battle ground. The shakti is of the women. But today even the women are without shakti and men are also powerless. This shakti comes from the woman's modesty. As long as this modesty of the woman is not active, the Gruhalakshmi's power does not manifest within her. But Gruhalakshmi has to be clever. Secondly, she has to be understanding. So we can say, when this Mahakali shakti becomes very calm, then she becomes Gruhalakshmi. We believe in Lady Fatimabi. She decorates the throne of Gruhalakshmi with the power of Mahakali. The Gruhalakshmi keeps her children on the proper road. She keeps her character shining. We are witness to the fact that the devotion and faithfulness of a devoted, faithful wife cannot be destroyed by anyone. She has her shakti. This is the Mahakali's shakti. People are afraid of a devoted wife. Husbands should also know that the active power inside them also comes from the woman. If that power comes from the woman, the thing to see is if the woman has modesty or not. If she does not, then the husband has the right to say shut up. With modesty, you need cleveness. In a modest wornan, there should be a great capacity to laugh. She should know what and when to laugh. She can correct thousands of questions and understand the subtle thing. I have told you to read Sharatchandra. In his novels all angularities are managed beautifully by the women. This is a matter of cleveness, we do not have to get into politics. There is absolutely no need to descend into this dirty economics. The entire work of society depends upon the woman. The woman who improves her home, children, health of her husband that woman makes a very strong society. Only because of the woman of India, today our society is alright. But the nature of the woman not in aggressiveness. She can win the entire world with modesty. Her style should be like a Devi. Mahakali Shakti sits on many points. They have their various vehicles. But when She sits on the elephant, She is called Lalita Gauri. Her art, skill, feeling are all respectable, beautiful. It is not necessary that you wear a veil. It is also not necessary that you cover your head. But in your eyes there should be modesty. It is a very big word. Many things are covered in this. Because the Saumya Swaroopa (tender) because She is Mahakali, whoever sees Her with adulterous eyes, he will be burnt to ashes. Not for Her protection, but for the other person who puts bad eyes on Her, he will be destroyed, so a veil is worn. 4- VOL. VII Issue 4 & 5 DIVINE COOL BREEZE

 The great Shakti of Mahakali is like this. She appears to be very shining, very modest, but Her Shakti is active from within. People say Mahakali is a very rudra shakti. But it is surprising to see Her Shakti. What a Mahamaya She is. By nature She is Mahakali, but appears modest, like a newly wed, what to say - so demure and shy. She will speak so sweetly as if flowers are falling. She will be so loving, you cannot believe. But this is the power of Mahakali. The one who has got it, no bhoot can touch Her. Instead of touching Her, he himself will be possessed by the bhoot. For the woman who is like this, her one glance can turn people to ashes. Now the second Shakti is of Mahasaraswati, with which we get many types of artistic and conceptual ideas enlightened in aur intellect. By the grace of Saraswati - Sharada, many types of thoughts are developed in a very calm, soothing manner. Very beautiful poems come out. Not the sorrowful ones, but the kinds that inspire. Many nationalistic songs have been written about the country. All these poems have gone, and now only these dirty film songs are being played everywhere. And that too in front of Shri Ganesha. If there is no wisdom they keep doing useless things. With their intelligence, they take out anything. The greatest one among these I would say, is Freud. I have not seen a greater fool than him. Unashamed he put his views in front of every one and every one even adopted them! If you read even one line of his writing, you will know he is completely a shameless man, or bhoot and his intellect wrote everything against Sharada. And it started everywhere - that sir, we have the freedom, we can write what we want. Today's newspaper people are also like that. Whatever funny ideas they understand, they keep writing and they do not want to write any good things at all. Who died, how many died. Sharada Devi is the one who gives the truth. She is the authority over truth. The light of truth that we get in our head, is because of Sharada Devi. When you write, don't you think where this writing power comes from? Sharada Devi gave you this power to write. Until now I have not written anything at all. I said I must write something that will go into everyone's heads. People's heads are not yet that open. Jesus did not write. Mohammed Saab did not write anything at all. He could not even read or write. By the grace of Sharada Devi many have written many things. Gnyaneshwaraji wrote the Gnyaneshwari and then another book. In the beginning of Gnyaneshwari, by the grace of Sharada Devi, he writes that "My words, whatever | am saying, is only to please Sharada Devi. In the way that feathers very gently float down into the ground, in the same way may my words fall into your heart and make you fragrant." What a great thing he has written! Such beautiful poetry, and so gently, tender, soothing, that you are partaking of amrut. In English there has been a great poet, and his poems are in a book called Visions. Please read it. His name was William Blake. Such stirring, whispering poetry feel you you are filled with inspiration, enthusiasm. It's as if Sharada Devi comes out of his poetry and starts speaking inside you. Similarly, if you read Sharad Chandra, you will start writing poetry. Such writers have been in our India, like nowhere else. Tolstoy was another great writer. In the south there was a poet called Kurup. His poems were so beautiful, what shall I tell you? She has blessed Rajasthan alot. There have been great poets. Even Alexander was greatly impressed with the culture here. So he did namaskar and went back taking Chand Vardai with -5- VOL. VII Issue 4 & 5 DIVINE COOL BREEZE

 him. Chand Vardai was a great poet and gave a great description of Alexander in Rajasthani language. Then among Sufis you have Khusro. What poetry he wrote. Kabir Das - what to say and of Nanak Sahib - he was the Guru, Himself. Ramadas Swami. In Bengal also there have been poets, one better than the other. And all this has happened with the grace of Sharada Devi. From every word, it is as if dharma is flowing, enlightenment is flowing. All their words perfectly arranged it seems they wrote in Nirvichar. Such a pure description. We knew a Muslim gentleman and he asked "Mataji, why do people sing gazals ?" He said that all those people who write gazals do not love their wives, they are in love with something else. I said how do you know this?" I have seen it. This is the case. They have their wives, and they are crying. The wife is sitting, alive and well. Better - live with her and enjoy life. Instead you are crying for a third one - or her shadow." Are these kinds of poems written with the blessing of Sharada Devi? These are just yet another kind of people who only want to befool others. One gentleman recited poems on liquor. I asked why doesn't the cup sway, and why do you sway? You are weaker than even a cup! After that he never spoke about wine. When his wife died, he made a poem about her and fifteen days after he married again, and then made a poem about the new wife. In this way, in our country many cheap type of poets were born, especially those kind of poets who drag God into everything. Look at Mr.S. Don't know what kind of romantic picture he is painting of Radha and Krishna. Where did Krishna have the time to do romance and all that. The one who is concerned about the entire universe! Radha - "Ra" means and "dha" means one who supports. Where does She have the time to do all this romance of energy, the world? Like Zen, Sahaja Yogis can understand the things written by the Zen poets. No one else can understand the way they describe anything, even the minutest detail, and the way they used to make pictures, only a yogi can feel the other's feelings. Nowadays even in Mujra they sing qawali! This is not any blessing of Sharada Devi. By no means to make such mixtures - there should be purity even in music. Because they do not know how to sing pure music, they keep mixing and make more mixtures. In the villages people sing so lovingly and with complete blessings of Sharada Devi. Only with Her blessings all the great volumes were written. All the great dramas, kadambaris that were written, were all with the grace of Sharada Devi. But in this present time it appears as if Sharada Devi has held back Her hand or has this blessing lessened. In this Rajasthan, there has been such a development of art that just in 2 or 3 years art has blossomed forth. This is absolutely the blessing of only Sharada Devi. There is no doubt about this. Such artistic things, people have started making with their hand - its surprising. Earlier also, they used to make very nice artistic things. People used to appreciate it. But you see in simple potteries, you see anywhere - such beautiful colours. Such colourful things. In Rajasthan they are not afraid. They wear all kinds of colours. Westerners are not like this. In the West they say if there is a border, there should not be anything above it - "spaced out", that's because their brains are "spaced out". There is no connection between their heart and head. Now when heart and head will be one, then people will understand what is 'exuberance'. Full of happiness, the joy that one feels becomes colours and spreads all over. This Holi can only happen in our country and in -6- DIVINE COOL BREEZE VOL. VII Issue 4 & 5

 no other country. The play of colours that happen here, the colourful sarees that are made. In the West they have only grey clothes if they go beyond grey, then all black. Do they have a capacity - to make even one saree like this? Only one point I will surely say - there is little attention paid to cleanliness. Women are very clean, they keep the house, etc., very clean. But outside is very dirty. Men here are not bothered at all with the outside of the house. All garbage rots outside. In foreign countries, the outside is clean. Because men clean on their own. Cleanliness and perfection - These are also the very blessings of Sharada Devi. This filth will not allow Sharada Devi to come near. The cleaning should also be organised and artistic. Sharada Devi is limitless. Her grace goes beyond limits. At least in India, women did not give up their style. The day the Indian women give up their modesty and decency, the same day from inside her, everything that is pure, from art, or woman's swaroop, wife's swaroop, mother's swaroop - everything finishes off. This should be known to all those who live in the grace of Sharada Devi. There is a saying - "art is in hiding the art". That, whatever you do there is no need of showing off. But whatever you do, you wear, or cover yourself - fyou need complete blessing of Sharada Devi, do for others, not for yourself. Not for the eyes of another - whatever actresses are there, people take their name as if they are women of the street. She does not have any respect. Just a piece of exhibition. In every simple thing there should be covering of Shri Sharada. If you want to have the blessings of Sharada, then, in your village, in your country, whatever is happening and whatever is made by the artists, respect them. Then there is the art of drama (theatre). In Bengal and Maharashtra the theatre is so developed that people go to see dramas, not cinerna. The standard of drama has gone down and we do not know what more things will happen. I have seen so many funny things that I feel Sharada Devi will run away from here. Now, they have said that they will take away this and that from the films. In my life time if I can see that this filth has been taken out, I will be very happy. Indian art is fine art. If you see the Chinese art it looks like a lion. If you see the Egyptian art, they make their dead mummies, the people are painted as if they are dead bodies standing. In England and America, the art was good until they were realistic. Then they became impressionistic - but still it was O.K. But now the modern art which has come is not within you, My or anybody else's capacity, Such a kind of degradation has come, it appears that Sharada Devi has run away from there. The more dirty, wrong, adharmic are the films being made, the more is the demand. All of you Sahaja Yogis should have understanding of art, and should support artistic things, especially hand made. So the ecological problem itself will be solved. Instead of having twenty five plastic things and forty paper plates it is better to have two artistic things in the house. This is our Indian culture, in which every cell has the light of Sharada. The women have preserved it but now the men also need to understand it. When you get into the pure form of music and dance, the blessings of Sharada are there. I have seen so many times, those who play and sing DIVINE COOLBREEZE -7- VOL. VII Issue 4 & 5

 before Me get famous very quickly. They get popular and start playing very well. They get the blessing of Shri Sharada. Now the third shakti which is in us, 'Trigunatmika' is the power of Mahalakshmi. Now the Puja of Mahalakshmi is only for seekers who have enjoyed all the blessing of Shri Lakshmi. This power of seeking is the power of Mahalakshmi. There is Mahalakshmi temple in Kolhapur, it is a Swayambhu. There they sing Jogawa 'O Mother awake, O Mother awake' - Namadeva wrote in the sixteenth century. Iasked the Brahmins in this temple. Why do you sing this song of Amba in the temple of Mahalakshmi ? They said, "We do not know, because they have been singing this for countless ages, since the time of Namadeva". Then who is this Amba ? They answered, "Amba is a Goddess, isn't it?". I said you know only that much. I will not be able to explain to you, it is very difficult. But Amba gets awakened only in the temple of Mahalakshmi. How is it? Our central channel is that of Mahalakshmi. In this channel your seeking of left side, right side and of your intellect is all finished. Then you come to the central path. When you start seeking, you get the blessings of Mahalakshmi. This is known as Redeemer in the Bible. Christ spoke about three persons. First power is called as Comforter which is of the left side. Right side is called as Counsellor and the central one Redeemer. These are the three aspects of the Holy Ghost. When you start to enter the central channel and come into it, you become a seeker then Mahalakshmi pours blessing over the seeker. He receives the grace of Mahalakshmi. To rise in the path of Mahalakshmi is very difficult. Because sometimes the mind goes to the left, sometimes to the right, only with the awakening of Kundalini, you can remain in the central channel. First she makes a bridge across the Void. After crossing and breaking the Brahmarandhra it unites with the universe (Brahmanda). But after this happens, the Trigunatmika together help Crossing the Agya chakra when you come to the Mahamaya. "Sahasrara Mahamaye.' It has been written when there is work of breaking the Sahasrara, She is in the form of Mahamaya. And that form is hidden, very hidden. As you try to know this form more and more you go from subtle, to subtler and to the subtlest state. That subtlety is extremely essential. Whatever is inside us which is something we can be proud of, precious, special - to know that you need subtlety, In that there is only ane obstacle which comes, is the pull of the left or the right side. For this need to face yourself and do introspection not of others, but your own. While doing this little by you get settled in Sahaja Yoga. you. you little All this talking remains as talk, until the seeker does not achieve that state he is restless. But even after you achieve the state, you have to use it. Otherwise this faith does not become strong, and it becomes difficult to achieve the state of Nirvikalpa. Today's lecture became very long, because the subject itself was like that. This was the description about all three powers, but Adi Shakti is beyond these. To describe Her is not easy. It is a very special thing. To describe Her is a difficult task. Only you people can describe Her, not Me. I leave this to you. May God bless all of you. 8- DIVINE COOLBREEZE VOL. VII Issue 4 & 5

 SHRI YOGESHWARA PUJA TALK BY H.H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI New Jersey USA 2-10-94 (Synopsis) Today we are going to worship Shri Krishna as Yogeshwara. Vishnu's first incarnation as a human being was Vaman Avatara and then it went till He came as Shri Rama, so the past of Shri Krishna was Shri Rama. When Shri Rama carne on this earth He went into lots of austerities to go to jungle. His wife was lost whom He had to find and to establish the benevolent King on this earth, He was made the king of Ayodhya. But all His life it was a struggle and austerities which He followed. As a result the people who followed Shri Rama became extremely austere. They used to sleep on the grass, because Shri Rama had to sleep on the grass for so many years. They used to wear wooden slippers. They would just wear very little clothes or one dhoti, just like Shri Rama wore when His wife was out. He never enjoyed any other life, as a man, but lived like an ascetic when His wite was lost. All these things were to establish a very ideal personality for a man to be attached to his wife. He was a person with "Ek patnivrat", means one wife. Though She knew She was Mahalaxmi, She was a Goddess but still He was forced to things because He wanted to show how a benevolent King should be. In the second incarnation of His when He came as Shri Krishna, had to neutralize all these austerities. In His childhood He also had to face lots of problems which He surpassed and He went and killed His uncle who was a rakshasa. After this He went to Dwaraka which He built and became the King of Dwaraka. To understand Shri Krishna in Sahaja Yoga is much more subtler than the stories. First he was Leeladhar. He said this is all a play. That means you have to become a witness. He said, your mind should become just a witness. At Virata stage He becomes Akbar. At that stage He is the mind, the brain of the great primordial being. So first He thinks that we have to become witness of the drama. And we should not get lost into the Maya. If you are a witness you can see the Maya, how it works. So the first subtle nature of Shri Krishna was to create a Leela, to neutralize all the austerities created by the incarnation of Shri Rama. The second great quality that He had is also to put the Maya on people. If He is the brain, then our brain should become a Sakshi, witness the play. It should not take anything as something extremely serious. When you look at things as Sakshi Svarupa, something that you are watching a drama, you may for the time being feel that you are Napolean or that you are acting. After some time when the play is over, you know its a play. To reach that state you have to become thoughtlessly aware, because we think from our brain. And this brain goes an thinking and thinking and creating a maya and playing into Maya. Here it is that you are a realised soul, you should see through the Maya. Everything that I am doing, what you are doing, should be understood very well, if you are really the reflection of Shri Krishna's brain. In your brain there should be no worry. There should be no stress, or problem, because you are just watching it in thoughtless awareness. When you are in thoughtless awareness means when your brain is just in the state of witness you understand everything that =9- VOL. VII Issue 4 & 5 DIVINE COOL BREEZE

 is Divine. For example I got into the car and they did not know where to go. We went into the wrong road. Then I told him go this way. He was wondering how Mother knows. He said vibrations. Through vibrations I could feel that they are all sitting there. Unless and until you are thoughtlessly aware you do not know the absolute truth. Through your brain only you know. You don't have to put your hands or ask questions, but it's like a computer that works, just gives you an answer. In that state you are completely one with the Divine. Everything, every moment is computerised by Shri Krishna. But at the same time He tests you. He plays His Leela on you, because He is a diplomat. How He has played Leela on you is very interesting to see. His style of Leela. Like He told Arjuna that I will not fight, but I will be your charioteer. Now it will look funny to everyone, that such a great man who calls me as his Guru, he says I am the best of his disciples, everything and here He just offers His services like a charioteer. In this He is just trying a trick on Arjuna, as if He knows the future that is going to happen. So the whole Gita was created because He was just a charioteer, because Arjuna said I cannot fight my own people, my relatives and grand parents. Now if you say that Gita is for peace, then it is not. He says that they are already dead, whom are you killing? But if you run away from the battlefield, people will call you a coward, and what will you get? But if you fight for the religion then you will get your resurrection. It's a big trick, same was said by Mohammad Sahib, and same in Christians and Hindus. That they all feel that they are fighting for Dharma. In Arjuna's case it was clear cut that somebody was a rakshasa, adharmic, so he was fighting them. What about other people when they say that we are going to die for religion? I met a Bosnian Muslim, why you want to fight for land when you believe in the formless God? He said, "It is written in Koran that if you fight for religion, then you will get your moksha." Exactly the same Shri Krishna has said. Where is the mistake? The mistake is "What is the Dharma?". Are you Dharmic? Then this fight in those days were with weapons. So why did Shri Krishna not take a weapon in His hand? Firstly, no one has Dharma, they may call themselves Hindu, Muslims, Christians. They don't follow religion. Secondly they are killing each other. Everybody is thinking I am right, whatever I am doing is the right thing. The first condition is put that you have to fight for Dharma. So first condition is we are fighting for Dharma? But he is even subtler. He didn't take any weapons in His hands. He was just holding the reigns of the chariot. Because Shri Krishna is the mind, the Virata, the great mind. He doesn't need any weapons as such. He used His mind for a very profound knowledge, to explain Arjuna in the battle field, where everybody was there to fight and they were about to start the war, He starts telling very patiently to Arjuna at that time. What is he doing there. He is counselling Arjuna, see His subtle brain. He introduces in the first chapter only and then He gives him the definition of a person who is an enlightened person which is a "Sthita Pragnya". Normally a business man will start from one dollar and move into a hundred. But its the other way around with Shri Krishna. He told him that first thing you have to become Sthita Pragnya otherwise it is no use. Unless and until you become Sthita Pragnya you cannot have Dharma. To understand Shri Krishna you have to have a very subtle brain. He says that you should give up this kind of moroseness that has developed in you. Now take - 10- VOL, VII Issue 4 & 5 DIVINE COOL BREEZE

 up the weapon in your hand and fight. Then he asked him "That You are here telling me that should become Nishkriya, that means no work. Your karmas become akarmas. Then why you do you want me to kill those people? That is the kama". He first says you should fight for Dharma. It's a very subtle thing. Are you in Dharma or not? You are not. So what Dharma are you fighting? Then the second thing is karma. His brains are extremely tricky. Second trick He plays on him that you are working, but if you are a Sthita Pragnya, then you leave all the work at the Lotus Feet of God. Give up all Dharmas and follow me". Now what is his Dharma? The problem is people don't understand him. Its all concentrated on Shri Krishna and His own manifestation. He says "Do your Karmas, but put them at the Lotus Feet of the Lord". It's not possible unless and until you are Sthita Pragnya, in enlightened when you are enlightened, you have got your realisation, you raise your Kundalini or anyone's Kundalini you don't say "I am giving realisation!" you say "It is happening". You talk in third person. When that "I" is lost then only you will put everything at the Lotus Feet of God. First it should be done in Dharma. Supposing somebody murders someone and says it is my karmas and I put it at the Lotus Feet of Shri Krishna. But he said, "for Dharma you should do it". First of all you should be a Sthita Pragnya, an unenlightened person. Whatever you do automatically goes at the Lotus Feet of God, spontaneously, Sahaj. What Now what about bhakti? The third thing needed. What is the reward for doing bhakti to God? There again He plays tricks. On one word He has made everybody dance. He says, "You do bhakti but it should be ananya" means when you have become one with Me, means you are a Sthita Pragnya, means you are a realised soul. Just imagine on this word if people pay attention they will give up all this nonsense of bhakti, and will first get their connection, when they become ananya and then do the bhakti, because Shri Krishna knew human beings very well. Shri Krishna was very clever. He said, they will not understand straight forward so give them in such a way that they will go on doing and doing. For realisation He has said you have to become the spirit. He didn't say at that time how you will become, what will work it out, because if you go to college all the knowledge is not given in first year. Something in second year and so on. The whole knowledge of Gita is nothing but tricks Shri Krishna has played with human beings, who are stupid and would never have understood Him if He had told them about Sahaja Yoga. Even today I meet many like that. But so many He could not have got at that time, so they didn't talk about Kundalini. Same with other incarnations. The kind of disciples they had, the kind of people they had, they could not tell them everything about their ascent because they were not ready. They were not of that level, their brains were not that developed. Now in this Kali Yuga when I am starting this work, I find our brains are over developed, so much so that our developed brains become stupid. How can you tell them such a subtle knowledge? What is the way, if I talk like Shri Krishna it would have been just a waste of My energy and your energy. Half of you would have gone off to sleep. So I said first of all let Me connect them to Divinity. If I could connect them even a little bit to Divinity, they will understand because that will enlighten their brain, and they will know that there is something more than what we know, and -11- DIVINECOOL BREEZE VOL. VII Issue 4 & 5

 that's how it is going to work out, the subtle system of trickery of Shri Krishna has helped a lot no doubt because people are realising that there is something missing in it. Even of Islam. Islam means surrender, but surrender to whom? To mullahs or to whom? The problem started when hierarchy started like that. In Riyadh, you are supposed to do puja 5 times and if you don't then they beat women. Every shop must be closed 5 times. I tell you that they are such hypocritical people naturally, because you are asked to do meditation 5 times. You will just do it out of fear. Out of fear if you do something, whats the use? Whatever Moharmmed Sahib or Christ has said it is only for angels, not for nomal people. Where are the angels? Very few. But there are those who are born realised, who have come on this earth are angels and they are told not to do something, they will not do. Most of them know what is right and wrong. Where are those angels? Very few, and those who are angels are treated like mad people. Nobody believes, only the angels could understand, but Shri Krishna thought these other people who are not angels, why not trick them. Marny people come and tell me "we take the name of Krishna". They haven't received anything, but first they said, He has to be Sthita Pragnya. Sthita means established. Pragnya means enlightened, you should be an enlightened personality absolutely established, firstly. After that He says all these things, and that's why many people have misunderstood. But His idea was, in one life they will misunderstand, secorid life they will misunderstand, third life they will start thinking that after all what is this? First you become a Sthita Pragnya, So what's wrong with us? Some introspection will start. That was His idea. I have seen people who give lectures on Gita for hours together but their brains are completely closed. Shri Krishna did not say anything about the Kundalini. Gyaneshwara took permission from his brother who was his guru, that allow me at least to say about Kundalini, that is how it was exposed a little. Of course before that we have had people like Adi Shankracharya in sixth century and before that Markandeya. But they talked about the Kundalini. That's all. Praised the Kundalini. But that She passes through six centres, how will it raise and all that, and not about the future, that this will happen one day. So many have written. But the one who has written complete description of Sahaja Yogis is by Gyaneshwara in the poetry called 'Pasaydan'. In which he has exactly said, what will happen. He has said, how many people will get realisation and he said, that you the people who are the forests of the boon giving trees. Kalptaru', rise and give it to others. Then he says, that you are the oceans who are giving ambrosia. He has described you in such a beautiful manner that you should read the translation of Pasaydan and then you will know what you are, he said, that you will lose other relationships and the only relationship will be these. They will be your real relations. To say all these things and to have such a vision, he must be a great incarnation himself. So this how in Gyaneshwari which is a commentary on Gita. He has said in the sixth chapter now you can get your realisation. About Kundalini, how it will work out. Gradually it was all unfolded. Gradually also people developed their spiritual strength to understand. Supposing I had started Sahaja Yoga even hundred years back, I would not have even one single disciple. The reason was that the people were all right, their life was very much satisfying, they were very peaceful and they were just interested in some horses. - 12- VOL. VII Issue 4 & 5 DIVINE COOL BREEZE

 But now you find people are so much disturbed, so much in trouble, so much in chaos in Kali Yuga. It is the height of Kali Yuga now, so much of immorality and dissatisfaction in life that they have to now think where to go, like a shock the future is waiting for them and now what should they achieve? This whole illusion of life starts staring at them, and then they start thinking what is this, what am I doing? What have I done? Why is it so? Why is everything in a chaos? Why is it happening? Then the seeking starts. With that seeking you have now got your realisation. Without the seeking it would not have been possible for me to talk to you at all about Sahaja Yoga. I am very happy that it has worked out in America. Another quality is that Shri Krishna is a 'Gochara' means that his element is of Akasha, and he penetrates into everything. He penetrates into the Anu, Renu and Parmanu. Three things the atoms. It shakes them. Any scientist will tell you that there are isometric and symmetric vibrations even in the atorns, because He can penetrate into anything, because of this, it is so penetrating that He encompasses everything, into matter, into animals, into human beings, into realised souls He penetrates. In the matter it is just vibrations. In the animals it is just a guiding force. Like birds from Siberia flying down to Australia. Who gives them the sense of direction? We never think about it. There are so many things animals are doing. They have such a sense of understanding, like a tiger in the forest. All the animals know that there is tiger in the forest. They are all quiet, respecting their king. He kills only one animal, they just respect. What he has killed is left. For one day nobody touches it. See the protocol. When he comes back next day he eats to his own satisfaction, then the tigress, then the children. Once they have finished then one by one in the order of protocol all the animals eat and last of all are crows. The protocol is maintained so it guides the animals and the animals keep their character. They are not like human beings, a snake is a snake and a tiger is a tiger. Human beings can be snake, tiger, leopard anything together. They could be anything, combinations of so many things, because they have passed through these yonis. These kinds of combinations, pemutations of the past are existing. If somebody can take you to your sub-conscious, people start barking like a dog and sometimes they behave like tigers. It can happen, All this is within us, the past. With all these complicated personalities, some are like owls, hawk- like, very serious. Same are like chirping birds. But there are so many cornbinations they have in them, that it is very difficult to make them little straight forward. They are so much entangled. First I have to remove all the entanglement and then to raise the Kundalini. The best part of the organisation is that consciousness is vertically placed. Sub-conscious on the left and supra-conscious on the right. In the central path is the Sushumna path. It is the Mahalaxmi's path. It is the path which leads you to the state of your Virata, the brain. So now the combination of three things work out. The brain is the Virata. Heart is Shiva, and the Liver is Brahmadev. All these three powers are there. But at the time when you are realised then your brain surrenders to the principle of Shiva that is the Spirit. Brain is surrendered not by force or anything but to absorb the power of the Spirit. The brain gets surrendered completely to the Spirit so that the Spirit enlightens the brain. It is the enlightenment of the brain that gives you all this subtle understanding. It is to make your brain understand there are so many blissful happenings. People are blessed once, twice, thrice then they are surprised. The brain starts thinking how did - 13- DIVINE COOL BREEZE VOL, VII Issue 4 & 5

 I get this blessing? How did it happen to me? How could I get my transformation? So slowly, slowly they start trusting their heart, means they start trusting their Spirit, they start trusting their devotion, and this is how the Bhakti is absolutely done without any desire, without any asking, without any obligation, just in oneness, because the brain joins hands with the heart, Now also the Brahmadeva becomes surrendered. As a result your liver is surrendered to your enlightened brain. When this happens, whatever you do is all enlightened work. Whether you sing, or are a government servant, whether anything. Whatever you do with your brain anything through the Swadhistana or through Brahmadeva it is an enlightened work. As it is the brain which is enlightened which is connected with this all pervading power, whatever you are doing, whatever your ideas are being absolutely enlightened you achieve that. Enlightened brain whatever it thinks, it is thinking as well as achieving, both together. It's a thing to be understood, that an enlightened person has the power to achieve anything, but at the same time his desires should be divine. Like the other day we had very few people in the programme. All the Sahaja Yogis were extremely unhappy, as if somebody has died in their family, even worse than that, why? Because this was their own work which they could not understand why this enlightened mind of theirs could not achieve the results. They felt extremely unhappy. This shows what identification there is for the spiritual work or divine work and their own lives. To them this is the most important thing. Everybody is not like that. For some people something else is more important. They may use Sahaja Yoga for their own well-being. But those who just think of Sahaja Yoga, that's again the brain which is enlightened, they achieve it. But it should not have any selfish motive behind it. It should not have any hatred behind it or anything, or for some sort of a publicity or something. But if it is just the thinking about the Sahaja Yaga work, it will be achieved. One should never feel frustrated, because God is with you. He is your shepherd. This is what happens when you become a surrendered lamb under the guide of this shepherd. Then as a result of this brain being enlightened you start having faith in yourself. Nirvikalpa, you become doubtlessly aware as soon as the brain becomes doubtless. It is the brain that thinks, doubts and creates conditionings and ego. One instrument doing all this nonsense. It will create hatred, justify nonsense. It will criticize others. It will hate others. It will make fun of others. That is not the quality of Shri Krishna because He is the collective. That's why He never said you are a sinner. He didn't criticize anyone. After all I have to criticize. If there was Kamsa, kill him. Kill Jarasandha, Narkasura finished, kill him. No argument, nothing, no time for this nonsense. Straight forward. What is the use of criticizing anyone? Just kill them. By killing them, they again come back in this Kali Yuga. The best thing is to detach people from these rakshasas where they are lost. One way could be that I put it in your brains that this is a rakshasa, but they won't believe. What happens is that when you go to them you get all the kinds in your head. You start getting pins and needles on your finger tips. This is all the activity of brain that it acts on your nerves, and you can feel it; they start shaking. In My presence the brain acts because it penetrates into energy. I I put My glance at somebody. There was a boy very naughty. He beats and bites people. As soon as he saw Me he ran away. He attacks every person but he ran away. Possessed people shake before Me. So who acts on these people who are possessed who makes all this gesture. Its the brain. In the brain they have problems and Shri Krishna makes them shake. It's the tremors, - 14 - DIVINE COOLBREEZE VOL VII Issue 4 & 5

 pins and needles and heat that they feel. All this is central nervous system after enlightenment, the brain is at peace with itself. It doesn't react as it used to react. I have seen people here so speedy, so nervous, so upset, jittery and irritable. A reading about Mao that his personal physician said he was absolutely like a tyrant. He was the cruellest man he had known. He used to keep up the face as appearance. Mao looked to be a great reformer and did so much but he was a hypocrite. How will you know somebody is a hypocrite or not? You will know with your brain only if you are enlightened. If Shri Krishna penetrates into your brain then you becorne an enlightened person (Sthita Pragnya). You become knowledgeable. You know everything, whatever is necessary. You may not know who is number one at Wimbledon, or the life of an actress, or the President of such and such place. But you will know whatever is necessary for you, otherwise people waste their energies. I know of somebody who knew the telephone and car numbers of 2000 people. What is the need? All these stupid things are a waste of mental energy, but a Sthita Pragnya does not. He is concentrated on to his own knowledge, onto the divine understanding. He works really like a computer and such an efficient computer. Today I started talking about Kabir, immediately they felt the vibrations. Only the people who are enlightened (their nervous system is so charged), that they can feel what is wrong and what is right, they can feel Divinity. They can make out who are incamations and who are not. You don't know what has happened to your nervous system, a new dimension has come, which is manifesting. This is also the blessings of Shri Krishna because he is collectiveness within us, in the form of collectivity He works. As America is the place of Shri Krishna's auspiciousness, so one has to understand what is Shri Krishna's auspiciousness. He had sixteen thousand wives. These were his sixteen thousand powers. To work out His Incanation He wanted them so they came on this earth as princesses who were captured and kept in the jail. So He fought that King and got them out of there and He married them. With a man, whatever be his age, and He has sixteen thousand women around him people will never understand. He is Yogeshwara. Men have this problem, not women so much, because women become mothers. Fatherhood can be challenged. So He married the essence of the five elements. He married them as five wives. But this real sense of morality is seen in the case of Draupadi. When She was brought in the court, Duryodhana asked Duhshashana to take out her sari. At that time, She was holding her saree with her teeth. She called Krishna. She could only say 'Kri'. As soon as She said 'Krishna' the sari fell down. When She just said Krishna there was a big sound in Dwarka where He was at that moment. Immediately with Shanka, Chakra, Gada, Padma - His four weapons, He came on the Garuda. For His own sister He came all the way to save Her chastity. To Him the chastity of His sisterwas of the greatest importance. He supplied the saris. The chastity of Draupadi was of such a height and how Shri Krishna tried to save it. It's remarkable. This Yogeshwara, Shri Krishna is also a Dhanvantri, means the doctor of doctors. He is the one who cures because its all the brain and the vibrations which flow on the nervous system. He cures people through His brain. How? Supposing somebody is having a problem on his heart, as soon as he puts hands to my photograph, immediately he gets problems on his left finger here. - - 15 - VOL. VII Issue 4 & 5 DIVINE COOL BREEZE

 The brain is working so in your brain my vibrations go of Shri Krishna, and they start sending these messages, because I am also Shri Krishna, so this computer acts and immediately you know what's wrong with that person. He is a heart patient. You don't have to do any diagnosis or anything and immediately you know. Who does this? Its the principle of Shri Krishna in the brain of the Virata. Now you are convinced about it. You know it works and acts like this, and how it communicates through you. So this computer of Mine communicates. Now in a computer if you go, you can just press the button, of course its man made, you then get the result, here it is not like that. Its the brain automatically gives the result. Immediately, through the other person. Also the same brain tells you what is to be done, and how to work it out. The same brain is emitting vibrations and those vibrations are flowing through this brain and they are ones who tell you what's wrong with this person. All this work of penetration is done by Shri Krishna. He takes these vibrations, puts into another brain and then that brain in the central nervous system starts working and then you get the results. Its instantaneous, as soon as they put their hands before me. How important it is for us to look after our brain. In America I don't know how far this brain is safe because you open any television, or look on the streets, or advertisements or hear this music, it break your brain completely. Whole atmosphere is anti - Shri Krishna. No purity of understanding. No sense of morality. The way they make pictures, horrible violence, immoral senses, all sorts of things, all created here in the land of Shri Krishna. ways can completely purify, because He is Yogeshwara, because He is detached, He cannot get attached to anything. Only the brain makes you attached. Supposing this carpet is here. This sari is here. I look at this sari. "I've got a nice sari". If it is Mine I am worried that it should not get spoilt or where it will be kept, what will happen to it? Goes on worrying about things. Any road you walk, there are shops and shops. Your attention goes there and in that altention this brain gets involved completely. It gets involved and wants this and wants that. In what? The one who through his Detachment from matter is only possible if you know generosity. There are many people who are in Sahaja Yoga but they are not generous. What is generosity? Generosity is that if you like my sari you can have it. That's the real generosity. Whatever I am buying is for you, supposing, so you have it. If you have a generous detached temperament then you can never get involved with matter and whatever you are involved it is love. Iwent to Russia and there was nice fish eggs called caviar. There's one doctor who ikes it very much in London. I bought it for the doctor. The doctor was very happy that Mother remembered such small things. The matter had a sense of giving very great joy to another person. If you do it with love and not attachment which is detached. He is the one who is detached so what is the love that is detached. Like a sap in the tree rises, it goes to every part of the tree and is not attached to any part, and t get attached then the tree will die and the fruit will die. it What is detached love? It is the most beautiful thing. Firstly by detached love you know what to give to whom, what will make people happy and joyous. What do they like. In love only you know these things. Whatever is done with love, even a little thing you like, I purchase because I know you like that. In the same way you also do that. This detachment has to be full and complete. Then only you get people attached to you, otherwise you cannot. If you are not 16- DIVINECOOL BREEZE VOL. VII Issue 4 & 5

 detached you cannot get that complete love for another person. Because if you are doing something for money or if you are doing something for lust or for greed or some sort of a position it has no meaning. In Sahaja Yoga also, many people come either to make money, or get cured, etc. But if you are detached then only Sahaja Yoga will spread. As long as there are attachments you should know you are not yet a Sahaja Yogi. You should introspect and see how much I am attached to this or that and why am I so much attached. I don't say you take out your eye or hand. Always as a result of attachment you will always find disappointments. I've seen parents who have doted on their child, loved their child etc they are the worst. But if you have a detached love for a child, you do nice things for the child, at the same time you know how to say 'no' where it's not good. I don't like, don't do it. You must say that. Detachment is even wider than that. Like some people are very fond of food. To say that to be detached from food is very difficult for them, especially at a certain age they are very fond of good food. Gandhiji has talked about that one should not have any taste, but as you grow Sahaja Yoga you will find automatically it will happen. All your fussy nature about food will drop off. That is another sign that you are absolutely detached about food. IfI don't eat it makes no difference to Me. It doesn't make Me weak or in any way unhappy. But thinking about food is just spoiling your brain. "We went to their house, they had made such nice things". What's the use? You have already eaten, finished, it's over. Why are you thinking about that. Or "I went to somebody's house they had given me horrible food", why to think of food? By thinking you cannot get back what you have been eating or what you are going to eat. When you know something will not do good to your teeth, you should not eat. For exarnple beef is very bad for the teeth, that's why people lose their teeth very fast. Many people ask Me whether My teeth are My own. They can't believe its Mine. I know what not to eat for the teeth's sake. But one should not be attached to an idea. That's an even subtler attachment. That has really killed this in world with so many problems like fanaticism, racialism etc. See the contradictions people have. They go to the sea to get darker and they have racialism. Then why do you go to the sea? Then why do you hate the people who are dark? Such a contradiction because the brain is not in balance and for that you have racialism. If not that then you have different conditioning, that you have different castes, especially in India. How can there be any caste when everybody has the spirit in their heart. They won't eat from a lower caste because they are higher caste. This brain is the one which creates all kinds of conditionings, and all those great saints who have lived on this earth whether they lived in India or abroad or anywhere, all of them have stood against this nonsense of discrimination. That comes from brain. Ask them why do you think that you are higher than others. The Germans think they are the highest race. Who will believe that story? Germans are the ones who have killed children in the chambers and enjoyed that, they must be the lowest race ever going, but they think they are the highest race. How can they be? To think yourself to be higher than others, to think that you are more beautiful than others, and others are ugly, all this is the brain, which takes the ego is the one who befools you all the time. gas to ego and you Narada the celestial sage thought he was a great man because he was never attracted to a - 17- VOL. VII Issue 4 & 5 DIVINE COOL BREEZE

 woman and he was challenging even Shiva. Then Shri Krishna played a trick on him. He sent two gandharvas to tease him. They went down and asked Narada that you are such a beautiful handsome, there is a marriage going on of Roopavati, the princess who is very beautiful, why don't you go there? She will definitely marry you. They pampered his ego such a lot that he started floating in the air. He went there because he thought he was so handsome. It's the ego. He went there and this princess came out with a garland, and looking at him, giggled and laughed a loud and she went away. He couldn't understand, looked at these two persons. Narada was very angry and went to the lake. When he looked into the lake, his face was like a monkey. Because this ego makes you a monkey and you start thinking you are great, or very this thing, that thing, but you are not because if you are, then you won't think. Whatever you are don't think about it. You don't think I'm a human being. Whatever you are, you boast. I man, beautiful, you am very beautiful, very good looking. Then Shri Krishna plays a part through the maya and he gives a big lesson to that person. So never think that you are something great or you have achieved this is life or achieved that in life and that you are a big Johnny. It's nothing but the that has moved in and giving you these ideas from the ego. If you go even further with it ego then Hitler may enter into your ego and you might behave like him or if you are conditioned it's impossible to tell you anything. I asked this Hare Rama fellow why do you wear dhoti in this cold weather. He said, my guru has told me to wear dhoti. What sort of guru is he who makes you feel cold. I am a Mother. I don't like all this nonsense. What a conditioning, and a conditioning which is absolutely absurd and ridiculous. Americans are most vulnerable to such a thing. You start any nonsense, immediately the Americans are the first to jump to it. Drugs, fancy dress etc. It will start in Paris and be sold in America. They are on the look out for something new. It might be a monkey but they will do it. I don't know why Americans who are residents of Shri Krishna's land have no discretion at all on what to accept and what not to accept. There is no maturity of any kind. The discretion which is at the Hamsa centre which is ruled by the Vishuddhi is completely blocked. One very high class lady who came to America told me very boastfully. "Have you been to the pubs in England? I went to the best. It's called Hermit, where the stink of a dead man's body preserved and the cobwebs are preserved as they are". She said, she felt so spiritual there!! i Then she started boasting "that we are free people. I allow my children to drink". These children were hardly twelve and fourteen years of age. After three or four months we heard that there was a birthday party of the younger and she had given all this alchohol for his friends. They had candles and the whole house got burnt. Another will say I have had so many women. They are stupid fools. Because you are organising a nice way to go to hell and you are all going to go to hell. This is what is to be told to them. If you go on like this what will happen to you? Accumulating, doing everything that is going to destroy them. I don't know why the Americans should accept anything that is destructive, when they have Shri Krishna as their Lord. It is to be understood by Sahaja Yogis also that you have to really transform yourself to such an extent that whatever is destructive should be given up. First of all I find many men and ladies with such long faces. How can you be? You are living in the country of Leeladhar. He is the one who made everybody dance and He is the one who - 18- VOL. VII Issue 4 & 5 DIVINE COOL BREEZE

 played Raas with Radha. One who did the mental energy enlightened and to sustain it. How can you people take to Adharma, to immorality and to destruction? Shri Krishna really has to save people of America from all kinds of nonsense they do moming till evening. There is nobody who is sensible in the politics. They are very good at criticizing others. Like we had a little plague in India and they published it all over the media. They stopped all our ships, planes, made such a fuss, put us into so much trouble. What about your AIDS which you are giving everywhere? It's very surprising that with your brain enlightened by Shri Krishna, how could people accept even mentally person like Freud? Now you are all ruined and are worried. Now they are breaking families. All the logical conclusions they reach is just the opposite of Shri Krishna. The people in charge of affairs do not want anyone to live. They think let them fight among themselves and do whatever they like, we should have our own seats. The way they are not worried about immorality and the destructive that are acted on American children, American youth and people. Tonight we are praising Shri Krishna who is Yogeshwara. He eats but He does not eat. He sleeps but He does not sleep. He has wives but He has no wife. Like this He is Yogeshwara. You are Yogis and He is your Ishwara so you have to try to be like Him. Let your brain be enlightened by His blessings and you become that great personality that encompasses everything, that sees everything, that gives you discretion that makes you understand what's wrong and you feel enthusiastic about changing this America with all your effort, with all their mind. That's the most important thing you have to do. As it is He is a Kubera. He is the Lord of wealth. He has given you such a lot of wealth all around. In everyway you are blessed, you have money, everything, brains. Everything is there but what is lacking is wisdom. Suppose you have a car, the keys, everything, but you don't know how to drive, so what will happen? May God Bless You. - 19 - VOL. VII Issue 4 & 5 DIVINE COOL BREEZE

 Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Book Inauguration of Sir C.P.Srivastava New Delhi - 3rd Dec. 94 (Synopsis) After listening to all these beautiful things about Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri, My heart is so full of gratitude to My husband that he accepted My desire, that he should write book about Lal Bahadur Shastri. The first day I saw Lal Bahadur Shastri, I knew that he was a very highly evolved soul. To have such a person in the politics itself was a great vision for Me. My father and mother sacrificed all their lives for the work of Mahatma Gandhi of getting freedom. When I was with Mahatma Gandhi, he knew about Sahaja Yoga because he was also a realised soul. But he told Me that just now we are not free people. We have to get our freedom otherwise we cannot talk about Sahaja Yoga. He wrote the Bhajanavali according to the different chakras. I was a very patriotic person. Whenever I see our flag My throat gets choked. With all these songs 1 just could not bear it. I don't know perhaps it reminds Me of all the struggles people have gone through, or maybe the mess which our country is in today, or maybe My heart felt love for My country. As you know I am full of compassion and how I used to cry when i saw people living in conditions which not even animals can manage. When I saw Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri, 1 felt now after Gandhiji here is a man. Normally you'll be surprised at most of these martyrs, like My father, mother, Gandhiji: they never cared for politics or wanted to do anything with politics. But there was a man who ventured himself into politics and was a realised soul. He was a very big combination for that. I could see the potential of this. If you ask me I can't join politics, Shastriji asked Me several times and I said I just can't. Most of them were so much detached they didn't want to have elections or do anything of that kind. I remember My father, when he came out of jail. Vallabh Bhai Patel asked him, "you have to contest the elections". He said, "I refuse, I don't want to go into politics". He said, "You will have to". He forced him, and forced him and ultimately sent somebody with some money, Rs.3000/- for My father, for your advertising. So My father said, "for advertising there is no need to send any money. If by that I am going to win, then I don't want to win such an election!! But that made him ready. He accepted the challenge and he really went for the election. Surprisingly he was the only Christian member elected in that assembly, and the one who was opposing him lost everything, lost his deposits, but his own daughter helped My father. In those days it was another atmosphere where people who sacrificied, loved their country, who were genuine, were very much respected. When My father was in jail, wherever we went, we were treated like you are treated here by Sahaja Yogis. We all brothers and sisters were given all kinds of help from everyone. They were very courageous people. They were politicians. They were fighting for a cause, but they were not politicians who were running after any position, or money. They never understood such things. It was beyond them. But they have no interest in joining this assembly or all this. I looked at Shastriji and said, "Now here is someone. I wanted someone to be like that, because there were so many I knew who were very sacrificing, detached, very honest, dharmic, but somehow they did not want to do anything with assemblies and elections. Shastriji was already in office when I saw him first. I think he recognized Me very well, no doubt. There are two or three incidents I remember. First of all he showed tremendous respect for Me. I -20- VOL. VII Issue 4 & 5 DIVINE COOL BREEZE

 always used to go to the airport to receive him. Once I was not well, so I didn't go. He was coming with all the cars and everything. Suddenly he stopped in front of our building and walked up to our flat all alone. "Why didn't you come to the airport? Are you not well?" I said, "I'm alright sir, just a little unwell". He said, "no, no, you must come everytime". So very sweet he was. Such small, small things he used to notice. Once his children told that "I have seen Bhabhiji, She is in the town". He said, "Where is She? Find out". They found out and said "You are to be there for lunch". One day I had eaten a special dish and he remembered. All these little little things. Iam surprised at him. He would talk to Me on subjects, I was just an ordinary housewife; subjects like economics. He would say "What are Your priorities? You run your household very well. Your husband is so busy". I said, "The first priority is that My children must get their food, second a house, third education and foremost is their character. They must have good character". I didn't start Sahaja Yoga until My daughters got married, because that was also My responsibility. It was time that was needed. Shastriji also looked after My children very much and he felt that he was sacrificing so much because their father was never at home, always busy. He could understand Me that I am a sensible woman and I am dedicated to this country, that I feel very happy that My husband is doing the work of the country. But still he used to feel for Me. Il am very fond of music but I had stopped going for music. I would not go without My husband. When I told him sormebody has come and I would like to hear him, he said, alright. He asked "What time is the programme?" I said "9 p.m." at 9 o'clock he started looking at the watch. So Shastriji asked him "What's the matter?" He said, "My wife has asked me to go for a music programme at 9 o'clock". He said, "Then get up, what are you doing?" He brought him in his own car and dropped him there. "She asked you once to go somewhere, what business have you got to sit down". He was so human. He was a mothering kind of person. My husband is a very alright. But he was really very hard working and Shastriji was quite worried about him. hard working man and I can always talk out his pressures when he comes home, so it was One day he got some termperature. Immediately he said, you are on leave. "I've arranged everything, you go to Shimla, He forced him to go to Shimla. I didn't know what to do with him because I've never lived with him on any holiday. That way Mr Srivastava is extremely honest but then there is a holiday and we are playing chess, scrabble and he used to cheat Me all the time!! I said, what is this going on, here is such an honest man. He said, "Its allowed if you can cheat your wife!!" Then we used to walk down to buy some cherries. We both are very fond of cherries. He would say "Alright we will make half and half. He would put much more in mine and less in his. I said "What is this cheating, why are you taking so little". "You also like cherries andl also like cherries, so lets exchange". So big fight on that! You see a woman in the house has to be very sensible. She has to be caring, sensible. I must say My two daughters never troubled Me because their father was not at home. They really supported Me very much and I gave them all the company that was needed, but they never complained to Me "Why our Daddy is not here? Why our Daddy doesn't come?". Everybody's Daddy used to be there, but their Daddy used to be missing. But they never even thought of it. It was such a help from everyone. Also I had such a good childhood with my parents. They taught us how to be sacrificing. When ither was in jail for years My mother went to jail five times. From huge big houses we were living in huts. But we used to enjoy everything. The feeling that whatever our parents are doing is for our 21 - VOL VII Issue 4 & 5 DIVINE COOLBREEZE

 country's freedom was so elevating that we nevereven thought of little comforts children ask for. We could sleep anywhere, eat anything, live anywhere. That time also I found lots of great people, who were My father's friends, such dynamic, patriotic people extremely patriotic. Once people told us that they are transferring the political prisoners to another place, so they are on the platform. We all rushed to the platform to see them. There was one sage and he was regarded as a very great honorable person. He called Me and asked Me "What are You doing? Why are You taking part in 1942 movement? Why don't You look after Your mother. Your mother is so much worried". He gave me a big lecture. Of course 1942 was a real ordeal for any young girl. They put Me on the ice and gave Me electric shocks, and all kinds of things. But to Me it didn't bother. My father called Me on one side. He said, "How dare this old man tell You all this nonsense. I am so very proud of You. Ihope all my children become like You and sacrifice themselves for the country". Then he shouted at My mother "You are the daughter of such and such family. How dare you letters like that, what do you mean by this?" Iwas very young about 17-18 yrs. He said, "Go ahead, I am all with You". And that has given Me the lesson that if you have complete purity about your dedication and purity about what you have to do, you can achieve and as Gandhiji has said that we have to have first freedom. I saw the Union Jack coming down and I saw the Tricolor going up. write That was the moment which is beyond me, even now I remember those days. Many of you who are Indians may not have seen those days, that's why you are so careless. That's why some of you do not understand out of what sacrifices this freedom we have got. It's not an easy freedom. It was a very, very difficult one and Shastriji was one of them who gave up everything to join. He had a mother to look after. He was another one who just gave all those things. Any young man would have had ambitions. He gave up everything just to join congress. Those were the days, where people were just charmed with it. Gandhiji was also a very short man. This gentleman had really chamed all the young people. So many young people gave up their studies. Gave up everything, not for something wrong, but to fight for your country. And they sacrificied their lives. So many were extremely honest, pure with a love for their country, made them so beautiful. They were young girls, young boys, old men and women. We never had anything such as corruption or any kind of bad feelings. We were all working together day and night. I had some very bad experiences where we had to stay in jungles and do all their things. If My biography is there, you can see all those things. In the main life of these great people, it's pure love for their country. There is a difference between love for your country. Pure love means you just love your country for the country's sake. Not because you can make money, get into high positions, etc, Just very purely an inner innate Dharma, you love your country. If any country is not equipped with that love for their own, it would be like a cancer if they join one world. The pure love for your country is so good. I find with Sahaja Yogis that once they are transformed, immediately they start seeing what is wrong with their country. It's not attachment, infatuation or blind faith, but they see. I think this is the essential thing we should see that what's wrong with our country. Say, if you love your child, then you must know what is wrong with that child. Also you should love the child and also say this is wrong with it. Otherwise we don't learn. It is possession, infatuation or conditioning. It's very surprising that, how with the subtle opening of your awareness now you see what is wrong, what is injurious or destructive for your country. And Vilh you want to improve it. -22- VOL. VII Issue 4 & 5 DIVINE COOLBREEZE

 Same with Lal Bahadur Shastri, He asked me several times how to improve the food conditions of India. Now you know with Sahaja Yoga you can. I couldn't tell him about Sahaja Yoga, but I did say that there is a divine method by which it can be done. But agriculture should be without income tax and maximum irmportance must be given to agriculture. Until today it is there, otherwise he asked me about various things, even about Kashmir. I told him the biggest mistake was to make a separate constitution. By that you just give a gap to them. His whole attention was so holistic. He would always see how we can create beautiful relationships between people of different places, different religions, different ideologies. He had a knack. I think he must have been raising their Kundalini perhaps, he could transform a person into something else. His style was so collective that in the garden he would stand there and everybody who came there, he would meet him. He had a tremendous memory. I too have, so I used to wonder, there's another one I have found out who has such a tremendous memory. Because to Me it is sometimes embarrassing to have such a memory but to him it was such a blessing, because he would ask them such small things like "How is your mother now" or "Did you get your house?" It was so much subtle. He was a motherly type of person. Of course he has been extremely kind to Sir C.P. One thing I did tell him, that take little rest also and do little meditation. He had no time. He said, "It's better to shine like a shooting star". I said, "Shooting stars are those which are no good as stars. But you are so important. You have no idea as to how important you are. And if you realise how important you are you will look after yourself." should you He used to live in the last part of the house. He was so humble, whatever you gave him he would eat. His ordinary bed he would sleep on. "Why are you such a saint? Why can't you sleep on a proper bed? After all we need you, for our sake you have to do it." He would say "I feel more comfortable in this". He is just a man who was so detached. He was going to Russia and they all felt that the coat he is wearing is not sufficient for Russia. They told me that you better tell him. They approached C.P. C.P. told him "Sir, don't you think you should make another coat for you?" He said, "Ah, so they have come to you now". To make one coat for him was impossible. He never carried any money. He did not know what the new coins are, so at the airport I would always be there and he would tell Me. "This lady is coming to put the peace flag on me I have no money, what to do?" I said: "AlrightI will give her something". I gave her one rupee. He said, "You have no coin?" I said, "Coin is for ten p.". What is that? 1 said, "It is one tenth of a rupee nowadays". "Oh I see. It's better you give her a note". He wanted to give her a coin, is an auspicious thing. So detached about things. He was so diligently working out, because the way he used to ask Me questions, I was surprised how diligently and subtly he wanted to improve the country. He said, "What should we do?" I said "First of all we must have water". He said, "I know that we must have water in every village". Gandhiji used to tell his wife go to the well and bring the water to me". I told her one day "Ba, let me do it, why are you doing it?" She said, "Oh no, my husband will be very angry, he has told me 'until every village gets water, you fill in the water for me". Shastriji was very much of that. Also he said, "These people who travel by third class, there is no fan". He put fans in the compartments and waiting rooms. He was a communist in a way, because he was a capitalist. He was so full of love and patriotism. His love would not allow him to see people suffer. Whatever he could he tried to do. He only lived VOL VII Issue 4 & 5 23- DIVINE COOL BREEZE

 for eighteen months. Like a shooting star, as he said, I have always been insisting on him for helping Shastriji because I knew what he was. I had the image of a man who would do such a revolution in this country, and bring down people to higher values. Not money and money business. Shastriji was a Shastri, and so leamed in all our scriptures. He had studied Koran, Bible, every sort of thing he had studied. I talked to him sometimes about what My father told me and he would say, "Yes, that's it". About Koran, he would say "Yes, that's correct". His own capacity to convince others was something very special and subtle. He would first smile, then wait, listen more, tlk less. But he would say just one sentence and it would stamp. There is something really absolutely Divine. He showed so much respect for Me. I used to feel very shy. In our country a saint is worshipped and respected. I remember President Sanjiva Reddy, who invited Me because I had cured him of his cancer. When I went there, they had everything made of sandlewood. I was rather careful sitting on the chair made of sandlewood. He came with his wife, with all kinds of fruits and such a big tray of silver, very beautifully done. And both of them sat at My feet. So I said, "Sir, what are you doing, you are President of India, why are you sitting here?" He said, "I'm President, but You are a Saint". He said, "You have to take something." I took an apple, but I told him I could not take anything. He is the one who gave us this land for our ashram. Also Govemor of Kashmir was a very nice man and was very kind to Me. But he knew Me as Sir C.P.'s wife. One day I saw him walking down to the guest house, without any shoes or socks in Kashmir. I said, "Sir, you are without shoes and socks!" He said, "I have come to meet a saint". And he came and sat at My feet. India is a very great country. It is a country where the saints are worshipped. They are not created by church or something, but are real saints and such saints are worshipped and respected by kings. This is the only country where it happens, I think. Another country is Russia. There they have respected Me so much. When Shastriji went there I was happy because I knew Russians are spiritual. Very introspective and are not conditioned by any religion or anything. Many things worked out in Shastriji's life. Now he is no more, but this book I hope will go all over the world and really open the eyes of the politicians and they will have to re-evaluate themselves. Socrates talked about a benevolent King. Shri Rama was a benevalent King, once upon a time. When I saw Lal Bahadur Shastri, I said, "Here is a benevolent King". He lived for a very short time, I think that is our fate. We Indians don't have a good fate, but now it is for us to express his life all over the world. Here we have Sahaja Yogis from everywhere. They can take this book and present to some of their politicians, if they have any time to read. They might understand that there's a life that is much higher, much valuable. After all this money. I have not known anyone who has elected a statue of a man who had too much money, wives, keeps or was a drunkard. The value system which is going on is of a nature which will not only destroy you, but destroy nations after nations. This book has a special value by which I feel many will see their faces in the mirror and they might be able to correct themselves and maybe on the political field may we find sensible better people. That was My idea and I got after My husband to write this book. May God Bless You. -24- DIVINE COOL BREEZE VOL. VII Issue 4 & 5



----------------------

1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-0.txt 
 All Sehaja. Yogis siould have iunderstma
ld support artistic
this vay the ceological pronem itself wll
thin speciallvna ade
t
H.H. Shri Mataji, Adi Shakti Paja. Jaipur.
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-1.txt 
 DIVINE COOL BREEZE
I
VOLVII
ISSUE 4 & 5
Coments
I Adi Shakti Puja - Jaipur
2. Shri Yogeshiwara Puja - New Jersey
3. Talk on Book release of Sir CP Siivastava
- 10 Dec. 94
2 Oet.94
-3 Dec 94
Yogi Mahajan
:Divine Cool Breeze. 9 Bhagyachir
Computex Graphics, 112 High Tech Indl., Caves Road, Jogeshwari East, Bombay 400060
Edited by
Published by
Printed by
ntamani Soc. Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411 029
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-2.txt 
 SHRI ADI SHAKTI PUJA
H. H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
Jaipur 10th Dec. 1994 (Synopsis)
We are worshippers of Shakti, followers of Shakti Dhamma and especially Kings and Maharajas,
all worship Shakti. Every one has his own Devi and these Devis have different names. The name
of Jaipur's Devi is Gangaur.
Adi Shakti had incarnated once in Rajasthan. She had manifested in the form of Sati Devi. She
has given many blessings that even now are present in the Rajasthani culture. Woman's dharma,
husband's dharma, wife's dharma, ruler's dharma - every type of dharma has been nourished
by Her Shakti. Sati Devi was herself Gangaur. She was married. But when She was travelling
after marriage, some bandits surrounded them, and even killed Her husband. Then She came
out of the Palanquin and manifested Her true form, destroying everyone of them, She even gave
up Her own physical life. The main thing to realise here is that from childhood to marriage She
had never revealed Her true nature to any one, because She was of the form of Mahamaya. Adi
Shakti has to be Mahamaya Swaroopa. This is because the tremendous shaktis that come on
this earth, first came in the form of Surabhi, who was a cow. All the Gods and Goddesses were
present in Her. After that, only once, She came in Rajasthan. My relationship with Rajasthan
very old, because my ancestors were from the Sisodia dynasty of Chittorgarh in Rajasthan.
is
Adi Shakti has limitless shaktis and there is no such shaktis which She does not have, but these
shaktis have to be kept hidden. It has two reasons - one is because if the people know that She
is Adi Shakti, then all types of peoples may attack Her. Because these people are absolutely
wicked, unculitured, uneducated. They are standing against God, earning money in the name
of God. All these people, if they know that Adi Shakti is on earth, they will either run away, or
will all band together and try that somehow the work of Adi Shakti is not completed in Kali yuga.
For this, it is essential that the form of Mahamaya be adopted.
Second, in this form a very profound work, a very subtle work has to be done, which no one has
ever done till now. That is of collective consciousness. This work has to be done and that too
in this way that no one will suffer at all; like you are seated in a boat, and are comfortably taken
to the other shore.
People who spoke of dharma were alright, but the ones they spoke to were not so. They did
not understand dharma and put people into a big confusion. In the name of religion there has
been a lot of terrible behaviour. The torture of women, the destruction of children, pillage, loot
and destruction.
Mahamaya has a great capacity even to hide shortcomings. Having hidden it, then now to digest
it. We are not keen to remove our bad points. We are working only to spotting the defect of
-1 -
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
VOL. VII Issue 4 & 5
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-3.txt 
 others. This is absolutely contrary to what we should be doing. Mahamaya Shakti was created
and incarnated so that our defects may be removed. By absorbing Her powers in our body, we
can cleanse it. The surprising thing is that possessed people, false gurus - all of them know me
very well. I don't know how they are the first to recognise Me. Sahaja Yogis are not able to
recognise Me. Maybe their eyes get dazzled. One of the forms of Adi Shakti is Mahakali, which
if you see you may be frightened. Elephants can see this, horses can also see this. But is a
difficult thing to show anyone else. I do not know how many will be sitting here. But it is very
necessary to have the form of Mahakali. As long as Mahakali is not manifested, left side defects
settled in you cannot be removed. The left side block means, firstly you keep the things from
your past. Secondly, my father was so and so, my father's fatherwas so and so. You keep thinking
these things.
You are lucky that you cannot remember your past life. But people ask - Mother, who was I in
my previous life. One gentleman had troubled Me a lot - "Who was I in my previous life"? I told
him, "Look son, the reason I do not talk to you means that something is not alright.
you asking Me. It is good enough that you are with Me in this life. Why do you keep asking
Me, who was I in my previous life? How is this going to help you?" "No, I need to know". He
said, "O.K. If I tell you that you were Maharaja of Jaipur in your previous life, then will you get
the throne ? If you go there, every one will chase you away. Then why do you talk of previous
life?" I asked. "Because one astrologer had told me that I was a King in my previous life".I
said "I can't see the signs of a King in you. The astrologer told you to get money from you".
dik
Without the form of Mahakali, such mad people cannot be free. Mahakali is needed for people
who are filled with bhoots by these gurus. Bhoots of gurus are like this that either you listen to
the gurus and become like them. If he tells you to go rob that house then you do so; kill some
one then you kill, do this and you do so. Absolutely bound by the guru's command.
In the Devi's temple in Calcutta, goats are sacrificed. This point is true, what to do. They cut the
goat in front of the Devi, to put the dead spirit from the possessed person into the goat, and relieve
the person from the possession. We remove with lemons - we are "vegetarians". By cutting the
lemons, they run away. The bhoots of these possessed people can see Mahakali. They see
only Her form and they start shaking strongly. Some one may ask, why are they shaking like
that. Many types of bhoots possess people. But the surprising thing is that if the ego is possessed
by a bhoot, then also they can see Mahakali.
There was a programme in Poona. They said, "Mataji is not a brahmin". There cannot be a
in our place, only a brahmin can do a programme. So the leader there said, "alright
programme
we will print in the newspaper that Mataji is not a brahmin. There will not be a programme here.
We will have the programme elsewhere". No! No! No! Don't do like this. We don't want to show
this. "O.K., then we will have our programme here". No one told Me anything. I don't know how
it came into My head, I said whoever is a brahmin amongst you, please put your hands towards
me, their hands started shaking like this. They started saying, "Mother, please stop, please stop.
We agree that you are Shakti. Please stop this." I said, why are you shaking ? I did not ask
-2-
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
VOL. VII Issue 4 & 5
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-4.txt 
 you to. You are shaking on your own. They were very proud of being great brahmins. Some
one said, "Mother see, there are some brahmins sitting there. Their hands are also shaking".
I said, ask them if they are brahmins. "No, sir, we are not brahmins. We are certified lunatics
and have come from the lunatic asylum. One lunatic from there went to You, Mataji, and became
alright. Thats why we have come. I said, have you understood now ? They are mad, and you
are also mad. Both are mad. Then they realised.
In the beginning, Mahakali's manifestations were many. Iwas at a loss to understand, if Mahakaliji
would reduce Her effect, I might be able to do other work also.
All the illnesses of the left side that are called psychosomatic, that are incurable, they can only
be cured with the grace of Mahakali, that's why we have to say the mantra of Mahakaili. And as
long as you do not manifest Mahakali, these illnesses cannot be cured. So much heat comes
out from these people that I cannot understand at all.
When you see the subtle form of Mahakali it is ati raudra (very fierce). About the Devi it is said
she is 'Adi raudra, ati saumya'. The rudra is very necessary otherwise this negativity will not go
away. This will only go away with the rudra form. The eleven rudras of the Ekadesha rudras,
all eleven rudras have only the Mahakali Shakti. These are situated in our medha (on the
forehead) in 11 chakras. If any man has his ekadesha caught up, then know that he has cancer
or some incurable disease. Sahaja Yoga science is absolutely perfect in all respects. You cannot
find any fault in it.
Now people come with cancer, this, that, even AIDS. Now they say, "Mother, we have not gone
to any guru". If you have not been to a guru, your mother or father may have been.
If Mahakali's swaroop was not used in Kali Yoga, Sahaja Yoga's work would have been impossible.
Because of these negative forces all chakras get caught up. Without improving the chakras,
Kundalini will never rise. That is why Mahakali Swaroop is very worshippable and adorable. It
does not bring any physical, emotional or mental troubles to anyone. Only with Her form, the
negativity runs away.
The quarrels between husband and wife are a very big problem nowadays. Because wives are
educated, and husbands want that wife be absolutely rustic. If she is not rustic, how to make
her rustic - once she is city bred, she is city bred - whether you wear a Lehanga or you wear
pants. The mind is city bred. Now those who are city bred, their femininity does come down.
There is more masculinity and lesser femininity. The greatest quality of the woman, which is
modesty, itself decreases. To protect her modesty, Rani Padmini had burnt herself along with
three thousand women, in the fort of Chittorgarh. She had never ventured out with a sword. But
when there was a need, then Jhansi Ki Rani stood with a sword in her hand. When the battle
was over, the English General Ross had said "Victory is ours, but the glory goes to the queen
of Jhansi". In our country there have been many glorious women of great character, devoted
to their husbands, very high in the woman's dharma. Such women have been there who minded
-3-
VOL VII Isue 4 & 5
DIVINE COOLBREEZE
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-5.txt 
 the house with their understanding. But when Gandhiji gave the call, then these women gave
him their bangles and all their omaments.
There is the story of Rana Pratap. Rana Pratap saw a leopard take away the chapatti made of
grass from his daughter. A doubt came in his mind "why am I doing like this?" Is it for my ego?
Why don't I surrender to the enemy, Akbar. So he sat down to write a letter to Akbar. At that
moment, his kshatriya wife's shakti was awakened. She took a spear in her hand and stood before
her daughter, And said, "I will kill you, because of you this weakness has come inside him". Then
Rana Pratap's eyes opened.
Women used to put the teeka (tilak) on their husbands and send them to the battle ground. The
shakti is of the women. But today even the women are without shakti and men are also
powerless.
This shakti comes from the woman's modesty. As long as this modesty of the woman is not active,
the Gruhalakshmi's power does not manifest within her. But Gruhalakshmi has to be clever.
Secondly, she has to be understanding. So we can say, when this Mahakali shakti becomes very
calm, then she becomes Gruhalakshmi.
We believe in Lady Fatimabi. She decorates the throne of Gruhalakshmi with the power of
Mahakali. The Gruhalakshmi keeps her children on the proper road. She keeps her character
shining. We are witness to the fact that the devotion and faithfulness of a devoted, faithful wife
cannot be destroyed by anyone. She has her shakti. This is the Mahakali's shakti. People are
afraid of a devoted wife. Husbands should also know that the active power inside them also comes
from the woman. If that power comes from the woman, the thing to see is if the woman has modesty
or not. If she does not, then the husband has the right to say shut up. With modesty, you need
cleveness. In a modest wornan, there should be a great capacity to laugh. She should know
what and when to laugh. She can correct thousands of questions and understand the subtle thing.
I have told you to read Sharatchandra. In his novels all angularities are managed beautifully by
the women. This is a matter of cleveness, we do not have to get into politics. There is absolutely
no need to descend into this dirty economics. The entire work of society depends upon the
woman. The woman who improves her home, children, health of her husband that woman makes
a very strong society. Only because of the woman of India, today our society is alright. But the
nature of the woman not in aggressiveness. She can win the entire world with modesty. Her
style should be like a Devi.
Mahakali Shakti sits on many points. They have their various vehicles. But when She sits on
the elephant, She is called Lalita Gauri. Her art, skill, feeling are all respectable, beautiful. It is
not necessary that you wear a veil. It is also not necessary that you cover your head. But in
your eyes there should be modesty. It is a very big word. Many things are covered in this.
Because the Saumya Swaroopa (tender) because She is Mahakali, whoever sees Her with
adulterous eyes, he will be burnt to ashes. Not for Her protection, but for the other person who
puts bad eyes on Her, he will be destroyed, so a veil is worn.
4-
VOL. VII Issue 4 & 5
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-6.txt 
 The great Shakti of Mahakali is like this. She appears to be very shining, very modest, but Her
Shakti is active from within. People say Mahakali is a very rudra shakti. But it is surprising to
see Her Shakti. What a Mahamaya She is. By nature She is Mahakali, but appears modest,
like a newly wed, what to say - so demure and shy. She will speak so sweetly as if flowers are
falling. She will be so loving, you cannot believe. But this is the power of Mahakali. The one
who has got it, no bhoot can touch Her. Instead of touching Her, he himself will be possessed
by the bhoot. For the woman who is like this, her one glance can turn people to ashes.
Now the second Shakti is of Mahasaraswati, with which we get many types of artistic and
conceptual ideas enlightened in aur intellect. By the grace of Saraswati - Sharada, many types
of thoughts are developed in a very calm, soothing manner. Very beautiful poems come out. Not
the sorrowful ones, but the kinds that inspire. Many nationalistic songs have been written about
the country. All these poems have gone, and now only these dirty film songs are being played
everywhere. And that too in front of Shri Ganesha. If there is no wisdom they keep doing useless
things. With their intelligence, they take out anything. The greatest one among these I would
say, is Freud. I have not seen a greater fool than him. Unashamed he put his views in front
of every one and every one even adopted them! If you read even one line of his writing, you
will know he is completely a shameless man, or bhoot and his intellect wrote everything against
Sharada. And it started everywhere - that sir, we have the freedom, we can write what we want.
Today's newspaper people are also like that. Whatever funny ideas they understand, they keep
writing and they do not want to write any good things at all. Who died, how many died.
Sharada Devi is the one who gives the truth. She is the authority over truth. The light of truth
that we get in our head, is because of Sharada Devi. When you write, don't you think where this
writing power comes from? Sharada Devi gave you this power to write.
Until now I have not written anything at all. I said I must write something that will go into everyone's
heads. People's heads are not yet that open. Jesus did not write. Mohammed Saab did not
write anything at all. He could not even read or write. By the grace of Sharada Devi many have
written many things. Gnyaneshwaraji wrote the Gnyaneshwari and then another book. In the
beginning of Gnyaneshwari, by the grace of Sharada Devi, he writes that "My words, whatever
| am saying, is only to please Sharada Devi. In the way that feathers very gently float down into
the ground, in the same way may my words fall into your heart and make you fragrant." What
a great thing he has written! Such beautiful poetry, and so gently, tender, soothing, that
you are partaking of amrut. In English there has been a great poet, and his poems are in a book
called Visions. Please read it. His name was William Blake. Such stirring, whispering poetry
feel
you
you are filled with inspiration, enthusiasm. It's as if Sharada Devi comes out of his poetry and
starts speaking inside you. Similarly, if you read Sharad Chandra, you will start writing poetry.
Such writers have been in our India, like nowhere else. Tolstoy was another great writer.
In the south there was a poet called Kurup. His poems were so beautiful, what shall I tell you?
She has blessed Rajasthan alot. There have been great poets. Even Alexander was greatly
impressed with the culture here. So he did namaskar and went back taking Chand Vardai with
-5-
VOL. VII Issue 4 & 5
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-7.txt 
 him. Chand Vardai was a great poet and gave a great description of Alexander in Rajasthani
language. Then among Sufis you have Khusro. What poetry he wrote. Kabir Das - what to say
and of Nanak Sahib - he was the Guru, Himself. Ramadas Swami. In Bengal also there have
been poets, one better than the other. And all this has happened with the grace of Sharada Devi.
From every word, it is as if dharma is flowing, enlightenment is flowing. All their words perfectly
arranged it seems they wrote in Nirvichar. Such a pure description.
We knew a Muslim gentleman and he asked "Mataji, why do people sing gazals ?" He said that
all those people who write gazals do not love their wives, they are in love with something else.
I said how do you know this?" I have seen it. This is the case. They have their wives, and they
are crying. The wife is sitting, alive and well. Better - live with her and enjoy life. Instead you
are crying for a third one - or her shadow." Are these kinds of poems written with the blessing
of Sharada Devi? These are just yet another kind of people who only want to befool others.
One gentleman recited poems on liquor. I asked why doesn't the cup sway, and why do you
sway? You are weaker than even a cup! After that he never spoke about wine. When his wife
died, he made a poem about her and fifteen days after he married again, and then made a poem
about the new wife. In this way, in our country many cheap type of poets were born, especially
those kind of poets who drag God into everything. Look at Mr.S. Don't know what kind of romantic
picture he is painting of Radha and Krishna. Where did Krishna have the time to do romance
and all that. The one who is concerned about the entire universe! Radha - "Ra" means
and "dha" means one who supports. Where does She have the time to do all this romance of
energy,
the world?
Like Zen, Sahaja Yogis can understand the things written by the Zen poets. No one else can
understand the way they describe anything, even the minutest detail, and the way they used to
make pictures, only a yogi can feel the other's feelings. Nowadays even in Mujra they sing qawali!
This is not any blessing of Sharada Devi. By no means to make such mixtures - there should
be purity even in music. Because they do not know how to sing pure music, they keep mixing
and make more mixtures. In the villages people sing so lovingly and with complete blessings of
Sharada Devi. Only with Her blessings all the great volumes were written. All the great dramas,
kadambaris that were written, were all with the grace of Sharada Devi. But in this present time
it appears as if Sharada Devi has held back Her hand or has this blessing lessened. In this
Rajasthan, there has been such a development of art that just in 2 or 3 years art has blossomed
forth. This is absolutely the blessing of only Sharada Devi. There is no doubt about this. Such
artistic things, people have started making with their hand - its surprising. Earlier also, they used
to make very nice artistic things. People used to appreciate it. But you see in simple potteries,
you see anywhere - such beautiful colours. Such colourful things. In Rajasthan they are not afraid.
They wear all kinds of colours. Westerners are not like this. In the West they say if there is a
border, there should not be anything above it - "spaced out", that's because their brains are
"spaced out". There is no connection between their heart and head. Now when heart and head
will be one, then people will understand what is 'exuberance'. Full of happiness, the joy that one
feels becomes colours and spreads all over. This Holi can only happen in our country and in
-6-
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
VOL. VII Issue 4 & 5
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-8.txt 
 no other country. The play of colours that happen here, the colourful sarees that are made. In
the West they have only grey clothes if they go beyond grey, then all black. Do they have a
capacity - to make even one saree like this?
Only one point I will surely say - there is little attention paid to cleanliness. Women are very clean,
they keep the house, etc., very clean. But outside is very dirty. Men here are not bothered at
all with the outside of the house. All garbage rots outside. In foreign countries, the outside is
clean. Because men clean on their own. Cleanliness and perfection - These are also the
very
blessings of Sharada Devi. This filth will not allow Sharada Devi to come near. The cleaning should
also be organised and artistic. Sharada Devi is limitless. Her grace goes beyond limits.
At least in India, women did not give up their style. The day the Indian women give up their modesty
and decency, the same day from inside her, everything that is pure, from art, or woman's swaroop,
wife's swaroop, mother's swaroop - everything finishes off. This should be known to all those who
live in the grace of Sharada Devi. There is a saying - "art is in hiding the art". That, whatever
you do there is no need of showing off. But whatever you do, you wear, or cover yourself -
fyou need complete blessing of Sharada Devi, do for others, not for yourself. Not for the eyes
of another - whatever actresses are there, people take their name as if they are women of the
street. She does not have any respect. Just a piece of exhibition. In every simple thing there
should be covering of Shri Sharada.
If you want to have the blessings of Sharada, then, in your village, in your country, whatever is
happening and whatever is made by the artists, respect them.
Then there is the art of drama (theatre). In Bengal and Maharashtra the theatre is so developed
that people go to see dramas, not cinerna. The standard of drama has gone down and we do
not know what more things will happen. I have seen so many funny things that I feel Sharada
Devi will run away from here. Now, they have said that they will take away this and that from the
films. In my life time if I can see that this filth has been taken out, I will be very happy.
Indian art is fine art. If you see the Chinese art it looks like a lion. If you see the Egyptian art,
they make their dead mummies, the people are painted as if they are dead bodies standing. In
England and America, the art was good until they were realistic. Then they became impressionistic
- but still it was O.K. But now the modern art which has come is not within you, My or anybody
else's capacity, Such a kind of degradation has come, it appears that Sharada Devi has run away
from there. The more dirty, wrong, adharmic are the films being made, the more is the demand.
All of you Sahaja Yogis should have understanding of art, and should support artistic things,
especially hand made. So the ecological problem itself will be solved. Instead of having twenty
five plastic things and forty paper plates it is better to have two artistic things in the house. This
is our Indian culture, in which every cell has the light of Sharada. The women have preserved
it but now the men also need to understand it. When you get into the pure form of music and
dance, the blessings of Sharada are there. I have seen so many times, those who play and sing
DIVINE COOLBREEZE
-7-
VOL. VII Issue 4 & 5
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-9.txt 
 before Me get famous very quickly. They get popular and start playing very well. They get the
blessing of Shri Sharada.
Now the third shakti which is in us, 'Trigunatmika' is the power of Mahalakshmi. Now the Puja
of Mahalakshmi is only for seekers who have enjoyed all the blessing of Shri Lakshmi. This power
of seeking is the power of Mahalakshmi. There is Mahalakshmi temple in Kolhapur, it is a
Swayambhu. There they sing Jogawa 'O Mother awake, O Mother awake' - Namadeva wrote
in the sixteenth century. Iasked the Brahmins in this temple. Why do you sing this song of Amba
in the temple of Mahalakshmi ? They said, "We do not know, because they have been singing
this for countless ages, since the time of Namadeva". Then who is this Amba ? They answered,
"Amba is a Goddess, isn't it?". I said you know only that much. I will not be able to explain to
you, it is very difficult. But Amba gets awakened only in the temple of Mahalakshmi. How is it?
Our central channel is that of Mahalakshmi. In this channel your seeking of left side, right side
and of your intellect is all finished. Then you come to the central path. When you start seeking,
you get the blessings of Mahalakshmi. This is known as Redeemer in the Bible. Christ spoke
about three persons. First power is called as Comforter which is of the left side. Right side is
called as Counsellor and the central one Redeemer. These are the three aspects of the Holy
Ghost. When you start to enter the central channel and come into it, you become a seeker then
Mahalakshmi pours blessing over the seeker. He receives the grace of Mahalakshmi. To rise
in the path of Mahalakshmi is very difficult. Because sometimes the mind goes to the left,
sometimes to the right, only with the awakening of Kundalini, you can remain in the central channel.
First she makes a bridge across the Void. After crossing and breaking the Brahmarandhra it unites
with the universe (Brahmanda). But after this happens, the Trigunatmika together help
Crossing the Agya chakra when you come to the Mahamaya. "Sahasrara Mahamaye.' It has
been written when there is work of breaking the Sahasrara, She is in the form of Mahamaya. And
that form is hidden, very hidden. As you try to know this form more and more you go from subtle,
to subtler and to the subtlest state. That subtlety is extremely essential. Whatever is inside us
which is something we can be proud of, precious, special - to know that you need subtlety, In
that there is only ane obstacle which comes, is the pull of the left or the right side. For this
need to face yourself and do introspection not of others, but your own. While doing this little by
you get settled in Sahaja Yoga.
you.
you
little
All this talking remains as talk, until the seeker does not achieve that state he is restless. But
even after you achieve the state, you have to use it. Otherwise this faith does not become strong,
and it becomes difficult to achieve the state of Nirvikalpa.
Today's lecture became very long, because the subject itself was like that. This was the description
about all three powers, but Adi Shakti is beyond these. To describe Her is not easy. It is a very
special thing. To describe Her is a difficult task. Only you people can describe Her, not Me. I
leave this to you.
May God bless all of you.
8-
DIVINE COOLBREEZE
VOL. VII Issue 4 & 5
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-10.txt 
 SHRI YOGESHWARA PUJA
TALK BY H.H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
New Jersey USA 2-10-94 (Synopsis)
Today we are going to worship Shri Krishna as Yogeshwara. Vishnu's first incarnation as a human
being was Vaman Avatara and then it went till He came as Shri Rama, so the past of Shri Krishna
was Shri Rama. When Shri Rama carne on this earth He went into lots of austerities to go to
jungle. His wife was lost whom He had to find and to establish the benevolent King on this earth,
He was made the king of Ayodhya. But all His life it was a struggle and austerities which He
followed. As a result the people who followed Shri Rama became extremely austere. They used
to sleep on the grass, because Shri Rama had to sleep on the grass for so many years. They
used to wear wooden slippers. They would just wear very little clothes or one dhoti, just like Shri
Rama wore when His wife was out. He never enjoyed any other life, as a man, but lived like an
ascetic when His wite was lost. All these things were to establish a very ideal personality for a
man to be attached to his wife. He was a person with "Ek patnivrat", means one wife. Though
She knew She was Mahalaxmi, She was a Goddess but still He was forced to things because
He wanted to show how a benevolent King should be.
In the second incarnation of His when He came as Shri Krishna, had to neutralize all these
austerities. In His childhood He also had to face lots of problems which He surpassed and He
went and killed His uncle who was a rakshasa. After this He went to Dwaraka which He built and
became the King of Dwaraka. To understand Shri Krishna in Sahaja Yoga is much more subtler
than the stories. First he was Leeladhar. He said this is all a play. That means you have to
become a witness. He said, your mind should become just a witness. At Virata stage He becomes
Akbar. At that stage He is the mind, the brain of the great primordial being. So first He thinks
that we have to become witness of the drama. And we should not get lost into the Maya. If you
are a witness you can see the Maya, how it works. So the first subtle nature of Shri Krishna was
to create a Leela, to neutralize all the austerities created by the incarnation of Shri Rama. The
second great quality that He had is also to put the Maya on people. If He is the brain, then our
brain should become a Sakshi, witness the play. It should not take anything as something
extremely serious. When you look at things as Sakshi Svarupa, something that you are watching
a drama, you may for the time being feel that you are Napolean or that you are acting. After some
time when the play is over, you know its a play. To reach that state you have to become
thoughtlessly aware, because we think from our brain. And this brain goes an thinking and thinking
and creating a maya and playing into Maya.
Here it is that you are a realised soul, you should see through the Maya. Everything that I am
doing, what you are doing, should be understood very well, if you are really the reflection of Shri
Krishna's brain. In your brain there should be no worry. There should be no stress, or problem,
because you are just watching it in thoughtless awareness. When you are in thoughtless
awareness means when your brain is just in the state of witness you understand everything that
=9-
VOL. VII Issue 4 & 5
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-11.txt 
 is Divine. For example I got into the car and they did not know where to go. We went into the
wrong road. Then I told him go this way. He was wondering how Mother knows. He said vibrations.
Through vibrations I could feel that they are all sitting there. Unless and until you are thoughtlessly
aware you do not know the absolute truth. Through your brain only you know. You don't have
to put your hands or ask questions, but it's like a computer that works, just gives you an answer.
In that state you are completely one with the Divine. Everything, every moment is computerised
by Shri Krishna. But at the same time He tests you. He plays His Leela on you, because He
is a diplomat.
How He has played Leela on you is very interesting to see. His style of Leela. Like He told Arjuna
that I will not fight, but I will be your charioteer. Now it will look funny to everyone, that such a
great man who calls me as his Guru, he says I am the best of his disciples, everything and here
He just offers His services like a charioteer. In this He is just trying a trick on Arjuna, as if He
knows the future that is going to happen. So the whole Gita was created because He was just
a charioteer, because Arjuna said I cannot fight my own people, my relatives and grand parents.
Now if you say that Gita is for peace, then it is not. He says that they are already dead, whom
are you killing? But if you run away from the battlefield, people will call you a coward, and what
will you get? But if you fight for the religion then you will get your resurrection. It's a big trick,
same was said by Mohammad Sahib, and same in Christians and Hindus. That they all feel that
they are fighting for Dharma. In Arjuna's case it was clear cut that somebody was a rakshasa,
adharmic, so he was fighting them. What about other people when they say that we are going
to die for religion? I met a Bosnian Muslim, why you want to fight for land when you believe in
the formless God? He said, "It is written in Koran that if you fight for religion, then you will get
your moksha." Exactly the same Shri Krishna has said. Where is the mistake? The mistake
is "What is the Dharma?". Are you Dharmic? Then this fight in those days were with weapons.
So why did Shri Krishna not take a weapon in His hand?
Firstly, no one has Dharma, they may call themselves Hindu, Muslims, Christians. They don't follow
religion. Secondly they are killing each other. Everybody is thinking I am right, whatever I
am doing is the right thing. The first condition is put that you have to fight for Dharma. So first
condition is we are fighting for Dharma? But he is even subtler. He didn't take any weapons
in His hands. He was just holding the reigns of the chariot. Because Shri Krishna is the mind,
the Virata, the great mind. He doesn't need any weapons as such. He used His mind for a very
profound knowledge, to explain Arjuna in the battle field, where everybody was there to fight and
they were about to start the war, He starts telling very patiently to Arjuna at that time. What is
he doing there. He is counselling Arjuna, see His subtle brain. He introduces in the first chapter
only and then He gives him the definition of a person who is an enlightened person which is a
"Sthita Pragnya". Normally a business man will start from one dollar and move into a hundred.
But its the other way around with Shri Krishna. He told him that first thing you have to become
Sthita Pragnya otherwise it is no use. Unless and until you become Sthita Pragnya you cannot
have Dharma. To understand Shri Krishna you have to have a very subtle brain.
He says that you should give up this kind of moroseness that has developed in you. Now take
- 10-
VOL, VII Issue 4 & 5
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-12.txt 
 up the weapon in your hand and fight. Then he asked him "That You are here telling me that
should become Nishkriya, that means no work. Your karmas become akarmas. Then why
you
do you want me to kill those people? That is the kama". He first says you should fight for Dharma.
It's a very subtle thing. Are you in Dharma or not? You are not. So what Dharma are you fighting?
Then the second thing is karma. His brains are extremely tricky. Second trick He plays on him
that you are working, but if you are a Sthita Pragnya, then you leave all the work at the Lotus
Feet of God. Give up all Dharmas and follow me". Now what is his Dharma? The problem is
people don't understand him. Its all concentrated on Shri Krishna and His own manifestation. He
says "Do your Karmas, but put them at the Lotus Feet of the Lord". It's not possible unless and
until you are Sthita Pragnya, in enlightened when you are enlightened, you have got your
realisation, you raise your Kundalini or anyone's Kundalini you don't say "I am giving realisation!"
you say "It is happening". You talk in third person. When that "I" is lost then only you will
put everything at the Lotus Feet of God. First it should be done in Dharma. Supposing somebody
murders someone and says it is my karmas and I put it at the Lotus Feet of Shri Krishna. But
he said, "for Dharma you should do it". First of all you should be a Sthita Pragnya, an
unenlightened person. Whatever you do automatically goes at the Lotus Feet of God,
spontaneously, Sahaj.
What
Now what about bhakti? The third thing needed. What is the reward for doing bhakti to God?
There again He plays tricks. On one word He has made everybody dance. He says, "You do
bhakti but it should be ananya" means when you have become one with Me, means you are a
Sthita Pragnya, means you are a realised soul. Just imagine on this word if people pay attention
they will give up all this nonsense of bhakti, and will first get their connection, when they become
ananya and then do the bhakti, because Shri Krishna knew human beings very well. Shri Krishna
was very clever. He said, they will not understand straight forward so give them in such a way
that they will go on doing and doing.
For realisation He has said you have to become the spirit. He didn't say at that time how you
will become, what will work it out, because if you go to college all the knowledge is not given in
first year. Something in second year and so on. The whole knowledge of Gita is nothing but
tricks Shri Krishna has played with human beings, who are stupid and would never have
understood Him if He had told them about Sahaja Yoga. Even today I meet many like that. But
so many He could not have got at that time, so they didn't talk about Kundalini. Same with other
incarnations. The kind of disciples they had, the kind of people they had, they could not tell them
everything about their ascent because they were not ready. They were not of that level, their
brains were not that developed.
Now in this Kali Yuga when I am starting this work, I find our brains are over developed, so much
so that our developed brains become stupid. How can you tell them such a subtle knowledge?
What is the way, if I talk like Shri Krishna it would have been just a waste of My energy and your
energy. Half of you would have gone off to sleep. So I said first of all let Me connect them to
Divinity. If I could connect them even a little bit to Divinity, they will understand because that will
enlighten their brain, and they will know that there is something more than what we know, and
-11-
DIVINECOOL BREEZE
VOL. VII Issue 4 & 5
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-13.txt 
 that's how it is going to work out, the subtle system of trickery of Shri Krishna has helped a lot
no doubt because people are realising that there is something missing in it. Even of Islam. Islam
means surrender, but surrender to whom? To mullahs or to whom? The problem started when
hierarchy started like that. In Riyadh, you are supposed to do puja 5 times and if you don't then
they beat women. Every shop must be closed 5 times. I tell you that they are such hypocritical
people naturally, because you are asked to do meditation 5 times. You will just do it out of fear.
Out of fear if you do something, whats the use?
Whatever Moharmmed Sahib or Christ has said it is only for angels, not for nomal people. Where
are the angels? Very few. But there are those who are born realised, who have come on this
earth are angels and they are told not to do something, they will not do. Most of them know what
is right and wrong. Where are those angels? Very few, and those who are angels are treated
like mad people. Nobody believes, only the angels could understand, but Shri Krishna thought
these other people who are not angels, why not trick them. Marny people come and tell me "we
take the name of Krishna". They haven't received anything, but first they said, He has to be Sthita
Pragnya. Sthita means established. Pragnya means enlightened, you should be an enlightened
personality absolutely established, firstly. After that He says all these things, and that's why many
people have misunderstood. But His idea was, in one life they will misunderstand, secorid life
they will misunderstand, third life they will start thinking that after all what is this? First you become
a Sthita Pragnya, So what's wrong with us? Some introspection will start. That was His idea.
I have seen people who give lectures on Gita for hours together but their brains are completely
closed. Shri Krishna did not say anything about the Kundalini. Gyaneshwara took permission
from his brother who was his guru, that allow me at least to say about Kundalini, that is how it
was exposed a little. Of course before that we have had people like Adi Shankracharya in sixth
century and before that Markandeya. But they talked about the Kundalini. That's all. Praised
the Kundalini. But that She passes through six centres, how will it raise and all that, and not about
the future, that this will happen one day. So many have written. But the one who has written
complete description of Sahaja Yogis is by Gyaneshwara in the poetry called 'Pasaydan'. In which
he has exactly said, what will happen. He has said, how many people will get realisation and
he said, that you the people who are the forests of the boon giving trees. Kalptaru', rise and
give it to others. Then he says, that you are the oceans who are giving ambrosia. He has
described you in such a beautiful manner that you should read the translation of Pasaydan and
then you will know what you are, he said, that you will lose other relationships and the only
relationship will be these. They will be your real relations. To say all these things and to have
such a vision, he must be a great incarnation himself. So this how in Gyaneshwari which is a
commentary on Gita. He has said in the sixth chapter now you can get your realisation. About
Kundalini, how it will work out. Gradually it was all unfolded. Gradually also people developed
their spiritual strength to understand. Supposing I had started Sahaja Yoga even hundred years
back, I would not have even one single disciple. The reason was that the people were all right,
their life was very much satisfying, they were very peaceful and they were just interested in some
horses.
- 12-
VOL. VII Issue 4 & 5
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-14.txt 
 But now you find people are so much disturbed, so much in trouble, so much in chaos in Kali
Yuga. It is the height of Kali Yuga now, so much of immorality and dissatisfaction in life that they
have to now think where to go, like a shock the future is waiting for them and now what should
they achieve? This whole illusion of life starts staring at them, and then they start thinking what
is this, what am I doing? What have I done? Why is it so? Why is everything in a chaos? Why
is it happening? Then the seeking starts. With that seeking you have now got your realisation.
Without the seeking it would not have been possible for me to talk to you at all about Sahaja Yoga.
I am very happy that it has worked out in America.
Another quality is that Shri Krishna is a 'Gochara' means that his element is of Akasha, and he
penetrates into everything. He penetrates into the Anu, Renu and Parmanu. Three things the
atoms. It shakes them. Any scientist will tell you that there are isometric and symmetric vibrations
even in the atorns, because He can penetrate into anything, because of this, it is so penetrating
that He encompasses everything, into matter, into animals, into human beings, into realised souls
He penetrates. In the matter it is just vibrations. In the animals it is just a guiding force. Like
birds from Siberia flying down to Australia. Who gives them the sense of direction? We never
think about it. There are so many things animals are doing. They have such a sense of
understanding, like a tiger in the forest. All the animals know that there is tiger in the forest. They
are all quiet, respecting their king. He kills only one animal, they just respect. What he has killed
is left. For one day nobody touches it. See the protocol. When he comes back next day he
eats to his own satisfaction, then the tigress, then the children. Once they have finished then
one by one in the order of protocol all the animals eat and last of all are crows. The protocol
is maintained so it guides the animals and the animals keep their character. They are not like
human beings, a snake is a snake and a tiger is a tiger. Human beings can be snake, tiger, leopard
anything together. They could be anything, combinations of so many things, because they have
passed through these yonis. These kinds of combinations, pemutations of the past are existing.
If somebody can take you to your sub-conscious, people start barking like a dog and sometimes
they behave like tigers. It can happen, All this is within us, the past. With all these complicated
personalities, some are like owls, hawk- like, very serious. Same are like chirping birds. But there
are so many cornbinations they have in them, that it is very difficult to make them little straight
forward. They are so much entangled. First I have to remove all the entanglement and then to
raise the Kundalini.
The best part of the organisation is that consciousness is vertically placed. Sub-conscious on
the left and supra-conscious on the right. In the central path is the Sushumna path. It is the
Mahalaxmi's path. It is the path which leads you to the state of your Virata, the brain. So now
the combination of three things work out. The brain is the Virata. Heart is Shiva, and the Liver
is Brahmadev. All these three powers are there. But at the time when you are realised then your
brain surrenders to the principle of Shiva that is the Spirit. Brain is surrendered not by force or
anything but to absorb the power of the Spirit. The brain gets surrendered completely to the Spirit
so that the Spirit enlightens the brain. It is the enlightenment of the brain that gives you all this
subtle understanding. It is to make your brain understand there are so many blissful happenings.
People are blessed once, twice, thrice then they are surprised. The brain starts thinking how did
- 13-
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
VOL, VII Issue 4 & 5
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-15.txt 
 I get this blessing? How did it happen to me? How could I get my transformation? So slowly,
slowly they start trusting their heart, means they start trusting their Spirit, they start trusting their
devotion, and this is how the Bhakti is absolutely done without any desire, without any asking,
without any obligation, just in oneness, because the brain joins hands with the heart, Now also
the Brahmadeva becomes surrendered. As a result your liver is surrendered to your enlightened
brain. When this happens, whatever you do is all enlightened work. Whether you sing, or are
a government servant, whether anything. Whatever you do with your brain anything through the
Swadhistana or through Brahmadeva it is an enlightened work. As it is the brain which is
enlightened which is connected with this all pervading power, whatever you are doing, whatever
your ideas are being absolutely enlightened you achieve that. Enlightened brain whatever it thinks,
it is thinking as well as achieving, both together. It's a thing to be understood, that an enlightened
person has the power to achieve anything, but at the same time his desires should be divine.
Like the other day we had very few people in the programme. All the Sahaja Yogis were extremely
unhappy, as if somebody has died in their family, even worse than that, why? Because this was
their own work which they could not understand why this enlightened mind of theirs could not
achieve the results. They felt extremely unhappy. This shows what identification there is for the
spiritual work or divine work and their own lives. To them this is the most important thing.
Everybody is not like that. For some people something else is more important. They may use
Sahaja Yoga for their own well-being. But those who just think of Sahaja Yoga, that's again the
brain which is enlightened, they achieve it. But it should not have any selfish motive behind it.
It should not have any hatred behind it or anything, or for some sort of a publicity or something.
But if it is just the thinking about the Sahaja Yaga work, it will be achieved. One should never
feel frustrated, because God is with you. He is your shepherd. This is what happens when you
become a surrendered lamb under the guide of this shepherd. Then as a result of this brain being
enlightened you start having faith in yourself. Nirvikalpa, you become doubtlessly aware as soon
as the brain becomes doubtless. It is the brain that thinks, doubts and creates conditionings and
ego. One instrument doing all this nonsense. It will create hatred, justify nonsense. It will criticize
others. It will hate others. It will make fun of others. That is not the quality of Shri Krishna because
He is the collective. That's why He never said you are a sinner. He didn't criticize anyone. After
all I have to criticize. If there was Kamsa, kill him. Kill Jarasandha, Narkasura finished, kill him.
No argument, nothing, no time for this nonsense. Straight forward. What is the use of criticizing
anyone? Just kill them. By killing them, they again come back in this Kali Yuga.
The best thing is to detach people from these rakshasas where they are lost. One way could
be that I put it in your brains that this is a rakshasa, but they won't believe. What happens is
that when you go to them you get all the kinds in your head. You start getting pins and needles
on your finger tips. This is all the activity of brain that it acts on your nerves, and you can feel
it; they start shaking. In My presence the brain acts because it penetrates into energy. I
I put
My glance at somebody. There was a boy very naughty. He beats and bites people. As soon
as he saw Me he ran away. He attacks every person but he ran away. Possessed people shake
before Me. So who acts on these people who are possessed who makes all this gesture. Its
the brain. In the brain they have problems and Shri Krishna makes them shake. It's the tremors,
- 14 -
DIVINE COOLBREEZE
VOL VII Issue 4 & 5
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-16.txt 
 pins and needles and heat that they feel. All this is central nervous system after enlightenment,
the brain is at peace with itself. It doesn't react as it used to react. I have seen people here
so speedy, so nervous, so upset, jittery and irritable. A reading about Mao that his personal
physician said he was absolutely like a tyrant. He was the cruellest man he had known. He used
to keep up the face as appearance. Mao looked to be a great reformer and did so much but
he was a hypocrite. How will you know somebody is a hypocrite or not? You will know with your
brain only if you are enlightened.
If Shri Krishna penetrates into your brain then you becorne an enlightened person (Sthita
Pragnya). You become knowledgeable. You know everything, whatever is necessary. You may
not know who is number one at Wimbledon, or the life of an actress, or the President of such
and such place. But you will know whatever is necessary for you, otherwise people waste their
energies. I know of somebody who knew the telephone and car numbers of 2000 people. What
is the need? All these stupid things are a waste of mental energy, but a Sthita Pragnya does
not. He is concentrated on to his own knowledge, onto the divine understanding. He works really
like a computer and such an efficient computer. Today I started talking about Kabir, immediately
they felt the vibrations. Only the people who are enlightened (their nervous system is so charged),
that they can feel what is wrong and what is right, they can feel Divinity. They can make out who
are incamations and who are not. You don't know what has happened to your nervous system,
a new dimension has come, which is manifesting. This is also the blessings of Shri Krishna
because he is collectiveness within us, in the form of collectivity He works.
As America is the place of Shri Krishna's auspiciousness, so one has to understand what is Shri
Krishna's auspiciousness. He had sixteen thousand wives. These were his sixteen thousand
powers. To work out His Incanation He wanted them so they came on this earth as princesses
who were captured and kept in the jail. So He fought that King and got them out of there and
He married them. With a man, whatever be his age, and He has sixteen thousand women around
him people will never understand. He is Yogeshwara. Men have this problem, not women so
much, because women become mothers. Fatherhood can be challenged. So He married the
essence of the five elements. He married them as five wives. But this real sense of morality
is seen in the case of Draupadi. When She was brought in the court, Duryodhana asked
Duhshashana to take out her sari. At that time, She was holding her saree with her teeth. She
called Krishna. She could only say 'Kri'. As soon as She said 'Krishna' the sari fell down. When
She just said Krishna there was a big sound in Dwarka where He was at that moment. Immediately
with Shanka, Chakra, Gada, Padma - His four weapons, He came on the Garuda. For His own
sister He came all the way to save Her chastity. To Him the chastity of His sisterwas of the greatest
importance. He supplied the saris. The chastity of Draupadi was of such a height and how Shri
Krishna tried to save it. It's remarkable.
This Yogeshwara, Shri Krishna is also a Dhanvantri, means the doctor of doctors. He is the one
who cures because its all the brain and the vibrations which flow on the nervous system. He
cures people through His brain. How? Supposing somebody is having a problem on his heart,
as soon as he puts hands to my photograph, immediately he gets problems on his left finger here.
-
- 15 -
VOL. VII Issue 4 & 5
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-17.txt 
 The brain is working so in your brain my vibrations go of Shri Krishna, and they start sending
these messages, because I am also Shri Krishna, so this computer acts and immediately you
know what's wrong with that person. He is a heart patient. You don't have to do any diagnosis
or anything and immediately you know. Who does this? Its the principle of Shri Krishna in the
brain of the Virata. Now you are convinced about it. You know it works and acts like this, and
how it communicates through you. So this computer of Mine communicates. Now in a computer
if you go, you can just press the button, of course its man made, you then get the result, here
it is not like that. Its the brain automatically gives the result. Immediately, through the other person.
Also the same brain tells you what is to be done, and how to work it out. The same brain is emitting
vibrations and those vibrations are flowing through this brain and they are ones who tell you what's
wrong with this person. All this work of penetration is done by Shri Krishna.
He takes these vibrations, puts into another brain and then that brain in the central nervous system
starts working and then you get the results. Its instantaneous, as soon as they put their hands
before me. How important it is for us to look after our brain. In America I don't know how far
this brain is safe because you open any television, or look on the streets, or advertisements or
hear this music, it break your brain completely. Whole atmosphere is anti - Shri Krishna. No purity
of understanding. No sense of morality. The way they make pictures, horrible violence, immoral
senses, all sorts of things, all created here in the land of Shri Krishna.
ways can completely purify, because He is Yogeshwara, because He is detached, He cannot
get attached to anything. Only the brain makes you attached. Supposing this carpet is here.
This sari is here. I look at this sari. "I've got a nice sari". If it is Mine I am worried that it should
not get spoilt or where it will be kept, what will happen to it? Goes on worrying about things. Any
road you walk, there are shops and shops. Your attention goes there and in that altention this
brain gets involved completely. It gets involved and wants this and wants that. In what?
The one who through his
Detachment from matter is only possible if you know generosity. There are many people who
are in Sahaja Yoga but they are not generous. What is generosity? Generosity is that if you
like my sari you can have it. That's the real generosity. Whatever I am buying is for you,
supposing, so you have it. If you have a generous detached temperament then you can never
get involved with matter and whatever you are involved it is love. Iwent to Russia and there was
nice fish eggs called caviar. There's one doctor who ikes it very much in London. I bought it
for the doctor. The doctor was very happy that Mother remembered such small things. The matter
had a sense of giving very great joy to another person. If you do it with love and not attachment
which is detached. He is the one who is detached so what is the love that is detached. Like
a sap in the tree rises, it goes to every part of the tree and is not attached to any part, and
t get attached then the tree will die and the fruit will die.
it
What is detached love? It is the most beautiful thing. Firstly by detached love you know what
to give to whom, what will make people happy and joyous. What do they like. In love only you
know these things. Whatever is done with love, even a little thing you like, I purchase because
I know you like that. In the same way you also do that. This detachment has to be full and
complete. Then only you get people attached to you, otherwise you cannot. If you are not
16-
DIVINECOOL BREEZE
VOL. VII Issue 4 & 5
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-18.txt 
 detached you cannot get that complete love for another person. Because if you are doing
something for money or if you are doing something for lust or for greed or some sort of a position
it has no meaning. In Sahaja Yoga also, many people come either to make money, or get cured,
etc. But if you are detached then only Sahaja Yoga will spread. As long as there are attachments
you should know you are not yet a Sahaja Yogi. You should introspect and see how much I am
attached to this or that and why am I so much attached. I don't say you take out your eye or
hand. Always as a result of attachment you will always find disappointments. I've seen parents
who have doted on their child, loved their child etc they are the worst. But if you have a detached
love for a child, you do nice things for the child, at the same time you know how to say 'no' where
it's not good. I
don't like, don't do it. You must say that.
Detachment is even wider than that. Like some people are very fond of food. To say that to
be detached from food is very difficult for them, especially at a certain age they are very fond of
good food. Gandhiji has talked about that one should not have any taste, but as you grow
Sahaja Yoga you will find automatically it will happen. All your fussy nature about food will drop
off. That is another sign that you are absolutely detached about food. IfI don't eat it makes no
difference to Me. It doesn't make Me weak or in any way unhappy. But thinking about food is
just spoiling your brain. "We went to their house, they had made such nice things". What's the
use? You have already eaten, finished, it's over. Why are you thinking about that. Or "I went
to somebody's house they had given me horrible food", why to think of food? By thinking you
cannot get back what you have been eating or what you are going to eat. When you know
something will not do good to your teeth, you should not eat. For exarnple beef is very bad for
the teeth, that's why people lose their teeth very fast. Many people ask Me whether My teeth
are My own. They can't believe its Mine. I know what not to eat for the teeth's sake. But one
should not be attached to an idea. That's an even subtler attachment. That has really killed this
in
world with so many problems like fanaticism, racialism etc.
See the contradictions people have. They go to the sea to get darker and they have racialism.
Then why do you go to the sea? Then why do you hate the people who are dark? Such a
contradiction because the brain is not in balance and for that you have racialism. If not that then
you have different conditioning, that you have different castes, especially in India. How can there
be any caste when everybody has the spirit in their heart. They won't eat from a lower caste
because they are higher caste. This brain is the one which creates all kinds of conditionings,
and all those great saints who have lived on this earth whether they lived in India or abroad or
anywhere, all of them have stood against this nonsense of discrimination. That comes from brain.
Ask them why do you think that you are higher than others. The Germans think they are the highest
race. Who will believe that story? Germans are the ones who have killed children in the
chambers and enjoyed that, they must be the lowest race ever going, but they think they are the
highest race. How can they be? To think yourself to be higher than others, to think that you are
more beautiful than others, and others are ugly, all this is the brain, which takes
the ego is the one who befools you all the time.
gas
to ego and
you
Narada the celestial sage thought he was a great man because he was never attracted to a
- 17-
VOL. VII Issue 4 & 5
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-19.txt 
 woman and he was challenging even Shiva. Then Shri Krishna played a trick on him. He sent
two gandharvas to tease him. They went down and asked Narada that you are such a beautiful
handsome, there is a marriage going on of Roopavati, the princess who is very beautiful,
why don't you go there? She will definitely marry you. They pampered his ego such a lot that
he started floating in the air. He went there because he thought he was so handsome. It's the
ego. He went there and this princess came out with a garland, and looking at him, giggled and
laughed a loud and she went away. He couldn't understand, looked at these two persons. Narada
was very angry and went to the lake. When he looked into the lake, his face was like a monkey.
Because this ego makes you a monkey and you start thinking you are great, or very
this thing, that thing, but you are not because if you are, then you won't think. Whatever you are
don't think about it. You don't think I'm a human being. Whatever you are, you boast. I
man,
beautiful,
you
am very beautiful, very good looking. Then Shri Krishna plays a part through the maya and he
gives a big lesson to that person. So never think that you are something great or you have
achieved this is life or achieved that in life and that you are a big Johnny. It's nothing but the
that has moved in and giving you these ideas from the ego. If you go even further with it
ego
then Hitler may enter into your ego and you might behave like him or if you are conditioned it's
impossible to tell you anything. I asked this Hare Rama fellow why do you wear dhoti in this cold
weather. He said, my guru has told me to wear dhoti. What sort of guru is he who makes you
feel cold. I am a Mother. I don't like all this nonsense. What a conditioning, and a conditioning
which is absolutely absurd and ridiculous. Americans are most vulnerable to such a thing. You
start any nonsense, immediately the Americans are the first to jump to it. Drugs, fancy dress etc.
It will start in Paris and be sold in America. They are on the look out for something new. It might
be a monkey but they will do it. I don't know why Americans who are residents of Shri Krishna's
land have no discretion at all on what to accept and what not to accept. There is no maturity
of any kind.
The discretion which is at the Hamsa centre which is ruled by the Vishuddhi is completely blocked.
One very high class lady who came to America told me very boastfully. "Have you been to the
pubs in England? I went to the best. It's called Hermit, where the stink of a dead man's body
preserved and the cobwebs are preserved as they are". She said, she felt so spiritual there!!
i
Then she started boasting "that we are free people. I allow my children to drink". These children
were hardly twelve and fourteen years of age. After three or four months we heard that there
was a birthday party of the younger and she had given all this alchohol for his friends. They had
candles and the whole house got burnt. Another will say I have had so many women. They are
stupid fools. Because you are organising a nice way to go to hell and you are all going to go
to hell. This is what is to be told to them. If you go on like this what will happen to you?
Accumulating, doing everything that is going to destroy them. I don't know why the Americans
should accept anything that is destructive, when they have Shri Krishna as their Lord. It is to
be understood by Sahaja Yogis also that you have to really transform yourself to such an extent
that whatever is destructive should be given up.
First of all I find many men and ladies with such long faces. How can you be? You are living
in the country of Leeladhar. He is the one who made everybody dance and He is the one who
- 18-
VOL. VII Issue 4 & 5
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-20.txt 
 played Raas with Radha. One who did the mental energy enlightened and to sustain it. How
can you people take to Adharma, to immorality and to destruction? Shri Krishna really has to save
people of America from all kinds of nonsense they do moming till evening. There is nobody who
is sensible in the politics. They are very good at criticizing others. Like we had a little plague
in India and they published it all over the media. They stopped all our ships, planes, made such
a fuss, put us into so much trouble. What about your AIDS which you are giving everywhere?
It's very surprising that with your brain enlightened by Shri Krishna, how could people accept even
mentally person like Freud? Now you are all ruined and are worried. Now they are breaking
families. All the logical conclusions they reach is just the opposite of Shri Krishna. The people
in charge of affairs do not want anyone to live. They think let them fight among themselves and
do whatever they like, we should have our own seats. The way they are not worried about
immorality and the destructive that are acted on American children, American youth and people.
Tonight we are praising Shri Krishna who is Yogeshwara. He eats but He does not eat. He sleeps
but He does not sleep. He has wives but He has no wife. Like this He is Yogeshwara. You
are Yogis and He is your Ishwara so you have to try to be like Him. Let your brain be enlightened
by His blessings and you become that great personality that encompasses everything, that sees
everything, that gives you discretion that makes you understand what's wrong and you feel
enthusiastic about changing this America with all your effort, with all their mind. That's the most
important thing you have to do. As it is He is a Kubera. He is the Lord of wealth. He has given
you such a lot of wealth all around. In everyway you are blessed, you have money, everything,
brains. Everything is there but what is lacking is wisdom. Suppose you have a car, the keys,
everything, but you don't know how to drive, so what will happen?
May God Bless You.
- 19 -
VOL. VII Issue 4 & 5
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji
Book Inauguration of Sir C.P.Srivastava
New Delhi - 3rd Dec. 94 (Synopsis)
After listening to all these beautiful things about Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri, My heart is so full of gratitude
to My husband that he accepted My desire, that he should write book about Lal Bahadur Shastri.
The first day I saw Lal Bahadur Shastri, I knew that he was a very highly evolved soul. To have such
a person in the politics itself was a great vision for Me. My father and mother sacrificed all their lives
for the work of Mahatma Gandhi of getting freedom. When I was with Mahatma Gandhi, he knew
about Sahaja Yoga because he was also a realised soul. But he told Me that just now we are not
free people. We have to get our freedom otherwise we cannot talk about Sahaja Yoga. He wrote
the Bhajanavali according to the different chakras.
I was a very patriotic person. Whenever I see our flag My throat gets choked. With all these songs
1 just could not bear it. I don't know perhaps it reminds Me of all the struggles people have gone
through, or maybe the mess which our country is in today, or maybe My heart felt love for My country.
As you know I am full of compassion and how I used to cry when i saw people living in conditions
which not even animals can manage. When I saw Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri, 1 felt now after Gandhiji
here is a man. Normally you'll be surprised at most of these martyrs, like My father, mother, Gandhiji:
they never cared for politics or wanted to do anything with politics. But there was a man who ventured
himself into politics and was a realised soul. He was a very big combination for that. I could see
the potential of this.
If you ask me I can't join politics, Shastriji asked Me several times and I said I just can't. Most of them
were so much detached they didn't want to have elections or do anything of that kind. I remember
My father, when he came out of jail. Vallabh Bhai Patel asked him, "you have to contest the elections".
He said, "I refuse, I don't want to go into politics". He said, "You will have to". He forced him, and
forced him and ultimately sent somebody with some money, Rs.3000/- for My father, for your
advertising. So My father said, "for advertising there is no need to send any money. If by that I am
going to win, then I don't want to win such an election!! But that made him ready. He accepted the
challenge and he really went for the election. Surprisingly he was the only Christian member elected
in that assembly, and the one who was opposing him lost everything, lost his deposits, but his own
daughter helped My father.
In those days it was another atmosphere where people who sacrificied, loved their country, who were
genuine, were very much respected. When My father was in jail, wherever we went, we were treated
like you are treated here by Sahaja Yogis. We all brothers and sisters were given all kinds of help
from everyone. They were very courageous people. They were politicians. They were fighting for
a cause, but they were not politicians who were running after any position, or money. They never
understood such things. It was beyond them. But they have no interest in joining this assembly or
all this. I looked at Shastriji and said, "Now here is someone. I wanted someone to be like that,
because there were so many I knew who were very sacrificing, detached, very honest, dharmic, but
somehow they did not want to do anything with assemblies and elections. Shastriji was already in
office when I saw him first. I think he recognized Me very well, no doubt.
There are two or three incidents I remember. First of all he showed tremendous respect for Me. I
-20-
VOL. VII Issue 4 & 5
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-22.txt 
 always used to go to the airport to receive him. Once I was not well, so I didn't go. He was coming
with all the cars and everything. Suddenly he stopped in front of our building and walked up to our
flat all alone. "Why didn't you come to the airport? Are you not well?" I said, "I'm alright sir, just
a little unwell". He said, "no, no, you must come everytime". So very sweet he was. Such small,
small things he used to notice.
Once his children told that "I have seen Bhabhiji, She is in the town". He said, "Where is She? Find
out". They found out and said "You are to be there for lunch". One day I had eaten a special dish
and he remembered. All these little little things. Iam surprised at him. He would talk to Me on subjects,
I was just an ordinary housewife; subjects like economics. He would say "What are Your priorities?
You run your household very well. Your husband is so busy". I said, "The first priority is that My
children must get their food, second a house, third education and foremost is their character. They
must have good character". I didn't start Sahaja Yoga until My daughters got married, because that
was also My responsibility. It was time that was needed.
Shastriji also looked after My children very much and he felt that he was sacrificing so much because
their father was never at home, always busy. He could understand Me that I am a sensible woman
and I am dedicated to this country, that I feel very happy that My husband is doing the work of the
country. But still he used to feel for Me. Il am very fond of music but I had stopped going for music.
I would not go without My husband. When I told him sormebody has come and I would like to hear
him, he said, alright. He asked "What time is the programme?" I said "9 p.m." at 9 o'clock he started
looking at the watch. So Shastriji asked him "What's the matter?" He said, "My wife has asked me
to go for a music programme at 9 o'clock". He said, "Then get up, what are you doing?" He brought
him in his own car and dropped him there. "She asked you once to go somewhere, what business
have you got to sit down". He was so human. He was a mothering kind of person. My husband
is a very
alright. But he was really very hard working and Shastriji was quite worried about him.
hard working man and I can always talk out his pressures when he comes home, so it was
One day he got some termperature. Immediately he said, you are on leave. "I've arranged everything,
you go to Shimla, He forced him to go to Shimla. I didn't know what to do with him because I've
never lived with him on any holiday. That way Mr Srivastava is extremely honest but then there is
a holiday and we are playing chess, scrabble and he used to cheat Me all the time!! I said, what
is this going on, here is such an honest man. He said, "Its allowed if you can cheat your wife!!" Then
we used to walk down to buy some cherries. We both are very fond of cherries. He would say "Alright
we will make half and half. He would put much more in mine and less in his. I said "What is this
cheating, why are you taking so little". "You also like cherries andl also like cherries, so lets exchange".
So big fight on that!
You see a woman in the house has to be very sensible. She has to be caring, sensible. I must
say My two daughters never troubled Me because their father was not at home. They really supported
Me very much and I gave them all the company that was needed, but they never complained to Me
"Why our Daddy is not here? Why our Daddy doesn't come?". Everybody's Daddy used to be there,
but their Daddy used to be missing. But they never even thought of it. It was such a help from everyone.
Also I had such a good childhood with my parents. They taught us how to be sacrificing. When
ither was in jail for years My mother went to jail five times. From huge big houses we were living
in huts. But we used to enjoy everything. The feeling that whatever our parents are doing is for our
21 -
VOL VII Issue 4 & 5
DIVINE COOLBREEZE
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-23.txt 
 country's freedom was so elevating that we nevereven thought of little comforts children ask for. We
could sleep anywhere, eat anything, live anywhere. That time also I found lots of great people, who
were My father's friends, such dynamic, patriotic people extremely patriotic.
Once people told us that they are transferring the political prisoners to another place, so they are
on the platform. We all rushed to the platform to see them. There was one sage and he was regarded
as a very great honorable person. He called Me and asked Me "What are You doing? Why are
You taking part in 1942 movement? Why don't You look after Your mother. Your mother is so much
worried". He gave me a big lecture. Of course 1942 was a real ordeal for any young girl. They
put Me on the ice and gave Me electric shocks, and all kinds of things. But to Me it didn't bother.
My father called Me on one side. He said, "How dare this old man tell You all this nonsense. I am
so very proud of You. Ihope all my children become like You and sacrifice themselves for the country".
Then he shouted at My mother "You are the daughter of such and such family. How dare you
letters like that, what do you mean by this?" Iwas very young about 17-18 yrs. He said, "Go ahead,
I am all with You". And that has given Me the lesson that if you have complete purity about your
dedication and purity about what you have to do, you can achieve and as Gandhiji has said that
we have to have first freedom. I saw the Union Jack coming down and I saw the Tricolor going up.
write
That was the moment which is beyond me, even now I remember those days.
Many of you who are Indians may not have seen those days, that's why you are so careless. That's
why some of you do not understand out of what sacrifices this freedom we have got. It's not an easy
freedom. It was a very, very difficult one and Shastriji was one of them who gave up everything to
join. He had a mother to look after. He was another one who just gave all those things. Any young
man would have had ambitions. He gave up everything just to join congress. Those were the days,
where people were just charmed with it. Gandhiji was also a very short man. This gentleman had
really chamed all the young people. So many young people gave up their studies. Gave up
everything, not for something wrong, but to fight for your country. And they sacrificied their lives. So
many were extremely honest, pure with a love for their country, made them so beautiful. They were
young girls, young boys, old men and women. We never had anything such as corruption or any
kind of bad feelings. We were all working together day and night. I had some very bad experiences
where we had to stay in jungles and do all their things. If My biography is there, you can see all
those things.
In the main life of these great people, it's pure love for their country. There is a difference between
love for your country. Pure love means you just love your country for the country's sake. Not because
you can make money, get into high positions, etc, Just very purely an inner innate Dharma, you
love your country. If any country is not equipped with that love for their own, it would be like a cancer
if they join one world. The pure love for your country is so good. I find with Sahaja Yogis that once
they are transformed, immediately they start seeing what is wrong with their country. It's not
attachment, infatuation or blind faith, but they see. I think this is the essential thing we should see
that what's wrong with our country. Say, if you love your child, then you must know what is wrong
with that child. Also you should love the child and also say this is wrong with it. Otherwise we don't
learn. It is possession, infatuation or conditioning. It's very surprising that, how with the subtle opening
of your awareness now you see what is wrong, what is injurious or destructive for your country. And
Vilh
you want to improve it.
-22-
VOL. VII Issue 4 & 5
DIVINE COOLBREEZE
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-24.txt 
 Same with Lal Bahadur Shastri, He asked me several times how to improve the food conditions of
India. Now you know with Sahaja Yoga you can. I couldn't tell him about Sahaja Yoga, but I did
say that there is a divine method by which it can be done. But agriculture should be without income
tax and maximum irmportance must be given to agriculture. Until today it is there, otherwise he asked
me about various things, even about Kashmir. I told him the biggest mistake was to make a separate
constitution. By that you just give a gap to them. His whole attention was so holistic.
He would always see how we can create beautiful relationships between people of different places,
different religions, different ideologies. He had a knack. I think he must have been raising their
Kundalini perhaps, he could transform a person into something else. His style was so collective that
in the garden he would stand there and everybody who came there, he would meet him. He had
a tremendous memory. I too have, so I used to wonder, there's another one I have found out who
has such a tremendous memory. Because to Me it is sometimes embarrassing to have such a
memory but to him it was such a blessing, because he would ask them such small things like "How
is your mother now" or "Did you get your house?" It was so much subtle. He was a motherly type
of person. Of course he has been extremely kind to Sir C.P. One thing I did tell him, that
take little rest also and do little meditation. He had no time. He said, "It's better to shine like a shooting
star". I said, "Shooting stars are those which are no good as stars. But you are so important. You
have no idea as to how important you are. And if you realise how important you are you will look
after yourself."
should
you
He used to live in the last part of the house. He was so humble, whatever you gave him he would
eat. His ordinary bed he would sleep on. "Why are you such a saint? Why can't you sleep on a
proper bed? After all we need you, for our sake you have to do it." He would say "I feel more
comfortable in this". He is just a man who was so detached. He was going to Russia and they all
felt that the coat he is wearing is not sufficient for Russia. They told me that you better tell him. They
approached C.P. C.P. told him "Sir, don't you think you should make another coat for you?" He
said, "Ah, so they have come to you now". To make one coat for him was impossible. He never
carried any money. He did not know what the new coins are, so at the airport I would always be
there and he would tell Me. "This lady is coming to put the peace flag on me I have no money, what
to do?" I said: "AlrightI will give her something". I gave her one rupee. He said, "You have no coin?"
I said, "Coin is for ten p.". What is that? 1 said, "It is one tenth of a rupee nowadays". "Oh I see.
It's better you give her a note". He wanted to give her a coin, is an auspicious thing. So detached
about things.
He was so diligently working out, because the way he used to ask Me questions, I was surprised
how diligently and subtly he wanted to improve the country. He said, "What should we do?" I said
"First of all we must have water". He said, "I know that we must have water in every village". Gandhiji
used to tell his wife go to the well and bring the water to me". I told her one day "Ba, let me do it,
why are you doing it?" She said, "Oh no, my husband will be very angry, he has told me 'until every
village gets water, you fill in the water for me". Shastriji was very much of that. Also he said, "These
people who travel by third class, there is no fan". He put fans in the compartments and waiting rooms.
He was a communist in a way, because he was a capitalist. He was so full of love and patriotism.
His love would not allow him to see people suffer. Whatever he could he tried to do. He only lived
VOL VII Issue 4 & 5
23-
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5.pdf-page-25.txt 
 for eighteen months. Like a shooting star, as he said, I have always been insisting on him for helping
Shastriji because I knew what he was. I had the image of a man who would do such a revolution
in this country, and bring down people to higher values. Not money and money business.
Shastriji was a Shastri, and so leamed in all our scriptures. He had studied Koran, Bible, every sort
of thing he had studied. I talked to him sometimes about what My father told me and he would say,
"Yes, that's it". About Koran, he would say "Yes, that's correct". His own capacity to convince others
was something very special and subtle. He would first smile, then wait, listen more, tlk less. But
he would say just one sentence and it would stamp. There is something really absolutely Divine.
He showed so much respect for Me. I used to feel very shy.
In our country a saint is worshipped and respected. I remember President Sanjiva Reddy, who invited
Me because I had cured him of his cancer. When I went there, they had everything made of
sandlewood. I was rather careful sitting on the chair made of sandlewood. He came with his wife,
with all kinds of fruits and such a big tray of silver, very beautifully done. And both of them sat at
My feet. So I said, "Sir, what are you doing, you are President of India, why are you sitting here?"
He said, "I'm President, but You are a Saint". He said, "You have to take something." I took an apple,
but I told him I could not take anything. He is the one who gave us this land for our ashram. Also
Govemor of Kashmir was a very nice man and was very kind to Me. But he knew Me as Sir C.P.'s
wife. One day I saw him walking down to the guest house, without any shoes or socks in Kashmir.
I said, "Sir, you are without shoes and socks!" He said, "I have come to meet a saint". And he came
and sat at My feet.
India is a very great country. It is a country where the saints are worshipped. They are not created
by church or something, but are real saints and such saints are worshipped and respected by kings.
This is the only country where it happens, I think. Another country is Russia. There they have
respected Me so much. When Shastriji went there I was happy because I knew Russians are spiritual.
Very introspective and are not conditioned by any religion or anything.
Many things worked out in Shastriji's life. Now he is no more, but this book I hope will go all over
the world and really open the eyes of the politicians and they will have to re-evaluate themselves.
Socrates talked about a benevolent King. Shri Rama was a benevalent King, once upon a time. When
I saw Lal Bahadur Shastri, I said, "Here is a benevolent King". He lived for a very short time, I think
that is our fate. We Indians don't have a good fate, but now it is for us to express his life all over
the world. Here we have Sahaja Yogis from everywhere. They can take this book and present to
some of their politicians, if they have any time to read. They might understand that there's a life that
is much higher, much valuable. After all this money. I have not known anyone who has elected
a statue of a man who had too much money, wives, keeps or was a drunkard. The value system
which is going on is of a nature which will not only destroy you, but destroy nations after nations.
This book has a special value by which I feel many will see their faces in the mirror and they might
be able to correct themselves and maybe on the political field may we find sensible better people.
That was My idea and I got after My husband to write this book.
May God Bless You.
-24-
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
VOL. VII Issue 4 & 5
