COOL BREEZE DIVINE Issue 7 Vol VII All Sahaja Yogis, men, women & children can spred Sahaja Yoga because they have the Shakti to do it, nat only for India but for the whole werld H.H. Shri Mataji Felicitations 21-3-95

 DIVINE COOL BREEZE VOL. II Issue 7 Contents 1. Holi Message - Sahaja Temple, Delhi 2. Birthday Puja Talk - Delhi 3. Felicitations Talk - Delhi 4. Medical Conference- St.Peterburg (Synopsis) Editedby Yogi Mahajan Divine Cool Breeze, 9 Bhagyachintamani Soc. Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 4 |1029 Computex Graphics, I12 High Tech Indl., Caves Road, Jogeshwari East, Bombay 400 060 Publishedby Printed by

 HOLI MESSAGE H.H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI Sahaja Temple Delhi 17-3-95 (Synopsis) People Celebrate Holi only on the outside, the real Holi is to be burnt within first. This means the negativity within has to be burnt first. Delhi being the capital is full of politics. Sahaja Yogis absorb this politics and it spreads in the Sahaja collectivity like flu. We cannot ascend by it. We should not form any groups or believe to any caste. Some one like Naradmuni comes along and fans the flames of animosity one against the other. But we should not play into the hands of such people. We should realize that our relationship is with Mother only Delhi people should not fall into wrong identifications, like they belong to Delhi, etc. When we are talking of the ocean how can we name or count the drops that form the ocean Oniy giving importance to your own people is not a good thing. Don't gossip and don't listen to gossip. Some people are gossip mongers - ignore them. People will be able to see through them. Keep everyone happy. We should wash away all our sins of this life time so that next life we come as saints. Do not allow negativity to creep in. Firstly, negativity comes trom aggression secondly from badhas, but thirdly from hypocracy where you deceive yourself. This negativity is hidden within so we cannot see it, but we go on doing the wrong thing. Shri Krishna said, first burn the holi you get from anger, desire for vengence, badhas, jealousy after that you celebrate the festival of holi. Don't be jealous or pretend all the tine. Don't do this otherwise you will get badhas. The best way to overcome negativity is to forgive. Say the Mantra "i forgive". our greatest shakti is forgiveness. The door of Sahaja Yoga is open for everyone: All kinds of people come in. If some one tries to deviate you from the path of truth, shun such person. Beware that you are not being influenced by negative people. If you truly believe that I am the Goddess, then more than My powers try to imbibe some of My qualities. When we introspect we cleanse ourself. Negativity spreads very fast in colletivity, on the otherhand one strong Sahaja Yogi can transform the entire collectivity. This is the miracle of Sahaja Yoga. Don't look at other's faults. Mother is there, She knows about everyone. You should only look at your own faults. VOL VII IsSIe 7 DIVINE COOL BREEZE

 When you burn the inner negativity, you become pure gold then you can give joy to others. Increase your power of forgiveness then your right side aggressiveness will go. People aggress on Shri Mataji to remove their badhas. but you should say how dare any badha stays' when a person has a badha he should not associate with any other with a badha. Some people assert a right on Sahaja Yoga like one Sahaja Yogi had a problem because there was bandha in the house. Shri Mataji told the person to shift from that house. That person did not shift but insisted on constantly Phoning Shri Mataji to remove his badhas. If people do not listen to Shri Mataji how will the badhas go. People with badhas should keep away from Shri Mataji for a year and stay in the background, otherwise the badha will not leave. Protocol towards Shri Mataji is very important for your ascent. Inner awareness and a good attention is very important for burning your inner negativity. Only when it is burnt can you ascend on Nirmala tattwa. Then you celebrate the real holi, enjoy and play with colour. Sahaja yoga's holi should be the holi of Shri Krishna. But people do the opposite of Shri Krishna. Shri Krishna never took any bhang. Our aggressive nature and 'bhoot' is the same thing. To enter the sea is easy but to swim in it is difficult. The same is the case with Sahaja Yoga. Those who want to stay in Sahaja Yoga should increase their Satguna: Such a person shines with the power of truth. Talking loo much interest in food is not a good thing. I am not fond of any particular food. I only taste delicasies to please you. Too much interest in food spoils the attention. The expression of one's likes and dislikes is not good. It is the ego. Christ has said. "hate the sin, love the sinner" love cleanses everything. Sahaja Yoga will spread through love only. Increase your love. Look to the comfort of the spirit, not the body. First the leader. his wife should clearne himself and then through love they should spread it to others. Sahaja Yoga is spreading very fast but people are not deep. You grow in depths by your dedication. Prayer should come from the heart, it should not be lip service. If you want to find pearls then you depth. Go on burning the negativity within. Likewise you can also burn the negativity of others because you are their leader. you have to dive deep in the ocean. Keep on going deeper and deeper, increasing This is the essence of Holi. May God Bless You. VOL VII Issue 7 DIVINE COOL BREEZE

 BIRTHDAY PUJA TALK H.H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI 20-3-1995, Delhi (Synopsis) In western civilization suddenly I find people have taken to a very licentious, vulgar, despicable life. I can't believe how can they be so stupid and idiotic. It seems they have no wisdom even to see that this is stupidity. Thank God you have achieved your self realisation, you got the light. you are so transformed, you look so beautiful, and that you have given up all those funny ideas of freedom. It is so clear cut. I out people who have such wise understanding of pure love and respect for your own purity As if suddenly you have come out of that darkness and have bathed in the light of the Divine. It's not possible otherwise. See the history of the western countries, they never had very great kings. In England a king killed seven wives. In India if one wite was killed he would have been killed first, before he killed the second one. Despite all that kind of a history and that kind of a vulgarity that has been going on for days together, suddenly you people have come up like lotuses and have made those countries so fragrant and so beautiful. But now thhey are afraid because they believe in licentiousness, vulgarity, they think it is their freedom. So they do attack you, but you don't know what to say. that in those western countries to find are not to be bothered because you have achieved something that is real, that is for eternal life. They are supposed to be Christians. Jews and also Muslims there. Among all of them I am surprised to see how they were interpreted, these three great religions, in the most contradictory way. For example Christ has said that if you make any sin with you eyes, then remove your eyes yourself. If one's hand does anything wrong. then cut that hand Ihave never seen anybody without an eye or without a hand in the whole of these Christian kingdoms, nowhere. They can cut others, but not their own. It's very difficult to be a Christian, because this is an imnpossible situation. For that we can say that this was for angels. must be, for the fallen angels that you take out your eye and cut you hand. Then Mohammed Sahib has said, he thought that why only the men are handled by Christ, so he says no, not that you cut it but let others cut your hand and take out your eye. And for women it is so that they should be buried in the mother earth half way and should be stoned. Think of American women, what would have happened to them. So very difficult to follow Islam, it's impossible. They were very great people, very pure and they thought that this was the only way. People can be kept pure. No. on the contrary with all these compulsion they become extremely immoral, this suppression doesn't help. The Islamic laws, shariat, was actually given by Moses to Jews, the Jews would not accept, they were sensible to say we can't accept it. It was too much So, that was taken over by Mohammed Sahib, better put it for these people. But with all this people become extremely immoral, extremely quarrelsome and go to the other side and such an imbalance is created. But after self realisation the Sahaja culture is born within you. With this Sahaja culture you come into balance and people are surprised at the western Sahaja Yogis, saying Mother. how have you made their eyes so pure, how can they get rid of these bad habits DIVINE COOL BREEZE VOL VII Isue 7

 of looking at every woman or every man, what have you done to their eyes, how have they become. So pure? It is the light of your own spirit which is shining through your eyes. It's very important. The wornen in the west have to understand what is Sahaja Yoga, not dominating anyone. Here the women are dominated, not always, but to a great extent. And there what you find is women are dominating. Firstly they believe in divorce and they try to harrass people with that. This domination comes from their upbringing, but Sahaja Yoga should change completely your and there should be no domination, but a complete understanding about which I have told you many a times and explained to you. Still I am overwhelmed by the response and on behalf of the Divine power I would like to thank you very much. It's really a new race that has come up, really. Somewhere, somebody goes wrong or something goes wrong, doesn't matter. On the whole, it's such a beautiful race of people, even in dreams people could not have believed it, they don't yet believe, but it has happened. You must now have an enlightened faith which we call as "Shraddha". With that enlightened faith l am sure you will adhere to the emancipation of human beings, it's your duty now. It is all given free, of course Sahaja Yoga is free, you don't have to pay anything, but you have to give to others, that is very important. Which is free to you and you cannot keep it to yourself. If you keep it to yourself, you can never be happy. ideas Where people have become collective and they told me "Mother, there's no greater joy than seeing people getting self realisation." That is the greatest joy one has, and this is what one has to have in your mind. Of course there are some people who start criticising Sahaja Yoga, why this, why that, all nonsense, but actually if you see everybody who is a deep Sahaja Yogi and wants that Sahaja Yoga should spread in their own countries, and then to see that it is accepted all over the world. It is such a wisdom which has come into them otherwise one fellow told me "Mother, I was only worried about my own house, my family, motorcar and this and that, now I've forgotten all that, now I'm only worried how will I be able to give this joy to others, I cannot be happy otherwise." And that's what has happened. and I'm very thankful to you, all of you who have come here all the way to celebrate My birthday and this is just your love and affection for Me and I also love you very much. May God Bless You don't know on My birthday which diety's puja you are doing. It's wihere there are all deities, all of them are there, with all of them being warshipped together it works out much faster. I think, As when you all of you are together, things work out much faster. May God Bless You. VOL VILIssue 7 DIVINE COOLBRIEZI

 FELICITATIONSTALK BY H.H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI 21.3.95 Delhi (Synopsis) "The great son of India, Mr Seshan, all the respected friends, guests and all My children Sahaja Yogis. It is true that Chaitanya organises many things which are most unexpected. I have been a great admirer of Mr Seshan. I My mother sacrificed everything to get freedom in this country, also as you know about My life, howI worked very hard as a young girl but when we got our freedom, I don't know what happened to us. We forgot many things. One of them was Gandhiji, with whom I have lived as a little child, who loved Me very much and he said, "let our country be free first, people who are slaves cannot talk of emanicipation." We became free quite alright but then I don't understand how people did not realise their responsibility. Some of them who were very sincere thought it's impossible to work out anything in this country. Then to My surprise I saw Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri who was a realized soul, he knew Me very well and I was hoping that he would work out the spiritual side of our country, and we'll try to bring a great name for this great Yoga Bhoomi. India, as you know is really a country where so many saints, incanations, poets of such high understanding and deep feeling were born, He died and I felt that now all our greatness, all our traditions, all our culture which came to us from saints. Gradually the deterioration started. When I saw I was really amazed how people are taking to things which are destructive for our country. saw a new rising son in India. As you krnow My past that My father, When I read about Mr Seshan, again a tremendous hope started kindling to My heart. My husband is another person who's birthday is today, who is not here. He sacrificed everything for honesty. For him honesty was so important. He was wedded to it, I mean to such an extent that if I tell you story you won't believe to what extent he was honest. One day, I had gone to a library and I was coming out (in Lucknow he was city magistrate at that time), it was raining heavily, there were no rickshaws, nothing, and as government servants you are really poor, you can't afford many things. Here he came on a police jeep so I stopped him, he said, "I can't stop, I'm going for important work and I can't take yau in the jeep", I said, "alright you go ahead, doesn't matter." Because patnotism is very important. If you have no feeling for your country you cannot do anything good. Any kind of sacrifice is not sufficient to satisfy that desire to do somethıng for your country. One thing if our politicians know. that they are not in the business. they are not here to make money, but to get the fame.. Even today you take the name of Lal Bahadur Shastri people just stop thinking, just they get lost. I know about My father, same thing. I forced My husband to write a book about Shastriji. You'll DIVINE COOL BREEZE VOL VII Isstue 7

 be surprised as soon as it was published, all the books were already sold, sold all over the world. So one thing one must realise and have hope that innately there are so many people in this world who are seeking the truth and who want peace of mind and the global peace, it's a fact. It's true, there is violence. People have tortured us also and troubled us, it's alright, better to forgive, because they are ignorant and they are in darkness. What we can do is to give them light. If you give them the light they will throw away everything that is destructive. You all know in your own lives how you have transformed yourself. I was surprised that in England, overnight people gave up drugs. They got realisation, from second day - no drugs at all. When the enlightenment takes place your attention itself becomes so beautiful. When we talk of Christ, He was a very great soul, I think He never understood human beings, they never understood Him. What He has said that, if your one eye does anything wrong, take it out. If your hand does any sinful thing, cut it out. I out or one hand cut. Same with Mohammed Sahib. What He said was why only make the men responsible for religion, why not make also the women. So He passed laws about women and He said, "alright, the women who have immorality in them should be put half way into the Mother earth and should be beaten and killed with stones." Now this was not for human beings, I tell you, this is for angels. They are so great that they never realised that you cannot be a Christian, haven't seen one man with one eye taken Muslim or a Jew. The Shariat was given to Jews by Moses which is now taken over by Muslims. It's a misunderstanding about human beings. I think they never had human realisation, they didn't know what's the problem with human beings. I haven't done anything, Kundalini Awakening has been in this country for thousands of year. We have had people like Adi Shankaracharya who has talked about it. Gyaneshwara in the 12th century has talked about it. But the people in charge of religion, Dharma Markandas, always "oh, that's no good, that's no good" and that's how we have forgotten. Even many people in the North do not know what is Kundalini, they think Kundalini is horoscope 'Kundali'. All this was kept in a very, secret way. Only the Nathpantis kept up the awakening, but the tradition was that one person could give realisation only to one person, one guru has only ane disciple, this was the tradition. At the time of Gyaneshwara in Maharashtra, in the 12th century, he requested his guru, his own brother, that allow me at least to talk about it. And in the 6th chapter of Gyaneshwari he wrote it, but again the Dharma Markanda said 'No'. How they tortured Adi Shankaracharya, how they tortured Gyaneshwara, Guru Nanaka, all of them. All these saints have never been recognised by these Dharma Markandas and they were in charge. General public understood them, but they were in charge of religion. Thus all these great heritages that we have, was all lost into wildemess. What Gandhiji had told Me after realisation, "You start your Sahaja Yoga." What Shastriji had told Me, "Let me solve the problem of Pakistan and of Kashmir and then You can start Your Sahaja Yoga." He used to talk to Me only of Sahaja Yoga, nothing else. But the problem is, if you go on postponing, it goes on like that. The essence of secularism also was lost completely, Gandhiji's secularism, because I stayed with DIVINE COOL BREEZE VOL VII Issue 7

 him in the ashram, he was an extremely strict man, the way he used to make every one get up at 4, have your bath, come for the puja, sit down for Prathana, but his quality was that what he said, what he did, he believed it, he followed it. There was no hypocrisy about it. Also he used to get into temper with people who would misbehave and I used to put some cool water on him. Because I was a little girl, he would really understand it and he used to say, "how is it, You keep so peaceful about all such things?" I said, "that's the solution, reaction is not the way we can really work it out". In this I would say, Buddha has said that you must forgive everyone. Forgiving itself solves the problem, by 90 percent at least, In Sahaja Yoga we have various activities, one of them is that we regard family as a very important thing. We don't believe in Sanyasa or anything to be given up and go to Himalayas because we have seen wherever these things are practised, it's very unnatural and people indulge into all kinds of immoral things. By force you cannot bring morality, what Shankara has said is true, what Vivekananda has said is true, is this part that you cannot force morality, then what should we do. This side is indulgences in the west, this side's just force according to the Muslims and the Jews, then what should we do? Both sides do not help you to be moral. You move from one end to another. Only way is to awaken the Kundalini which pushes your attention to the centre, pierces through your fontanelle bone area and gives you the connection of the Divine Power all around. Nobody believes, if you tell them there is a Divine Power. If you ask them who runs your heart, the doctor will say autonomous nervous system, but who is this 'Auto'? They don't know. Science cannot answer the question, who am 1?, Sahaja Yoga can, you are the pure spirit, you have to become the pure spirit. This is the answer and which has worked out in all of course it gives you health, also it gives you wealth because of your attention, but not the wealth as we see, but Laxmi's blessings that you keep a balance. It gives you creativity. I know of so many artists who have become world famous after coming to Sahaja Yoga. Musicians, artists, they have suddenly gained. It gives you wisdom, it gives you intelligence. Also I know of many children who have failed in their classes have become first class students. All of you can write one big book about the miracles you have seen in life. It is all there, it's truth, because this all you. Of pervading power is not only the ocean of knowledge, it's not only the ocean of bliss, compassion and love, but it is the ocean of miracles and so many miracles - have worked that now we have decided not to write any book, because how can you write so many volumes, from where to get so much money to write these volumes. But all of you know very well that there are so many miracles in Sahaja Yoga. Even you have seen the photograph of this all pervading power, which has light. It's said, that you cannot give realisation to people who are idiots, who are stupid, who are arrogant and adament. I think it has something to do with your previous lives that people are so ready to get realisation. Now I would like to quote the Russians. Russians in thousands are there, unbelievable. They don't know Me, I am a foreigner, but for them My programme is always in DIVINE COOL BREEZE VOL VII Issue 7 7

 a big stadium, all full. In the stadium they get realisation, they settle down with it, they practise it and they are Sahaja Yogis, and they get cured. Even the scientists, I was surprised, 2500 scientists were there for the conference where they conferred upon Me a honorable award for being the greatest scientist and the philosopher, can you believe it? They had given only ten awards, it's a very ancient university of St. Petersburg, I said, "how could you give Me this award, it is too much, because Einstein has got it also". They said, "What Einstein, what work he has done? He has worked on matter, You have worked on human beings". I was rather shy about the whole thing, I couldn't believe. Now the government of Russia has given Me award, can you imagine. My husband has got I think 135 awards KOCMG and all these. He said, "actually you should get an award, "I said, "for what, this is My love that is working, I have not paid for it nothing, it's just My love which pays me. This love is something, is a feeling of oneness with you, oneness with My country, oneness with your countries, oneness with you, your families, everything, It's something I always feel that they are part and parcel of My being. And that is how I remember you, I remember every person through the picture of their Kundalini, as it was and it is today. For which I don't exert, assert anything. Now people say You travel so much, My passport is so big, but I am just sitting there, I don't think, I travel. I am sitting as I am sitting here, I am sitting there, I can sit anywhere. Just not to think, to be in thoughtless awareness is the first sign that you have achieved your ascent. Nirvichar Samadhi. So many of you achieved it. On My birthday I don't know what to say, which comes and goes and comes and goes. 72 years have passed, I don't think about it. I also don't feel My age at all, in any way because I don't think about it. It is there, tilL I have to live I live, when I don't have to live I won't live, that's all. That's not My job, if there is anything My love wants to do is to give Realisation to everyone in the world, whatever they are. Only after self realisation I have seen people show their love for their country, immediately they know what's wrong with their country, immediately. They are the ones who told Me that "Mother this is wrorng with our country, another one will come and tell me "Mother, see this is wrong with our society" another with our politics. I was amazed, so far they could never see these things, they were so proud of their country that they could never see anything wrong with them. And here is somebody who has seen the wrong, what is destroying this great country. but it can never be destroyed. It's a country of eternal nature. Again and again, people of this quality will come up and save this country from complete destruction. Corruption of course is the worst thing but because they believe that it's a business. Actually they should know that it is through politics, people like Abraham Lincoln, Sadat, and so many people have such a love. I went to Turkey and Attaturk Kamal Pasha (whose life I had read when I was very young), he made these people so conscious about their own country. We should not try to copy others and get their products on our head which are just plastics. We should try to help our own country. Every portion of every country if it grows, the whole world will be strengthened. But by copying and by becoming slaves it's not going to in any way to improve. Till the Sahasrara was opened I used to wear pure Khadi, My husband was collector and all that and he's a little fond of clothes and he said, "at least take to something better", I said, DIVINE COOL BREEZE VOL VII IsSue 7

 "this is the best." I was wearing khadi throughout and I felt great satisfaction because this is My country where people make khadi in the villages. Gandhiji always used to say "now don't have too many machineries" always. Now I can see why he said, wear hand made things which are artistic and that's how you will help the country. Now in the west I was surprised people pay so much for hand made things because they cannot make it any more. Now the computer has come, the brain has given up, now all these things are coming. We can calculate very well because we studied in the old style of education, but now people can't calculate even two plus, what has happened to their brains.One should not take to artificial things too much. If you are in Sahaja Yoga, keep to natural things. I don'l say you become hippies or anything, nothing of the kind. In Sahaja Yoga you should be decently dressed, according to your country, nothing to be given up. But There's a struggle going on between matter and spirit. The other day somebody asked me "Mother, You always say make beautiful things with your hands and things so you also talk of materialism I said, you can use matter as an expression of your love, nothing else. "For example if I have to please you what should I do? i give you a very small thing and you think it's a very great blessings. For instance this carpet which is beautiful, if it is Mine, I may have to insure it. But supposing I don't think then all the joy of this carpet starts trickling down Me, making Me peaceful, completely. So thoughtless awareness if you establish, then you will realise that you can conquer materialism fully. Because you don't get any joy. You know the economic law is that in general wants are not satiable. You want today a house, a car, then helicopter, go on like that. But if you are in thoughtless awareness, whatever you have you enjoy. You enjoy should not take to artificiality because this artificial domination of matter kills our spirit. you everything in the present, you are not tense, not in the past, nor in the future. And this state is what you all have achieved, you have to also achieve another state of doubt, this is doubtless awareness.I am happy to see how your faces glowing with joy, peace and freedom. They are free to do what they like but they won't do anything wrong. I always give an example that supposing I am very obstinate and conditioned and I have a snake in My hand and you tell me "Mother, You have a snake in Your hand." But I am obstinate and there's darkness. I'll say "no, I don't believe you, it's a rope." Till that snake bites, hold onto it. But if there is little light, I drop that snake immediately. Now you have become your own guide and you have become your own masters. You don't need any master. This is a country where Mother is respected. It is country of Mother and understand the value of Mother. I think orily the Mother could do this kind of a job which is requiring so much of patience and love. If it was Father like Shr Krishna, He would have used His sudarshana and killed all of them, solved the problem. Christ would have crucified. You have to work it out, this is of course Ghor Kali Yuga, but this is the time only when people will be seeking the truth because of the problems of Kali Yuga and you will be blessed. It's written already. prophesised by seers. I have done nothing special. Only thing if you say. I knew about it since I was bom, I know about Myself. IfI have done anything it is to understand human beings, what's the problem. They follow VOL VII Issue 7 DIVINE COOL BREEZE

 Christ, they follow Mohammed Sahib, they follow Ram, they follow Shri Krishna, they follow everything but nothing inside, what is the matter? Nothing penetrates. That was the thing I thought they are not yet connected. They are to be connected to all this. Then only what I have done is to work out the permutations and combinations of human beings. That's not difficult because there are only mainly seven chakras one has to work it out, and how you can raise the Kundalini, to break the Sahasrara. It has worked, it's working out in thousands. My heart knows no bounds. In Kali Yuga nobody bothers about the Mother but the way My children are expressing their lave, I don't know how to express My gratitude. Just try to love others, that is much more than loving yourself. Just try to give love, just try to forgive. You will be amazed that you will realise how glorious you are, how great you are and suddenly you will discover that you are a global personality. This expansion is working out and I am hopeful that in My lifetime l'll see this world coming to some peaceful state. I have told you that the peace is within ourselves. It is not by organisation or by getting peace awards, it is within yourself, the peace which is to be established. I have seen people who have got peace awards, very big people, you can't go near them, you have to use a barge pole. That shows, I don't know from what angle they got peace awards, but those who have no peace within cannot create peace, you have to be peaceful and this peace gives you that witness state. Within that get annoyed, you don't get worried. This has been such a great occasion for Me because suddenly I find many doors are opening out and there are so many responses. So many mayors of different countries have written letters to Me, specially from Brazila who came to the airport and see the whole world like a drama and really you enjoy the humour of it, then you don't you gave Me the key of Brazilia and said, "Mother please keep Brazilia in Your attention so there is I didn't know what to say, what to answer, just tears came into My eyes, that's peace in Brazil. all, I was trying to control them. So many mayor, even in New York, Canada, Australia, they have written beautiful letters because they had some good experiences of Sahaja Yogis. It is you who can do the job, not Me. If I could do it, I would not have bothered about you but we have to have good channels. Whenever Sahaja Yogis go they create such a beautiful image of Sahaja Yoga that everybody is impressed, and that is how they have given us this kind of a beautiful response. "How are we to expedite and spread Sahaja Yoga fast." It's such a good question. I said, "it is spontaneous, we cannot force it, we respect everyone, but the way it is growing everywhere T have great hopes that one day all over the world it will spread very fast. Actually we don't plan anything, we cannot plan and it just works like that. Everything works so spontaneously that am surprised how they come, these people from Punjab and asked me "Mother why don't You come to Punjab," I said, "let there be shanti" because My husband doesn't allow Me to go to places like that. So next year it was all very peaceful. I went down and now I was told that in Punjab we are getting the maximum great number of Sahaja Yogis. Kashmir is the Adi Shakti's VOL VII Issue 7 DIVINE COOL BREEZE 10

 place and l'm sure one day we can work on Kashmir very well, In every religion there is some sort of stupid stuff pushed forward. Nobody could really stop because those people who are in charge of religion have no enlightenment. That's how I have seen people say in Japan they follow one religion and in China they follow another religion, both are just the same, one is Zen another is Tao. But the misunderstanding is that, they think we are exclusive. They are not, none of them are exclusive. Mohammed Sahib described all of them, from Abraham to Moses, to Christ to the Mother of Christ and he said, there have been more than one lakh Nabis on this earth but now why to feel we are exclusive. This exclusiveness comes from ego, Christ described all of them, Tao, the one religion that they follow in China is nothing but Sahaja Yoga. Tao is Kundalini. Zen is nothing but Sahaja, Zorashtra, everyone, and they are fighting among each other. But there are also some stupid things. Like I met one fellow from Bosnia, in Bosnia who was a Muslim with great gusto he was saying "we must die in the name of God." I said, "are you sure you are dying in the name of God?" He said, I'm very sure, alright. So it's written in Koran, (I think I have read Koran well), it's written in Koran that, if you die in the name of God and if you are put in a proper way, what you can say a grave, in a Islamic way, then your body will be resurrected at the time of Kyama (resurrection time), this is the resurrection time, this is the ressurection, Uthan, this is the time. And I told him "Are you mad? After 500 years what will be left in that grave? What bones are going to rise?" In Indian philosophy it's clearly said that your souls will rise. That seems sensible because soul is eternal. And then another question I asked, one that you believe in a formless God, Nirakar, why are you fighting for the land?" I feel so concerned, the way people are fighting for God, this thing, that thing, and killing themselves, do you think God will be happy with this kind of an idea? So one has to really give realisation otherwise, there's no solution, sir. There has to be transformation, otherwise there's no solution. One can talk, talk, talk for hours together, nothing works out unless and until you are transformed. So only thing is that for Me I feel that as long as possible I would strive to see that people get their self realisation and settle down. There's no hanky panky about it, there's no miracle of a stupid type but actually the person who is transformed, himself knows he is transformed. Then he gets all the powers. Like one light which is enlightened can enlighten many people. Now do you mean to say I have given realisation to all of them? Maybe some, but not all. Even the people now who are living in Delhi city go abroad and give realisation. They ga to villages also and give realisation. All over it is spreading like that. But when he asked Me the question I have to just say that all the Sahaja Yogis have to realise what they are, they have to know, they should know their identity. They are now the lights, and they have to spread the light. They are busy with business, they are busy with politics, they are busy with this, it's all there. I am also very busy, I have a family, I have grand-children, I have My children, I look after My family also. At the same time the main attention should be in giving realisations to others, that's the only way we can expedite. A person who is not a realised soul, who'll start talking on religion, he'll start collecting money or I don't know what he will do. But you people have that essence in you which you have to give to everyone and nothing more enjoyable VOL VII Issue 7 DIVINE COOL BREEZE 11

 than giving realisations to others. You may get the wealth of the whole world, it cannot be compared with that. I would request all the Sahaja Yogis whether they are women or men, even children, can spread Sahaja Yoga because they have got the powers in them to spread it. They have the shakti to do it. That should be a case not only for India, but all over the world it can be done, and this is the promise as a present You have to give me on My birthday, if you think it's nice. Thank you very much. MEDICAL CONFERENCE H. H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI St. Petersburg, Russia 14-4-94 (Synopsis) I am so much surprised that scientists are talking of morality, is something unusual. It's only in Russia people can do that. Because science is Amoral and it has nothing to do with spirituality. I find that you people are so advanced that you want to know about spirituality. Spirituality is meta- science. The morality sense has come now to science and scientific research that they are realising that there are gene in the Human beings which get you to mutation. There are two genes specifically, which look after our morality. With one gene mutation we do sin against the Mother. Sin against the Mother is that you indulgė into things which are immoral. Everything that is self destructive. This self destruction is what we call immorality. The second gene in Human beings goes into mutation when you do the sin against the father. Against the father the mutation takes place when we are aggressive, violent, we are thieves or do things which are improper in the legal way. These genes get into mutation and then person starts doing all kinds of things. Either he starts destroying himself or he starts destroying others. Thank God they have now reached the state of genes in medical science. Tam sure they will find out these two mutation bound genes in Human Beings. Only through traditions of moral life can these be preserved. In the democratic countries, freedom was given, so they went absolutely haywire. These two genes have gone into such mutation, that people do not even know that they are doing something wrong. In a way science has shown that going beyond limits of science one can get reactions. When there is no limits of production of anything which is scientifically found out, people go on producing things like atom bomb, hydrogen bomb, all kinds of things. Now there is a big movement to stop the production of these bombs. This aggressiveness which started in scientific advancement went too far. They dominated so many countries and destroyed so many people. DIVINE COOL. BREEZE VOL VII Issue 7 12

 The second part which is the sin against the Mother where people have taken to drugs, alcohol, womanising, all kinds of wrong things. In America you cannot talk against homosexuality, because homosexuals gave votes for Clinton to be elected. Now with this Aids reaction what is happening is that they have now become like martyrs, they think it is a very big thing they have done because their ego now is hurt, they do not want to admit that they have done mistake, that they have got this Aids, this horrible disease. But who creates the genes and who puts them into mutation? In science there is no answer yet. Here you see within yourself - this is the mechanism. This is a very subtle builtin system within us. You are all scientists here, so you should have an open mind. Whatever I am telling you today is before you some - sort of a hypothesis. If it is true then you have to accept it as honest people, because it is for the benevolence of you as individuals, for the benevolence of your country and benevolence of the whole world. Here you see a triangular bone which is called as "sacrum" which Greeks knew -as a sacred bone. In this bone lies a power of pure desire, all other desires are not pure. Today you want to buy a house, then a car, then a helicopter, you go on buying, you are never satisfied. According to economics, wants are not satisfied in general. This is the pure desire within us. You may be aware of it or may not. Now what is the pure desire? The pure desire is to be the spirit. You are not this body, you are not this mind, you are not this intellect, you are not these emotions, your ego, but you are pure spirit. In the evolutionary state you have reached a state which we call as human beings. But it's not the end of the journey. Even in science you find out something, then somebody else comes and says no, that's not so. We do not know the absolute truth. If we had known the absolute truth there would have been no quarrels, no fights, no war. This is meta science, but it was known in My country thousands of years back. If I have done anything, is this that I have brought this knowledge to the masses. It's nothing great, all human problems create world problems, and all fugal problems come from these centres, which are our foundations. These centres act on the left and on the right. The left side sympathetic and the right side sympathetic are not doing the same work. They do two types, absolutely different. In the centre is the parasympathetic nervous system. It is meta- science. I need not tell doctors, they know that when you want to run you can increase the beat of the heart. In emergency sympathetic acts. But the heart is brought to normal by parasym- pathetic. Now on top of the brain these channels go and create from the left side, they cross over in the optic chiasma. And they created a balloon like thing. From left side activity you get your conditionings. This can be called as psyche but psyche is ugly word. Say a Mother is nursing the child and the child is very happy, but she turms him round so he doesn't like it. So the like of ego starts, then she scolds him, "don't do like this." Then the first line of conditioning starts. Thus we live either on ego or on conditioning. We see these beautiful flowers, but they are miracles, aren't they. Who creates these flowers? If you ask a doctor, who runs your heart. hell say it is the autonomous nervous system. But who is this auto? This they cannot answer. Now this Kundalini which is in the triangular bone is your mother, is your individual mother. VOL VII Issue 7 DIVINE COOL BREEZE 13

 She knows everything about you, she's a doctor, and also a psychologist, and a scientist. She thinks, she understands, above all she loves. Everyone of you have this power; this power when awakened passes through six centres above. These six centres are responsible for your physical, emotional, mental and spiritual being. The second centre is called swadisthana which is on the physical side manifest as aortic plexus. Only we'll deal with one today and you'll be amazed how many diseases can be cured if this one centre can be enlightened. The function of this centre, because it moves and can also contract, is like a lotus. The function is to look after liver, pancreas, spleen, kidneys and intestine. It has another very important work, is to convert the fat for the use of the grey cells. Now, the scientists have not reached that point. A person who thinks too much, is futuristic, he plans. Such a person uses the energy of his grey cells, isn't it? This centre becomes concerned about the supply of the energy. So all these organs start suffering from starvation. First attack is on liver. The function of liver is to deliver the poison from the body into the blood. I'm talking in general. Now what happens that the heat accumulates in the liver. Such a person, starts becoming thin because there is poison in the liver. He becomes hot tempered. He develops skin troubles. Then this heat can start moving to other organs because other organs are also suffering. When it goes to the pancreas people start suffering from a disease called Diabetes. Diabetes can only happen to people who are futuristic, who sit on the seat, plan things. In My country the farmers take at least six spoons of sugar in one cup of tea, they don't get Diabetes because whatever they earn they spend and sleep off. This disease is more in the west. In the west people have insurances, all kinds of problems if they even have a small little thing. It's a mad race of insurance. Now the other, spleen is the most important. I don't know about Russia but in the other western countries people sleep very late. They have to attend drinking parties, dancing parties, maddening parties. Then they get up very early, somehow or other they dress up hectically and start reading newspapers. Now our spleen is a speedometer. It creates red blood cells as you kow very well when there is an emergency. But the life is so hectic and then to read newspaper in the morning, you get such a shock that this poor spleen starts wobling. Then they get into the car and there is a traffic. They get upset and go to the office and the boss starts shouting at them. They are just slaves of the time. Even if somebody is one minute late they will shout for fifteen minutes. This poor spleen doesn't know how to cope with this hectic that, truthfully, personality. That also become hectic and vulnerable to blood cancer. Imust tell you that blood cancer has been cured by Sahaja Yoga, without changing blood, without doing anything. Third thing is the kidney. With this heat the kidney also coagulates, so you cannot pass your urine. Then you go for dialysis and die bankrupt. Now this can also be cured by this Kundalini awakening. There is no need at all to go in for dialysis. People get constipated, some develop terrible constipation at the end of the large intestine. Apart from that, when this heat rises above, it reaches the heart. If there is a young boy who is drinking too much, who is maybe playing or something very hard game, and who thinks too much, such a young boy can get a heart attack tennis which is always Fatal. Also people get it in old age as this heat rises and contracts the heart. VOL VII Issue 7 DIVINE COOL BREEZE 14

 Then this heat rises even above and goes to the brain and constricts your arteries and you get concussion of the brain on the left hand side. Left hand, because it crosses over and one gets paralysis on the right hand side, there's a reaction. There are diseases on the left hand side also. Now when it is on the left hand side your diseases are of a more serious nature. Left side gives you psychosomatic diseases, all incurable diseases, right from muscular diseases, cancers, heart angina, madness, lunacy, out of which psychosomatic are these diseases and lunacy is just somatic. All other are psychosomatic, they cone from viruses. Now on the left side is all our past since our creation, so there are many dead vegetables which have gone out of the circulation of evolution. Dead animals, dead human beings. When the attention starts moving towards the left, towards the past or you get a shock or you start feeling sorry for something then it goes to the left. Russia has more left side I feel because of whatever was the political situation before. One has to be in the centre because if you go to the left there these viruses catch you or some dead animals will catch you, some micro animals might catch you or some Human beings who are dead. So the possessions take place. With the awakening of the Kundalini your attention is drawn in the centre. All the religions were created to create a balance. not to go to extremes. But why the balance? Because with the balance only you can ascend. All living work is done by aill pervading Divine power. In the Bible it is described as the cool breeze of the Holy Ghost. In the Koran as Ruh. And in Indian philosophy it is described as Param Chaitanya. Adi Shankaracharya said, "Salilam, Salilam " means cool, cool. You have to become one with that. That is the Yog. Once you are united with that all pervading power then you become empowered. Our thoughts rise and fall, again rise and fall, and we are jumping on the cusp of the thoughts. We cannot be in the present, and the reality is in the present, when this Kundalini rises over this centre on the optic chiasma, she creates present in you, becomes silent, thoughtlessly aware You are aware but thoughtless. You jumnp out of your problems also. If you are standıng in the water you are afraid of the high waves, but if you jump out of it into a boat you can see that, you can enjoy them, but if you learn how to swim, you can jump in and save many. So you become into next state that is doubtlessly aware. You have so many powers potential in you, they are awakened. In India many artists have become world famous, many painters have become world famous. It is a bliss, actually you enter into the kingdom of God and all the time you feel you are being looked after, guided, protected, that is your right, we call it Sahaja Yoga. "Saha" means with, "ja" is born, means it is born with you, this right to be in this Yoga, this union, with the Divine. you become divine automatically, you become absolutely moral, you become righteous, you enjoy all your virtues, you become your own guide in the light of the spirit. Overnight people have givern up their drugs. This is the last breakthrough of our evolution. Can you imagine Christ addressing you people like this? They crucified Him. Christ was a great DIVINECOOL BREEZE VOL VII Issue 7 15

 Divine personality, very great. He didn't understand human beings I think, because He was so pure. What He has said that if your eye commits a sin, take it out. If your right hand commits a sin, cut it. In the west everybody would have been without hands and eyes if they had followed Him. Then Mohammed Sahib thought that Christ has said about the men to be that strict, but for women he didn't say anything. So He said about women. I just thought that first let them have little light. Now supposing I am obstinate, I have a snake in My hand, and I'm standing in the darkness, I don't want to listen to you. You go on telling Me there is a snake. I will not leave it till it bites Me. But if there is a little light, immediately I'll leave it Myself. That is what I thought that Human beings, if they get little light they will immediately change, and it has worked. I never dreamt that l'l be able to address such people in Russia. It's really destined I think that such Divine people should be sitting before Me. In this short lecture I'm sorry I can't tell you everything about Sahaja Yoga. In English language only I must have given 5000 lectures, but lecture is just a mental acrobat, you have to go beyond it, and achieve a state of enlightenment. Enlightenment doesn't mean any brand, like born-again or anything. it is actualisation and a becoming. It's not just talk, talk, it is also not blind faith, this is an actual happening. This happening has to take place, for which you don't have to pay. It is a living process. When you put a seed in the Mother earth, it sprouts. How much does the Mother earth take from us in money? Because it is built in the Mother earth to sprout and built in the seed to be sprouted. It's a living process of spontanity. Nobody can explain why are we on this earth, nobody can say why when the foetus starts growing why don't we throw it away, as all the foreign things have to be thrown away out of the body? It is preserved, looked after, till it has to be thrown, it is kept in the womb. Who does that? The other day somebody asked Me "why am I on this Earth?" I said, "to become Divine and to enter into the kingdom of God." So he said, "How will that help me?" I told him" first it will not only help you physically, mentally, emotionally, spiritually but it will help others." On your finger tips you can feel your centres. On your finger tips you can feel the centres of others. Otherwise half of the people die only during diagnosis. On your finger tips you can find out the trouble. They talk the language of centres. You can feel the vibrations of anyone whether dead, alive or far away. Now if you know how to correct, you can correct your centres and correct the centres of others, because who is the other, you have become collective now, that means the microcosm has become a macrocosm, or a drop has become the sea. This is your capacity, this is your glory, this is what you have to have as your own. No obligation, it's all love and compassion. The power is of love, of Divine love, of pure love without any lust or greed. We have never used the power of love. Now the time has come and one day I am sure this Russia will be the leader of the whole world. This knowledge is coming say from an Indian person or India, but science has come from the West, so it doesn't matter, if it is coming from the East why should people think it something low. All the wise people will realise that they are the one. enter, you May God Bless You All ! DIVINE COOL BREEZE VOL VII Isue 7 16



----------------------

1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_7.pdf-page-0.txt 
 COOL BREEZE
DIVINE
Issue 7
Vol VII
All Sahaja Yogis, men, women & children can spred Sahaja Yoga
because they have the Shakti to do it, nat only for India but for the whole werld
H.H. Shri Mataji
Felicitations 21-3-95
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_7.pdf-page-1.txt 
 DIVINE COOL BREEZE
VOL. II
Issue 7
Contents
1. Holi Message - Sahaja Temple, Delhi
2. Birthday Puja Talk - Delhi
3. Felicitations Talk - Delhi
4. Medical Conference- St.Peterburg (Synopsis)
Editedby
Yogi Mahajan
Divine Cool Breeze, 9 Bhagyachintamani Soc. Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 4 |1029
Computex Graphics, I12 High Tech Indl., Caves Road, Jogeshwari East, Bombay 400 060
Publishedby
Printed by
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_7.pdf-page-2.txt 
 HOLI MESSAGE
H.H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
Sahaja Temple Delhi 17-3-95 (Synopsis)
People Celebrate Holi only on the outside, the real Holi is to be burnt within first. This means the
negativity within has to be burnt first. Delhi being the capital is full of politics. Sahaja Yogis absorb
this politics and it spreads in the Sahaja collectivity like flu. We cannot ascend by it. We should
not form any groups or believe to any caste. Some one like Naradmuni comes along and fans
the flames of animosity one against the other. But we should not play into the hands of such
people. We should realize that our relationship is with Mother only
Delhi people should not fall into wrong identifications, like they belong to Delhi, etc. When we
are talking of the ocean how can we name or count the drops that form the ocean Oniy giving
importance to your own people is not a good thing. Don't gossip and don't listen to gossip. Some
people are gossip mongers - ignore them. People will be able to see through them.
Keep everyone happy.
We should wash away all our sins of this life time so that next life we come as saints.
Do not allow negativity to creep in. Firstly, negativity comes trom aggression secondly from
badhas, but thirdly from hypocracy where you deceive yourself. This negativity is hidden within
so we cannot see it, but we go on doing the wrong thing. Shri Krishna said, first burn the holi
you get from anger, desire for vengence, badhas, jealousy after that you celebrate the festival
of holi. Don't be jealous or pretend all the tine. Don't do this otherwise you will get badhas. The
best way to overcome negativity is to forgive. Say the Mantra "i forgive". our greatest shakti is
forgiveness.
The door of Sahaja Yoga is open for everyone: All kinds of people come in. If some one tries
to deviate you from the path of truth, shun such person. Beware that you are not being influenced
by negative people.
If you truly believe that I am the Goddess, then more than My powers try to imbibe some of My
qualities.
When we introspect we cleanse ourself. Negativity spreads very fast in colletivity, on the otherhand
one strong Sahaja Yogi can transform the entire collectivity. This is the miracle of Sahaja Yoga.
Don't look at other's faults. Mother is there, She knows about everyone. You should only look
at your own faults.
VOL VII IsSIe 7
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_7.pdf-page-3.txt 
 When you burn the inner negativity, you become pure gold then you can give joy to others.
Increase your power of forgiveness then your right side aggressiveness will go. People aggress
on Shri Mataji to remove their badhas. but you should say how dare any badha stays' when a
person has a badha he should not associate with any other with a badha.
Some people assert a right on Sahaja Yoga like one Sahaja Yogi had a problem because there
was bandha in the house. Shri Mataji told the person to shift from that house. That person did
not shift but insisted on constantly Phoning Shri Mataji to remove his badhas. If people do not
listen to Shri Mataji how will the badhas go.
People with badhas should keep away from Shri Mataji for a year and stay in the background,
otherwise the badha will not leave.
Protocol towards Shri Mataji is very important for your ascent.
Inner awareness and a good attention is very important for burning your inner negativity. Only
when it is burnt can you ascend on Nirmala tattwa. Then you celebrate the real holi, enjoy and
play with colour. Sahaja yoga's holi should be the holi of Shri Krishna. But people do the opposite
of Shri Krishna. Shri Krishna never took any bhang.
Our aggressive nature and 'bhoot' is the same thing. To enter the sea is easy but to swim in
it is difficult. The same is the case with Sahaja Yoga. Those who want to stay in Sahaja Yoga
should increase their Satguna: Such a person shines with the power of truth.
Talking loo much interest in food is not a good thing. I am not fond of any particular food. I only
taste delicasies to please you. Too much interest in food spoils the attention. The expression
of one's likes and dislikes is not good. It is the ego.
Christ has said. "hate the sin, love the sinner" love cleanses everything. Sahaja Yoga will spread
through love only. Increase your love. Look to the comfort of the spirit, not the body. First the
leader. his wife should clearne himself and then through love they should spread it to others.
Sahaja Yoga is spreading very fast but people are not deep. You grow in depths by your
dedication. Prayer should come from the heart, it should not be lip service. If you want to find
pearls then
you depth. Go on burning the negativity within. Likewise you can also burn the negativity of others
because you are their leader.
you have to dive deep in the ocean. Keep on going deeper and deeper, increasing
This is the essence of Holi.
May God Bless You.
VOL VII Issue 7
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_7.pdf-page-4.txt 
 BIRTHDAY PUJA TALK
H.H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
20-3-1995, Delhi (Synopsis)
In western civilization suddenly I find people have taken to a very licentious, vulgar, despicable
life. I can't believe how can they be so stupid and idiotic. It seems they have no wisdom even
to see that this is stupidity. Thank God you have achieved your self realisation, you got the light.
you are so transformed, you look so beautiful, and that you have given up all those funny ideas
of freedom. It is so clear cut. I
out people who have such wise understanding of pure love and respect for your own purity As
if suddenly you have come out of that darkness and have bathed in the light of the Divine. It's
not possible otherwise. See the history of the western countries, they never had very great kings.
In England a king killed seven wives. In India if one wite was killed he would have been killed
first, before he killed the second one. Despite all that kind of a history and that kind of a vulgarity
that has been going on for days together, suddenly you people have come up like lotuses and
have made those countries so fragrant and so beautiful. But now thhey are afraid because they
believe in licentiousness, vulgarity, they think it is their freedom. So they do attack you, but you
don't know what to say. that in those western countries to find
are not to be bothered because you have achieved something that is real, that is for eternal life.
They are supposed to be Christians. Jews and also Muslims there. Among all of them I am
surprised to see how they were interpreted, these three great religions, in the most contradictory
way. For example Christ has said that if you make any sin with you eyes, then remove your eyes
yourself. If one's hand does anything wrong. then cut that hand Ihave never seen anybody
without an eye or without a hand in the whole of these Christian kingdoms, nowhere. They can
cut others, but not their own. It's very difficult to be a Christian, because this is an imnpossible
situation. For that we can say that this was for angels. must be, for the fallen angels that you
take out your eye and cut you hand. Then Mohammed Sahib has said, he thought that why only
the men are handled by Christ, so he says no, not that you cut it but let others cut your hand
and take out your eye. And for women it is so that they should be buried in the mother earth
half way and should be stoned. Think of American women, what would have happened to them.
So very difficult to follow Islam, it's impossible. They were very great people, very pure and they
thought that this was the only way. People can be kept pure. No. on the contrary with all these
compulsion they become extremely immoral, this suppression doesn't help. The Islamic laws,
shariat, was actually given by Moses to Jews, the Jews would not accept, they were sensible to
say we can't accept it. It was too much
So, that was taken over by Mohammed Sahib, better put it for these people. But with all this people
become extremely immoral, extremely quarrelsome and go to the other side and such an
imbalance is created. But after self realisation the Sahaja culture is born within you. With this
Sahaja culture you come into balance and people are surprised at the western Sahaja Yogis,
saying Mother. how have you made their eyes so pure, how can they get rid of these bad habits
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
VOL VII Isue 7
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_7.pdf-page-5.txt 
 of looking at every woman or every man, what have you done to their eyes, how have they
become. So pure? It is the light of your own spirit which is shining through your eyes. It's very
important.
The wornen in the west have to understand what is Sahaja Yoga, not dominating anyone. Here
the women are dominated, not always, but to a great extent. And there what you find is women
are dominating. Firstly they believe in divorce and they try to harrass people with that. This
domination comes from their upbringing, but Sahaja Yoga should change completely your
and there should be no domination, but a complete understanding about which I have told you
many a times and explained to you. Still I am overwhelmed by the response and on behalf of
the Divine power I would like to thank you very much. It's really a new race that has come up,
really. Somewhere, somebody goes wrong or something goes wrong, doesn't matter. On the
whole, it's such a beautiful race of people, even in dreams people could not have believed it, they
don't yet believe, but it has happened. You must now have an enlightened faith which we call
as "Shraddha". With that enlightened faith l am sure you will adhere to the emancipation of human
beings, it's your duty now. It is all given free, of course Sahaja Yoga is free, you don't have to
pay anything, but you have to give to others, that is very important. Which is free to you and
you cannot keep it to yourself. If you keep it to yourself, you can never be happy.
ideas
Where people have become collective and they told me "Mother, there's no greater joy than seeing
people getting self realisation." That is the greatest joy one has, and this is what one has to have
in your mind. Of course there are some people who start criticising Sahaja Yoga, why this, why
that, all nonsense, but actually if you see everybody who is a deep Sahaja Yogi and wants that
Sahaja Yoga should spread in their own countries, and then to see that it is accepted all over
the world. It is such a wisdom which has come into them otherwise one fellow told me "Mother,
I was only worried about my own house, my family, motorcar and this and that, now I've forgotten
all that, now I'm only worried how will I be able to give this joy to others, I cannot be happy
otherwise." And that's what has happened. and I'm very thankful to you, all of you who have come
here all the way to celebrate My birthday and this is just your love and affection for Me and I also
love you very much.
May God Bless You
don't know on My birthday which diety's puja you are doing. It's wihere there are all deities, all
of them are there, with all of them being warshipped together it works out much faster. I think,
As when you all of you are together, things work out much faster.
May God Bless You.
VOL VILIssue 7
DIVINE COOLBRIEZI
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_7.pdf-page-6.txt 
 FELICITATIONSTALK
BY H.H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
21.3.95 Delhi (Synopsis)
"The great son of India, Mr Seshan, all the respected friends, guests and all My children Sahaja
Yogis.
It is true that Chaitanya organises many things which are most unexpected. I have been a great
admirer of Mr Seshan. I
My mother sacrificed everything to get freedom in this country, also as you know about My life,
howI worked very hard as a young girl but when we got our freedom, I don't know what happened
to us. We forgot many things. One of them was Gandhiji, with whom I have lived as a little child,
who loved Me very much and he said, "let our country be free first, people who are slaves cannot
talk of emanicipation." We became free quite alright but then I don't understand how people did
not realise their responsibility. Some of them who were very sincere thought it's impossible to
work out anything in this country. Then to My surprise I saw Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri who was
a realized soul, he knew Me very well and I was hoping that he would work out the spiritual side
of our country, and we'll try to bring a great name for this great Yoga Bhoomi. India, as you know
is really a country where so many saints, incanations, poets of such high understanding and deep
feeling were born, He died and I felt that now all our greatness, all our traditions, all our culture
which came to us from saints. Gradually the deterioration started. When I saw I was really amazed
how people are taking to things which are destructive for our country.
saw a new rising son in India. As you krnow My past that My father,
When I read about Mr Seshan, again a tremendous hope started kindling to My heart.
My husband is another person who's birthday is today, who is not here. He sacrificed everything
for honesty. For him honesty was so important. He was wedded to it, I mean to such an extent
that if I tell you story you won't believe to what extent he was honest. One day, I had gone to
a library and I was coming out (in Lucknow he was city magistrate at that time), it was raining
heavily, there were no rickshaws, nothing, and as government servants you are really poor, you
can't afford many things. Here he came on a police jeep so I stopped him, he said, "I can't stop,
I'm going for important work and I can't take yau in the jeep", I said, "alright you go ahead, doesn't
matter." Because patnotism is very important.
If you have no feeling for your country you cannot do anything good. Any kind of sacrifice is not
sufficient to satisfy that desire to do somethıng for your country. One thing if our politicians know.
that they are not in the business. they are not here to make money, but to get the fame.. Even
today you take the name of Lal Bahadur Shastri people just stop thinking, just they get lost. I
know about My father, same thing. I forced My husband to write a book about Shastriji. You'll
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
VOL VII Isstue 7
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_7.pdf-page-7.txt 
 be surprised as soon as it was published, all the books were already sold, sold all over the world.
So one thing one must realise and have hope that innately there are so many people in this world
who are seeking the truth and who want peace of mind and the global peace, it's a fact. It's true,
there is violence. People have tortured us also and troubled us, it's alright, better to forgive,
because they are ignorant and they are in darkness. What we can do is to give them light. If
you give them the light they will throw away everything that is destructive. You all know in your
own lives how you have transformed yourself. I was surprised that in England, overnight people
gave up drugs. They got realisation, from second day - no drugs at all. When the enlightenment
takes place your attention itself becomes so beautiful.
When we talk of Christ, He was a very great soul, I think He never understood human beings,
they never understood Him. What He has said that, if your one eye does anything wrong, take
it out. If your hand does any sinful thing, cut it out. I
out or one hand cut. Same with Mohammed Sahib. What He said was why only make the men
responsible for religion, why not make also the women. So He passed laws about women and
He said, "alright, the women who have immorality in them should be put half way into the Mother
earth and should be beaten and killed with stones." Now this was not for human beings, I tell
you, this is for angels. They are so great that they never realised that you cannot be a Christian,
haven't seen one man with one eye taken
Muslim or a Jew.
The Shariat was given to Jews by Moses which is now taken over by Muslims. It's a
misunderstanding about human beings. I think they never had human realisation, they didn't know
what's the problem with human beings. I haven't done anything, Kundalini Awakening has been
in this country for thousands of year. We have had people like Adi Shankaracharya who has
talked about it. Gyaneshwara in the 12th century has talked about it. But the people in charge
of religion, Dharma Markandas, always "oh, that's no good, that's no good" and that's how we
have forgotten. Even many people in the North do not know what is Kundalini, they think Kundalini
is horoscope 'Kundali'. All this was kept in a very, secret way. Only the Nathpantis kept up the
awakening, but the tradition was that one person could give realisation only to one person, one
guru has only ane disciple, this was the tradition. At the time of Gyaneshwara in Maharashtra,
in the 12th century, he requested his guru, his own brother, that allow me at least to talk about
it. And in the 6th chapter of Gyaneshwari he wrote it, but again the Dharma Markanda said 'No'.
How they tortured Adi Shankaracharya, how they tortured Gyaneshwara, Guru Nanaka, all of them.
All these saints have never been recognised by these Dharma Markandas and they were in
charge. General public understood them, but they were in charge of religion. Thus all these great
heritages that we have, was all lost into wildemess. What Gandhiji had told Me after realisation,
"You start your Sahaja Yoga." What Shastriji had told Me, "Let me solve the problem of Pakistan
and of Kashmir and then You can start Your Sahaja Yoga." He used to talk to Me only of Sahaja
Yoga, nothing else. But the problem is, if you go on postponing, it goes on like that.
The essence of secularism also was lost completely, Gandhiji's secularism, because I stayed with
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
VOL VII Issue 7
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_7.pdf-page-8.txt 
 him in the ashram, he was an extremely strict man, the way he used to make every one get up
at 4, have your bath, come for the puja, sit down for Prathana, but his quality was that what he
said, what he did, he believed it, he followed it. There was no hypocrisy about it. Also he used
to get into temper with people who would misbehave and I used to put some cool water on him.
Because I was a little girl, he would really understand it and he used to say, "how is it, You keep
so peaceful about all such things?" I said, "that's the solution, reaction is not the way we can
really work it out". In this I would say, Buddha has said that you must forgive everyone. Forgiving
itself solves the problem, by 90 percent at least,
In Sahaja Yoga we have various activities, one of them is that we regard family as a very important
thing. We don't believe in Sanyasa or anything to be given up and go to Himalayas because
we have seen wherever these things are practised, it's very unnatural and people indulge into
all kinds of immoral things. By force you cannot bring morality, what Shankara has said is true,
what Vivekananda has said is true, is this part that you cannot force morality, then what should
we do. This side is indulgences in the west, this side's just force according to the Muslims and
the Jews, then what should we do? Both sides do not help you to be moral. You move from
one end to another. Only way is to awaken the Kundalini which pushes your attention to the centre,
pierces through your fontanelle bone area and gives you the connection of the Divine Power all
around. Nobody believes, if you tell them there is a Divine Power. If you ask them who runs
your heart, the doctor will say autonomous nervous system, but who is this 'Auto'? They don't
know.
Science cannot answer the question, who am 1?, Sahaja Yoga can, you are the pure spirit, you
have to become the pure spirit. This is the answer and which has worked out in all of
course it gives you health, also it gives you wealth because of your attention, but not the wealth
as we see, but Laxmi's blessings that you keep a balance. It gives you creativity. I know of so
many artists who have become world famous after coming to Sahaja Yoga. Musicians, artists,
they have suddenly gained. It gives you wisdom, it gives you intelligence. Also I know of many
children who have failed in their classes have become first class students. All of you can write
one big book about the miracles you have seen in life. It is all there, it's truth, because this all
you. Of
pervading power is not only the ocean of knowledge, it's not only the ocean of bliss, compassion
and love, but it is the ocean of miracles and so many miracles - have worked that now we have
decided not to write any book, because how can you write so many volumes, from where to get
so much money to write these volumes. But all of you know very well that there are so many
miracles in Sahaja Yoga. Even you have seen the photograph of this all pervading power, which
has light.
It's said, that you cannot give realisation to people who are idiots, who are stupid, who are arrogant
and adament. I think it has something to do with your previous lives that people are so ready
to get realisation. Now I would like to quote the Russians. Russians in thousands are there,
unbelievable. They don't know Me, I am a foreigner, but for them My programme is always in
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
VOL VII Issue 7
7
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_7.pdf-page-9.txt 
 a big stadium, all full. In the stadium they get realisation, they settle down with it, they practise
it and they are Sahaja Yogis, and they get cured. Even the scientists, I was surprised, 2500
scientists were there for the conference where they conferred upon Me a honorable award for
being the greatest scientist and the philosopher, can you believe it? They had given only ten
awards, it's a very ancient university of St. Petersburg, I said, "how could you give Me this award,
it is too much, because Einstein has got it also". They said, "What Einstein, what work he has
done? He has worked on matter, You have worked on human beings". I was rather shy about
the whole thing, I couldn't believe. Now the government of Russia has given Me award, can you
imagine. My husband has got I think 135 awards KOCMG and all these. He said, "actually you
should get an award, "I said, "for what, this is My love that is working, I have not paid for it nothing,
it's just My love which pays me. This love is something, is a feeling of oneness with you, oneness
with My country, oneness with your countries, oneness with you, your families, everything, It's
something I always feel that they are part and parcel of My being. And that is how I remember
you, I remember every person through the picture of their Kundalini, as it was and it is today. For
which I don't exert, assert anything. Now people say You travel so much, My passport is so big,
but I am just sitting there, I don't think, I travel. I am sitting as I am sitting here, I am sitting there,
I can sit anywhere. Just not to think, to be in thoughtless awareness is the first sign that you
have achieved your ascent. Nirvichar Samadhi. So many of you achieved it. On My birthday
I don't know what to say, which comes and goes and comes and goes. 72 years have passed,
I don't think about it. I also don't feel My age at all, in any way because I don't think about it.
It is there, tilL I have to live I live, when I don't have to live I won't live, that's all. That's not My
job, if there is anything My love wants to do is to give Realisation to everyone in the world, whatever
they are. Only after self realisation I have seen people show their love for their country,
immediately they know what's wrong with their country, immediately. They are the ones who told
Me that "Mother this is wrorng with our country, another one will come and tell me "Mother, see
this is wrong with our society" another with our politics. I was amazed, so far they could never
see these things, they were so proud of their country that they could never see anything wrong
with them. And here is somebody who has seen the wrong, what is destroying this great country.
but it can never be destroyed. It's a country of eternal nature. Again and again, people of this
quality will come up and save this country from complete destruction.
Corruption of course is the worst thing but because they believe that it's a business. Actually
they should know that it is through politics, people like Abraham Lincoln, Sadat, and so many
people have such a love. I went to Turkey and Attaturk Kamal Pasha (whose life I had read when
I was very young), he made these people so conscious about their own country.
We should not try to copy others and get their products on our head which are just plastics. We
should try to help our own country. Every portion of every country if it grows, the whole world
will be strengthened. But by copying and by becoming slaves it's not going to in any way to
improve. Till the Sahasrara was opened I used to wear pure Khadi, My husband was collector
and all that and he's a little fond of clothes and he said, "at least take to something better", I said,
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
VOL VII IsSue 7
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_7.pdf-page-10.txt 
 "this is the best." I was wearing khadi throughout and I felt great satisfaction because this is My
country where people make khadi in the villages. Gandhiji always used to say "now don't have
too many machineries" always. Now I can see why he said, wear hand made things which are
artistic and that's how you will help the country. Now in the west I was surprised people pay so
much for hand made things because they cannot make it any more. Now the computer has come,
the brain has given up, now all these things are coming. We can calculate very well because
we studied in the old style of education, but now people can't calculate even two plus, what has
happened to their brains.One should not take to artificial things too much. If you are in Sahaja
Yoga, keep to natural things. I don'l say you become hippies or anything, nothing of the kind.
In Sahaja Yoga you should be decently dressed, according to your country, nothing to be given
up. But
There's a struggle going on between matter and spirit. The other day somebody asked me
"Mother, You always say make beautiful things with your hands and things so you also talk of
materialism I said, you can use matter as an expression of your love, nothing else. "For example
if I have to please you what should I do? i give you a very small thing and you think it's a very
great blessings. For instance this carpet which is beautiful, if it is Mine, I may have to insure it.
But supposing I don't think then all the joy of this carpet starts trickling down Me, making Me
peaceful, completely. So thoughtless awareness if you establish, then you will realise that you
can conquer materialism fully. Because you don't get any joy. You know the economic law is
that in general wants are not satiable. You want today a house, a car, then helicopter, go on
like that. But if you are in thoughtless awareness, whatever you have you enjoy. You enjoy
should not take to artificiality because this artificial domination of matter kills our spirit.
you
everything in the present, you are not tense, not in the past, nor in the future. And this state is
what you all have achieved, you have to also achieve another state of doubt, this is doubtless
awareness.I am happy to see how your faces glowing with joy, peace and freedom. They are
free to do what they like but they won't do anything wrong. I always give an example that
supposing I am very obstinate and conditioned and I have a snake in My hand and you tell me
"Mother, You have a snake in Your hand." But I am obstinate and there's darkness. I'll say "no,
I don't believe you, it's a rope." Till that snake bites, hold onto it. But if there is little light, I drop
that snake immediately.
Now you have become your own guide and you have become your own masters. You don't
need any master. This is a country where Mother is respected. It is country of Mother and
understand the value of Mother. I think orily the Mother could do this kind of a job which is requiring
so much of patience and love. If it was Father like Shr Krishna, He would have used His
sudarshana and killed all of them, solved the problem. Christ would have crucified. You have
to work it out, this is of course Ghor Kali Yuga, but this is the time only when people will be seeking
the truth because of the problems of Kali Yuga and you will be blessed. It's written already.
prophesised by seers.
I have done nothing special. Only thing if you say. I knew about it since I was bom, I know about
Myself. IfI have done anything it is to understand human beings, what's the problem. They follow
VOL VII Issue 7
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_7.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Christ, they follow Mohammed Sahib, they follow Ram, they follow Shri Krishna, they follow
everything but nothing inside, what is the matter? Nothing penetrates. That was the thing I thought
they are not yet connected. They are to be connected to all this. Then only what I have done
is to work out the permutations and combinations of human beings. That's not difficult because
there are only mainly seven chakras one has to work it out, and how you can raise the Kundalini,
to break the Sahasrara. It has worked, it's working out in thousands.
My heart knows no bounds. In Kali Yuga nobody bothers about the Mother but the way My children
are expressing their lave, I don't know how to express My gratitude. Just try to love others, that
is much more than loving yourself. Just try to give love, just try to forgive. You will be amazed
that you will realise how glorious you are, how great you are and suddenly you will discover that
you are a global personality. This expansion is working out and I am hopeful that in My lifetime
l'll see this world coming to some peaceful state.
I have told you that the peace is within ourselves. It is not by organisation or by getting peace
awards, it is within yourself, the peace which is to be established. I have seen people who have
got peace awards, very big people, you can't go near them, you have to use a barge pole. That
shows, I don't know from what angle they got peace awards, but those who have no peace within
cannot create peace, you have to be peaceful and this peace gives you that witness state. Within
that
get annoyed, you don't get worried. This has been such a great occasion for Me because
suddenly I find many doors are opening out and there are so many responses. So many mayors
of different countries have written letters to Me, specially from Brazila who came to the airport and
see the whole world like a drama and really you enjoy the humour of it, then you don't
you
gave Me the key of Brazilia and said, "Mother please keep Brazilia in Your attention so there is
I didn't know what to say, what to answer, just tears came into My eyes, that's
peace in Brazil.
all, I was trying to control them. So many mayor, even in New York, Canada, Australia, they have
written beautiful letters because they had some good experiences of Sahaja Yogis.
It is you who can do the job, not Me. If I could do it, I would not have bothered about you but
we have to have good channels. Whenever Sahaja Yogis go they create such a beautiful image
of Sahaja Yoga that everybody is impressed, and that is how they have given us this kind of a
beautiful response.
"How are we to expedite and spread Sahaja Yoga fast." It's such a good question. I said, "it
is spontaneous, we cannot force it, we respect everyone, but the way it is growing everywhere
T have great hopes that one day all over the world it will spread very fast. Actually we don't plan
anything, we cannot plan and it just works like that. Everything works so spontaneously that
am surprised how they come, these people from Punjab and asked me "Mother why don't You
come to Punjab," I said, "let there be shanti" because My husband doesn't allow Me to go to
places like that. So next year it was all very peaceful. I went down and now I was told that in
Punjab we are getting the maximum great number of Sahaja Yogis. Kashmir is the Adi Shakti's
VOL VII Issue 7
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
10
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_7.pdf-page-12.txt 
 place and l'm sure one day we can work on Kashmir very well,
In every religion there is some sort of stupid stuff pushed forward. Nobody could really stop
because those people who are in charge of religion have no enlightenment. That's how I have
seen people say in Japan they follow one religion and in China they follow another religion, both
are just the same, one is Zen another is Tao. But the misunderstanding is that, they think we
are exclusive. They are not, none of them are exclusive. Mohammed Sahib described all of them,
from Abraham to Moses, to Christ to the Mother of Christ and he said, there have been more than
one lakh Nabis on this earth but now why to feel we are exclusive. This exclusiveness comes
from ego, Christ described all of them, Tao, the one religion that they follow in China is nothing
but Sahaja Yoga. Tao is Kundalini. Zen is nothing but Sahaja, Zorashtra, everyone, and they
are fighting among each other. But there are also some stupid things. Like I met one fellow from
Bosnia, in Bosnia who was a Muslim with great gusto he was saying "we must die in the name
of God." I said, "are you sure you are dying in the name of God?" He said, I'm very sure, alright.
So it's written in Koran, (I think I have read Koran well), it's written in Koran that, if you die in the
name of God and if you are put in a proper way, what you can say a grave, in a Islamic way,
then your body will be resurrected at the time of Kyama (resurrection time), this is the resurrection
time, this is the ressurection, Uthan, this is the time. And I told him "Are you mad? After 500 years
what will be left in that grave? What bones are going to rise?" In Indian philosophy it's clearly
said that your souls will rise. That seems sensible because soul is eternal. And then another
question I asked, one that you believe in a formless God, Nirakar, why are you fighting for the
land?" I feel so concerned, the way people are fighting for God, this thing, that thing, and killing
themselves, do you think God will be happy with this kind of an idea?
So one has to really give realisation otherwise, there's no solution, sir. There has to be
transformation, otherwise there's no solution. One can talk, talk, talk for hours together, nothing
works out unless and until you are transformed. So only thing is that for Me I feel that as long
as possible I would strive to see that people get their self realisation and settle down. There's
no hanky panky about it, there's no miracle of a stupid type but actually the person who is
transformed, himself knows he is transformed. Then he gets all the powers. Like one light which
is enlightened can enlighten many people. Now do you mean to say I have given realisation to
all of them? Maybe some, but not all. Even the people now who are living in Delhi city go abroad
and give realisation. They ga to villages also and give realisation. All over it is spreading like
that. But when he asked Me the question I have to just say that all the Sahaja Yogis have to
realise what they are, they have to know, they should know their identity. They are now the lights,
and they have to spread the light. They are busy with business, they are busy with politics, they
are busy with this, it's all there. I am also very busy, I have a family, I have grand-children, I have
My children, I look after My family also. At the same time the main attention should be in giving
realisations to others, that's the only way we can expedite. A person who is not a realised soul,
who'll start talking on religion, he'll start collecting money or I don't know what he will do. But you
people have that essence in you which you have to give to everyone and nothing more enjoyable
VOL VII Issue 7
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
11
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_7.pdf-page-13.txt 
 than giving realisations to others. You may get the wealth of the whole world, it cannot be
compared with that.
I would request all the Sahaja Yogis whether they are women or men, even children, can spread
Sahaja Yoga because they have got the powers in them to spread it. They have the shakti to
do it. That should be a case not only for India, but all over the world it can be done, and this
is the promise as a present You have to give me on My birthday, if you think it's nice.
Thank you very much.
MEDICAL CONFERENCE
H. H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
St. Petersburg, Russia 14-4-94 (Synopsis)
I am so much surprised that scientists are talking of morality, is something unusual. It's only in
Russia people can do that. Because science is Amoral and it has nothing to do with spirituality.
I find that you people are so advanced that you want to know about spirituality. Spirituality is meta-
science. The morality sense has come now to science and scientific research that they are
realising that there are gene in the Human beings which get you to mutation.
There are two genes specifically, which look after our morality. With one gene mutation we do
sin against the Mother. Sin against the Mother is that you indulgė into things which are immoral.
Everything that is self destructive. This self destruction is what we call immorality. The second
gene in Human beings goes into mutation when you do the sin against the father. Against the
father the mutation takes place when we are aggressive, violent, we are thieves or do things which
are improper in the legal way. These genes get into mutation and then person starts doing all
kinds of things. Either he starts destroying himself or he starts destroying others. Thank God
they have now reached the state of genes in medical science. Tam sure they will find out these
two mutation bound genes in Human Beings. Only through traditions of moral life can these be
preserved. In the democratic countries, freedom was given, so they went absolutely haywire.
These two genes have gone into such mutation, that people do not even know that they are doing
something wrong. In a way science has shown that going beyond limits of science one can get
reactions. When there is no limits of production of anything which is scientifically found out, people
go on producing things like atom bomb, hydrogen bomb, all kinds of things. Now there is a big
movement to stop the production of these bombs. This aggressiveness which started in scientific
advancement went too far. They dominated so many countries and destroyed so many people.
DIVINE COOL. BREEZE
VOL VII Issue 7
12
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_7.pdf-page-14.txt 
 The second part which is the sin against the Mother where people have taken to drugs, alcohol,
womanising, all kinds of wrong things. In America you cannot talk against homosexuality, because
homosexuals gave votes for Clinton to be elected. Now with this Aids reaction what is happening
is that they have now become like martyrs, they think it is a very big thing they have done because
their ego now is hurt, they do not want to admit that they have done mistake, that they have got
this Aids, this horrible disease.
But who creates the genes and who puts them into mutation? In science there is no answer yet.
Here you see within yourself - this is the mechanism. This is a very subtle builtin system within
us. You are all scientists here, so you should have an open mind. Whatever I am telling you
today is before you some - sort of a hypothesis. If it is true then you have to accept it as honest
people, because it is for the benevolence of you as individuals, for the benevolence of your country
and benevolence of the whole world. Here you see a triangular bone which is called as "sacrum"
which Greeks knew -as a sacred bone. In this bone lies a power of pure desire, all other desires
are not pure. Today you want to buy a house, then a car, then a helicopter, you go on buying,
you are never satisfied. According to economics, wants are not satisfied in general. This is the
pure desire within us. You may be aware of it or may not. Now what is the pure desire? The
pure desire is to be the spirit. You are not this body, you are not this mind, you are not this intellect,
you are not these emotions, your ego, but you are pure spirit. In the evolutionary state you have
reached a state which we call as human beings. But it's not the end of the journey. Even in science
you find out something, then somebody else comes and says no, that's not so.
We do not know the absolute truth. If we had known the absolute truth there would have been
no quarrels, no fights, no war. This is meta science, but it was known in My country thousands
of years back. If I have done anything, is this that I have brought this knowledge to the masses.
It's nothing great, all human problems create world problems, and all fugal problems come from
these centres, which are our foundations. These centres act on the left and on the right. The
left side sympathetic and the right side sympathetic are not doing the same work. They do two
types, absolutely different. In the centre is the parasympathetic nervous system. It is meta-
science. I need not tell doctors, they know that when you want to run you can increase the beat
of the heart. In emergency sympathetic acts. But the heart is brought to normal by parasym-
pathetic. Now on top of the brain these channels go and create from the left side, they cross
over in the optic chiasma. And they created a balloon like thing. From left side activity you get
your conditionings. This can be called as psyche but psyche is ugly word.
Say a Mother is nursing the child and the child is very happy, but she turms him round so he doesn't
like it. So the like of ego starts, then she scolds him, "don't do like this." Then the first line of
conditioning starts. Thus we live either on ego or on conditioning. We see these beautiful flowers,
but they are miracles, aren't they. Who creates these flowers? If you ask a doctor, who runs
your heart. hell say it is the autonomous nervous system. But who is this auto? This they cannot
answer. Now this Kundalini which is in the triangular bone is your mother, is your individual mother.
VOL VII Issue 7
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
13
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_7.pdf-page-15.txt 
 She knows everything about you, she's a doctor, and also a psychologist, and a scientist. She
thinks, she understands, above all she loves. Everyone of you have this power; this power when
awakened passes through six centres above. These six centres are responsible for your physical,
emotional, mental and spiritual being. The second centre is called swadisthana which is on the
physical side manifest as aortic plexus. Only we'll deal with one today and you'll be amazed how
many diseases can be cured if this one centre can be enlightened. The function of this centre,
because it moves and can also contract, is like a lotus. The function is to look after liver, pancreas,
spleen, kidneys and intestine. It has another very important work, is to convert the fat for the use
of the grey cells. Now, the scientists have not reached that point. A person who thinks too much,
is futuristic, he plans. Such a person uses the energy of his grey cells, isn't it? This centre becomes
concerned about the supply of the energy. So all these organs start suffering from starvation.
First attack is on liver. The function of liver is to deliver the poison from the body into the blood.
I'm talking in general. Now what happens that the heat accumulates in the liver. Such a person,
starts becoming thin because there is poison in the liver. He becomes hot tempered. He develops
skin troubles. Then this heat can start moving to other organs because other organs are also
suffering. When it goes to the pancreas people start suffering from a disease called Diabetes.
Diabetes can only happen to people who are futuristic, who sit on the seat, plan things. In My
country the farmers take at least six spoons of sugar in one cup of tea, they don't get Diabetes
because whatever they earn they spend and sleep off. This disease is more in the west.
In the west people have insurances, all kinds of problems if they even have a small little thing.
It's a mad race of insurance. Now the other, spleen is the most important. I don't know about
Russia but in the other western countries people sleep very late. They have to attend drinking
parties, dancing parties, maddening parties. Then they get up very early, somehow or other they
dress up hectically and start reading newspapers. Now our spleen is a speedometer. It creates
red blood cells as you kow very well when there is an emergency. But the life is so hectic and
then to read newspaper in the morning, you get such a shock that this poor spleen starts wobling.
Then they get into the car and there is a traffic. They get upset and go to the office and the boss
starts shouting at them. They are just slaves of the time. Even if somebody is one minute late
they will shout for fifteen minutes. This poor spleen doesn't know how to cope with this hectic
that, truthfully,
personality. That also become hectic and vulnerable to blood cancer. Imust tell you
that blood cancer has been cured by Sahaja Yoga, without changing blood, without doing
anything.
Third thing is the kidney. With this heat the kidney also coagulates, so you cannot pass your
urine. Then you go for dialysis and die bankrupt. Now this can also be cured by this Kundalini
awakening. There is no need at all to go in for dialysis. People get constipated, some develop
terrible constipation at the end of the large intestine. Apart from that, when this heat rises above,
it reaches the heart. If there is a young boy who is drinking too much, who is maybe playing
or something very hard game, and who thinks too much, such a young boy can get a heart attack
tennis
which is always Fatal. Also people get it in old age as this heat rises and contracts the heart.
VOL VII Issue 7
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
14
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_7.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Then this heat rises even above and goes to the brain and constricts your arteries and you get
concussion of the brain on the left hand side. Left hand, because it crosses over and one gets
paralysis on the right hand side, there's a reaction. There are diseases on the left hand side
also. Now when it is on the left hand side your diseases are of a more serious nature. Left side
gives you psychosomatic diseases, all incurable diseases, right from muscular diseases, cancers,
heart angina, madness, lunacy, out of which psychosomatic are these diseases and lunacy is
just somatic. All other are psychosomatic, they cone from viruses. Now on the left side is all
our past since our creation, so there are many dead vegetables which have gone out of the
circulation of evolution. Dead animals, dead human beings. When the attention starts moving
towards the left, towards the past or you get a shock or you start feeling sorry for something then
it goes to the left. Russia has more left side I feel because of whatever was the political situation
before. One has to be in the centre because if you go to the left there these viruses catch you
or some dead animals will catch you, some micro animals might catch you or some Human beings
who are dead. So the possessions take place.
With the awakening of the Kundalini your attention is drawn in the centre. All the religions were
created to create a balance. not to go to extremes. But why the balance? Because with the
balance only you can ascend. All living work is done by aill pervading Divine power. In the Bible
it is described as the cool breeze of the Holy Ghost. In the Koran as Ruh. And in Indian philosophy
it is described as Param Chaitanya. Adi Shankaracharya said, "Salilam, Salilam " means cool,
cool. You have to become one with that. That is the Yog. Once you are united with that all
pervading power then you become empowered.
Our thoughts rise and fall, again rise and fall, and we are jumping on the cusp of the thoughts.
We cannot be in the present, and the reality is in the present, when this Kundalini rises over this
centre on the optic chiasma, she creates present in you, becomes silent, thoughtlessly aware
You are aware but thoughtless. You jumnp out of your problems also. If you are standıng in the
water you are afraid of the high waves, but if you jump out of it into a boat you can see that,
you can enjoy them, but if you learn how to swim, you can jump in and save many. So you become
into next state that is doubtlessly aware. You have so many powers potential in you, they are
awakened.
In India many artists have become world famous, many painters have become world famous.
It is a bliss, actually you enter into the kingdom of God and all the time you feel you are being
looked after, guided, protected, that is your right, we call it Sahaja Yoga. "Saha" means with,
"ja" is born, means it is born with you, this right to be in this Yoga, this union, with the Divine.
you become divine automatically, you become absolutely moral, you become righteous, you enjoy
all your virtues, you become your own guide in the light of the spirit. Overnight people have givern
up their drugs. This is the last breakthrough of our evolution.
Can you imagine Christ addressing you people like this? They crucified Him. Christ was a great
DIVINECOOL BREEZE
VOL VII Issue 7
15
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_7.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Divine personality, very great. He didn't understand human beings I think, because He was so
pure. What He has said that if your eye commits a sin, take it out. If your right hand commits
a sin, cut it. In the west everybody would have been without hands and eyes if they had followed
Him. Then Mohammed Sahib thought that Christ has said about the men to be that strict, but
for women he didn't say anything. So He said about women. I just thought that first let them have
little light. Now supposing I am obstinate, I have a snake in My hand, and I'm standing in the
darkness, I don't want to listen to you. You go on telling Me there is a snake. I will not leave
it till it bites Me. But if there is a little light, immediately I'll leave it Myself. That is what I thought
that Human beings, if they get little light they will immediately change, and it has worked. I never
dreamt that l'l be able to address such people in Russia.
It's really destined I think that such Divine people should be sitting before Me. In this short lecture
I'm sorry I can't tell you everything about Sahaja Yoga. In English language only I must have
given 5000 lectures, but lecture is just a mental acrobat, you have to go beyond it, and achieve
a state of enlightenment. Enlightenment doesn't mean any brand, like born-again or anything.
it is actualisation and a becoming. It's not just talk, talk, it is also not blind faith, this is an actual
happening. This happening has to take place, for which you don't have to pay. It is a living process.
When you put a seed in the Mother earth, it sprouts. How much does the Mother earth take from
us in money? Because it is built in the Mother earth to sprout and built in the seed to be sprouted.
It's a living process of spontanity. Nobody can explain why are we on this earth, nobody can say
why when the foetus starts growing why don't we throw it away, as all the foreign things have to
be thrown away out of the body? It is preserved, looked after, till it has to be thrown, it is kept
in the womb. Who does that?
The other day somebody asked Me "why am I on this Earth?" I said, "to become Divine and to
enter into the kingdom of God." So he said, "How will that help me?" I told him" first
it will not only help you physically, mentally, emotionally, spiritually but it will help others." On your
finger tips you can feel your centres. On your finger tips you can feel the centres of others.
Otherwise half of the people die only during diagnosis. On your finger tips you can find out the
trouble. They talk the language of centres. You can feel the vibrations of anyone whether dead,
alive or far away. Now if you know how to correct, you can correct your centres and correct the
centres of others, because who is the other, you have become collective now, that means the
microcosm has become a macrocosm, or a drop has become the sea. This is your capacity, this
is your glory, this is what you have to have as your own. No obligation, it's all love and compassion.
The power is of love, of Divine love, of pure love without any lust or greed. We have never used
the power of love. Now the time has come and one day I am sure this Russia will be the leader
of the whole world. This knowledge is coming say from an Indian person or India, but science
has come from the West, so it doesn't matter, if it is coming from the East why should people think
it something low. All the wise people will realise that they are the one.
enter,
you
May God Bless You All !
DIVINE COOL BREEZE
VOL VII Isue 7
16
