DIVINE COOL BREEZE Issue 1 VOL. VII You must understand the subtleties of Shri Krishna's personality, Try to become extremely peaceful, kind, tender, helpful & caring. H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi - Shri Krishna Puja, Cabella 1994

 DIVINE COOL BREEZE ISSUE I VOL VII Contents. 1. Shri Krishna Puja - Cabella 2. Shri Ganesh Puja - Moscow Edited by :Yogi Mahajan : Divine Cool Breeze, 9 Bhagyachintamani Soc. Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411 029 Computex Graphics, 112 High Tech Indl., Caves Road, Jogeshwari East, Bombay 400 060 Published by Printed by

 SHRI KRISHNA PUJA TALK BY H.H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI Cabella, Italy 28 Aug. "94 (Synopsis) Shri Krishna is the incornation of Vishnu and Vishnu is the one who is the preserver of this universe. When this whole world was created it was necessary to creote a preserver also because this world would have been destroyed. If it is left alone without a preserver then the way human beings are, they could have done anything to this world. In the evolutionary process He has taken different forms. many prophets around Himself so that they could preserve the Dharma of this universe, so the basis of preservation was Dharma, In this Dharma whatever was to be established was to be established by balance. It is a habit with people to go to extremes in anything. He created an atmosphere of the The first principle of Dharma was to create balance. If a person doesn't have a balance then he cannot achieve his ascent. If you don't have a balance in a ship, it won't move. In the same way, first human beings had to achieve the balance, but they are born with different capacities and copabilities. samstitha'. Means the aptitudes ore different. different faces, with different colors, because variety was to be created. looked the same they would be looking like some robots, everybody was created in a different way - according to the country and the parents. All this was organized by the principle of Shri Vishnu, that He created this world in different varieties. Shri Krishna is the master of it. At the time when Shri Krishna came, people were very serious type and had become very ritualistic. The reason was that Shri Rama came and he talked of Maryadas. These Maryadas made people extremely austere type. In that austerity people lost the sense of joy, beauty and variety. It is said "Ya devi sarva bhutesha jaati rupena We are born with different aptitudes, If everybody Shri Krishna's incarnation came as sompoorma. As the moon has sixteen Kalas He too had sixteen petals, so He is sampoorna. He is the Poornima The full moon'. With this completeness of Vishnu's incarnations, it was the total and it manifested. Whatever was lacking in Rama's incarnation He brought it forth. 12 petals. With this He showed so many things which people miss completely. When Gita was written down people started following the book. "At this time you have to fight for Dharma, for the Truth". my uncles and relations". He said "Who are you killing, they are already dead, because they have no dharma". If you have no dharma then you are already dead. What is there to kill or not to kill and that is what we see today. On the right heart you have Shri Krishna said to Arjuna Arjuna said "I can't kll Vol. VII Issue 1 Divine Cool Breeze

 This message was given in Kurukshetra to Arjuna. Then He said "You have asked me to kill these people because I have dharma in me. beyond this?". So Shri Krishna described Sahaja Yoga. He described in the second chapter "Who is the Sthita Pragnya?". It is the man who is balanced. Then he says that such a man is never angry. Inside he is absolutely at peace. What he described is really the modern times, or we can say Sahaja Yaga. He said howa person should become. He did not say how to become that. At the time that Kauravas were fighting | am killing then. But what is During that fight He told him that if you become Sthita Pragya then the Pandavos. you can transcend all these problems, all these understandings that you have and you become absolutely peaceful with yourself. In modern tines we do not have to fight Kauravas. The five Pandovas have to fight the Kauravas. What are these five Pandavas? They are our senses or they are the cosmos divided into various elements. They have to fight the Kauravas which are within There are 100 Kauravas. The nature has to fight something that is against the nature. People will say anger is natural. To be aggressive is natural but now we must know that we have the natural capacity to ascend. natural to be a Sahaja Yogi. This is also built in us. Then is sprouts. It becomes the tree, so it is also natural in a seed that all the future thousands of trees that are gaing to be, are also in that seed. They are experimenting now that in one seed they can get thousands of little sprouts, which can be made into trees or plants. LIS: It is natural to go higher. It is For example a seed is a seed. US. When He said, that you have to become Sthita Pragya' what He was trying to say is that you should achieve your balance. This He told when there wos a war on. If you have to have war with people, or kill them, its all right, once that is over then you have to build up your spiritual sense. The building up of the spiritual sense is our work and that's what we have to do. Not only dharma. Many Sahaja Yogis think that they are working and living in Dharma. But that's not the end of it. That's the balance part. You have to go ahead and build up your spiritual self and spread it. He is the one who communicates. As you know America is communicating everywhere, This is the work of Shri Krishna also, because in a wrong way, but it is there. It has got computers, etc. All communication things it has done because it is innately built in them to communicate. But because they don't believe in Shri Krishna, neither in Dharma, so the bosis itself is wrong. With this wrong basis they have started spreading filth and dirt, which is against our ascent and against God and they are doing all this. Why are they doing all this which they are not supposed to do? i think it's the intellect. It's the intellect which is also the brain, which is the seat of Virata. With the intellect they say it is natural to be Adharmic. It is natural Vol. VII Issue 1 Divine Cool Breeze

 to be aggressive, money oriented. Everything that they have is all 'natural", because according to them, with their intellect they have sorne how or other managed to convince through your rationality, that this is the correct thing to do, without this you cannot exist. This is supposed to be their culture. This sort of culture is all over and is accepted because of the intellect. They are much more intelligent. A person who always thinks of money becomes very intelligent, in the sense he becomes sharp. He becomes smart and becomes in a way, as if he knows everything. He thinks he knows everything. Whatever he does is right, whichever way he behaves, is right. These Pandavas which he has got within himself, these elements that he has got, he Uses them for a purpose which is absolutely destructive and anti-God. He is not aware because his intelligence always justifies that they also try to go against what is dharma. For example, even Shri Krishna's life they try to depict that Shri Krishna Himself had five wives and ló wives later on. Actually these were His powers. Without understanding what Shri Krishna was, because intellect is such a gross nonsense that it doesn't take you to the right thinking. It always takes you to wrong thinking because you want to justify everything. This justification makes you live with yourself. Otherwise normally you connot live with a life which is Adharmic, aggressive, war-mongering type. All that is expected of a human being; all the opposite, the juxta position of that is being done in all these western cultures. You can see if clearly how they justify immorality. Christ was more strict than Mohammed Sahib. eyes, you should take out one eye. Anybody whose hand is spoiling him, should cut his hand. Most of the Europeans and Americans would have been without one hand, according to Christ. Mohammed Sahib thought Christ has done so much for the men why not do something for the women also. For looking at many women the justification is natural. beings. They are worse than animals and what a mess we have created with this kind of understanding through these intellectuals, who are trying to tell us something and He said anybody does anything with Have you seen any animal behaving like that if the animals are natural we accept. One of the problems is that if there is an intelligent man, he dominates. For example some fashion starts, we all take it. The intellect of an entrepreneur can really befool you completely. But not with people who are wise. They will say, get lost. about morality part. That is the worst practised in the West. It is worse than animals. And that's how they are suffering today, with so many diseases, troubles, etc. This is Second thing which we always justify is violence. Now there is no war going on in Kurukshetra, but you see violence everywhere. In America it is terrible. It's not only in America, it's everywhere, because everybody's Guru is America. It starts from America Vol. VII Issue 1 3 Divine Cool Breeze

 and people just follow blindly. The violence has entered into our films. Killing somebody is not allowed. Thou shalt not kill. Muslims are killing. Everybody is killing everyone. This idea of aggressiveness ultimately takes you to the killing part. You can't even create ane ant, how can you kill human beings like that? This killing business is taken to the highest limit, like Hitler believed that he was top of the world. This is insane, you just forget what you are and you just start assuming, through your ego, that you are something very great. Also in Sahaja Yaga there are some people who are sayıng they are Gods, they are deities. This ego business is actually taking energy The greatest enemy of a human being is his intelligence, because it is so limited, so conditioned, arrogant, and so blind. of your intelligence. Wisdom is a different thing. You get wisdom through your spirit which gives you a complete idea as to what is right and what is wrong. Whatever is wrong will be accepted by . They are two different things. Krishna was known to be the diplomat. He had Divine diplomacy. That means that He was very intelligent. have met some people who very highly placed but do not have much intelligence. I have now seen that this intellect is a dangerous thing. Shri Krishna used his intellect. He is all powerful. Nothing can dominate Him. See the difference. You should be able to use your intellect and not be dominated by it. His whole diplomacy was to intellect. Intellect is not wisdom. use His intellect, and use it for the purpose of Divine. All the time the Divine in Him was helping Him to use His intellect. The difference is that we are slaves of our intellect conditionings, emotions, and body. When you master it, then you see your intellect very clearly. This intellect can give you ideas that you are the Lord of the whole world. Or the same intellect can give you ideas that you are nothing. This intellect plays on top of you. You have not to be guided by your intellect but by wisdom, as you are Sahaja Yogis. You have a very good instrumenit of feeling it through your vibrations, you can make out what is good and what is bad. You can see that as human beings there are some intellectual effects also coming in. But with Sahaj Yoga you can judge what is this intellect telling you. The main thing you should go to the subtle point, how this intellect has It has come to us becouse our brain became active very soon. 1 have come to uS. seen some children extremely intelligent, but they have no wisdom. If only the brain develops too much, the mother and father maybe very intelligent, inheritance would be great so they get it. parficular country, you suddenly become very intelligent. and English read all the time will read every book. They know all about computers. All this is Avidya. It is not knowledge. It is non - knowledge. So they think they very intelligent, because they Like maybe you are born in a I have seen that Americans But what is the outcome of all that reading? They Or maybe the circumstances. Vol. VII Issue 1 Divine Cool Breeze

 know everything about everything. With this intellect, as consciousness comes in, they start creating very intellect ideos. Specially in America, they have got all kinds of funny things just to extract money. For example they have a golliwog which has a birthday. Sometimes even the people have big parties for them. Then they started with celebrating birthday of the dogs. Anybody who puts ideas into them. to die you tell us what suit you want to wear or what tie you want to wear. kind of coffin you want. It is to such an extent that some people say, put us on the ice so we will be there. The worst thing in Europe is that they have nicely advertised and marketed the idea of going for a holiday. Sa in Italy if a person doesn't go on holiday, he will say that there is a crisis in my life because I could not go on holiday. Then they say you go there tan yourself, stay in hotels. Everybody has to go out. They are spoiling all the seashores. They have no respect for the sea, which is their father They have no respect for each other. The women try to slim down and look very nice so that they could become nude there. The whole industry is so bad. If you are intelligent Then there are organizations that say, when you are going What how can you accept this stupid idea? Sahaja economics is very different. We are not bound by all these nonsensical ideas. that are prevalent as economics. is how to impress people, how to sell things, how to do this or that. All this is nothing but financial aggressiveness. It is nothing but exploitation. I is marketing. It Shri Krishna was the king. He lived like a king but also He lived in a very humble abode, in Gokul. He was not attached. So the first thing is the way they are attached to money, any justification for getting money is alright. Once we went to a hotel in India. We had some American friends. They eat a lot and were eating but we could not compete with them. They called the waiter and told him to pack the left-over meal, because they had paid for it. And they had no shame about it. I said we don't do this in India, because these are bad manners. They said, "But we paid for it. Once you've paid for it then there are no bad manners". You cannot be miserly in Sahaj Yoga. You have to be generous and giving. You have to feel for others. This is the only way we con express ourselves. All this generosity is not to create a big hero ouf of you. The worst is Hollywood. If is the film industry. Under the name of 'Industry you can do anything. This Hollywood is creating such horrible films, but the worst is that they get awards for the worst films. is eating the flesh of human beings and they enjoy. They even got awards for the best film and best actor. Then they are producing films where they show all dead bodies In one film there is a man who is a cannibal who Vol. VII Issue 1 5. Divine Cool Breeze

 hanging. Why do these people like to see such horrible things. What is their character where have they gone? Why do they enjoy things which no human being, who is human being will enjoy. The first principle is communication. How you communicate with others. home with your children, wife, husband. Try to find out whether you are dominating, Start it all aggressive. It can go to any limit, this aggressiveness, either of women or men. Here it is more women. In India men are extremely dominating. The basics as human beings should have is good manners except that they wear good dresses. All manners are they talk nothing but scandals. One must understand that Shri Krishna never talked of scandals. How is that these European countries are equipped with all the scandals of the world. What is the interest people have in the scandals to top it all is media, because they have to make money. such a hand in glove business, that the people like to hear all this nonsense so they Atleast about 30 years back you could never hear Now suddenly the whole in dresses, but when there are people together Its have scandals in the newspaper. such a thing. thing has flowered that any magazine or book you read you can't understand what they are preaching. They are preaching the cult of destruction. People take it and like it and work it out. They are using the women for their own purpose and stupidly women accept it. Of course they dominate on one side, and feel very happy they are dominating. There was a lady boasting in a magazine that she has had 400 men in her life! There is no place in hell for such a woman. Where will you put such a woman there. This movement which is absolutely against the principle of dharna and of communicatian. And all such.books were completely banned. How should you communicate? Decently, with very tender and very beautiful mannerism, you have to talk to another person and other Sahaja Yogis. You should talk in a very You Not in an artificial manner like the French. sweet manner to another person. should talk with decent language and humility. You need not go on jabbering all the time, and talking too much. Shri Krishna's power was madhurys. It is the sweeteners like honey. You have to know that you must talk in a manner that will please another person. While talking ta anyone you can talk very sweetly, very nicely and in a way which will please that person. Not to provoke, or say things which are hard. But some people have a habit of saying all the time, which is something very provoking, which If it is is not good. Some people, when it comes to their business they are sweet. something else, then they are very harsh. We have a Jain community in India where if it is for their business they are the sweetest, but when it comes to something else like donating, etc., they are extremely hard. Shri Krishna was just the other way round. In His life time He was always a guest Krishna of Vidura who was the son of a maid servant but he was a realized son. Vol. VII Issue 1 Divine Cool Breeze

 used to stay in the humble abode of Vidura and eat very simple food, but He would no go to the palace of Duryodhana. Shri Krishna never cared for money or bothered He has shown complete detachment about His throne, kingdom or money part of it. Once you are attached you have all the pangs of money. Supposing you about it. are detached, the same money you can use. Once you become slave of that money, that money sits on your head. To whole reaction is building up and this is where all the elements are reacting against you. The people from Sierra Nevada, said is true "when we try to acquire more money, have money also is dangerous these doys. The go on acquiring it then there are looters who come along. The worst are those who have got names as entrepreneurs. For example, they will say if you have a 'designer's' watch, then everybody runs for designers watch. Look at Shri Krishna, so wise witnessing everything. How He plays around, and how he wins over. Supposing He was attached, He could not have done it. To get over this, you have to detach yourself from this anti-Shri Krishna culture. "This is the fashion, that's the fashion". All these fashions are extremely destructive. Not to put oil in the hair and end up with bald heads. Whatever He did, was to destroy the evil and negativity and to bring forth the joy, which is Raas. The Raas is the energy which you have and that's how you play the Raas with that energy and enjoy. He brought Holi which was very sensible and just to express your joy in a mirthful playful way, because that was lacking in Shri Rama's life. only for Sahaja Yogis, not for others. Others go to the pubs, etc. He said, "Just allow yourself to enjoy. But this was Shri Krishna has said that we have to enjoy everything, but in a dharmic way. We should not be adharmic. The dharma should give you joy. Otherwise, if you are dharmic then you become absolutely austere and joyless person and sometimes silly. This joy you communicate with others. Without this joyous nature, you cannot be communicative. THB He is the one as Virata who puts light into your brain. In that light you see what is stupid and unwise. This is the blessing of Shri Krishna. He gives you the 'Neeranand' because if you do not have the light you cannot enjoy the joy of your mind, or brain. It is through His light that we see ourselves as something full of joy. Another fashion is to say " It's too much ". Because the brain is full of nonsense, so you tell them anything and nothing can go in their heads. The wise person, as Shri Krishna who is the source of wisdom, has to be Sthita Pragya' means he has to be in balance and in Dharma, and above that, he has to be in joy. You are not Vol. VII Issue 1 7. Divine Cool Breeze

 only in joy but you know the Truth, the Absolute Truth. This absolute truth is the one that makes you understand what is right and is wrong and you develop your wisdom, not your intellect so much. You may see your intellect misbehaving, sometimes telling you negative ideas, or oggressive ideas. You can become Krishna has said 1 am the Sakshi of the whole world'. a witness or sakshi. Shri It We have to see where we are going wrong and how can Shri Krishna save us. is by becoming wiser, day by day. wisdom gives you definite ideas as to how you have to be. You will hove the same smile as Shri Krishna had. We have to understand I get Vishuddhi because this America should be that our Vishuddhi has to be alright. alright, otherwise my Vishuddhi will never be alright. For Vishuddhi we have so many things in Sahaja Yoga which very few people do. Atleast if a few Sahaja Yogis keep their Vishuddhi alright, will be much better off. You are a new race, blessed by the Divine and you have Shri Krishna within yourself, You should know what is to be done. One awakened in His own glory and light. must communicate. But what I see that people don't even meditate. Even if they meditate they don't want to communicate. Sometimes when they communicate they think they have become Gods. Human beings are a very difficult commodity to handle. You have to communicate with complete humility, the way Shri Krishna did. In His Raas He spread the energy of Radha into all the people, by holding hands. His childhood where He killed so many people is over. Even His adulthood where He had to kill His own uncle is also over. Most of When He becomes the king then what does He do. It is to communicate. his expressions and quaities are seen after He became the king. busy killing one after another, all these horrible people. After that He built Dwarka and tried to communicate with people. Your duty is to build up yourself and communicate with others, with all the sweetness and beauty of Shri Krishna. With full understanding Before that, He was Once you understand that, you will not as to what stupid things are going around. take it. You will become wise enough not to take to all these things that are going you become the witness of the whole thing, you will see what is happening. We have to stop them from going to hell. We have to really develop a really good If on. personality of a Sahaja Yogi. Divorce There are many marriages that take place and suddenly they try to divorce. Vol. VII Issue 1 Divine Cool Breeze

 is allowed in Sahaja Yoga, but not this American style of non-sense. The husband or the wife is dominating and then you divorce. What is the achievement? We have to work out everything in us because we are conditioned and we are in an atmosphere. I would request all of you to try to understand these subtleties of Shri Krishna's personality. Try to become extremely peaceful, kind, fender, helpful and caring. In humility He had no consciousness of money. Also, as you know, He was a dark person for some reason. Whatever qualities are described or said, try to see how many we have. That's the the introspection will start. Once you start introspecting and understanding yourself the wisdom will grow. Not by seeing faults in others, or putting blinks on others, but on yourself. That is how the things will work out. Krishna did not have to do that way WIS because He was samepoorna (complete). We have to do all this, to see that we also become complete. There's another point I wanted to mention about Sahaja Yogis, that we introduce classical Indian music for you people because it helps the vibrations. But as is the nature of Western people, that anything they take up they must go to the ultimate end till they I was surprised how people are lost in the music. There should are completely lost. I be some occasion. They are all already in another world with the music. Dont do these things. You go to extremes of everything. That's not proper. Even pujas, anything. To go to extremes, you won't be in the centre. You will not You go to extremes. be in the place of Shri Krishna. As a matter of habit we create a world like that. Somebody has music world, somebody has dancing world, another one has a world where they think no end of themselves. "We have a special relationship with Shri Mataji". It is a very common thing. I cannot have any special relationship. Nobody has any special relationship with me. This I would like to tell you very clearly. You should not claim that. May Gad Bless You. Vol. VII Issue 1 9. Divine Cool Breeze

 O Most Resplendent Goddess" Where the resplendent Goddess Shri Nirmala Devi is seated on Her throne, We are transported to the Garden of Eden Where jasminies and roses cast dn enchantment Our Kundalini drinks deeply of intoxicating spells Never to cast eyes on those dark satanic mills of the mind Rise higher & higher O Mother Kundalini even beyond clouds Where the sun shines forever in splendour of our Divine Mother Where the Mather of the Universe showers thausand benedictions a No evil eye dare cross our path O Mother Nirmala, How many nights of splendour and days of wonder have we enjoyed at your lotus feet Even the stars of heaven gleam in memory of those ethereal moments The gift of Sahaja world you have given us, is the most precious treasure of our heart The diamonds in your royal crown reflect your multidimensional facets Your ruby ring wears the lustre of your warmth In the jingle of your golden bangles we hear the flute of Shri Krishna playing your raas that protects with your Sudarshan The pink pearls in your royal necklace were churned by the oceans to cleanse our sins The enameled anklets that adorn your gleaming feet are embellished by our devotion Your toe rings express your acceptance of our love in your heart O Mother of all the worlds, thank you again & again for gracing our Sahaja (this paem was offered by Yogi Mahajan to Shri Mataji in Moscow) Vol. VII Issue 1 10 Divine Cool Breeze

 SHRI GANESH PUJA TALK BY H.H.SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI Moscow 11 Sep 94 (Synopsis) Shri Ganesha resides in the Mooladhar Chakra, not on Mooladhar. On the Mooladhar is placed the Kundalini. She is the Mother of Shri Ganesha. We call Her Gauri. Now we are af a human awareness, which we call as the fourth dimension. Without Shri Ganesha it is not possible. He is the symbol of innocence within us. This innocence never gets destroyed because it is eternal, but it may happen that it will get covered by clouds by mistakes that we commit. But once you get your realisation, your innocence is re-established and manifests. You become innocent. Your attention becomes innocent. It is impossible to follow any religion, either Christ, Mohammed Sahib or Jews if you do not have enlightenment. This is one thing they did not realize because they were of a high level. They did nat know what is the condition of human beings. As in the Bible, it is written that if your right eye commits sins, i.e: goes against Shri Ganesha, you take it away. Or if your right hand does anything wrong against Shri Ganesha, then cut it out. When Moses brought the 10 Commandments he found that the Jews were having a decadent society, as they have now. There are no morals. Sahaja is the only way where human beings can become innocent, because Jews were given the Shariat where it was that if you are a thief then cut off the hands, and various portions of the body. Shri Ganeshas is the Spirit within us, and He incarnated on this earth But all kinds of things have been done against such great as our Lord Jesus Christ. people, and they made separate religions. None of these books have separated themselves from each other. For example Mohammed Sahib has described Moses, Mother of Christ. So he never established another religion. fogether in one. But we have now people who do not believe that all religions are born out of one tree of Spirituality. They are not only fighting with others but amang themselves. In the name of God, they are killing so many people. He was talking about all the religions woven Innocence is the source of love. Like small children when you see them sweetly dancing When you see a very sweet baby smiling you feel such tremendous love for them. at you, you feel tremendous love for that child. If you do not respect your innocence, you can never be a loving person. Vol. VII Issue 1 Divine Cool Breeze 11

 Without love you cannot know truth. Only thing is that sometimes we feel rather awkward, sometimes frightened to love the innocent people. The innocent are most harmless people. I do not like parents to beat their children. They, in innocence do something, so you must be really kind to them and understand them. Now-a-days in Russia also there ore many children who are born realized, because you all are now enlightened and there are so many great saints who want to be born. Bul you have to be innocent yourself. The countries where the children are not respected, children don't want to be born. There is a minus growth in those countries. But in a country like India, where there is so much love for children, they want to take birth in India, though there is poverty. Children don't understand money or material things, they understand love. If you don't have love in your heart, Shri Ganesha cannot shine in you. The mother who loves her child, enjoys everything she has to do for her child. While the mother who doesn't love the child feels she is doing too much. If you ask her what is the matter, she will say hove to wash this, clean this, look after this child and such stories. But the mother who is enlightened will love doing all that and enjoy it. She will have respect for her children and she will make them respect her. There is no need to be harsh with your children. Children are very sensitive and intelligent. Maybe among thousands you may find one child who is not so good. But later on, they pick up things from elders, especially from parents and from the atmosphere and they start troublesome. That doesn't mean that you should not control or restrict your children and train them. Best way is to be yourself, innocent and dharmic. Ganesha is the basis of morality. Moral behaviour when it is lost in a society that Whatever may be the economic advantages, financial society becomes destroyed. advantages or political advantages, but they get destroyed from within. For example - take the case of America which is supposed to be an affluent country, but what is happening? Small children of 12 years are killing and selling drugs. In some other countries in the west, so many children are killed by the parents. Every country which is affluent has some sort of a speciality of immorality. They are absolutely violent, aragant and egoistical. Innocence absolutely resolves the ego, and when you talk to children and make such sweet comments, such intelligent comments, that you are amazed that they are talking and saying all these things. They are extremely affectionate and kind. Vol. VII Issue 1 Divine Cool Breeze 12

 In the cose of Shri Ganesha, the Father said that the one who will go round the Mother Earth first will be given a present. Shri Ganesha thought "That this Kartikeya can go faster because he is going on a peacock, which is a bird, so he can fly. What about me, I am just going on a little rat". But as He is the source of all wisdom, in his wisdom He thought, "My mother is greater than this Mother Earth". So He went three times round His mother and He got the present. A person who is innocent is extremely humble. He doesn't try to show off. He doesn't know how to show off. For example, Shri Gonesha has a little rat as his conveyance. But if you see people who are show offs, they try to buy cars beyond their means with big loans just to show off that they are rich. This is a disease of people who are not innocent and people take advantage of this very much in the world. In the West they have designers. So they put their stamp as designers. One has to pay a lot for that. And they try to show off the name of the designer on their coats. Thus the entrepreneurs take full advantage of the people who try to show-off. Innocent person is not bothered about his own body, any fashions or additions to his body. The foundation of Dharma is Shri Ganesha. You should see children, they don't know how to tell lies. They say things sometimes which is emborrossing. The mother told the father that the man who is coming in the evening eats like a hog. So this boy heard it and when the gentleman came he was looking at him eating, then he said You "Mother, he doesn't eat like a hog, why did you say that he eats like a hog. You should not tell lies". And mother was so embarrassed. An innocent person minimizes by his innocence, the judgement and criticism of others, because they don't see things which a person who is immoral can see. in a swimming dress. It was a picture. She told the picture, "You go and dress up properly otherwise my grandma will be angry with you". So when you see these small little children talking, the way they behave and the way they are innocent, you really enjoy because innocence is the source of love and joy. If you do not have love and Once my own granddaughter saw a lady you cannot enjoy anything, you start crifticizing, judging and wasting your energy on non- sensical things. Like the other day I was listening to some good music. I had closed my eyes and the music wos wonderful. I really got lost into it. But there were some THE ladies who were commenting on what clothes the musician was wearing, how he was pulting his hands. All these superficial things they were seeing, not the essence. Innocence takes to essence and the essence is love. Thus we have to understand that the quality of Ganesha. We must all imbibe within ourselves. Vol. VII Issue 1 13 Divine Cool Breeze

 His quality of innocence which is already there within us has to be manifested. I was in the house of a Sahaja Yogi and we had a meeting of about 25 people. The meeting was over. I waited for all of them to go away. This gentleman was in the kitchen when they all went away. He came back and said, "Mother what have you done? Where have they gone? I have cooked for all of them". And tears came into his eyes. was so overwhelmed by his generosity and by his kindness. When the generosity is done innocently, you are not even aware of what you are doing. You just enjoy your generosity and you don't bother to see the reaction of the other person. We have in our Shastras, description of such people. Like Shri Rama. the forest and there was an old toothless tribal woman called Shabari. She came before Shri Rama and offered him some berries, and innocently told him that I have tasted all the sour ones and thrown them oway and kept only the sweet ones. Normally in India people don't eat anything touched by another mouth. So Shri Ramna ate them. But his brother Laxmana was very angry. When she started putting this berry into the mouth of Shri Rama, he was getting even worse. Shri Rama said, "What wonderful fruits I have never tasted such fruits in my lifetime". His wife Sita also ate some and enjoyed them. Laxmana finally asked for some. Shabari said she had more and would He also enjoyed the berries. give to Laxman. Sometimes we commit the mistake that we get too much attached to innocent children. We give them too much importance. Innocent is like a river flowing, if yoOu try to stagnate it, then the children get spoilt. They must be respected but one should not try to make them something very exceptional. They are all just the same. They may have different facets. Firstly, they never get bored. If you are innocent you will never be bored. You see beauty all the time. Even if you are alone you enjoy yourself. It is only the grown- ups who get bored. Supposing you are at the airport and the plane is late, older people will be very upset, but children will find something there at the airport. the They will find railings or steps and enjoy themselves. They don't want to make their life miserable by just bringing everything to some meticulous definition. I have seen people at airports feeling very bored and terrible, while the children are running up and down and making friends with other children whom they have never met. Only by innocence you can transcend your limited ideas. I have seen parents who are extremely racist, their children take to other people in no time. An innocent person is like that. He can carry on with any person without thinking of what sort of color he has, what Vol. VII Issue 1 Divine Cool Breeze 14

 sort of face or hair he has. These things do not matter. These are superficial. Children don't bother about superficial things. They just want to see the heart of the person. If the person is loving, whatever maybe the race religion, anything, children will jump. Innocence dissolves the ego. An innocent person cannot be aggressive. If the aggression is there it is a very loving aggression. Like a child will say, "Why don't you give my clathes to this boy? " You will say "O God. I have paid so much money and you want to give it away". this to this boy". Innocent children do not have sense of possession. Also they do not hesitote to share their things. But if they are brought up in a way that this is yours and should be kept as yours, then they start becoming possessive of their things. The He will say "Alright, next fime you again buy for me but let me give best thing to enjoy life is to live with children and to be like that and to enjoy them. This is how our innocence gets nourishment. In Sahaja Yoga become very innocent. Shri Ganesha who is on the back side if your head, who is Maha Ganesha, starts acting on the eyes. The lust and greed from the eyes just drop I have seen that people out, because you become innocent in your attention you don't have to take out your eyes or cut your hand, because you really become alright. As Ganesha was created, you are also created as innocent saints. Try to respect your innocence. That will make you feel young and happy. In Maharashtra we have 8 syambhu Ganeshas and I have seen the people of Maharashtra quite innocent. Somehow its a very ancient country and in that area Shri Ganesha is worshipped and people have become very innocent. They have Ganesha being established now, which is for 10 days. It is made out of clay and later on put in the sea or river. But as this coca-cola culture has also come to India, in the presence of Shri Ganesha they are singing horrible vulgar songs and drinking in His presence. These are all public Ganeshas. So I warned them in two lectures that don't do this, because if Shri Ganesha gets angry you will get earthquokes. They would not believe. In the third these people put Ganesha in the water and came back and ihey were all year drunk and they were dancing in the night. Suddenly this great earthquake came in and all of them were buried except for Sahaja Yogis. The Sahaja Yoga centre which was there, was not at all hit by earthquake. There was a big gap round the centre. The people ran towards the centre so that they could be saved, but they all fell in that big gap and died. Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VII Issue 1 15

 Innocence is very powerful. Anybody who tries to molest or tries to destroy somebody's innocence, is ultimately very badly punished by Shri Ganesha. Those people who do not worship Ganesha in their heart, con become right sided or can become left sided. They become right sided and get all kinds of diseases, which are more physical. If they get left sided they get diseases which are psychosomatic, which are incurable We have had some horrible people in our country who preached that through sex you can raise all kinds of horrible things in the Kundalini, they become tantrikas. These tantrikas did the temples. They put erotic insult to Shri Ganesha. They are all now being destroyed. So one should never try to challenge a person who is innocent, who has the blessings of Shri Ganesha. Only through enlightment you can awaken Shri Ganesha within yourself. May God Bless You Vol. VII Issue 1 16 Divine Cool Breeze



----------------------

1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1.pdf-page-0.txt 
 DIVINE COOL BREEZE
Issue 1
VOL. VII
You must understand the subtleties of Shri Krishna's personality,
Try to become extremely peaceful, kind, tender, helpful & caring.
H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi - Shri Krishna Puja, Cabella 1994
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1.pdf-page-1.txt 
 DIVINE COOL BREEZE
ISSUE I
VOL VII
Contents.
1. Shri Krishna Puja - Cabella
2. Shri Ganesh Puja - Moscow
Edited by
:Yogi Mahajan
: Divine Cool Breeze, 9 Bhagyachintamani Soc. Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411 029
Computex Graphics, 112 High Tech Indl., Caves Road, Jogeshwari East, Bombay 400 060
Published by
Printed by
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1.pdf-page-2.txt 
 SHRI KRISHNA PUJA
TALK BY H.H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
Cabella, Italy 28 Aug. "94 (Synopsis)
Shri Krishna is the incornation of Vishnu and Vishnu is the one who is the preserver
of this universe. When this whole world was created it was necessary to creote a preserver
also because this world would have been destroyed. If it is left alone without a preserver
then the way human beings are, they could have done anything to this world. In the
evolutionary process He has taken different forms.
many prophets around Himself so that they could preserve the Dharma of this universe,
so the basis of preservation was Dharma, In this Dharma whatever was to be established
was to be established by balance. It is a habit with people to go to extremes in anything.
He created an atmosphere of the
The first principle of Dharma was to create balance. If a person doesn't have a balance
then he cannot achieve his ascent. If you don't have a balance in a ship, it won't move.
In the same way, first human beings had to achieve the balance, but they are born
with different capacities and copabilities.
samstitha'. Means the aptitudes ore different.
different faces, with different colors, because variety was to be created.
looked the same they would be looking like some robots, everybody was created in a
different way - according to the country and the parents. All this was organized by
the principle of Shri Vishnu, that He created this world in different varieties. Shri Krishna
is the master of it. At the time when Shri Krishna came, people were very serious
type and had become very ritualistic. The reason was that Shri Rama came and he
talked of Maryadas. These Maryadas made people extremely austere type. In that austerity
people lost the sense of joy, beauty and variety.
It is said "Ya devi sarva bhutesha jaati rupena
We are born with different aptitudes,
If everybody
Shri Krishna's incarnation came as sompoorma. As the moon has sixteen Kalas He
too had sixteen petals, so He is sampoorna. He is the Poornima The full moon'. With
this completeness of Vishnu's incarnations, it was the total and it manifested. Whatever
was lacking in Rama's incarnation He brought it forth.
12 petals. With this He showed so many things which people miss completely. When
Gita was written down people started following the book.
"At this time you have to fight for Dharma, for the Truth".
my uncles and relations". He said "Who are you killing, they are already dead, because
they have no dharma". If you have no dharma then you are already dead. What
is there to kill or not to kill and that is what we see today.
On the right heart you have
Shri Krishna said to Arjuna
Arjuna said "I can't kll
Vol. VII Issue 1
Divine Cool Breeze
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1.pdf-page-3.txt 
 This message was given in Kurukshetra to Arjuna. Then He said "You have asked me
to kill these people because I have dharma in me.
beyond this?". So Shri Krishna described Sahaja Yoga. He described in the second
chapter "Who is the Sthita Pragnya?". It is the man who is balanced. Then he says
that such a man is never angry. Inside he is absolutely at peace. What he described
is really the modern times, or we can say Sahaja Yaga. He said howa person should
become. He did not say how to become that. At the time that Kauravas were fighting
| am killing then. But what is
During that fight He told him that if you become Sthita Pragya then
the Pandavos.
you can transcend all these problems, all these understandings that you have and you
become absolutely peaceful with yourself.
In modern tines we do not have to fight Kauravas. The five Pandovas have to fight
the Kauravas. What are these five Pandavas? They are our senses or they are the
cosmos divided into various elements. They have to fight the Kauravas which are within
There are 100 Kauravas. The nature has to fight something that is against the
nature. People will say anger is natural. To be aggressive is natural but now we must
know that we have the natural capacity to ascend.
natural to be a Sahaja Yogi. This is also built in us.
Then is sprouts. It becomes the tree, so it is also natural in a seed that all the future
thousands of trees that are gaing to be, are also in that seed. They are experimenting
now that in one seed they can get thousands of little sprouts, which can be made into
trees or plants.
LIS:
It is natural to go higher. It is
For example a seed is a seed.
US.
When He said, that you have to become Sthita Pragya' what He was trying to say is
that you should achieve your balance. This He told when there wos a war on.
If
you have to have war with people, or kill them, its all right, once that is over then
you have to build up your spiritual sense.
The building up of the spiritual sense is our work and that's what we have to do. Not
only dharma. Many Sahaja Yogis think that they are working and living in Dharma.
But that's not the end of it. That's the balance part. You have to go ahead and build
up your spiritual self and spread it.
He is the one who communicates. As you know America is communicating everywhere,
This is the work of Shri Krishna also, because
in a wrong way, but it is there. It has got computers, etc. All communication things
it has done because it is innately built in them to communicate. But because they don't
believe in Shri Krishna, neither in Dharma, so the bosis itself is wrong. With this wrong
basis they have started spreading filth and dirt, which is against our ascent and against
God and they are doing all this. Why are they doing all this which they are not supposed
to do? i think it's the intellect. It's the intellect which is also the brain, which is the
seat of Virata. With the intellect they say it is natural to be Adharmic. It is natural
Vol. VII Issue 1
Divine Cool Breeze
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1.pdf-page-4.txt 
 to be aggressive, money oriented. Everything that they have is all 'natural", because
according to them, with their intellect they have sorne how or other managed to convince
through your rationality, that this is the correct thing to do, without this you cannot exist.
This is supposed to be their culture. This sort of culture is all over and is accepted
because of the intellect. They are much more intelligent. A person who always thinks
of money becomes very intelligent, in the sense he becomes sharp. He becomes smart
and becomes in a way, as if he knows everything. He thinks he knows everything.
Whatever he does is right, whichever way he behaves, is right.
These Pandavas which he has got within himself, these elements that he has got, he
Uses them for a purpose which is absolutely destructive and anti-God. He is not aware
because his intelligence always justifies that they also try to go against what is dharma.
For example, even Shri Krishna's life they try to depict that Shri Krishna Himself had
five wives and ló wives later on. Actually these were His powers. Without understanding
what Shri Krishna was, because intellect is such a gross nonsense that it doesn't take
you to the right thinking. It always takes you to wrong thinking because you want to
justify everything. This justification makes you live with yourself. Otherwise normally you
connot live with a life which is Adharmic, aggressive, war-mongering type. All that is
expected of a human being; all the opposite, the juxta position of that is being done
in all these western cultures. You can see if clearly
how they justify immorality.
Christ was more strict than Mohammed Sahib.
eyes, you should take out one eye. Anybody whose hand is spoiling him, should cut
his hand. Most of the Europeans and Americans would have been without one hand,
according to Christ. Mohammed Sahib thought Christ has done so much for the men
why not do something for the women also. For looking at many women the justification
is natural.
beings. They are worse than animals and what a mess we have created with this kind
of understanding through these intellectuals, who are trying to tell us something and
He said anybody does anything with
Have you seen any animal behaving like that if the animals are natural
we accept.
One of the problems is that if there is an intelligent man, he dominates. For example
some fashion starts, we all take it. The intellect of an entrepreneur can really befool
you completely. But not with people who are wise. They will say, get lost.
about morality part. That is the worst practised in the West. It is worse than animals.
And that's how they are suffering today, with so many diseases, troubles, etc.
This is
Second thing which we always justify is violence. Now there is no war going on in
Kurukshetra, but you see violence everywhere. In America it is terrible. It's not only
in America, it's everywhere, because everybody's Guru is America. It starts from America
Vol. VII Issue 1
3
Divine Cool Breeze
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1.pdf-page-5.txt 
 and people just follow blindly. The violence has entered into our films. Killing somebody
is not allowed. Thou shalt not kill. Muslims are killing. Everybody is killing everyone.
This idea of aggressiveness ultimately takes you to the killing part. You can't even create
ane ant, how can you kill human beings like that? This killing business is taken to
the highest limit, like Hitler believed that he was top of the world. This is insane, you
just forget what you are and you just start assuming, through your ego, that you are
something very great. Also in Sahaja Yaga there are some people who are sayıng they
are Gods, they are deities. This ego business is actually taking energy
The greatest enemy of a human being is his intelligence, because it is so limited, so
conditioned, arrogant, and so blind.
of
your intelligence.
Wisdom is a different thing. You get wisdom through your spirit which gives you a complete
idea as to what is right and what is wrong. Whatever is wrong will be accepted by
. They are two different things. Krishna was known
to be the diplomat. He had Divine diplomacy. That means that He was very intelligent.
have met some people who very highly placed but do not have much intelligence.
I have now seen that this intellect is a dangerous thing. Shri Krishna used his intellect.
He is all powerful. Nothing can dominate Him. See the difference. You should be
able to use your intellect and not be dominated by it. His whole diplomacy was to
intellect. Intellect is not wisdom.
use His intellect, and use it for the purpose of Divine. All the time the Divine in Him
was helping Him to use His intellect. The difference is that we are slaves of our intellect
conditionings, emotions, and body. When you master it, then you see your intellect
very clearly. This intellect can give you ideas that you are the Lord of the whole world.
Or the same intellect can give you ideas that you are nothing. This intellect plays on
top of you.
You have not to be guided by your intellect but by wisdom, as you are Sahaja Yogis.
You have a very good instrumenit of feeling it through your vibrations, you can make
out what is good and what is bad. You can see that as human beings there are some
intellectual effects also coming in. But with Sahaj Yoga you can judge what is this intellect
telling you. The main thing you should go to the subtle point, how this intellect has
It has come to us becouse our brain became active very soon.
1 have
come to uS.
seen some children extremely intelligent, but they have no wisdom. If only the brain
develops too much, the mother and father maybe very intelligent, inheritance would be
great so they get it.
parficular country, you suddenly become very intelligent.
and English read all the time
will read every book. They know all about computers. All this is Avidya. It is not
knowledge. It is non - knowledge. So they think they very intelligent, because they
Like maybe you are born in a
I have seen that Americans
But what is the outcome of all that reading? They
Or maybe the circumstances.
Vol. VII Issue 1
Divine Cool Breeze
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1.pdf-page-6.txt 
 know everything about everything.
With this intellect, as consciousness comes in, they start creating very intellect ideos.
Specially in America, they have got all kinds of funny things just to extract money. For
example they have a golliwog which has a birthday. Sometimes even the people have
big parties for them. Then they started with celebrating birthday of the dogs. Anybody
who puts ideas into them.
to die you tell us what suit you want to wear or what tie you want to wear.
kind of coffin you want. It is to such an extent that some people say, put us on the
ice so we will be there. The worst thing in Europe is that they have nicely advertised
and marketed the idea of going for a holiday. Sa in Italy if a person doesn't go on
holiday, he will say that there is a crisis in my life because I could not go on holiday.
Then they say you go there tan yourself, stay in hotels. Everybody has to go out. They
are spoiling all the seashores. They have no respect for the sea, which is their father
They have no respect for each other. The women try to slim down and look very nice
so that they could become nude there. The whole industry is so bad. If you are intelligent
Then there are organizations that say, when you are going
What
how can you accept this stupid idea?
Sahaja economics is very different. We are not bound by all these nonsensical ideas.
that are prevalent as economics.
is how to impress people, how to sell things, how to do this or that. All this is nothing
but financial aggressiveness.
It is nothing but exploitation. I is marketing. It
Shri Krishna was the king. He lived like a king but also He lived in a very humble
abode, in Gokul. He was not attached. So the first thing is the way they are attached
to money, any justification for getting money is alright. Once we went to a hotel in
India. We had some American friends. They eat a lot and were eating but we could
not compete with them. They called the waiter and told him to pack the left-over meal,
because they had paid for it. And they had no shame about it. I said we don't do
this in India, because these are bad manners. They said, "But we paid for it. Once
you've paid for it then there are no bad manners". You cannot be miserly in Sahaj
Yoga. You have to be generous and giving. You have to feel for others. This is the
only way we con express ourselves. All this generosity is not to create a big hero ouf
of you.
The worst is Hollywood. If is the film industry. Under the name of 'Industry you can
do anything. This Hollywood is creating such horrible films, but the worst is that they
get awards for the worst films.
is eating the flesh of human beings and they enjoy. They even got awards for the
best film and best actor. Then they are producing films where they show all dead bodies
In one film there is a man who is a cannibal who
Vol. VII Issue 1
5.
Divine Cool Breeze
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1.pdf-page-7.txt 
 hanging. Why do these people like to see such horrible things. What is their character
where have they gone? Why do they enjoy things which no human being, who is
human being will enjoy.
The first principle is communication. How you communicate with others.
home with your children, wife, husband. Try to find out whether you are dominating,
Start it all
aggressive. It can go to any limit, this aggressiveness, either of women or men. Here
it is more women. In India men are extremely dominating. The basics as human beings
should have is good manners except that they wear good dresses. All manners are
they talk nothing but scandals. One
must understand that Shri Krishna never talked of scandals. How is that these European
countries are equipped with all the scandals of the world. What is the interest people
have in the scandals to top it all is media, because they have to make money.
such a hand in glove business, that the people like to hear all this nonsense so they
Atleast about 30 years back you could never hear
Now suddenly the whole
in dresses, but when there are people together
Its
have scandals in the newspaper.
such a thing.
thing has flowered that any magazine or book you read you can't understand what they
are preaching. They are preaching the cult of destruction. People take it and like it
and work it out. They are using the women for their own purpose and stupidly women
accept it. Of course they dominate on one side, and feel very happy they are dominating.
There was a lady boasting in a magazine that she has had 400 men in her life! There
is no place in hell for such a woman. Where will you put such a woman there. This
movement which is absolutely against the principle of dharna and of communicatian.
And all such.books were completely banned.
How should you communicate? Decently, with very tender and very beautiful mannerism,
you have to talk to another person and other Sahaja Yogis. You should talk in a very
You
Not in an artificial manner like the French.
sweet manner to another person.
should talk with decent language and humility. You need not go on jabbering all the
time, and talking too much. Shri Krishna's power was madhurys. It is the sweeteners
like honey. You have to know that you must talk in a manner that will please another
person. While talking ta anyone you can talk very sweetly, very nicely and in a way
which will please that person. Not to provoke, or say things which are hard. But some
people have a habit of saying all the time, which is something very provoking, which
If it is
is not good. Some people, when it comes to their business they are sweet.
something else, then they are very harsh. We have a Jain community in India where
if it is for their business they are the sweetest, but when it comes to something else
like donating, etc., they are extremely hard.
Shri Krishna was just the other way round. In His life time He was always a guest
Krishna
of Vidura who was the son of a maid servant but he was a realized son.
Vol. VII Issue 1
Divine Cool Breeze
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1.pdf-page-8.txt 
 used to stay in the humble abode of Vidura and eat very simple food, but He would
no go to the palace of Duryodhana. Shri Krishna never cared for money or bothered
He has shown complete detachment about His throne, kingdom or money
part of it. Once you are attached you have all the pangs of money. Supposing you
about it.
are detached, the same money you can use. Once you become slave of that money,
that money sits on your head. To
whole reaction is building up and this is where all the elements are reacting against
you. The people from Sierra Nevada, said is true "when we try to acquire more money,
have money also is dangerous these doys. The
go on acquiring it then there are looters who come along. The worst are those who
have got names as entrepreneurs. For example, they will say if you have a 'designer's'
watch, then everybody runs for designers watch.
Look at Shri Krishna, so wise witnessing everything. How He plays around, and how
he wins over. Supposing He was attached, He could not have done it. To get over
this, you have to detach yourself from this anti-Shri Krishna culture. "This is the fashion,
that's the fashion". All these fashions are extremely destructive. Not to put oil in the
hair and end up with bald heads. Whatever He did, was to destroy the evil and negativity
and to bring forth the joy, which is Raas. The Raas is the energy which you have
and that's how you play the Raas with that energy and enjoy. He brought Holi which
was very sensible and just to express your joy in a mirthful playful way, because that
was lacking in Shri Rama's life.
only for Sahaja Yogis, not for others. Others go to the pubs, etc.
He said, "Just allow yourself to enjoy. But this was
Shri Krishna has
said that we have to enjoy everything, but in a dharmic way. We should not be adharmic.
The dharma should give you joy. Otherwise, if you are dharmic then you become
absolutely austere and joyless person and sometimes silly. This joy you communicate
with others. Without this joyous nature, you cannot be communicative.
THB
He is the one as Virata who puts light into your brain. In that light you see what is
stupid and unwise. This is the blessing of Shri Krishna. He gives you the 'Neeranand'
because if you do not have the light you cannot enjoy the joy of your mind, or brain.
It is through His light that we see ourselves as something full of joy.
Another fashion is to say " It's too much ". Because the brain is full of nonsense,
so you tell them anything and nothing can go in their heads. The wise person, as
Shri Krishna who is the source of wisdom, has to be Sthita Pragya' means he has
to be in balance and in Dharma, and above that, he has to be in joy. You are not
Vol. VII Issue 1
7.
Divine Cool Breeze
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1.pdf-page-9.txt 
 only in joy but you know the Truth, the Absolute Truth. This absolute truth is the one
that makes you understand what is right and is wrong and you develop your wisdom,
not your intellect so much. You may see your intellect misbehaving, sometimes telling
you negative ideas, or oggressive ideas. You can become
Krishna has said 1 am the Sakshi of the whole world'.
a witness or sakshi. Shri
It
We have to see where we are going wrong and how can Shri Krishna save us.
is by becoming wiser, day by day. wisdom gives you definite ideas as to how you
have to be. You will hove the same smile as Shri Krishna had. We have to understand
I get Vishuddhi because this America should be
that our Vishuddhi has to be alright.
alright, otherwise my Vishuddhi will never be alright. For Vishuddhi we have so many
things in Sahaja Yoga which very few people do. Atleast if a few Sahaja Yogis keep
their Vishuddhi alright, will be much better off.
You are a new race, blessed by the Divine and you have Shri Krishna within yourself,
You should know what is to be done. One
awakened in His own glory and light.
must communicate. But what I see that people don't even meditate. Even if they meditate
they don't want to communicate. Sometimes when they communicate they think they
have become Gods. Human beings are a very difficult commodity to handle. You have
to communicate with complete humility, the way Shri Krishna did. In His Raas He spread
the energy of Radha into all the people, by holding hands. His childhood where He
killed so many people is over. Even His adulthood where He had to kill His own uncle
is also over.
Most of
When He becomes the king then what does He do. It is to communicate.
his expressions and quaities are seen after He became the king.
busy killing one after another, all these horrible people. After that He built Dwarka
and tried to communicate with people. Your duty is to build up yourself and communicate
with others, with all the sweetness and beauty of Shri Krishna. With full understanding
Before that, He was
Once you understand that, you will not
as to what stupid things are going around.
take it. You will become wise enough not to take to all these things that are going
you become the witness of the whole thing, you will see what is happening.
We have to stop them from going to hell. We have to really develop a really good
If
on.
personality of a Sahaja Yogi.
Divorce
There are many marriages that take place and suddenly they try to divorce.
Vol. VII Issue 1
Divine Cool Breeze
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1.pdf-page-10.txt 
 is allowed in Sahaja Yoga, but not this American style of non-sense. The husband or
the wife is dominating and then you divorce. What is the achievement? We have to
work out everything in us because we are conditioned and we are in an atmosphere.
I would request all of you to try to understand these subtleties of Shri Krishna's personality.
Try to become extremely peaceful, kind, fender, helpful and caring. In humility He had
no consciousness of money. Also, as you know, He was a dark person for some reason.
Whatever qualities are described or said, try to see how many we have. That's the
the introspection will start. Once you start introspecting and understanding yourself
the wisdom will grow. Not by seeing faults in others, or putting blinks on others, but
on yourself. That is how the things will work out. Krishna did not have to do that
way
WIS
because He was samepoorna (complete). We have to do all this, to see that we also
become complete.
There's another point I wanted to mention about Sahaja Yogis, that we introduce classical
Indian music for you people because it helps the vibrations. But as is the nature of
Western people, that anything they take up they must go to the ultimate end till they
I was surprised how people are lost in the music. There should
are completely lost. I
be some occasion. They are all already in another world with the music. Dont do
these things. You go to extremes of everything. That's not proper. Even pujas, anything.
To go to extremes, you won't be in the centre. You will not
You go to extremes.
be in the place of Shri Krishna.
As a matter of habit we create a world like that. Somebody has music world, somebody
has dancing world, another one has a world where they think no end of themselves.
"We have a special relationship with Shri Mataji". It is a very common thing. I cannot
have any special relationship. Nobody has any special relationship with me. This I
would like to tell you very clearly. You should not claim that.
May Gad Bless You.
Vol. VII Issue 1
9.
Divine Cool Breeze
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1.pdf-page-11.txt 
 O Most Resplendent Goddess"
Where the resplendent Goddess Shri Nirmala Devi is seated on Her throne,
We are transported to the Garden of Eden
Where jasminies and roses cast dn enchantment
Our Kundalini drinks deeply of intoxicating spells
Never to cast eyes on those dark satanic mills of the mind
Rise higher & higher O Mother Kundalini even beyond clouds
Where the sun shines forever in splendour of our Divine Mother
Where the Mather of the Universe showers
thausand benedictions
a
No evil eye dare cross our path
O Mother Nirmala, How many nights of splendour and days of wonder
have we enjoyed at your lotus feet
Even the stars of heaven gleam in memory of those ethereal moments
The gift of Sahaja world you have given us,
is the most precious treasure of our heart
The diamonds in your royal crown reflect your multidimensional facets
Your ruby ring wears the lustre of your warmth
In the jingle of your golden bangles we hear the
flute of Shri Krishna playing your raas
that protects with your Sudarshan
The pink pearls in your royal necklace
were churned by the oceans to cleanse our sins
The enameled anklets that adorn your gleaming feet
are embellished by our devotion
Your toe rings express your acceptance of our love in your heart
O Mother of all the worlds, thank you again & again
for gracing our Sahaja
(this paem was offered by Yogi Mahajan to Shri Mataji in Moscow)
Vol. VII Issue 1
10
Divine Cool Breeze
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1.pdf-page-12.txt 
 SHRI GANESH PUJA
TALK BY H.H.SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
Moscow 11 Sep 94 (Synopsis)
Shri Ganesha resides in the Mooladhar Chakra, not on Mooladhar. On the Mooladhar
is placed the Kundalini. She is the Mother of Shri Ganesha. We call Her Gauri. Now
we are af a human awareness, which we call as the fourth dimension. Without Shri
Ganesha it is not possible. He is the symbol of innocence within us. This innocence
never gets destroyed because it is eternal, but it may happen that it will get covered
by clouds by mistakes that we commit. But once you get your realisation, your innocence
is re-established and manifests. You become innocent. Your attention becomes innocent.
It is impossible to follow any religion, either Christ, Mohammed Sahib or Jews if you
do not have enlightenment. This is one thing they did not realize because they were
of a high level. They did nat know what is the condition of human beings.
As in
the Bible, it is written that if your right eye commits sins, i.e: goes against Shri Ganesha,
you take it away. Or if your right hand does anything wrong against Shri Ganesha,
then cut it out. When Moses brought the 10 Commandments he found that the Jews
were having a decadent society, as they have now.
There are no morals. Sahaja is
the only way where human beings can become innocent, because Jews were given the
Shariat where it was that if you are a thief then cut off the hands, and various portions
of the body. Shri Ganeshas is the Spirit within us, and He incarnated on this earth
But all kinds of things have been done against such great
as our Lord Jesus Christ.
people, and they made separate religions. None of these books have separated themselves
from each other. For example Mohammed Sahib has described Moses, Mother of Christ.
So he never established another religion.
fogether in one. But we have now people who do not believe that all religions are
born out of one tree of Spirituality. They are not only fighting with others but amang
themselves. In the name of God, they are killing so many people.
He was talking about all the religions woven
Innocence is the source of love. Like small children when you see them sweetly dancing
When you see a very sweet baby smiling
you feel such tremendous love for them.
at you, you feel tremendous love for that child. If you do not respect your innocence,
you can never be a loving person.
Vol. VII Issue 1
Divine Cool Breeze
11
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Without love you cannot know truth. Only thing is that sometimes we feel rather awkward,
sometimes frightened to love the innocent people. The innocent are most harmless people.
I do not like parents to beat their children. They, in innocence do something, so you
must be really kind to them and understand them.
Now-a-days in Russia also there ore many children who are born realized, because you
all are now enlightened and there are so many great saints who want to be born. Bul
you have to be innocent yourself. The countries where the children are not respected,
children don't want to be born.
There is a
minus growth in those countries. But
in
a country like India, where there is so much love for children, they want to take birth
in India, though there is poverty. Children don't understand money or material things,
they understand love. If you don't have love in your heart, Shri Ganesha cannot shine
in you.
The mother who loves her child, enjoys everything she has to do for her child. While
the mother who doesn't love the child feels she is doing too much. If you ask her what
is the matter, she will say
hove to wash this, clean this, look after this child and such
stories. But the mother who is enlightened will love doing all that and enjoy it. She
will have respect for her children and she will make them respect her. There is no need
to be harsh with your children. Children are very sensitive and intelligent. Maybe among
thousands you may find one child who is not so good. But later on, they pick up
things from elders, especially from parents and from the atmosphere and they start
troublesome. That doesn't mean that you should not control or restrict your
children and train them. Best way is to be yourself, innocent and dharmic.
Ganesha is the basis of morality. Moral behaviour when it is lost in a society that
Whatever may be the economic advantages, financial
society becomes destroyed.
advantages or political advantages, but they get destroyed from within. For example
- take the case of America which is supposed to be an affluent country, but what is
happening? Small children of 12 years are killing and selling drugs. In some other
countries in the west, so many children are killed by the parents. Every country which
is affluent has some sort of a speciality of immorality. They are absolutely violent, aragant
and egoistical. Innocence absolutely resolves the ego, and when you talk to children
and make such sweet comments, such intelligent comments, that you are amazed that
they are talking and saying all these things. They are extremely affectionate and kind.
Vol. VII Issue 1
Divine Cool Breeze
12
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1.pdf-page-14.txt 
 In the cose of Shri Ganesha, the Father said that the one who will go round the Mother
Earth first will be given a present. Shri Ganesha thought "That this Kartikeya can go
faster because he is going on a peacock, which is a bird, so he can fly. What about
me, I am just going on a little rat". But as He is the source of all wisdom, in his
wisdom He thought, "My mother is greater than this Mother Earth". So He went three
times round His mother and He got the present.
A person who is innocent is extremely humble. He doesn't try to show off. He doesn't
know how to show off. For example, Shri Gonesha has a little rat as his conveyance.
But if you see people who are show offs, they try to buy cars beyond their means with
big loans just to show off that they are rich. This is a disease of people who are not
innocent and people take advantage of this very much in the world. In the West they
have designers. So they put their stamp as designers. One has to pay a lot for that.
And they try to show off the name of the designer on their coats. Thus the entrepreneurs
take full advantage of the people who try to show-off. Innocent person is not bothered
about his own body, any fashions or additions to his body.
The foundation of Dharma is Shri Ganesha. You should see children, they don't know
how to tell lies. They say things sometimes which is emborrossing. The mother told
the father that the man who is coming in the evening eats like a hog. So this boy
heard it and when the gentleman came he was looking at him eating, then he said
You
"Mother, he doesn't eat like a hog, why did you say that he eats like a hog. You
should not tell lies". And mother was so embarrassed. An innocent person minimizes
by his innocence, the judgement and criticism of others, because they don't see things
which a person who is immoral can see.
in a swimming dress. It was a picture. She told the picture, "You go and dress up
properly otherwise my grandma will be angry with you". So when you see these small
little children talking, the way they behave and the way they are innocent, you really
enjoy because innocence is the source of love and joy. If you do not have love and
Once my own granddaughter saw a lady
you cannot enjoy anything, you start crifticizing, judging and wasting your energy on non-
sensical things. Like the other day I was listening to some good music. I had closed
my eyes and the music wos wonderful. I really got lost into it. But there were some
THE
ladies who were commenting on what clothes the musician was wearing, how he was
pulting his hands. All these superficial things they were seeing, not the essence. Innocence
takes to essence and the essence is love. Thus we have to understand that the quality
of Ganesha. We must all imbibe within ourselves.
Vol. VII Issue 1
13
Divine Cool Breeze
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1.pdf-page-15.txt 
 His quality of innocence which is already there within us has to be manifested. I was
in the house of a Sahaja Yogi and we had a meeting of about 25 people. The meeting
was over. I waited for all of them to go away. This gentleman was in the kitchen
when they all went away. He came back and said, "Mother what have you done? Where
have they gone? I have cooked for all of them". And tears came into his eyes.
was so overwhelmed by his generosity and by his kindness. When the generosity is
done innocently, you are not even aware of what you are doing. You just enjoy your
generosity and you don't bother to see the reaction of the other person.
We have in our Shastras, description of such people. Like Shri Rama.
the forest and there was an old toothless tribal woman called Shabari. She came before
Shri Rama and offered him some berries, and innocently told him that I have tasted
all the sour ones and thrown them oway and kept only the sweet ones. Normally in
India people don't eat anything touched by another mouth. So Shri Ramna ate them.
But his brother Laxmana was very angry. When she started putting this berry into the
mouth of Shri Rama, he was getting even worse. Shri Rama said, "What wonderful
fruits I have never tasted such fruits in my lifetime". His wife Sita also ate some and
enjoyed them. Laxmana finally asked for some. Shabari said she had more and would
He also enjoyed the berries.
give to Laxman.
Sometimes we commit the mistake that we get too much attached to innocent children.
We give them too much importance. Innocent is like a river flowing, if yoOu try to stagnate
it, then the children get spoilt. They must be respected but one should not try to make
them something very exceptional. They are all just the same. They may have different
facets. Firstly, they never get bored. If you are innocent you will never be bored. You
see beauty all the time. Even if you are alone you enjoy yourself. It is only the grown-
ups who get bored. Supposing you are at the airport and the plane is late,
older people will be very upset, but children will find something there at the airport.
the
They will find railings or steps and enjoy themselves. They don't want to make their
life miserable by just bringing everything to some meticulous definition. I have seen
people at airports feeling very bored and terrible, while the children are running up
and down and making friends with other children whom they have never met. Only
by innocence you can transcend your limited ideas.
I have seen parents who are extremely
racist, their children take to other people in no time. An innocent person is like that.
He can carry on with any person without thinking of what sort of color he has, what
Vol. VII Issue 1
Divine Cool Breeze
14
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1.pdf-page-16.txt 
 sort of face or hair he has. These things do not matter. These are superficial. Children
don't bother about superficial things. They just want to see the heart of the person.
If the person is loving, whatever maybe the race religion, anything, children will jump.
Innocence dissolves the ego. An innocent person cannot be aggressive. If the aggression
is there it is a very loving aggression. Like a child will say, "Why don't you give my
clathes to this boy?
" You will say "O God. I have paid so much money and you want
to give it away".
this to this boy". Innocent children do not have sense of possession. Also they do not
hesitote to share their things. But if they are brought up in a way that this is yours
and should be kept as yours, then they start becoming possessive of their things. The
He will say "Alright, next fime you again buy for me but let me give
best thing to enjoy life is to live with children and to be like that and to enjoy them.
This is how our innocence gets nourishment. In Sahaja Yoga
become very innocent. Shri Ganesha who is on the back side if your head, who is
Maha Ganesha, starts acting on the eyes. The lust and greed from the eyes just drop
I have seen that people
out, because you become innocent in your attention you don't have to take out your eyes
or cut your hand, because you really become alright. As Ganesha was created, you
are also created as innocent saints. Try to respect your innocence. That will make you
feel young and happy.
In Maharashtra we have 8 syambhu Ganeshas and I have seen the people of Maharashtra
quite innocent. Somehow its a very ancient country and in that area Shri Ganesha is
worshipped and people have become very innocent. They have Ganesha being established
now, which is for 10 days. It is made out of clay and later on put in the sea or
river. But as this coca-cola culture has also come to India, in the presence of Shri
Ganesha they are singing horrible vulgar songs and drinking in His presence. These
are all public Ganeshas. So I warned them in two lectures that don't do this, because
if Shri Ganesha gets angry you will get earthquokes. They would not believe. In the
third
these people put Ganesha in the water and came back and ihey were all
year
drunk and they were dancing in the night. Suddenly this great earthquake came in
and all of them were buried except for Sahaja Yogis. The Sahaja Yoga centre which
was there, was not at all hit by earthquake. There was a big gap round the centre.
The people ran towards the centre so that they could be saved, but they all fell in that
big gap and died.
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VII Issue 1
15
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Innocence is very powerful. Anybody who tries to molest or tries to destroy somebody's
innocence, is ultimately very badly punished by Shri Ganesha. Those people who do
not worship Ganesha in their heart, con become right sided or can become left sided.
They become right sided and get all kinds of diseases, which are more physical. If they
get left sided they get diseases which are psychosomatic, which are incurable We have
had some horrible people in our country who preached that through sex you can raise
all kinds of horrible things in
the Kundalini, they become tantrikas. These tantrikas did
the temples. They put erotic insult to Shri Ganesha. They are all now being destroyed.
So one should never try to challenge a person who is innocent, who has the blessings
of Shri Ganesha.
Only through enlightment you can awaken Shri Ganesha within yourself.
May God Bless You
Vol. VII Issue 1
16
Divine Cool Breeze
