Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VII Issue 2 & 3 In blind faith you have faith, but no powers. In enlightened faith, you have faith and all the powers. H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Diwali Puija. Nov'04

 Divine Cool Breeze IVI Vol. VII Issue 2 & 3 Contents Navratri Puja - Cabella Moscow Public Programme Diwali Puja - Istanbul Award presented to Shri Mataji 11 13 17 :Yogi Mahajan The Divine Cool Breeze, 9 Bhagyachintamani Society. Paud Road. Kothrud, Pune 411 029 :Computex Graphics, 112 High Tech Indi. Centre. Caves Road, Jogeshwari East, Bombay 400 060 Editor Published by Printed by Vol. VII Issue 2 & 3 Divine Cool Breeze 1

 The 12 Names of ShriGaneshha Sumukha Ekadanta Kapila Gajakarnaka Lambodara Vikata Vighnanasha Ganadhip Dhumraketu Ganadhyaksha Bhalachandra Gajananah offered at Shri Ganesha Puja Moscon, Russia Sunday 11 September 1994 "Shri Ganesha is such a support to your other Jou are all my supporis foo. But, to supporl me you have to be extremely strong and straight, because Ihave made you in the patlern of Shri Ganesha". HH Shri Mataji. Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VII Issue 2 & 3 2

 NAVRATRI PUJA TALK BY H.H.SHRI MATAJI Cabella 9-Oct.94 (Synopsis) The Kundalini has given you this realisation. Ofcourse Kundalini is a reflection of Adi Shakti and the Jagdamba is also part of Adi Shakti. She is placed in the centre of two hearts which is a very important point. Now all these powers are placed in that chakra. So imagine how many of these powers must be in there, and Her powers are expressed through the centre heart in all the ganas you have around your body. These ganas are the ones who give you the protection, the sleep the energy, and the blessing. All of them are at work all the time and these bodies are extremely dedicated and connected all the time to the Mother Amba or Jagdamba. She is the Mother of the Universe, you can imagine how busy She has to be to look after the whole universe. When this centre becomes weak, that means Her connection with the Ganas is reduced. Ganas also are weak, and all the powers that could be excercised cannot be done because of this weakness. It's a very subtle centre because it is Mother's centre. I's impossible to understand the love of Mother. When the girls get married and they become mothers, then they start understanding how much their mother must have done for them to come up. In the same when Sahaja Yogis become good Sahaja Yogis, like Ganas, they realize how much the ganas have to have, patience, love and intelligence to fight the negativity. So all the forces of the Jagdamba act towards hitting the negativity of all kinds. That is Her first and foremost nature, is to destroy all the negativity that is in this world and is against Sahaja and you. you sin against the Goddess, then all kinds of physical problems start, like psychosomatic diseases, Her destruction takes place in so many ways. First of all we have to know that if But some of the diseases have also got mixed up with the Ganapati. cancer, Aids etc. Now Ganapati is Lord of all the ganas, the Mother has Ganapati and She controls all these ganas through Her son Ganapati. It's so connected. When we sin against the Mother, means when we become immoral, that is when we start indulging into things which are not permitted by Dharma. Now you people understand Sahaja Dharma innately, from within, I did'nt have to tell you. Now you know what is wrong, or right. So any such things you try to do, because She is Mother, She takes time to punish you, if you commit sin against the Father like boastfulness, cruel, talking harsh, etc, immediately the punishment comes to you. But from Her, She being the ocean of compassion, the punishment is more Vol. VII Issue 2 & 3 Divine Cool Breeze

 delayed and a full chance is given to the person to improve himself and guide himself. When the punishment starts then you get into diseases which are of a very serious nature, it comes from one thing, what we call as fear. When somebody frightens or aggresses you. Somebody who is oppressed, aggressed, threatened or intimidated, then that person starts losing faith in the powers of Mother. This centre heart is to be looked after. Out 00 of fear if somebody is thrown on to the left side, away from the Mother, because She is the one who gives us confidence, who gives us courage and bravery. But if you are frightened or under fear, also you can be thrown to the left side, and you can get into all kinds of diseases which are very serious, and incurable. Another thing is that if you are driven by your senses into indulgences, without any Dharma then also this central path throws you to the left side because you are not worthy to be at the Lotus feet of the Mother. Now this centre is the one which, when we are afraid remote control and informs all the ganas that an attack the sternum starts moving like a is coming. But if you deliberately go to the left side and get into indulgenesses, then they are not bothered. Then they say, alright go ahead, do what you like, and behave the way you want to behave. All these different types of movements towards the left takes you away from your Mother. In America, a very old Sahaja Yogi came out of his shop where he was working. He got out of his car where there was a man sitting with a dagger. He hit him with a dagger in the centre heart. This fellow started bleeding. He said "I don't know what happened to me Mother, I got such strength that I caught hold of him, started fighting with him and I took the dagger from him. He had the handle and the dagger came into my hand, and the fellow ran away. But still I was not worried about my bleeding. I called my colleague and we went for half an hour, searching for that fellow." They did not go to the police. When they finally went to the police, the police were surprised because the whole shirt was full of blood. The police were shocked that for half an hour they were searching for the man. See the courage. Then he was taken to the hospital and then he was alright. They stitched him up. That is the sign of a person who can never get anyone of these horrible diseases, because there is no fear in his mind of any kind. He said I've never slapped my own children or fought with anyone, I'm not a wrestler, but I don't know from where I got this Shakti and how I did it. There are many stories about Sahaja Yogis like this and about so many, saints. How they were never afraid of attacking someone when somebody attacks them, or of protecting themselves from all kinds of horrible things with their courage. This is something one Vol. VII Issue 2 & 3 Divine Cool Breeze

 cannot believe sometimes, but it is happening everyday. I get letters from people how they believe in the Goddess, then know that She is extremely have been courageous. If you powerful. She is very intelligent and if She has to protect you She will protect you, out and out in such a way that you will not know how yoü are profected. But this faith has to be developed by experience, also how you have been protected always, how you have been helped always and how you came out of so many crises. But despite that if you get upset or worried if some clouds oppear in the sky of your life, that means you are still weak. Firstly if you are really worshipping the Goddess, then you sould have no worry at all of kind and no fear at all. Go ahead fearlessly. Whatever you are doing, do it fearlessly. any At the same time I have to tell you the other side, that one should not go about like a zombie, saying all kinds of nonsensical things. But If you have to do something, do it with clear cut ideas and also without any fear. All Her powers will start manifesting in you, a man who is fearless has nothing to worry about his sleep or well-being. Fearless does'nt mean you go on hitting everybody or saying all kinds of things. It means that you. are fearless and if anybody attacks you, can always protect yourself. This story I told because this was not a protection from within like Goddess protects them, but he actually protected himself. So the power had started working through him. You should allow your you mind and body to project these powers. We are otherwise here to do pujas, everything. Alright the power is there but your mind tells you this is not so. There are many stories and miracles people have described about this. You should not have any fe fear about anything. If you have done nothing wrong. If you are on the right path, you will be always protected. Now remember this "YOU WILL BE ALWAYS PROTECTED". Remember this and believe in this that "I am always protected". This is something very difficult, because perhaps, our mind gives us ideas like "O God, what will happen, etc". First and foremost thing is to be fearless, to make the Goddess express Herself. Take it like this, now the Ganas are following you. Now if the leader of an army is a frightened personality, what will others do, Thus you become dependant upon yourself. This faith also must be developed. I have seen people who are sick, so they must come and see me, because they do not depend upon themselves. They can cure themselves. There is need for them to come and see me. There are many cases where people have cured no themselves and cured others, just with prayer. But when the faith is not matured then they think should treat them, touch them or I should do this or that, now you depend upon yourself. Not only that you can help yourself, but you are going to help others. But if you do not have faith in yourself, that you can cure or look after and protect yourself, the whole thing becomes like, all the time the mother has to do the job. Vol. VII Issue 2 & 3 Divine Cool Breeze 5.

 have to feed the little baby, you can look after him, do everything. But when First you he grows up then he does'nt want his mother to feed him. In the same way the Sahaja Yogis should see that how many years I have been working, you have to grow up dignified and you should mature so that you can yourself do things properly. This maturity is there because you, Mother has blessed you. All Her powers, She has given you. But one power of patience is difficult, you have to be patient like your Mother. You might think it is difficult, but try to be. First of all 1 know many people who think they are spiritually nothing and who have not achieved anything. This is absolutely a sort of an escapism, that you want to escape your personality. Just see, if you introspect you will find out that you have developed into a real spiritual giant now. Nobody can touch you. You can do everything. You can look after yourself, you can support others. All these powers are manifested in you. But still you leave it to chance, and to others, but not to yourself. Now this is one point that no one has done this kind of a job is to connect all the disciples to the Divine Power, because it is the Divine Power of how you must know how to love others. That's very important. Some are too attached to their children. Before this they were known to be absolutely selfish and no attachment for children, wife or anything. But now it is like a glue, children are glued to then, wife is glued to them. I'm not saying you have to give up your family or child, but again I say the detachment is your power, watch everything in detachment. Now don't think "I came only few days back in Sahaja Yoga". Don't think somebody is higher than me and I am no good. You just introspect yourself and see for yourself how many powers you have already got. The more you will know, the more humble you will No fear of any kind. You can have fear if you have lot of money with you. become. If you are very well educated, you might have fears of jealousies. If you have ornaments, etc, you will be afraid of thief coming. if you are a politician then you might be afraid that somebody might take away your seat when you are away, but when it comes to Sahaja Yoga, it is the other way round. Who can steal your self-realization, who can steal your power? Who can steal your vibrations? Think of it. And who can steal your Love. Because it is coming from the Spirit. It is eternal and the flow. is all the time there, when you go away from your spirit then only you feel all these things, which you feel in the darkness. of Mother is that She gives you a state in which you are a Saakshi, a witness, Another power watching everything, you have tremendous patience. Whatever has happened alright, you get rid of a horrible thing called anger, and this gives you such a peaceful witness state, that you start becoming younger and younger. There are some Sahaja Yogis whom I gave Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VII Issue 2 & 3

 realization last year. This year I met them I could not recognize them. They have suddenly become 10 years younger, you become a peaceful personality because your Mother is there . This faith that She is always there with us, protecting us. But now we have grown always up, so She has given us all the powers. So what is there to be afraid, of this faith has to be not just a blind-faith but an enlightened faith. In blind faith you have faith, but no powers. In enlightened faith, you have faith and all the powers. When that happens to you, you start growing very much fast in your dharma and you are not afraid of virtues. You tell people, you talk about Sahaja Yoga everywhere and it works. your Once you don't have any fear the whole picture will be clear to you because you become Опce . Like how C.S. Lewis could see our VIsionary, what we call in Sanskrit "Drushtas". procession. How could William Blake predict our future. How could Gyaneshwara write about 'Pasaydaan', which is description about all the Sahaja Yagis. All the time he is trying to assure people. How could Rabindranath Tagore see our going to Ganapatipule. It happens when people are in enlightened faith. In enlightened faith your Mother gives you another very great power, which is of discretion. Somebody come to me and said "this gentleman is very good but nobody has looked after him. He's very well educated and a great person". I said show me the photograph. After seeing it I said 'no. Better keep him out absolutely". I could feel the vibrations from his photograph. One gentleman came and told me that some Nigerians have written a letter to him that you put $ 35,000/- in the bank and we will put our money also, in millions and then you can have one third of that. "I told him to keep out of it. It's a scam." When he went back to America he found out it was a scam. I told him the vibrations were so hot. You have got vibrations, you can feel your vibrations, now if you don't want to use this new awareness, what's the use of coming to Sahaja Yoga. He was very upset when 1 told him to forget it. I asked him why he needed money. In this way you can gradually experience, try to put the experience in your heart and have faith in that experience. What were you? What have you become now? How many experiences in Sahaja Yoga you had of the Mother's attention on you. Now if you have that enlightened faith in you, you become powerful. You are powerless because your faith is like this. But if you become really an evolved matured realized soul, then all your powers will work. There is a fisherman in India who is a graduate. One day he was going on a boat to another island to do Sahaja Yoga. When he came out of his hut he found a big black clouds hovering and Vishnu maya playing. He just stood on the shore and told Vishnu maya "Please tell these clouds to behave themselves. I'm Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VII Issue 2 & 3

 going for the wark of Mother and they dare not trouble me on the way". Just imagine, they got into the boat, did the programme and came home. When he went into his hut the rain started, you control all the five elements by your enlightened faith, for which you don't even have to say anything, the powers are so great that they act. Today when the puja was to be done, suddenly, it became pleasant. I did'nt ask, it could have been very cold. But this should become a faith which is reality, last time we had horrible rain and people had to pull all these pillars down. As soon as they started saying my JAl' it stopped. Now this experience should make you mature. These ordeals also come to make you mature. If these ordeals do not come then you will not supercede them; and if you will not supercede them, you will not know what is your faith. A person who is standing on the shore says I don't know how to swim, but supposing you make him jump into the water Because you don't know what you have and he swims, then he knows that he can swim. become, you do not know that you can swim. You do not know that you can save others. You are still busy with small little things here and there. But if you just know what you have become then you are going to completely change your smallness which looks like a little particle, will cover the whole sky. But this power that is within you will not give you ego. The test is that it will make you humble, extremely loving and compassionate, you will not hurt other people with these powers. That's the sign. It is Mother's love, the power of Mother's love. A person who has a very laving and nice mother, becomes a very nice person. It's a psychological fact. If you realize what you are now, what you have become. Navratri Puja is a very, very powerful puja, because it manifests and opens out the channels . Its very important and since morning I hove been flowing with vibrations It was like a waterfall of vibrations. The whole time I was seeing light. That's why I closed of your powers my eyes because all the time I would be seeing something else and not you people But now you are the light, light is not afraid of darkness, because it can remove the darkness. That's what you are you live with very small ideas about yourself. I'm not saying you should become like Gurus, who go around talking big with 2 horns in their head. Your decoration is your humility, your kindness, sweetness and the way you handle people. I also tell people when I find something wrong with them. But I tell them in a way that a person understands, that it is for the benevolence of that person. The whole personality and temperament changes. The whole face and movement changes. The style of talking changes automatically, as if the machinery has changed within. You develop the qualities of a real Maha Yogi. This Maha Yogi condition is achieved by also many people before, ALE but they had to go through very circuitous life. They had to give up everything, really from Vol. VII Issue 2 & 3 Divine Cool Breeze 8.

 the heart. They had to detach, get out of it, go to some far fetched places and live on ordinary food. Even Buddha and Christ suffered. They were incarnations but still they had to suffer. Rama, Shri Krishna suffered so much. You people did'nt have to suffer, on the contrary you all came out of the suffering into enjoyment, music, everything. To enjoy Sahaja Yoga in Neeranand, absolutely without anything but joy, then one has to know that he should give up all the myths with which he is living. Some people have myths that we are very poor or very rich, or that we are very unhappy or very happy, etc. These are all myths. What is the thing, is the complete emptiness that is joy. This emptiness is filled with joy. Then you dont expect anything from anyone and this emptiness from within gives chance to compassion and love to enter into. Supposing there is something in a pot already, what can you paur into it? If you are completely empty within then nothing of the past or the future, ambitions, aspirations, and falsehood will not come in. If you are empty, it is filled in with nothing but joy, and joy of such an eternal nature. As you know Devi's things are so very deep and subtle. How She took the form of the Mother and how She looked after Her Bhaktas with love. How She fought demons and also negativity. But now the demons have entered into your hearts. These false gurus have entered into your brains. Through these horrible books so many things are coming, all the time attacking. Even if you kill those demons, still they keep lingering in your heads. They have reflected into your mind. Once this goes away then they should actually be killed. Then only it's possible to eliminate otherwise they will go away and leave their bhoots into your heads. These negativities which come from wrong type of following you have hod, or wrong books you have read. Also in Sahaja Yoga when you come, you can be misled by some people. In that case also forgive that person. That person may improve but you may continue with the same funny ideas and they may suddenly come up. The quality is of compassion and love, fearlessness, courage, and the complete emptiness. In this emptiness you are not worried about what you have to achieve, how many people you have to gather, how many must come to Sahaja Yoga. Automatically it will work out, would not desire for it, and you will not hanker. We should not run after people but you who are negative and useless. But we must definitely take over the people who are genuinely good. Automatically such negative people will drop out of Sahaja Yoga. In one shot they will go away. They don't stay because they don't deserve to be there. They don't deserve to have the Mother's powers. So this happens in a very beautiful subtle manner. I go late to any programme so those who are useless just disappear and some of them Vol. VII Issue 2 & 3 Divine Cool Breeze 6.

 disappear half way through. Nothing goes into their hearts. They don't understand anything so they go away. The ones which are left are the real seekers of truth and all of them get realization. This is a natural selection that takes place and how people go away and how they come back to Sahaja Yoga is very interesting. This is a common happening in Sahaj Yoga. You should not get upset. Now if you get foo many people, say from Russia and not so much from Switzerland, then you should not worry because we are no more Russians or Swiss. We are Sahaja Yogis. Whether they are Russians, Indians or Africans, as long as they are Sahaja Yogis, we should be happy. When we want to share the love then we feel the dearth of Sahaja Yogi, not because we are Swiss but because we cannot share. That time a new personality rises. This new personality is the one which works. We have not given you any money or awards. What makes you work as hard in Sahaja Yoga, What makes you spread Sahaja Yoga. Only thing is that you want to share. You can't help it. But in Sahaja Yoga you share it because you are collective. You have become collective. You become a very noble person. You think "If I am so much enjoying, why not others, why should people not have the same bliss as I have". No words can describe my joy when I see you people working it so spontaneously. Because there is a sense of collectivity that is why this Marathi music has come to Cabella and is working out. The new age people talk of, is here. And new consciousness is also there. What is the new now, is the new collectivity. That collectivity acts that you want to spread. Like your hunger. It is another kind of hunger that you want to create more Sahaja Yogis, you want to have more brothers and sisters and you want to help them so that they could come to the pujas and become good Sahaja Yogis. This kind of an ambition shows that in your heart the collectivity is prospering and that's why you cannot enjoy Sahaja Yoga alone sitting in the Himalayas. You want to help other people. This is the sign of how the Mother's love has taken roots in your hearts, and how you are all going to spread Sahaja Yoga. You You just become great lights of your Mother, you have all the power flowing in you. have the light which is enlightened but you must expand it more and more, and you will be surprised what Tukarama has said "That I am like a small little particle of dust and also I am the whole sky". This is what your personality is. you. You May God Bless you. Vol. VII Issue 2 & 3 Divine Cool Breeze 10

 MOSCOW PUBLIC PROGRAMME TALK BY H. H. SHRI MATAJI 12 Sept.94 (Synopsis) outset we have to know that truth is what it is. We cannot change it. It cannot At the very be forced on you. You have to ask for it. If you do not want it, it cannot be forced. But these are the times of last judgement. If you want to go to hell you can go. If you want to go to heaven you can go. It is all your desire. It's the Pure Desire. In the triangular bone of Sacrum, you have the power to ascend. All of you have this. It's all your own. But this is the power of Pure desire, I see many people who think they are doing very well, they are satisfied and happy people and they are not worried about others. So we have to take to understanding. We must have wisdom to understand that we have to ascend all the religions where there is balance in you. But they became money oriented and also power oriented. This is the problem, that when we go to religion we feel so disappointed. They had spirit oriented. They have to seek their enlightenment. But they did not, so people lose faith. This is unscientific. You must keep your mind open to see for yourself if there is God or not. Only through enlightenment you will know there is. There is this all pervading Divine Power, which you have to feel on your central nervous system. The time has come for you to become enlightened. It is through your own power you will become the enlightened soul. As Christ has said that you have to be born again, but people did not attention to that. Thus we find that though they follow a religion, they are just fighting pay among themselves. They do not respect each other, they have no understanding that this god activity to indulge into power and money. Those who are seeking the truth have to understand that by paying money you cannot achieve it. God doesn't understand money. He doesn't care for money. To ascend is your right. To feel this all pervading is onti power is your right. The fime has come for you to get it. By doing that you will achieve a state of your being, which will be very powerful. It would be dynamic and at the same time very compassionate. If you are truly seeking the truth then you will get it, but supposing you are a hypocrite or arrogant and also it is not meant for idiots. Now we are on the crossroads. There are so many problems in every country. Even in To overcome these problems you have to transform human beings. Unless and until they cannot change all the problems they are having, this transformation has to take place. This will definitely change the whole world and will solve, on individual basis all Russia. Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VII Issue 2 & 3 11

 physical, mental, emotional problems and it will be benevolent for you, your country and the whole world. The time has come, one has to realise. And if it works, you yourself will feel this all pervading power of Divine Love on your finger tips. For the first time will feel it and then you have to believe that there is this power. If you are honest you you have to believe. What happens to you is most interesting. First of all you become peaceful within yourself. You see everything as a drama that you are witnessing. You get out of your problems and you can see your problems and then only you can solve them. Most of the world problems are because these chakras are in trouble. Because these problems come from human beings. If somehow you know how to solve the problem of these centres, you can solve your problems and the problem of others. When you get your enlightenment, your attention becomes enlightened, and you become a person without any lust or greed in your mind. You really become righteous automatically. Nobody has to tell you. In the light of the spirit you know what is wrong, and then your just give up whatever is destructive. You can help others because you have the powers to raise the Kundalini. You can know about your self and you can know about others. But the highest thing is that you jump into the ocean of joy. That means you are in a state of ecstasy? Joy is not like happiness and unhappiness. When our ego is pampered we feel very happy. But when it is punctured, then we feel that we are unhappy. These are two sides of one coin. But joy is singular, of all the things you know the absolute truth on your finger tips. If you know the truth and all of you feel it the same then how can there be any arguement and discussion. There is no quarrel, na wars, nothing. The time has come to enter into the kingdom of God, and God looks after you. You have to have connection. This connection is the Yoga which is very spontaneous, and all built in you and all the mechanism. You have to just open your heart and you can get it. Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VII Issue 2 & 3 12

 DIWALI PUJA TALK BY H. H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI Istanbul, Turkey - 6 Nov 1994 (Synopsis) Diwali means the rows of lights. It has been a festival of very ancient times in India. After killing Narkosura, Diwali was celebrated in the darkest night of the year. It is very symbolic of these modern times, because the worst time os far as morality is concerned, has been in these modern times. We call it the Ghor Kaliyuga, complete darkness, that's why there are all kinds of crises. Because of that also there are many who are also seeking the light. Because of ignorance people have no knowledge what they should do. At this time there are thousands of real seekers who are born. That is why this job was given to me to create Diwali, to remove this darkness of ignorance. It's not an easy job because one side we have all the dark forces acting against the truth. Also on the other side, we have to fight the false people who are toking advantage of your seeking. Firstly, people don't know what to seek. All these false people are money oriented and they try to work out marketing of their falsehood. Somebody asked me on Bogota television, what about the cults and all sorts of things. Its true that there are crooks, there are horrible people, they are criminals, they call themselves as spiritual. The mistake lies with the people who follow them. A person who is absolutely immoral, and dishonest cannot be a Guru. The Guru should not ask for anything, he should not be greedy. These things are already written down, but nobody reads what is required of a Guru and only they say that you have to surrender everything. The last day of Diwali, the brothers and sisters celebrate together for a relationship which is so pure and protective. This is to show that after putting the lights morality must be the first priority of the society. Immorality is the greatest darkness of modern times, where people don't know how they relate to each other. Mohammed Sahib passed rules and a man with bad eyes regulations about women, We said that any woman who looks ot should be buried half way and killed by stone. I don't know what would have happened to the American ladies. Modern man is even worse than a normal human being, because he wants something destructive all the time. I realised that it is not an easy thing to talk to human beings about any thing that is good without giving them realisation. Unless and until you give them realisation nothing can penetrate into their minds, lectures and sermons will be of a mental level only. Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VII Issue 2 & 3 13

 Enlightenment is the only way one can save this world. In the darkest night of the whole history of this world, we needed the light and many lights. I had to study human beings, what are their problems. In India we have the pot, or the container, which is made of clay. Then there is the oil and the wick. This body, this mind and all that is visible and within is all the pot. The oil is the compassion, love. The wick is the Kundalini, the pure desire: And the spark is the Spirit. First of all the container has to be alright. It should be able to contain the oil and should not allow it to ooze out. The two holes that cause problem is, one is Ego, and the other is conditioning. If a Sahaj Yogi thinks of his conditioning, that I'm a Christian, or I'm from this race, or community. All these limitations with which we build ourselves are so flimsy that they take out. Because there is no reality in them. They fizzle out. They all act like possessions and a person becomes absolutely After coming to Sahaja Yoga, Christians will adhere to Christ, muslims to Mohammed Sahib, other to the conditionings from which they have come. They cannot blind. see the integration of all these personalities in one person. One has to know on this point have got the light. You are enlightened, you have become a bird. that you You have to give up all that is falsehood. If you are fully enlightened you will give up automatically, you don't have to be told. The Spirit automatically feels responsible that it has to give light. It has to tell that you please give light, because it is light, because it is eternal light nothing can kill it. There is a Sloka "It cannot be killed by anybody, nothing can destroy it. Even if you want to suck it, you cannot. It is such a powerful light." You can verify it whether it is eternal or not. You have to see for yourself, you have got such unique light within you. In the history of spirituality of this world, so many have got realization, such light is them. How could these stupid, flimsy, useless conditionings dominate now, when you are the carrier of eternal light. When you introspect that this have the freedom. You is the eternal light, then the conditionings will be put off. That you IS want to have the eternal light, you will have it, otherwise this light can be damaged completely. Another hole, is that of ego. One side conditioning which can be resolved by the sense of responsibility, when asserted through ego, could be very dangerous. This light can become fire. And it can burn the house of Sahaja Yoga. Light is for giving us light and for burning houses. With ego in Sahaja Yoga, you can think that you are responsible for Sahaja Yoga. This responsibility should not give you an idea that you are in charge of Sahaja Yoga. Gradually you become so right sided that people are surprised, that how this man was normal and has become like a bull in a China-shop. You are not in charge Vol. VII Issue 2 & 3 Divine Cool Breeze 14

 of Sahaja Yoga. The government servants are supposed to be servants but they are the bosses. So the whole understanding should be of complete wisdom in Sahaja Yoga. The second part is the oil which is natural, innate and joy-giving. The compassion has to be pure. I'm seen many Sahaja Yogis who try to trouble the leaders. They oppose the leader and try to hinder the work of Sahaja Yoga. These are supposed to be Sahaja Yogis and they don't understand that if their compassion is pure they will appreciate their leader, because the leader is doing such a compassionate work. Pure compassion has nothing to do with greed or temptations. appreciativeness of the work, he or she is putting. Compassion cannot be impure. But One has to feel such dearmess with the leader and this compassion should be expressed in such a decent monner that nobody should doubt your compassion. I was told, it was written on Indian airports "Please don't kiss the custom officers". In modern times a man can kiss a woman but he can't Long time bock, kiss a man. Even if they make a goal in football, now they don't even hug, they just touch with hands. Now I've seen people who make a goal get so excited, they run out of the field, they don't know what to do. For Sahaja Yogi's we should know that man can kiss men and hug them there's nothing wrong. Men need not touch women and women need not touch men. What is this nonsense, you cannot express your love. A lady can touch the younger man and a man can touch a much older woman. Compassion has to have decency as fragrance in the body. How do we express our compassion. There are rakhi sisters and rakhi brothers. One has to understand that it is not for money that we should become rakhi brothers and sisters, but for compassion. You have to express your rakhi relationship just for the protection of each other. Compassion is so joy giving that it should not have conditions of maney or any other stupid conditions which will kill your joy. Anather thing also is, to express your love you give some things as presents, that gives you joy. It should not be by any chance that you just give to your rakhi sister and not to your wife. The sap of compassion has to rise in the plant giving love to different parts in different ways, whatever is required. If you have to be ambitions you have to be only ambitions about Sahaja Yoga, so that you humble down. There is one promise in Sahaja Yoga, that your life will be full of joy. There is no need to take out your eyes, cut your hands. If you have too many holes you need not come to Sahaja Yoga. You have become Holy. Whatever you have achieved is attached to you. Vol. VII Issue 2 & 3 Divine Cool Breeze 15

 Another thing that you are promised is bliss with the experience of joy. Maybe you find you were in an accident and you were saved and you are amazed. Everybody feels the bliss and you also feel the bliss. First it is in an abstract form. At that point anybody can know what is the thought. Later on it becomes a language. If you can jump at that abstract then you know that, but you have to put your attention quite a lot. When Kundalini is not working out well because there are problems in your chakras, what you have to say is "you are, you are", "you are saakshat", you don't say "you are Her Holiness", you say "you are Ganesha". It cleanses all the dirt and all the problems of your chakras. It also corrects your conditioning and your ego. Then you do not take the credit for anything, you do not feel you are doing something, and the whole personality changes into a complete instrument. Then you see your work, everything as the work of the Divine. That is how you become enlightened. That is how you become the light of joy and peace. Today we are celebrating a Diwali of the lights of Sahaj Yoga. I don't know what to say, in what state of bliss I am. All the ripples of joy are this overwhelming for me. No words can describe This light is burning through meditation, and you can become very strong because of the light. May God Bless You All. Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VII Issue 2 & 3 16

 Петровская академия наук и искусств Petri Primi akademia scientiarum et artium ДИПЛОМ Mrs. Nirmala Devi Shrivastava избран ПочетцыМ членом академин HASK KRAREMNA Amad5. B. AAN atapod a No ПИА 03 19 MAY 1994 Fpesnche * CAHNS-RETETS T ia cexpetaps Санкт-lетербург Россия Vol. VII Issue 2 & 3 Divine Cool Breeze 17 MCKSCCTA

 RESOLUTION of International Scientific conference Medicine, Self congnition, Morality 14.15 September 1994 Saint Petersburg Russia According to the opinion of scientist religious and social outstanding people of the majority of countries it is Russia where from the spiritual renaissance of the World will originate. If is not by chance that this conference takes place in the city of St. Petersburg which is a potential epicentre of the moral, economical and spiritual renaissance of Russia and the World. The nearest target of the population of this planet is to provide assistance in establishing of moral arts, spiritual intellect, love for good among the nations of Russia, practical transformation of St. Petersburg into the capital of the Spiritual of the World. If is practical and scientific help in the process of transformation of Russia into the Leading country of the World which is the target of the conference: "Medicine. Self Cognition. Morality EAST WEST". To achieve if we consider the following items at the conference: 1. All measures to be taken to strengthen economical, spiritual and intellectual links of Russia with all countries of the World and in the first place with one of the greatest powers of the word which is India. (Its attitude toward Russia has always been friendly and according to the professional forecast in 50 years its population will exceed that of China). 2. It is search, accumulation and research in all socially supplicant programs, best technologies, methods and directions of arts which lead to the moral, spiritual, physical and economical becoming of a human being (hence nation and mankind as a whole). Preliminary evaluation and selection of programmes, methods and suggestions for scientific 3. research works. Vol. VII Issue 2 & 3 Divine Cool Breeze 18

 All the participants of the conference express their deep respect and sincere gratitude to the Holiness, Honourable member of The Petrovskaya Aeademy of Science and arts Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi to his Holiness Metropolitus of St. Petersburg Ladoga region Johann who is an acting member of Petrovskaya and Academy of Science and Arts for their reports, wise guidance and advice. The Conference states that: All the reports of the scientists from Australia, U.K.India and Russia contain references to the positive complex of prophylactic and healing measures of spiritual nature elaborated and theoretieally, outlined by Doctor of Philosophy and medicine - Mrs. Shrivastava. Within the period of 10-15 years these measures are proved in the elinics of Delhi, London, Sydney etc. For the last five years they are used also in Russia - Moscow, St. Petersburg, Novosibirsk, Togliatti and other eities. Its effect can be observed as positive even for mentally retarded children. Conference resolves that: 1. Complex seientific research of the above mentioned practice should be undertaken in the framework of Petrovskaya academy activities. Academician Voronov Yu. A. is assigned to supervise the research process. TL! 2. A research centre entitled to the undertake studies field "Human being and Environment" is to be established. The main targets of the centre are as follows: 2.1. To elaborate needed minimum of technology with regard to psycho physiological aspects for physical and moral improvement of a human being (taking into account functional hypertension of today) with maximum effect for harmonisation of a bio system "Human being and its field of Activity". 2.2. Elaboration of ideological Program for Russia. 2.3. Elaboration of special guidance for improvement of educational system in Russia (civil and military), aiming to solve global problems of Humanity - practical formation of a harmonised creative and spiritually dynamic personality of a human being of the XXI century 2.4. Elaboration of a project and scenario for musical entertaining complex based on national legends, tales and myths (similar in technical aspects to "Dysney-land") with practical demonstration and education in the streets and corners of the complex all possible handicrafts, with a centre for spiritual and physical recovery, museums ete. for the cultivation of Kind, laborious, dynamic and moral youth. 3. The Conference recommends to establish an advising council for the Government of Russia out of best representatives of religious communities, scientists and social activists aiming to stop the Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VII Issue 2 & 3 19

 decadence of youth the antihuman policy on TV, radio and other entertaining programs (including advertising ones). 4. To elect a committee for establishment of a research centre "Human being and Environment" of 15 members including: 1. Academician Uglov F.G. 2. Academician Andriankin E.I. 3. Academician Voronov Y.A. 4. Academician Petlenko V.P. 5. Academician Sergeantov V.P. 6. England Seyshell Sara 7. Australia Shechovich B. 8. India Dr. U.CRai 9. Member of Academy Aristova N.A. 10. Member of Academy Belyaev H.H. 11. Member of Academy Bobrov A.E. 12. Member of Academy Kolesnikov B.P. 13. Member of Academy Malyavko E.A 14. Member of Academy Penyazeva G.A. 15. Member of Academy Chernyshev O.A. 5. To entrust the elected committee to act as the permanent council of the conferences for these items. 6. To hold not less than once a year international conferences in this moral, philosophie and gnosiological direction with participation of scientists, religious and socially active people, writers and other representatives of culture and art not less than once a year. 7. To publish the reports of the conference (with exclusive rights for the Academy). Besides the reports of academicians: Her Holiness Mrs. Shrivastava His Holiness Metropolitaus of St. Petersburg and Ladoga region - Johann and the patriarch of Russian science F.G.Uglov should be published separately. May God help us! By authority of the coference; Academician F.G. Uglov Academician V.F. Sergeantov Academician Y.A. Voronov Vol. VII Issue 2 & 3 Divine Cool Breeze 20



----------------------

1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_2,3.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VII
Issue 2 & 3
In blind faith you have faith, but no powers.
In enlightened faith, you have faith and all the powers.
H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Diwali Puija. Nov'04
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_2,3.pdf-page-1.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
IVI
Vol. VII
Issue 2 & 3
Contents
Navratri Puja - Cabella
Moscow Public Programme
Diwali Puja - Istanbul
Award presented to Shri Mataji
11
13
17
:Yogi Mahajan
The Divine Cool Breeze, 9 Bhagyachintamani Society. Paud Road. Kothrud, Pune 411 029
:Computex Graphics, 112 High Tech Indi. Centre. Caves Road, Jogeshwari East, Bombay 400 060
Editor
Published by
Printed by
Vol. VII Issue 2 & 3
Divine Cool Breeze
1
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_2,3.pdf-page-2.txt 
 The 12 Names of ShriGaneshha
Sumukha
Ekadanta
Kapila
Gajakarnaka
Lambodara
Vikata
Vighnanasha
Ganadhip
Dhumraketu
Ganadhyaksha
Bhalachandra
Gajananah
offered at
Shri Ganesha Puja
Moscon, Russia
Sunday 11 September 1994
"Shri Ganesha is such a support to your other
Jou are all my supporis foo. But, to supporl me
you have to be extremely strong and straight,
because Ihave made you in the patlern of Shri Ganesha".
HH Shri Mataji.
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VII Issue 2 & 3
2
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_2,3.pdf-page-3.txt 
 NAVRATRI PUJA
TALK BY H.H.SHRI MATAJI
Cabella 9-Oct.94 (Synopsis)
The Kundalini has given you this realisation. Ofcourse Kundalini is a reflection of Adi Shakti
and the Jagdamba is also part of Adi Shakti. She is placed in the centre of two hearts
which is a very important point.
Now all these powers are placed in that chakra. So imagine how many of these powers
must be in there, and Her powers are expressed through the centre heart in all the ganas
you have around your body. These ganas are the ones who give you the protection, the
sleep the energy, and the blessing. All of them are at work all the time and these bodies
are extremely dedicated and connected all the time to the Mother Amba or Jagdamba. She
is the Mother of the Universe, you can imagine how busy She has to be to look after the
whole universe. When this centre becomes weak, that means Her connection with the
Ganas is reduced. Ganas also are weak, and all the powers that could be excercised
cannot be done because of this weakness. It's a very subtle centre because it is Mother's
centre. I's impossible to understand the love of Mother. When the girls get married and
they become mothers, then they start understanding how much their mother must have
done for them to come up. In the same when Sahaja Yogis become good Sahaja Yogis,
like Ganas, they realize how much the ganas have to have, patience, love and intelligence
to fight the negativity. So all the forces of the Jagdamba act towards hitting the negativity
of all kinds. That is Her first and foremost nature, is to destroy all the negativity that is
in this world and is against Sahaja and you.
you sin
against the Goddess, then all kinds of physical problems start, like psychosomatic diseases,
Her destruction takes place in so many ways. First of all we have to know that if
But some of the diseases have also got mixed up with the Ganapati.
cancer, Aids etc.
Now Ganapati is Lord of all the ganas, the Mother has Ganapati and She controls all these
ganas through Her son Ganapati. It's so connected. When we sin against the Mother,
means when we become immoral, that is when we start indulging into things which are
not permitted by Dharma. Now you people understand Sahaja Dharma innately, from
within, I did'nt have to tell you. Now you know what is wrong, or right. So any such things
you try to do, because She is Mother, She takes time to punish you, if you commit sin
against the Father like boastfulness, cruel, talking harsh, etc, immediately the punishment
comes to you. But from Her, She being the ocean of compassion, the punishment is more
Vol. VII Issue 2 & 3
Divine Cool Breeze
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_2,3.pdf-page-4.txt 
 delayed and a full chance is given to the person to improve himself and guide himself.
When the punishment starts then you get into diseases which are of a very serious nature,
it comes from one thing, what we call as fear. When somebody frightens or aggresses
you. Somebody who is oppressed, aggressed, threatened or intimidated, then that person
starts losing faith in the powers of Mother. This centre heart is to be looked after. Out
00
of fear if somebody is thrown on to the left side, away from the Mother, because She is
the one who gives us confidence, who gives us courage and bravery. But if you are
frightened or under fear, also you can be thrown to the left side, and you can get into
all kinds of diseases which are very serious, and incurable.
Another thing is that if you are driven by your senses into indulgences, without any Dharma
then also this central path throws you to the left side because you are not worthy to be
at the Lotus feet of the Mother. Now this centre is the one which, when we are afraid
remote control and informs all the ganas that an attack
the sternum starts moving like a
is coming. But if you deliberately go to the left side and get into indulgenesses, then they
are not bothered. Then they say, alright go ahead, do what you like, and behave the way
you want to behave. All these different types of movements towards the left takes you away
from your Mother.
In America, a very old Sahaja Yogi came out of his shop where he was working. He got
out of his car where there was a man sitting with a dagger. He hit him with a dagger
in the centre heart. This fellow started bleeding. He said "I don't know what happened
to me Mother, I got such strength that I caught hold of him, started fighting with him and
I took the dagger from him. He had the handle and the dagger came into my hand, and
the fellow ran away. But still I was not worried about my bleeding. I called my colleague
and we went for half an hour, searching for that fellow." They did not go to the police.
When they finally went to the police, the police were surprised because the whole shirt was
full of blood. The police were shocked that for half an hour they were searching for the
man. See the courage. Then he was taken to the hospital and then he was alright. They
stitched him up. That is the sign of a person who can never get anyone of these horrible
diseases, because there is no fear in his mind of any kind. He said I've never slapped
my own children or fought with anyone, I'm not a wrestler, but I don't know from where
I got this Shakti and how I did it.
There are many stories about Sahaja Yogis like this and about so many, saints. How they
were never afraid of attacking someone when somebody attacks them, or of protecting
themselves from all kinds of horrible things with their courage. This is something one
Vol. VII Issue 2 & 3
Divine Cool Breeze
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_2,3.pdf-page-5.txt 
 cannot believe sometimes, but it is happening everyday. I get letters from people how they
believe in the Goddess, then know that She is extremely
have been courageous. If you
powerful. She is very intelligent and if She has to protect you She will protect you, out
and out in such a way that you will not know how yoü are profected. But this faith has
to be developed by experience, also how you have been protected always, how you have
been helped always and how you came out of so many crises. But despite that if you get
upset or worried if some clouds oppear in the sky of your life, that means you are still
weak.
Firstly if you are really worshipping the Goddess, then you sould have no worry at all of
kind and no fear at all. Go ahead fearlessly. Whatever you are doing, do it fearlessly.
any
At the same time I have to tell you the other side, that one should not go about like a
zombie, saying all kinds of nonsensical things. But If you have to do something, do it
with clear cut ideas and also without any fear. All Her powers will start manifesting in
you, a man who is fearless has nothing to worry about his sleep or well-being. Fearless
does'nt mean you go on hitting everybody or saying all kinds of things. It means that you.
are fearless and if anybody attacks you, can always protect yourself. This story I told
because this was not a protection from within like Goddess protects them, but he actually
protected himself. So the power had started working through him. You should allow your
you
mind and body to project these powers. We are otherwise here to do pujas, everything.
Alright the power is there but your mind tells you this is not so. There are many stories
and miracles people have described about this. You should not have any fe
fear about
anything. If you have done nothing wrong. If you are on the right path, you will be always
protected. Now remember this "YOU WILL BE ALWAYS PROTECTED". Remember this and
believe in this that "I am always protected". This is something very difficult, because
perhaps, our mind gives us ideas like "O God, what will happen, etc".
First and foremost thing is to be fearless, to make the Goddess express Herself. Take it
like this, now the Ganas are following you. Now if the leader of an army is a frightened
personality, what will others do, Thus you become dependant upon yourself. This faith
also must be developed. I have seen people who are sick, so they must come and see
me, because they do not depend upon themselves. They can cure themselves. There is
need for them to come and see me. There are many cases where people have cured
no
themselves and cured others, just with prayer. But when the faith is not matured then they think
should treat them, touch them or I should do this or that, now you depend upon yourself. Not
only that you can help yourself, but you are going to help others. But if you do not have faith
in yourself, that you can cure or look after and protect yourself, the whole thing becomes like,
all the time the mother has to do the job.
Vol. VII Issue 2 & 3
Divine Cool Breeze
5.
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_2,3.pdf-page-6.txt 
 have to feed the little baby, you can look after him, do everything. But when
First you
he grows up then he does'nt want his mother to feed him. In the same way the Sahaja
Yogis should see that how many years I have been working, you have to grow up dignified
and you should mature so that you can yourself do things properly. This maturity is there
because you, Mother has blessed you. All Her powers, She has given you. But one power
of patience is difficult, you have to be patient like your Mother. You might think it is difficult,
but try to be. First of all 1 know many people who think they are spiritually nothing and
who have not achieved anything. This is absolutely a sort of an escapism, that you want
to escape your personality. Just see, if you introspect you will find out that you have
developed into a real spiritual giant now. Nobody can touch you. You can do everything.
You can look after yourself, you can support others. All these powers are manifested in
you. But still you leave it to chance, and to others, but not to yourself. Now this is one
point that no one has done this kind of a job is to connect all the disciples to the Divine
Power, because it is the Divine Power of how you must know how to love others. That's
very important. Some are too attached to their children. Before this they were known to
be absolutely selfish and no attachment for children, wife or anything. But now it is like
a glue, children are glued to then, wife is glued to them. I'm not saying you have to give
up your family or child, but again I say the detachment is your power, watch everything
in detachment.
Now don't think "I came only few days back in Sahaja Yoga". Don't think somebody is
higher than me and I am no good. You just introspect yourself and see for yourself how
many powers you have already got. The more you will know, the more humble you will
No fear of any kind. You can have fear if you have lot of money with you.
become.
If you are very well educated, you might have fears of jealousies. If you have ornaments,
etc, you will be afraid of thief coming. if you are a politician then you might be afraid
that somebody might take away your seat when you are away, but when it comes to Sahaja
Yoga, it is the other way round.
Who can steal your self-realization, who can steal your power? Who can steal your
vibrations? Think of it. And who can steal your Love. Because it is coming from the Spirit.
It is eternal and the flow. is all the time there, when you go away from your spirit then
only you feel all these things, which you feel in the darkness.
of Mother is that She gives you a state in which you are a Saakshi, a witness,
Another
power
watching everything, you have tremendous patience. Whatever has happened alright, you
get rid of a horrible thing called anger, and this gives you such a peaceful witness state,
that you start becoming younger and younger. There are some Sahaja Yogis whom I gave
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VII Issue 2 & 3
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_2,3.pdf-page-7.txt 
 realization last year. This year I met them I could not recognize them. They have suddenly
become 10 years younger, you become a peaceful personality because your Mother is there
. This faith that She is always there with us, protecting us. But now we have grown
always
up, so She has given us all the powers. So what is there to be afraid, of this faith has
to be not just a blind-faith but an enlightened faith. In blind faith you have faith, but no
powers. In enlightened faith, you have faith and all the powers. When that happens to
you, you start growing very much fast in your dharma and you are not afraid of
virtues. You tell people, you talk about Sahaja Yoga everywhere and it works.
your
Once you don't have any fear the whole picture will be clear to you because you become
Опce
. Like how C.S. Lewis could see our
VIsionary, what we call in Sanskrit "Drushtas".
procession. How could William Blake predict our future. How could Gyaneshwara write
about 'Pasaydaan', which is description about all the Sahaja Yagis. All the time he is trying
to assure people. How could Rabindranath Tagore see our going to Ganapatipule. It
happens when people are in enlightened faith.
In enlightened faith your Mother gives you another very great power, which is of discretion.
Somebody come to me and said "this gentleman is very good but nobody has looked after
him. He's very well educated and a great person". I said show me the photograph. After
seeing it I said 'no. Better keep him out absolutely". I could feel the vibrations from his
photograph. One gentleman came and told me that some Nigerians have written a letter
to him that you put $ 35,000/- in the bank and we will put our money also, in millions
and then you can have one third of that. "I told him to keep out of it. It's a scam." When
he went back to America he found out it was a scam. I told him the vibrations were so
hot. You have got vibrations, you can feel your vibrations, now if you don't want to use
this new awareness, what's the use of coming to Sahaja Yoga. He was very upset when
1 told him to forget it. I asked him why he needed money. In this way you can gradually
experience, try to put the experience in your heart and have faith in that experience. What
were you? What have you become now? How many experiences in Sahaja Yoga you had
of the Mother's attention on you.
Now if you have that enlightened faith in you, you become powerful. You are powerless
because your faith is like this. But if you become really an evolved matured realized soul,
then all your powers will work. There is a fisherman in India who is a graduate. One
day he was going on a boat to another island to do Sahaja Yoga. When he came out
of his hut he found a big black clouds hovering and Vishnu maya playing. He just stood
on the shore and told Vishnu maya "Please tell these clouds to behave themselves. I'm
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VII Issue 2 & 3
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_2,3.pdf-page-8.txt 
 going for the wark of Mother and they dare not trouble me on the way". Just imagine,
they got into the boat, did the programme and came home. When he went into his hut
the rain started, you control all the five elements by your enlightened faith, for which you
don't even have to say anything, the powers are so great that they act. Today when the
puja was to be done, suddenly, it became pleasant. I did'nt ask, it could have been very
cold. But this should become a faith which is reality, last time we had horrible rain and
people had to pull all these pillars down. As soon as they started saying my JAl' it stopped.
Now this experience should make you mature. These ordeals also come to make you
mature. If these ordeals do not come then you will not supercede them; and if you will
not supercede them, you will not know what is your faith. A person who is standing on
the shore says I don't know how to swim, but supposing you make him jump into the water
Because you don't know what you have
and he swims, then he knows that he can swim.
become, you do not know that you can swim. You do not know that you can save others.
You are still busy with small little things here and there. But if you just know what you
have become then you are going to completely change your smallness which looks like a
little particle, will cover the whole sky. But this power that is within you will not give you
ego. The test is that it will make you humble, extremely loving and compassionate, you
will not hurt other people with these powers. That's the sign. It is Mother's love, the
power
of Mother's love. A person who has a very laving and nice mother, becomes a very nice
person. It's a psychological fact. If you realize what you are now, what you have become.
Navratri Puja is a very, very powerful puja, because it manifests and opens out the channels
. Its very important and since morning I hove been flowing with vibrations
It was like a waterfall of vibrations. The whole time I was seeing light. That's why I closed
of your powers
my eyes because all the time I would be seeing something else and not you people
But now you are the light, light is not afraid of darkness, because it can remove the
darkness. That's what you are you live with very small ideas about yourself. I'm not saying
you should become like Gurus, who go around talking big with 2 horns in their head. Your
decoration is your humility, your kindness, sweetness and the way you handle people. I
also tell people when I find something wrong with them. But I tell them in a way that a
person understands, that it is for the benevolence of that person. The whole personality
and temperament changes. The whole face and movement changes. The style of talking
changes automatically, as if the machinery has changed within. You develop the qualities
of a real Maha Yogi. This Maha Yogi condition is achieved by also many people before,
ALE
but they had to go through very circuitous life. They had to give up everything, really from
Vol. VII Issue 2 & 3
Divine Cool Breeze
8.
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_2,3.pdf-page-9.txt 
 the heart. They had to detach, get out of it, go to some far fetched places and live on
ordinary food. Even Buddha and Christ suffered. They were incarnations but still they had
to suffer. Rama, Shri Krishna suffered so much. You people did'nt have to suffer, on the
contrary you all came out of the suffering into enjoyment, music, everything.
To enjoy Sahaja Yoga in Neeranand, absolutely without anything but joy, then one has to
know that he should give up all the myths with which he is living. Some people have myths
that we are very poor or very rich, or that we are very unhappy or very happy, etc. These
are all myths. What is the thing, is the complete emptiness that is joy. This emptiness
is filled with joy. Then you dont expect anything from anyone and this emptiness from
within gives chance to compassion and love to enter into. Supposing there is something
in a pot already, what can you paur into it? If you are completely empty within then nothing
of the past or the future, ambitions, aspirations, and falsehood will not come in. If you
are empty, it is filled in with nothing but joy, and joy of such an eternal nature.
As you know Devi's things are so very deep and subtle. How She took the form of the
Mother and how She looked after Her Bhaktas with love. How She fought demons and
also negativity. But now the demons have entered into your hearts. These false gurus
have entered into your brains. Through these horrible books so many things are coming,
all the time attacking. Even if you kill those demons, still they keep lingering in your heads.
They have reflected into your mind. Once this goes away then they should actually be
killed. Then only it's possible to eliminate otherwise they will go away and leave their bhoots
into your heads. These negativities which come from wrong type of following you have
hod, or wrong books you have read. Also in Sahaja Yoga when you come, you can be
misled by some people. In that case also forgive that person. That person may improve
but you may continue with the same funny ideas and they may suddenly come up.
The quality is of compassion and love, fearlessness, courage, and the complete emptiness.
In this emptiness you are not worried about what you have to achieve, how many people
you have to gather, how many must come to Sahaja Yoga. Automatically it will work out,
would not desire for it, and you will not hanker. We should not run after people
but you
who are negative and useless. But we must definitely take over the people who are
genuinely good. Automatically such negative people will drop out of Sahaja Yoga. In one
shot they will go away. They don't stay because they don't deserve to be there. They don't
deserve to have the Mother's powers. So this happens in a very beautiful subtle manner.
I go late to any programme so those who are useless just disappear and some of them
Vol. VII Issue 2 & 3
Divine Cool Breeze
6.
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_2,3.pdf-page-10.txt 
 disappear half way through. Nothing goes into their hearts. They don't understand
anything so they go away. The ones which are left are the real seekers of truth and all
of them get realization. This is a natural selection that takes place and how people go
away and how they come back to Sahaja Yoga is very interesting. This is a common
happening in Sahaj Yoga. You should not get upset.
Now if you get foo many people, say from Russia and not so much from Switzerland, then
you should not worry because we are no more Russians or Swiss. We are Sahaja Yogis.
Whether they are Russians, Indians or Africans, as long as they are Sahaja Yogis, we
should be happy. When we want to share the love then we feel the dearth of Sahaja Yogi,
not because we are Swiss but because we cannot share. That time a new personality rises.
This new personality is the one which works. We have not given you any money or awards.
What makes you work as hard in Sahaja Yoga, What makes you spread Sahaja Yoga.
Only thing is that you want to share. You can't help it. But in Sahaja Yoga you share
it because you are collective. You have become collective. You become a very noble
person. You think "If I am so much enjoying, why not others, why should people not have
the same bliss as I have". No words can describe my joy when I see you people working
it so spontaneously. Because there is a sense of collectivity that is why this Marathi music
has come to Cabella and is working out.
The new age people talk of, is here.
And new consciousness is also there. What is the
new now, is the new collectivity. That collectivity acts that you want to spread. Like your
hunger. It is another kind of hunger that you want to create more Sahaja Yogis, you want
to have more brothers and sisters and you want to help them so that they could come to
the pujas and become good Sahaja Yogis. This kind of an ambition shows that in your
heart the collectivity is prospering and that's why you cannot enjoy Sahaja Yoga alone sitting
in the Himalayas. You want to help other people. This is the sign of how the Mother's
love has taken roots in your hearts, and how you are all going to spread Sahaja Yoga.
You
You just become great lights of your Mother, you have all the power flowing in you.
have the light which is enlightened but you must expand it more and more, and you will
be surprised what Tukarama has said "That I am like a small little particle of dust and
also I am the whole sky". This is what your personality is.
you. You
May God Bless you.
Vol. VII Issue 2 & 3
Divine Cool Breeze
10
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_2,3.pdf-page-11.txt 
 MOSCOW PUBLIC PROGRAMME
TALK BY H. H. SHRI MATAJI
12 Sept.94 (Synopsis)
outset we have to know that truth is what it is. We cannot change it. It cannot
At the very
be forced on you. You have to ask for it. If you do not want it, it cannot be forced. But
these are the times of last judgement. If you want to go to hell you can go. If you want
to go to heaven you can go. It is all your desire. It's the Pure Desire. In the triangular
bone of Sacrum, you have the power to ascend. All of you have this. It's all your own.
But this is the power of Pure desire, I see many people who think they are doing very well,
they are satisfied and happy people and they are not worried about others. So we have
to take to understanding. We must have wisdom to understand that we have to ascend
all the religions where there is balance in you. But they became money oriented and also
power oriented. This is the problem, that when we go to religion we feel so disappointed.
They had spirit oriented. They have to seek their enlightenment. But they did not, so people
lose faith.
This is unscientific. You must keep your mind open to see for yourself if there is God
or not. Only through enlightenment you will know there is. There is this all pervading
Divine Power, which you have to feel on your central nervous system. The time has come
for you to become enlightened. It is through your own power you will become the
enlightened soul. As Christ has said that you have to be born again, but people did not
attention to that. Thus we find that though they follow a religion, they are just fighting
pay
among themselves. They do not respect each other, they have no understanding that this
god activity to indulge into power and money. Those who are seeking the truth
have to understand that by paying money you cannot achieve it. God doesn't understand
money. He doesn't care for money. To ascend is your right. To feel this all pervading
is onti
power is your right. The fime has come for you to get it. By doing that you will achieve
a state of your being, which will be very powerful. It would be dynamic and at the same
time very compassionate. If you are truly seeking the truth then you will get it, but
supposing you are a hypocrite or arrogant and also it is not meant for idiots.
Now we are on the crossroads. There are so many problems in every country. Even in
To overcome these problems you have to transform human beings. Unless and
until they cannot change all the problems they are having, this transformation has to take
place. This will definitely change the whole world and will solve, on individual basis all
Russia.
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VII Issue 2 & 3
11
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_2,3.pdf-page-12.txt 
 physical, mental, emotional problems and it will be benevolent for you, your country and
the whole world. The time has come, one has to realise. And if it works, you yourself
will feel this all pervading power of Divine Love on your finger tips. For the first time
will feel it and then you have to believe that there is this power. If you are honest you
you
have to believe.
What happens to you is most interesting. First of all you become peaceful within yourself.
You see everything as a drama that you are witnessing. You get out of your problems
and you can see your problems and then only you can solve them. Most of the world
problems are because these chakras are in trouble. Because these problems come from
human beings. If somehow you know how to solve the problem of these centres, you can
solve your problems and the problem of others. When you get your enlightenment, your
attention becomes enlightened, and you become a person without any lust or greed in your
mind. You really become righteous automatically. Nobody has to tell you. In the light
of the spirit you know what is wrong, and then your just give up whatever is destructive.
You can help others because you have the powers to raise the Kundalini. You can know
about
your self and you can know about others. But the highest thing is that you jump
into the ocean of joy. That means you are in a state of ecstasy? Joy is not like happiness
and unhappiness. When our ego is pampered we feel very happy. But when it is
punctured, then we feel that we are unhappy. These are two sides of one coin. But joy
is singular, of all the things you know the absolute truth on your finger tips. If you know
the truth and all of you feel it the same then how can there be any arguement and
discussion. There is no quarrel, na wars, nothing. The time has come to enter into the
kingdom of God, and God looks after you. You have to have connection. This connection
is the Yoga which is very spontaneous, and all built in you and all the mechanism. You
have to just open your heart and you can get it.
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VII Issue 2 & 3
12
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_2,3.pdf-page-13.txt 
 DIWALI PUJA
TALK BY H. H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
Istanbul, Turkey - 6 Nov 1994 (Synopsis)
Diwali means the rows of lights. It has been a festival of very ancient times in India. After
killing Narkosura, Diwali was celebrated in the darkest night of the year. It is very symbolic
of these modern times, because the worst time os far as morality is concerned, has been
in these modern times. We call it the Ghor Kaliyuga, complete darkness, that's why there
are all kinds of crises. Because of that also there are many who are also seeking the light.
Because of ignorance people have no knowledge what they should do. At this time there
are thousands of real seekers who are born. That is why this job was given to me to create
Diwali, to remove this darkness of ignorance.
It's not an easy job because one side we have all the dark forces acting against the truth.
Also on the other side, we have to fight the false people who are toking advantage of your
seeking. Firstly, people don't know what to seek. All these false people are money oriented
and they try to work out marketing of their falsehood. Somebody asked me on Bogota
television, what about the cults and all sorts of things. Its true that there are crooks, there
are horrible people, they are criminals, they call themselves as spiritual. The mistake lies
with the people who follow them. A person who is absolutely immoral, and dishonest
cannot be a Guru. The Guru should not ask for anything, he should not be greedy. These
things are already written down, but nobody reads what is required of a Guru and only
they say that you have to surrender everything.
The last day of Diwali, the brothers and sisters celebrate together for a relationship which
is so pure and protective. This is to show that after putting the lights morality must be
the first priority of the society. Immorality is the greatest darkness of modern times, where
people don't know how they relate to each other.
Mohammed Sahib passed rules and
a man with bad eyes
regulations about women, We said that any woman who looks ot
should be buried half way and killed by stone. I don't know what would have happened
to the American ladies. Modern man is even worse than a normal human being, because
he wants something destructive all the time.
I realised that it is not an easy thing to talk to human beings about any thing that is good
without giving them realisation. Unless and until you give them realisation nothing can
penetrate into their minds, lectures and sermons will be of a mental level only.
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VII Issue 2 & 3
13
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_2,3.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Enlightenment is the only way one can save this world. In the darkest night of the whole
history of this world, we needed the light and many lights. I had to study human beings,
what are their problems. In India we have the pot, or the container, which is made of
clay. Then there is the oil and the wick. This body, this mind and all that is visible and
within is all the pot. The oil is the compassion, love. The wick is the Kundalini, the pure
desire: And the spark is the Spirit. First of all the container has to be alright. It should
be able to contain the oil and should not allow it to ooze out. The two holes that cause
problem is, one is Ego, and the other is conditioning. If a Sahaj Yogi thinks of his
conditioning, that I'm a Christian, or I'm from this race, or community. All these limitations
with which we build ourselves are so flimsy that they take out. Because there is no reality
in them. They fizzle out. They all act like possessions and a person becomes absolutely
After coming to Sahaja Yoga, Christians will adhere to Christ, muslims to
Mohammed Sahib, other to the conditionings from which they have come. They cannot
blind.
see the integration of all these personalities in one person. One has to know on this point
have got the light. You are enlightened, you have become a bird.
that you
You have to give up all that is falsehood. If you are fully enlightened you will give up
automatically, you don't have to be told. The Spirit automatically feels responsible that it
has to give light. It has to tell that you please give light, because it is light, because it
is eternal light nothing can kill it. There is a Sloka "It cannot be killed by anybody, nothing
can destroy it. Even if you want to suck it, you cannot. It is such a powerful light." You
can verify it whether it is eternal or not. You have to see for yourself, you have got such
unique light within you. In the history of spirituality of this world, so many have got
realization, such light is them. How could these stupid, flimsy, useless conditionings
dominate now, when you are the carrier of eternal light. When you introspect that this
have the freedom. You
is the eternal light, then the conditionings will be put off. That you
IS
want to have the eternal light, you will have it, otherwise this light can be damaged
completely.
Another hole, is that of ego. One side conditioning which can be resolved by the sense
of responsibility, when asserted through ego, could be very dangerous. This light can
become fire. And it can burn the house of Sahaja Yoga. Light is for giving us light and
for burning houses. With ego in Sahaja Yoga, you can think that you are responsible for
Sahaja Yoga. This responsibility should not give you an idea that you are in charge of
Sahaja Yoga. Gradually you become so right sided that people are surprised, that how
this man was normal and has become like a bull in a China-shop. You are not in charge
Vol. VII Issue 2 & 3
Divine Cool Breeze
14
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_2,3.pdf-page-15.txt 
 of Sahaja Yoga. The government servants are supposed to be servants but they are the
bosses. So the whole understanding should be of complete wisdom in Sahaja Yoga.
The second part is the oil which is natural, innate and joy-giving. The compassion has
to be pure. I'm seen many Sahaja Yogis who try to trouble the leaders. They oppose the
leader and try to hinder the work of Sahaja Yoga. These are supposed to be Sahaja Yogis
and they don't understand that if their compassion is pure they will appreciate their leader,
because the leader is doing such a compassionate work. Pure compassion has nothing
to do with greed or temptations.
appreciativeness of the work, he or she is putting. Compassion cannot be impure. But
One has to feel such dearmess with the leader and
this compassion should be expressed in such a decent monner that nobody should doubt
your compassion. I was told, it was written on Indian airports "Please
don't kiss the custom officers". In modern times a man can kiss a woman but he can't
Long time bock,
kiss a man. Even if they make a goal in football, now they don't even hug, they just touch
with hands. Now I've seen people who make a goal get so excited, they run out of the
field, they don't know what to do. For Sahaja Yogi's we should know that man can kiss
men and hug them there's nothing wrong. Men need not touch women and women need
not touch men. What is this nonsense, you cannot express your love. A lady can touch
the younger man and a man can touch a much older woman. Compassion has to have
decency as fragrance in the body. How do we express our compassion. There are rakhi
sisters and rakhi brothers. One has to understand that it is not for money that we should
become rakhi brothers and sisters, but for compassion. You have to express your rakhi
relationship just for the protection of each other.
Compassion is so joy giving that it should not have conditions of maney or any other stupid
conditions which will kill your joy.
Anather thing also is, to express your love you give
some things as presents, that gives you joy. It should not be by any chance that you just
give to your rakhi sister and not to your wife. The sap of compassion has to rise in the
plant giving love to different parts in different ways, whatever is required.
If you have to be ambitions you have to be only ambitions about Sahaja Yoga, so that
you humble down. There is one promise in Sahaja Yoga, that your life will be full of joy.
There is no need to take out your eyes, cut your hands. If you have too many holes you
need not come to Sahaja Yoga. You have become Holy. Whatever you have achieved
is attached to you.
Vol. VII Issue 2 & 3
Divine Cool Breeze
15
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_2,3.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Another thing that you are promised is bliss with the experience of joy. Maybe you find
you were in an accident and you were saved and you are amazed. Everybody feels the
bliss and you also feel the bliss. First it is in an abstract form. At that point anybody
can know what is the thought. Later on it becomes a language. If you can jump at that
abstract then you know that, but you have to put your attention quite a lot. When
Kundalini is not working out well because there are problems in your chakras, what you
have to say is "you are, you are", "you are saakshat", you don't say "you are Her Holiness",
you say "you are Ganesha". It cleanses all the dirt and all the problems of your chakras.
It also corrects your conditioning and your ego. Then you do not take the credit for
anything, you do not feel you are doing something, and the whole personality changes into
a complete instrument. Then you see your work, everything as the work of the Divine. That
is how you become enlightened. That is how you become the light of joy and peace.
Today we are celebrating a Diwali of the lights of Sahaj Yoga. I don't know what to say,
in what state of bliss I am. All the ripples of joy are this overwhelming for me. No words
can describe This light is burning through meditation, and you can become very strong
because of the light.
May God Bless You All.
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VII Issue 2 & 3
16
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_2,3.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Петровская академия
наук и искусств
Petri Primi akademia
scientiarum et artium
ДИПЛОМ
Mrs. Nirmala Devi
Shrivastava
избран
ПочетцыМ членом
академин
HASK
KRAREMNA
Amad5.
B.
AAN atapod a
No
ПИА 03 19 MAY 1994
Fpesnche
* CAHNS-RETETS
T ia cexpetaps
Санкт-lетербург
Россия
Vol. VII Issue 2 & 3
Divine Cool Breeze
17
MCKSCCTA
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_2,3.pdf-page-18.txt 
 RESOLUTION
of International Scientific conference
Medicine, Self congnition, Morality
14.15 September 1994
Saint Petersburg
Russia
According to the opinion of scientist religious and social outstanding people of the majority of
countries it is Russia where from the spiritual renaissance of the World will originate.
If is not by chance that this conference takes place in the city of St. Petersburg
which is a potential
epicentre of the moral, economical and spiritual renaissance of Russia and the World. The nearest
target of the population of this planet is to provide assistance in establishing of moral arts, spiritual
intellect, love for good among the nations of Russia, practical transformation of St. Petersburg into
the capital of the Spiritual of the World.
If is practical and scientific help in the process of transformation of Russia into the Leading country
of the World which is the target of the conference: "Medicine. Self Cognition. Morality EAST
WEST".
To achieve if we consider the following items at the conference:
1. All measures to be taken to strengthen economical, spiritual and intellectual links of Russia with
all countries of the World and in the first place with one of the greatest powers of the word which
is India. (Its attitude toward Russia has always been friendly and according to the professional
forecast in 50 years its population will exceed that of China).
2. It is search, accumulation and research in all socially supplicant programs, best technologies,
methods and directions of arts which lead to the moral, spiritual, physical and economical becoming
of a human being (hence nation and mankind as a whole).
Preliminary evaluation and selection of programmes, methods and suggestions for scientific
3.
research works.
Vol. VII Issue 2 & 3
Divine Cool Breeze
18
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_2,3.pdf-page-19.txt 
 All the participants of the conference express their deep respect and sincere gratitude to the Holiness,
Honourable member of The Petrovskaya Aeademy of Science and arts Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi to
his Holiness Metropolitus of St. Petersburg Ladoga region Johann who is an acting member of
Petrovskaya and Academy of Science and Arts for their reports, wise guidance and advice.
The Conference states that:
All the reports of the scientists from Australia, U.K.India and Russia contain references to the positive
complex of prophylactic and healing measures of spiritual nature elaborated and theoretieally,
outlined by Doctor of Philosophy and medicine - Mrs. Shrivastava.
Within the period of 10-15 years these measures are proved in the elinics of Delhi, London, Sydney
etc. For the last five years they are used also in Russia - Moscow, St. Petersburg, Novosibirsk,
Togliatti and other eities. Its effect can be observed as positive even for mentally retarded children.
Conference resolves that:
1. Complex seientific research of the above mentioned practice should be undertaken in the
framework of Petrovskaya academy activities. Academician Voronov Yu. A. is assigned to supervise
the research process.
TL!
2. A research centre entitled to the undertake studies field "Human being and Environment" is to be
established. The main targets of the centre are as follows:
2.1. To elaborate needed minimum of technology with regard to psycho physiological aspects for
physical and moral improvement of a human being (taking into account functional hypertension of
today) with maximum effect for harmonisation of a bio system "Human being and its field of
Activity".
2.2. Elaboration of ideological Program for Russia.
2.3. Elaboration of special guidance for improvement of educational system in Russia (civil and
military), aiming to solve global problems of Humanity - practical formation of a harmonised creative
and spiritually dynamic personality of a human being of the XXI century
2.4. Elaboration of a project and scenario for musical entertaining complex based on national
legends, tales and myths (similar in technical aspects to "Dysney-land") with practical demonstration
and education in the streets and corners of the complex all possible handicrafts, with a centre for
spiritual and physical recovery, museums ete. for the cultivation of Kind, laborious, dynamic and
moral youth.
3. The Conference recommends to establish an advising council for the Government of Russia out
of best representatives of religious communities, scientists and social activists aiming to stop the
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VII Issue 2 & 3
19
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_2,3.pdf-page-20.txt 
 decadence of youth the antihuman policy on TV, radio and other entertaining programs (including
advertising ones).
4. To elect a committee for establishment of a research centre "Human being and Environment" of
15 members including:
1. Academician Uglov F.G.
2. Academician Andriankin E.I.
3. Academician Voronov Y.A.
4. Academician Petlenko V.P.
5. Academician Sergeantov V.P.
6. England Seyshell Sara
7. Australia Shechovich B.
8. India Dr. U.CRai
9. Member of Academy Aristova N.A.
10. Member of Academy Belyaev H.H.
11. Member of Academy Bobrov A.E.
12. Member of Academy Kolesnikov B.P.
13. Member of Academy Malyavko E.A
14. Member of Academy Penyazeva G.A.
15. Member of Academy Chernyshev O.A.
5. To entrust the elected committee to act as the permanent council of the conferences for these items.
6. To hold not less than once a year international conferences in this moral, philosophie and
gnosiological direction with participation of scientists, religious and socially active people, writers and
other representatives of culture and art not less than once a year.
7. To publish the reports of the conference (with exclusive rights for the Academy). Besides the
reports of academicians: Her Holiness Mrs. Shrivastava His Holiness Metropolitaus of St. Petersburg
and Ladoga region - Johann and the patriarch of Russian science F.G.Uglov should be published
separately.
May God help us!
By authority of the coference;
Academician F.G. Uglov
Academician V.F. Sergeantov
Academician Y.A. Voronov
Vol. VII Issue 2 & 3
Divine Cool Breeze
20
