DIVINE COOL BREEZE ISSUE 11 & 12 VOLUME VII Without Your attention you cannot work out Sahaja Yoga. Your attention has to be towards God Almighty. Otherwise nothing can work out. H H. Shri. Mataji Nirmala Devi Guru Puja 1995. Cabella, Italy.

 DIVINE COOL BREEZE ISSUE 11 & 12 VOL. VII Contents: Guru Puja, Cabella, Italy. 2. Shri Krishna Puja, Cabella, Italy. 3. Shri Ganesha Puja, cabella, Italy. Edited by Published by : Divine Cool Breeze, 9 Bhagyachintamani Soc., Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411 029. Printed by : Yogi Mahajan : Golden Arts, 2/11, Bandal Complex, Paud Road, Pune 411 029. Vol. VII Issue 11 & 12 Divine Cool Breeze

 GURU PUJA TALK H. H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI Cabella, Italy. July 1995 (Synopsis) It is a very important Guru Puja today because we have completed 25 years of Guru Puja. It's a question of understanding what Sahaja Yoga is. It's a very unique discovery I feel now, that people who were seeking the truth have found it and have now got it absolutely, on their central nervous system. In some places that seems to be difficult how it has happened, how it has worked out and how in these 25 years we have been able to achieve this expansion of Sahaja Yoga. The main thing that you all should know is that as the tree grows, the roots have to grow much deeper and should spread also deeper. It does not happen that the tree can be sustained only by the mother earth. The roots are in your own life, in your own heart. When we say we have become our own Guru we should really try to find out with our introspection, are we our guru or not? Because before this your mind was on one side, your heart was on another side and your attention was in another dimension. These three were creating confusion within you. If you understand a human being then you will be surprised that these three things act separately in human beings and sometimes they fight also. Then it is your intellect and your mind, second is your heart, your feelings and your emotions, the third is your attention. In this modern times this confusion is the worst because all the time your attention is outside. It could be towards beautiful things, beautiful women, beautiful men, all kinds of nonsensical things, a way of wasting energy. Such attention is absolutely like a loose horse, you cannot control such an attention. This attention runs from one thing to another. It's a fashion also, it's sort of a very popular thing to keep the attention moving all the time. But this attention that has to be towards the Divine, towards the Almighty is just being frittered away. First is to find out about yourself. Where does your attention go? What makes you feel like, looking after, concerned for your attention? See the bad attention comes from various problems, and could be your upbringing where you are not controlled, could be your education, could be the atmosphere in which these outside energies or negative forces and it gets entangled, like a river flowing straight into the ocean can get lost in a barren face. In the same way this attention that should go towards the Divine gets frittered away and is finished. This attention cannot take you towards The Divine. Ultimately you find that all this attention is completely been absorbed and frittered away. In these modern times as you know, its a very chaotic condition. In this chaotic condition you do't know that there are all kinds of attractions which can take away your attention and reduce the energy of your attention. It's possible more for the people who are very right sided, also the left sided people can be very much affected. Right sided people go up to a point and become extremely dry. self-opiniated and aggressive. All their attention is in aggression. While the people who are on the left side are indulging too much into their own whims, desires and temptations. Both sides ean fritter away your attention which is the most important thing. But the attention cannot be controlled by a person who has a weak mind and a weak heart. Now supposing you take an intelligent person, the intelligent person would solve his attention by encapturing the attention of others. I don't know why but it's a kind of a paradise. The person who himself is having such a lot of aggressiveness tries to be sweet with people just to keep good relation so that they pay attention to that person. This is a very subtle thing. They are not even aware of it. In modern times so many stupid things people do just to attract attention of others. Most of the fads that live, could be your own ego or your conditionings. This attention is being attached by all you 2. Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VII Issue 11

 had come up in modern times were just to make something stupid so that people should pay attention to them. You should not try to attract the attention of others. Instead of that what you have to do is to pay attention to others in a very subtle way. Not with any expectations that you are paying any attention to somebody, so that person should pay attention to you. That's a very big struggle. I have seen in Sahaja Yoga all through, that people try to say and become very popular or become very outstanding or something of very great qualities, to show off that they are something better than others. A person who is really in connection with the Divine is least bothered about how people pay attention to that person, but automatically the attention of such a person is on others, is very subtle. You can not make out that the attention of such person is on you. But it works beautifully. We have to understand that we have now came into the attention of Divinity, we are in the kingdom of God and we are in Divine. We are very powerful people but if we fritter away our attention we become very weak people. It's easy to feel that we are Sahaja Yogis, we have given so much of realization to others, or we have helped so many people. All this consciousness comes within you, then you know that you are not still fully developed as a Sahaja Yogi. There should be no consciousness. What you are doing, what you are committing, there is no need to boast about it, no need to advertise it. Whatever you are is already seen by everyone. Even that desire is not needed because you are doing for the satisfaction of the spirit. In the heart resides the spirit as you know very well. Now, when you know that it is the heart which has to work over your brain and whieh can work. What becomes of you? You become the Source of Love and Compassion. You don't aggress on others, you don't say I have done so much for you so what are you doing for me? What is this that I should have so much expressed in so many ways and you are forgetting and not doing anything for me. The expectations of reward, if it is there, then you must know that it's your mind which is giving you these ideas and is working it out. That way you put attention to the amount of love that other person has given you for whatever you have given to another person. It's very subtle. In Sahaja Yoga you should see yourself as just a source of love which is just flowing. In that you do not say that you have to have this or that or you have to achieve this goal or to become that, that is finished now. Once you have become the source then how can you become something. The thing is those who are receiving both want to have some sort of a reward or some of a recognition. In this subtle way one should know where mind is very clever. In Sahaja Yoga we are very clever and intelligent people, but with this mind you have to be very careful, because this mind can cheat you. So ask your mind why are you in Sahaja Yoga? What is the purpose of Sahaja Yoga? Gradually this mind will shut up and then you have to ask yourself: What is my own desire now? What do I want to achieve? Why am I in Sahaja Yoga? If you ask these questions you will see you will just dissolve, you will just become thoughtless because there is no desire left now. There is no ambition, no competition left .There are the qualities of brain or you can say of the intellect which makes you competitively jealous. The jealousy is also the product of this competitiveness. Because when two persons are competing or many are competing and one is selected others become jealous instead of feeling happy by it. So, one of us has become something, we should be happy that he has become. On the contrary other people feel jealous. Why has he become, who is he, what does he think of himself. Then we go further. Not you people but on the whole, people go further with it and what they do is to harm another person. In Sahaja Yoga people are also sometimes worried or frightened. There is no need to be worried or frightened because now you have become a Sahaja Yogi and a Guru. Nobody can touch you. Anybody Vol. VII Issue 11 & 12 3 Divine Cool Breeze

 who will try to touch you is subsided somehow or the other. We don't have to worry us to who criticizes, or what they say about you, They are absolutely blind people. They are not matured as far as their wisdom is concerned. For them to understand Sahaja Yoga is not possible. They go up to a point and stop. They cannot go further, because their resolution of being as I said. that the drop becomes the ocean. It is diffieult in the West where there are so many people of their own ideas, of their own recognition, of their own personalities. Again it is quite a paradox that we don't want people to behave indecently. Decency is a very big part of sahaja Yoga. One can ask another when you say you have dissolved, then why should we have dignity, why should we worry about having dignity. This question is alright. The answer is supposing you put a drop of some filth in an ocean, then the ocean becomes dirty. If we put some poison, then the whole ocean becomes poisonous. In the same way, whatever is not alright to the ocean, to the Divine Power should not be done. Otherwise you will spoil the whole of it. We have had the experience, we had Sahaja Yogis who were leaders also and who tried to be funny, and the whole collectivity was spoiled. One person who is not a good person can spoil all the collectivity. One whe is then leader on the top of that is even worse. So one has to understand that when you are becoming a drop of ocean that this ocean is the pure ocean of love. In that you should not do something that will create poison, frustration or even sometimes it can create a very grotesque image of the whole ocean. That is why we have to be decent people. It is not in anyway that we want to be dandy people or anything. But you must respect your body, respect yourself. Respectable personality you should have. Too much indulgence into that is also not proper. But it should be such that you should respect yourself. It is very important. If you cannot respect yourself, you cannot respect the divinity within you. It is like a decoration of divinity. Your behavior, your whole attire has to be in such a way that people should know that he is a decent man. Indecent things have come out and have become everyday fashion and they go on coming one after another because of entrepreneurs. They go on playing into the hands of entrepreneurs. But if you know what is good for you. What dress you have to wear? Once for all you have to decide. Now the attention should not be also wasted that today I will wear this kind of a dress, tomorrow I will wear that kind of a dress because that spoils the attention. If it is a decent thing it is perfectly alright and that will really make you feel dignified within yourself. In modern times the people don't have respect for themselves. You see very highly posted people, highly placed people doing all kinds of nonsensical things like cheating, having relations with people who are of dishonorable position. All this is happening if you see in the newspaper. You are shocked how these people at the helms of affairs would be like this because they are still not matured enough to know where are they, what is their position, how they have to be. If you are matured enough you will understand that say I am a house wife, I am such a minister, I am prime minister, how I should be. That all that achievement remains outside that doesn't go inside. But for a Sahaja Yogi it should be observed within. It has to be absolute within so that the attention is not wasted too much. completely Another part which one has to see is the heart. Some people are saying Mother if our heart is ruling the head then we become too much emotional, we get too much attached to people, we get sort of individual friendships and things like that. On this point one has to know that why do you get attached to that person. Its not your heart. You get attached to a person because you have some sort of a relationship. May be you like the hair dress of a person, some outside quality is attracting you towards that person. It is not some inner quality that you are attracted to. For example if you were attached to your children you will spoil them. They will not come up to your expectations. Anybody who gets 4 Vol. VII Issue i1 Divine Cool Breeze

 attached, you must verify why are you are attached to such a person? What is the reason? Now in Sahaja Yoga, people are attached to each other very much. I know that, but it is not for any external reason because somebody is richer, somebody is famous, somebody is doing some sort of an extraordinary work. They are attached to that person because that person is a bundle of vibrations that it gives you tranquility, it gives you joy and it gives you a kind of immense resolution of human beings. So that happens when you are very much there as I have told the sort of a potter. Gorakumbhar was a potter and Namdeva was a tailor and a very well known poet. Both of them were poets. He went and he saw this potter was doing such a respectable work. He was busy kneading clay. He looked at him and what he says that I have come here to see Chaitanya, to see the formless but what I find that the formless has got into a form. This, I say is possible only between the two sainmts of same level that the way they appreciate, the way they feel. There are no words for what I want to say, but the way they feel the oneness, unity which is the subtle one between each other. Such a feeling if you have for each other then you have dissolved and you are in the ocean of joy. But on the contrary those who are sitting on the shores cannot feel that way. They judge, they try to find out what's wrong with that person, this is not so. They can never appreciate another person. What they feel they have a right to criticize, to find out faults with others and that they are something special and the other person also finds out faults with this person. It is a fault finding society, I must say and you get fed up with it. But when you see that another person who is there, the person who is another saint. you feel such a Prem (Love), such a oneness, spontaneous feeling for such a person which is absolutely pure. There is no expectations. There is no mental activity to find out what's wrong with the person. There is no judgement about what he, is like. But just oneness with that person. You feel thaät your quality of love has got a new the person, shine, a new dimension. So it comes to that what we should appreciate others within our selves is the pr.rity of our love. When you are pure, the purity is that you do not get attached to anything. But in detachinent you are enjoying. In attachment you cannot enjoy. Because in that you are bothered more about the superficial relationship with the other person. Now in a wider way Sahaja Yogis are all important people because in the history of spirituality there were not so many saints together. So many people from so many countries thinking about divinity and morality. It is impossible to get so many people together on any point whatsoever who are feeling the oneness, the most soothing feeling with each other. Whether it is comfortable or not or whether it is very much according to the norms of comfort. People who are saints are absolutely happy with other saints and other saintly people. They rush to people who are saints. Once it happened to me when I was in Kolhapur that they told me there is a saint who talks about me. They said he lives up there and it takes at least three hours to climb up. He only lives there, he doesn't come out. I said alright. I would like to go and see him. So I was walking and it started raining. They said "Mother you never go to anybody like that. Why are you going to him? I said "No, I just want to go up and see him". Now this fellow, they said had a control over rain. But it was raining, very heavily and I got compeletly drenched. When I reached up, I saw him sitting down and shaking with anger. I said "Let us go and sit in the cave". This fellow was not in a normal mood. So I went and sat in the cave and he came there. He couldn't walk because his legs became absolutely lame because of the vibrations that were too much in him. Whatever it is he couldn't walk so they brought him there. The first thing he asked me that "Why you not allow me to stop the rain. It was raining so heavily when you were coming up, I didn't want you to get drenched the way you are full of water now and I didn't want you to suffer like this. Because it is not a good welcome to you. Did you do it just to control my ego? I must have developed ego did Vol. VII Issue 11 & 12 51 Divine Cool Breeze

 because I can control rain. I just smiled at him and said, "See, you are my son isn't it? And you have brought a saree for me but you are a Sanyasi, I cannot take a saree from you because Sanyasi Dharma is different I am a Gruhasta so I deliberately got drenched so that you could give me the saree. The whole temper the whole unnatural behaviour all dropped down and he became extremely sweet. Then he said, "How do you know I brought saree?" I said "In love you know everything". And then he brought a saree for me and he did Aarti and everything but you see all these things show that how the love masters everything so easily. Small things if you are expert in expressing your love, how it works out. The main thing we have to see within ourselves is do we really love each other? Do we actually have affection and compassion for others who are not even Sahja Yogis. Those who are not Sahaja Yogis are also blind people. You should feel that these people are so unhappy and who cannot come to Sahaja Yoga and they cannot become Sahaja Yogis and only in their ego they are satisfied. You must have real compassion for them or if you have this compassion, you be might be told by people that why are you wasting your energy. Why are you doing this and doing that. The compassion actually Lunites all these things within ourselves. That's the uniting factor. First is your attention and the second one is your intelleet or you can say your mind and third one is your heart. They all get at sometime or other united together. Once you have this capacity to have compassion you don't quarrel with anyone, you don't have to think about it. You just feel absolutely at home when you are compassionate and with this compassion you are having relations with others. Compassion is not studied out or worked out or manoeuvred. It is just there. In that compassion it forgives, it forgets all nonsensical things. The forgiveness is only possible if you have compassion within yourself. Now even there are Sahaja Yogis who ask me. "Mother how can we have love and compassion?" Now the simple thing is that if you develop your thoughtless awareness in your meditation. You watch anything in thoughtless awareness, any relationship you see in thoughtless awareness then you will be amazed how the gates of compassion will open. Thoughtless awareness heart, but it does not go from one person to another person. But it is showing lights on all opens your other sides of your being. Every body is benefited, everybody has a divine feeling for you. Because this compassion is not linear, nor it is aggressive but it just flows and smooths and soothes everything that is chaotic, that is troublesome and that is painful. This is what you have to do. This was done by saints long time back, But nobody liked them and they crucified them out of jealousy. Because if somebody could become a saint, people would be jealous of that person so they killed them or tortured them and troubled them. The situation is not so bad now. Of course, there are some useless people. There are some people who are really monsters. Forget about them. But on the whole our attitude should be that these are blind people. Now looking at somebody who maybe there is something wrong with him or who does not have a good nature, but in your heart you should not have any grudge. You should not have any complaints about others. You can talk to that person about it. You can tell him about it in a way that will be absorbed. But you should not try to make an issue out of it and try to trouble in anyway or torture. You have seen already in Sahaja Yoga those people who came and were troublesome and were not of any worth for us, just dropped out themselves. We didn't have to do much about it. They just got into some sort of a problematic life. There is a big choice going on and the Divine is trying to decide who are capable of receiving the blessings of the Divine. This is the only key point you have to achieve. That's why you have come to Sahaja Yoga. Nothing else is important. There are people who are very highly placed and tomorrow they go into dust. There are people who are regarded as very great famous people. They go into dust. Its all the time happening in your presence. Everyday you read the Vol. VII Issue I1 Divine Cool Breeze

 news papers and you find how they are bchaving. As they have no value of themselves, they just live with their ego and think I'm such a big man. They walk in a different way and talk in a different and suddenly they go down. way That person had no feeling why people respected him, he was not conscious of it. In your case you have to be conscious that you are Sahaja Yogis. If you become the ocean, that doesn't mean your consciousness has vanished, but it has enlarged. You have got the consciousness of the ocean. You are not the one who has become like a mesmerised person, a person who has no connection with oneself. On the contrary you are connected with yourself much more than you were before. so when the ocean you don't lose your personality. you expand your personality. You become a greater person. This is happening in Sahaja Yoga. Whatever you are doing, whatever is your enterprise, your life-style that's all outside. One should not lose the attention which is towards God Almighty. If that is lost. you are lost. There is a very nice poem Namdeva has written about that. There was a boy who was flying a kite. The kite was floating and this boy was looking after the kite. And while he was talking to every body else his attention was still on the kite. Then he goes further and says the lady is carrying a little child on the waist and she is cleaning the house, cleaning with her little broom. She has to move from here to there and after that cleaning she has to do other works also. But the child is there, so her attention is on the child that it should not fall down, that something should not happen. Though she is doing all kinds of work, her attention is on the child. In the same way your attention should be on the Divine Powers of Kundalini. It is described that, there are many ladies who are taking water from a river. Sometimes they have 3 pitchers on their head and are walking. When they are walking, they are talking to each other, they are telling stories about each other but their attention is on the pitchers that are on their heads. In the same way whatever we are doing our attention should be on our Kundalini. We should know what we are doing. As it is , you have light into every corner of your life. Every aspect of your thinking, every kind of effort, you will be amazed, if you watch your attention you will really know what you are doing. The attention is to be watched so much, that ultimately you will be surprised that your attention is no more frittering away. became you Without your attention you cannot work out Sahaja Yoga. This is the main problem of Sahaja Yoga. Your attention has to be towards God Almighty. Otherwise nothing can work out. Your ascent cannot work out. If you have come to Sahaja Yoga to make money, alright, you can make money and get out. If you have come to show off your knowledge, then show and get out. If you have come to show your and authority, you show and get out. Like that many people have gone out. Don't try to use power Sahaja yoga for all these stupid things which are not permanent and not eternal. Sahaja Yoga is to be used just for cleansing yourself, for becoming the ocean of Love. Many people feel that Love is rather difficult because you can be harmed by others or somebody can take advantage of it. The main thing about Love is, if it is not pure Love, then it creates problems.. Supposing if you trust somebody because of money, relationships or anything you can indulge in it and ultimately you will find that it is very disappointing. But supposing you show your Love just with purity about that person. It's so subtle, it's so innate built in you. It's there, we have to just open out. Every human being is a bundle of love. But in pure Love there is a kind of a beautiful light which protects you, guides you and enlightens your life completely. This light is just nourished and also we can say that the lamp has to have oil. That is for our spirituality. You are the embodiment of Love because you are a human being. Even the animals are there who know what Love is. You see I know that if you Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VII Issue 11 & 12

 love a tiger, the tiger will never harm. If you love a snake, it will never harm. If you try to love anybody who is very cruel and very bad, gradually he will calm down . He will harm you a little bit, he will do this, see things but then gradually you find love works, works and works. Ultimately it is your love which is important to that person. Now, your Love is really just appreciated more by innocent people. Children know what love is. If children see you and run away, that means something is wrong with you. The judgement of innocent people is the best judgement. It means in their innocence, they are extremely well equipped to judge a person who has love and who does not have. They are the best they will appreciate you the best. They will understand that these are people of high quality. But if they are not innocent, like some people are extremely cunning, that's the intelligence part of it, they can never appreciate you. They like to appreciate something very abnormal, which from some divine part or divine angle it is very obtuse or funny. Up to a point they may, but they cannot. people because You have to appreciate yourself. You have to know that you are not unkind to anyone, you are not judging others and that you are appreciating everything in that person whatever is good in him as a person or human being. It works. You have seen it all works through my love and compassion. But I'm not conscious that I'm giving you love or compassion or anything. I'm not conscious even that I'm giving you anything. I'm not even conscious as to how 1 have created such a lot of beautiful people. I'm not conscious, it just happens. Just like the tree is here, it is not conscious as to what it is? Why and what it looks like. It's just there. In the same way if it happens to you, you become really a source of such a joy for everyone. Now, what do we have to do for this world? What is needed to be done for this world? People talk of peace, this, that. There is no need to do anything. It's just that you become that kind of personality that It is emits peace and love and joy to others. This power is within you because it is built within you. in the potential form in every person. Only thing it has to be brought out. With affection you may not. But with love and feeling that is innate within you: There are no words for such subtle things that are within yourself. Because so far people don't know what are these things that make you feel oneness with others. All this can happen to you very casily when you understand that you are not this mind, not this body, not this attention, you are Spirit. Then you introspect. Am I the Spirit? Then if I'm the Spirit what am I doing? Once you become Spirit, then you feel why not others? Out of compassion, not for becoming leaders or anything. Just out of love. If I'm like that, why not make others. That is how Sahaja Yoga spreads so much and we have such gems of people. Such beautiful people that I really never expected so much to happen in my life time. It has never happened with any saint, any incarnation, any prophet. The story of Radha and Krishna is very beautiful. Where Radha said why do you take this flute to your lips? Krishna said, "Why not go and ask the flute". She went and asked the flute, "why does Shri Krishna take you to his lips all the time? The Flute said, You know, I have become completely hollow. There's nothing in me. He puts me to his lips and people say that I'm playing the tune. It's He who is playing the tune. Where am I? I'm not there. I'm just enjoying the same tune which is passing through". That is the expression. You have to be like a flute. Means to be hollow within yourself. All these little, little things which come into your life are not important. What is important is that have you become completely hollow. This is where I would say introspection will help. The one who makes the flute is also within you. So let there be a flute made out of you by yourself. This is the way you make yourself what you have to be. In Geeta, Sri Krishna has said the spirit gets satisfied by itself. It is very difficult to understand how can the spirit be satisfied. But now you can understand what Sri Krishna said that your own spirit becomes satisfied with itself. Then it doesn't require any Vol. VII Issue 11 8. Divine Cool Breeze

 satisfaction. You see the comfort of your spirit. You see the beauty of your spirit. You don't even see, but it is in itself filled with that joy of the spirit and it only can be satisfied with the spirit only. It's like the reflection in the mirror. When you look at the mirror you see your own reflection. Now if the mirror is not alright I will say I am not satisfied, you will try to get better picture of yourself. In the same way the spirit which is reflected within you wants to see its own image and then what to go some how or the other changing cleaning or making it alright through your meditation so that the spirit is satisfied with your spirit. Sri Krishna wrote Geeta in such an ambigious manner because he was clever. He knew human beings cannot take things straight. So tell them this way, that way. So that do is you very they will run around and ultimately may come to truth. Truth is very simple. Truth is extremely simple. You don't have to go here and there. You don't have to stand on your legs or feet all the time. You don't have to do some sort of a Tapasya, Nothing. Only just you become like a flute. You become hollow. It's not difficult at all for Sahaja Yogis because already the Kundalini has made you hollow. But still I find people deviate their attention here and there. So many people have told me how their problems have solved without doing anything about it. I said what did you do? They said. "No Mother. I put it at your lotus feet. I said "really". "Yes that's all. We were standing outside and looking at the problem and the problem got solved". Even the most difficult problem that you see can be solved very easily because you have powers. Your powers are great. You are saints. But much more than saints because you are born at such a volatile time. Like supposing you have a light and darkness. You are finding something and bump into that but supposing this is a place full of gas. You bring the light and whole thing becomes enlightened. Like that you have powers but you must get out of this nonsense of me, my and mine. It's not like a swimming pool that you jump into it and get out. It is another kind of very subtle understanding that our roots have to grow and growing our roots within ou:selves.Find out within ourselves what is the area we are occupying. In what areas in our life style we are taking these roots inside. Also Shri Krishna has said that the tree of life has roots in the brain and grows downwards. It's very interesting to understand that the roots are growing in the brain. That means your own intellect is just covered with compassion. It's just being absolutely one with compassion. I had told you the story about a saint who used to take water to a deity in Gujarat and he walked one month to go there with a pitcher of water and there was a very high mountain on which the deity was. He reached at the foothill. There he found a little donkey dying of thirst. He poured all the water for that donkey. Those who were with him asked, "What are you doing. You brought it all THIER and why are you putting it for this donkey?" He said, "You don't know God has come all the the way way down just to meet me here. He does not want me to climb up". This kind of absolutely simple understanding of feelings and anothers problems you can solve them, you can sort them out and the person will tell you that you sorted out the problem. You will not know how you have solved because this love is the power. This love can see things. It is every thing. It is just like a television. If you see a telephone, it is a telephone. If you see anything you do with power it is always embedded inside with love. You did not have a telephone. The whole subtle of ether is at your feet. Just you want to do something, you must do it. Just with your vibrations. Now many people say, "Mother cure this person, cure that person". There is no need to. You all can cure anyone you want to, but you bring that person to me. It is not needed. Just you can cure anybody you feel like. You can solve all their problems yourself. One little bandhan can solve it. But for that you should be the source of love. Once you give a bandhan, this powerful love takes over. Alright I will do the job. But for that you have to be the master of this beautiful thing. Now one must take care. It is very different from masters. In other masters people Vol. VII Issue 11 & 12 6. Divine Cool Breeze

 try to dominate or try to use it to destroy others. But the mastery of love is that you know how to build a rapport with the Divine Love, And this Divine Love is not only powerful but it is such an efficient, such an alert instrument which works out everything in such a manner that you will amazed how things have worked out. And everybody has noticed this. I know you will know it. But you do not use it. You have to be on vibratory awareness and use that even giving yourself a bandhan itself clarifies you. Imagine in your hand there is this great power, giving you this balance, this love, this affection and protection. While you can give it to others also you have become now the part and parcel of Divine Power. You are now in the kingdom of God. Whatever you want to do can be done by this Divine Power. With all this telling you I still feel sometimes you are not confident. You get upset. You feel that how can this be? You have no trust in yourself. You have no faith in yourself. Also there are some sort of people who feel they are neglected. Something should have happened to them.Once a lady started crying. I said, "Why is she crying?" She said "Mother did'nt smile at me". This kind of feeling comes Lup sometimes that in Sahaja Yoga Mother should all the time be attached to you. She can not get attached. They say you must look after this man because he is very important. Nothing. To me you are part and parcel of me, finished. Nothing more than that so you see every body should know that you are very close to my heart, very near. I am very proud of you. It is a miracle, it has happened that you people have taken to Sahaja Yoga. So on that point also that how much Mother cares for me what she does? Now supposing I say to somebody "alright don't sit here, sit there". They feel bad. Anything you do they feel bad. This kind of a person has no sense of love. He doesn't understand Mother's love. When you are a Guru you are also a mother. You have to express yourself like a mother. She is kind, she is gentle, she forgives. She also corrects whenever necessary. But in her own sweet way. So the correction takes place. Not that a rebellion starts. So all that wisdom of Mother is within you, is already there, So please try to use. I am sure it will all work out. And we are a very beautiful big group of people who are something out of ordinary who are so much in peace and enjoy together. May god bless you Vol. VII Issue 11 Divine Cool Breeze 10

 SHRI KRISHNA PUJA TALK H. H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI Cabella, Italy. August 1995. Today we are going to worship Radha Krishna. It is a very festive feeling because Sri Krishna came on this earth at a time when people had become extremely serious about religion and spirituality. That made the whole aspect of religions as a joyless achievement. Also the attention of people was diverted into a kind of a drama which created an aloofness from the society. People become individualistic and secretive. Such peoples's children also become of that style, because a kind if a fear developed. The family does make the difference and influence on the personality They got the same type of a feeling. Two thousand years after Sri Rama went away, the whole situation became a very secret pursuit and they would not tell each other what they had found. In this secretiveness they got lost. That's how there were lot of false gurus and paths. This aloofness made the society so disintegrated. Even in the family the father would not talk to the son, he would not talk to the wife or may be the wife would not talk to the children. In India they religiously follow the dharma part. But they went to the right side in such an austere manner that they follow Geeta without seeing through lines what was written there. When Shri Krishna talked of karmayoga, He said that action should become non action. What he said was to put everything at his Lotus Feet. But that never happened because unless and until you get your self realization you always. think you are doing something, you are achieving something and when you start doing like this, then you also start sometimes overpowering and dominating. There is another group that starts thinking that I am being aggressed, I am so much in pain, in trouble. So there are two types of people developed, one aggressive type and another where the people who are äbsolutely crying and weeping. So Krishna started talking about the quality of a Sahaja Yogi. He said that a Sahaja Yogi is a balanced person, for him happiness and unhappiness have no meaning, whatever he does he feels its all done by God Almighty. You have to be a Sahaja Yogi to be that wäy. Though he described a Sahaja Yogi there were no Sahaja Yogis at that time. Mostly people were extremely austere, they went to Himalayas for seeking truth. So another thing started was a Bhakti cult. In that Bhakti also they were secretive. They wouldn't tell anybody what they were doing. But Shri Krishna came and talked about Bhakti, He said that you have to have Bhakti that is absolutely surrendered to God "Ananya". Then there is not the other. You become one and this is what people misunderstood. Because they thought ananya means complete. So Shri Krishna was also misunderstood by these people and they went to another extreme. Then one big wave started and people used to run here and there saying HareRama, HareKrishna and used to do all kinds of things without understanding what He said about Bhakti. Bhakti without connection is no Bhakti according to him. So some people got lost into that kind of a Bhakti which was not at all meant for your ascent and evolution. So many saints came. They didn't know what to tell the people because they couldn't give them realization. So they said that you should remember God. You should remember the name of Shri Ram, Shri Krishna and all that. Specially in Maharashtra there were many saints who said that try to remember the name of God. But it didn't mean just remember or just all the time you do whatever you like and say "I remember God". You see, they also have failed because they never understood human beings. Vol. VII Issue 11 & 12 Divine Cool Breeze 11

 Saints became very intimated by other priests and by people. There are two types of saints where we have people who are talking of Viraha (that means separation from God) and then they start talking about meeting with God. But very few people really showed any interest in becoming that: They would say we have regard for this, we respect this, we believe in this, we believe in Shri Krishna. They used to go to a place called Pandharpur. Everywhere you go you will find because Shri Krishna ruled there. They are all believers of Shri Krishna but what he came for was forgotten. He was talking about realization. He was talking about connection. in all these preachings they could not read what is written between the lines and they started doing on their own. a Shri Krishna. Specially in Gujrat, In our history we have horrible things done in the name of Shri Krishna, e.g. HareRama HareKrishna. We have a temple of Shri Mataji and that temple was created for a deity who was very vibrating, was the deity of Shri Krishna. When he ran away from the field of battle "Ranchoddas" Now, when He ran away from the field of battle it was because he wanted to deceive one monster and wanted to kill him. So this "Ranchoddas" state was very important for how He tricked these monster and how He managed to take him to a cave where a saint was sleeping and who had a boon that "if anybody tries to wake you up, you can open your third eye and kill him.Shri Krishná played a trick. He ran into this cave and this monster also ran after Him and then He put His shawl on top of this saint who was sleeping. The monster came behind and said "So you are running, are tired and are sleeping here", He pulled the shawl. As son as he pulled the shawl, the saint got up and burnt Him, and that's how He killed that devil. The life style of Shri Krishna was very different than that of mine. Rama was the one who accepted exile and spent 14 years in the forest. He went out in search of His wife and also His children didn't accept Him very much. Now, the aspect of Shri Krishna's life was very different. First thing He came to know about human beings is that they are very cunning people and if you tell them about God or anything they will never accept . They will do the way they think about it. So He said let us try the otherway round. He played a trick with His preaching. That, "You have to do your Karmas. Your action Becomes a nonaction". This is an impossible situation. And the second that. "Your devotion should be ananya'. Now, these two conditions nobody could fulfil. At the time of Sahaja Yoga they come around knowing that they have not achieved anything by practising all those things whatever Shree Krishna has said. But His life-style was different. When He came as a little boy He first tried to kill all these monsters who were invading Gokul where He was living. In a different manner. He killed "Putna" who was a horrible "rakshasi". He killed Her just while sucking her breast because she wanted to poison Him with her milk. This shows that the first thing He took to was extreme aggressiveness against all the negative forces that were working. Rama succumbed to everything whatever happened. Later on Hekilled Ravana. From very childhood, the attitude of Shri Krishna was more action as far as the negativity is concerned and He killed many rakshasas till He killed "Kamsa". So the first part was killing these people because they were very aggressive and they were sucking the energy and they were also becoming megalomania, they used to think no end of themselves. So, he killed their ego. Then He helped the Pandavas to establish the truth. But He didn't give them realization. Up to a point he brought them to understand that always the truth wins. They call it "Satyameva Jayate". This happened at the time when it was very important to show that those negative forces cannot overpower. To show how useless they were. To show how they have been acting, dominating and every body had fear but all of them were neutralized. That He can kill all these negative forces. This was one thing of His style which is very important for modern times. Vol, VII Issue 11 12 Divine Cool Breeze

 Now in America you see there are so many negative forces that have come. They are in different forms, they are not like monsters. But they are by temperament monsters. He preached collectively through Rasleela and all that. That was also remarkable that He made people dance together, play together, to be festive and to know that you are a witness, you are not a slave of your religion or of your but you have to be festive. Then He introduced Holy festivals like Rakshabandhan. All these he brought in because He thought this is how the society will be cleansed and they will have lot of enjoyment also. He brought the idea of enjoyment to the lives of people just to tease them and to make them turn to something that was very great enjoyment. Now, this enjoyment was the enjoyment of the Spirit, pure enjoyment. You see all these things reflected in American life today but in a perverted way. The sense of enjoyment in American life is absolutely perverted because it is still destructive. Whatever they take to is self destructive. You tell them anything, they will say what's wrong. Why all these gurus prospered there because they pampered the ego of Americans and said "It's all right. You can do whatever you like as long as you give us money"... And started doing all these things, a sort of going into perversion like Rajneesh, he came to America and started a Rajneeshnagram this and that and established there with thousands of people but then again Sri Krishna's power worked on him and he was defeated there. Every meditation where find there are so many gurus, they were defeated really by Sri Krishna's power because he you has all the tricks of the trade. He knows how to make fools out of them. As a result of all that has happened people have lost faith, they have no faith in any one. They think if these people could deceive us like that, take away our money, so they decided not to have anything to do with the gurus. We are not abnormal, we are absolutely normal people. We haven't made any absurd type of following or absurd type of meditation, that you will fly in the air and all sort of things. But the people of America are not so matured to understand, Other wise they would not have fallen in with these horrible gurus. On one side we have people who are very much affected by these gurus, on the other side we have people who think I must try also to be one of them and on the third aspect is this that the people are extremely simple and extremely immature. They are like children. Some Americans told me that they are like children and to approach them you have to say that a mother's love can only put them right. Now as far as I am concerned, it was the first country I had visited in 1974. I gave realization to many, but what I feel was that they didn't care for deep things so we lost many Sahaja Yogis like that. Then there were some people who were sick, they wanted their treatment and that's all. Then came some more who were taken away by bombastic gurus who told them lots of stories. People were absolutely not prepared for Sahaja Yoga though they were seekers no doubt. They had that restlessness but they were not ready for Sahaja Yoga. They didn't know what to see, what to get, that was the part I feel very sad. So after that I didn't go for nine years because I thought better devote your time for something else, till these people mature and understand what is wrong with them. Now they have been to the gurus and they lost. There are some who have this restlessness I see in many articles they write or books they write. There is this a kind of restlessness which is very important for Sahaja Yogis. Most of you have been seekers from past lives and you had this restlessness within you. But with this restlessness you didn't know what to do, where to go. With this restlessness it was logical that you go to somebody to get rid of your restlessness minimum of minimum. But that never happened. When it never happened they thought that there is somebody missing. You have to have another program, you have to grow through another course so they went on falling more and more. At the same time the negativity of immorality took place. Though if you read the constitution of America you will be amazed, in very subtle ways, it has just supported complete morality. There is a law that when you Vol. VII Issue 11 & 12 13 Divine Cool Breeze

 go out of the house you cannot wear funny dresses. When you are in the swimming suit also that is regularity and nobody can be absolutely nude. The whole basis was that people have to become moral. But always if you make any law, human beings have the capacity to blast it, to say why this law? That is how the idea of control started. How can you control? How can you say one should not do like that? Now there is the whole explosion in the family also, and the children started disobeying also. The parents themselves were of the same style, then the children became of the same style. They thought that there is not freedom. Those who don't know how to use freedom should not get any freedom. They must know what freedom is. Those who respect and understand freedom can only be free people.In that freedom with this explosion, they were thrown away and they started taking to lives which are really absolutely absurd, calling it most reasonable, most logical. So the people became homo sexual. It is absurd. It is not natural at all. But when the idea of freedom exploded in them then all the bhoots came to take their freedom.It's from the bhoots they got these ideas. In such a large scale these bhoots are affecting the people as a result of that people have started getting all these diseases and all that. The most negative personality from Austria at the same moment was Freud. He is the one who ruined their lives because as soon as they became free they thought anybody who writes anything in black and white is 'Bible'. They started following this fellow and some others also from France. It is a sign of complete immaturity. A matured person won't take to this. They said we never have any problem, we enjoy every thing, we do this we do that, the enjoyment is important. Now they are talking about the problems that they are facing out of these enjoyments. They say that 65% of the people became schizophrenic, 30% will became lunatic. So who are left normal then ? You are shocked how could such a big number of human beings get in to trouble of this kind and the diseases they have are more funny. Like they have most of the discases of the mooladhara. Now enjoyment is at what point? Where do you enjoy? You enjoy in your heart. You can enjoy in your Sahasrara. But with mooladhara this is no question, if you go on like this, there is no end to it. That has created tremendous problems in America. Now they are money oriented. To them money is success, money is joy, money is everything. Now this third quality from where did it come? At the time of Sri Krishna people were very money oriented. In the sense that they used to sell their milk, and butter to Kamsa who was a devil. So Sri Krishna used to break their pitchers so that they didn't take it there. The women would not give milk and butter to their own children but would take all that to these horrible people. It is like the shadow and the light. Light is Sri Krishna. He was such a detached person that he can never commit any wrong things, he couldn't do any immoral things. Whatever he did was absolutely moral, because if you are detached and you are doing something then nothing touches you. He brought in this idea of Leela, or this play of the divine. Now we see in our lives also. How the play of divine works. The Sahaja Yogis when they come they are really restless and they ask me hundred questions. They start also dominating others and doing all kinds of things. But once they get the experience of the Divine Power then they start settling down. Then they see that there are so many coincidences and miracles. Then they start understanding that there is some power which is taking us to the right path. So unless and until this happens, realizing that there is a power which is helping us, something beyond what we know then things will start changing. Now we have to workout in America. We have to tell that this is the power that is beyond, waiting to transform you. There is going to be a global transformation. I can see it so clearly now. In every country I see this and that it works. This global transformation I Vol. VII Issue 11 Divine Cool Breeze 14

 never thought, I will able to see in my life time but has really reached its highest point or its development. You are all transformed, this was predicted long time back in India. Now when you start feeling the vibrations and you start using it then you understand that there is this power and it works. Then you start seeing also energy centers of swayambhus and all that. Then you start understanding. Your understanding goes on increasing but first they have to believe that there is a power beyond this. They may not believe in Kundalini doesn't matter, but once you know that there is a power beyond they will try to work it out and this is what is very difficult to convince people that there is a power beyond, because they are so conditioned by science, also by family traditions, also all nonsensical ideas about ego that they cannot see. This point is that the nature is helping. Now why America is such a rich country they never ask such a question. What have they done? What are their punyas? One of the reason is Sri Krishna is Kubera. He is doing his job. He is working it out but people do not understand that this is a Divine blessing. They think that this is their right to have it and they boast about it. A very boastful people. They talk about their wealth. It's a very different situation and culture, for in India somebody starts boasting about his wealth, they wil think he must be mad, because it's regarded as bad manners. So there is nothing like bad manners in the west. They can abuse their father with very dirty words. We have to really save America. It is from all the sides under attack. Take morality part, its under attack, take from artist point of view it is under attack. They are not creating many artists. Their modern paintings haven't got the depth at all. It's all full of filthy things. Now whom do you sell to the people who are not matured enough. Who are so much enticed by the mooladhara problem. Now how can you help them? How can you bring them around? It's a question of people maturing for which of course this Param Chaitanya will help. What is wrong with them is this that they lack maturity as far as evolution is concerned. Also we can start a kind of a newspaper, could be some sort of a media of having a cable TV or something like that by which we can propagate Sahaja Yoga. Tell them what good it has done, what good it can do to you. It's a quite mad place because they have so many books, everything is so much. Every where you find, there is violence, there is corruption and there is fighting. This is no religion. Nobody could have pleased that way. But it is that way. So now you all stand out of all this where you love each other, care for each other, enjoy each other, enjoy everything inspite of that. Your enjoyment is absolutely pure and this is what is to be seen by others and it can work out. I am sure one day in America we will be very successful. May God Bless You. Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VII Issue 11 & 12 15

 SHRI GANESHA PUJA SYNOPSIS Talk By H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Cabella, Italy. 10th Sep. 1995 You must get lost into moment to moment enjoyment till you get destructive, completely destroyed but I really don't understand how you have achieved this state where you see that purity is so important to life that Ganesha's qualities, his value system and his innocence is to be imbibed. I feel very gratified, that such a thing happened now in our life and you all are so much impressed by Shri Ganesha. Shri Ganesha is there from our childhood. You all have Shri Ganesha settled very nicely within yourselves and it is Awakened in such a manner, that in your free will also you do not want to do the thing that will go against Shri Ganesha. His manifestation within you is so evident. See your faces, they are so beautifully shining. So very different from other people. One day I was travelling from London and there was one Indian lady who came to see me and she said, "I was so surprised to see your disciples. Their faces were shining with such light I have never seen any disciples like that." I asked her, "Who are you?" She said " I am married in Guru Nanak's family and all the people in his family are just opposite to what Shri Guru Nanaka was. So I said, "Because Sahaja Yogis worship Shri Ganesha." So he said that in our family nobody worships Shri Ganesha." I said, "It cannot be possible, how is it?" "No, they believe in Nirakar, in the formless god of Chaitanya. Why don't they find out who is the source?" So they said that Nanaka has only talked up to this point he has not talked about this source. I said, "Better find out because in his books something has been taken away and then somebody gave me a passage, where he had described the innocence; the deity of Shri Ganesha also. He had deseribed that the whole creation was done by the mother and not by the father. The Nirakar are the people who don't believe in the form of god. They always talk of father not of mother. It is true also about Christianity, Islam and Jews all of them talk of the father and not of the mother nor about Shri Ganesha. It seems in the ancient time they believed in child god in China, in Greece and also in many other countries who were supposed to be primitive. But they all believed in the child god. Now when we deal with our children we should know that they are just like Shri Ganesha. They are very innocent, very simple, except in cases some times they are affected by some things and they lose their moorings. Shri Ganesha's greatest contribution to Sahaja Yoga is that he makes you feel my vibrations. He makes you feel the beauty of purity and simplicity. It is only possible if Shri Ganesha is awakened within you. Also the Kundalini won't rise without the sanction of this Chancellor. He is the one sitting on the Mooladhara. But you should know he is on every Chakra. Innocence cures all the maladies, physical, mental, emotional specially the spiritual. But most important quality of Shri Ganesha is that he believes in emitting vibrations. He believes in projecting his vibrations to everyone. That the quality now I feel all of you as Sahaja Yogis can use. You got your realisation without any effort it was Sahaja. The life before self realisation was different. You got your Transformation and you have jumped in to the new era of metascience but here now we have to see, what ever we have got what are we to do with it? You ofcourse know that you have to give realisation to others. You have to cure people. You have to love them and you have to be compassionate. But apart from that now the deliberation about yourselves have to start. That is through Shri Ganesha's powers that arewithin you. You can emit your Vol. VII Issue 11 16 Divine Cool Breeze

 powers, your energy to others, you can project it to others. Now for example if somebody comes to you, needs you then if you know how to deliberately project your energy you can help him. This is a new type of meditation you have to practice. That to emit your energy and project it to others. You don't have to say anything, you don't have to talk. But just feel deliberately. Again I say deliberately. It is not Sahaja, is not spontaneous. This is what you have to practice is to emit your energy of your innocence of Shri Ganesha to others. Thus their innocence will be awakened. Now for example say we had some problems in London and Sahaja Yogis told me, "Mother you know there are still some men are looking at us " some said "there are many women who are looking at us" I said "You can project your energy in such a manner that the projection will stop all this kind of stupid behavior of others and also make them understand, respect you and feel your dignity. Its not very difficult. But on the contrary as the culture is to attract men and women the energy will diminish. When you feel your dignity and serenity and that you are now, self realised people. It is a kind of majestic personality developed within you. That majestic personality can have a tremendous effect on the surrounding people. You should start a kind of deliberate projection, just spontaneous. It just happens. But you can achieve it by yourself with little practice, try to pace such people not with disdaint or contempt but adjust your majestic personality. This personality is here now sitting in such a majestic manner. And is also giving the vibrations to others. The whole figure is doing something suddenly to the people. To expect that the whole world should change spontaneously, I don't think it alright. Because you know the world is so chaotic. So much ego. So much conditionings. But something within you can rise above others. Its your sense of dignity, your complete selfhood, where you stand yourself. You are not to be rude, or egoistical. You need not say things if you don't want to say anything, Just that silent personality can emit such beautiful vibrations which you have stored up within yourself and this storing is showing on your faces which I say are shining. up The innocence that you have, you have to be proud of it. Even now some times you feel that people will say you are not properly dressed up or ugly looking or all kinds of things. In this world all human beings expect others to be very good. Every body should be a hero or something. What about themselves they never think. Now you have become heroes in the sense that spiritually you are much higher than all of them. This deliberate projection when it starts then you should not be afraid that you will develop an ego. You should not be afraid that you will get some conditionings. But just in a way, with the understanding that you have these powers within you beautifully expressing themselves as a child. If there is one child it can entertain atleast hundred people. What is so sweet about the child is the innocence! The way he speaks, behaves and the way he expresses his love. It's so simple! But it has some thing in the essence it is this innocence of Shri Ganesha. Any where in the world if there is a question of children the whole world gets worried about it. It wants to solve the problem. If a child is in trouble anywhere it will be eirculated all over. If they see a child anywhere their faces change. The expression changes because the child is emitting that innocence without any deliberation. Without any special way of doing things, but just spontaneously. But then you have to grow. You start growing. With others who are not innocent. You have to meet them. You cannot run away from the society. You start getting all the rapport with such people, who are talking about things actually, who are criticising Shri Ganesha, gradually your innocence starts dying out. And you feel sometimes inferior to all those who are supposed to be the great warriers against innocence. In the sense that when I was in London, I saw they all used to laugh at me because I had this Kumkum. I used Vol. VII Issue 11 & 12 Divine Cool Breeze 17

 to think that they don't know why I am wearing it! So ignorant they are! Very ignorant people that they don't know in India all the married women wear it. So I said that this is just written down on my head that I am married woman is just to tell to people, so that they don't bother about me. I have got my husband behind me and he can take you to task. This kind of ignorance is so much in the west, and still they think that they are the higher race, they are great people. They don't know even the small things about life. For the innocence I think they have lost the knowledge about it long time back and that is how it is a society today which is absolutely löst in it's own moorings. Every individual is separate, every individual is different and they don't know each other. Without innocence you cannot have the rapport with other people. Because that means you have some sort of a lust or greed behind that thing. Somebody asked me about Freud and what he said Why people are so much against him? Why are you so much against him? He said that there is a bad relationship between mother and a child. He just jumped. My goodness, thank God, he never come to India, otherwise we would have cut him into pieces and put him in the Indian sea. But why spoil the purity of Indian sea also. Every time anywhere you go there is nothing but this sex business. It is too much. I cannot understand how people go on tolerating. It is all right, at the most in some famous adult film you might show some things. But every time you see a film suddenly you find such type of a nonsensical bedroom scene is coming. People like it. They pay for it. They want to have all aspects of it. It's such a natural thing. What is there to talk about it I don't understand it is only the development of the brain of such a manner that every kind of a nonsense it wants to accept. "So what? What is wrong?" You are mad. That is what you go to lunatic aslums for. Lunatics also talk like that. So what is wrong? Same way because of such acceptance they don't know how much people have ruined their family life, their children's life. In every way we find that the society is full of this nonsense. Specially in the television. Whatever it is through the blessings of Shri Ganesha you all are transformed. You are on a different line. You see what Shri Ganesha has done to you. How he has made your attention so beautiful that you enjoy all the beautiful things of the world, all the innocent things of the world. And there are many people like that. Who are struggling. Not that all the society has accepted this nonsense. In England they published a book about what children have to say about the politicians. Very sweet sweet things. And there were 5000 books and in one day all the books were sold. In one day! That shows that there are so many people still who are respecting their innocence and they want to be innocent. They want to enjoy their innocence.. But the society has to be created of that kind. For that you must have a kind of a personality. They said, "You see our husbands told us if you want to see serenity personified then you must see Mrs. Srivastava". I was surprised. In Greece they are talking of serenity. In modern times any body talking about purity. I just couldn't understand but I felt at the back of their mind their tradition. What ever it is. These men could see that simple thing in me and they went and told them and they all enjoyed my company very much. I was making them laugh and telling them things and all that and one of them turned on and said, "Mrs. Shrivastava you are just like a child!" I said, "Really?" "We enjoyed your company so much." And when I was coming they were in tears. Whatever innocent personality you are, you have to project, towards others. Somebody trying to be funny with you, just with one glance you can put that person right. You don't like it just to say you don't like it in a way that is a projection. Around your society, around where you are working you will also find people who have no sense of innocence and its disgusting to be with them but as you have powers, you must use it to project. I see with Sahaja Yogis they don't even cure people. They will tell me, "Mother, he is to be cured, that is to be done". But you are so many. Why do you need me to do that now? You all can cure the patient. You can help the patient Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VII Issue 11 18

 why can't you do it? What is the need for me to do it? You have these qualities within you because potentially you had them before and now they are enlightened through the grace of Shri Ganesha. Now have to do is to assert them. Ofcourse you must remember not to use your ego, not to use what you your mind. Somebody would say that "Mother without mind how can you impress others. How can you have rapport with others?" It's very simple. Just become thought less. Once you become thoughtless you are in the realm of the Divine and the Divine takes charge. It will start emitting such beautiful vibrations that you will be amazed that yourself how things are working out. It is not a coincidence like one I was going somewhere and they told me that you have to be very careful. I said, "Why?" "Because in the night Naxalites are here and they might just kill you" I said "All right." They said "It's very late, be careful. So the gentleman with me was very much worried and he said," Take out your ornaments. He put them under the seat and all that. As soon as we reached that place where many Naxalites were standing with their lanterns I told the driver for one minute to stop the car. He said, "I will not." I said, "you stop." I looked at them and I don't know what happened. I said, "Now speed up the car." You see it is the power that God has. Until you use the power of love and compassion, you will not know that you have got it and that comes from Shri Ganesha. Now children understand love. If you are nice to them how they react. may be sometimes they don't. But 99% they really react to love, In our school in Dharamshala there were two children and they were very troublesome to begin with and the parents were worried about them. They sent them to Dharamshala and otherwise they were very demanding as the modern children are. You buy this, you buy that, we go here, we want Mc Donald, this that was going on. When they went to the school after one year they came back and the parents asked them. "What do you want?" "We don't want anything. The parents asked "You don't want anything? You don't want to go to the Mac Donald." "We want to sit here and watch mother's videos". They said. What has happened to them, they were so much changed. What is the matter with them? So then the parents asked, "What about food?" They said, "Whatever you cook we will eat. We are not bothered." They were anmazęd how these children had changed. Then they said, "You must go out somewhere. You must see the river, you must wander." All right that we will do. Then again they came home, no demands, nothing. They didn't want to go shopping. They were satisfied, dignified. The parents said, "What is the matter with you? You don't want anything. They answered "No, we want something but we don't know how to tell you." "What is it?" for апy Because you don't have that. You can't get it in the market". "What is it?" "Can you get us a pendant of Shri Mataji?" I know the children. I met them. But I have not been with them for a long time. I have never been so close to them, nothing. But look at the love. That they have. They were telling me in the school in the beginning that anybody used to trouble us we said, "Now we are going to inform Shri Mataji." "No, no, don't inform her." "Why?" "Because She will not love me any more". Can you imagine the value of my love is so much understood by these little little children. So much they admire, they want it. It has no material gain by that, Nothing. All this really shows that Christ has said it that you have to be like small children to enter into the kingdom of God. Without that you cannot enjoy anything. Look at these Swiss. This is the power of Shri Ganesha's love because they were to celebrate Shri Ganesha's birthday so they got equipped from within. But if they had not projected it there would have been nothing. Whatever He is giving you, whatever He is creating in you, the beautiful innocence, this beautiful fragrance of your living every moment you are enjoying it then also know that we have to give it to others. We have to pour this into others. It will be hard to work out but I know it will work out. Divine Cool Breeze 19 Vol. VII Issue 11 & 12

 It has tremendous powers. If you are innocent nobody can cheat us, nobody can trouble us because in innocence you become a person who doesn't care for what is happening to him. You become a person who tolerates everything. It's a story about a king in China, he had decided to win a cock's fight. So he went to one and told him that how will you train the cock to fight the other cocks. He said, "Leave the cock with me." He left the cock with him and he trained him very well. When the king arrived one month after, before the fight. He said, "See now take the cock." This is done. He said. "This one? This one is not doing anything, only standing. What will I do with him? He took that cock and put him in that contest. All the cocks were together, they started troubling this cock. He was just standing like this as if some stupid people are trying to trouble him. He was doing nothing. He would not react. All the cocks were surprised that this one is not protesting. And he is not bothered about what we are doing. One by one all the cocks disappeared from the field and this was the only cock which stood up. The king was surprised. He took him to the saint and said, "This one has become a saint now. It's better you keep with you. Your personality it self made him like that and now you worship him so much. He is within you and any kind of problems that you have will be solved very easily, if you take to your innocence and that will create coincidence as they call it but it's not coincidence it's the vibrations that you will be amazed how the things are solved. You will say." Mother, the other day it rained so much. That it has all become muddy, Mother what are we going to do." I said "It will be all right leave it to me." Next day it was very hot. It is impossible that there could be such a change rained so heavily and the other day whole thing gets absolutely dried up. It's His work because He is so much powerful and you have came to worship him. So first of all cleaning has to be done. And He did the cleansing by putting the rain. There is such heavy rains and some of the parts of the heavy rains which came near Palazzo Dorio they turned into ice. great saint in the weather that one day it Now it is something unbelievable that al over it just rained and only near our house these ice balls are coming. We call it miracles, we can call it anything but it's Shri Ganesha's sensitivity. We should say that He thought that this rain is going near my mother's house so let's make some sort of a beautiful ice balls. I went out and I saw and I was amazed how it was, all around my house there were ice balls. What He can do what is he capable is absolutely unbelievable. How He guides you and how He helps you. How He takes you to the right path. Not only that how He protects you, all the time He is with you, because you have become his Ganas now. You are His Ganas so He protects you. He looks after you. He gives you all the guidance. He takes you to the right path. He takes you to the right road. He gives you all that is Dharmic to enjoy. You always meet friends here and there. You think it's a coincidence but it is not and that's how He works. He works with all His beautiful, sweet, loving attention on you because you are all His ganas. But the ganas have to work. As I say in our body there are ganas and they fight the diseases, they fight the problems that are in the body, there are antibodies which are the ganas of Shri Ganesha. In the same way you are also His ganas. He does all this for you, protects you, loves you. He gives you a good time. Then what are we doing about it? It should not be one sided. When He does all this for you then what should we do about Shri Ganesha? What can we so as antibodies? You don't have to fight the enemies with any sword or any kind of a weapon. The enemies you can conquer by simply two methods. One is try your love, your pure love on them. You may melt away many people or else if that is not working then what should you do is to sit down to meditate and to give Bandhans. There are ways of giving bandhans. Bandhan works so fast and so beautifully that you are amazed how it has worked. Because you are so powerful. The way you give Vol. VII Issue 11 20 Divine Cool Breeze

 bandhan anybody can give, it is not going to work. It is only you the Sahaja Yogis can give bandhan. There are different types of bandhans you have to give and all that works out so well. So we have to have the faith in our own powers. We have to know that we are empowered by Shri Ganesha to do the work of Sahaja Yoga. To do the work of Sahaja Yoga is not to feel that you are doing but it is Shri Ganesha who is doing it. Giving realisations to the people is the greatest joy a Sahaja Yogi can have. And then you don't have to think that you have done it. That is the best. But if you think that I am very tired I have done this, I have done that. Many people come and tell me, "Mother, we have done this, we have done that. That means they are just feeling the strains of doing any work. But you have not to feel any strain. His powers are within you. You can see, believe in me, believe in yourself, have confidence and faith in yourself that you are a storehouse of innocence which is nothing but compassion, and love. If you have that faith you will develop a beautiful way of talking to others, of having relationship with others. It's something that is really the gift of Shri Ganesha. I don't think I ever shouted at any one. Even at my own children. I have never got into a fury or a temper. Because I think I can manage without it. Ofcourse I had to correct, I had to tell people. But one thing I have seen, that everybody has been afraid of one thing that I should never drive out someone out of Sahaja Yoga. Because Sahaja Yoga is such a joy. It's such a absolutely confident about yourself. To ask you to leave Sahaja Yoga is the greatest punishment because you cannot leave me now. It's just impossible. That is what it is, you also develop the qualities that you cannot leave. See a child, if it is lost I mean the parents just go off They don't know how the child is lost. But supposing some son of their's is a very bad boy, is misbehaving. doing all kinds of wrong things. They don't mind. But when they are young they are innocent. It's some sort of a tremendous attachment to them and understanding that they are our children, we have to look after them. So this innocence that attracts you that keeps you wondering about children. energy giving thing. It's such a light that you feel You must know how to smile. You must know how to win over people. Still there are some Sahaja Yogis and Sahaja Yoginis who are still rather stiff and they cannot give up their stiffness. They think no end of themselves or whatever it is. Then they will not enjoy Sahaja Yoga, of course they will enjoy Sahaja Yoga and its worth, it's joyous moments. Today is the day to celebrate His birth and He was the first God that was created on this earth. Because He is auspiciousness, He is also holiness. So the Primordial Mother didn't want to create this world without first creating the holiness, the auspiciousness, the purity. That's why He was first created, on this earth with vibrations which are just bundles of love, vibrations, So that He can look after all the people who are going to come from ages to ages, to guide them always on the straight path. He is supposed to be incharge of our conscience, the conscience that eats you up sometimes. That say this is not all right that is not all right. That I should not have done this. But one should try to take very great pride in it. Like there was one Indian gentleman I told him, "Why did you give up your land?" He said, "Mother I thought later on when my children will grow. I might become greedy and I may not give this land to my brother who deserves it because I am too clever I can cheat him. So I thought it is better to give up the land now to my brother. He was so innocently telling mẹ that I should not become greedy. May be that my children will grow up and I will feel that I must give this all to by own brother but I said," What about your brother?" He said," He deserves, he needs it. I don't need so much land and I am doing very well in my life that is why I have given." So the innocence works out in such a manner. There is one Sahaj Yogi about 16 years old. He came to me and he said, "My mother has some badhas and my father too. I don't know what to do. Now supposing I leave my father and mother Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VII Issue 11 & 12 21

 then will the badhas also leave me?" I said, "May be, may be not. It depends ." So he said, "Then what is the need for the people to leave their parents when they are 18 years of age because it will be a big loss." I said," Why?" "Firstly if I start smoking who will stop me?" Such an innocent boy "If I start smoking only my father can slap me on my face. Nobody else so he can save me from the smoking. I was amazed at his innocence. "You see, then my mother, she is the one who corrects me at every point. If I am not with her who will correct me? Who will tell me don't do this, and don't do that?" This innocence always seeks virtuous life, better life and it doesn't assert on others. But if somehow there is innocence like you people are now self-realised people, in the light of yourself you don't want to do something that is not innocent, that is not Sahaj. For example, I have never see such honest people as we have in Sahaja Yoga. I mean they don't want to take a single penny out of things, Of course there have been some horrible people also who made lots of money out of Sahaja Yoga. Doesn't matter, but most of you have become so honest. When there is so much corruption in this world and to see people who are so honest. The greatest quality of Shri Ganesha is that for him the Mother is the most important. What mother says, what mother does, that's the most important thing. It is so much that I really cannot understand how you people are so much fond of me because I think that whatever you think about me mentally is nothing compared to what you have within yourself. And that Shri Ganesha's quality because he is so attached to me that He will fight His father, He will fight everybody. That's what you are, anything against me you cannot tolerate. I saw people getting furious if somebody said a word against me. This quality of love for me is coming from Shri Ganesha within you. But another quality as I said that He makes the ganas work and so you have to work it out. You all have talents, you all have understanding, you are all intelligent, all of you are special people and you have to work out in collective way and also individual way to show your quality of Shri Ganesha. The way He has rhythm. He is very rhythmic. The rhythm of Shri Ganesha is working and His understanding for music which is one of His qualities that He dances on the music of which Nataraj His father 'Shiva' has taught it. Shri Ganesha with such a big stomach yet Hedances so well, so lightly. He lifts his body he works out amazingly. How he does it? He is very light and lightness comes because of innocence. If the mooladhara is all right then the lightness is there. In Maharashtra how these people were playing Lezim' with such speed, such a lightness. They were lifting their legs and hands. It was really amazing how they were doing it and it is only the innocence of these people that they don't understand much of this nonsense, they don't know what is going on with all these things. They earn their living. They are farmers and then in the evening they sleep off in complete innocence. They don't plan. They do not sit down and find out how to kill somebody. How to rob somebody or other bad things that people think, no bad action comes into their minds. There is no time for that. They work whole day and in the evening nicely they sleep or else they will have Bhajan Mandali where they will all sing together in a very beautiful manner. So its a real Sahaja style. If you are innocent your power is your innocence. You don't have to have your weapons and guns and things. All these religions so called are using nothing but weapons and guns and all kinds of killing objects and they are also killed. It is a funny thing all in the name of god, in the name of Shri Ganesha. There is no need for us to fight. There is no need for us to think that we will kill this man and we will kill that man. Only you have to just desire. Project your energy and you will see the person will disappear. He will either become a transformed person or he will not be there to trouble you. Vol. VII Issue 11 Divine Cool Breeze 22

 We must know our qualities and our powers. Many people I know who would never come on the and speak. I said, "You get along. start anything, you just project, I can't do it. Why can't I do it? To say I can't, I am sorry. This sorry is so common now. How can I do it ? All such people are not yet awakened of their powers that they have. You can do it. You can. Everything can be managed, afterall you have the power. In that power you must know that you are not going to do something indiscreet. You are not going to spoil anybody. But your power itself will show that this power is really of love, affection, compassion for the transformation of the whole world. I am thinking of the complete global transformation which I know is a dream, but still I think like that because I see you all. Then I think you all can do it and when I see the Shri Ganesha in you I am sure it will work out. In my life time I have seen so many Sahaja Yogis all over. How things are worked out. You have heard about in Brazil and also in Argentina, most the people came to the program from 12'o clock in the morning when we were going to have the program at 7'o clock in evening. I reached there at 8'o clock as usual and they said, "Mother, you won't believe there was a big drama here" "What drama?" "They were sitting here from 12'o clock. So all those who came earlier got inside but those who came at the last minute they would not be allowed and they are sitting there and fighting, we are going to come inside. Then one of the Sahaja Yogi sensibly went and talk to the manager and told them, "Baba, let them come, there is room so there were four floors. When I came I saw what's this? All over the whole thing filled with these people, I have never seen them before. But they were true and so respectful so much absorbing the vibrations and I found it difficult to control my tears out of real feeling of such gratitude for Shri Ganesha. He is the one who worked it out. That is why they say always first worship Shri Ganesha before starting any work because it gives you that peace that tremendous power. He is the one who works out so many things that you never thought of it ever. stage May God Bless You. Divine Cool Breeze 23 Vol. VII Issue 11 & 12



----------------------

1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-0.txt 
 DIVINE COOL BREEZE
ISSUE 11 & 12
VOLUME VII
Without Your attention you cannot work out Sahaja Yoga. Your
attention has to be towards God Almighty. Otherwise nothing can
work out.
H H. Shri. Mataji Nirmala Devi
Guru Puja 1995.
Cabella, Italy.
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-1.txt 
 DIVINE COOL BREEZE
ISSUE 11 & 12
VOL. VII
Contents:
Guru Puja, Cabella, Italy.
2. Shri Krishna Puja, Cabella, Italy.
3. Shri Ganesha Puja, cabella, Italy.
Edited by
Published by : Divine Cool Breeze, 9 Bhagyachintamani Soc., Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411 029.
Printed by
: Yogi Mahajan
: Golden Arts, 2/11, Bandal Complex, Paud Road, Pune 411 029.
Vol. VII Issue 11 & 12
Divine Cool Breeze
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-2.txt 
 GURU PUJA TALK
H. H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
Cabella, Italy. July 1995 (Synopsis)
It is a very important Guru Puja today because we have completed 25 years of Guru Puja. It's a question
of understanding what Sahaja Yoga is. It's a very unique discovery I feel now, that people who were
seeking the truth have found it and have now got it absolutely, on their central nervous system. In some
places that seems to be difficult how it has happened, how it has worked out and how in these 25 years
we have been able to achieve this expansion of Sahaja Yoga. The main thing that you all should know
is that as the tree grows, the roots have to grow much deeper and should spread also deeper. It does
not happen that the tree can be sustained only by the mother earth. The roots are in your own life, in
your own heart. When we say we have become our own Guru we should really try to find out with our
introspection, are we our guru or not? Because before this your mind was on one side, your heart was
on another side and your attention was in another dimension. These three were creating confusion within
you. If you understand a human being then you will be surprised that these three things act separately
in human beings and sometimes they fight also. Then it is your intellect and your mind, second is your
heart, your feelings and your emotions, the third is your attention. In this modern times this confusion
is the worst because all the time your attention is outside. It could be towards beautiful things, beautiful
women, beautiful men, all kinds of nonsensical things, a way of wasting energy. Such attention is
absolutely like a loose horse, you cannot control such an attention. This attention runs from one thing
to another. It's a fashion also, it's sort of a very popular thing to keep the attention moving all the time.
But this attention that has to be towards the Divine, towards the Almighty is just being frittered away.
First is to find out about yourself. Where does your attention go? What makes you feel like, looking
after, concerned for your attention? See the bad attention comes from various problems, and could be
your upbringing where you are not controlled, could be your education, could be the atmosphere in
which
these outside energies or negative forces and it gets entangled, like a river flowing straight into the ocean
can get lost in a barren face. In the same way this attention that should go towards the Divine gets
frittered away and is finished. This attention cannot take you towards The Divine. Ultimately you find
that all this attention is completely been absorbed and frittered away. In these modern times as you
know, its a very chaotic condition. In this chaotic condition you do't know that there are all kinds of
attractions which can take away your attention and reduce the energy of your attention. It's possible
more for the people who are very right sided, also the left sided people can be very much affected. Right
sided people go up to a point and become extremely dry. self-opiniated and aggressive. All their
attention is in aggression. While the people who are on the left side are indulging too much into their
own whims, desires and temptations. Both sides ean fritter away your attention which is the most
important thing. But the attention cannot be controlled by a person who has a weak mind and a weak
heart. Now supposing you take an intelligent person, the intelligent person would solve his attention by
encapturing the attention of others. I don't know why but it's a kind of a paradise. The person who
himself is having such a lot of aggressiveness tries to be sweet with people just to keep good relation
so that they pay attention to that person. This is a very subtle thing. They are not even aware of it. In
modern times so many stupid things people do just to attract attention of others. Most of the fads that
live, could be your own ego or your conditionings. This attention is being attached by all
you
2.
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VII Issue 11
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-3.txt 
 had come up in modern times were just to make something stupid so that people should pay attention
to them. You should not try to attract the attention of others. Instead of that what you have to do is to
pay attention to others in a very subtle way. Not with any expectations that you are paying any attention
to somebody, so that person should pay attention to you. That's a very big struggle. I have seen in Sahaja
Yoga all through, that people try to say and become very popular or become very outstanding or
something of very great qualities, to show off that they are something better than others. A person who
is really in connection with the Divine is least bothered about how people pay attention to that person,
but automatically the attention of such a person is on others, is very subtle. You can not make out that
the attention of such person is on you. But it works beautifully. We have to understand that we have
now came into the attention of Divinity, we are in the kingdom of God and we are in Divine. We are
very powerful people but if we fritter away our attention we become very weak people. It's easy to feel
that we are Sahaja Yogis, we have given so much of realization to others, or we have helped so many
people. All this consciousness comes within you, then you know that you are not still fully developed
as a Sahaja Yogi. There should be no consciousness. What you are doing, what you are committing,
there is no need to boast about it, no need to advertise it. Whatever you are is already seen by
everyone. Even that desire is not needed because you are doing for the satisfaction of the spirit.
In the heart resides the spirit as you know very well. Now, when you know that it is the heart which
has to work over your brain and whieh can work. What becomes of you? You become the Source of
Love and Compassion. You don't aggress on others, you don't say I have done so much for you so what
are you doing for me? What is this that I should have so much expressed in so many ways and you are
forgetting and not doing anything for me. The expectations of reward, if it is there, then you must know
that it's your mind which is giving you these ideas and is working it out. That way you put attention
to the amount of love that other person has given you for whatever you have given to another person.
It's very subtle.
In Sahaja Yoga you should see yourself as just a source of love which is just flowing. In that you do
not say that you have to have this or that or you have to achieve this goal or to become that, that is
finished now. Once you have become the source then how can you become something. The thing is
those who are receiving both want to have some sort of a reward or some of a recognition. In this subtle
way one should know where mind is very clever. In Sahaja Yoga we are very clever and intelligent
people, but with this mind you have to be very careful, because this mind can cheat you. So ask your
mind why are you in Sahaja Yoga? What is the purpose of Sahaja Yoga? Gradually this mind will shut
up and then you have to ask yourself: What is my own desire now? What do I want to achieve? Why
am I in Sahaja Yoga? If you ask these questions you will see you will just dissolve, you will just become
thoughtless because there is no desire left now. There is no ambition, no competition left .There are the
qualities of brain or you can say of the intellect which makes you competitively jealous. The jealousy
is also the product of this competitiveness. Because when two persons are competing or many are
competing and one is selected others become jealous instead of feeling happy by it. So, one of us has
become something, we should be happy that he has become. On the contrary other people feel jealous.
Why has he become, who is he, what does he think of himself. Then we go further. Not you people
but on the whole, people go further with it and what they do is to harm another person.
In Sahaja Yoga people are also sometimes worried or frightened. There is no need to be worried or
frightened because now you have become a Sahaja Yogi and a Guru. Nobody can touch you. Anybody
Vol. VII Issue 11 & 12
3
Divine Cool Breeze
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-4.txt 
 who will try to touch you is subsided somehow or the other. We don't have to worry us to who
criticizes, or what they say about you, They are absolutely blind people. They are not matured as far
as their wisdom is concerned. For them to understand Sahaja Yoga is not possible. They go up to a point
and stop. They cannot go further, because their resolution of being as I said. that the drop becomes the
ocean. It is diffieult in the West where there are so many people of their own ideas, of their own
recognition, of their own personalities. Again it is quite a paradox that we don't want people to behave
indecently.
Decency is a very big part of sahaja Yoga. One can ask another when you say you have
dissolved, then why should we have dignity, why should we worry about having dignity. This question
is alright. The answer is supposing you put a drop of some filth in an ocean, then the ocean becomes
dirty. If we put some poison, then the whole ocean becomes poisonous. In the same way, whatever is
not alright to the ocean, to the Divine Power should not be done. Otherwise you will spoil the whole
of it. We have had the experience, we had Sahaja Yogis who were leaders also and who tried to be
funny, and the whole collectivity was spoiled. One person who is not a good person can spoil all the
collectivity. One whe is then leader on the top of that is even worse. So one has to understand that when
you are becoming a drop of ocean that this ocean is the pure ocean of love. In that you should not do
something that will create poison, frustration or even sometimes it can create a very grotesque image
of the whole ocean. That is why we have to be decent people. It is not in anyway that we want to be
dandy people or anything. But you must respect your body, respect yourself. Respectable personality
you should have. Too much indulgence into that is also not proper. But it should be such that you
should respect yourself. It is very important. If you cannot respect yourself, you cannot respect the
divinity within you. It is like a decoration of divinity. Your behavior, your whole attire has to be in such
a way that people should know that he is a decent man. Indecent things have come out and have become
everyday fashion and they go on coming one after another because of entrepreneurs. They go on playing
into the hands of entrepreneurs. But if you know what is good for you. What dress you have to wear?
Once for all you have to decide. Now the attention should not be also wasted that today I will wear this
kind of a dress, tomorrow I will wear that kind of a dress because that spoils the attention. If it is a
decent thing it is perfectly alright and that will really make you feel dignified within yourself. In modern
times the people don't have respect for themselves. You see very highly posted people, highly placed
people doing all kinds of nonsensical things like cheating, having relations with people who are of
dishonorable position. All this is happening if you see in the newspaper. You are shocked how these
people at the helms of affairs would be like this because they are still not matured enough to know
where are they, what is their position, how they have to be. If you are matured enough you will
understand that say I am a house wife, I am such a minister, I am prime minister, how I should be. That
all that achievement remains outside that doesn't go inside. But for a Sahaja Yogi it should be observed
within. It has to be absolute within so that the attention is not wasted too much.
completely
Another part which one has to see is the heart. Some people are saying Mother if our heart is ruling
the head then we become too much emotional, we get too much attached to people, we get sort of
individual friendships and things like that. On this point one has to know that why do you get attached
to that person. Its not your heart. You get attached to a person because you have some sort of a
relationship. May be you like the hair dress of a person, some outside quality is attracting you towards
that person. It is not some inner quality that you are attracted to. For example if you were attached to
your children you will spoil them. They will not come up to your expectations. Anybody who gets
4
Vol. VII Issue i1
Divine Cool Breeze
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-5.txt 
 attached, you must verify why are you are attached to such a person? What is the reason? Now in Sahaja
Yoga, people are attached to each other very much. I know that, but it is not for any external reason
because somebody is richer, somebody is famous, somebody is doing some sort of an extraordinary
work. They are attached to that person because that person is a bundle of vibrations that it gives you
tranquility, it gives you joy and it gives you a kind of immense resolution of human beings. So that
happens when you are very much there as I have told the sort of a potter. Gorakumbhar was a potter
and Namdeva was a tailor and a very well known poet. Both of them were poets. He went and he saw
this potter was doing such a respectable work. He was busy kneading clay. He looked at him and what
he says that I have come here to see Chaitanya, to see the formless but what I find that the formless
has got into a form. This, I say is possible only between the two sainmts of same level that the way they
appreciate, the way they feel. There are no words for what I want to say, but the way they feel the
oneness, unity which is the subtle one between each other. Such a feeling if you have for each other
then you have dissolved and you are in the ocean of joy. But on the contrary those who are sitting on
the shores cannot feel that way. They judge, they try to find out what's wrong with that person, this is
not so. They can never appreciate another person. What they feel they have a right to criticize, to find
out faults with others and that they are something special and the other person also finds out faults with
this person. It is a fault finding society, I must say and you get fed up with it. But when you see that
another person who is there, the person who is another saint. you feel such a Prem (Love), such a
oneness, spontaneous feeling for such a person which is absolutely pure. There is no expectations. There
is no mental activity to find out what's wrong with the person. There is no judgement about what he,
is like. But just oneness with that person. You feel thaät your quality of love has got a new
the
person,
shine, a new dimension. So it comes to that what we should appreciate others within our selves is the
pr.rity of our love. When you are pure, the purity is that you do not get attached to anything. But in
detachinent you are enjoying. In attachment you cannot enjoy. Because in that you are bothered more
about the superficial relationship with the other person.
Now in a wider way Sahaja Yogis are all important people because in the history of spirituality
there were not so many saints together. So many people from so many countries thinking about divinity
and morality. It is impossible to get so many people together on any point whatsoever who are feeling
the oneness, the most soothing feeling with each other. Whether it is comfortable or not or whether it
is very much according to the norms of comfort. People who are saints are absolutely happy with other
saints and other saintly people. They rush to people who are saints. Once it happened to me when I was
in Kolhapur that they told me there is a saint who talks about me. They said he lives up there and it
takes at least three hours to climb up. He only lives there, he doesn't come out. I said alright. I would
like to go and see him. So I was walking and it started raining. They said "Mother you never go to
anybody like that. Why are you going to him? I said "No, I just want to go up and see him". Now this
fellow, they said had a control over rain. But it was raining, very heavily and I got compeletly drenched.
When I reached up, I saw him sitting down and shaking with anger. I said "Let us go and sit in the
cave". This fellow was not in a normal mood. So I went and sat in the cave and he came there. He
couldn't walk because his legs became absolutely lame because of the vibrations that were too much in
him. Whatever it is he couldn't walk so they brought him there. The first thing he asked me that "Why
you not allow me to stop the rain. It was raining so heavily when you were coming up, I didn't want
you to get drenched the way you are full of water now and I didn't want you to suffer like this. Because
it is not a good welcome to you. Did you do it just to control my ego? I must have developed ego
did
Vol. VII Issue 11 & 12
51
Divine Cool Breeze
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-6.txt 
 because I can control rain. I just smiled at him and said, "See, you are my son isn't it? And you have
brought a saree for me but you are a Sanyasi, I cannot take a saree from you because Sanyasi Dharma
is different I am a Gruhasta so I deliberately got drenched so that you could give me the saree. The
whole temper the whole unnatural behaviour all dropped down and he became extremely sweet. Then
he said, "How do you know I brought saree?" I said "In love you know everything". And then he
brought a saree for me and he did Aarti and everything but you see all these things show that how the
love masters everything so easily. Small things if you are expert in expressing your love, how it works
out. The main thing we have to see within ourselves is do we really love each other? Do we actually
have affection and compassion for others who are not even Sahja Yogis. Those who are not Sahaja
Yogis are also blind people. You should feel that these people are so unhappy and who cannot come
to Sahaja Yoga and they cannot become Sahaja Yogis and only in their ego they are satisfied. You must
have real compassion for them or if you have this compassion, you be might be told by people that
why are you wasting your energy. Why are you doing this and doing that. The compassion actually
Lunites all these things within ourselves. That's the uniting factor. First is your attention and the second
one is your intelleet or you can say your mind and third one is your heart. They all get at sometime
or other united together. Once you have this capacity to have compassion you don't quarrel with anyone,
you don't have to think about it. You just feel absolutely at home when you are compassionate and with
this compassion you are having relations with others.
Compassion is not studied out or worked out or manoeuvred. It is just there. In that compassion it
forgives, it forgets all nonsensical things. The forgiveness is only possible if you have compassion
within yourself. Now even there are Sahaja Yogis who ask me. "Mother how can we have love and
compassion?" Now the simple thing is that if you develop your thoughtless awareness in your
meditation. You watch anything in thoughtless awareness, any relationship you see in thoughtless
awareness then you will be amazed how the gates of compassion will open. Thoughtless awareness
heart, but it does not go from one person to another person. But it is showing lights on all
opens your
other sides of your being. Every body is benefited, everybody has a divine feeling for you. Because this
compassion is not linear, nor it is aggressive but it just flows and smooths and soothes everything that
is chaotic, that is troublesome and that is painful. This is what you have to do. This was done by saints
long time back, But nobody liked them and they crucified them out of jealousy. Because if somebody
could become a saint, people would be jealous of that person so they killed them or tortured them and
troubled them. The situation is not so bad now. Of course, there are some useless people. There are
some people who are really monsters. Forget about them. But on the whole our attitude should be that
these are blind people. Now looking at somebody who maybe there is something wrong with him or
who does not have a good nature, but in your heart you should not have any grudge. You should not
have any complaints about others. You can talk to that person about it. You can tell him about it in
a way that will be absorbed. But you should not try to make an issue out of it and try to trouble in
anyway or torture. You have seen already in Sahaja Yoga those people who came and were troublesome
and were not of any worth for us, just dropped out themselves. We didn't have to do much about it. They
just got into some sort of a problematic life. There is a big choice going on and the Divine is trying
to decide who are capable of receiving the blessings of the Divine. This is the only key point you have
to achieve. That's why you have come to Sahaja Yoga. Nothing else is important. There are people who
are very highly placed and tomorrow they go into dust. There are people who are regarded as very great
famous people. They go into dust. Its all the time happening in your presence. Everyday you read the
Vol. VII Issue I1
Divine Cool Breeze
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-7.txt 
 news papers and you find how they are bchaving. As they have no value of themselves, they just live
with their ego and think I'm such a big man. They walk in a different way and talk in a different
and suddenly they go down.
way
That person had no feeling why people respected him, he was not conscious of it. In your case you have
to be conscious that you are Sahaja Yogis. If you become the ocean, that doesn't mean your
consciousness has vanished, but it has enlarged. You have got the consciousness of the ocean. You are
not the one who has become like a mesmerised person, a person who has no connection with oneself.
On the contrary you are connected with yourself much more than you were before. so when
the ocean you don't lose your personality. you expand your personality. You become a greater person.
This is happening in Sahaja Yoga. Whatever you are doing, whatever is your enterprise, your life-style
that's all outside. One should not lose the attention which is towards God Almighty. If that is lost. you
are lost. There is a very nice poem Namdeva has written about that. There was a boy who was flying
a kite. The kite was floating and this boy was looking after the kite. And while he was talking to every
body else his attention was still on the kite. Then he goes further and says the lady is carrying a little
child on the waist and she is cleaning the house, cleaning with her little broom. She has to move from
here to there and after that cleaning she has to do other works also. But the child is there, so her attention
is on the child that it should not fall down, that something should not happen. Though she is doing
all kinds of work, her attention is on the child. In the same way your attention should be on the Divine
Powers of Kundalini. It is described that, there are many ladies who are taking water from a river.
Sometimes they have 3 pitchers on their head and are walking. When they are walking, they are talking
to each other, they are telling stories about each other but their attention is on the pitchers that are on
their heads. In the same way whatever we are doing our attention should be on our Kundalini. We
should know what we are doing. As it is , you have light into every corner of your life. Every aspect
of your thinking, every kind of effort, you will be amazed, if you watch your attention you will really
know what you are doing. The attention is to be watched so much, that ultimately you will be surprised
that your attention is no more frittering away.
became
you
Without your attention you cannot work out Sahaja Yoga. This is the main problem of Sahaja Yoga.
Your attention has to be towards God Almighty. Otherwise nothing can work out. Your ascent cannot
work out. If you have come to Sahaja Yoga to make money, alright, you can make money and get out.
If you have come to show off your knowledge, then show and get out. If you have come to show your
and authority, you show and get out. Like that many people have gone out. Don't try to use
power
Sahaja yoga for all these stupid things which are not permanent and not eternal. Sahaja Yoga is to be
used just for cleansing yourself, for becoming the ocean of Love.
Many people feel that Love is rather difficult because you can be harmed by others or somebody can
take advantage of it. The main thing about Love is, if it is not pure Love, then it creates problems..
Supposing if you trust somebody because of money, relationships or anything you can indulge in it and
ultimately you will find that it is very disappointing. But supposing you show your Love just with purity
about that person. It's so subtle, it's so innate built in you. It's there, we have to just open out. Every
human being is a bundle of love. But in pure Love there is a kind of a beautiful light which protects
you, guides you and enlightens your life completely. This light is just nourished and also we can say
that the lamp has to have oil. That is for our spirituality. You are the embodiment of Love because you
are a human being. Even the animals are there who know what Love is. You see I know that if you
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VII Issue 11 & 12
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-8.txt 
 love a tiger, the tiger will never harm. If you love a snake, it will never harm. If you try to love anybody
who is very cruel and very bad, gradually he will calm down . He will harm you a little bit, he will
do this, see things but then gradually you find love works, works and works. Ultimately it is your love
which is important to that person. Now, your Love is really just appreciated more by innocent people.
Children know what love is. If children see you and run away, that means something is wrong with you.
The judgement of innocent people is the best judgement. It means in their innocence, they are extremely
well equipped to judge a person who has love and who does not have. They are the best
they will appreciate you the best. They will understand that these are people of high quality. But if they
are not innocent, like some people are extremely cunning, that's the intelligence part of it, they can never
appreciate you. They like to appreciate something very abnormal, which from some divine part or divine
angle it is very obtuse or funny. Up to a point they may, but they cannot.
people because
You have to appreciate yourself. You have to know that you are not unkind to anyone, you are not
judging others and that you are appreciating everything in that person whatever is good in him as a
person or human being. It works. You have seen it all works through my love and compassion. But
I'm not conscious that I'm giving you love or compassion or anything. I'm not conscious even that I'm
giving you anything. I'm not even conscious as to how 1 have created such a lot of beautiful people.
I'm not conscious, it just happens. Just like the tree is here, it is not conscious as to what it is? Why
and what it looks like. It's just there. In the same way if it happens to you, you become really a source
of such a joy for everyone.
Now, what do we have to do for this world? What is needed to be done for this world? People talk of
peace, this, that. There is no need to do anything. It's just that you become that kind of personality that
It is
emits peace and love and joy to others. This power is within you because it is built within
you.
in the potential form in every person. Only thing it has to be brought out. With affection you may not.
But with love and feeling that is innate within you: There are no words for such subtle things that are
within yourself. Because so far people don't know what are these things that make you feel oneness
with others. All this can happen to you very casily when you understand that you are not this mind,
not this body, not this attention, you are Spirit. Then you introspect. Am I the Spirit? Then if I'm the
Spirit what am I doing? Once you become Spirit, then you feel why not others? Out of compassion, not
for becoming leaders or anything. Just out of love. If I'm like that, why not make others. That is how
Sahaja Yoga spreads so much and we have such gems of people. Such beautiful people that I really
never expected so much to happen in my life time. It has never happened with any saint, any
incarnation, any prophet. The story of Radha and Krishna is very beautiful. Where Radha said why do
you take this flute to your lips? Krishna said, "Why not go and ask the flute". She went and asked the
flute, "why does Shri Krishna take you to his lips all the time? The Flute said, You know, I have become
completely hollow. There's nothing in me. He puts me to his lips and people say that I'm playing the
tune. It's He who is playing the tune. Where am I? I'm not there. I'm just enjoying the same tune which
is passing through". That is the expression. You have to be like a flute. Means to be hollow within
yourself. All these little, little things which come into your life are not important. What is important is
that have you become completely hollow. This is where I would say introspection will help. The one
who makes the flute is also within you. So let there be a flute made out of you by yourself. This is the
way you make yourself what you have to be. In Geeta, Sri Krishna has said the spirit gets satisfied by
itself. It is very difficult to understand how can the spirit be satisfied. But now you can understand what
Sri Krishna said that your own spirit becomes satisfied with itself. Then it doesn't require any
Vol. VII Issue 11
8.
Divine Cool Breeze
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-9.txt 
 satisfaction. You see the comfort of your spirit. You see the beauty of your spirit. You don't even see,
but it is in itself filled with that joy of the spirit and it only can be satisfied with the spirit only. It's
like the reflection in the mirror. When you look at the mirror you see your own reflection. Now if the
mirror is not alright I will say I am not satisfied, you will try to get better picture of yourself. In the
same way the spirit which is reflected within you wants to see its own image and then what
to go some how or the other changing cleaning or making it alright through your meditation so that the
spirit is satisfied with your spirit. Sri Krishna wrote Geeta in such an ambigious manner because he was
clever. He knew human beings cannot take things straight. So tell them this way, that way. So that
do is
you
very
they will run around and ultimately may come to truth. Truth is very simple.
Truth is extremely simple. You don't have to go here and there. You don't have to stand on your legs
or feet all the time. You don't have to do some sort of a Tapasya, Nothing. Only just you become like
a flute. You become hollow. It's not difficult at all for Sahaja Yogis because already the Kundalini has
made you hollow. But still I find people deviate their attention here and there. So many people have
told me how their problems have solved without doing anything about it. I said what did you do? They
said. "No Mother. I put it at your lotus feet. I said "really". "Yes that's all. We were standing outside
and looking at the problem and the problem got solved". Even the most difficult problem that you see
can be solved very easily because you have powers. Your powers are great. You are saints. But much
more than saints because you are born at such a volatile time. Like supposing you have a light and
darkness. You are finding something and bump into that but supposing this is a place full of gas. You
bring the light and whole thing becomes enlightened. Like that you have powers but you must get out
of this nonsense of me, my and mine. It's not like a swimming pool that you jump into it and get out.
It is another kind of very subtle understanding that our roots have to grow and growing our roots within
ou:selves.Find out within ourselves what is the area we are occupying. In what areas in our life style
we are taking these roots inside. Also Shri Krishna has said that the tree of life has roots in the brain
and grows downwards. It's very interesting to understand that the roots are growing in the brain. That
means your own intellect is just covered with compassion. It's just being absolutely one with
compassion. I had told you the story about a saint who used to take water to a deity in Gujarat and
he walked one month to go there with a pitcher of water and there was a very high mountain on which
the deity was. He reached at the foothill. There he found a little donkey dying of thirst. He poured all
the water for that donkey. Those who were with him asked, "What are you doing. You brought it all
THIER
and why are you putting it for this donkey?" He said, "You don't know God has come all the
the
way
way down just to meet me here. He does not want me to climb up". This kind of absolutely simple
understanding of feelings and anothers problems you can solve them, you can sort them out and the
person will tell you that you sorted out the problem. You will not know how you have solved because
this love is the power. This love can see things. It is every thing. It is just like a television. If you see
a telephone, it is a telephone. If you see anything you do with power it is always embedded inside with
love. You did not have a telephone. The whole subtle of ether is at your feet. Just you want to do
something, you must do it. Just with your vibrations. Now many people say, "Mother cure this person,
cure that person". There is no need to. You all can cure anyone you want to, but you bring that person
to me. It is not needed. Just you can cure anybody you feel like. You can solve all their problems
yourself. One little bandhan can solve it. But for that you should be the source of love. Once you give
a bandhan, this powerful love takes over. Alright I will do the job. But for that you have to be the master
of this beautiful thing. Now one must take care. It is very different from masters. In other masters people
Vol. VII Issue 11 & 12
6.
Divine Cool Breeze
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-10.txt 
 try to dominate or try to use it to destroy others. But the mastery of love is that you know how to build
a rapport with the Divine Love, And this Divine Love is not only powerful but it is such an efficient,
such an alert instrument which works out everything in such a manner that you will amazed how things
have worked out. And everybody has noticed this. I know you will know it. But you do not use it. You
have to be on vibratory awareness and use that even giving yourself a bandhan itself clarifies you.
Imagine in your hand there is this great power, giving you this balance, this love, this affection and
protection. While you can give it to others also you have become now the part and parcel of Divine
Power. You are now in the kingdom of God. Whatever you want to do can be done by this Divine
Power. With all this telling you I still feel sometimes you are not confident. You get upset. You feel
that how can this be? You have no trust in yourself. You have no faith in yourself. Also there are some
sort of people who feel they are neglected. Something should have happened to them.Once a lady started
crying. I said, "Why is she crying?" She said "Mother did'nt smile at me". This kind of feeling comes
Lup sometimes that in Sahaja Yoga Mother should all the time be attached to you. She can not get
attached. They say you must look after this man because he is very important. Nothing. To me you are
part and parcel of me, finished. Nothing more than that so you see every body should know that you
are very close to my heart, very near. I am very proud of you. It is a miracle, it has happened that you
people have taken to Sahaja Yoga. So on that point also that how much Mother cares for me what she
does? Now supposing I say to somebody "alright don't sit here, sit there". They feel bad. Anything you
do they feel bad. This kind of a person has no sense of love. He doesn't understand Mother's love.
When you are a Guru you are also a mother. You have to express yourself like a mother. She is kind,
she is gentle, she forgives. She also corrects whenever necessary. But in her own sweet way. So the
correction takes place. Not that a rebellion starts. So all that wisdom of Mother is within you, is already
there, So please try to use. I am sure it will all work out. And we are a very beautiful big group of people
who are something out of ordinary who are so much in peace and enjoy together.
May god bless you
Vol. VII Issue 11
Divine Cool Breeze
10
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-11.txt 
 SHRI KRISHNA PUJA TALK
H. H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
Cabella, Italy. August 1995.
Today we are going to worship Radha Krishna. It is a very festive feeling because Sri Krishna came
on this earth at a time when people had become extremely serious about religion and spirituality. That
made the whole aspect of religions as a joyless achievement. Also the attention of people was diverted
into a kind of a drama which created an aloofness from the society. People become individualistic and
secretive. Such peoples's children also become of that style, because a kind if a fear developed. The
family does make the difference and influence on the personality They got the same type of a feeling.
Two thousand years after Sri Rama went away, the whole situation became a very secret pursuit and
they would not tell each other what they had found. In this secretiveness they got lost. That's how there
were lot of false gurus and paths.
This aloofness made the society so disintegrated. Even in the family the father would not talk to the
son, he would not talk to the wife or may be the wife would not talk to the children. In India they
religiously follow the dharma part. But they went to the right side in such an austere manner that they
follow Geeta without seeing through lines what was written there. When Shri Krishna talked of
karmayoga, He said that action should become non action. What he said was to put everything at his
Lotus Feet. But that never happened because unless and until you get your self realization you always.
think you are doing something, you are achieving something and when you start doing like this, then
you also start sometimes overpowering and dominating.
There is another group that starts thinking that I am being aggressed, I am so much in pain, in trouble.
So there are two types of people developed, one aggressive type and another where the people who are
äbsolutely crying and weeping. So Krishna started talking about the quality of a Sahaja Yogi. He said
that a Sahaja Yogi is a balanced person, for him happiness and unhappiness have no meaning, whatever
he does he feels its all done by God Almighty. You have to be a Sahaja Yogi to be that wäy. Though
he described a Sahaja Yogi there were no Sahaja Yogis at that time. Mostly people were extremely
austere, they went to Himalayas for seeking truth. So another thing started was a Bhakti cult. In that
Bhakti also they were secretive. They wouldn't tell anybody what they were doing. But Shri Krishna
came and talked about Bhakti, He said that you have to have Bhakti that is absolutely surrendered to
God "Ananya". Then there is not the other. You become one and this is what people misunderstood.
Because they thought ananya means complete. So Shri Krishna was also misunderstood by these people
and they went to another extreme. Then one big wave started and people used to run here and there
saying HareRama, HareKrishna and used to do all kinds of things without understanding what He said
about Bhakti. Bhakti without connection is no Bhakti according to him. So some people got lost into
that kind of a Bhakti which was not at all meant for your ascent and evolution.
So many saints came. They didn't know what to tell the people because they couldn't give them
realization. So they said that you should remember God. You should remember the name of Shri Ram,
Shri Krishna and all that. Specially in Maharashtra there were many saints who said that try to remember
the name of God. But it didn't mean just remember or just all the time you do whatever you like and
say "I remember God". You see, they also have failed because they never understood human beings.
Vol. VII Issue 11 & 12
Divine Cool Breeze
11
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-12.txt 
 Saints became very intimated by other priests and by people. There are two types of saints where we
have people who are talking of Viraha (that means separation from God) and then they start talking
about meeting with God. But very few people really showed any interest in becoming that: They would
say we have regard for this, we respect this, we believe in this, we believe in Shri Krishna. They used
to go to a place called Pandharpur. Everywhere you go you will find
because Shri Krishna ruled there. They are all believers of Shri Krishna but what he came for was
forgotten. He was talking about realization. He was talking about connection. in all these preachings
they could not read what is written between the lines and they started doing on their own.
a Shri Krishna. Specially in Gujrat,
In our history we have horrible things done in the name of Shri Krishna, e.g. HareRama HareKrishna.
We have a temple of Shri Mataji and that temple was created for a deity who was very vibrating, was
the deity of Shri Krishna. When he ran away from the field of battle "Ranchoddas" Now, when He ran
away from the field of battle it was because he wanted to deceive one monster and wanted to kill him.
So this "Ranchoddas" state was very important for how He tricked these monster and how He managed
to take him to a cave where a saint was sleeping and who had a boon that "if anybody tries to wake
you up, you can open your third eye and kill him.Shri Krishná played a trick. He ran into this cave and
this monster also ran after Him and then He put His shawl on top of this saint who was sleeping. The
monster came behind and said "So you are running, are tired and are sleeping here", He pulled the
shawl. As son as he pulled the shawl, the saint got up and burnt Him, and that's how He killed that
devil.
The life style of Shri Krishna was very different than that of mine. Rama was the one who accepted
exile and spent 14 years in the forest. He went out in search of His wife and also His children didn't
accept Him very much. Now, the aspect of Shri Krishna's life was very different. First thing He came
to know about human beings is that they are very cunning people and if you tell them about God or
anything they will never accept . They will do the way they think about it. So He said let us try the
otherway round. He played a trick with His preaching. That, "You have to do your Karmas. Your action
Becomes a nonaction". This is an impossible situation. And the second that. "Your devotion should be
ananya'. Now, these two conditions nobody could fulfil. At the time of Sahaja Yoga they come around
knowing that they have not achieved anything by practising all those things whatever Shree Krishna has
said. But His life-style was different. When He came as a little boy He first tried to kill all these
monsters who were invading Gokul where He was living. In a different manner. He killed "Putna" who
was a horrible "rakshasi". He killed Her just while sucking her breast because she wanted to poison Him
with her milk. This shows that the first thing He took to was extreme aggressiveness against all the
negative forces that were working. Rama succumbed to everything whatever happened. Later on
Hekilled Ravana. From very childhood, the attitude of Shri Krishna was more action as far as the
negativity is concerned and He killed many rakshasas till He killed "Kamsa". So the first part was killing
these people because they were very aggressive and they were sucking the energy and they were also
becoming megalomania, they used to think no end of themselves. So, he killed their ego. Then He
helped the Pandavas to establish the truth. But He didn't give them realization. Up to a point he brought
them to understand that always the truth wins. They call it "Satyameva Jayate". This happened at the
time when it was very important to show that those negative forces cannot overpower. To show how
useless they were. To show how they have been acting, dominating and every body had fear but all
of them were neutralized. That He can kill all these negative forces. This was one thing of His style
which is very important for modern times.
Vol, VII Issue 11
12
Divine Cool Breeze
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Now in America you see there are so many negative forces that have come. They are in different forms,
they are not like monsters. But they are by temperament monsters. He preached collectively through
Rasleela and all that. That was also remarkable that He made people dance together, play together, to
be festive and to know that you are a witness, you are not a slave of your religion or of your
but you have to be festive. Then He introduced Holy festivals like Rakshabandhan. All these he brought
in because He thought this is how the society will be cleansed and they will have lot of enjoyment also.
He brought the idea of enjoyment to the lives of people just to tease them and to make them turn to
something that was very great enjoyment. Now, this enjoyment was the enjoyment of the Spirit, pure
enjoyment. You see all these things reflected in American life today but in a perverted way. The sense
of enjoyment in American life is absolutely perverted because it is still destructive. Whatever they take
to is self destructive. You tell them anything, they will say what's wrong. Why all these gurus prospered
there because they pampered the ego of Americans and said "It's all right. You can do whatever you
like as long as you give us money"... And started doing all these things, a sort of going into perversion
like Rajneesh, he came to America and started a Rajneeshnagram this and that and established there with
thousands of people but then again Sri Krishna's power worked on him and he was defeated there. Every
meditation
where
find there are so many gurus, they were defeated really by Sri Krishna's power because he
you
has all the tricks of the trade. He knows how to make fools out of them.
As a result of all that has happened people have lost faith, they have no faith in any one. They think
if these people could deceive us like that, take away our money, so they decided not to have anything
to do with the gurus. We are not abnormal, we are absolutely normal people. We haven't made any
absurd type of following or absurd type of meditation, that you will fly in the air and all sort of things.
But the people of America are not so matured to understand, Other wise they would not have fallen
in with these horrible gurus. On one side we have people who are very much affected by these gurus,
on the other side we have people who think I must try also to be one of them and on the third aspect
is this that the people are extremely simple and extremely immature. They are like children. Some
Americans told me that they are like children and to approach them you have to say that a mother's
love can only put them right. Now as far as I am concerned, it was the first country I had visited in
1974. I gave realization to many, but what I feel was that they didn't care for deep things so we lost
many Sahaja Yogis like that. Then there were some people who were sick, they wanted their treatment
and that's all. Then came some more who were taken away by bombastic gurus who told them lots of
stories. People were absolutely not prepared for Sahaja Yoga though they were seekers no doubt. They
had that restlessness but they were not ready for Sahaja Yoga. They didn't know what to see, what to
get, that was the part I feel very sad. So after that I didn't go for nine years because I thought better
devote your time for something else, till these people mature and understand what is wrong with them.
Now they have been to the gurus and they lost. There are some who have this restlessness I see in many
articles they write or books they write. There is this a kind of restlessness which is very important for
Sahaja Yogis. Most of you have been seekers from past lives and you had this restlessness within you.
But with this restlessness you didn't know what to do, where to go. With this restlessness it was logical
that you go to somebody to get rid of your restlessness minimum of minimum. But that never happened.
When it never happened they thought that there is somebody missing. You have to have another
program, you have to grow through another course so they went on falling more and more. At the same
time the negativity of immorality took place. Though if you read the constitution of America you will
be amazed, in very subtle ways, it has just supported complete morality. There is a law that when you
Vol. VII Issue 11 & 12
13
Divine Cool Breeze
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-14.txt 
 go out of the house you cannot wear funny dresses. When you are in the swimming suit also that is
regularity and nobody can be absolutely nude. The whole basis was that people have to become moral.
But always if you make any law, human beings have the capacity to blast it, to say why this law? That
is how the idea of control started. How can you control? How can you say one should not do like that?
Now there is the whole explosion in the family also, and the children started disobeying also. The
parents themselves were of the same style, then the children became of the same style. They thought
that there is not freedom. Those who don't know how to use freedom should not get any freedom. They
must know what freedom is. Those who respect and understand freedom can only be free people.In that
freedom with this explosion, they were thrown away and they started taking to lives which are really
absolutely absurd, calling it most reasonable, most logical. So the people became homo sexual. It is
absurd. It is not natural at all. But when the idea of freedom exploded in them then all the bhoots came
to take their freedom.It's from the bhoots they got these ideas. In such a large scale these bhoots are
affecting the people as a result of that people have started getting all these diseases and all that. The
most negative personality from Austria at the same moment was Freud. He is the one who ruined their
lives because as soon as they became free they thought anybody who writes anything in black and white
is 'Bible'. They started following this fellow and some others also from France. It is a sign of complete
immaturity. A matured person won't take to this. They said we never have any problem, we enjoy every
thing, we do this we do that, the enjoyment is important. Now they are talking about the problems that
they are facing out of these enjoyments. They say that 65% of the people became schizophrenic, 30%
will became lunatic. So who are left normal then ? You are shocked how could such a big number of
human beings get in to trouble of this kind and the diseases they have are more funny. Like they have
most of the discases of the mooladhara.
Now enjoyment is at what point? Where do you enjoy? You enjoy in your heart. You can enjoy in your
Sahasrara. But with mooladhara this is no question, if you go on like this, there is no end to it. That
has created tremendous problems in America. Now they are money oriented. To them money is
success, money is joy, money is everything. Now this third quality from where did it come? At the time
of Sri Krishna people were very money oriented. In the sense that they used to sell their milk, and butter
to Kamsa who was a devil. So Sri Krishna used to break their pitchers so that they didn't take it there.
The women would not give milk and butter to their own children but would take all that to these
horrible people. It is like the shadow and the light. Light is Sri Krishna. He was such a detached person
that he can never commit any wrong things, he couldn't do any immoral things. Whatever he did was
absolutely moral, because if you are detached and you are doing something then nothing touches you.
He brought in this idea of Leela, or this play of the divine. Now we see in our lives also. How the play
of divine works.
The Sahaja Yogis when they come they are really restless and they ask me hundred questions. They start
also dominating others and doing all kinds of things. But once they get the experience of the Divine
Power then they start settling down. Then they see that there are so many coincidences and miracles.
Then they start understanding that there is some power which is taking us to the right path. So unless
and until this happens, realizing that there is a power which is helping us, something beyond what we
know then things will start changing. Now we have to workout in America. We have to tell that this
is the power that is beyond, waiting to transform you. There is going to be a global transformation. I
can see it so clearly now. In every country I see this and that it works. This global transformation I
Vol. VII Issue 11
Divine Cool Breeze
14
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-15.txt 
 never thought, I will able to see in my life time but has really reached its highest point or its
development. You are all transformed, this was predicted long time back in India.
Now when you start feeling the vibrations and you start using it then you understand that there is this
power and it works. Then you start seeing also energy centers of swayambhus and all that. Then you
start understanding. Your understanding goes on increasing but first they have to believe that there is
a power beyond this. They may not believe in Kundalini doesn't matter, but once you know that there
is a power beyond they will try to work it out and this is what is very difficult to convince people that
there is a power beyond, because they are so conditioned by science, also by family traditions, also all
nonsensical ideas about ego that they cannot see. This point is that the nature is helping. Now why
America is such a rich country they never ask such a question. What have they done? What are their
punyas? One of the reason is Sri Krishna is Kubera. He is doing his job. He is working it out but people
do not understand that this is a Divine blessing. They think that this is their right to have it and they
boast about it. A very boastful people. They talk about their wealth. It's a very different situation and
culture, for in India somebody starts boasting about his wealth, they wil think he must be mad, because
it's regarded as bad manners. So there is nothing like bad manners in the west. They can abuse their
father with very dirty words. We have to really save America. It is from all the sides under attack.
Take morality part, its under attack, take from artist point of view it is under attack. They are not
creating many artists. Their modern paintings haven't got the depth at all. It's all full of filthy things.
Now whom do you sell to the people who are not matured enough. Who are so much enticed by the
mooladhara problem. Now how can you help them? How can you bring them around? It's a question
of people maturing for which of course this Param Chaitanya will help. What is wrong with them is this
that they lack maturity as far as evolution is concerned. Also we can start a kind of a newspaper, could
be some sort of a media of having a cable TV or something like that by which we can propagate Sahaja
Yoga. Tell them what good it has done, what good it can do to you. It's a quite mad place because they
have so many books, everything is so much. Every where you find, there is violence, there is corruption
and there is fighting. This is no religion. Nobody could have pleased that way. But it is that way. So
now you all stand out of all this where you love each other, care for each other, enjoy each other, enjoy
everything inspite of that. Your enjoyment is absolutely pure and this is what is to be seen by others
and it can work out. I am sure one day in America we will be very successful.
May God Bless You.
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VII Issue 11 & 12
15
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-16.txt 
 SHRI GANESHA PUJA SYNOPSIS
Talk By H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Cabella, Italy. 10th Sep. 1995
You must get lost into moment to moment enjoyment till you get destructive, completely destroyed but
I really don't understand how you have achieved this state where you see that purity is so important to
life that Ganesha's qualities, his value system and his innocence is to be imbibed. I feel very gratified,
that such a thing happened now in our life and you all are so much impressed by Shri Ganesha. Shri
Ganesha is there from our childhood. You all have Shri Ganesha settled very nicely within yourselves
and it is Awakened in such a manner, that in your free will also you do not want to do the thing that
will go against Shri Ganesha. His manifestation within you is so evident. See your faces, they are so
beautifully shining. So very different from other people.
One day I was travelling from London and there was one Indian lady who came to see me and she said,
"I was so surprised to see your disciples. Their faces were shining with such light I have never seen
any disciples like that." I asked her, "Who are you?" She said " I am married in Guru Nanak's family
and all the people in his family are just opposite to what Shri Guru Nanaka was. So I said, "Because
Sahaja Yogis worship Shri Ganesha." So he said that in our family nobody worships Shri Ganesha." I
said, "It cannot be possible, how is it?" "No, they believe in Nirakar, in the formless god of Chaitanya.
Why don't they find out who is the source?" So they said that Nanaka has only talked up to this point
he has not talked about this source. I said, "Better find out because in his books something has been
taken away and then somebody gave me a passage, where he had described the innocence; the deity of
Shri Ganesha also. He had deseribed that the whole creation was done by the mother and not by the
father. The Nirakar are the people who don't believe in the form of god. They always talk of father not
of mother. It is true also about Christianity, Islam and Jews all of them talk of the father and not of the
mother nor about Shri Ganesha. It seems in the ancient time they believed in child god in China, in
Greece and also in many other countries who were supposed to be primitive. But they all believed in
the child god.
Now when we deal with our children we should know that they are just like Shri Ganesha. They are
very innocent, very simple, except in cases some times they are affected by some things and they lose
their moorings. Shri Ganesha's greatest contribution to Sahaja Yoga is that he makes you feel my
vibrations. He makes you feel the beauty of purity and simplicity. It is only possible if Shri Ganesha
is awakened within you. Also the Kundalini won't rise without the sanction of this Chancellor. He is
the one sitting on the Mooladhara. But you should know he is on every Chakra. Innocence cures all the
maladies, physical, mental, emotional specially the spiritual. But most important quality of Shri Ganesha
is that he believes in emitting vibrations. He believes in projecting his vibrations to everyone. That the
quality now I feel all of you as Sahaja Yogis can use. You got your realisation without any effort it was
Sahaja. The life before self realisation was different. You got your Transformation and you have jumped
in to the new era of metascience but here now we have to see, what ever we have got what are we to
do with it? You ofcourse know that you have to give realisation to others. You have to cure people. You
have to love them and you have to be compassionate. But apart from that now the deliberation about
yourselves have to start. That is through Shri Ganesha's powers that arewithin you. You can emit your
Vol. VII Issue 11
16
Divine Cool Breeze
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-17.txt 
 powers, your energy to others, you can project it to others. Now for example if somebody comes to you,
needs you then if you know how to deliberately project your energy you can help him. This is a new
type of meditation you have to practice. That to emit your energy and project it to others. You don't
have to say anything, you don't have to talk. But just feel deliberately. Again I say deliberately. It is
not Sahaja, is not spontaneous. This is what you have to practice is to emit your energy of your
innocence of Shri Ganesha to others. Thus their innocence will be awakened. Now for example say we
had some problems in London and Sahaja Yogis told me, "Mother you know there are still some men
are looking at us " some said "there are many women who are looking at us" I said "You can project
your energy in such a manner that the projection will stop all this kind of stupid behavior of others and
also make them understand, respect you and feel your dignity. Its not very difficult. But on the contrary
as the culture is to attract men and women the energy will diminish.
When you feel your dignity and serenity and that you are now, self realised people. It is a kind of
majestic personality developed within you. That majestic personality can have a tremendous effect on
the surrounding people. You should start a kind of deliberate projection, just spontaneous. It just
happens. But you can achieve it by yourself with little practice, try to pace such people not with disdaint
or contempt but adjust your majestic personality. This personality is here now sitting in such a majestic
manner. And is also giving the vibrations to others. The whole figure is doing something suddenly to
the people. To expect that the whole world should change spontaneously, I don't think it alright. Because
you know the world is so chaotic. So much ego. So much conditionings. But something within you can
rise above others. Its your sense of dignity, your complete selfhood, where you stand yourself. You are
not to be rude, or egoistical. You need not say things if you don't want to say anything, Just that silent
personality can emit such beautiful vibrations which you have stored up within yourself and this storing
is showing on your faces which I say are shining.
up
The innocence that you have, you have to be proud of it. Even now some times you feel that people
will say you are not properly dressed up or ugly looking or all kinds of things. In this world all human
beings expect others to be very good. Every body should be a hero or something. What about themselves
they never think. Now you have become heroes in the sense that spiritually you are much higher than
all of them. This deliberate projection when it starts then you should not be afraid that you will develop
an ego. You should not be afraid that you will get some conditionings. But just in a way, with the
understanding that you have these powers within you beautifully expressing themselves as a child. If
there is one child it can entertain atleast hundred people. What is so sweet about the child is the
innocence! The way he speaks, behaves and the way he expresses his love. It's so simple! But it has
some thing in the essence it is this innocence of Shri Ganesha.
Any where in the world if there is a question of children the whole world gets worried about it. It wants
to solve the problem. If a child is in trouble anywhere it will be eirculated all over. If they see a child
anywhere their faces change. The expression changes because the child is emitting that innocence
without any deliberation. Without any special way of doing things, but just spontaneously. But then you
have to grow. You start growing. With others who are not innocent. You have to meet them. You cannot
run away from the society. You start getting all the rapport with such people, who are talking about
things actually, who are criticising Shri Ganesha, gradually your innocence starts dying out. And you
feel sometimes inferior to all those who are supposed to be the great warriers against innocence. In the
sense that when I was in London, I saw they all used to laugh at me because I had this Kumkum. I used
Vol. VII Issue 11 & 12
Divine Cool Breeze
17
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-18.txt 
 to think that they don't know why I am wearing it! So ignorant they are! Very ignorant people that they
don't know in India all the married women wear it. So I said that this is just written down on my head
that I am married woman is just to tell to people, so that they don't bother about me. I have got my
husband behind me and he can take you to task. This kind of ignorance is so much in the west, and
still they think that they are the higher race, they are great people. They don't know even the small things
about life. For the innocence I think they have lost the knowledge about it long time back and that is
how it is a society today which is absolutely löst in it's own moorings. Every individual is separate,
every individual is different and they don't know each other. Without innocence you cannot have the
rapport with other people. Because that means you have some sort of a lust or greed behind that thing.
Somebody asked me about Freud and what he said Why people are so much against him? Why are you
so much against him? He said that there is a bad relationship between mother and a child. He just
jumped. My goodness, thank God, he never come to India, otherwise we would have cut him into pieces
and put him in the Indian sea. But why spoil the purity of Indian sea also. Every time anywhere you
go there is nothing but this sex business. It is too much. I cannot understand how people go on
tolerating. It is all right, at the most in some famous adult film you might show some things. But every
time you see a film suddenly you find such type of a nonsensical bedroom scene is coming. People like
it. They pay for it. They want to have all aspects of it. It's such a natural thing. What is there to talk
about it I don't understand it is only the development of the brain of such a manner that every kind of
a nonsense it wants to accept. "So what? What is wrong?" You are mad. That is what you go to lunatic
aslums for. Lunatics also talk like that. So what is wrong? Same way because of such acceptance they
don't know how much people have ruined their family life, their children's life. In every way we find
that the society is full of this nonsense. Specially in the television. Whatever it is through the blessings
of Shri Ganesha you all are transformed. You are on a different line. You see what Shri Ganesha has
done to you. How he has made your attention so beautiful that you enjoy all the beautiful things of the
world, all the innocent things of the world. And there are many people like that. Who are struggling.
Not that all the society has accepted this nonsense. In England they published a book about what
children have to say about the politicians. Very sweet sweet things. And there were 5000 books and in
one day all the books were sold. In one day! That shows that there are so many people still who are
respecting their innocence and they want to be innocent. They want to enjoy their innocence.. But the
society has to be created of that kind. For that you must have a kind of a personality. They said, "You
see our husbands told us if you want to see serenity personified then you must see Mrs. Srivastava".
I was surprised. In Greece they are talking of serenity. In modern times any body talking about purity.
I just couldn't understand but I felt at the back of their mind their tradition. What ever it is. These men
could see that simple thing in me and they went and told them and they all enjoyed my company very
much. I was making them laugh and telling them things and all that and one of them turned on and said,
"Mrs. Shrivastava you are just like a child!" I said, "Really?" "We enjoyed your company so much."
And when I was coming they were in tears. Whatever innocent personality you are, you have to project,
towards others. Somebody trying to be funny with you, just with one glance you can put that person
right. You don't like it just to say you don't like it in a way that is a projection. Around your society,
around where you are working you will also find people who have no sense of innocence and its
disgusting to be with them but as you have powers, you must use it to project. I see with Sahaja Yogis
they don't even cure people. They will tell me, "Mother, he is to be cured, that is to be done". But you
are so many. Why do you need me to do that now? You all can cure the patient. You can help the patient
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VII Issue 11
18
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-19.txt 
 why can't you do it? What is the need for me to do it? You have these qualities within you because
potentially you had them before and now they are enlightened through the grace of Shri Ganesha. Now
have to do is to assert them. Ofcourse you must remember not to use your ego, not to use
what
you
your mind. Somebody would say that "Mother without mind how can you impress others. How can you
have rapport with others?" It's very simple. Just become thought less. Once you become thoughtless you
are in the realm of the Divine and the Divine takes charge. It will start emitting such beautiful vibrations
that you will be amazed that yourself how things are working out. It is not a coincidence like one I was
going somewhere and they told me that you have to be very careful. I said, "Why?" "Because in the
night Naxalites are here and they might just kill you" I said "All right." They said "It's very late, be
careful. So the gentleman with me was very much worried and he said," Take out your ornaments. He
put them under the seat and all that. As soon as we reached that place where many Naxalites were
standing with their lanterns I told the driver for one minute to stop the car. He said, "I will not." I said,
"you stop." I looked at them and I don't know what happened. I said, "Now speed up the car." You see
it is the power that God has. Until you use the power of love and compassion, you will not know that
you have got it and that comes from Shri Ganesha.
Now children understand love. If you are nice to them how they react. may be sometimes they don't.
But 99% they really react to love, In our school in Dharamshala there were two children and they were
very troublesome to begin with and the parents were worried about them. They sent them to
Dharamshala and otherwise they were very demanding as the modern children are. You buy this, you
buy that, we go here, we want Mc Donald, this that was going on. When they went to the school after
one year they came back and the parents asked them. "What do you want?" "We don't want anything.
The parents asked "You don't want anything? You don't want to go to the Mac Donald." "We want to
sit here and watch mother's videos".
They said. What has happened to them, they were so much
changed. What is the matter with them? So then the parents asked, "What about food?" They said,
"Whatever you cook we will eat. We are not bothered." They were anmazęd how these children had
changed. Then they said, "You must go out somewhere. You must see the river, you must wander." All
right that we will do. Then again they came home, no demands, nothing. They didn't want to go
shopping. They were satisfied, dignified. The parents said, "What is the matter with you? You don't
want anything. They answered "No, we want something but we don't know how to tell you." "What is
it?"
for
апy
Because you don't have that. You can't get it in the market". "What is it?" "Can you get us a
pendant of Shri Mataji?" I know the children. I met them. But I have not been with them for a long
time. I have never been so close to them, nothing. But look at the love. That they have. They were
telling me in the school in the beginning that anybody used to trouble us we said, "Now we are going
to inform Shri Mataji." "No, no, don't inform her." "Why?" "Because She will not love me any more".
Can you imagine the value of my love is so much understood by these little little children. So much
they admire, they want it. It has no material gain by that, Nothing. All this really shows that Christ has
said it that you have to be like small children to enter into the kingdom of God. Without that you cannot
enjoy anything.
Look at these Swiss. This is the power of Shri Ganesha's love because they were to celebrate Shri
Ganesha's birthday so they got equipped from within. But if they had not projected it there would have
been nothing. Whatever He is giving you, whatever He is creating in you, the beautiful innocence, this
beautiful fragrance of your living every moment you are enjoying it then also know that we have to give
it to others. We have to pour this into others. It will be hard to work out but I know it will work out.
Divine Cool Breeze
19
Vol. VII Issue 11 & 12
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-20.txt 
 It has tremendous powers. If you are innocent nobody can cheat us, nobody can trouble us because in
innocence you become a person who doesn't care for what is happening to him. You become a person
who tolerates everything.
It's a story about a king in China, he had decided to win a cock's fight. So he went to one
and told him that how will you train the cock to fight the other cocks. He said, "Leave the cock with
me." He left the cock with him and he trained him very well. When the king arrived one month after,
before the fight. He said, "See now take the cock." This is done. He said. "This one? This one is not
doing anything, only standing. What will I do with him? He took that cock and put him in that contest.
All the cocks were together, they started troubling this cock. He was just standing like this as if some
stupid people are trying to trouble him. He was doing nothing. He would not react. All the cocks were
surprised that this one is not protesting. And he is not bothered about what we are doing. One by one
all the cocks disappeared from the field and this was the only cock which stood up. The king was
surprised. He took him to the saint and said, "This one has become a saint now. It's better you keep with
you. Your personality it self made him like that and now you worship him so much. He is within you
and any kind of problems that you have will be solved very easily, if you take to your innocence and
that will create coincidence as they call it but it's not coincidence it's the vibrations that you will be
amazed how the things are solved. You will say." Mother, the other day it rained so much. That it has
all become muddy, Mother what are we going to do." I said "It will be all right leave it to me." Next
day it was very hot. It is impossible that there could be such a change
rained so heavily and the other day whole thing gets absolutely dried up. It's His work because He is
so much powerful and you have came to worship him. So first of all cleaning has to be done. And He
did the cleansing by putting the rain. There is such heavy rains and some of the parts of the heavy rains
which came near Palazzo Dorio they turned into ice.
great saint
in the weather that one day it
Now it is something unbelievable that al over it just rained and only near our house these ice balls are
coming. We call it miracles, we can call it anything but it's Shri Ganesha's sensitivity. We should say
that He thought that this rain is going near my mother's house so let's make some sort of a beautiful
ice balls. I went out and I saw and I was amazed how it was, all around my house there were ice balls.
What He can do what is he capable is absolutely unbelievable. How He guides you and how He helps
you. How He takes you to the right path. Not only that how He protects you, all the time He is with
you, because you have become his Ganas now. You are His Ganas so He protects you. He looks after
you. He gives you all the guidance. He takes you to the right path. He takes you to the right road. He
gives you all that is Dharmic to enjoy. You always meet friends here and there. You think it's a
coincidence but it is not and that's how He works. He works with all His beautiful, sweet, loving
attention on you because you are all His ganas. But the ganas have to work. As I say in our body there
are ganas and they fight the diseases, they fight the problems that are in the body, there are antibodies
which are the ganas of Shri Ganesha. In the same way you are also His ganas. He does all this for
you,
protects you, loves you. He gives you a good time. Then what are we doing about it? It should not be
one sided. When He does all this for you then what should we do about Shri Ganesha? What can we
so as antibodies? You don't have to fight the enemies with any sword or any kind of a weapon. The
enemies you can conquer by simply two methods. One is try your love, your pure love on them. You
may melt away many people or else if that is not working then what should you do is to sit down to
meditate and to give Bandhans. There are ways of giving bandhans. Bandhan works so fast and so
beautifully that you are amazed how it has worked. Because you are so powerful. The way you give
Vol. VII Issue 11
20
Divine Cool Breeze
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-21.txt 
 bandhan anybody can give, it is not going to work. It is only you the Sahaja Yogis can give bandhan.
There are different types of bandhans you have to give and all that works out so well. So we have to
have the faith in our own powers. We have to know that we are empowered by Shri Ganesha to do the
work of Sahaja Yoga. To do the work of Sahaja Yoga is not to feel that you are doing but it is Shri
Ganesha who is doing it. Giving realisations to the people is the greatest joy a Sahaja Yogi can have.
And then you don't have to think that you have done it. That is the best. But if you think that I am very
tired I have done this, I have done that. Many people come and tell me, "Mother, we have done this,
we have done that. That means they are just feeling the strains of doing any work. But you have not
to feel any strain. His powers are within you. You can see, believe in me, believe in yourself, have
confidence and faith in yourself that you are a storehouse of innocence which is nothing but compassion,
and love. If you have that faith you will develop a beautiful way of talking to others, of having
relationship with others. It's something that is really the gift of Shri Ganesha. I don't think I ever shouted
at any one. Even at my own children. I have never got into a fury or a temper. Because I think I can
manage without it. Ofcourse I had to correct, I had to tell people. But one thing I have seen, that
everybody has been afraid of one thing that I should never drive out someone out of Sahaja Yoga.
Because Sahaja Yoga is such a joy. It's such a
absolutely confident about yourself. To ask you to leave Sahaja Yoga is the greatest punishment because
you cannot leave me now. It's just impossible. That is what it is, you also develop the qualities that you
cannot leave. See a child, if it is lost I mean the parents just go off They don't know how the child is
lost. But supposing some son of their's is a very bad boy, is misbehaving. doing all kinds of wrong
things. They don't mind. But when they are young they are innocent. It's some sort of a tremendous
attachment to them and understanding that they are our children, we have to look after them. So this
innocence that attracts you that keeps you wondering about children.
energy giving thing. It's such a light that you feel
You must know how to smile. You must know how to win over people. Still there are some Sahaja
Yogis and Sahaja Yoginis who are still rather stiff and they cannot give up their stiffness. They think
no end of themselves or whatever it is. Then they will not enjoy Sahaja Yoga, of course they will enjoy
Sahaja Yoga and its worth, it's joyous moments.
Today is the day to celebrate His birth and He was the first God that was created on this earth. Because
He is auspiciousness, He is also holiness. So the Primordial Mother didn't want to create this world
without first creating the holiness, the auspiciousness, the purity. That's why He was first created, on
this earth with vibrations which are just bundles of love, vibrations, So that He can look after all the
people who are going to come from ages to ages, to guide them always on the straight path. He is
supposed to be incharge of our conscience, the conscience that eats you up sometimes. That say this
is not all right that is not all right. That I should not have done this. But one should try to take very
great pride in it. Like there was one Indian gentleman I told him, "Why did you give up your land?"
He said, "Mother I thought later on when my children will grow. I might become greedy and I may not
give this land to my brother who deserves it because I am too clever I can cheat him. So I thought it
is better to give up the land now to my brother. He was so innocently telling mẹ that I should not
become greedy. May be that my children will grow up and I will feel that I must give this all to by own
brother but I said," What about your brother?" He said," He deserves, he needs it. I don't need so much
land and I am doing very well in my life that is why I have given." So the innocence works out in such
a manner. There is one Sahaj Yogi about 16 years old. He came to me and he said, "My mother has
some badhas and my father too. I don't know what to do. Now supposing I leave my father and mother
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VII Issue 11 & 12
21
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-22.txt 
 then will the badhas also leave me?" I said, "May be, may be not. It depends ." So he said, "Then what
is the need for the people to leave their parents when they are 18 years of age because it will be a big
loss." I said," Why?" "Firstly if I start smoking who will stop me?" Such an innocent boy "If I start
smoking only my father can slap me on my face. Nobody else so he can save me from the smoking.
I was amazed at his innocence. "You see, then my mother, she is the one who corrects me at every point.
If I am not with her who will correct me? Who will tell me don't do this, and don't do that?"
This innocence always seeks virtuous life, better life and it doesn't assert on others. But if somehow
there is innocence like you people are now self-realised people, in the light of yourself you don't want
to do something that is not innocent, that is not Sahaj. For example, I have never see such honest
people as we have in Sahaja Yoga. I mean they don't want to take a single penny out of things, Of course
there have been some horrible people also who made lots of money out of Sahaja Yoga. Doesn't matter,
but most of you have become so honest. When there is so much corruption in this world and to see
people who are so honest.
The greatest quality of Shri Ganesha is that for him the Mother is the most important. What mother says,
what mother does, that's the most important thing. It is so much that I really cannot understand how you
people are so much fond of me because I think that whatever you think about me mentally is nothing
compared to what you have within yourself. And that Shri Ganesha's quality because he is so attached
to me that He will fight His father, He will fight everybody. That's what you are, anything against me
you cannot tolerate. I saw people getting furious if somebody said a word against me. This quality of
love for me is coming from Shri Ganesha within you. But another quality as I said that He makes the
ganas work and so you have to work it out.
You all have talents, you all have understanding, you are all intelligent, all of you are special people
and you have to work out in collective way and also individual way to show your quality of Shri
Ganesha. The way He has rhythm. He is very rhythmic. The rhythm of Shri Ganesha is working and
His understanding for music which is one of His qualities that He dances on the music of which Nataraj
His father 'Shiva' has taught it. Shri Ganesha with such a big stomach yet Hedances so well, so lightly.
He lifts his body he works out amazingly. How he does it? He is very light and lightness comes because
of innocence. If the mooladhara is all right then the lightness is there. In Maharashtra how these people
were playing Lezim' with such speed, such a lightness. They were lifting their legs and hands. It was
really amazing how they were doing it and it is only the innocence of these people that they don't
understand much of this nonsense, they don't know what is going on with all these things. They earn
their living. They are farmers and then in the evening they sleep off in complete innocence. They don't
plan. They do not sit down and find out how to kill somebody. How to rob somebody or other bad things
that people think, no bad action comes into their minds. There is no time for that. They work whole
day and in the evening nicely they sleep or else they will have Bhajan Mandali where they will all sing
together in a very beautiful manner. So its a real Sahaja style.
If you are innocent your power is your innocence. You don't have to have your weapons and guns and
things. All these religions so called are using nothing but weapons and guns and all kinds of killing
objects and they are also killed. It is a funny thing all in the name of god, in the name of Shri Ganesha.
There is no need for us to fight. There is no need for us to think that we will kill this man and we will
kill that man. Only you have to just desire. Project your energy and you will see the person will
disappear. He will either become a transformed person or he will not be there to trouble
you.
Vol. VII Issue 11
Divine Cool Breeze
22
 1995_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-23.txt 
 We must know our qualities and our powers. Many people I know who would never come on the
and speak. I said, "You get along. start anything, you just project, I can't do it. Why can't I do it? To
say I can't, I am sorry. This sorry is so common now. How can I do it ? All such people are not yet
awakened of their powers that they have. You can do it. You can. Everything can be managed, afterall
you have the power. In that power you must know that you are not going to do something indiscreet.
You are not going to spoil anybody. But your power itself will show that this power is really of love,
affection, compassion for the transformation of the whole world. I am thinking of the complete global
transformation which I know is a dream, but still I think like that because I see you all. Then I think
you all can do it and when I see the Shri Ganesha in you I am sure it will work out. In my life time
I have seen so many Sahaja Yogis all over. How things are worked out. You have heard about in Brazil
and also in Argentina, most the people came to the program from 12'o clock in the morning when we
were going to have the program at 7'o clock in evening. I reached there at 8'o clock as usual and they
said, "Mother, you won't believe there was a big drama here" "What drama?" "They were sitting here
from 12'o clock. So all those who came earlier got inside but those who came at the last minute they
would not be allowed and they are sitting there and fighting, we are going to come inside. Then one
of the Sahaja Yogi sensibly went and talk to the manager and told them, "Baba, let them come, there
is room so there were four floors. When I came I saw what's this? All over the whole thing filled with
these people, I have never seen them before. But they were true and so respectful so much absorbing
the vibrations and I found it difficult to control my tears out of real feeling of such gratitude for Shri
Ganesha. He is the one who worked it out. That is why they say always first worship Shri Ganesha
before starting any work because it gives you that peace that tremendous power. He is the one who
works out so many things that you never thought of it ever.
stage
May God Bless You.
Divine Cool Breeze
23
Vol. VII Issue 11 & 12
