DIVINE COOL BREEZE ISSUE 1 & 2 VOLUME VII When you become thoughtlessly aware then you become completely peaceful within yourself. H. H. Shri. Mataji Nirmala Devi World Women Conference, 1995 Beijing, China.

 INTER REGIONAL ROUND TABLE FOURTH WORLD CONFERENCE ON WOMEN BEIJING 13 SEPTEMBER 1995 ADDRESS BY DR (MRS) NIRMALA SRIVASTAVA FOUNDER SAHAJA YOGA Brothers and Sisters of the World It is a great honour for me to talk about global problems of women in front of this distinguished assembly. First of all, I would like to offer my profound gratitude to the government and people of our host country, the People's Republic of China. I have had the privilege of visiting China on two previous occasions and I am a great admirer of the wisdom and culture of this great nation that I have visited. This is, beyond my imagination, the most glorious time in the history of the world that at this time we are so much aware of the problems of women. Women as a whole have definitely suffered over the ages because we have not realised what their importance is and what their proper role is in human society. Society itself, which is her creation, tries to control or put down the womanhood. In the East, we can say, that due to fundamentalist influence, women have been under great pressure and their morality is based on fear rather than freedom. In the West, thay have fought for their fredom but what they have attained is spurious freedom. The women in the West have freedom to abandon all social and moral values. Thus in the East, we can say, that most of the women are timid, oppressed and cannot express themselves, while in the West, we find, most of the women are reduced to a sex symbol. They are keen to expose their body; their anxiety is to appear in fashion advertisements and very popularity. Most of them accepted this position because otherwise they could not have survived in that chaotic world of the West. What most of the women in the East will regard as very humiliating and degrading, is regarded as something very glorifying in the West. I have seen both the worlds very deeply and I feel that, unless and until you bring a new culture by which women from the East and women from the West can both rise in their own esteem and express themselves in such a way that they create high moral standards for their society, women neither in the East nor in the West will rise to their full stature of feminine The speciality is that, if women are respected for their womanhood, understsanding what they are capable of and how they can empower themselves with all the education needed, all the security will be provided to them and they will provide security to the society. cheap speciality, All the fundamentalists who talk of religion expect women to be absolutely moral and the men can do whatever they like. I feel we have to educate men more than women. Because the idea for of war comes from men to begin with. I must admit it is not difficult to collect poor women in the developing countries and help them to get out of their poverty, but mопеy unfortunately, my knowledge is that the money we are collecting may not reach the poor women but may end up into the pockets of the corrupt ministers, bureaucrats and other people in charge and ultimately it will end up in the Swiss bank. Vol. VIII Issue 1 & 2 Divine Cool Breeze

 Immorality, corruption, violence are horrible monsters which are eating up our society. I would blame the mothers of these corrupt and immoral persons because they have failed in their duty as mothers in their chilhood. The living training of the mother is the first and most effective influence in shaping the children into beautiful citi. ens. Mothers who never tried to guide with great concern and love, or the wives or the daughters who are falling into the fear of the men or of the destructive culture, have not done their duty as integral members of the family to strengthen the moral fibre of the men. It is important also to see how children are treated in these two cultures of East and West. What we see in the East is that children would listen to their mothers if they are not under fundamentalist culture. This culture relegates women to the level of an inferior human being, fit to be dominated by men and children. In the West also the same thing happens. Children don't respect their mothers, neither do they listen to them. I feel this is because, generally, the Western women spend more time looking after their body and looks than on looking after and loving their children. The nexus between the mother and children weakens and breaks. It is for this reason that many children become street urchins. Fortunately, there are still many families in the East and some in the West who deeply defy the corrupting trends of today and look after their children and bring them up properly. But still I must say that the children in the East are not that much ruined as they are in the West. The reason, also, is that in the East there are many people who have not taken to fundamentalist culture or to the Western culture and have a very good society and produce children who are exceptionally good, though this number may not be very great. But whatever culture they have inherited, since long, traditionally, is very much ingrained in them and to them the moral value system is the highest, more than money or power. The West is now full of problems. Though they have money, they don't have peace within and without. The truth is that women are the potential power of every civilisation and every country. It is evident that women are the creators and the preservers of the entire human kind. This is the role which the Almighty God has assigned to them. Seeds cannot create anything by themselves. It is the Mother Earth which provides the flowers and the fruits and other bounties. Similarly, it is the woman who creates the child, who nurtures the baby and eventually brings up the citizen of tomorrow. Women must therefore rank with Mother Earth as the edifice of the entire humanity. Unfortunately, men have utilised muscle power to gain a dominating position over women. They have not recognised that women are complementary and equal but not similar partners in human endeavours. A society that does recognise this fundamental truth and does not give to women their rightful role is not a civilised society. In my own country, there is a saying in Sanskrit, "Yatra narya pujyante tatra ramante devata" which means that "where the women are respected and respectable, there resides the Gods of our well-being", So it is for us at this moment to understand the value of this great power that is given to us by our Creator. But what do we find? Whether in the East or in the West, women have not been able to give a full manifestation of their greatness. I am not suggesting at all that the only role of women in human society is that of the Mother, the pro-creator and preserver of Vol. VIII Issue 1 & 2 Divine Cool Breeze

 children, or that of a wife, or a sister. Women have a full right to participate as equal partners every aspect of life; social, cultural, educational, political, economical, administrative and the rest. In order to prepare themselves for this all-pervading role, they must have the right to education in all branches of knowledge. But if they are mothers, they have a great reponsibility towards their children as well as their society. Men are responsible for politics and economics of the country but women are responsible for the society. Women can also support men and they can take leading part, of course, in any position. But, it is very important that they should not forget they are women who have to manifest deep, motherly concern and love. If they become manly and aggressive, the balance of the society cannot be maintained. in At the same time I must submit that while we ask for the rights of women we must also stress the fundamental duties of women to the human society. The women in the West, or those who are educated in the West, have gone to the other extreme when they are taking to political, economical or administrative role. To compete with men they have become much too self- willed, self-centred and ambitious. They have no more their soothing and pleasing qualities which can keep the balance. On the contrary, they become dominating, pleasure-seeking individuals. They are far more worried about their physical attractions than about having a pleasing, sweet and dignified personality. They give in to their baser self much faster than men, wittingly or unwittingly. All this leads to chaotic societies and children grow up into street urchins, thieves and even murderers as we read every day in the paper. What we need is a balance between the two extremes. We need women as equal but not similar partners with t men, but with a subtle understanding of the nature of men and how to bring them into the center with inner balance. We need balanced women in order to have a balanced human race with peace within itself. You might say all this is excellent in thought, but how do we achieve this state of balance? How do we stem the tide of diseases, corruption, immorality and immaturity. How do we end the present state of conflict and confusion? How do we bring about peace within every mind and heart? very humbly submit that there is an answer to these questions. There is a new way. Whatever I am going to tell you now is not be taken for granted. You should, of course, have your minds open like scientists and treat whatever I am stating as a hypothesis. If this hypothesis can be proved, then you have to accept it as honest persons as the absolute truth because it is for your benevolence. It is for the benevolence of your family. It is for the benevolence of your country and for the benevolence of the whole world. am here to tell you about the last breakthrough of our evolution. This breakthrough of our evolution in our awareness has to happen in these modern times and has been, moreover, recorded in the writings of many seers. These are the times called as the "Decadent Times" last called by the great saint Vyasa who has written the Gita, and it is the decadence of humanity that we see around in every way possible. Now I would like to tell the secret knowledge of our inner being which was known in India thousands of years back. For our evolution and spiritual ascent there is a residual within us which is located in the triangular bone at the base of our spine. This residual power power Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VIII Issue 1 & 2 3

 is known as Kundalini. Though the knowledge of this power was available thousands of years back in India, the awakening of the Kundalini was done, traditionally, on an individual basis only. One guru would give awakening to one disciple. As a result of that awakening, what happens is that you achieve your self-realisation, your self-hood. Secondly, when this power is awakened, it rises and passes through six subtle energy centres in your body, nourishing them and integrating them. Ultimately this power breaks through the fontanelle bone area called as the Talu or the Brahmarandra and connects you to the all-pervading power of divine love, which is described in the bible also as the "cool breeze of the Holy Ghost", also in the Koran as "Ruh" and also in the Indian scriptures as "Paramchaitanya". Patanjali has called it as "Ritambhara Pragya". Whatever the name, this is a power which is all-pervading, which doses all the subtle works of living process, of evolutionary process. The existence of this all- pervading energy is not felt before realisation but after self-realisation you can feel it on your tips or at the centre of your palm or above the fontanelle bone area. finger Moreover, this process has to be spontaneous, "Sahaja". "Saha" means "with" and "ja" means "born". That means the right to get this union with the all-pervading power of Divine love is the birth right of every human being. Our mental energies are limited. Our limited mental energy, which is linear in movement and has no sustenance of reality, reaches a point and stops. From there it boomerangs and all that mental, linear movement comes back to us as a punishment sometimes. So now we need more energy, higher energy, deeper energy and for that this happening has to take place. BLL I must say that in the West I have met many people who are true seekers of Truth and are fed up of artificiality of the Western life. Also they didn't know what they were seeking sometimes and they have made lots of mistakes. They have gone to false gurus who have taken lots of money and the people have become bankrupts and mentally and physically handicapped. The one thing you must note is that the awakening of the Kundalini and thus achieving self-realisation is a living process of evolution for which we cannot pay anything. It is like putting a seed in the Mother Earth. It sprouts because Mother Earth has the power to sprout it and the seed has an in-built germinating quality within it. In the same way we have this germinating power in the triangular bone which the Greeks called as Sacrum. This is a three and a half coil energy. This shows that the Greeks knew that this was a sacred bone and hence they gave the name Sacrum. Actually in some people you can see this triangular bone pulsating and the Kundalini very slowly rising, but where there are no obstructions and if the person is a balanced being, the Kundalini rises from the Sacrum just like a jet and passes through the fontanelle bone area to become one with the all-pervading power. This Kundalini is the spiritual mother of every individual and She knows or has recorded all the past aspirations of Her child. She is anxious to give second birth to Her child and during Her ascent, She nourishes six energy centres. When a person is not connected to the all-pervading power, he is like an instrument which is not connected to the mains and has no identity, has no meaning, has no purpose. As soon as it is connected, all that is built in inside this instrument starts working and manifesting itself. When this Kundalini rises it connects you to the all-pervading power, which is vital and which is an ocean of knowledge as well as an ocean of bliss. After the awakening of Kundalini, you Divine Cool Breeze l VIII Isue 1 & 2 Vol

 experience many coincidernces which are miraculous and extremely blissful. Above all Kundalini is the ocean of forgiveness. So whatever mistakes you have committed in the past are forgiven and instead you get your self-realisation as a blessing. The consequences of the awakening of the Kundalini and thereby the attainment of self- realisation are numerous. First and foremost, such a person is constantly in contact with or is in fact a part of the all-pervading Divine power. He seeks the truth by using his new awareness. And as truth is one, all self-realised persons see this same truth. Thus conflicts are avoided. Purely mental activity without self-realisätion, leads to conflicting ideas and even wars. All this is avoided after self-realisation., Now, let us see how many other things happen in a person who gets realisation. Firstly you start feeling the cool breeze of the Holy Ghost on your fingertips, which represent the subtle energy centres. Thus you know the truth on your fingertips. You transcend all the limitations of race, religion and other ideas and you go beyond your mind to see and feel the reality and understand it. The next thing that happens is that you become thoughtlessly aware. We live in the future and in the past through our thoughts. They come to us from these two areas of time but we carinot be in the present. While these thoughts are rising and falling we are jumping on the cusp of these thoughts. But when the Kundalini rises She elongates these thoughts and thereby creates some space in-between which is the present, which is the reality. So the past is over and the future doesn't exist. At that time you have no thoughts. You reach a new state as you become thoughtlessly aware about which Jung has written clearly. At this moment, whatsoever happens is recorded in your memory well and you enjoy every moment of this reality. When you become thoughtlessly aware then you become completely peaceful within yourself. A person who has achieved this peace also emits peace and creates a peaceful atmosphere around himself. This peace is very important. Unless and until we have this we will never truly understand whatever our ideas are, whether universal or just limited. You can feel your own seven centres on your fingertips. Also you can feel the centres of others because you develop a new dimension of awareness which is called as collective consciousness. When such new awareness is established into you, you start feeling also the centres of others. I must tell you that these centres are responsible for our physical, mental, emotional and spiritual well-being and when they are affected or they are in jeopardy, people suffer from one disease or another. As a result of the awakening of the Kundalini and the nourishment of these centres, an important development would be that you will feel an inner balance and you will enjoy good health. Many diseases, even some incurable ones, have been cured by the awakeneng of the Kundalini. Even the data base of the inherited genes may be restructured after self-realisation through the awakening of the Kundalini. As a result, a person who might have inherited genes indicating criminal tenedency might well become a good man. peace Our attention also becomes very pure. In the light of the spirit we can see things much more clearly than when we were blind. For example, a person who goes with his blind eyes and feels an elephant and then another comes in and a third comes in, all of them have different ideas about the elephant, depending on whichever part of the elephant thay have touched. But if they open their eyes then they can all see the same thing, the reality and there will be no Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VIII Isue 1 & 2 Issue

 quarrel and fights. Aself-realised person can feel the absolute knowledge on the fingertips. Supposing someone doesn't believe in God. A self-realised person carn suggest to the non-believer that he should ask the question:"Is there god?" The questioner will get, you will find, a very nice cool breeze coming into his being. He may not believe in God but there is God. Unfortunately, so many of those who believe in God are also absurd, hypocritical, cruel, weird and so immoral that people have lost faith in God. But while those who represent God may be wrong. God himself exists and his power also exists which we call as the all-pervading power of Divine love. This is the power of love and compassion and not of aggression and destruction. This power of love and compassion, when it is imbibed in a yogi or in a self-realised person, it works in a very different way like an angel. Such people can cure others and cure themselves. Even mental cases have been cured. Not only that. Even those who have been to wrong gurus in their search of truth, have achieved their spiritual stability after leaving false gurus and coming to the path of self-realisation. In the next stage, you become thoughtlessly aware, when your Kundaliri is stabilised and you know undoubtedly that you have achieved your self-realisation., that you have attained all the powers that can be utilised. You become very powerful because you can raise the Kundalini of others. You become very active and you don't feel tired easily. For example, I am seventy three years of age and I am travelling about every third day, but I am quite alright. This energy flows into you you and fills you up with vitality. You become extremely dynamic and at the same time extremely compassionate, kind and mild. You feel that you are protected and thus you are confident but not egoistical. Your whole personality changes. This is the kind of global transformation which is taking place with such a speed all over that I, myself, am surprised at how it is working out so fast. Actually, this knowledge existed a long time back but my contribution, if there is any, is that we can now achieve en-masse realisation. Thousands can achieve mass realisation. It is a gift of this time where it was predicted that such global transformation will take place. In as many as 65 countries, thousands of people have attained their self-realisation through Sahaja Yoga. The power of Kundalini is the pure desire of attaining your self-hood. If someone doesn't want cannot force him because the Divine respects the freedom of that person. If he wants to go to heaven, he can go there, or if he wants to go to hell, he can go to hell. Self- realisation can be attained easily if the people have a sincere and pure desire to get their self- realisation. But if they stick to some of their ideas, which are fixed, the Kundalini won't rise.. Also it cannot work for idiots or for immature people. It works for people who are wise, who are more in the centre, and it works very fast. I was amazed to see that it has worked even on people who were drug addicts, who were alcoholics and who were very immoral. But they all had an intense and pure desire to secure self-improvement, self-realisation. So many of such people achieved their goal of self-realisation. Overnight, they gave up their drugs, their alcoholism. Thus you become very powerful and at the same time you understand that to have it, you you are now glorified and you start behaving in a very dignified and a very sensible manner. This is how a new culture is born and this new culture takes you, in a way, into a new style of life where you become innately, I say innately, righteous. Nobody has to tell you: "Don't do this" Vol. VIII Issue 1 & 2 6. Divine Cool Breeze

 and "Don't do that". It is all achieved through your enlightened attention. This enlightened attention is also full of power. Wherever you put your attention it works, it creates peace, it creates harmony and also it creates a new dimension of collective consciousness. So to blame your genes for your mistakes is not going to work out anymore because these genes can be changed in their database and can be brought to the level of a very righteous, angelic personality. The ego and the conditioning of a person gets dissolveld by the ascent of the Kundalini and he becomes really a free bird. Absolute freedom is achieved in reality and his behaviour changes tremendously with great faith in himself. He becomes a witness of the whole drama of life. When you are in the water you are afraid of getting drowned, but supposing you get into a boat, you can watch the same waters with enjoyment. But if you learn how to jump in the water and save others then it is even a higher situation and so we have a higher awareness which we call as doubtless awareness. Above all, we fall into the ocean of joy. Joy is absolute. It doesn't have duality. It is not like happiness and unhappiness. It is a singular thing and once you jump into it you learn easily how to enjoy everything, whether it is beautiful or ridiculous. In one case you see the beauty; in the other you see the humour as to how people are ridiculous. The remarkable thing is that Sahaja Yogis have become great musicians, great writers, great speakers, great administrators. In every way they have risen very high, specially in their attitude towards others. They respect everyone and they know what is wrong with other people so that they can approach them carefully, gently to see that this person who has these problems can be easily evolved and become a self-realised soul. It is like one candle lighting another candle. This work is going on all over the world and there is great hope that it will also start in China. Before this, somehow, I coulld not start but the Divine coincidence has given a chance to me by this conference to talk to Chinese people, whom I find very wise and sensitive, about the great treasure of spirituality. This is not a coincidence. It was inevitable and has been brought about by this all-pervading power. In your life also you will notice lots of coincidences but you will not know how to connect them to something that is divine unless and until you get connected to the Divine power. work my Confucius has taught the humanity how we can improve our relations with other human beings. But Lao Tse in China has very beautiful described TAO, meaning the Kundalini. And I have had a voyage through the Yangtze River through which LaoTse had gone many times. I know he was trying to show that this river, which is the Kundalini, is flowing towards the sea and one should not be tempted by the nature that is around. The nature around the Yangtze River is very, very beautiful, no doubt, but one has to go through the river. Also there are lots of currents which flow and can be quite dangerous and we need a good navigator who should take his ship across to the point where it is nearest the sea. At that stage it becomes very silent and extremely simple in its flow. This country has been endowed with great philiosophers, I would say the greatest was Lao Tse, because humanism was for the preparation of human beings for their ascent about which Lao Tse had spoken. But because of the subtle subject it was not described in such a clear-cut manner as I am talking to you. It is such a pleasure for me to talk to this august gathering here. After travelling all over the world, I realise that China is one of the best countries as far as spirituality is concerned. May the Divine bless you all. Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VIII Issue 1 & 2

 INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC CONFERENCE "Morality Health and The World" H.H. Shri Mataji All the religions came on this earth as flowers on the same tree of spirituality and then people plucked these flowers and are now fighting with the dead flowers. This is mine, this is mine. After the second world war a new style of war has started in the name of God. How can you fight if you believe in one God, so it is just a mental idea they have. It's not the real thing in the heart. No religion teaches you of hate, but the situation is just the opposite. In the beginning all these religions came in the purest form and tried to bring love, peace unity in this world. But some people became in charge of the religion. They were also nice but gradually they started separating from each other. Whatever they have done at least they have created the feeling of righteousness. They have talked of morality. They have talked of love and compassion. They have been many organisation to express that feeling, but all that has been very superficial. You see anybody who says he is a Christian, Muslim or Hindu. Is he really a Christian? Christ has said, "Thou shalt not have adulterous eyes." Have you met any Christian who doesn't have adulterous eyes? Or who never had. Mohammed Sahib has said that unless and until you know yourself you will not go wrong. 'Self means the spirit. How many have tried that? All these Muslims. Are they trying to be spiritually oriented? They are just fighting. I feel so sorry for them because thousands are killed and they are encouraged to have wars. Whatever good they have done is neutralised by this because those who don't follow their religion are heathens according to them. If you want to know about the Muslims go and ask the Jews. If you want to know about the Jews, ask Christians. And if you want to know about Christians better go to America and see what they are doing. Did Christ preach immorality? Did he talk of prostitution? In the west they have no respect of their Chastity. So how are you Christians Same about the Muslims. They talk of Islam which was such a great religion which professed morality, Mohammad even talked about Christ and Mother's chastity. But if you see the Muslims, they are sometimes worse than Christians. Orice I was travelling from Riyadh to Delhi, and I went off to sleep. When I got up, all those men and women who were wearing Arabic dresses, were with me in the plane. When I got up find that they were all very fashionable, nude type of dresses which the women were wearing. Absolutely shameful and they were all drinking, smoking. So I asked the air-hostess, " Did we go somewhere else during the travel." She said, " No " I said, " Who are these people?" She said, " They are the same." " How are they changed?" She said, " You go and see them in London and you will know they drink more than the Scots. Christianity has failed. Islam has failed. By forcing you cannot bring morality. I met some English men. I asked them, " Why are you looking at women all the time?" They said "we enjoy." Isaid "what about Christ?" They said, " We do this even in the church. Should we fix our eyes on something?" I said, " You can. There is a way. You are not Christians. You are not Muslims. You are not Jews. You are all hopelessly bad people." They asked what they should do? I asked them "Are you seekers of truth or you want to live with your fixed old ideas. Or is it that we are Christian, Jews, Muslims so we are saved people. Frankly I would tell you that most of you would go to hell.' They said, "Why?" I said," Because you are hypocrites." Reality is that you don't follow your religion. You just have a label here. and what I Divine Cool Breeze 1 & 2 Vol. VIII Issue

 First came Abraham, then Moses then Christ. It was a step by step forward movement. Even the Shariat was not given to the Muslims. It was not given by Koran. It is in the Bible that Moses gave it to Jews. And the Jews said we will not have this. It is too much. The Christians said it is too much. But the Muslims took it up. It was meant for Jews at that time, because Moses found them to be absolutely decadent. But does it help anyone? How if they believe in the abstract, formless God, then why should they fight for any country or any land. God is everywhere. Those who will think they are Muslim first, Christian first they will fight. Because they are Political minded. They are not spiritual minded. You have to be spiritual minded, otherwise you should say we don't believe in God then you have to be spiritual minded. Now the quarrel is between the Western culture and the culture of fundamentalism. The fundamentalists are saying that you should take to very strict culture. They are forcing it. In Algeria thousands of people were killed because they were dressed like Westerns. They are throwing bombs in Paris. All kinds of violence these fundamentalists have taken to. Mohammad Sahib has told of Raheem, Rehmat-compassion. There is no equality at all Islam. They ill treat their women. One women who is not producing 8 or 10 children is thrown away as Talaq. In India we have thousands and thousands of such women and children who are the poorest in our country. He said you can marry four women but women should not become prostitutes. That was the time. So now they are Muslims prostitutes. How are they to live? They should starve in the name of Islam. And also kill their children? What good has Christianity, Muslims or Jews done? among The people in charge of religion are working very hard to do their level best, but they must face the reality. They have not achieved anything that Christ or Mohammad Sahib asked for, Buddhists asked for. On the contrary because of their blindness they have brought such a bad name to all these great founders of these great religions. I saw advertisements of imported goods in your television. Are you mad? All your money you are spending on these junks here which are not sold anywhere in the West or America. All learned people are going to America to become dish-washers. There is no sense of patriotism or sacrifice. In my country, imported. Thanks to Gandhiji. He said don't buy anything from abroad. You can buy hand woven, hand spun cloth. My parents sacrificed everything for the country, because they were patriotic and I am also patriotic and I want all of you to be patriotic. This is only possible through Sahaja Yoga. Not by saying'I am Islam or Christian You have to first say you are a Russian. You can follow any path you like but first of all know what you want. you I can say very proudly that you cannot get even a tie which is There is another sinister illegal thing which has been accepted called the Swiss Bank. Nobody in says anything about it. They have accepted it. Three-fourths of my country is locked up Swiss banks and I don't know how much Russian Mafia is there. Through your legal forces you must attack because they are illegal. This money was to go to the poor, to the sick, to the lepers. They have taken up all that money into Swiss Banks. For example in my country what happened India was a country with great potential but for three hundred years the British came and stayed in or country without any visa. They looted us and now the situation is such that if one Indian wants to go to England they will thoroughly examine you. They took away all our gold, our diamond, our silver, all the precious things. Just like a highway robbery, and Vol. VIII Issue 1 & 2 9. Divine Cool Breeze

 they call themselves Christians their level doesn't go out. Now before leaving India they created problems between Muslims and Hindus, also Buddhist, Jains, Christians, everybody. So the Muslims said we had our own land as usual. Muslims are very attached to land. So they took Pakistan and Bangladesh. Bangladesh is the poorest country in the whole world. Now they are smuggling themselves to come back to India. But Pakistan is much worse because the people from India who opted for Pakistan they thought they would become very rich and have big positions. And what happened was that they were treated just like slaves. Indians are very cunning and clever. They formed themselves near Karachi which is the most important post. This gentleman who is the leader of those people said that this prime minister is like Hitler and she is killing every day 14 16 people to reduce the majority. So now the Muslims are fighting with Muslims. Saddam Hussein is fighting these rich Muslims. Khurds are fighting Turk's. In this Islam, isthis the way to enshrine Mohammad Sahib? Because they have not found themselves they don't know about God. Sahaja Yoga is the only way by which you can get your self realisation and self knowledge. We have had people from all religions, from all races, from all the countries. And all of them had told me that Sahaja Yoga is the only way by which we got our peace. If you have no peace within how can you give peace to others. People who have been given awards of peace are horrible hot tempered people. They never even smile. They are so tense. How can they give peace to anyone? So the first is that we must achieve the peace within us. This is my work for the last 25 years. Not only that you get peace but you get citizenship of the kingdom of God. Last time when I came to Russia there was a coup, and I saw the Sahaja Yogis absolutely peaceful. I asked them, " Are you not worried about what's happening around?" They said, Mother, we are in the kingdom of God. Why should we worry?" These governments will come and go, but we have entered into eternal life. You can see from their face. It was no һуроcracy. Sahaja Yoga is the one that gives you the absolute knowledge, not relative knowledge. Relative knowledge is that because I am Christian, I am higher than Muslims. I am Muslim so I am higher than Christian. It is with some fixed ideas because you are born a Muslim, or a Christian. Hitler was the climax of that. He said that he is a superior race. They killed children in the chambers and enjoyed it. How can they be superior races? Whom do we consider gas superior? It is the saints who have compassion and love. We have those ideas stuck into our and we have no freedom or courage to get out those ideas which limit us. Moreover our human error is our limiting. As all of them have said and I say there is a power which is all pervading Why should we not try to get it. Why should we think that we are Christians or Muslims or whatever it is. But why not we get that energy which is described by Mohammed Sahib, by Christ, by Moses. What is the harm? If you can get something why not have it. Also it is free. You don't have to pay. Actually I don't need anything from you. I am sufficient in myself. I also don't need Sahaja Yoga. But why am I running everywhere, because of this love, this compassion within me makes me do alI this because people are blind, they cannot see. I don't need to have anymore Churches, wars, synagogues and all these building. But in the heart resides the spirit. All this is built in this mechanism of Kundalini. God has made it. Why has he made it for the last break. It is your own Mother. She is going to give it. It is there, it is your own power, it is your own Mother. You have a right to get this, you have every right Vol. VIII Issue 1 & 2 Divine Cool Breeze 10

 to become orne with the Divine Power. We have this instrument. Supposing God has make this instrument. But we don't want to connected it to the mains, then what are you? What is your identity? Why are you born? Now come to science. Science has its own limitations. Whatever they can discuss is science. But can they say why human beings have come on this earth? Can they say why evolution took place? Can they say what is the aim of human beings? They cannot answer many many questions. Say for doctors. You ask them who runs your heart. They will say autonomous nervous system. Who is this auto? They have no answer. But in the body there are two chemicals acetylene and adrelin. One augments and one relaxes. But in the body it acts arbitrarily. Nobody knows. The one which has to augment, contracts, why? Anything foreign that goes in the body is thrown out immediately. But when the foetis is formed it is not thrown out. It gets nourished, developed, up to the right time and then it is thrown away. Who does this discrimination? There is big fight going on? And what have they produced? Atom bomb, hydrogen bomb. Because science is amoral, there is no morality for science, they can become spies, killers, they can be scientists. They can be drunkards. They can be adulterous, just like any priest. What's wrong with them? They are so highly placed. They have so many awards. And you find that they are so low level in morality, because they do not respect themselves. They so not expect themselves because they do not know what they are. They do not know how great they are. We don't know what we are. We are not this body, or this mind, we are not this intelligence, or these emotions. We are not this ego and conditioning of religions or anything. But we are pure spirit. Now I will tell you exactly when you become the spirit. I don't think anybody should object to it, because it is you your benevolence. It is for benevolence of your family and the whole world. We have this power of Kundalini within us. It is a very ancient science for Indians. In the Quran it is also written 'Asas'. In the Bible it is said "I will appear before you as tongues of flame." The reality is that you must experience, you should not have blind faith in me. We have had enough problem of blind faith all around, but experience it, that this Kundalini rises and pierces through your fontanelle bone area. As a result you get connected with this all pervading power of Divine Love. It is no lecture, no sermon. This is the actualisation of your baptism. If you are wise, you will understand that we are not living in a very peaceful world. The first thing that happens to you is that you become thoughtlessly aware. Where we are thinking, we are thinking of the future or the past, but not of the present. Present is the reality. The past is finished. Future doesn't exist, but we cannot be in the present, is a fact. One of thought rises and falls, another thought rises and falls, and we are jumping on the cusp these thoughts of past and future. But when Kundalini rises, she elongates these thoughts and there is a space created in you. That is the present when you don't have a reflective mind, absolutely at peace with yourself. You are aware, but you are thoughtless. When you get connected with this all pervading power which is absolute peace, this starts pouring in and peace spreads. You make others peaceful. So you know one thing that God is the source of peace. That is how you can spread this peace. In Sahaja Yoga you find there is peace among thousands and thousands. They many belong to any country, they may belong to any race but the Vol. VIII Issue 1 & Divine Cool Breeze 11 2

 when they are together they are like one ocean. It is not imagination because with this you become part and parcel of the whole because the drop becomes the ocean. They enjoy each other. They don't fight. Because they are pure spirit. Another good thing that happens to you is that your attention becomes enlightened. Most people become senile in their seventies because their attention becomes like this. It is difficult to change them also. But your attention will become enlightened. In that enlightened attention firstly you see the totality. It is enlightened with love and compassion. You see the good points of others and try to help who need your help. I must tell you an experience of mine that first time I came to Russia I didn't know any Russian language either. And who came to help me were about 25 Germans, Sahaja Yogis. Tears came into my eyes. I said how are you said "Germans have killed so mäny Russians, we are duty bound to come. This kind of love is so genuine. It's only possible when yor become the Spirit. here. They Second that happens to your attention is that this enlightened attention gives you the righteous path. Over night people have given up drugs, alcohol and all destructive things. In the West the idea is that we must enjoy every moment of our lives. But every enjoyment is self- destructive. In Sahaja Yoga you enjoy without getting into destruction. You enjoy all the nature. You enjoy all the human beings. You enjoy all the innate, not the superficial. All this is available to you is your own attention. Now this attention also works. Yesterday they told me that "Mother, it will be very cold". I told Sahaja Yogis you just put your attention, suddenly nature will be there at your service. It was sunny yesterday. You can order all the nature to be at your lotus feet, because you have to become one with this Divine Power. This Divine Power is the one which creates seasons, which creates everything. It has created all of you. And whatever is good for you it will do. If you think somebody should be killed it won't work out. But after realisation, after becoming the Spirit you don't think of bad things. Another very important thing that happens to you is that wherever you put your attention you can even give realisation. Like one candle is enlightened, it can enlighten many candles thousands and thousands. I have not been to Africa but there are so many Sahaja Yogis in South Africa, Cameroon etc. I have not been to Siberia but there are so many who are in Siberia. It is spreading. Those who will be against it will be dropped out very soon. People wi know that they are hypocrits. We don't have to worry about it. They will be found out. We should not think bad of anyone. We should not curse anybody. Sahaja Yogis cannot kill anybody. After you start giving realisation to others you achieve another state of doubtless awareness. Where you have no doubts about Sahaja Yoga, about me, about the working of Sahaja Yoga. Also doubts about yourself. That level once you have to achieve. Many have achieved this state. I have great respect for Russians and a very great love. Because they had never even heard the name of Kundalini, how did they accept it. What was in them that they were seeking? What love, what understanding of this subtle subject. Very few people in the world are like this. This is the last judgement and those who miss will miss it in anycase. Christ has said, " You will be calling me Christ, Christ, but I will not recognize you. " So understand that you have to become the spirit. As Christ has said that you are to be born again. You may have faith in Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VIII Issue 1 & 2 12

 me or not, you must have faith in yourself to begin with. But when you will grow spiritually will know that I will not tell what I am. Christ was the son of God. You may deny you you you it but he was. But when he said that they crucified him. Whatever I am, I am. But I am not there to tell you. You have to rise in your spirit and realise with understanding. Why? Because you have to do good to others. What a beautiful responsibility Last of all you enter into the Kingdom of God and then drown into the ocean of joy. Joy has not got a double point like happiness or unhappiness. It is singular. You lose all greed and you become chaste and see yourself. You don't have to become an ascetic. You don't have to go to Himalyas. You don't have to fast. It is something internal. Nothing to change outside. I know there is going to be global transformation in the world. Even the data base of your genes change. All transformation. So many people have been cured of incurable diseases. Without paying anything, give them divine vibrations, even the crops grow ten times better. lust and your kinds of people who have come to Sahaja Yoga have got by their own powers. So easily Sahaja spontaneous. It works with animals, if you In this last judgement there is a new race of great people. It is your own power. Only you have to know how glorious you are, how great you are. Absolutely free, because you get that superior intelligence. In the light of spirit you know what is constructive for you. You know absolute knowledge, Only thing I want to request that all the people who are supposed to be in charge of religion. Now they have brought people up to point. Like different steps they have crossed for what? Why to have the religion? It leads to ascent. They must ascend. The balance has to be established through religion. Like we have aeroplanes fixed in different workshops to get the balance because they have to fly. What is the use of just balancing without any flying. You have to fly with all the freedom of the spirit. You don't have to say don't do this, don't do that. You are ready to fly. Now enjoy your realisation. May God Bless You All. Vol. VIII Issue 1 & 2 Divine Cool Breeze 13

 TALK AT DELHI By H. H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI On 25th October 1995 Every year a new year comes and keeps coming. But people do not understand the feeling of creating clothes and celebrate. They never think that a new year is coming and what new thing we must think of. Whatever has been going on, it goes on day after day. new year. They only understand that on the New year day they will wear new In Sahaja Yoga when we are so collective, then we must think what new thing we must have in Sahaja Yoga. You have gone quite deep in meditation. You understand meditation and you have also established a certain state. But in a new year what new aspect you should take, we put out attention towards this. We must think what are the problems of our country and A also the problems of the world, and how can we solve them. For this I think wherever a Sahaja Yogi has interest he should put attention on that. must There are many new things that have started in Sahaja Yoga. This time I have thought that we should call the Shia Muslims and make them understand. We are trying for that and we are trying to spread the message of the holy life of Shivaji. Both are good that the Shias may understand what is Dharma and by looking at the life of Shivaji we must understand what is dharma, and what were his ideas and what all he did for his ideals. In such a short time he did such a great work. Now collectively we have become much better in Delhi, and around Delhi, Sahaja Yoga is spreading. But along with this we must think that are we getting egoistical? If Sahaja Yoga is i spreading it's quantity is spreading so has the quality come or not? You should give attention towards this. You must put your attention on the groups that are there, and to increase your members you must go to the nearby villages. In this way you can grow much more. In this new year you must think that we have taken out many projects with which we got flats, houses, Ashrams. It is good thing. But what are we going to do in that Asharam? What can we print about Sahaja Yoga by which we may know each other. There should be a newspaper of Sahaja Yoga. You should pay special attention on three things. Firstly is peace. That we have to bring peace within ourselves and we must find out the cause of unrest outside in the world. Why is there unrest and why is there turmoil in the whole country? You must find out the root cause of all this. And we must find out how we can become involved and active in it. Like regarding Chechenya. They told that the problem in Chechenya is that if we are socialistic or if we are a democratic country then there is lot of difference in both. In a democratic country if you are democratic then you cannot rule on any one religion. These three religions are the same Buddhism and Jainism is the same thing. These three religions which came from the five angels, which we say as Jews, Christians and Muslims. They believe in only one book and belive in only one incarnation and that is why they are exclusive. But in reality they are not exclusive. They should write down this point. In all these religions say if you write about Moses, then he spoke of Abrahim. Then came Christ. He spoke of Moses and Abraham. When Mohammad Sahib came he spoke of all three and also of Christ's Mother. These exclusive Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VIII Issue 1 & 2 14

 religions have been made by man. That is why there are quarrels over them. If anyone tells them to make a universal religion, they don't like it, because then how will they fight? But it is important for them to come into an universal religion. The moment they come into an universal religion these feelings will go, that we are separate and other religions are separate. If you see even now a days there are big wars being fought over these religions. It will all finish off once people realise that this religion is not exclusive, so why are you fighting. If a Jew or Christian or Muslim is there all these religions have come from one source. No one religion is exclusive and the fight that is going on over this should be stopped. In Chechenya if they give the government to the Muslims. The Muslims are famous for producing 28 children per family. They say that women from there are a child producing factory. By creating so many children they have made themselves into a majority. Now if you give them the government they will again do the same. Then how can you stop them? In their dharma whatever power is there is this that we are in great numbers. It is not difficult for them to increase the numbers. If they increase like this they will eat up the whole of Russia. Why do they talk of Religion? Why don't they become Russian? Regarding Indian Muslims. They are first Muslims and then Indians. It is in all countries. Now in Pakistan daily 18-20 people are being killed. They said in an interview, " Neither we got God or any human also, we roam neither here nor there " It is such a bad situation there. Now this has started penetrating into the brains of the Indian Muslims, that the people who stayed back in India are flourishing and prosperous. There people are afraid that who will be killed when. Because the Sindhis and Punjabis don't want the Muslims who came from India to live there. Now these people have make Karachi their home and live around there and they are demanding Karachi. But Karachi is their only port. The greaest thing that has been said in Islam is that "till you do not know yourself you cannot know God. First know thyself." The second thing is that they have created such problems ie. they believe in the Nirakar, the formless. They don't believe in God with form. The ones who believe in the formless, why are they fighting over lands. It is a form and a material thing. believe in the Nirakar then try to achieve the Nirakar. But how to explain to them for they are so blood thirsty. If we can print articles and point these things then people will start thinking that how muIch truth or untruth is there in what they are saying. Then they will also see that uptill now we kept fighting and killing and what was the use of that. The Muslims are quite difficult. Of course there are Muslims in Sahaja Yoga. This time when I When you gave a speech on radio. When I spoke to them clearly no one argued with me. They were speaking to me by phone. Some ladies rang up and said "we are feeling cold after listening to Shri Mataji." And many people get realisation. This is also a way also by which people got realisation. Like Iranians have gone out of their country and they are living in America. We can give them realisation. In this way we can get hold Muslims in various countries. They are very violent and fight a lot. They should be made to understand that if you believe in the Nirakara why are you fighting over lands. The second stupidity about them is that when you die and will be buried and when the Kiyama' the Resurrection time' will come, then your body will come out and you will be resurrected. After 500 years what part of the body can rise? This way many strange things are believed in. So we should write it in newspapers and tell them that they are doing and thinking stupid things. Mohammad Sahib did not write the Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VIII Issue 1 & 2 15

 Quran. It was written 40 years after him. Christ did not write the Bible, and neither did Moses write anything. This way then what is the authenticity of these books? If this goes on like this they will go to hell. There seems to be no other solution. There is a limit to stupidity and by this they cannot be benefited. It is very different to find among Muslims, maybe one or two may come out. If they come in Sahaja Yoga then no one can kill anyone. If anyone had so much guts then we can explain to others. The biggest thing is our peace has been destroyed because of Religion. These irreligions has created agitation and violence. If this one thing could finish then at least 75% problems of wars will finish off. Where does agitation 'Ashanti' come from? If we see that many big countries are fighting. Like French president Chiraq, burst on atom bomb in the South Pacific and because of that there are many protest 'bombs' being burst in his country. But if you see individually then where does agitation and violence come into individuals. What makes a person agitated? Now there are many causes. It could be jealousies, ambitions etc. If he is a right sided person then he will be restless. It could also be left sided. In the left he will be an unhappy person and the right sided person thinks of himself as happy. But both are agitated. So we have to make this agitation alright. By coming into Sahaja the genes get alright, and when the genes become alright then man himself will get alright. His whole nature will change. I have explained in detail in about phosphorus that the phosphorus which is in the genes. When a man becomes dry then phosphorus explodes. Dr. Worlikar said, " three people have got Noble prize for this research on phosphorus. But what you have said today nobody has said." When a man becomes restless and agitated then groups can form. It is in two ways. One with egoistical people and second with left sided and possessed people. Africa problem is due to possessed people. The others are due to ego problems. If we can destroy ego and possession then we can become peaceful. With the help of that peace we can ourselves can give peace to others. book my We should pay more attention to the villages. Then we must explain the path of peace to them, like in he villages in North India, there is one defect that due to Muslim mentality, women are suppressed a lot. When you supress women and when they reach and stand up then they are even greater than men. There should be respect for women. In Sahaja Yoga women are very weak. They do not meditate. They back-bite, create fights and are dominating. These things that have crept into women, by that their power gets diminished. Because the power comes from women. They are the potential. And when they behave like this the entire Shakti of society finishes. The greatest thing is that in our women is to establish peace. For that even the husband should be peaceful. If he is peaceful and respects his wife then the children will become peaceful and the home will become peaceful. Now a kind of aggression that is in the men will never remain in its limit. It will always rebound. The companionship that is there. To talk to each other lovingly. And decently. How to behave properly in front of others we should attention to this. Many of the husbands are such who do not care for their wives pay and keep beating them, even after coming to Sahaja Yoga . I feel extremely unhappy that even after coming to Sahaja Yoga a husband and wife have no companionship then it is something serious. For me it is a very serious thing that there should be complete companionship. Because you are a Sahaja Yogi and your wife is also a Sahaja Yogi and when both are sitting Vol. VIII Issue 1 & 2 Divine Cool Breeze 16

 the same boat then how can they have quarrels. It should not be, because it is a very dangerous thing. Now that you have come into Sahaja Yoga fighting with one another then all the deities get angry with you then what problems you might get stuck into one cannot You should pay extreme attention to this point. Suppose there is a man who is purposely troubling a woman. Telling her that this is not good, that is not good, then one day will come when the deities within that man will become angry with him. It is a problem of Laxmi. If it is not Laxmi then it is the heart. The biggest problem is when left Nabhi catches then you can get very different kind of diseases. I have worked a lot on left-Nabhi, and I see that left Nabhi gets alright with great difficulty, because there is no introspection. They don't think why is my left Nabhi catching. Supposing the wife is a shrew and does not listen and does just do what she wants. She insults the husband. Then sit and talk with her. There should be rapport with each other. There should be communication. There is never any communication between husband and wife nor with the children You should give time for Sahaja Yoga. But there should be companionship, both together, and also the children, the wife should come into Sahaja Yoga. If you feel that you are doing the work of Sahaja Yoga and wife is sitting at home. You should try that there is full companionship. Discuss with the wife, tell her that this is the plan. There should be ascent of her and the children also. Their intellectual level and understanding should grow. say. Now everything is going opposite due to Muslim influence. First the women were suppressed and now the women are dominating the men. This action reaction should be finished off in Sahaja Yoga. The remedy for this is to improve this in your individual married life. When you will become peaceful then your children will also become peaceful. All these illnesses of agitation which you see in big wars, where does it come from? It comes from man. It does not come from the sky or the trees. Man is the root cause of it. If man can become peaceful and he established in it should feel very proud that I am peaceful. At least our society should improve. Sahaja Yogis have to take on the task of improving the society. But those who are busy fighting among themselves how can they change society? Many times I get complaints that the man is nice but his wife is a terror, or the wife is nice but the husband is terrible. We Sahaja very Yogis have our own decency and our own ways. We are moving out from those norms and doing wrong things. I have explained many times that they are the two wheels of a chariot. If one wheel is smaller than the other then it is not alright. They are not similar. Their height is the same, their construction is the same but if you try to put right on left and left on it will not work. Both have their own specialities. Like a woman has her own weaknesses, she has her own characteristic. Men have their own characteristics. They always carry a watch. Men are very time bound. Women are slow in getting ready if they have to go anywhere. If they cannot go on time then the man are angry. These are very small things but the quarrels start on these small things. Some men think they are in charge of everything. That they must reach on time. If one didn't arrive on time then nothing so terrible has happened. Slowly train mind that you do not react. You should just watch. Slowly you will be surprised that you will get alright and your wife will get alright. Both have to practise this, that both should watch as witness. One should understand that woman is different and man is different. They have their different ways, though the similarity is this that they are both human beings. your Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VIII Isue 1 & 2 17

 You should introspect and find out why do such problems come in Sahaja yoga. Like a married girl came from Lucknow. She had a thousand problems. Ask her what are her problems? Sahaja Yoga is not to break people but to unite them. If something is breaking then what is behind it what is it, you should see to this and unite it. Now that we talk of uniting then the Delhi people should unite with the Bombay people. But it is not like that. If the Puja is in Bombay it is in Delhi too. When you expand your heart then you will see that you are the whole world. Wherever there is a Puja it is for you. It is too much, that we should have puja in Delhi and you must come here Mother. Just because of this I am going from here to there. Someone will say please come to Moradabad or some will say come to this or that place. Now at this age how many places can I go to, I suffer because people should not feel I have favoured someone and not the other. So I thought I will not go to Europe. But the Europeans come wherever I go. I went to Romania, or Russia they came there. In Sahaja Yoga you all know each other. In the whole world there is such a great family feeling. Like if I say I will There never come to Delhi, I will only come to Nagpur, then all of you will come to Nagpur. should be a detachment. People keep telling me to come to their cities. Nobody thinks that I am doing such hard work even at this age. I have to travel so much. If all the time you keep pulling me here and there then how can it be possible? You should explain to people on this point, that whatever Mother had to do She has done and now whatever is Her wish we will do that we will not put anything on Her. If She says Herself than we will do Puja. If She | Herself says then we will accept otherwise not. We will not put any kind of pressure on Her. With this one thing will happen that My health will be saved a bit. If I have to do some more work I don't want that I should be pulled in different directions. Now what you have to do that, think about it and don't put this burden on My head. You all come to me for little little things. If someone is ill you phone me. But you are Sahaja Yogis. I have project you given you so many powers. Why bother me? You take it on yourself. It is your responsibility now. I think that my children have grown up and become responsible and understand everything. You should instead give me the assurance that Mother we don't want to trouble you. We will rectify the illnesses and problems. When this will start, then I will be satisfied. Now the situation is such that I get letters upon letters of problems. But you must tell them that send letters to the centres. Why are you bothering Shri Mataji? your We must see that how many Sahaja Yogis have solved the problem of how many Sahaja Yogis. We have to solve it. But for that you must know Sahaja Yoga properly, and do it with pure intention. Both are very important. I have seen many people who will say, " Come I will cure you." Then they will get after him so much that the man runs away from Sahaja Yoga. Make a committee and work out solution through that committee. Like you go somewhere and people present their problems before you .You are now fully acquainted with this state, and know what should be done. If possible I will write a book on how to solve problems of you various people. So what will happen is that the burden that is now on me will be shared by you, and by that you will grow and prosper. The dharma which is in you, the advantage you have, the civility that is in you, on the basis of that you can do a lot. Regarding marriage, you are leaders. Please think very carefully before you suggest a person for marriage. It does not help us. You can get so many married there is no financial help in that for you. The only pleasure you get is if they are happily Vol. VIII Issue 1 & 2 Divine Cool Breeze 18

 married, then the advantage is to the husband and wife and many great saints can take birth. But they think that by marrying they are obliging us. What is the advantage to us? When you recommend a marriage tell the couple that there is no advantage to Shri Mataji. There is no advantage to Sahaja Yoga except that your marriage is being performed through Sahaja Yoga which is to your advantage. After a lot of discretion and finding out only should you recommend a marriage. Because suddenly many problems crop up where a marriage takes place. You see that people are getting better, the marriages are getting alright. I have to put attention on the children also. my First I thought of peace, the second thing I thought of was the society. Respect for women, looking after them. The foundations of society are the women. Women have to look after society. For that men are not needed so much. The work of men is to do economics or politics. Women should be of a sacrificing nature, should be understanding and wise. Then only will the society remain alright. Many women are not generous. They don't know much about Sahaja Yoga. If they know, they think no end of themselves. To bring balance in them, to make them understand, it is a very important task. The woman should know what she is. Why she has come on this earth? What is her task? She is the one who makes society a beautiful society. You should put your attention on women. The Third thing is the children. We should understand our ideas about children. You should talk to children, ask them their problems. In England they published a book in which what the children say about everyone is written. All the copies got sold out, as everyone wants to read what the children have to say. Very sweet things they have written. With this two things will happen. In society children will have their own power. What children say and what is the innocence in them the whole society will know. The children see that what we said was obeyed. The elders think that what the children are saying how they should implement them. In this the children should not be rude. Neither should there be any ego in them. But they should have the ability to state their point of view. Keep attention on them. Children say such sweet things. Their understanding is very deep and full of experience. They see into little little things, and relate so sweetly small small things, just like they are completely one with the Divine Knowledge or Divine Activity. Children see everything through vibrations. Then they put the elders right also. Like a gentleman came and sat down with both hands on the ground. Some children told him not to sit like that because otherwise how will he get vibrations from Shri Mataji. He would only get vibrations from the earth. I enjoy very much the way children say many things and try to make one understand. They look after me a lot also. Learn from children. Keep rapport with them. Speak to them. When they grow up they become like one of us. But the Sanskaras is there in childhood. So sit and talk to them ask, them about anything, It is a very joy-giving thing. And everyone should get this joy. People who fight in the name of religion, bring peace into them. Talk to them, make them understand. Secondly, the society. If the society is not alright then that country cannot have peace and prosperity. It cannot develop. Like the society of Russia and China is very good. Even the Indian society is very good. The reason for this is the women of these countries have controlled the society. America has lot of wealth, etc. but the society is decadent. A very great task of Sahaja Yoga is to make the foundation of the society. One should look into the unlawful Vol. VII Issue 1 & 2 19 Divine Cool Breeze

 aspects of society everywhere. In America a very small girl was beaten up so the Sahaja Yogis rang up to say we would like to support that girl. I said, "Absolutely do so." It is very important. Keep her with you and look after her. So a new dimension will come to you that these people care a lot. If someone is upset, someone has no money. Some one is upset not because of some greed but because of adversities so pay attention to that person so it has become very important the time has now come for that. In a proper manner take out a solution to the problems of society. Like people who have become old and cannot walk, they should have a place to stay. Then I started a refugee camp, a leper home. I left the place but those homes are still there. Keep attention on the deprived and downtrodden people of society. If you help society this way then every one will love and respect you a lot. We do for ourselves in any case. We have attained for ourselves but what are we giving to others. Specially with the help of Sahaja Yoga Shakti you cure so many people, remove their diseases, help them, you can do good to them. In a way we have a burden of society on us, that when God has given us this Shakti then in what way we can change society so that the physical, mental and spiritual well being of humanity can take place. This one job Sahaja Yogis should take Also up. help the poor and downtrodden people. Slowly you will be surprised that your popularity will slowly spread in the whole country. In reality people make forums for such things only to get votes or to earn something, but we don't want all that, just by your powers you can cure people. If those people get alright then they can prove by their powers that how people improve with Sahaja Yoga. Not only that but they can talk openly about Sahaja Yoga. In this new year, the shell in which we live, we must come out of a And project outward In the beginning there will be problems, your own problems. Firstly ego will stand. That will spoil your head. Then you will get angry, upset. Different kinds of things will come but to gain control over this also you will have to get out of the shell. When you will come out then you will realise how you should behave with outsiders, because you have to integrate them. When we will learn to deal peacefully with them then we must understand that we will be cleansed within immediately. It is a question of cleansing. Many people agree with what I say but they themselves feel they cannot be like that. Why not? They reply, "because If I am God and I am doing it means that the very high state you have got, make it in such a way that it is beneficial, not that you have uselessly become Sahaja Yogis. There should be a method to use it fully, which you have. When you will pay attention to yourself then you will say that your home and society and your country everywhere there will be a kind of a you are God" I said, " God, doesn't do anything. He remains away." new state. Even now Sahaja Yogis are very nice. Their faces shine their eyes sparkle, vibrations are coming. This can be of any realised soul but you have more than that. It is the use of it that you can give to others collectively. When your movement will be in collectivity then be will you surprised that not only with your powers you can cure others but also give to others. But people are very exclusive regarding this matter. Sahaja Yoga means only Sahaja Yogis talk to anyone else. You should pay attention at whatever level of society it is and there is no harm in talking about it. You should pull those people into Sahaja Yoga. Those who are not in Sahaja Yoga, doesn't matter, but it is important to give them peace and reassurance. You why Vol. VIII Issue 1 & 2 Divine Cool Breeze 20

 have to work on these three levels. Like you have collectively put the land alright. It is great. But even greater than that is that you should expand to global state and help the needy. Help women. Help down trodden, the sick people. Not with a missionary zeal but from within. They feel so they do. With this Sahaja Yoga will get a great name. It is not difficult. We have then to work for that. In a way we have to increase our introspection. When that increases you will reach that point where you will be absolutely thoughtless. As soon as thoughtlessness come you should try to increase that. In thoughtless awareness whatever you can do you into cannot do otherwise. That is why you should pay attention to yourself and try to go thoughtless awareness. In meditation try to get thoughtless awareness. In that thoughtlessness you have gone above your mind and all the cosmic powers will help you then whatever you want will happen. But at the time of doing this, you should be thoughtless. It is very important otherwise it will be half here and half there. Now we all have become collective but it should be beneficial. We have become realised souls for what? Did we do it to die like Buddha or Mahavira? For what did we use our realisation. I have seen people use their vibrations a lot, but this we do for ourselves, or for Sahaja yoga. But those who are non Sahaja Yogis we should use it for them also. It is not a very difficult thing. This Shakti is within you, to whomsoever | you desire, give it. When the tendency of doing benevolence will awaken in you then no question will remain. May God Bless You. Vol. Vill Isue Divine Coo Breeze e 1 & 2 21

 SHRI MATAJI'S PRECIOUS ADVICE The numerous pearls of precious advice from shri Mataji to the Taiwan collective during the four nights and five days were so sweet that we can only listen to them over and over: Truth is love. Sahaja Yoga talks only of God's love. When we love someone we have to know each and every detail about the other person. We have to develop the dynamic of love and manifest it in each one's daily life. Introspection is not a mental activity. When we are in the state of thoughtless awareness, automatically we are in introspection. We become the witness for ourselves. During meditation, listening to music is all right as long as we have no reaction to the music. There should be enough light for us to see the picture of Mother; too strong or complete darkness is not good. To see is not to be; to be is to be there. Very often yogis in Sushupti state (deep sleep) see the future but sometimes it is very confusing and mistaken. To spread Sahaja Yoga is everyone's responsibility; it is not just the leader's responsibility. All should remember to do liver treatment in the summer time. In order for new people to feel the vibrations after self-realisation, they have to forgive. Vol. VIII Issue 1 & 2 Divine Cool Breeze 22

 HOW TO TALK TO NEW PEOPLE Synopsis of a Talk by Shri Mataji to Sahaja Yogis in Bangkok, March 1995 To get your self realisation is very easy but to become a Sahaja Yoga is actually a very difficult thing to do as it requires a change in awareness from a human awareness to a divine awareness. This journey of deep growth is a treacherous one and new people need to be helped with a great deal of compassion, love and understanding. Shri Mataji makes it quite clear that we need to communicate in simple ways that they can relate to that are not confrontational or frightening and that we should not at first condemn their gurus or their ways. Rather, find a point of common reference that will soothe them down, like "Yes, I used to be like that but I'm better now." She stresses the importance of the public relations aspect of this challenge! During this sweet, informal talk Shri Mataji addressed the familiar problem of what happens to the seekers after She has gone from an area and why they all seem to disappear. Our character and style of behaviour is crucial at this stage. She says that the way we behave towards each other is extremely important, and She impresses on us that we must support each other and not quarrel and disagree with each other in front of new people as it creates a very bad impression. Shri Mataji reminds us that "We are all One." From the outset, it's a good idea, if the seeker has a guru, to ask the person, "Has this guru given you your peace? Has he given you your self-realisation?" This is the point that they need to understand. Then explain to them what benefits they can get in Sahaja Yoga. She then gives a point-by-point guideline as to how to conduct a meeting. The emphasis is on playing one of Her videos (the length of time you play it is up to your discretion), then seeing if they have any questions and very silently answering them. Then they should go into meditation. She makes the interesting point that to talk too much at this point will spoil them and spoil us. Then after raising their Kundalini and ascertaining their particular make-up (whether they are right-sided or left-sided, for example), we need to tell them how to start meditating and what will help them in particular. It is well worth getting this tape to hear Shri Mataji talk about this. She speaks very gently about the way we need to treat the new people: "Now you should know that we are believers in the power of love" and so we have to be very gentle with people and not get angry or upset them. They need to be assured that everything will be all right. She also makes an interesting point that if there is a particular problem, we need to tell them how to correct it and let them know that we or they can write to Shri Mataji about it through the leader. Shri Mataji makes an amusing analogy to a businessman and his behaviour of great sweetness towards his customers. We need to make the new seekers feel very loved, very peaceful, and very secure in our company, and let them experience that we are truly deep and enlightened people. Again She emphasizes how we behave towards each other, that we should never interrupt one another and we should show the utmost consideration. This will help us Vol. VIII Issue 1 & 2 Divine Cool Breeze 23

 enormously to make Sahaja Yoga grow. She assured the Yogis in Bangkok that She would return many times and that they would have many Sahaja Yogis in time. During this talk, Shri Mataji is encouraging the Bangkok Yogis. At the market place in Bangkok, both men and women had come spontaneously to bow to Her feet. This was a very good sign given self-realisation to several influential people in the society who were very much impressed by Her work, notably a princess who had become a nun and was very active with improving the misery of women in the country. She told them they would be very helpful to Sahaja Yoga. for it showed that the awakening had already come. Furthermore Shri Mataji had There are a lot of Sikhs and Punjabis in Thailand, but it may take some time for them to come to Sahaja Yoga. Even in India things were very slow at the beginning. Shri Mataji went to Dehli for ten years without much success, but now there are 16,000 practising Sahaja Yogis there, and it has spread all over northern India. She was surprised this year to hear people singing Her praise on the train and greeting Her in large numbers on the platforms as She travelled through the countryside. Shri Mataji also marvelled at the growth in Russia where there are 21,000 who are practising Sahaja Yoga. She also spoke about the Catholic Church and the ridiculous behaviour of the clergy in Europe. She mentioned a book that is being written exposing all of this. She said that there are actually no practising Christians in France and that is why they are after the Muslims and the Sahaja Yogis: But She told us not to worry, that everything will work out very quickly now wherever there is Sahaja Yoga. The proof is that even in America there are many people who have taken to Sahaja Yoga now and She never expected that to happen. Shri Mataji ended by cautioning us to be careful, reminding us that "we are the messengers of God" and that we need to be very sweet and gentle with each other. Between husbands and wives there should be full understanding, and the children should also be treated and sweetly kindly very : Yogi Mahajan Edited by Published by : Divine Cool Breeze, 9 Bhagyachintamani Soc., Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411 029. Printed by Golden Arts, 2/11, Bandal Complex, Paud Road, Pune 411 029. Vol. VIII Issue 1 & 2 Divine Col Breeze 24



----------------------

1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-0.txt 
 DIVINE COOL BREEZE
ISSUE 1 & 2
VOLUME VII
When you become thoughtlessly aware then you become
completely peaceful within yourself.
H. H. Shri. Mataji Nirmala Devi
World Women Conference, 1995
Beijing, China.
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-1.txt 
 INTER REGIONAL ROUND TABLE
FOURTH WORLD CONFERENCE ON WOMEN
BEIJING 13 SEPTEMBER 1995
ADDRESS BY DR (MRS) NIRMALA SRIVASTAVA
FOUNDER SAHAJA YOGA
Brothers and Sisters of the World
It is a great honour for me to talk about global problems of women in front of this
distinguished assembly. First of all, I would like to offer my profound gratitude to the
government and people of our host country, the People's Republic of China. I have had the
privilege of visiting China on two previous occasions and I am a great admirer of the wisdom
and culture of this great nation that I have visited.
This is, beyond my imagination, the most glorious time in the history of the world that at this
time we are so much aware of the problems of women. Women as a whole have definitely
suffered over the ages because we have not realised what their importance is and what their
proper role is in human society. Society itself, which is her creation, tries to control or put
down the womanhood. In the East, we can say, that due to fundamentalist influence, women
have been under great pressure and their morality is based on fear rather than freedom. In the
West, thay have fought for their fredom but what they have attained is spurious freedom. The
women in the West have freedom to abandon all social and moral values. Thus in the East,
we can say, that most of the women are timid, oppressed and cannot express themselves,
while in the West, we find, most of the women are reduced to a sex symbol. They are keen
to expose their body; their anxiety is to appear in fashion advertisements and very
popularity. Most of them accepted this position because otherwise they could not have
survived in that chaotic world of the West. What most of the women in the East will regard
as very humiliating and degrading, is regarded as something very glorifying in the West. I
have seen both the worlds very deeply and I feel that, unless and until you bring a new culture
by which women from the East and women from the West can both rise in their own esteem
and express themselves in such a way that they create high moral standards for their society,
women neither in the East nor in the West will rise to their full stature of feminine
The speciality is that, if women are respected for their womanhood, understsanding what they
are capable of and how they can empower themselves with all the education needed, all the
security will be provided to them and they will provide security to the society.
cheap
speciality,
All the fundamentalists who talk of religion expect women to be absolutely moral and the men
can do whatever they like. I feel we have to educate men more than women. Because the idea
for
of war comes from men to begin with. I must admit it is not difficult to collect
poor
women in the developing countries and help them to get out of their poverty, but
mопеy
unfortunately, my knowledge is that the money we are collecting may not reach the
poor
women but may end up into the pockets of the corrupt ministers, bureaucrats and other
people in charge and ultimately it will end up in the Swiss bank.
Vol. VIII Issue 1 & 2
Divine Cool Breeze
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Immorality, corruption, violence are horrible monsters which are eating up our society. I
would blame the mothers of these corrupt and immoral persons because they have failed in
their duty as mothers in their chilhood. The living training of the mother is the first and most
effective influence in shaping the children into beautiful citi. ens. Mothers who never tried to
guide with great concern and love, or the wives or the daughters who are falling into the fear
of the men or of the destructive culture, have not done their duty as integral members of the
family to strengthen the moral fibre of the men. It is important also to see how children are
treated in these two cultures of East and West. What we see in the East is that children would
listen to their mothers if they are not under fundamentalist culture. This culture relegates
women to the level of an inferior human being, fit to be dominated by men and children. In
the West also the same thing happens. Children don't respect their mothers, neither do they
listen to them. I feel this is because, generally, the Western women spend more time looking
after their body and looks than on looking after and loving their children. The nexus between
the mother and children weakens and breaks. It is for this reason that many children become
street urchins. Fortunately, there are still many families in the East and some in the West who
deeply defy the corrupting trends of today and look after their children and bring them up
properly.
But still I must say that the children in the East are not that much ruined as they are in the
West. The reason, also, is that in the East there are many people who have not taken to
fundamentalist culture or to the Western culture and have a very good society and produce
children who are exceptionally good, though this number may not be very great. But whatever
culture they have inherited, since long, traditionally, is very much ingrained in them and to
them the moral value system is the highest, more than money or power.
The West is now full of problems. Though they have money, they don't have peace within and
without.
The truth is that women are the potential power of every civilisation and every country. It is
evident that women are the creators and the preservers of the entire human kind. This is the
role which the Almighty God has assigned to them. Seeds cannot create anything by
themselves. It is the Mother Earth which provides the flowers and the fruits and other
bounties. Similarly, it is the woman who creates the child, who nurtures the baby and
eventually brings up the citizen of tomorrow. Women must therefore rank with Mother Earth
as the edifice of the entire humanity. Unfortunately, men have utilised muscle power to gain
a dominating position over women. They have not recognised that women are complementary
and equal but not similar partners in human endeavours. A society that does recognise this
fundamental truth and does not give to women their rightful role is not a civilised society. In
my own country, there is a saying in Sanskrit, "Yatra narya pujyante tatra ramante devata"
which means that "where the women are respected and respectable, there resides the Gods of
our well-being",
So it is for us at this moment to understand the value of this great power that is given to us
by our Creator. But what do we find? Whether in the East or in the West, women have not
been able to give a full manifestation of their greatness. I am not suggesting at all that the only
role of women in human society is that of the Mother, the pro-creator and preserver of
Vol. VIII Issue 1 & 2
Divine Cool Breeze
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-3.txt 
 children, or that of a wife, or a sister. Women have a full right to participate as equal partners
every aspect of life; social, cultural, educational, political, economical, administrative and
the rest. In order to prepare themselves for this all-pervading role, they must have the right
to education in all branches of knowledge. But if they are mothers, they have a great
reponsibility towards their children as well as their society. Men are responsible for politics
and economics of the country but women are responsible for the society. Women can also
support men and they can take leading part, of course, in any position. But, it is very
important that they should not forget they are women who have to manifest deep, motherly
concern and love. If they become manly and aggressive, the balance of the society cannot be
maintained.
in
At the same time I must submit that while we ask for the rights of women we must also stress
the fundamental duties of women to the human society. The women in the West, or those who
are educated in the West, have gone to the other extreme when they are taking to political,
economical or administrative role. To compete with men they have become much too self-
willed, self-centred and ambitious. They have no more their soothing and pleasing qualities
which can keep the balance. On the contrary, they become dominating, pleasure-seeking
individuals. They are far more worried about their physical attractions than about having a
pleasing, sweet and dignified personality. They give in to their baser self much faster than
men, wittingly or unwittingly. All this leads to chaotic societies and children grow up into
street urchins, thieves and even murderers as we read every day in the paper. What we need
is a balance between the two extremes. We need women as equal but not similar partners with t
men, but with a subtle understanding of the nature of men and how to bring them into the
center with inner balance. We need balanced women in order to have a balanced human race
with peace within itself. You might say all this is excellent in thought, but how do we achieve
this state of balance? How do we stem the tide of diseases, corruption, immorality and
immaturity. How do we end the present state of conflict and confusion? How do we bring
about peace within every mind and heart?
very humbly submit that there is an answer to these questions. There is a new way.
Whatever I am going to tell you now is not be taken for granted. You should, of course, have
your minds open like scientists and treat whatever I am stating as a hypothesis. If this
hypothesis can be proved, then you have to accept it as honest persons as the absolute truth
because it is for your benevolence. It is for the benevolence of your family. It is for the
benevolence of your country and for the benevolence of the whole world.
am here to tell you about the last breakthrough of our evolution. This breakthrough of our
evolution in our awareness has to happen in these modern times and has been, moreover,
recorded in the writings of many seers. These are the times called as the "Decadent Times" last
called by the great saint Vyasa who has written the Gita, and it is the decadence of humanity
that we see around in every way possible.
Now I would like to tell the secret knowledge of our inner being which was known in India
thousands of years back. For our evolution and spiritual ascent there is a residual
within us which is located in the triangular bone at the base of our spine. This residual
power
power
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VIII Issue 1 & 2
3
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-4.txt 
 is known as Kundalini. Though the knowledge of this power was available thousands of years
back in India, the awakening of the Kundalini was done, traditionally, on an individual basis
only. One guru would give awakening to one disciple. As a result of that awakening, what
happens is that you achieve your self-realisation, your self-hood. Secondly, when this power
is awakened, it rises and passes through six subtle energy centres in your body, nourishing
them and integrating them. Ultimately this power breaks through the fontanelle bone area
called as the Talu or the Brahmarandra and connects you to the all-pervading power of divine
love, which is described in the bible also as the "cool breeze of the Holy Ghost", also in the
Koran as "Ruh" and also in the Indian scriptures as "Paramchaitanya". Patanjali has called it
as "Ritambhara Pragya". Whatever the name, this is a power which is all-pervading, which
doses all the subtle works of living process, of evolutionary process. The existence of this all-
pervading energy is not felt before realisation but after self-realisation you can feel it on your
tips or at the centre of your palm or above the fontanelle bone area.
finger
Moreover, this process has to be spontaneous, "Sahaja". "Saha" means "with" and "ja" means
"born". That means the right to get this union with the all-pervading power of Divine love is
the birth right of every human being. Our mental energies are limited. Our limited mental
energy, which is linear in movement and has no sustenance of reality, reaches a point and
stops. From there it boomerangs and all that mental, linear movement comes back to us as a
punishment sometimes. So now we need more energy, higher energy, deeper energy and for
that this happening has to take place.
BLL
I must say that in the West I have met many people who are true seekers of Truth and are fed
up of artificiality of the Western life. Also they didn't know what they were seeking
sometimes and they have made lots of mistakes. They have gone to false gurus who have
taken lots of money and the people have become bankrupts and mentally and physically
handicapped. The one thing you must note is that the awakening of the Kundalini and thus
achieving self-realisation is a living process of evolution for which we cannot pay anything.
It is like putting a seed in the Mother Earth. It sprouts because Mother Earth has the power
to sprout it and the seed has an in-built germinating quality within it. In the same way we
have this germinating power in the triangular bone which the Greeks called as Sacrum. This
is a three and a half coil energy. This shows that the Greeks knew that this was a sacred bone
and hence they gave the name Sacrum. Actually in some people you can see this triangular
bone pulsating and the Kundalini very slowly rising, but where there are no obstructions and
if the person is a balanced being, the Kundalini rises from the Sacrum just like a jet and passes
through the fontanelle bone area to become one with the all-pervading power. This Kundalini
is the spiritual mother of every individual and She knows or has recorded all the past
aspirations of Her child. She is anxious to give second birth to Her child and during Her
ascent, She nourishes six energy centres.
When a person is not connected to the all-pervading power, he is like an instrument which is
not connected to the mains and has no identity, has no meaning, has no purpose. As soon as
it is connected, all that is built in inside this instrument starts working and manifesting itself.
When this Kundalini rises it connects you to the all-pervading power, which is vital and which
is an ocean of knowledge as well as an ocean of bliss. After the awakening of Kundalini, you
Divine Cool Breeze
l VIII Isue 1 & 2
Vol
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-5.txt 
 experience many coincidernces which are miraculous and extremely blissful. Above all
Kundalini is the ocean of forgiveness. So whatever mistakes you have committed in the past
are forgiven and instead you get your self-realisation as a blessing.
The consequences of the awakening of the Kundalini and thereby the attainment of self-
realisation are numerous. First and foremost, such a person is constantly in contact with or is
in fact a part of the all-pervading Divine power. He seeks the truth by using his new
awareness. And as truth is one, all self-realised persons see this same truth. Thus conflicts are
avoided. Purely mental activity without self-realisätion, leads to conflicting ideas and even
wars. All this is avoided after self-realisation.,
Now, let us see how many other things happen in a person who gets realisation. Firstly you
start feeling the cool breeze of the Holy Ghost on your fingertips, which represent the subtle
energy centres. Thus you know the truth on your fingertips. You transcend all the limitations
of race, religion and other ideas and you go beyond your mind to see and feel the reality and
understand it. The next thing that happens is that you become thoughtlessly aware. We live
in the future and in the past through our thoughts. They come to us from these two areas of
time but we carinot be in the present. While these thoughts are rising and falling we are
jumping on the cusp of these thoughts. But when the Kundalini rises She elongates these
thoughts and thereby creates some space in-between which is the present, which is the reality.
So the past is over and the future doesn't exist. At that time you have no thoughts. You reach
a new state as you become thoughtlessly aware about which Jung has written clearly. At this
moment, whatsoever happens is recorded in your memory well and you enjoy every moment
of this reality. When you become thoughtlessly aware then you become completely peaceful
within yourself. A person who has achieved this peace also emits peace and creates a peaceful
atmosphere around himself. This peace is very important. Unless and until we have this
we will never truly understand whatever our ideas are, whether universal or just limited. You
can feel your own seven centres on your fingertips. Also you can feel the centres of others
because you develop a new dimension of awareness which is called as collective
consciousness. When such new awareness is established into you, you start feeling also the
centres of others. I must tell you that these centres are responsible for our physical, mental,
emotional and spiritual well-being and when they are affected or they are in jeopardy, people
suffer from one disease or another. As a result of the awakening of the Kundalini and the
nourishment of these centres, an important development would be that you will feel an inner
balance and you will enjoy good health. Many diseases, even some incurable ones, have been
cured by the awakeneng of the Kundalini. Even the data base of the inherited genes may be
restructured after self-realisation through the awakening of the Kundalini. As a result, a
person who might have inherited genes indicating criminal tenedency might well become a
good man.
peace
Our attention also becomes very pure. In the light of the spirit we can see things much more
clearly than when we were blind. For example, a person who goes with his blind eyes and
feels an elephant and then another comes in and a third comes in, all of them have different
ideas about the elephant, depending on whichever part of the elephant thay have touched. But
if they open their eyes then they can all see the same thing, the reality and there will be no
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VIII Isue 1 & 2
Issue
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-6.txt 
 quarrel and fights.
Aself-realised person can feel the absolute knowledge on the fingertips. Supposing someone
doesn't believe in God. A self-realised person carn suggest to the non-believer that he should
ask the question:"Is there god?" The questioner will get, you will find, a very nice cool breeze
coming into his being. He may not believe in God but there is God. Unfortunately, so many
of those who believe in God are also absurd, hypocritical, cruel, weird and so immoral that
people have lost faith in God. But while those who represent God may be wrong. God himself
exists and his power also exists which we call as the all-pervading power of Divine love. This
is the power of love and compassion and not of aggression and destruction. This power of love
and compassion, when it is imbibed in a yogi or in a self-realised person, it works in a very
different way like an angel. Such people can cure others and cure themselves. Even mental
cases have been cured. Not only that. Even those who have been to wrong gurus in their
search of truth, have achieved their spiritual stability after leaving false gurus and coming to
the path of self-realisation.
In the next stage, you become thoughtlessly aware, when your Kundaliri is stabilised and you
know undoubtedly that you have achieved your self-realisation., that you have attained all the
powers that can be utilised. You become very powerful because you can raise the Kundalini
of others. You become very active and you don't feel tired easily. For example, I am seventy
three years of age and I am travelling about every third day, but I am quite alright. This energy
flows into you you and fills you up with vitality. You become extremely dynamic and at the
same time extremely compassionate, kind and mild. You feel that you are protected and thus
you are confident but not egoistical. Your whole personality changes. This is the kind of global
transformation which is taking place with such a speed all over that I, myself, am surprised
at how it is working out so fast.
Actually, this knowledge existed a long time back but my contribution, if there is any, is that
we can now achieve en-masse realisation. Thousands can achieve mass realisation. It is a gift
of this time where it was predicted that such global transformation will take place. In as many
as 65 countries, thousands of people have attained their self-realisation through Sahaja Yoga.
The power of Kundalini is the pure desire of attaining your self-hood. If someone doesn't want
cannot force him because the Divine respects the freedom of that person. If he
wants to go to heaven, he can go there, or if he wants to go to hell, he can go to hell. Self-
realisation can be attained easily if the people have a sincere and pure desire to get their self-
realisation. But if they stick to some of their ideas, which are fixed, the Kundalini won't rise..
Also it cannot work for idiots or for immature people. It works for people who are wise, who
are more in the centre, and it works very fast. I was amazed to see that it has worked even
on people who were drug addicts, who were alcoholics and who were very immoral. But they
all had an intense and pure desire to secure self-improvement, self-realisation. So many of
such people achieved their goal of self-realisation. Overnight, they gave up their drugs, their
alcoholism. Thus you become very powerful and at the same time you understand that
to have it,
you
you
are now glorified and you start behaving in a very dignified and a very sensible manner. This
is how a new culture is born and this new culture takes you, in a way, into a new style of life
where you become innately, I say innately, righteous. Nobody has to tell you: "Don't do this"
Vol. VIII Issue 1 & 2
6.
Divine Cool Breeze
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-7.txt 
 and "Don't do that". It is all achieved through your enlightened attention. This enlightened
attention is also full of power. Wherever you put your attention it works, it creates peace, it
creates harmony and also it creates a new dimension of collective consciousness.
So to blame your genes for your mistakes is not going to work out anymore because these
genes can be changed in their database and can be brought to the level of a very righteous,
angelic personality. The ego and the conditioning of a person gets dissolveld by the ascent of
the Kundalini and he becomes really a free bird. Absolute freedom is achieved in reality and
his behaviour changes tremendously with great faith in himself. He becomes a witness of the
whole drama of life. When you are in the water you are afraid of getting drowned, but
supposing you get into a boat, you can watch the same waters with enjoyment. But if you learn
how to jump in the water and save others then it is even a higher situation and so we have
a higher awareness which we call as doubtless awareness. Above all, we fall into the ocean of
joy. Joy is absolute. It doesn't have duality. It is not like happiness and unhappiness. It is a
singular thing and once you jump into it you learn easily how to enjoy everything, whether
it is beautiful or ridiculous. In one case you see the beauty; in the other you see the humour
as to how people are ridiculous. The remarkable thing is that Sahaja Yogis have become great
musicians, great writers, great speakers, great administrators. In every way they have risen
very high, specially in their attitude towards others. They respect everyone and they know
what is wrong with other people so that they can approach them carefully, gently to see that
this person who has these problems can be easily evolved and become a self-realised soul. It
is like one candle lighting another candle. This work is going on all over the world and there
is great hope that it will also start in China. Before this, somehow, I coulld not start
but the Divine coincidence has given a chance to me by this conference to talk to Chinese
people, whom I find very wise and sensitive, about the great treasure of spirituality. This is
not a coincidence. It was inevitable and has been brought about by this all-pervading power.
In your life also you will notice lots of coincidences but you will not know how to connect
them to something that is divine unless and until you get connected to the Divine power.
work
my
Confucius has taught the humanity how we can improve our relations with other human
beings. But Lao Tse in China has very beautiful described TAO, meaning the Kundalini. And
I have had a voyage through the Yangtze River through which LaoTse had gone many times.
I know he was trying to show that this river, which is the Kundalini, is flowing towards the
sea and one should not be tempted by the nature that is around. The nature around the
Yangtze River is very, very beautiful, no doubt, but one has to go through the river. Also there
are lots of currents which flow and can be quite dangerous and we need a good navigator who
should take his ship across to the point where it is nearest the sea. At that stage it becomes
very silent and extremely simple in its flow.
This country has been endowed with great philiosophers, I would say the greatest was Lao
Tse, because humanism was for the preparation of human beings for their ascent about which
Lao Tse had spoken. But because of the subtle subject it was not described in such a clear-cut
manner as I am talking to you. It is such a pleasure for me to talk to this august gathering here.
After travelling all over the world, I realise that China is one of the best countries as far as
spirituality is concerned.
May the Divine bless you all.
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VIII Issue 1 & 2
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-8.txt 
 INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC CONFERENCE
"Morality Health and The World"
H.H. Shri Mataji
All the religions came on this earth as flowers on the same tree of spirituality and then people
plucked these flowers and are now fighting with the dead flowers. This is mine, this is mine.
After the second world war a new style of war has started in the name of God. How can you
fight if you believe in one God, so it is just a mental idea they have. It's not the real thing in
the heart. No religion teaches you of hate, but the situation is just the opposite.
In the beginning all these religions came in the purest form and tried to bring love, peace
unity in this world. But some people became in charge of the religion. They were also nice but
gradually they started separating from each other. Whatever they have done at least they have
created the feeling of righteousness. They have talked of morality. They have talked of love
and compassion. They have been many organisation to express that feeling, but all that has
been very superficial. You see anybody who says he is a Christian, Muslim or Hindu. Is he
really a Christian? Christ has said, "Thou shalt not have adulterous eyes." Have you met any
Christian who doesn't have adulterous eyes? Or who never had. Mohammed Sahib has said
that unless and until you know yourself you will not go wrong. 'Self means the spirit. How
many have tried that? All these Muslims. Are they trying to be spiritually oriented? They are
just fighting. I feel so sorry for them because thousands are killed and they are encouraged to
have wars. Whatever good they have done is neutralised by this because those who don't
follow their religion are heathens according to them. If you want to know about the Muslims
go and ask the Jews. If you want to know about the Jews, ask Christians. And if you want to
know about Christians better go to America and see what they are doing. Did Christ preach
immorality? Did he talk of prostitution? In the west they have no respect of their Chastity.
So how are you Christians Same about the Muslims. They talk of Islam which was such a great
religion which professed morality, Mohammad even talked about Christ and Mother's
chastity. But if you see the Muslims, they are sometimes worse than Christians. Orice I was
travelling from Riyadh to Delhi, and I went off to sleep. When I got up, all those men and
women who were wearing Arabic dresses, were with me in the plane. When I got up
find that they were all very fashionable, nude type of dresses which the women were wearing.
Absolutely shameful and they were all drinking, smoking. So I asked the air-hostess, " Did we
go somewhere else during the travel." She said, " No " I said, " Who are these people?" She
said, " They are the same." " How are they changed?" She said, " You go and see them in
London and you will know they drink more than the Scots. Christianity has failed. Islam has
failed. By forcing you cannot bring morality. I met some English men. I asked them, " Why
are you looking at women all the time?" They said "we enjoy." Isaid "what about Christ?" They
said, " We do this even in the church. Should we fix our eyes on something?" I said, " You
can. There is a way. You are not Christians. You are not Muslims. You are not Jews. You are
all hopelessly bad people." They asked what they should do? I asked them "Are you seekers
of truth or you want to live with your fixed old ideas. Or is it that we are Christian, Jews,
Muslims so we are saved people. Frankly I would tell you that most of you would go to hell.'
They said, "Why?" I said," Because you are hypocrites." Reality is that you don't follow your
religion. You just have a label here.
and
what I
Divine Cool Breeze
1 & 2
Vol. VIII Issue
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-9.txt 
 First came Abraham, then Moses then Christ. It was a step by step forward movement. Even
the Shariat was not given to the Muslims. It was not given by Koran. It is in the Bible that
Moses gave it to Jews. And the Jews said we will not have this. It is too much. The Christians
said it is too much. But the Muslims took it up. It was meant for Jews at that time, because
Moses found them to be absolutely decadent. But does it help anyone? How if they believe in
the abstract, formless God, then why should they fight for any country or any land. God is
everywhere. Those who will think they are Muslim first, Christian first they will fight. Because
they are Political minded. They are not spiritual minded. You have to be spiritual minded,
otherwise you should say we don't believe in God then you have to be spiritual minded.
Now the quarrel is between the Western culture and the culture of fundamentalism. The
fundamentalists are saying that you should take to very strict culture. They are forcing it. In
Algeria thousands of people were killed because they were dressed like Westerns. They are
throwing bombs in Paris. All kinds of violence these fundamentalists have taken to.
Mohammad Sahib has told of Raheem, Rehmat-compassion. There is no equality at all
Islam. They ill treat their women. One women who is not producing 8 or 10 children is thrown
away as Talaq. In India we have thousands and thousands of such women and children who
are the poorest in our country. He said you can marry four women but women should not
become prostitutes. That was the time. So now they are Muslims prostitutes. How are they to
live? They should starve in the name of Islam. And also kill their children? What good has
Christianity, Muslims or Jews done?
among
The people in charge of religion are working very hard to do their level best, but they must
face the reality. They have not achieved anything that Christ or Mohammad Sahib asked for,
Buddhists asked for. On the contrary because of their blindness they have brought such a bad
name to all these great founders of these great religions.
I saw advertisements of imported goods in your television. Are you mad? All your money you
are spending on these junks here which are not sold anywhere in the West or America. All
learned people are going to America to become dish-washers. There is no sense of patriotism
or sacrifice. In my country,
imported. Thanks to Gandhiji. He said don't buy anything from abroad. You can buy hand
woven, hand spun cloth. My parents sacrificed everything for the country, because they were
patriotic and I am also patriotic and I want all of you to be patriotic. This is only possible
through Sahaja Yoga. Not by saying'I am Islam or Christian You have to first say you are
a Russian. You can follow any path you like but first of all know what you want.
you
I can say very proudly that you cannot get even a tie which is
There is another sinister illegal thing which has been accepted called the Swiss Bank. Nobody
in
says anything about it. They have accepted it. Three-fourths of my country is locked
up
Swiss banks and I don't know how much Russian Mafia is there. Through your legal forces
you must attack because they are illegal. This money was to go to the poor, to the sick, to the
lepers. They have taken up all that money into Swiss Banks. For example in my country what
happened India was a country with great potential but for three hundred years the British
came and stayed in or country without any visa. They looted us and now the situation is such
that if one Indian wants to go to England they will thoroughly examine you. They took away
all our gold, our diamond, our silver, all the precious things. Just like a highway robbery, and
Vol. VIII Issue 1 & 2
9.
Divine Cool Breeze
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-10.txt 
 they call themselves Christians their level doesn't go out. Now before leaving India they
created problems between Muslims and Hindus, also Buddhist, Jains, Christians, everybody.
So the Muslims said we had our own land as usual. Muslims are very attached to land. So they
took Pakistan and Bangladesh. Bangladesh is the poorest country in the whole world. Now
they are smuggling themselves to come back to India. But Pakistan is much worse because the
people from India who opted for Pakistan they thought they would become very rich and
have big positions. And what happened was that they were treated just like slaves. Indians
are very cunning and clever. They formed themselves near Karachi which is the most
important post. This gentleman who is the leader of those people said that this prime minister
is like Hitler and she is killing every day 14 16 people to reduce the majority. So now the
Muslims are fighting with Muslims. Saddam Hussein is fighting these rich Muslims. Khurds
are fighting Turk's. In this Islam, isthis the way to enshrine Mohammad Sahib? Because they
have not found themselves they don't know about God.
Sahaja Yoga is the only way by which you can get your self realisation and self knowledge.
We have had people from all religions, from all races, from all the countries. And all of them
had told me that Sahaja Yoga is the only way by which we got our peace. If you have no peace
within how can you give peace to others. People who have been given awards of peace are
horrible hot tempered people. They never even smile. They are so tense. How can they give
peace to anyone? So the first is that we must achieve the peace within us. This is my work for
the last 25 years. Not only that you get peace but you get citizenship of the kingdom of God.
Last time when I came to Russia there was a coup, and I saw the Sahaja Yogis absolutely
peaceful. I asked them, " Are you not worried about what's happening around?" They said,
Mother, we are in the kingdom of God. Why should we worry?" These governments will
come and go, but we have entered into eternal life. You can see from their face. It was no
һуроcracy.
Sahaja Yoga is the one that gives you the absolute knowledge, not relative knowledge. Relative
knowledge is that because I am Christian, I am higher than Muslims. I am Muslim so I am
higher than Christian. It is with some fixed ideas because you are born a Muslim, or a
Christian. Hitler was the climax of that. He said that he is a superior race. They killed children
in the
chambers and enjoyed it. How can they be superior races? Whom do we consider
gas
superior? It is the saints who have compassion and love. We have those ideas stuck into our
and we have no freedom or courage to get out those ideas which limit us. Moreover our
human error is our limiting. As all of them have said and I say there is a power which is all
pervading Why should we not try to get it. Why should we think that we are Christians or
Muslims or whatever it is. But why not we get that energy which is described by Mohammed
Sahib, by Christ, by Moses. What is the harm? If you can get something why not have it. Also
it is free. You don't have to pay. Actually I don't need anything from you. I am sufficient in
myself. I also don't need Sahaja Yoga. But why am I running everywhere, because of this love,
this
compassion within me makes me do alI this because people are blind, they cannot see. I
don't need to have anymore Churches, wars, synagogues and all these building. But in the
heart resides the spirit. All this is built in this mechanism of Kundalini. God has made it. Why
has he made it for the last break. It is your own Mother. She is going to give it. It is there, it
is your own power, it is your own Mother. You have a right to get this, you have every right
Vol. VIII Issue 1 & 2
Divine Cool Breeze
10
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-11.txt 
 to become orne with the Divine Power. We have this instrument. Supposing God has make this
instrument. But we don't want to connected it to the mains, then what are you? What is your
identity? Why are you born?
Now come to science. Science has its own limitations. Whatever they can discuss is science. But
can they say why human beings have come on this earth? Can they say why evolution took
place? Can they say what is the aim of human beings? They cannot answer many many
questions. Say for doctors. You ask them who runs your heart. They will say autonomous
nervous system. Who is this auto? They have no answer. But in the body there are two
chemicals acetylene and adrelin. One augments and one relaxes. But in the body it acts
arbitrarily. Nobody knows. The one which has to augment, contracts, why? Anything foreign
that
goes in the body is thrown out immediately. But when the foetis is formed it is not thrown
out. It gets nourished, developed, up to the right time and then it is thrown away. Who does
this discrimination?
There is big fight going on? And what have they produced? Atom bomb, hydrogen bomb.
Because science is amoral, there is no morality for science, they can become spies, killers, they
can be scientists. They can be drunkards. They can be adulterous, just like any priest. What's
wrong with them? They are so highly placed. They have so many awards. And you find that
they are so low level in morality, because they do not respect themselves. They so not expect
themselves because they do not know what they are. They do not know how great they are.
We don't know what we are. We are not this body, or this mind, we are not this intelligence,
or these emotions. We are not this ego and conditioning of religions or anything. But we are
pure spirit.
Now I will tell you exactly when you become the spirit. I don't think anybody should object
to it, because it is you your benevolence. It is for benevolence of your family and the whole
world. We have this power of Kundalini within us. It is a very ancient science for Indians. In
the Quran it is also written 'Asas'. In the Bible it is said "I will appear before you as tongues
of flame." The reality is that you must experience, you should not have blind faith in me. We
have had enough problem of blind faith all around, but experience it, that this Kundalini rises
and pierces through your fontanelle bone area. As a result you get connected with this all
pervading power of Divine Love. It is no lecture, no sermon. This is the actualisation of
your
baptism. If you are wise, you will understand that we are not living in a very peaceful world.
The first thing that happens to you is that you become thoughtlessly aware. Where we are
thinking, we are thinking of the future or the past, but not of the present. Present is the reality.
The past is finished. Future doesn't exist, but we cannot be in the present, is a fact. One
of
thought rises and falls, another thought rises and falls, and we are jumping on the cusp
these thoughts of past and future. But when Kundalini rises, she elongates these thoughts and
there is a space created in you. That is the present when you don't have a reflective mind,
absolutely at peace with yourself. You are aware, but you are thoughtless. When you get
connected with this all pervading power which is absolute peace, this starts pouring in and
peace spreads. You make others peaceful. So you know one thing that God is the source
of peace. That is how you can spread this peace. In Sahaja Yoga you find there is peace among
thousands and thousands. They many belong to any country, they may belong to any race but
the
Vol. VIII
Issue 1 &
Divine Cool Breeze
11
2
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-12.txt 
 when they are together they are like one ocean. It is not imagination because with this you
become part and parcel of the whole because the drop becomes the ocean. They enjoy each
other. They don't fight. Because they are pure spirit.
Another good thing that happens to you is that your attention becomes enlightened. Most
people become senile in their seventies because their attention becomes like this. It is difficult
to change them also. But your attention will become enlightened. In that enlightened attention
firstly you see the totality. It is enlightened with love and compassion. You see the good points
of others and try to help who need your help. I must tell you an experience of mine that first
time I came to Russia I didn't know any Russian language either. And who came to help me
were about 25 Germans, Sahaja Yogis. Tears came into my eyes. I said how are you
said "Germans have killed so mäny Russians, we are duty bound to come. This kind of love
is so genuine. It's only possible when yor become the Spirit.
here. They
Second that happens to your attention is that this enlightened attention gives you the
righteous path. Over night people have given up drugs, alcohol and all destructive things. In
the West the idea is that we must enjoy every moment of our lives. But every enjoyment is self-
destructive. In Sahaja Yoga you enjoy without getting into destruction. You enjoy all the
nature. You enjoy all the human beings. You enjoy all the innate, not the superficial. All this
is available to you is your own attention. Now this attention also works. Yesterday they told
me that "Mother, it will be very cold". I told Sahaja Yogis you just put your attention,
suddenly nature will be there at your service. It was sunny yesterday. You can order all the
nature to be at your lotus feet, because you have to become one with this Divine Power. This
Divine Power is the one which creates seasons, which creates everything. It has created all of
you. And whatever is good for you it will do. If you think somebody should be killed it won't
work out. But after realisation, after becoming the Spirit you don't think of bad things.
Another very important thing that happens to you is that wherever you put your attention you
can even give realisation. Like one candle is enlightened, it can enlighten many candles
thousands and thousands. I have not been to Africa but there are so many Sahaja Yogis in
South Africa, Cameroon etc. I have not been to Siberia but there are so many who are in
Siberia. It is spreading. Those who will be against it will be dropped out very soon. People wi
know that they are hypocrits. We don't have to worry about it. They will be found out. We
should not think bad of anyone. We should not curse anybody. Sahaja Yogis cannot kill
anybody. After you start giving realisation to others you achieve another state of doubtless
awareness. Where you have no doubts about Sahaja Yoga, about me, about the working of
Sahaja Yoga. Also doubts about yourself. That level once you have to achieve. Many have
achieved this state.
I have great respect for Russians and a very great love. Because they had never even heard the
name of Kundalini, how did they accept it. What was in them that they were seeking? What
love, what understanding of this subtle subject. Very few people in the world are like this.
This is the last judgement and those who miss will miss it in anycase. Christ has said, " You
will be calling me Christ, Christ, but I will not recognize you. " So understand that you have
to become the spirit. As Christ has said that you are to be born again. You may have faith in
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VIII Issue 1 & 2
12
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-13.txt 
 me or not, you must have faith in yourself to begin with. But when you will grow spiritually
will know that I will not tell what I am. Christ was the son of God. You may deny
you
you
you
it but he was. But when he said that they crucified him. Whatever I am, I am. But I am not
there to tell you. You have to rise in your spirit and realise with understanding. Why? Because
you have to do good to others. What a beautiful responsibility
Last of all you enter into the Kingdom of God and then drown into the ocean of joy. Joy has
not got a double point like happiness or unhappiness. It is singular. You lose all
greed and you become chaste and see yourself. You don't have to become an ascetic. You don't
have to go to Himalyas. You don't have to fast. It is something internal. Nothing to change
outside. I know there is going to be global transformation in the world. Even the data base of
your genes change. All
transformation. So many people have been cured of incurable diseases. Without paying
anything,
give them divine vibrations, even the crops grow ten times better.
lust and
your
kinds of people who have come to Sahaja Yoga have got
by their own powers. So easily Sahaja spontaneous. It works with animals, if
you
In this last judgement there is a new race of great people. It is your own power. Only you have
to know how glorious you are, how great you are. Absolutely free, because you get that
superior intelligence. In the light of spirit you know what is constructive for you. You know
absolute knowledge, Only thing I want to request that all the people who are supposed to be
in charge of religion. Now they have brought people up to point. Like different steps they have
crossed for what? Why to have the religion? It leads to ascent. They must ascend. The balance
has to be established through religion. Like we have aeroplanes fixed in different workshops
to get the balance because they have to fly. What is the use of just balancing without any
flying. You have to fly with all the freedom of the spirit. You don't have to say don't do this,
don't do that. You are ready to fly. Now enjoy your realisation.
May God Bless You All.
Vol. VIII Issue 1 & 2
Divine Cool Breeze
13
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-14.txt 
 TALK AT DELHI
By H. H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
On 25th October 1995
Every year a new year comes and keeps coming. But people do not understand the feeling of
creating
clothes and celebrate. They never think that a new year is coming and what new thing we
must think of. Whatever has been going on, it goes on day after day.
new year. They only understand that on the New year day they will wear new
In Sahaja Yoga when we are so collective, then we must think what new thing we must have
in Sahaja Yoga. You have gone quite deep in meditation. You understand meditation and you
have also established a certain state. But in a new year what new aspect you should take, we
put out attention towards this. We must think what are the problems of our country and A
also the problems of the world, and how can we solve them. For this I think wherever a Sahaja
Yogi has interest he should put attention on that.
must
There are many new things that have started in Sahaja Yoga. This time I have thought that we
should call the Shia Muslims and make them understand. We are trying for that and we are
trying to spread the message of the holy life of Shivaji. Both are good that the Shias may
understand what is Dharma and by looking at the life of Shivaji we must understand what is
dharma, and what were his ideas and what all he did for his ideals. In such a short time he
did such a great work.
Now collectively we have become much better in Delhi, and around Delhi, Sahaja Yoga is
spreading. But along with this we must think that are we getting egoistical? If Sahaja Yoga is
i spreading it's quantity is spreading so has the quality come or not? You should give attention
towards this. You must put your attention on the groups that are there, and to increase your
members you must go to the nearby villages. In this way you can grow much more. In this
new year you must think that we have taken out many projects with which we got flats,
houses, Ashrams. It is good thing. But what are we going to do in that Asharam? What can
we print about Sahaja Yoga by which we may know each other. There should be a newspaper
of Sahaja Yoga.
You should pay special attention on three things. Firstly is peace. That we have to bring peace
within ourselves and we must find out the cause of unrest outside in the world. Why is there
unrest and why is there turmoil in the whole country? You must find out the root cause of all
this. And we must find out how we can become involved and active in it. Like regarding
Chechenya. They told that the problem in Chechenya is that if we are socialistic or if we are
a democratic country then there is lot of difference in both. In a democratic country if you are
democratic then you cannot rule on any one religion. These three religions are the same
Buddhism and Jainism is the same thing. These three religions which came from the five
angels, which we say as Jews, Christians and Muslims. They believe in only one book and
belive in only one incarnation and that is why they are exclusive. But in reality they are not
exclusive. They should write down this point. In all these religions say if you write about
Moses, then he spoke of Abrahim. Then came Christ. He spoke of Moses and Abraham. When
Mohammad Sahib came he spoke of all three and also of Christ's Mother. These exclusive
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VIII Issue 1 & 2
14
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-15.txt 
 religions have been made by man. That is why there are quarrels over them. If anyone tells
them to make a universal religion, they don't like it, because then how will they fight? But it
is important for them to come into an universal religion. The moment they come into an
universal religion these feelings will go, that we are separate and other religions are separate.
If you see even now a days there are big wars being fought over these religions. It will all
finish off once people realise that this religion is not exclusive, so why are you fighting. If a
Jew or Christian or Muslim is there all these religions have come from one source. No one
religion is exclusive and the fight that is going on over this should be stopped. In Chechenya
if they give the government to the Muslims. The Muslims are famous for producing 28
children per family. They say that women from there are a child producing factory. By creating
so many children they have made themselves into a majority. Now if you give them the
government they will again do the same. Then how can you stop them? In their dharma
whatever power is there is this that we are in great numbers. It is not difficult for them to
increase the numbers. If they increase like this they will eat up the whole of Russia. Why do
they talk of Religion? Why don't they become Russian? Regarding Indian Muslims. They are
first Muslims and then Indians. It is in all countries. Now in Pakistan daily 18-20 people are
being killed. They said in an interview, " Neither we got God or any human also, we roam
neither here nor there " It is such a bad situation there. Now this has started penetrating into
the brains of the Indian Muslims, that the people who stayed back in India are flourishing and
prosperous. There people are afraid that who will be killed when. Because the Sindhis and
Punjabis don't want the Muslims who came from India to live there. Now these people have
make Karachi their home and live around there and they are demanding Karachi. But Karachi
is their only port.
The greaest thing that has been said in Islam is that "till you do not know yourself you cannot
know God. First know thyself." The second thing is that they have created such problems ie.
they believe in the Nirakar, the formless. They don't believe in God with form. The ones who
believe in the formless, why are they fighting over lands. It is a form and a material thing.
believe in the Nirakar then try to achieve the Nirakar. But how to explain to them
for they are so blood thirsty. If we can print articles and point these things then people will
start thinking that how muIch truth or untruth is there in what they are saying. Then they will
also see that uptill now we kept fighting and killing and what was the use of that. The
Muslims are quite difficult. Of course there are Muslims in Sahaja Yoga. This time when I
When
you
gave
a speech on radio. When I spoke to them clearly no one argued with me. They were speaking
to me by phone. Some ladies rang up and said "we are feeling cold after listening to Shri
Mataji." And many people get realisation. This is also a way also by which people got
realisation. Like Iranians have gone out of their country and they are living in America. We
can give them realisation. In this way we can get hold Muslims in various countries. They are
very violent and fight a lot. They should be made to understand that if you believe in the
Nirakara why are you fighting over lands. The second stupidity about them is that when
you
die and will be buried and when the Kiyama' the Resurrection time' will come, then your
body will come out and you will be resurrected. After 500 years what part of the body can
rise? This way many strange things are believed in. So we should write it in newspapers
and
tell them that they are doing and thinking stupid things. Mohammad Sahib did not write the
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VIII Issue 1 & 2
15
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Quran. It was written 40 years after him. Christ did not write the Bible, and neither did Moses
write anything. This way then what is the authenticity of these books? If this goes on like this
they will go to hell. There seems to be no other solution. There is a limit to stupidity and by
this they cannot be benefited. It is very different to find among Muslims, maybe one or two
may come out. If they come in Sahaja Yoga then no one can kill anyone. If anyone had so much
guts then we can explain to others. The biggest thing is our peace has been destroyed because
of Religion. These irreligions has created agitation and violence. If this one thing could finish
then at least 75% problems of wars will finish off.
Where does agitation 'Ashanti' come from? If we see that many big countries are fighting. Like
French president Chiraq, burst on atom bomb in the South Pacific and because of that there
are many protest 'bombs' being burst in his country. But if you see individually then where
does agitation and violence come into individuals. What makes a person agitated? Now there
are many causes. It could be jealousies, ambitions etc. If he is a right sided person then he will
be restless. It could also be left sided. In the left he will be an unhappy person and the right
sided person thinks of himself as happy. But both are agitated. So we have to make this
agitation alright.
By coming into Sahaja the genes get alright, and when the genes become alright then man
himself will get alright. His whole nature will change. I have explained in detail in
about phosphorus that the phosphorus which is in the genes. When a man becomes dry then
phosphorus explodes. Dr. Worlikar said, " three people have got Noble prize for this research
on phosphorus. But what you have said today nobody has said." When a man becomes
restless and agitated then groups can form. It is in two ways. One with egoistical people and
second with left sided and possessed people. Africa problem is due to possessed people. The
others are due to ego problems. If we can destroy ego and possession then we can become
peaceful. With the help of that peace we can ourselves can give peace to others.
book
my
We should pay more attention to the villages. Then we must explain the path of peace to them,
like in he villages in North India, there is one defect that due to Muslim mentality, women are
suppressed a lot. When you supress women and when they reach and stand up then they are
even greater than men. There should be respect for women. In Sahaja Yoga women are very
weak. They do not meditate. They back-bite, create fights and are dominating. These things
that have crept into women, by that their power gets diminished. Because the power comes
from women. They are the potential. And when they behave like this the entire Shakti of
society finishes. The greatest thing is that in our women is to establish peace. For that even the
husband should be peaceful. If he is peaceful and respects his wife then the children will
become peaceful and the home will become peaceful. Now a kind of aggression that is in the
men will never remain in its limit. It will always rebound. The companionship that is there.
To talk to each other lovingly. And decently. How to behave properly in front of others we
should
attention to this. Many of the husbands are such who do not care for their wives
pay
and keep beating them, even after coming to Sahaja Yoga . I feel extremely unhappy that even
after coming to Sahaja Yoga a husband and wife have no companionship then it is something
serious. For me it is a very serious thing that there should be complete companionship.
Because you are a Sahaja Yogi and your wife is also a Sahaja Yogi and when both are sitting
Vol. VIII Issue 1 & 2
Divine Cool Breeze
16
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-17.txt 
 the same boat then how can they have quarrels. It should not be, because it is a very
dangerous thing. Now that you have come into Sahaja Yoga fighting with one another then
all the deities get angry with you then what problems you might get stuck into one cannot
You should pay extreme attention to this point. Suppose there is a man who is purposely
troubling a woman. Telling her that this is not good, that is not good, then one day will come
when the deities within that man will become angry with him. It is a problem of Laxmi. If it
is not Laxmi then it is the heart. The biggest problem is when left Nabhi catches then you can
get very different kind of diseases. I have worked a lot on left-Nabhi, and I see that left Nabhi
gets alright with great difficulty, because there is no introspection. They don't think why is my
left Nabhi catching. Supposing the wife is a shrew and does not listen and does just do what
she wants. She insults the husband. Then sit and talk with her. There should be rapport with
each other. There should be communication. There is never any communication between
husband and wife nor with the children You should give time for Sahaja Yoga. But there
should be companionship, both together, and also the children, the wife should come into
Sahaja Yoga. If you feel that you are doing the work of Sahaja Yoga and wife is sitting at home.
You should try that there is full companionship. Discuss with the wife, tell her that this is the
plan. There should be ascent of her and the children also. Their intellectual level and
understanding should grow.
say.
Now everything is going opposite due to Muslim influence. First the women were suppressed
and now the women are dominating the men. This action reaction should be finished off in
Sahaja Yoga. The remedy for this is to improve this in your individual married life. When you
will become peaceful then your children will also become peaceful. All these illnesses of
agitation which you see in big wars, where does it come from? It comes from man. It does not
come from the sky or the trees. Man is the root cause of it. If man can become peaceful and
he established in it should feel very proud that I am peaceful. At least our society should
improve.
Sahaja Yogis have to take on the task of improving the society. But those who are busy fighting
among themselves how can they change society? Many times I get complaints that the man
is
nice but his wife is a terror, or the wife is nice but the husband is terrible. We Sahaja
very
Yogis have our own decency and our own ways. We are moving out from those norms and
doing wrong things. I have explained many times that they are the two wheels of a chariot.
If one wheel is smaller than the other then it is not alright. They are not similar. Their height
is the same, their construction is the same but if you try to put right on left and left on it will
not work. Both have their own specialities. Like a woman has her own weaknesses, she has
her own characteristic. Men have their own characteristics. They always carry a watch. Men
are very time bound. Women are slow in getting ready if they have to go anywhere. If they
cannot go on time then the man are angry. These are very small things but the quarrels start
on these small things. Some men think they are in charge of everything. That they must reach
on time. If one didn't arrive on time then nothing so terrible has happened. Slowly train
mind that you do not react. You should just watch. Slowly you will be surprised that you will
get alright and your wife will get alright. Both have to practise this, that both should watch
as witness. One should understand that woman is different and man is different. They have
their different ways, though the similarity is this that they are both human beings.
your
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VIII Isue 1 & 2
17
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-18.txt 
 You should introspect and find out why do such problems come in Sahaja yoga. Like a
married girl came from Lucknow. She had a thousand problems. Ask her what are her
problems? Sahaja Yoga is not to break people but to unite them. If something is breaking then
what is behind it what is it, you should see to this and unite it. Now that we talk of uniting
then the Delhi people should unite with the Bombay people. But it is not like that. If the Puja
is in Bombay it is in Delhi too. When you expand your heart then you will see that you are
the whole world. Wherever there is a Puja it is for you. It is too much, that we should have
puja in Delhi and you must come here Mother. Just because of this I am going from here to
there. Someone will say please come to Moradabad or some will say come to this or that place.
Now at this age how many places can I go to, I suffer because people should not feel I have
favoured someone and not the other. So I thought I will not go to Europe. But the Europeans
come wherever I go. I went to Romania, or Russia they came there. In Sahaja Yoga you all
know each other. In the whole world there is such a great family feeling. Like if I say I will
There
never come to Delhi, I will only come to Nagpur, then all of you will come to Nagpur.
should be a detachment. People keep telling me to come to their cities. Nobody thinks that I
am doing such hard work even at this age. I have to travel so much. If all the time you keep
pulling me here and there then how can it be possible? You should explain to people on this
point, that whatever Mother had to do She has done and now whatever is Her wish we will
do that we will not put anything on Her. If She says Herself than we will do Puja. If She
| Herself says then we will accept otherwise not. We will not put any kind of pressure on Her.
With this one thing will happen that My health will be saved a bit. If I have to do some more
work I don't want that I should be pulled in different directions. Now what you have to
do that, think about it and don't put this burden on My head. You all come to me
for little little things. If someone is ill you phone me. But you are Sahaja Yogis. I have
project you
given
you so many powers. Why bother me? You take it on yourself. It is your responsibility now.
I think that my children have grown up and become responsible and understand everything.
You should instead give me the assurance that Mother we don't want to trouble you. We will
rectify the illnesses and problems. When this will start, then I will be satisfied. Now the
situation is such that I get letters upon letters of problems. But you must tell them that send
letters to the centres. Why are you bothering Shri Mataji?
your
We must see that how many Sahaja Yogis have solved the problem of how many Sahaja Yogis.
We have to solve it. But for that you must know Sahaja Yoga properly, and do it with pure
intention. Both are very important. I have seen many people who will say, " Come I will cure
you." Then they will get after him so much that the man runs away from Sahaja Yoga. Make
a committee and work out solution through that committee. Like you go somewhere and
people present their problems before you .You are now fully acquainted with this state, and
know what should be done. If possible I will write a book on how to solve problems of
you
various people. So what will happen is that the burden that is now on me will be shared by
you, and by that you will grow and prosper.
The dharma which is in you, the advantage you have, the civility that is in you, on the basis
of that you can do a lot. Regarding marriage, you are leaders. Please think very carefully
before
you suggest a person for marriage. It does not help us. You can get so many married
there is no financial help in that for you. The only pleasure you get is if they are happily
Vol. VIII Issue 1 & 2
Divine Cool Breeze
18
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-19.txt 
 married, then the advantage is to the husband and wife and many great saints can take birth.
But they think that by marrying they are obliging us. What is the advantage to us? When you
recommend a marriage tell the couple that there is no advantage to Shri Mataji. There is no
advantage to Sahaja Yoga except that your marriage is being performed through Sahaja Yoga
which is to your advantage. After a lot of discretion and finding out only should you
recommend a marriage. Because suddenly many problems crop up where a marriage takes
place. You see that people are getting better, the marriages are getting alright. I have to put
attention on the children also.
my
First I thought of peace, the second thing I thought of was the society. Respect for women,
looking after them. The foundations of society are the women. Women have to look after
society. For that men are not needed so much. The work of men is to do economics or politics.
Women should be of a sacrificing nature, should be understanding and wise. Then only will
the society remain alright. Many women are not generous. They don't know much about
Sahaja Yoga. If they know, they think no end of themselves. To bring balance in them, to make
them understand, it is a very important task. The woman should know what she is. Why she
has come on this earth? What is her task? She is the one who makes society a beautiful society.
You should put your attention on women.
The Third thing is the children. We should understand our ideas about children. You should
talk to children, ask them their problems. In England they published a book in which what the
children say about everyone is written. All the copies got sold out, as everyone wants to read
what the children have to say. Very sweet things they have written. With this two things will
happen. In society children will have their own power. What children say and what is the
innocence in them the whole society will know. The children see that what we said was
obeyed. The elders think that what the children are saying how they should implement them.
In this the children should not be rude. Neither should there be any ego in them. But they
should have the ability to state their point of view. Keep attention on them. Children say such
sweet things. Their understanding is very deep and full of experience. They see into little little
things, and relate so sweetly small small things, just like they are completely one with the
Divine Knowledge or Divine Activity. Children see everything through vibrations. Then they
put the elders right also. Like a gentleman came and sat down with both hands on the ground.
Some children told him not to sit like that because otherwise how will he get vibrations from
Shri Mataji. He would only get vibrations from the earth. I enjoy very much the way children
say many things and try to make one understand. They look after me a lot also. Learn from
children. Keep rapport with them. Speak to them. When they grow up they become like one
of us. But the Sanskaras is there in childhood. So sit and talk to them ask, them about anything,
It is a very joy-giving thing. And everyone should get this joy.
People who fight in the name of religion, bring peace into them. Talk to them, make them
understand. Secondly, the society. If the society is not alright then that country cannot have
peace and prosperity. It cannot develop. Like the society of Russia and China is very good.
Even the Indian society is very good. The reason for this is the women of these countries have
controlled the society. America has lot of wealth, etc. but the society is decadent. A very great
task of Sahaja Yoga is to make the foundation of the society. One should look into the unlawful
Vol. VII Issue 1 & 2
19
Divine Cool Breeze
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-20.txt 
 aspects of society everywhere. In America a very small girl was beaten up so the Sahaja Yogis
rang up to say we would like to support that girl. I said, "Absolutely do so." It is very
important. Keep her with you and look after her. So a new dimension will come to you that
these people care a lot. If someone is upset, someone has no money. Some one is upset not
because of some greed but because of adversities so pay attention to that person so it has
become very important the time has now come for that. In a proper manner take out a solution
to the problems of society. Like people who have become old and cannot walk, they should
have a place to stay. Then I started a refugee camp, a leper home. I left the place but those
homes are still there. Keep attention on the deprived and downtrodden people of society. If
you help society this way then every one will love and respect you a lot. We do for ourselves
in any case. We have attained for ourselves but what are we giving to others. Specially with
the help of Sahaja Yoga Shakti you cure so many people, remove their diseases, help them, you
can do good to them. In a way we have a burden of society on us, that when God has given
us this Shakti then in what way we can change society so that the physical, mental and
spiritual well being of humanity can take place. This one job Sahaja Yogis should take
Also
up.
help the poor and downtrodden people. Slowly you will be surprised that your popularity will
slowly spread in the whole country. In reality people make forums for such things only to get
votes or to earn something, but we don't want all that, just by your powers you can cure
people. If those people get alright then they can prove by their powers that how people
improve with Sahaja Yoga. Not only that but they can talk openly about Sahaja Yoga.
In this new year, the shell in which we live, we must come out of a And project outward In
the beginning there will be problems, your own problems. Firstly ego will stand. That will
spoil your head. Then you will get angry, upset. Different kinds of things will come but to gain
control over this also you will have to get out of the shell. When you will come out then you
will realise how you should behave with outsiders, because you have to integrate them. When
we will learn to deal peacefully with them then we must understand that we will be cleansed
within immediately. It is a question of cleansing.
Many people agree with what I say but they themselves feel they cannot be like that. Why not?
They reply, "because
If I am God and I am doing it means that the very high state you have got, make it in such
a way that it is beneficial, not that you have uselessly become Sahaja Yogis. There should be
a method to use it fully, which you have. When you will pay attention to yourself then you
will say that your home and society and your country everywhere there will be a kind of a
you are God" I said, " God, doesn't do anything. He remains away."
new state.
Even now Sahaja Yogis are very nice. Their faces shine their eyes sparkle, vibrations are
coming. This can be of any realised soul but you have more than that. It is the use of it that
you can give to others collectively. When your movement will be in collectivity then
be
will
you
surprised that not only with your powers you can cure others but also give to others. But
people are very exclusive regarding this matter. Sahaja Yoga means only Sahaja Yogis
talk to anyone else. You should pay attention at whatever level of society it is and there is no
harm in talking about it. You should pull those people into Sahaja Yoga. Those who are not
in Sahaja Yoga, doesn't matter, but it is important to give them peace and reassurance. You
why
Vol. VIII Issue 1 & 2
Divine Cool Breeze
20
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-21.txt 
 have to work on these three levels. Like you have collectively put the land alright. It is great.
But even greater than that is that you should expand to global state and help the needy. Help
women. Help down trodden, the sick people. Not with a missionary zeal but from within.
They feel so they do. With this Sahaja Yoga will get a great name. It is not difficult. We have
then
to work for that. In a way we have to increase our introspection. When that increases
you
will reach that point where you will be absolutely thoughtless. As soon as thoughtlessness
come you should try to increase that. In thoughtless awareness whatever you can do you
into
cannot do otherwise. That is why you should pay attention to yourself and try to go
thoughtless awareness. In meditation try to get thoughtless awareness. In that thoughtlessness
you have gone above your mind and all the cosmic powers will help you then whatever you
want will happen. But at the time of doing this, you should be thoughtless. It is very important
otherwise it will be half here and half there. Now we all have become collective but it should
be beneficial. We have become realised souls for what? Did we do it to die like Buddha or
Mahavira? For what did we use our realisation. I have seen people use their vibrations a lot,
but this we do for ourselves, or for Sahaja yoga. But those who are non Sahaja Yogis we should
use it for them also. It is not a very difficult thing. This Shakti is within you, to whomsoever
| you desire, give it. When the tendency of doing benevolence will awaken in you then no
question will remain.
May God Bless You.
Vol. Vill Isue
Divine Coo Breeze
e 1 & 2
21
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-22.txt 
 SHRI MATAJI'S PRECIOUS ADVICE
The numerous pearls of precious advice from shri Mataji to the Taiwan collective during the
four nights and five days were so sweet that we can only listen to them over and over:
Truth is love. Sahaja Yoga talks only of God's love. When we love someone we have to know
each and every detail about the other person. We have to develop the dynamic of love and
manifest it in each one's daily life.
Introspection is not a mental activity. When we are in the state of thoughtless awareness,
automatically we are in introspection. We become the witness for ourselves.
During meditation, listening to music is all right as long as we have no reaction to the music.
There should be enough light for us to see the picture of Mother; too strong or complete
darkness is not good.
To see is not to be; to be is to be there. Very often yogis in Sushupti state (deep sleep) see the
future but sometimes it is very confusing and mistaken.
To spread Sahaja Yoga is everyone's responsibility; it is not just the leader's responsibility.
All should remember to do liver treatment in the summer time.
In order for new people to feel the vibrations after self-realisation, they have to forgive.
Vol. VIII Issue 1 & 2
Divine Cool Breeze
22
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-23.txt 
 HOW TO TALK TO NEW PEOPLE
Synopsis of a Talk by Shri Mataji to Sahaja Yogis in Bangkok, March 1995
To get your self realisation is very easy but to become a Sahaja Yoga is actually a very difficult
thing to do as it requires a change in awareness from a human awareness to a divine
awareness. This journey of deep growth is a treacherous one and new people need to be
helped with a great deal of compassion, love and understanding.
Shri Mataji makes it quite clear that we need to communicate in simple ways that they can
relate to that are not confrontational or frightening and that we should not at first condemn
their gurus or their ways. Rather, find a point of common reference that will soothe them
down, like "Yes, I used to be like that but I'm better now." She stresses the importance of the
public relations aspect of this challenge!
During this sweet, informal talk Shri Mataji addressed the familiar problem of what happens
to the seekers after She has gone from an area and why they all seem to disappear. Our
character and style of behaviour is crucial at this stage. She says that the way we behave
towards each other is extremely important, and She impresses on us that we must support
each other and not quarrel and disagree with each other in front of new people as it creates
a very bad impression. Shri Mataji reminds us that "We are all One."
From the outset, it's a good idea, if the seeker has a guru, to ask the person, "Has this guru
given you your peace? Has he given you your self-realisation?" This is the point that they need
to understand. Then explain to them what benefits they can get in Sahaja Yoga.
She then gives a point-by-point guideline as to how to conduct a meeting. The emphasis is on
playing one of Her videos (the length of time you play it is up to your discretion), then seeing
if they have any questions and very silently answering them. Then they should go into
meditation. She makes the interesting point that to talk too much at this point will spoil them
and spoil us. Then after raising their Kundalini and ascertaining their particular make-up
(whether they are right-sided or left-sided, for example), we need to tell them how to start
meditating and what will help them in particular. It is well worth getting this tape to hear Shri
Mataji talk about this.
She speaks very gently about the way we need to treat the new people: "Now you should
know that we are believers in the power of love" and so we have to be very gentle with people
and not get angry or upset them. They need to be assured that everything will be all right. She
also makes an interesting point that if there is a particular problem, we need to tell them how
to correct it and let them know that we or they can write to Shri Mataji about it through the
leader.
Shri Mataji makes an amusing analogy to a businessman and his behaviour of great sweetness
towards his customers. We need to make the new seekers feel very loved, very peaceful, and
very secure in our company, and let them experience that we are truly deep and enlightened
people. Again She emphasizes how we behave towards each other, that we should never
interrupt one another and we should show the utmost consideration. This will help us
Vol. VIII Issue 1 & 2
Divine Cool Breeze
23
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2.pdf-page-24.txt 
 enormously to make Sahaja Yoga grow. She assured the Yogis in Bangkok that She would
return many times and that they would have many Sahaja Yogis in time.
During this talk, Shri Mataji is encouraging the Bangkok Yogis. At the market place in
Bangkok, both men and women had come spontaneously to bow to Her feet. This was a very
good sign
given self-realisation to several influential people in the society who were very much
impressed by Her work, notably a princess who had become a nun and was very active with
improving the misery of women in the country. She told them they would be very helpful to
Sahaja Yoga.
for it showed that the awakening had already come. Furthermore Shri Mataji had
There are a lot of Sikhs and Punjabis in Thailand, but it may take some time for them to come
to Sahaja Yoga. Even in India things were very slow at the beginning. Shri Mataji went to Dehli
for ten years without much success, but now there are 16,000 practising Sahaja Yogis there,
and it has spread all over northern India. She was surprised this year to hear people singing
Her praise on the train and greeting Her in large numbers on the platforms as She travelled
through the countryside.
Shri Mataji also marvelled at the growth in Russia where there are 21,000 who are practising
Sahaja Yoga. She also spoke about the Catholic Church and the ridiculous behaviour of the
clergy in Europe. She mentioned a book that is being written exposing all of this. She said that
there are actually no practising Christians in France and that is why they are after the Muslims
and the Sahaja Yogis: But She told us not to worry, that everything will work out very quickly
now wherever there is Sahaja Yoga. The proof is that even in America there are many people
who have taken to Sahaja Yoga now and She never expected that to happen.
Shri Mataji ended by cautioning us to be careful, reminding us that "we are the messengers
of God" and that we need to be very sweet and gentle with each other. Between husbands and
wives there should be full understanding, and the children should also be treated
and sweetly
kindly
very
: Yogi Mahajan
Edited by
Published by : Divine Cool Breeze, 9 Bhagyachintamani Soc., Paud Road, Kothrud,
Pune 411 029.
Printed by
Golden Arts, 2/11, Bandal Complex, Paud Road, Pune 411 029.
Vol. VIII Issue 1 & 2
Divine Col Breeze
24
